Since personalized medicine is the main objective of
cancer research, it is essential to form an alliance be-
tween imaging diagnostics (radiology and nuclear medi-
cine) and surgical pathology since a structured
collaboration model between these disciplines can speed
up the achievement of a paradigm for personalized
medicine. A recent study presented automatic glioma
grade identification from MRI images using deep convo-
lutional neural network. Glioma images were collected
from government hospitals and the AI system catego-
rized the tumors into four grades: low grade glioma,
oligodendroglioma, anaplastic glioma and glioblastoma
multiforme. The results showed reasonably good per-
formance with high classification accuracies [ 21]. An-
other recent study by Mobadersany et al. utilized digital
pathology images and genomic markers to predict over-
all survival of brain tumors. The authors examined the
ability of AI in predicting overall survival in diffuse gli-
omas. Histologic grading and genomic classifications
have independent prognostic power in such predictions.
Until the recent past, histologic diagnosis and grading
were used but the recent emergence of molecular sub-
typing has resolved the uncertainty related to lineage.
Criteria for grading gliomas need to be redefined in the
context of molecular subtyping. Improving the accuracy
and objectivity of glioma grading will directly impact pa-
tient care by identifying patients with aggressive disease
who require more aggressive therapeutic regimens and
sparing those with less aggressive disease from unneces-
sary treatments. Currently, all grade III and IV diffuse
gliomas are typically treated very aggressively with radi-
ation and concomitant chemotherapy. In the above men-
tioned study, the AI software learned about survival
from histologic images and created a unified framework
which interpreted histology and genomic biomarkers for
predicting time to event outcomes. The ability of pre-
dicting patient outcomes by AI was found to be more
accurate than that of surgical pathologists. This study
provides insights into applications of deep learning in
medicine and the integration of histology and genomic
data and provides methods for dealing with factors such
as intratumoral heterogeneity [ 22]. Similarly, Muneer
et al. used AI techniques for glioma grade identification
and their results were excellent with greater than 90%
accuracy [ 23]. The clinical success of Immunotherapy is
driving the need to develop new prognostic and predict-
ive assays for patient selection and stratification. This
can be achieved by a combination of computational
pathology and AI. A recent study critically assessed vari-
ous computational approaches which can help in the de-
velopment of a standardized methodology in the
assessment of immune oncology biomarkers such as
PDL-1. The authors discussed how integrated bio in-
formatics allow the amalgamation of complexmorphological phenotypes with AI. They provided an
outline of ML and AI tools which can be applied in
immuno -oncology for example pattern recognition in
large and complex data sets and deep learning ap-
proaches for survival analysis. They were hopeful that
combinations of surgical pathology and computational
analysis will improve patient stratification in immuno –
oncology. The authors are convinced that future clinical
demands will be best met by dedicated research at the
interface of surgical pathology and bio informatics sup-
ported by professional societies and by incorporating
data sciences and digital image analysis in the profes-
sional education of pathologists [ 24].
AI in oncology
In Oncology, new AI intelligence platforms could in fu-
ture assist in making therapeutic decisions in cancer pa-
tients [ 25]. In 2016, the results of a double-blind
validation study were presented at the San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium which demonstrated a strong
concordance between treatment recommendations by a
panel of oncologists and Watson for oncology (WFO),
an AI platform which was developed by IBM Corpor-
ation, (Armonk, NY) in collaboration with Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. WFO computing system
has the ability to extract and assess large amounts of
structured and unstructured data from medical records.
It then uses natural language processing and machine
learning to present cancer treatment options. In this
study, the authors compared the concordance between
WFO and the multidisciplinary tumor board of the insti-
tution (a group of 12 to 15 oncologists). The degree of
concordance was analyzed in 638 patients with breast
cancer who had been treated at the hospital. The time it
took for each method to issue recommendations was
also analyzed. The study showed that 90% of WFO ’s rec-
ommendations were concordant with those of the tumor
board. Nearly 80% of the recommendations were con-
cordant in patients with non –metastatic breast cancer.
However, concordance was only 45% in patients with
metastatic disease, 68% in patients with triple negative
breast cancer and 35% in patients with HER 2/neu nega-
tive breast cancer. The authors noted that patients with
triple negative breast cancer have fewer treatment op-
tions compared to those with HER 2/neu negative breast
cancer. More complicated cancers lead to more diver-
gent opinions regarding treatment. The authors found
that it took an average of 20 min to manually capture
and analyze the data and generate recommendations.
However, after the oncologists gained more familiarity
with the cases, the mean time decreased to approxi-
mately 12 min. WFO, on the other hand took only 40 s
to capture and analyze the data and make recommenda-
tions. According to the authors of this study, WFO canAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 7 of 16