of pathologists being replaced. Although their work-
flow will likely change, their contribution to patient
care will continue to be critically important. The
diagnostic process is too complicated and diverse to
be trusted to hard-wired algorithms alone. It is hoped
that AI and human pathologists will be natural coop-
erators, not natural competitors. Thus, it appears AI
will not replace the microscopist or take over path-
ology anytime soon. The hypothesis that intuition and
creativity combined with the raw computing of AI
heralds an age where well designed and executed AI
algorithms will solve complex problems and replace
the microscopist are not true. The microscope will
probably be around for a long time. However, AI will
likely play an increasingly important role in diagnostic
microscopy. In the words of Granter et al., “winter
may be coming but hopefully it will be gentle and
mild. ”[6,38,42].
Current applications of AI in pathology
Let us now examine various examples of application of
AI in practical surgical pathology especially in cancers
and its impact on patient care.
As far back in 2007, Wild et al. used AI to predict the
risk of progression to muscle invasion in non-muscle in-
vasive bladder cancers. They integrated urinary bladder
cancer arrays with artificial neural networks for this pur-
pose. Although the recurrence rate of non-invasive blad-
der cancer is high, the majority of tumors are indolent
and can be managed by endoscopic means alone. On the
other hand, the prognosis of muscle invasion in bladder
cancer is poor and radical treatment is required if cure
is to be obtained. The authors developed a predictive
panel of 11 genes to identify tumor progression. They
found that the combination of genes analyzed using arti-
ficial neural networks was able to significantly stratify
risk of tumor progression which was very difficult to
identify by clinicopathological means [ 44].
In lung cancer, computational analysis of histological
images using AI is now being increasingly applied in
order to improve the diagnostic accuracy. Tumor pheno-
type usually reflects the overall effect of molecular alter-
ations on the behavior of cancer cells and provides a
practical visual reading of the aggressiveness of the
tumor. However, in some cases, the human evaluation of
histological images is subjective and lacks reproducibil-
ity. AI is now being increasingly used in routine clinical
practice for the optimization of histological and cyto-
logical classification, prognostic prediction and genomic
profiling of patients with lung cancer. However, there
are still several challenges which need to be addressed
for successful utilization of AI in the accurate diagnosis
and prognostication of lung cancer [ 45].Histopathological assessment of lung cancer slides is
usually accurate in reaching a correct diagnosis. How-
ever, the prediction of prognosis is not very accurate. In
a 2016 study, Yu et al. used fully automated microscopic
pathology image factors to predict the prognosis of non-
small cell lung cancer. They obtained 2186 H&E stained
whole slide images of lung adenocarcinoma and squa-
mous cell carcinoma patients from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) and an additional 294 histological images
from Stanford Tissue Array (STA) database. From these
images, they extracted 9879 quantitative image features
and selected the top features by using regularized ma-
chine learning methods. They were able to distinguish
short term survivors from long term survivors in pa-
tients with stage I adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma and showed that automatically derived image
features can predict the prognosis of lung cancer pa-
tients accurately. Their findings were statistically signifi-
cant. The authors are confident that their methods are
extensible to histopathology images of cancers from
other organs [ 39].
In a 2018 study, Kumar et al. built an automatic in-
formatics methodology capable of identifying statistically
significant associations between clinical findings of non-
small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) in unstructured texts of
patient pathology reports and the various clinically ac-
tionable genetic mutations identified from next gener-
ation sequencing (NGS) in NSCLC (EGFR, KRAS, BRAF
and PIK3CA). Their findings were statistically significant
(p-value < 0.05) and showed associations to mutations in
specific genes which were consistent with published lit-
erature. Like Yu et al., Kumar et al. were also confident
that their approach is extensible to other cancers and
provide the first steps toward understanding the role of
genetic mutations in the development and treatment of
different types of cancer [ 40].
Considerable work utilizing AI has already been done
in breast cancer pathology. In breast cancer, the most
common malignancy in women worldwide, earlier diag-
nosis and better adjuvant therapy have substantially im-
proved patient outcome in recent decades. Although
pathological diagnosis has proved to be instrumental in
guiding breast cancer treatment, new challenges have
emerged as increased understanding of breast cancer in
the last few years has revealed its complex nature. As pa-
tient demand for personalized breast cancer therapy
grows, there is an urgent need for more precise bio-
marker assessment and more accurate histologic diagno-
sis to make better therapy decisions. The digitization of
pathology data has opened the door to faster, more re-
producible and more precise diagnosis through comput-
erized image analysis. Software to assist diagnostic
breast pathology through image processing techniques
have been around for years. But recent breakthroughs inAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 12 of 16