In 2017, FDA approved the first WSI system which may
encourage the pathology community to begin standardiz-
ing and using digitization on a larger scale thereby stream-
lining the exchange of information. The multidimensional
nature of radiology or cardiology images allows them to
be viewed on a 2 or 3 or 4 dimensional plane which pro-
vides rich information via AI pattern recognition. On the
other hand, pathology images are digitized for 2 dimen-
sional imaging of the sample which does not provide as
much information as it would on a 3 or 4 dimensional
plane. Currently, in the absence of standardized pathologic
imaging workflow, the exchange and translation of infor-
mation to other information systems, physicians and
health systems is very difficult. Large centralized image ar-
chives of digitized pathologic images are not accessible
compared to other medical imaging archives creating add-
itional obstacles to the successful integration of AI into
pathology practice. The development of such large cen-
tralized image archives or databases will require immense
capital investment which may not be feasible for smaller
hospitals. Thus even assuming that high speed AI algo-
rithms can be developed to accurately detect and diagnose
digitized pathology images, the gain in productivity from
automation may be low in the face of the immense finan-
cial costs involved. One viable solution to this problem
may be pathologic imaging management in the cloud
computing environment provided adequate security priv-
acy issue safeguards are ensured and the speed of image
transfer over the internet is sufficient. If these are success-
ful and a standardized digital imaging infrastructure in
pathology is established, it will allow AI to become a
powerful asset to pathologists who seek to better bridge
the gap between research and patient care. In the near fu-
ture, it is likely that technological advances like highly effi-
cient automated whole slide scanner systems, innovative
AI platforms, and pathologist friendly image annotation
and analysis systems will become increasingly prominent
in the daily professional lives of pathologists [ 5].
Many authors now predict that computers will become
increasingly integrated into the pathology work flow and
will especially be useful when they can improve accuracy
in answering questions which are difficult for patholo-
gists. It is predicted that computer programs i will be
able to count mitotic figures or quantitatively grade im-
munohistochemistry stains more accurately than pathol-
ogists and could identify regions of interest in
cytopathology slides thus reducing the time a pathologist
would need to spend in screening. Some authors also
predict that, over time, as computers gain more and
more discriminatory abilities, they will reduce the
amount of time it takes for pathologists to render diag-
noses and in the process reduce the demand for patholo-
gists as microscopists potentially enabling pathologists
to focus their cognitive resources on higher leveldiagnostic and consultative tasks such as integrating mo-
lecular, morphologic and clinical information to assist in
treatment and clinical management decisions for indi-
vidual patients, in other words on personalized care. It is
predicted that digital pathology, WSI and AI will be syn-
ergistic technologies to human cognition. The question
of“human versus computer ”is already being refined to
“human versus human with computer ”. It is believed
that AI will enable pathologists to focus more on higher
level cognitive tasks by performing the repetitive detailed
tasks which require accuracy and speed and which
humans find mind-numbing and consequently error
prone. Pathologic diagnosis is considered to be a well-
thought-out cognitive opinion, benefiting from the pa-
thologists ’training and experience and subject to their
biases. It is argued that the professional value of patholo-
gists comes from their ability to give the most appropri-
ate (even if not the most perfect) opinion in the clinical
context and that human pathologists constantly recali-
brate their diagnosis based on even small but significant
bits of clinical and patient specific information provided
through physician notes, pathology reports, verbal or
written communications with clinicians etc. It is believed
by many authors that a person working in partnership
with an information resource is better than that same
person unassisted. In other words, they favor “human
versus human with computer ”rather than “human ver-
sus computer ”. They believe that a sunny era of AI as-
sistance in pathology is on the horizon and do not
believe in dark clouds of AI competition replacing pa-
thologists. However, at the same time, they are realistic
enough to recognize that eventually even the cognitive
lead of human pathologists will narrow as new and bet-
ter AI products emerge. Currently the whole frame work
of AI, digital pathology and WSI depends on financial
factors and remains undefined. It may, ironically, depend
on human ability to overcome financial, technological
and regulatory obstacles [ 42,43].
Education of pathologists will be the greatest challenge
and will require the longest times. AI methods will need
to be integrated into all pathology training programs.
Future generations of pathologists will need to be com-
fortable using digital images and other data in combin-
ation with computer algorithms in their daily practice.
Optimistically, 5 to 10 years will be required to build
such a work force even in developed countries and that
too only if the process begins now. Many believe that AI
may be just what pathology has been waiting for. While
still requiring evaluation within a normal surgical path-
ology workflow, deep learning has the opportunity to as-
sist pathologists by improving the efficiency of their
work, standardizing quality and providing better prog-
nostic information. Like in the case of immunohisto-
chemistry and molecular diagnostics, there is little riskAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 11 of 16