where it is not available. In using AI for better medical
care the investment of time and manpower to validate
model data sets is a major hurdle. Because Deep learning
AI identifies patterns, the data used to train the AI
model must be validated by medical specialists. Add-
itional financial resources and considerable time are re-
quired to perfect AI models which can be deployed with
confidence to assist in medical practice.
The question of legal responsibility will need to be re-
solved before AI can become common place in medicine
especially in imaging specialties such as radiology and
pathology. Who will be held accountable for an action
resulting from an AI based decision? Who will be re-
sponsible for an error made through the use of an AI
program? It cannot be emphasized enough that legal re-
sponsibility is a significant consideration in the medical
field when implementing new technologies or proce-
dures or when developing new drugs. Use of AI is new
in medicine and no legal precedents are available. No
matter how much more accurate AI tools are compared
to their human counterparts, the possibility that data
might be misinterpreted through false positive and false
negative findings cannot be excluded. The issue of legal
responsibility for AI based decisions in medicine is fur-
ther complicated and obscured by the lack of clarity and
confusion regarding major issues such as processing of
sensitive personal information and data collection, con-
sent, transparency, storage etc. The human element will
remain an important factor in incorporating AI into
wide practice in hospitals. In pathology, even if the
process is completely automated with a routine digital
imaging system and data base management, human
agreement will likely be essential [ 5].
Although health care was slow to adopt AI, the pace
of implementation is now accelerating at an impressive
rate. In 2014, the acquisition of AI startups in health
care was about 600 million dollars. In 2021, it is antici-
pated to reach 6.6 billion dollars. One reason health care
is ripe for AI is “big data ”. The health care industry has
rich data sets which are ideal for AI [ 6]. Personalized
care is the major objective of both basic and transla-
tional cancer research. Building an intelligent automated
entity to evaluate, diagnose and treat patients in research
settings is arguably the easiest part of designing an end –
to- end medical AI system. There is a lot of hype and
hopes surrounding emerging AI applications in medicine
but the brittleness of these systems, the importance of de-
fining the correct frameworks for their application and the
need to ensure vigorous quality control including human
supervision to avoid driving patients on ‘autopilot ’towards
unexpected, unwanted and unhealthy outcomes are essen-
tial factors that need to be acknowledged. Since modern
machine learning algorithms perform complex mathemat-
ical transformations to the input data, errors made bycomputational systems will require extra vigilance for de-
tection and interpretation [ 7].
AI will in all probability transform clinical practice
over the next decade. As AI building an intelligent auto-
mated entity to evaluate, diagnose and treat patients in
research settings is arguably the easiest part of designing
an end –to- end medical AI system. There is a lot of
hype and hopes surrounding emerging AI applications
in medicine but the brittleness of these systems, the im-
portance of defining the correct frameworks for their
application and the need to ensure vigorous quality
control including human supervision to avoid driving
patients on ‘autopilot ’towards unexpected, unwanted
and unhealthy outcomes are essential factors that need
to be acknowledged. Since modern machine learning al-
gorithms perform complex mathematical transforma-
tions to the input data, errors made by computational
systems will require extra vigilance for detection and
interpretation [ 7].
AI will in all probability transform clinical practice
over the next decade. As AI technologies are evolving at
a fast pace and machine learning models are being up-
dated with additional pieces of information, regulatory
approval is essential. Recently, the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) announced a pilot certification ap-
proach that inspects both the AI developers and the
product itself [ 8]. Such steps can ensure public trust in
novel medical AI applications. Even if an AI system is
designed only to advise physicians or health care
personnel rather than to carry out the actual diagnosis
and treatment tasks, it may still result in unintended
harmful consequences. A recent study showed that over-
reliance on decision support systems resulted in in-
creased false negative rate in radiology diagnoses com-
pared with the study scenario when the computer-aided
diagnostic system was unavailable to the same group of
radiologists- this is termed confirmatory bias. In
addition, inexperienced medical practitioners may over-
react to excessive warning messages - this is termed alert
fatigue. Thus, AI developers need to address these chal-
lenges even if the systems only play an advisory role.
Trust in medical technology is closely related to its an-
ticipated utility. If a perception emerges that a new tech-
nology is harmful and has untoward consequences, then
the barriers to its acceptance will become next to insur-
mountable. This issue becomes even more complicated
if the technology is complex and the general public and
even the domain expert cannot fully evaluate its efficacy
and potential hazards. This is termed ‘Frame Problem ’.
Frame problem can cause medical errors that will draw
the attention of the public and lead to law suits against
companies or organizations using, deploying or develop-
ing medical AI applications. The ‘black box ’nature (lack
of full disclosure and information about the technology)Ahmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 4 of 16