AI promise to fundamentally change the way breast can-
cer is detected and treated in the near future [ 46].
Nodal metastasis of breast cancer, or any other cancer
for that matter, influences therapy decisions. Identifica-
tion of tumor cells in lymph nodes can be laborious and
error prone especially for small tumor foci. Steiner et al.
developed a deep learning algorithm for the detection of
breast cancer metastases in lymph nodes. In this study,
six pathologists reviewed 70 digitized slides from lymph
node sections unassisted and assisted by algorithms. In
the assisted mode, the deep learning algorithm was used
to identify and outline regions with high likelihood of
containing tumor. Algorithm assisted pathologists dem-
onstrated higher accuracy than either the algorithm or
the pathologist alone. In particular, algorithm assistance
significantly increased the sensitivity of detection for mi-
cro metastases (91% vs 83%, p-value = 0.02). Average re-
view time per image was also significantly shorter with
assistance than without assistance for both micro metas-
tases and negative images ( p-value = 0.002 and 0.018 re-
spectively). The pathologists were asked to provide a
numeric score regarding the difficulty of each image
classification. On the basis of this score, pathologists
considered the image review of micro metastases to be
significantly easier when interpreted with assistance ( p-
value = 0.0005). This study demonstrates the potential of
a deep learning algorithm to improve pathologist accur-
acy and efficiency in a digital pathology workflow [ 47].
In a 2017 study, Yala et al. developed a machine learn-
ing model to extract pertinent tumor characteristics
from breast pathology reports which enabled them to
create a large database. Their system was trained to ex-
tract 20 separate categories of information. They trained
their system from two data sets which consisted of 6295
and 10,841 manually attenuated reports. It is important
to note that extracting information manually from elec-
tronic medical records is a time-consuming and expen-
sive process. The authors tested the accuracy of their
model on 500 reports that did not overlap with the
training set. The model achieved accuracy of 90% for
correctly parsing all carcinoma and atypia categories for
a given patient. The average accuracy for individual cat-
egories was 97%. Using this classifier, they created a
database of 91,505 breast pathology reports from which
information was extracted. They also developed a user –
friendly interface to the data base that allows physicians
to easily identify patients with target characteristics. The
authors believe that their model has the potential to re-
duce the effort required for analyzing large amounts of
data from medical records and to minimize the cost and
time required to extract scientific information from
these data [ 48].
In a 2018 study, Bychkov et al. developed and trained
a deep learning network to predict outcome of colorectalcancer based on images of tumor tissue samples.
They evaluated a set of digitized H&E stained tumor
tissue microarray (TMA) samples from 420 colorectal
cancer patients with known clinicopathological and
outcome data. Their results showed that deep learn-
ing based outcome prediction with only small tissue
areas as input outperformed visual histological assess-
ment performed by human experts in stratification of
patients into low risk and high risk categories. They
suggested that state –of-the-art deep learning tech-
niques can extract more prog nostic information from
the tissue morphology of colorectal cancer than an
experienced human observer [ 49].
Yoshida et al. in a 2018 study evaluated the classifica-
tion accuracy of a newly developed e –Pathologist
image analysis software in gastric biopsies. They ob-
tained and stained 3062 consecutive gastric biopsy speci-
mens and digitalized the specimen slides. Two
experienced gastrointestinal pathologists evaluated each
slide for histological diagnosis. The authors compared
the three tier (positive for carcinoma or suspicion of car-
cinoma; caution for adenoma or suspicion of a neoplas-
tic lesion; or negative for a neoplastic lesion) or two –
tier (negative or positive) classification results of human
pathologists with the e-Pathologist. Overall concordance
rate was 55.6%. For negative specimens, concordance
rate was 90.6% but for positive biopsy specimens,
concordance rate was less than 50%. For the two tier
classification, sensitivity and specificity were 89.5 and
50.7% respectively. The authors concluded that al-
though there are limitations to the application of au-
tomated histopathological classification of gastric
biopsy specimens in the clinical setting, the results
s h o wp r o m i s ef o rt h ef u t u r e[ 50].
The shortage of well –annotated pathology image
data for training deep neural networks is currently a
major issue because of the high costs involved. To over-
come this, transfer learning techniques are generally
used to reinforce the capacity of deep neural networks.
In order to further boost the performance of the state-
of-the-art deep neural networks and overcome the insuf-
ficiency of well annotated data, Qu et al. presented a
novel stepwise fine tuning-based deep learning scheme
for gastric pathology image classification. Their pro-
posed scheme proved capable of making the deep neural
network imitating the pathologist ’s professional observa-
tions and of acquiring pathology –related knowledge in
advance but with very limited extra cost in data annota-
tion. They conducted their experiments with both well-
annotated gastric pathology data and the proposed
target-correlative intermediate data on several state-of-
the art deep neural networks. Their results demonstrated
the feasibility and superiority of their proposed scheme
for boosting the classification performance [ 51].Ahmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 13 of 16