(Continued from previous page)
Conclusion: AI has the potential to transform the practice of surgical pathology by ensuring rapid and accurate
results and enabling pathologists to focus on higher level diagnostic and consultative tasks such as integrating
molecular, morphologic and clinical information to make accurate diagnosis in difficult cases, determine prognosis
objectively and in this way contribute to personalized care.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, Medicine, Pathology
Introduction
The role of Artificial intelligence (AI) in the field of
medicine is constantly expanding. AI promises to
revolutionize patient care in the coming years with the
aim of optimizing personalized medicine and tailoring it
to the use of individual patients. Medicine embraced AI
slowly. Some specialties such as radiology were quick to
adopt AI. Others like pathology are only now beginning
to utilize AI in clinical use. In this article, we will start
by describing the general principles of AI. We will then
analyze its current role in medicine in general by looking
at various examples of its applications in specialties such
as radiology and oncology. In the second half of this re-
view, we will discuss the current and expected future
role of AI in surgical pathology, the practical, financial
and regulatory difficulties involved, the future of the
microscope and the fear of pathologists of being re-
placed by computer algorithms. We will also discuss a
number of recent studies which highlight the usefulness
of AI in the practice of surgical pathology.
Main text
General principles and definitions
AI can be defined as the ability of computers to perform
tasks that normally require human intelligence. It refers
to the development and programming of computers and
devices having human-like characteristics which can per-
form diverse complex functions such as driving an auto-
matic car, diagnosing a medical condition, discovering
fraud and money laundering, interpreting legal advice,
proving mathematical theorems etc.
Machine learning (ML)
a subfield of AI, is defined as a computational system
based on a set of algorithms that attempts to analyze
vast and diverse data by using multiple layers of analysis.
There are a number of ways in which a computer can be
programmed to make intelligent judgments and it is es-
sential to use the right algorithms for specific purposes.
ML is one of the commonest AI techniques used for
processing big data. It is a self-adaptive system that pro-
vides increasingly better analysis and patterns with ex-
perience and newly added data. These techniques have
evolved hand –in–hand with the digital era which has
brought about an explosion of data in all forms from allparts of the world. Enormous amount of data, known
simply as big data is easily and readily accessible and can
be shared through applications like cloud computing.
ML applies statistical methods to automatically learn
from data and experience without explicit instructions.
It has seen an explosion of interest in recent years. One
technique in particular, known as deep learning, has
produced ground breaking results in many important
problems including image classification and speed
recognition.
Recent growing interest and efforts to incorporate AI
into any number of industries is mainly due to the rise
of deep learning. Also known as deep neural learning or
deep neural network or convoluted neural network
(CNN), it is a type of machine learning algorithm that
uses multiple layers of data for example multiple layers
of image processing to access higher level features from
the image. It is a function of AI which is inspired by the
neurons of the human brain and imitates the functioning
of the human brain in processing data and creating pat-
terns which can be used in decision making. It is capable
of learning unsupervised from data. Deep or convoluted
neural networks are the most used ML techniques in the
biomedical world. These artificial neural networks are
interconnected and follow mathematical models. Their
field of application is vast and allows the management of
‘big data ’in genomics and molecular biology. They are
most commonly applied for analyzing visual images.
Through deep learning, AI recognizes patterns using
various forms of neural networks based on the availabil-
ity of big data repositories. The process is inexpensive
and the computational processing power is easily access-
ible. The neural networks can acquire data rapidly via
image scanners, digital cameras, remote sensors, elec-
tronic appliances or the Internet of Things (IoT). AI has
the ability to learn from both unstructured and un-
labeled data. It uses a hierarchical level of artificial
neural networks to carry out the process of ML. Artifi-
cial neural networks used in AI are built, as mentioned
above, like the human brain with neuron nodes con-
nected together like a web. This is in contrast with trad-
itional computer programs which build analysis with
data in a linear way. The hierarchical design of deep
learning systems enables machines to process data via a
nonlinear approach [ 1].Ahmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 2 of 16