algorithms. In developed western countries, the private
sector is showing interest in investing in AI and other
new technologies in healthcare. AI incorporation in
pathology should be explored as a bold and creative idea
in developing countries to motivate investment by
private sector. The global efforts currently going on
towards developing sustainable pathology and labora-
tory medicine services in low and middle income
countries should include AI in pathology especially
surgical pathology [ 29,30,34,36].
However, other authorities disagree, at least in the
context of surgical pathology. Some believe that al-
though AI will play some role in diagnosis in the future,
it could actually detract attention from proven, basic in-
vestments that are necessary to provide access to path-
ology and laboratory medicine services in low and
middle income countries (LMICs). They argue that the
use of AI in surgical pathology is still in its infancy and
its ability to generate accurate diagnoses is yet to be
proven. They believe that AI in telepathology will only
be implemented in LMICs if it has first been successfully
implemented in high income countries (HICs) where
currently its role in day to day patient care remains un-
clear. These authors further argue that although tele-
pathology could be used within integrated, tiered
laboratory networks in LMICs, with slides prepared and
scanned in lower levels and transferred to higher levels
within the network for interpretation and consultation,
telepathology relies on access to technology that is nei-
ther affordable nor practical in these countries. Most
LMICs even lack the capacity to generate the slides
needed as a prerequisite for telepathology and do not
have access to these integrated networks. Even if it was
affordable and possible to develop histopathology ser-
vices, implement telepathology systems and transmit im-
ages taken in LMICs to pathologists in HICs as a
temporary solution, there are insufficient numbers of pa-
thologists in HICs to interpret images for large numbers
of patients even in their own countries [ 37].
Will AI replace microscopes and pathologists? Not-
withstanding the many difficulties and obstacles, it is
now widely accepted that the use of AI will transform
clinical practice over the next decade and some authors
believe that an early impact of this will likely be the inte-
gration of image analysis and ML into routine surgical
pathology. With a digital revolution transforming the
reporting practice of diagnostic surgical pathology, a
proliferation of image analysis software tools has re-
sulted worldwide. This has ignited a hot debate among
pathologists whether with increasing availability and re-
finement of image analysis software, surgical pathologists
will ultimately be replaced by computer algorithms. In
other words, will AI algorithms and computer programs
replace pathologists and what therefore is the future ofsurgical pathologists? It is already widely accepted that
AI algorithms “will be incredibly useful in medical re-
search, diagnosis (and) complex treatment planning ”.
Currently, there appear to be many hurdles to replacing
human microscopists with computer algorithms. On the
practical side, as discussed previously there are signifi-
cant financial barriers and c osts to incorporating slide
scanners and computers into pathology workflow, al-
though presumably hospitals would undertake these
steps if it was proved that computer algorithms im-
prove diagnostic accuracy or increase the efficiency of
pathologists [ 5,38].
An especially important and interesting question is: will
computer algorithms surpass humans in diagnostic abil-
ities? Some authorities are skeptical and believe that not-
withstanding the success of AI in radiology and
cardiology, it is at present difficult to envision how AI can
be integrated effectively into routine pathology practice.
Pathology departments generate high resolution micros-
copy images which unlike radiology and cardiology do not
correlate to equivalent standardized digital imaging for-
mats and workflows. Images in pathology require a man-
ual process of tissue biopsy, specimen preparation and
staining before digitization. Currently, development of
such state - of - the - art computer vision algorithms re-
quires millions of training images. Although WSI which
involves scanning the whole tissue on glass slides and
digitizing the images is useful and allows many pathology
slides to be analyzed efficiently within a relatively short
period of time, the system nevertheless suffers from com-
plications associated with acceptance, speed, the ability to
digitize all types of tissues as well as issues of data reso-
lution, storage and regulation. More importantly, estab-
lishing a whole slide image database of millions of images
is currently not practical. Although there are research pro-
jects experimenting with digitized pathologic images, there
is currently no standardized digital pathologic imaging
workflow. Another problem is the size of data. It is cur-
rently impossible to directly feed whole slide images into
algorithms because each one contains about 10GB of data.
However newer studies have demonstrated a promising
approach to circumvent this problem by dividing whole
slide images into smaller patches and then training an al-
gorithm to classify these patches into different categories.
Once this is done, statistical summaries of patch diag-
nosis are fed into a machine learning algorithm to
c l a s s i f yt h ee n t i r ei m a g ei n t oas i n g l ed i a g n o s i s .R e -
cent studies have shown that algorithms developed in
this way are able to distinguish subtypes of non –
small cell carcinoma of lung with an accuracy similar
to that of expert pulmonary pathologists. In breast
cancer, combining the predictions of human patholo-
gists and algorithms led to an 85% decrease in human
error in detecting metastatic breast cancer [ 5,39–41].Ahmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 10 of 16