provide treatment recommendations not only for pa-
tients with breast cancer but also for those with lung
and colorectal cancer. The lead author ’s institution in
India recently adopted the WFO system to support on-
cologists in making quality, evidence based treatment
decisions in cancer patients. The study however cau-
tioned that though AI is a helpful step toward personal-
ized medicine, it can only complement the physician ’s
work, not replace it. This is because when dealing with
humans, many factors such as the context and prefer-
ence of each patient, the patient-physician relationship,
human touch and empathy are present which cannot be
addressed by a machine [ 26].
Liu et al. in 2018 published a feasibility study using
WFO to assess its ability to make treatment recommenda-
tions in Chinese patients with lung cancer. In the authors ’
own words, “WFO is an outstanding representative AI in
the medical field, and it can provide to cancer patients
prompt treatment recommendations comparable with
ones made by expert oncologists ”. WFO is increasingly
being used in China. The authors selected all lung cancer
patients who were hospitalized and received antitumor
treatment for the first time at their hospital. They used
WFO to make treatment recommendations for their pa-
tients and then compared these recommendations to
those made by (or treatment regimens administered by)
their expert multi-disciplinary team. Almost 66% recom-
mendations made by WFO were consistent with the rec-
ommendations made by the oncology experts. They
concluded that though WFO recommendations were con-
sistent with the experts in the majority of cases, they were
still inconsistent in a significantly high proportion of cases
and thus, WFO could not currently replace oncologists.
They asserted that WFO can improve the efficiency of
clinical work by providing assistance to doctors but it
needs to learn the regional, ethnic characteristics of pa-
tients to improve its assistive ability [ 27].
AI in surgical pathology: its potential and promise,
difficulties and obstacles, current applications and future
directions
More than a decade ago, a number of articles described
in detail the steps by which AI could be applied for rou-
tine tissue based diagnosis using ‘virtual slides ’or in
other words the presentation of microscopic images as a
whole in a digital matrix. These steps include the meas-
urement of individual image quality and its correction if
unsatisfactory, development of a pixel based diagnostic
algorithm and its application in diagnosis and classifica-
tion and feedback to order additional information. Ex-
amples include virtual Immunohistochemical slides,
automated image classification, detection of relevant
image information, and supervision by pathologists.
These early studies hoped that pathologists will nolonger be primary “water carriers ”but will work as super-
visors at a “higher level ”and AI will allow them more time
to concentrate on difficult cases for the benefit of their pa-
tients. Even in 2009, virtual slides were already in use for
teaching and continuous education and first attempts to
introduce them into routine work had begun. At that time
the implementation of a complete connected AI sup-
ported system was in its childhood [ 28].
Advances in the quality of whole –slide images have
set the stage for the clinical use of digital images in sur-
gical pathology. Along with advances in computer image
analysis, this raises the possibility for computer assisted
diagnostics in pathology to improve histopathologic in-
terpretation and clinical care.
Pathology was late to adopt digital imaging and com-
puter assisted diagnostic technologies. This is partly due
to practical and financial obstacles. It needs to be under-
stood that unlike radiology, many of the practical bene-
fits cannot be achieved with pathology digitization. A
surgical pathology workflow that includes digital path-
ology will not reduce or remove the need to produce
and ultimately store glass slides. Instead of any reduc-
tions, digital pathology will require additional workflows,
personnel, equipment and importantly storage of data (it
is estimated that digital pathology images constitute at
least ten times larger files than radiology images) all on
top of an already financially and operationally stressed
health care system. Digital pathology will definitely bring
some advantages especially in areas such as rapid tele-
consultations with experts, quality and safety etc. Thus,
proof of definite clinical value will be essential for wide-
spread adoption of digital pathology. Given that digital
pathology is likely to be costlier. AI in pathology will
need to demonstrate improved efficiency, quality and
safety [ 4,6].
A major challenge to the deployment of digital path-
ology was recently addressed. In April 2019, Philips re-
ceived FDA clearance for a Pathology Solution to be
used for primary pathology diagnostics. This device is
used for scanning glass pathology slides and for review-
ing these slides on computer monitors. This Pathology
Solution has already been established as a predicate de-
vice that could pave the way for a host of other FDA ap-
proved whole-slide scanners for primary diagnostics to
become available in the coming years. Thus, the expand-
ing role of AI in health care, the reduced costs of digital
data and the availability of usable digital images are now
in alignment for digital pathology to succeed [ 6].
Telepathology is defined as the practice of routine
pathology using telecommunication links to enable the
electronic transmission of digital pathology images. It
can be used for remotely rendering primary diagnoses,
second opinion consultations, quality assurance, educa-
tion and research. Until recently the use of telepathologyAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 8 of 16