risk of surgical intervention in their patients. The au-
thors were confident that it could be used to design
treatment strategies tailored to individual Cohn ’s Disease
patients [ 16].
Even in surgery, the same critical question is now be-
ing asked. How will the digital revolution and AI change
surgical practice? How will it translate in the practice of
surgery? A recent study by Wall and Krummel believes
that AI may impact surgery in the near future in three
main areas. These include enhancement of training mo-
dalities, cognitive enhancement of the surgeon and pro-
cedural automation. The authors admit that there have
been unanticipated missteps in the use of these tech-
nologies but have little doubts about their adoption in
surgical practice. The authors agree that the promise of
big data, AI and automation in surgery is high and be-
lieve that surgeons in the near future will need to be-
come “digital surgeons ”and must be prepared to adopt
smarter training modalities, supervise the learning of
machines that can enhance cognitive function and ultim-
ately oversee autonomous surgery without allowing for a
decay in their operating skills [ 17].
AI in radiology, already a success story
In radiology, AI is improving accuracy in diagnostic im-
aging. As patient images can be directly acquired in
digital form for central archival and soft copy review,
radiology practice has readily incorporated AI into clin-
ical practice. An established digital imaging infrastruc-
ture has allowed a seamless embedding of AI into the
radiology workflow. Large amounts of data can be
translated and transmitted within minutes. For patient
images generated by different imaging modalities such
as X-ray, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Com-
puted Tomography (CT), ultrasound, and mammo-
gram, deep learning AI can be automated to pinpoint
accurately the areas of interest and diagnosis. Image
recognition using AI with deep learning through
CNNs has dramatically improved and is being in-
creasingly applied for diagnostic imaging [ 5].
Radiology converted to digital images more than 25
years ago. It is well positioned to deploy AI for diagnos-
tics. Several studies have shown considerable success in
the use of AI for evaluating a variety of scan types in-
cluding mammography for breast lesions, CT scans for
lung nodules and infections and MRI images for brain
tumors. By converting to digital images, radiology elimi-
nated film, chemicals, developers and storage of films
and solved problems related to loss of films and trans-
port of films to where they are needed for example in-
tensive care units (ICUs), operating rooms (ORs) and
emergency departments. There was inherent value
within these images for greater learning using computers
to improve the quality, safety and efficiency ofradiologists. However, the role of radiologist remains
crucial. For example, chest x-ray films with atypical fea-
tures would still need to be reviewed by radiologists to
ensure that artifacts or unusual clinical contexts were
adequately captured. An AI system will need to be con-
tinually calibrated by human feedback.
Lee et al. developed a deep learning based computer-
aided diagnosis (CAD) system for use in diagnosis of
cervical lymph node metastases by CT scan in thyroid
cancer. The authors collected 995 axial CT images (647
benign and 348 malignant) from 202 patients who
underwent CT for planning of surgery. Their system was
able to classify cervical lymph node metastases with a
high degree of accuracy. The authors believe that their
model may be useful in the clinical setting for the above
purpose [ 18].
A 2019 radiology based stud y tested the effect of AI in
automatic identification of lung cancer nodules (1 mm and
5 mm thick) by CT in patient s with stage T1 lung cancer
and compared the results with manual screening of T1 lung
cancer nodules by CT. It needs to be understood that using
CT to screen lung cancer nodules is a huge workload. The
AI recognition technology used in the study learned by
computer neural network methods 5000 cases of stage T1
lung cancer patients with 1 mm and 5 mm thickness nod-
ules. Following this learning, 500 cases of chest CT in stage
T1 lung cancer patients with 1 mm and 5 mm thickness
nodules were tested with AI and results were compared
with those of artificial manua l reading by radiologists. The
detection rates were similar and no significant differences
were noted. Thus, automatic learning of early lung cancer
chest CT images by AI showed hig h specificity and sensitiv-
ity for early lung cancer identification and may prove in-
valuable in the near future in assisting doctors in the early
diagnosis of small lung cancer nodules [ 19].
Value of a synergistic approach between disciplines
using AI for cancer prognostication and therapy: AI,
through the use of convolutional networks is also ex-
pected to play an important role in prediction of cancer
outcome. Survival outcome is the most important out-
come for cancer patients so that they can plan for them-
selves and their families. Thus, determining cancer
progress is crucial to controlling suffering and death due
to cancer. As the histologic diagnosis of cancer is an es-
sential initial step in determining the line of therapy, pa-
thologists have a great responsibility in the diagnosis of
cancer. Histologic grading and staging systems based on
the size or extent of invasion of the primary tumor, in-
volvement of regional lymph nodes and presence or ab-
sence of distant metastases are currently used to predict
the biologic behavior of cancer. In addition to histology,
several other tools including genomic markers, gene ex-
pression and epigenetic modifications are also used to
predict outcome in cancer patients [ 20].Ahmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 6 of 16