in clinical patient care was limited mostly to large aca-
demic institutions. In addition to prohibitive costs and
legal and regulatory issues technological problems, lack
of universal standards and most importantly resistance
from pathologists slowed its widespread use. The adop-
tion of telepathology practice is likely to expand in order
the meet the increased demands for subspecialist con-
sultation, and as technology advances, to improve diag-
nostic accuracy and work flow [ 29].
There are five main categories of digital or (tele) path-
ology i.e. static, dynamic, robotic, whole slide imaging
(WSI) and hybrid methods. Telepathology systems from
any of these categories can be used and have been found
to provide timely and accurate diagnoses similar to con-
ventional microscopy. It is important that these systems
meet clinical needs and are validated for the intended
use. The decision to purchase a particular system will
depend on the clinical application, specific needs and
budget of the laboratory as well as the personal prefer-
ences of the telepathologists involved [ 30].
In addition, the recent development of tissue clearing
technology introduces the possibility of 3D pathology
which allows for the collection of the 3D context of tis-
sue and would contribute to increased accuracy of auto-
matic pathological diagnosis by machine learning [ 31].
Automated analysis of histological slides is now possible
through WSI scanners which can acquire and store slides
in the form of digital images. This scanning associated
with deep learning algorithms allows recognition of le-
sions through automatic recognition of regions of interest
previously validated by the pathologist. These computers
aided diagnostic techniques have already been tested in
breast pathology and dermatopathology [ 32].
A 2016 study tested techniques for preprocessing of
free-text breast cancer pathology reports with the aim of
facilitating the extraction of information relevant to can-
cer morphology, grading and staging. These techniques
included using freely available software to classify the re-
ports as semi-structured or unstructured based on their
general layout, and using an open source language en-
gineering framework to predict parts of the report text
which contained information relevant to the cancer. The
results showed that it was possible to predict the layout
of reports and that the accuracy of prediction as to
which segments of a report contained relevant certain
information was sensitive to the report layout and the
type of information sought [ 33].
The digital revolution is transforming the practice of
diagnostic surgical pathology by integrating image ana-
lysis and machine learning into routine surgical path-
ology. Thus a clear need is being felt for a robust and
evidence based framework in which to develop these
new tools in a collaborative manner that meet regulatory
approval. A number of regulatory steps have beenapproved and implemented by the FDA in the United
States and the NCRI Cellular Molecular Pathology (CM-
Path) initiative and the British In Vitro Diagnostic Asso-
ciation (BIVDA) in the United Kingdom. These bodies
have set out a road map to help academia, industry and
clinicians develop new software tools to the point of ap-
proved clinical use. A 2019 study compared two com-
monly used CNNs in surgical pathology because it is
often assumed that the quality and format of the training
image as well as the number of training images in differ-
ent convolutional networks impacts the accuracy of
diagnosis. The authors photographed 30 hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) stained slides with normal tissue or
carcinoma from breast, colon and prostate generating
3000 partially overlapping images (1000 per tissue type).
They found that the images from the two convolutional
networks were similar in their accuracy and large num-
bers of unique H&E stained slides were not required for
training optimal ML models in diagnostic surgical path-
ology. The authors reinforced the need for an evidence
based approach by comparing different ML models in
order to achieve the best practices for histopathological
ML ensuring an accurate diagnosis [ 34,35]. Added value
of quantitative AI in pathology includes the confirmation
of equivocal findings noted by a pathologist, increasing
sensitivity of feature detection, improving efficiency etc.
Role of AI in surgical pathology in poor countries
Many authorities believe that there is no denying that
quantitative AI is part of the future of pathology. How-
ever, the significant cost issues involved may be cur-
rently prohibitive for poor, developing countries. In
these countries, the focus on ‘telepathology ’as a possible
solution will be inadequate. Incorporating AI in tele-
pathology can provide temporary solutions until requis-
ite financing schemes are implemented. AI is especially
applicable to surgical pathology because diagnosis de-
pends on pattern recognition which is a useful quality
for digital applications that depend on machine learning.
AI has the potential to create online data repositories
that can be used for the diagnosis of pathological speci-
mens (e. g breast cancer) worldwide, greatly reducing
human and infrastructural resource burden. A recent
study showed that machine learning algorithms achieved
potentially faster and more accurate diagnoses than 11
pathologists in a simulated setting. It is obvious that in-
corporation of AI in telepathology will demand high re-
sources and entail heavy costs. These issues could be
directly addressed if value is clearly demonstrated and
results in government and third-party payers investing
in reimbursement strategies for its use in pathology. The
recognition of AI as part of reimbursement strategies
that reward value-based care would provide important
incentives to develop and implement validatedAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 9 of 16