Big data is usually unstructured and is so vast that it
could take years, even decades for humans to under-
stand it, process it and obtain relevant information from
it. The unaided human brain cannot extract meaning
from such vast data sets. Thus, it is necessary to use
computers to identify patterns and associations and
make inferences and predictions from the data. Com-
panies in all spheres and fields have now realized the in-
credible potential of unraveling this wealth of
information and are increasingly adapting to AI systems.
Exponential growth in computing power, data storage
and sensing technology is producing a new world in
which incredible amount of data can be captured and
analyzed.
Owing to the breakthrough of deep learning, AI rap-
idly developed in the 2010s. Utilizing highly advanced
computer processing power and software technology, AI
is expected to radically change our lives, industries and
society as a whole. It has now entered the era of full-
scale practical dissemination.
AI in medicine, the present and the future
Advances in ML algorithms are resulting in the replica-
tion of many medical tasks which currently require hu-
man expertise by AI systems at levels of accuracy similar
to or greater than that achieved by human experts. In
medicine ,deep learning applications are increasingly be-
ing trained with large amounts of annotated data sets
freeing medical specialists to focus on more productive
tasks and projects. The potential of AI in medicine is
limitless and can serve as a great boon to improve health
care delivery in clinical practice.
According to Goldenberg et al., computer based de-
cision support systems based on ML have the poten-
tial to revolutionize medicine by performing complex
tasks that are currently assigned to specialists. ML
systems can increase diagnostic accuracy, increase ef-
ficiency of thorough puts, better streamline clinical
workflow, decrease human resource costs and im-
prove treatment choices [ 2].
However effective use of AI in medicine requires syn-
ergistic transdisciplinary competencies. In medicine, re-
cent promising biomedical and biomarker discoveries
notwithstanding, individually tailored care is still far
from reality and novel therapies which emerge from pre-
clinical trials are very rarely translatable to evaluation
for their diagnostic and therapeutic potential. The dis-
crepancy between experimental data on new anticancer
molecules and their actual use in diagnosis and therapy
is due to a number of factors which include biological
differences between human disease and animal models,
inconsistencies in experimental methodologies, wrong
interpretation of experimental results, lack of validation
of such data by pathologists with long term experiencein animal cancer models etc. For example, personalized
care in oncology requires the synergistic combination of
several disciplines such as nuclear medicine, radiology
and surgical pathology which represent complementary
approaches to diagnosis, prognosis and evaluation of
therapeutic response. A structural collaboration model
between these disciplines can accelerate the achievement
of a medical paradigm which takes into consideration
the uniqueness of every human being. A recent study ex-
amined fifteen papers focusing on early and accurate
diagnosis of breast, lung and prostate cancer and lymph-
oma using innovative AI applications. One example was
the application of a deep neural network in discriminat-
ing between malignant breast cancer lesions in mammo-
graphic images. The authors of this study were confident
that the data they examined provides the scientific ra-
tionale for further investigations in translational medi-
cine based on the combination between surgical
pathology, radiology and nuclear medicine [ 3].
ML is pioneering a new paradigm for scientific re-
search. Traditionally, the classic ‘hypothesis testing ’ap-
proach is used in research in which processing of data
leads to explanatory mechanisms which then suggest
further experiments that in turn lead to classic findings.
As a result of rapid technological advances, however,
many experiments now collect vast amounts of informa-
tion and can be considered ‘hypothesis generating ’. In-
vestigations in genomics and other-omics are cases in
point. The advent of image digitization has led to experi-
ments which generate enormous gigabytes or terabytes
of data. Fortunately, advances in deep learning allow the
derivation of important qualitative and quantitative in-
formation from images, putting visual observation on
the same playing field as molecular analysis. Since deep
learning is also very useful for- omic analysis, it allows
the amalgamation and interpretation of image based
data with –omic information, allowing this data to be
used for providing new and more accurate knowledge.
In this new hypothesis generating paradigm, we hunt for
meaning in a huge data set instead of proceeding one lo-
gical step at a time from observation to better explana-
tions. Thus deep learning has turned the scientific
process on its end [ 4].
AI has already become a major element in the health
care landscape. It has already become a reality providing
value in many fields of medicine for example in assess-
ment of skin lesions, evaluating fundus retinography for
detection of diabetic retinopathy, radiologic diagnosis for
example interpretation chest radiographs etc. These ex-
amples highlight the value of AI in aiding clinicians to
improve quality, safety, diagnosis and democratization of
care. For example, AI has enable radiologists to read im-
aging studies from anywhere in the world at their own
institution bringing expert care to parts of the worldAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 3 of 16