of modern machine learning algorithms may further ex-
acerbate and aggravate the issue. High profile examples
of harmful or inadequate performance will result in
extra scrutiny of the whole field and may hinder the de-
velopment of more robust AI systems. It must be kept in
mind that data driven AI algorithms are not immune
from the ‘garbage - in garbage –out ’rule. ML algo-
rithms are designed to identify the hidden patterns of
the data and generate output projections based on what
they have seen in the past. As many input data sets con-
tain artifacts or biases, the models learnt from such data
carry those biases and can potentially amplify them with
harmful consequences for the patients. Thus, optimized
machine learning models in medicine can be con-
founded by their training data, may not reflect an object-
ive clinical assessment and lead to partiality and
mistakes. Thus, great attention needs to be paid to data
quality and provenance in order to foster ‘patient trust ’
in AI systems and to avoid unethical practices even if
only due to negligence. However, this is an expensive
task. In other words, since modern machine learning
algorithms make complex mathematical changes to
the input data, biases and errors made by computa-
tional systems will require extra vigilance to detect
and interpret [ 9].
Let us now examine various examples of the applica-
tion of AI in various subspecialties of medicine including
gastroenterology, ophthalmology, dermatology, surgery,
radiology, oncology etc. The promise of AI in health care
is the delivery of improved quality and safety of care and
the potential to democratize expertise.
Nakagawa et al. developed a deep learning based AI
system for assessment of superficial esophageal squa-
mous cell carcinoma (SCC). Invasion of tumor depth is
a critical factor which affects the choice of treatment.
However, assessment of cancer depth is subjective and
inter observer variability is common. The authors ob-
tained 8660 non-magnified endoscopic (non-ME) and
5678 ME images as training data set and 405 non- ME
images from 155 patients as validation set. The system
showed sensitivity and specificity of 90.1 and 95.8% re-
spectively and its performance in diagnosing depth of in-
vasion in superficial SCC was comparable to that of
experienced endoscopists [ 10].
Similarly, Horie et al. developed a deep learning CNN
and tested its ability to diagnose esophageal SCC and
adenocarcinoma. They retrospectively collected 8428
training images of known esophageal carcinoma from
384 patients at their hospital and then prepared 1118
test images from 47 patients with esophageal cancer and
50 patients without cancer to evaluate diagnostic accur-
acy. The CNN took just 27 s to analyze the test images
with a sensitivity of 98%. It detected all cancers less than
10 mm in size. The authors were confident that moretraining would lead to even greater diagnostic accuracy
thus facilitating early diagnosis with consequent better
prognosis for patients with esophageal cancer [ 11].
Hirasawa et al. developed a CNN to detect gastric can-
cer in endoscopic images. They trained their CNN-
based diagnostic system using 13,584 endoscopic images
of gastric cancer. To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy, an
independent test set of 2296 images collected from 69
consecutive patients with 77 gastric cancer lesions was
applied to the constructed CNN. The CNN correctly
diagnosed 71 of 77 cancer lesions with an overall sensi-
tivity of 92.2%. 70 of the 71 lesions (98.6%) with a
diameter of 6 mm or more as well as all invasive can-
cers were correctly detected. All missed lesions were
superficially depressed and differentiated –type intra
mucosal cancers that were difficult to distinguish from
gastritis even for experienced endoscopists. Thus, the
system developed by Hirasawa et al. was able to process
numerous stored endoscopic images in a very short
time with a clinically relevant diagnostic ability and
could be applied to daily clinical practice to reduce the
burden of endoscopists [ 12].
Esteva et al. developed a deep CNN to discriminate
between the most common skin cancers including ma-
lignant melanoma. They compared their algorithm
against 21 board certified dermatologists in evaluating
biopsy proven clinical images and demonstrated at least
equivalent if not outright superiority. The authors sug-
gested that mobile devices, like smart phones, could be
deployed with similar algorithms, permitting potentially
low cost universal access to vital diagnostic care any-
where in the world [ 13]. Digital pathology is becoming
the new standard of care in dermatology and personal-
ized medicine. This collaboration between dermato-
pathology and dermatology (personalized dermatology)
is aimed at therapy tailored to the specific needs of each
patient [ 14].
In another recent study, Gulshan et al. applied a deep
CNN approach to a test set of more than 128,000 retinal
fundus images from adult patients with diabetes to iden-
tify referable diabetic retinopathy. The algorithm that
they developed demonstrated a very high sensitivity and
specificity for detecting referable diabetic retinopathy
and macular edema. This study showed that AI will not
be used to replace physicians but rather to perform sim-
ple, cost effective and widely available examinations and
analyses which could help identify at risk patients who
require referral for specialty care while reassuring other
patients that retinopathy was not present [ 15].
In a recent study, Dong et al. used machine learning
algorithms to predict the disease course of Crohn ’s Dis-
ease in Chinese patients. Crohn ’s disease is a complex
disease and it is difficult to predict its course. Their pro-
posed machine learning model accurately predicted theAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 5 of 16