A recent study by Liu et al. evaluated the application
and clinical implementation of a state-of-the-art deep-
learning-based AI algorithm. (Lymph Node Assistant or
LYNA) for detection of metastatic breast cancer in senti-
nel lymph node biopsies. They obtained whole slide im-
ages from H&E stained lymph nodes from 399 patients
(publicly available Camelyon 16 challenge data set).
LYNA was developed by using 270 slides and evaluated
on the remaining 129 slides. The findings were com-
pared with 108 slides (86 blocks) from 20 patients ob-
tained from an independent laboratory using a different
scanner to measure reproducibility. LYNA achieved a
slide-level area under the receiver operating characteris-
tic (AUC) of 99% and a tumor level sensitivity of 91%. It
was not affected by common histological artifacts such
as poor staining, air bubbles or over fixation. The AI al-
gorithm exhaustively evaluated every tissue patch on a
slide and achieved higher tumor-level sensitivity than,
and comparable slide-level performance to, pathologists.
This study once again showed that AI algorithms may
improve the pathologist ’s productivity and reduce the
number of false negatives associated with morphologic
detection of tumor cells. The authors provide a frame
work to aid practicing pathologists in assessing AI algo-
rithms for adoption into their workflow (akin to how a
pathologist assesses immunohistochemistry results) [ 52].
An International contest was held recently to have a
machine detect sentinel lymph node metastases of breast
cancer. It was termed the CAMELYON 16 grand chal-
lenge (Cancer Metastases in Lymph Nodes Challenge)
and different teams submitted deep learning algorithms
for this purpose. The findings of AI algorithms were
compared with those of a panel of 11 pathologists with
varying degrees of expertise in breast pathology. Al-
though the top algorithms performed better than the 11
pathologists when they were under time constraint, they
did not perform differently from the pathologists when
the latter had unlimited time. However, the fact that the
algorithms detected nodal micro metastases at the same
rate or better than pathologists was exciting. The fact
that pathologists were able to do as well or even better
than the algorithms when there were no time constraints
is significant. The CAMELYON 16 challenge highlights
a significant opportunity for AI in pathology, namely
assisting pathologists with screening for lesions [ 53].
In surgery for laryngeal carcinoma, preservation of ad-
jacent healthy tissue is very important. Thus, accurate
and rapid intraoperative histology of laryngeal tissue is
critical to achieve optimal surgical outcomes. Zhang
et al. used deep-learning based Stimulating Raman Scat-
tering (SRS) microscopy to provide accurate automated
diagnosis of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma on fresh
surgical specimens without fixation, sectioning, staining
or processing. The authors demonstrated near perfectconcordance between SRS and standard histology evalu-
ated by pathologists. Their deep learning based SRS clas-
sified 33 surgical specimens with 100% accuracy. The
authors contended that SRS histology integrated with
deep learning algorithms has the potential for providing
rapid intraoperative diagnosis which could help in the
surgical management of laryngeal carcinoma [ 54].
Yadav et al. recently showed how AI is optimizing the
detection and management of prostate cancer through
integration of machine learning based identification of
Gleason scores from pathology slides with genomics, im-
aging (especially MRI) and biomarkers [ 55].
It is predicted that the laboratory of the future will be
more highly automated and dominated by robotics and
will be more connected to take advantage of the benefits
of AI and the Internet of Things [ 56].
Conclusion
AI, the theory and development of computer systems
which can perform tasks which normally require human
intelligence, is slowly becoming part of everyday modern
life. Health care was slow to embrace AI but the pace of
implementation has now picked up. Computer based de-
cision support systems based on Machine Learning can
perform complex tasks which are currently assigned to
specialists. This has the potential to revolutionize medi-
cine by increasing diagnostic accuracy, improving clin-
ical workflow, decreasing costs of human resources and
improving therapeutics. Growing interest in AI and ma-
chine learning in diverse industries including health care
is mainly due to the rise of Deep Learning, a process
through which AI recognizes patterns using various
forms of neural networks which resemble the human
brain and which are in turn based on the availability of
big data repositories. The promise of AI in health care is
to deliver improved quality and safety of care and to
democratize expertise through use of mobile devices
such as smart phones which can be deployed with algo-
rithms and potentially be accessible universally at low
cost anywhere in the world delivering vital diagnostic
care. Health care is ripe for AI because it has rich data
sets (big data) which are ideal for AI since computers re-
quire large data sets to learn. AI is thus fast becoming a
major element in the health care landscape. AI algo-
rithms will in the coming future play an important role
in predicting cancer outcome and assisting in thera-
peutic decisions for cancer patients. In fields like radi-
ology which has already embraced digital operations, an
AI revolution is already in progress. Deep neural net-
works will be able to provide a synergistic combination
of disciplines such as radiology, nuclear medicine and
surgical pathology which will hopefully allow the
achievement of a medical paradigm which recognizes
that every human being is unique. Although pathologyAhmad et al. Diagnostic Pathology           (2021) 16:24 Page 14 of 16