36 
 advisable  due to the continuous evolution of tec hnologies  and customer s becoming  
accustomed to such experiences.  
Third, sample and data collection. The studies analysed tend to use students as 
consumers, but in the future other groups must be invited to participat e (actual users). 
Particularly older consumers should be involved in these studies, asking them how they 
feel these technologies could improve their social and personal well -being. This target 
can be important not only for consumer studies, but also for ci tizens when some social 
equipment is projected, or for tourists who intend to visit a destination.  Sample size and 
the data collection process are also a concern. Prior studies tend mostly to use sample s 
between 100 and 200 , and convenience samples , which does not allow generalization, 
Therefore, in future researchers should be more careful and use randomized or quota 
samples to avoid bias  and reach  more accurate conclusions.  
Fourth, measurements  and equipment . The use of questionnaires and scales to  
measure perceptions , particularly for level s of immersion , presence or enjoyment. Further 
research should use more often sensors and psychological analys is to avoid bias.  In this 
line, researchers should consider  that different VR equipment (e.g., Samsung Gear VR or 
Google Cardboard or Oculus Rift) can vary in levels of immersion capability and simulate 
different types of actions and interactions, making it  difficult t o compar e studies a s 
findings c annot be generalized to other equipment.  Finally, multi-sensory simulations in 
VR studies and the implications for consumer behaviour are recommended for contexts 
such as retail, education, hospitality and destination, and manufacturing.  
Finally , technology -driven experience with VR. Future res earch can analy se the 
influence of factors such as screen size, image motion, a stereoscopic presentation, or a 
realistic and  detailed design on VR experience s. A tool (e.g., measurement scale) that 
could measure different dimensions of VR experiences is recommende d (e.g., emotional,