29 
 not been prolific in publishing studies about the use of VR and r elated techniques in 
marketing.  Even so, w e point out Grewal et al. ’s (2017) article which gives a very brief 
glimpse of VR and AR in retail. They claim that VR and AR is a promis ing area  that is 
just beginning to take shape .   
Consistent with the seminal  theories on  marketing , proposed  and communicated 
by Kotler (1967), Howard and Sheth (1969) or Sheth (1973), we can trace the roots of 
studies on VR connected to marketing. Therefore, consumer buying -behavio ur and 
consumer decision -making work as a process leading marketeers, researchers and 
practitioners to continuously  discuss how to design, plan and manage the process where by 
consumers go from pre -purchase and purchase to post -purchase stages.  
 Starting wit h the pre -purchase stage, marketing academics consider all consumers 
experience the firm/brand before purchase, for instance: search ing for information about 
alternative products/brands through advertising and all form s of marketing 
communication, acknowle dging the reputation and credibility of the firm/brand and 
evaluati ng alternatives (e.g., Pieters, Baumgartner  & Allen 1995; Baek, Kim  & Yu, 2010; 
Swoboda,  Berg  & Schramm -Klein,  2013 ). Thus, VR technology can contribute to 
promot ing brand/firms acting as advertising, simulating the product/package, testing 
products (e.g., virtual car test drive) and collaborating in the process of developing new 
products. Connected to these themes we find the topics  of communication and social 
media (e.g., Huhn et al., 2011) , manufacturing and new product development - 
particularly in the process of launch ing the new product (e.g., Choi, Jo, Lee & Do Noh, 
2010) or VR applications (e.g., Dad et al., 2016). In sum, all marketing communication 
that allow s consumers to visualize products through VR and related technologies 
contribut es to a more vivid representation of the advertising, enriching consumers ’ 
imagina tion and eliciting more positive attitudes. However , the pre-purchase phase can