5 
 Positioning System) and have become ubiquitous as a means of searching for information. 
This gro wth allowed AR to become used in developing applications in many different 
sectors such as medicine, architecture, retailing and the tourism marketing industry (e.g., 
Bui, 2000; Grewal et al. , 2017 ). SAR has all the advantages of AR a s well as  enabl ing the  
augment ation of  real scale scene elements without the need of in -between devices 
allowing consumers to see 3D virtual environments that are in sync with their physical 
environment, letting them feel as if the new stimuli are in fact real (Roo & Hach et, 2017) . 
Some of the products that we now experience as physical ones may one day become 
virtual products displayed using SAR in a way that consumers might think they are really 
interacting with a physical product.  
Despite the important uses of AR and SAR technology, its technology is based on 
the physical environment and sometimes consumers need to be transported to a new 
setting where they can experiment what it would be like to be there enjoying a specific 
service or using a specific product. In such cases, an immersive simulated reality , such as 
those allowed by Virtual Reality (VR) technologies , has played an important role in 
engaging consumers in new and exciting experiences.  VR has been used successfully in 
various fields of study such as arc hitectural planning  (Schnabel et al. , 2001; Dorta & 
Pérez 2006) , rehabilitation medicine and health (Gourlay et al., 2000; Rizzo et al., 2011) , 
military applications (Manojlovich et al., 2003) , industrial a pplications (Wang & Li, 
2004)  and commerce (Krasonikolakis et al. , 2014; van Herpen et al. , 2016) , among others . 
2.2 Techn ology and Immersion  
Definitions of VR vary between th ose concentrat ing on  the technological apparatus, 
specifying hardware varieties and flavours, and th ose related to the human experience, 
focusing on the concept of presence (Steuer, 1992) . Immersive VR refers to the 
construction of a virtual world where users feel immersed as if they were part of the