31 
 complements traditional surveys measuring constructs like satisfaction, brand choice or 
enjoyment.  
One example of a company using VR simulating the purchase phase is Carrefour, 
which create s virtual environments  in which consumers can visualize the various products 
on offer (Carrefour, 2016). Other cases are IKEA (2018), where customers can organize 
and re -organize the layout and design of a room or TESCO Pele (2018), a store devoted 
to football merchandi se. 
The third stage includes customers’  interactions and exchanges with brands after 
the actual purchase. Traditionally, here we may consider consumption, engagement, post -
purchase services, service recovery, repurchase or customer engagement processes (e.g., 
through brand communities, online reviewers) (e.g., Kelley & Davis 1994; Bolton 1998; 
Hollebeek, Glynn  & Brodie, 2014) . Regarding the traditional issues studied in this stage, 
we may claim that neither  academics nor practitioners have paid the same attention a s 
they did to the last two phases. This is particularly true for VR in the marketing context. 
Nevertheless, some elements  of this post -purchase phase exist in some studies in the topic 
of interaction. For instance, when approach ing the co -creation process which can occur 
in the first stages of develop ing a new product, but also when brand and consumers 
continuously cooperate and interact in improving the product (e.g., Jung &  tom Dieck, 
2017). In this vein, future research could analy se how VR technology could contribute to 
service recovery or engagement processes.  
Overall, when consider ing the whole set of studies analysed on VR in marketing , 
we can highlight four major gaps: (i) a lack of studies de voted  to the post -purchase phase 
and in the second place  the studies associated to the  pre-purchase phase, (ii) no studies 
examin ing how consumer s’ past experience can influence their decision -making process 
and consumption behavio ur, (iii) the majority of studies us ing graduate and undergraduate