35 
 associated with consumers ’ attitud e and behaviours  (e.g., Ajzen, 1991) . The theory of 
self-expansion come s from social psychology and may offer support for some studies , 
since individuals have a natural des ire to enhance their potential efficacy  and resources 
(through material, social  or informational resources ) (e.g., Aron & Aron, 1997; Aron  et 
al., 2013 ). Self-expansion is also related to flow (a mental state characterized by  full 
immersion, energized focus, and enjoyment and conce ntrated focus on an activity) and is 
similarly often characterized by high positive affect ( e.g., Csíkszentmihályi, 2008 ).  Thus, 
the immersive experience provided by VR and the other related technologies may 
motiv ate consumers  to experience VR and also self -expand through relationships with 
others in virtual environments (e.g., avatar  or other simulation of human identity ). 
Secondly, moderators  and mediators . Previous stu dies tend to regard  constructs 
such as pleasure, arousal, vividness  and telepresence as m ediators  between stimuli and 
behavioural intentions. However , we suggest other m ediators , such as  the involvement 
with the product/brand or setting and atmospheric responsiveness  (Eroglu et al., 2001) or 
consider other cognitive states related to thinking  and learning (engagement as suggested 
by Hollebeek et al., 2014) or memory creation ( e.g., Kastenholz et al., 2018) . Moderators 
are sparsely  analysed. We find a few studies comparing male s and female s (e.g., Zhao et 
al. (2017), but we cannot fully understand the possible differences in perceptions  of 
experiences between gender s. Future studies could  explore other socio -demographic 
variables - such as age, education level , technical skills  - or personality traits  (e.g., 
extroversion versus introversion, self -esteem , empathy, internal locus of control  or the 
feeling of control over the virtual environment ) or even cultural issues  (which can lead to 
cross -cultural studies) . Past experience with VR technologies should not be neglected  as 
a moderator, since the number of times VR is used could change the emotions and the 
sensation of novelty toward s the technology . Finally,  longitudinal follow -up studies are