7 
 Mounted Display (HMD) or video screen and virtual objects are overlaid on the real 
world. Users can experience AR through a direct vision device like a head -mounted see -
through device (e.g., Hololens, other AR glasses and retinal displays), or an indirect 
vision display like a han d-held see -through display (e.g., tablets and smartphones). Both 
types of devices have a limited field of vision which does not provide the user with a 
complete view of the reality that is augmented or a full sense of presence. SAR is 
completely detached f rom the users, allowing them to have free hands, eyes and head and 
can assume different techniques as explained by Bimber and Raskar  (2005) , such as 
screen -based video see -through displays, spatial optical see -through displays and 
projection -based spatial displays. Projector -based spatial displays project images directly 
on the surfaces of a physical object an d usually take advantage of the volumes of that 
object. These projections can be performed by static, steerable and multiple projectors 
and may be based on static or video digital content, with or without stereoscopy.  
With VE, the notions of immersion  and sense  of presence  were introduced. These 
notions are intrinsically related because greater immersion is commonly related to a 
stronger  sense  of presence as well as the opposite. Immersion  relates to what the system 
delivers from a technical perspective and can be objectively measured , while presence 
relates to the human experience of the given environment.  
Immersion is a VE system’s ability to deliver an inclusive (where the physical reality 
is shut out), extensive (concerning the inclusion of sensory modalities), surrounding (how 
panoramic the VR is) and vivid (resolution, fidelity, variety of energy) illus ion of reality 
to the senses of a human participant (Slater & Wilbur, 1997) . VE can be fully immersive 
(e.g., CAVE, HDM with a wide field of vision), semi -immersive (e.g. stereoscopic 
powerwall) and non -immersive (e.g., desktops). The sense  of presence is the extent to 
which the observer feels present within the display scene (Milgram et al., 1994)  and can