33 
 Finally, two sectors stand out  as the most studied : tourism (hospitality and cultural  
contexts) and retailing . Here , in hospitality  and cultural contexts , VR has interest ing 
applications, emerging as a threat to the travel industry, as a mean s of reduc ing the 
negative impacts of tourism and as a marketing tool that helps to increase a destination’s  
appeal. Senses such as sight, sound, touch, smell and taste could be integrated in VR 
experiences to increase the feeling of being in the place and creating a desire in tourists  
to visit those places in the future. In the hospitality industry , experiments have used the 
virtual servicescape to analyse the effect of stimuli on consumers’ emotional state and 
their behavio ur or brand preference and choice process. Serious leisure contexts (e.g., 
museums) are conducting visitors through virtual wor lds and experiences, where the 
feeling is of  travelling to the past. Retailing is also using virtual setting s to simulat e stores 
(e.g., supermarket s), where products can be selected and purchased using mobile 
applications. The way marketers are communicati ng and promoting  products /services and 
brands is another field undergoing major  transformation.  
6.1 Managerial implications  
The current study offers insights for managers. First, VR contribute s to creat ing stimuli 
to enhance the customer experience from evaluation and decision -making to actual  
purchase and repurchase intentions. Consumers can participate  in the process of 
developing new products from the beginning of the project  until testing the 
products /service before purchase. Along this process, t hey can make  suggestions  and 
point out negative issues in joint co -creation with companies.  
Managers should also be more active in  setting up virtual flagship stores in virtual 
worlds for promotion  purposes  by sponsoring an event or through press release s of their 
activities in virtual worlds. Tourism organizations should not remain  outside virtual 
worlds. They need to be more active  in promot ing different destinations by  means of