11 
 A first query with the term “VIRTUAL REALITY” was performed in Web of Science 
(WOS ) and revealed 12.534 articles on the subject of  VR. However, a closer look at WOS 
categories reveal that most of them belong to Computer Science, Engineering, Medical 
and other fields not related to Marketing. Thus, we performed a second search on WOS 
for latent topics related to VR and Marketing issue s with the query expressed in the text 
below.  The search process was conducted for words in the title, abstract and keywords. 
The terms of the query were selected based on Marketing functions (supported  on the 
conceptualization of Marketing and Marketing research of American Marketing 
Association)  that may be impacted by VR  (AMA, 2013) . Some of the words were 
followed by a wildcard to account for multiple possible terms under the root word.  
TS=("VIRTUAL REALITY" AND (MARKETING OR "CONSUMER BE HAVIOR" OR 
"CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR" OR ADVERTIS* OR BRAND* OR "SUPPLY CHAIN" OR PRIC* 
OR "SOCIAL MEDIA" OR SERVICE*) ) 
 
Results from the query were filtered to return only papers  in English  in peer -
review journals. A first look at the dispersion of the papers among many different journals 
shows that although the query is focused on marketing terms, papers appeared in a very 
wide range of journals.  The 617  papers that compl ied with these criteria  were then filtered 
according to a systematic literature review bec ause most of them still were not focused 
on Marketing itself  but mainly on Computer Science and Medical topics. Figure 2 shows 
the dispersion of the most frequent categories of WOS in the 617 papers collected.  
INSERT Figure 2. ABOUT HERE  
The systematic analysis process follows the three major criteria: validity (how 
accurate is the study and information presented in articles to treat what we intend to 
investigate , that is , VR in marketing ); reliability (the consistency and the degree of 
replication of th e results and the possibility to generalize); credibility (with regard to 
articles published in well -reputed journals worldwide); integrity (regarded as how reliable