28 
 90%) deal with the VR equipment or software and related technologies, medical issues 
and training, geographical information system (GIS), following by pilot training, 
education, and gaming. Indeed, one of the first applications of VR and related 
technologies is the incorporation of computer -based virtual reality technology in medical 
education (e.g., surgical training) (e.g., Wexner et al., 2009; White et al., 2010; Abboudi 
et al., 2013) . VR has been successfully employed in training surgeons, and VR simulators 
aid progression along the learning curve for this rapidly developing surgical technique 
within a safe training environment. Thus, users with disabilities may benefit from using 
VR, as can elderly users, as Jeng et al. (2017) find in their study of leisure activities.  
Although still not directly related to marketing, s tudies in geographical 
information system s are also prolific in operating a local government's landscape and 
urban planni ng activities via a website. Implementing GIS systems help s build a more 
realistic landscape and urban planning models and facilitate s the location of streets, tours, 
museums and other attractions or facilities for both resident s and tourists ( Rau & Cheng,  
2013) . Close to this issue we can also find studies on the use of VR to assist students in 
their learning process (Freina  & Ott, 2015; Hainey et al., 2016). Finally, we also find a 
mixed group of articles presenting studies where gamification ( the applica tion of typical 
elements of game playing (e.g. point scoring, competition with others, rules of play) to 
other areas of activity) is incorporated in VR and used to be more captivating for students 
(Hainey et al., 2016; Makri  & Vlachopoulos, 2017). As the use of VR technologies in 
gaming evolves, the importance of image quality (Rau & Cheng, 2013) ergonomics , 
computational speed (Rau & Cheng, 2013) and costs (Torrente et al., 2014) emerge s.  
 The studies connecting marketing issues and VR are still scarce w hen compar ed 
to all those on  VR extracted from Web of Science (WOS). To date, journals considered 
as top tier in the marketing field (for instance , on the  ABS list 2018) (Harzing, 2018) have