20 
 single captured moment of time. The information gathered allows researchers to 
reconstruct the chronology of the customer -product relationship  and contribut es to 
understand ing consumers ’ buying -decision  process  (Katicic, Häfner  & Ovtcharova, 
2015).  
By working with gaze tracking  in VR, any type of simulated environment can be 
designed, where visual stimuli and research scenarios can be easily and quickly repeated  
- all in a timely, cost -efficient manner. For instance,  using these tools  Bigné, Llinares and 
Torrecilla (2016) point out that the key driver of additional brand choices is the time 
buyers spend on the first choice, showing that the allocation of less  time to the first-choice  
triggers addi tional purchases within the product category and, therefore, increases sales. 
In another study, Rojas et al. (2015) prepare a photographic and a virtual representation 
of a beer bottle to be analy sed by consumers. Eye -tracking analysis confirms that the 
orientation of the bottle and how it is presented also affect consumer perception.  
VR with eye -tracking could even be used to develop service configuration in  an 
online setting. Several studies present  different modules to perform product analysis and 
provid e decision -making information. Thus, users can configure and virtually experience 
the products that they want to purchase on any client workstation (Choi, Kang, Bae  & 
Cho, 2001). Consumers can also contribute to service configuration (e.g., service 
conditi ons, security, typology of the service) using adapted modules allowing them  to 
organize the service elements (e.g., Wang, Chai  & Qi, 2011; Fang, Zhang, Sensoy  & 
Magnenat -Thalmann, 2014; Zhang, Zhao  & Gupta, 2018).  
The studies belonging to this set of arti cles tend to use experiments as a process 
to test the technology developed to aggregate VR and gaze tracking. The sample size 
tends to be up to 100, students are the prefer red participants, and descriptive statistics are 
used (e.g., means, percentages)  (about 80%)  (e.g., Rojas, Contero, Bartomeu & Guixeres,