6 
 virtual environment. VR interfaces are diverse, ranging from movable devices suc h as 
VR headsets consisting of head -mounted glasses with a screen in front of the eyes, to non -
movable ones such as specially designed rooms with multiple large screens. Several types 
of Head Mounted Displays (HDM) have been developed over the years and mo st now 
have stereoscopic displays, tracking systems and a wide field of vision. By having 
gyroscopes and accelerometers, these devices can recognize the user’s position and 
therefore position the scene according to that information.  
Fixed devices like larg e VR screen -based systems have been developed and used 
in several areas of knowledge. The CAVE (Cave Automatic Virtual Environment), a fully 
immersive VR system, is normally a cubic room where, on all the walls except one, 
stereoscopic images are projected , allowing the user, wearing stereoscopic glasses, to feel 
they are experiencing a real world. Smaller devices, such as just one big flat screen, a 
composition of smaller screens, curved screens, hemispheric screens and other types, 
allow VR experiences wi th lower levels of immersion.  
The ability to present users with (virtual) reality at a full scale is an advantage of 
a VR system compared to displaying digital content in other types of devices such as 
computer screens. Besides this type of visualization, several immersive VR sets have 
dynamic binaural sound. As well as normal interaction via mouse, keyboard and game 
devices, interaction with the VR system is possible via gestures (3D position trackers 
measure body motion and act accordingly) and speech. Al though not as well developed, 
immersive VR can also allow unique forms of physical or quasi -physical interaction when 
using haptic systems such as data gloves with tracking sensors (Mizell et al., 2002) .  
Unlike VR techniques, AR and SAR  “generate images somewhere on the optical 
path in between the observer’s eyes and the physical object to be augmented” (Bimber & 
Raskar 2005, p. 71) . In AR the observer sees the real world through some kind of Head -