25 
  As the use of the virtual world evolves, Finch and Yang (2016) focus the 
discussion around the intellectual property of user -generated content (UGC) created in 
entertainment and games VR platforms. In these contexts, the discussion on intellectual 
property emerges as platforms commercial ly explore content that is developed by their 
users, including avatars. The authors analy se various court decisions and find no clear 
jurisprudence established, proposing that future studies evolve on that matter.  
 The effectiveness of avatars in performin g their various applications is largely 
associated with the level of self -congruity and functional congruity perceived by the user, 
with users reacting more positively in situations where they perceive similarity to the 
characters (Suh, Kim  & Suh, 2011). T he need for robust similarity and accurate real -time 
visualization impose s various technical challenges related to image capturing , with the 
reconstructed 3D models often lacking sharpness and definition (Anton, Kurillo  & 
Bajcsy, 2018).  In order to deliver  a more accurate experience, the adoption of head 
mounted displays (HMD) involve s the recommended inclusion of augmented context -
based interactions, combining stories, visuals and sounds for a richer experience, as 
opposed to a virtual reality environment that simply replicates the existing real world 
(Kang, 2018). Finally, th ese studies tend to be conceptual and de scribe how new 
algorit hms and systems ma y improve and complement the use  of VR in different 
activities , such as online marketing , multimedia experience in VR retailing o r the use of 
augmented information in immersive virtual reality environments  (e.g., Finch and Yang, 
2016; Anton, Kurillo & Bajcsy, 2018) . 
T7. COMMUNICATION & SOCIAL MEDIA . Studies on this topic are mostly 
focused on the use of VR in media communications, exploring it in relation to  future 
perspectives associated with social media platforms ( Kane, 2017 ; Lytras et al., 2015 ; 
Lytras et al., 2017 ) and its use in advertising.