13 
 structured document -term matrix using “ tm” and “topicmodels”  library. All text was 
converted to lower case and the corpus was stripped from whitespaces, punctuation and 
numbers. English stopwords  and core keywords such as “virtual”, “reality” and “virtual 
reality” were removed from text. Although such terms are frequent in the text, they may 
jeopardize the cohesion of the topics given their high frequency overall (Guerreiro et al., 
2016).  A final t okenization was performed on the text so that individual or co -occurring 
terms ( n-gram s depending on the prefix, gra m means a set of co -occurring words within 
a given window and when computing the n -grams we typically move one word forward ) 
were chosen. Si ngle term ( unigrams ) and two-term ( bigrams ) n-grams  were selected for 
analysis. The document -term matrix was treated for sparsity and revealed a total of 2125 
n-grams  over 150 documents.  
In order to group latent topics discussed in the literature according  to co -
occurrence of words, latent Dirichelet allocation (LDA) topic models using Gibbs 
sampling method ( Griffiths &Steyvers, 2004; Cao et al., 2009; Geman  & Geman, 1984)  
was used. Regarding  select ion of the K number of topics that could be st represent the  
underlying groups of discussions in the papers, a set of possible LDA models were 
developed with K=2  topics to K=60 topics. Figure 5 shows the results for each LDA 
model. Measures for choosing the best K were derived from the work of Griffiths and 
Steyvers  (2004 ) and Cao et al. (2009 ). 
INSERT Figure 5. ABOUT HERE  
According to Guerreiro et al. (2016), the ideal number of clusters/topics is attained 
when the variability explained does not change significantly by adding more clusters. A 
small number of  topics produce topics that are too general, while a big number of topics 
may reduce the interpretability of the results (Pavlinek  & Podgorelec, 2017). The number 
of optimal topics (K) was selected w hen there was a more negative likelihood after the