4 
 2. Overview o f simulated realities  
2.1 Concept ualization  
The ability to  simulat e different forms of reality through technology  has opened up new 
forms of  interact ing with the world  and created a new set  of possibilities for brands . The 
simulation of reality allows users and consumers to access real -time information in 
several way s. From the broad spectrum of the Reality -Virtuality continuum as stated by 
Milgram et al. (1994)  three types of technolog ical solutions are being increasingly 
presented to consumers : (1) Virtual Reality,  (2) Augmented Reality, (3) Spatial 
Augmented Reality . 
A Virtual Reality (VR) environment is a completely synthetic world that may or 
may not mimic the real world and in which the participant is immersed  (Milgram et al., 
1994) . The real environment and the VR  are at the opposite ends of the Reality -Virtuality 
continuum where other types of combinations of virtuality and reality exist . Augmented 
Reality (AR) relates purely virtual environments to purely real environments. In AR , the 
observer sees the real world  and also sees virtual objects overlaid  on the real world , 
usually by wearing see -through displays (Bimber & Raskar , 2005) . Spatial Augmented 
Reality  (SAR) is a type of AR that can be  used in areas where traditional AR is not 
possible , for instance,  on large surfaces such as spatial ly-aligned wall projections (also 
commonly named 3D video mapping).  Augmented Virtuality (AV) exists when in a 
totally virtual environment some real objects are overlaid. An example of this AV is when 
a projection of the real person is overlaid  on a virtual environment . Within this spectru m, 
Mixed Reality environments (MR) are th ose where  real and virtual objects coexist in a 
single display in different types of combination (Milgram et al. , 1994) . 
AR has seen a b oom in commercial applications in the last decade, particularly 
since smartphones have new technologies embedded in each device such as GPS (Global