24 
 Google Cardboard, Samsung Gear VR), particularly since 2014 when th is equipment 
became more accessible in the market. Although most studie s (about 80%)  tend to use 
graduate and undergraduate students, particularl y those that develop experiments with  a 
sample size between 100 and 200 (e.g., Panic et al., 2011; Cauberghe et al., 2011), when 
using real scenarios, the sample tend s to be above 300 (e.g., Hyun & O'Keefe, 2012; 
Cheng et al., 2014). The y tend to be quanti tative studies where the most common 
statistical techniques are t -test, ANOVA, ANCOVA and structural equations. Finally, it 
is worth noting that we have found a study whose participants are elderly  (Jeng et al. , 
2017) . In the study, each elderly respondent  experienced the activities (leisure activities 
in VR) for ten weeks. The findings show that experience value is not only able to 
effectively predict behavio ural intentions (including purchases and ongoing 
participation), but it is also a mediating variabl e in the relationship between experience 
quality and behavio ural intentions.  
T6. VR APPLICATIONS . This topic comprises studies that explore applications of VR, 
where the use algorithms like avatars (as human representation in virtual setting ) are the 
most analysed  (about 60%) . An avatar represents an electronic presence of the user inside 
the virtual world, resembl ing a real human being ( Dad, Davies & Kear, 2016) and 
behaving as such while interacting with other s (Kim, Kim & Cho, 2011; Suh, Kim & Suh, 
2011) . The business applications of avatars in marketing are of various types with 
individuals trading virtual items in flagship stores, being exposed to virtual advertising 
(billboards and multimedia) and event sponsorship. Marketing research is also  presented 
as an important application, with companies using virtual worlds to observe the attitudes 
and motivations of their residents and implementing product testing and co -creation of 
virtual and real products.