Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 28 of 54
method gives the advantages of both denoising a small image patch and denoising a
larger image consisting of those patches. When test samples are corrupted with noise, this
method improves even the classiﬁcation performance. Different from the Refs. [ 39,180,181]
listed above, Ref. [ 182] demonstrated that a convolutional denoising auto-encoder (CDAE)
could also be used for the efﬁcient denoising of medical images. In Ref. [ 183], the authors
proposed a CAE2for image restoration, which was unlike the network architecture of [ 182].
It is an encoding–decoding framework with symmetric convolutional–deconvolutional
layers. Considering that deeper networks tend to be more difﬁcult to train, multiple skip-
layer connections were proposed to symmetrically link convolutional and deconvolutional
layers. Hence, the training converges became much faster, and better performance was
achieved. Compared with the previous works in this subsection, this work has more
powerful multi-functions. It achieved better performance than state-of-the-art methods
for image denoising, image super-resolution, JPEG deblocking, and image inpainting.
Ref. [ 184] argue that conventional neural networks do not consider that similar visual cues
in the human brain can stimulate the same neuron to induce similar neurological signals.
As a result, these models are unstable regarding their internal propagation. The stacked
non-local AE, which exploited self-similar information in natural images for stability, were
constructed. Further, this proposed model was applied to image denoising and image
super-resolution. Experiment results revealed that this model outperforms the plain SAE2.
(4) Image retrieval
Content-based image retrieval has been the subject of growing concern in the multime-
dia ﬁeld for over two decades. The traditional image retrieval framework is involved with
multiple modules, including feature extraction, codebook learning, feature quantization,
image indexing, etc. Those modules are individually designed and independently opti-
mized for the retrieval task. Before image retrieval, users need to express their imaginary
intention into some concrete visual query. The quality of the query has a signiﬁcant impact
on the retrieval results [ 185]. Generally, there are several kinds of query formation, such as
sketch map by query, example image by query, context map by query, color map by query,
etc. Ref. [ 186] proposed deep conditional generative models based on AAEs and VAEs
for the zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval task. The workﬂow of the network is ﬁrst
taking the sketch feature vector as an input and then making full use of deep conditional
generative models to generate a number of possible image vectors by ﬁlling the missing
information stochastically. Lastly, they take advantage of these generated image feature
vectors to retrieve images from the database. In Ref. [ 186], the authors made full use of
the advantages of VAEs as a powerful generative model. However, the traditional VAEs
are prone to the phenomenon of “posterior collapse”. Hence, Ref. [ 187] studied the use
of the Vector-Quantized Variational Auto-encoder (VQ-VAE) for representation learning
in image retrieval. The VQ-VAE provides an unsupervised model for learning discrete
representations by combining vector quantization and the AE. They further modiﬁed the
VQ-VAE by introducing a product quantizer (PQ) into the bottleneck stage such that an
end-to-end unsupervised learning model could be formed for the image retrieval task. This
“end-to-end” mechanism is an improvement compared with the traditional image retrieval
framework. Compared with directly matching real-valued codes or pixel intensities, binary
codes had a lot of advantages for content-based image retrieval [ 188]. Hence, the authors
used very deep AEs initialized with DBNs to map small color images to short binary
codes. The above references focus on plain RGB images retrieval, an unsupervised feature
learning framework based on AE is proposed to learn sparse feature representations for
content-based remote-sensing imagery retrieval (CBRSIR) in [ 189]. Using the ReLU function
and the soft threshold function to realize sparsity, the authors argued that this proposed
framework requires fewer parameters than the SAE1. They also demonstrated that this
proposed framework was more effective than traditional BOVW using several performance
metrics. Both Refs. [ 188,189] utilized the basic AE. The authors of Ref. [ 190] proposed a
multiple input multiple task deep auto-encoder (MIMT-DAE), which was combined with
the wavelet transformation. For this proposed method, the image is ﬁrst processed using