Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 36 of 54
the limited user responses and the vast combinations of users and items. Additionally,
VAE is known to ﬁnd a richer representation, which can meaningfully improve the
performance on the task of CF with auxiliary information. They have applied VAE with
GAN-style learning and conditional VAE with the ladder structures for collaborative
ﬁltering to deal with auxiliary information. This method shows that GAN-style
learning can be also applied to a CF ﬁeld in addition to the image processing ﬁeld.
There will be more possible combinations of AEs and other DL methods but not all
have been exploited.
AEs have a straightforward structure, and they are appropriate for feature engineering,
dimensionality reduction, and missing value estimation. Among all DL models, AEs are
more popular in RS, especially for handling with sparsity and scalability [ 236]. Based on
Ref. [ 237] and the above references in this subsection, we have summarized the architecture
of AE-based RSs, as shown in Figure 7.
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  38 of 56 
 
 
 
Integration Model    Non-integration Model 
Integrated AE 
with traditional 
RS method 
Integrated AE 
with other DL 
methods Relying only 
on AE methods User feedback  
data User or item 
information Auxiliary 
information 
The latent 
representation 
of user The latent 
representation 
of item 
Recommendation 
 Input layer Input layer
Model layer Model layer
Output layer Output layer
list 
Figure 7. The architecture of AE -based RSs . 
5.3. Pattern Recognition  
Pattern recognition (PR) refers to the process of processing and analyzing various 
forms of information, which is an important part of information science and AI. Patterns 
can also be divided into abst ract and concrete forms. The former belongs to the category 
of concept recognition, such as consciousness, thought , and discussion. It is another 
branch of AI. The latter is to classify and identify the specific pattern objects such as voice 
waveform, seis mic wave, EEG, ECG, photo, picture, text, symbol,  and biological sensor s. 
With the rapid industrial development, ever increasing requirements on the capability of 
information retrieval and processing has brought new challenges for PR. In recent years, 
the development in DL architectures has provided novel approaches for solving the prob-
lems of PR. In this subsection, we will mostly analyze how to apply AEs to solve the mul-
tiple problems in PR field.  
5.3.1. Face Recognition  
In the face recognition community, one sample per person (OSPP) face recognition is 
a challenging and opening problem. Because only one sample is available for each subject, 
lacking samples is the key reason for the failure of most algorithms in OSPP. In Ref. [238], 
Zhang et al. proposed a new algorithm based on deep AE to generalize intra -class varia-
tions of multi -sample subjects to single -sample subjects and reconstructed new samples. 
Specifically, a generalized deep AE (GDA) is first trained with all images in the gallery, 
and then a class -specific deep AE (CDA) is fine -tuned for each single -sample subject with 
its single sample. Samples of the multi -sample subject, which is most like the single -sam-
ple subject, are input to the corresponding CDA to reconstruct n ew samples. Additionally, 
the minimum L2 distance, PCA, sparse represented -based classifier , and SR are used for 
classification. Inspired by the DAE, Ref. [239] have proposed a supervised AE to build the 
deep neural network for OSPP. The formulation about this supervised AE is as follo ws: 
2
2
00 2,,21min ( ( ( )) ( ) ( ) ) ( ( ) ( ))
fgii i i x xW b bix g f x f x f x KL KLN     
 (33) 
where  
ix
 and 
ix  denote each probe image in this dataset and its corresponding gallery 
image , respectively. Additionally , 
11( ( ) 1)2xi
ifxN
 (34) 
Figure 7. The architecture of AE-based RSs.
5.3. Pattern Recognition
Pattern recognition (PR) refers to the process of processing and analyzing various
forms of information, which is an important part of information science and AI. Patterns
can also be divided into abstract and concrete forms. The former belongs to the category
of concept recognition, such as consciousness, thought, and discussion. It is another
branch of AI. The latter is to classify and identify the speciﬁc pattern objects such as voice
waveform, seismic wave, EEG, ECG, photo, picture, text, symbol, and biological sensors.
With the rapid industrial development, ever increasing requirements on the capability of
information retrieval and processing has brought new challenges for PR. In recent years, the
development in DL architectures has provided novel approaches for solving the problems
of PR. In this subsection, we will mostly analyze how to apply AEs to solve the multiple
problems in PR ﬁeld.
5.3.1. Face Recognition
In the face recognition community, one sample per person (OSPP) face recognition
is a challenging and opening problem. Because only one sample is available for each
subject, lacking samples is the key reason for the failure of most algorithms in OSPP . In
Ref. [ 238], Zhang et al. proposed a new algorithm based on deep AE to generalize intra-
class variations of multi-sample subjects to single-sample subjects and reconstructed new
samples. Speciﬁcally, a generalized deep AE (GDA) is ﬁrst trained with all images in
the gallery, and then a class-speciﬁc deep AE (CDA) is ﬁne-tuned for each single-sample
subject with its single sample. Samples of the multi-sample subject, which is most like the
single-sample subject, are input to the corresponding CDA to reconstruct new samples.