Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 25 of 54
integrate the strengths of local or holistic features. This fusion of heterogeneous features
signiﬁcantly improves the accuracy by around 10%, i.e., achieving 91.67% overall accuracy
on a histopathological image-guided diagnosis of intraductal breast lesions. Similarly,
considering that hyperspectral imagery (HSI) is intrinsically deﬁned in both the spectral
and spatial domains, Ref. [ 165] further established two stacked SAE-based feature learning
approaches for sparse spectral feature learning and multi-scale spatial feature learning,
respectively. Compared to traditional handcraft features, this learned spectral–spatial
feature representation is highly discriminative and has more potential turns for HSI classi-
ﬁcation. Similar to Ref. [ 165], the method introduced by Ref. [ 166] also used spatial and
spectral information, which was merged using the SAE2. Unlike Ref. [ 165], this architecture
mixed the traditional feature extraction method and DL architecture. PCA is introduced to
condense the whole image, reduce the data dimension to a reasonable scale, and reserve
spatial information simultaneously. A series of SAE2s with different depths were trained,
which further proves that the depth of the features affects classiﬁcation accuracies. There
are many studies [ 167–170] that have combined traditional feature extraction methods
(such as HOG, ICA, the Gobor ﬁlter, and so on) with the AE. At the same time, a growing
number of scholars have integrated other DL methods into AEs. In Ref. [ 171], the authors
proposed a novel approach based on convolutional features and SAE for scene-level land
use (LU) classiﬁcation. This approach ﬁrst generated an initial feature representation of the
scenes under analysis from a CNN, which was pre-learned on a large amount of labeled
data from an auxiliary domain. Then, these convolutional features are input into a SAE1
for learning a new suitable representation in an unsupervised manner. In another work, a
novel VAE was developed using the Deep Generative Deconvolutional Network (DGDN)
as a decoder of the latent image features and using a CNN as an image encoder. A CNN
was used to approximate a distribution for the latent DGDN features [172].
In addition to integrating the theories of CNNs into AEs, another branch of research
has emerged. Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) theories and learning mechanisms have
been used in more and more AE algorithms. Ref. [ 173] originally proposed the Extreme
Learning Machine Auto-encoder (ELM-AE) and Sparse Extreme Learning Machine Auto-
encoder (SELM-AE) with orthogonal and sparse random hidden neurons. Unlike the
tied weight auto-encoder (TAE), the hidden neurons in ELM-AE and SELM-AE do not
need to be tuned. Additionally, the input weights and biases in additive neurons are
initialized using orthogonal and sparse random weights, respectively, which were used to
retain the Euclidean information in the data of the hidden layer. Due to only calculating
output weights, the proposed linear and nonlinear ELM-AE and SELM-AE have lower
computational complexity. The performance comparison of classiﬁcation on the USPS,
CIFAR-10, and NORB Datasets shows that ELM-AE and SELM-AE learn features that are
discriminative and sparse. In Ref. [ 174], the authors presented a method that used ELMs as a
stacked supervised AE. In the process of implementing the algorithm, the authors randomly
project the ‘label pixel’ outputs from an ELM module to an independent set of hidden units
in the next ELM module. Furthermore, the ELM is known to be relatively fast to train
compared to iterative training methods such as the AE. For the reasons above, this work
gained the best of both worlds: fast implementation and lower error rates. This method
used standard benchmark datasets for multi-class image classiﬁcation (MNIST, CIFAR-
10, and SVHN). In the ﬁeld of remote sensing image classiﬁcation, Ref. [ 175] proposed
a method called SAE-ELM that was based on the ELM. Different from Ref. [ 173] and
Ref. [ 174], the authors chose ELM as a base classiﬁer to improve the learning speed of
the algorithm. Finally, the Q statistic is adopted to determine the ﬁnal ensemble-based
classiﬁer. The common feature of these three papers is that they all take advantage of
the fast-learning speed of ELM. Different from the single-task AE listed above, Ref. [ 176]
developed a multi-task AE architecture consisting of three layers with multiple separated
outputs. Each output corresponds to one task. This multi-task AE can learn features that
are robust to the variability in real-world images, so it can be well generalized in various