Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 42 of 54
There is not a single criterion for determining the best toolkit for DL. Each toolkit was
designed and built to address the needs perceived by the developer(s) and also reﬂect their
skills and approaches to problems [ 259]. All of the DL toolkits are in development. We can
choose toolkits by comparing the current performance and function, but more importantly,
we can compare the development trend in these different toolkits. DL is currently in a
vigorous development stage, so we should pay more attention to the activeness of these
toolkits in the open source community to select toolkits [ 260]. Only the toolkits with high
community activity can keep up with the development speed of DL itself, so they will not
face the risk of being eliminated in the future. Figure 8 compares some indicators of the
activity in each of the DL frameworks listed above on GitHub as of March 2023. From
the ﬁgure, it can be seen that Tensorﬂow is far more active than other toolkits in terms
of the number for Star, Fork, and Watch. It can be seen that there are many people who
actually use this toolkit. This is thanks to the full support of a large number of developers
and Google.
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  44 of 56 
 
 2023. From the figure , it can be seen that Tensorflow is far more active than other toolkits 
in terms of the number for Star, Fork , and Watch. It can be seen that there are man y people 
who actually use this tool kit. This is thanks to the full support of a large number of devel-
opers and Google . 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of different deep learning tools on GitHub . 
7. Future Trends  
With the deepening in the era of big data, DL is more and more widely used in aca-
demia and industry. As a typical model of unsupervised learning in DL, AEs can process 
a large number of unlabeled data to save human and material resources  and provide a 
good feature learning abi lity. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of  the AE 
and its v ariant model s. We have mainly introduced the basic theory and feature s of these 
various v ariant model s, discussed AEs from different perspectives, and also presented  
relationships  with shallow models and deep models. In particular , we have compared the 
available DL toolkits  for AEs. T he various application s show  that t he research on AEs has 
become one of the current research hotspots.  However, there is still a long way to go in 
order to fully realize its potential while coping with many unsolved challenges. N ow, we 
will discuss several important open issues and point out the corresponding possible di-
rections for addressing them in the future . 
⚫ Constructing a hybrid model based on AEs  
Based on the basic AE and its various variants, we can build different hybrid models 
by combining AEs with other methods. Specifically, there are two main mixing methods. 
First, the traditional shallow models are integrated with AEs. Although the traditional  
shallow models depend on the artificial designing feature, they also have the advantages 
of simplicity and strong interpretability. Therefore, the combination of AE models and 
these existing shallow models can integrate the advantages of these methods. Al though 
there have some relevant studies [261,262] , this direction is still worth researcher ’s atten-
tion. Secondly, other excellent DL models can also be integrated with AEs, such as CNN 
[263] and GAN [264]. This can improve the overall performance of the model.  
⚫ Integrat ing the attention mechanism into AE s 
The h uman visual attention mechanism is a  very important working mechanism in 
the human visual system, which can greatly improve the working efficiency of the human 
visual system by allocating different computing resources to different regions in the visual 
scene [265]. Combining a visual attenti on mechanism with a DNN can form DL models 020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,000160,000180,000200,000Comparison of different DL tools on Github
stars watching forks
Figure 8. Comparison of different deep learning tools on GitHub.
7. Future Trends
With the deepening in the era of big data, DL is more and more widely used in
academia and industry. As a typical model of unsupervised learning in DL, AEs can process
a large number of unlabeled data to save human and material resources and provide a
good feature learning ability. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of the AE
and its variant models. We have mainly introduced the basic theory and features of these
various variant models, discussed AEs from different perspectives, and also presented
relationships with shallow models and deep models. In particular, we have compared the
available DL toolkits for AEs. The various applications show that the research on AEs
has become one of the current research hotspots. However, there is still a long way to go
in order to fully realize its potential while coping with many unsolved challenges. Now,
we will discuss several important open issues and point out the corresponding possible
directions for addressing them in the future.
 Constructing a hybrid model based on AEs
Based on the basic AE and its various variants, we can build different hybrid models
by combining AEs with other methods. Speciﬁcally, there are two main mixing methods.
First, the traditional shallow models are integrated with AEs. Although the traditional
shallow models depend on the artiﬁcial designing feature, they also have the advantages of
simplicity and strong interpretability. Therefore, the combination of AE models and these