Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 27 of 54
a high reconstruction residual. Further, utilizing the capacity of data reconstruction for
AEs, the saliency map can be generated using this FE-SAE. In Ref. [ 20], the authors were
also inspired by the powerful data reconstruction ability and feature learning of the SAE2.
Hence, they constructed a stacked AE-based center–surround (C-S) inference network to
model the human visual perception process and to estimate bottom-up saliency.
To obtain a uniﬁed reconstruction pattern for the current image, this model was trained
with the data sampled randomly from the entire image to obtain a uniﬁed reconstruction
pattern. Because global competition in sampling and learning processes are integrated into
the nonlocal reconstruction and saliency estimation of each pixel, this model can achieve
better detection results in comparison to those models with separate consideration of local
and global rarity. This C-S inference network also used the relation between reconstruction
residual and saliency. Different from Refs. [ 21,177,178], an extra inference layer was added
on the top of the AE to provide ways to explore the C–S contrast relationship. Additionally,
the authors have trained RBMs to initialize this SAE2.
AEs can be used not only for conventional saliency detection but also for an interesting
and emerging topic, co-saliency detection. It aims at simultaneously extracting common
salient objects in multiple related images. The authors of Ref. [ 179] proposed a novel co-
saliency detection approach using two individual SDAE models. The SDAE not only has the
advantage of learning more abstract feature representations based on its deep architecture
but also has the advantage of out-of-distribution data for knowledge transferring. So,
one SDAE is built as a transfer learning framework, which can be effective for predicting
intrasaliency. They ﬁrst attempted to leverage the deep reconstruction residual obtained in
the highest hidden layer of another SDAE to discover the deep intersaliency. Compared
with the previous works in this subsection, SDAEs used in this paper are not only for the
generation of the robust intrasaliency prior but also for mining deep intersaliency patterns.
In this subsection, we analyzed the literature based on AEs for image saliency detec-
tion. From these analyses, we can draw the following conclusions: 1. AEs have multiple
merits: the ability to learn more abstract feature representations with the deep architecture,
the ability of data reconstruction, and the advantage of out-of-distribution data for knowl-
edge transfer. Hence, they can be applied to the saliency detection model. 2. Multiple
independent AEs can be constituted into a whole saliency detection model. 3. In the process
of designing a saliency detection model, the reconstruction residual of AEs is an important
factor to be considered.
(3) Image restoration
Observed image signals are often corrupted by acquisition channels or artiﬁcial editing.
The goal of image restoration techniques is to restore the original image from a noisy version.
Image restoration is a well-studied problem in computer vision and image processing,
including image denoising, inpainting, super resolution, and so on. Image denoising
methods can be utilized for an image corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise, which
is a common result of many acquisition channels. When some pixel values are missing
or when we want to remove more sophisticated patterns, such as superimposed text or
other objects from an image, image inpainting methods can be put to use. In reference [ 39],
the authors took advantage of the DAE for image denoising and blind inpainting. They
proposed a new training scheme for the DAE, which improved the DAE performance
in the tasks of unsupervised feature learning. After training the ﬁrst layer, the hidden
layer activations of both the clean input and the noisy input are calculated to serve as the
training data for the second layer. Compared to traditional linear sparse coding algorithms
on the denoising task additive white Gaussian noise, this non-linear method achieves
better performance. In addition, this approach is capable of tackling the complex blind
inpainting problem. Furthermore, the denoising performance can be improved by adding
more hidden layers of the DAE, especially when the level of noise is high. When there
is no prior information on the target image and only the noise image is available, a DAE
also can perform blind image denoising well [ 180]. Based on Ref. [ 39], Ref. [ 181] proposed
a simple sparsiﬁcation of the latent representation found by the encoder. This proposed