Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 30 of 54
whole video and information that changes temporally. This work could be extended to use
a prior with multiple factors, so each factor changes at varying rates from fast to slow to
static. Ref. [ 198] also argue that a VAE model can learn a latent representation of the data,
which is split into a static and dynamic part, allowing us to approximately disentangle fea-
ture representations. The previous approaches designed the probabilistic graphical model
carefully to achieve a disentangled representation. In Ref. [ 198], the authors explicitly used
a latent variable to represent the invariant information through the sequence and a series of
latent variables associated with each frame to represent dynamical information. A VAE was
used to focus on learning the distribution of the video content and dynamics to generate
future sequences without conditioning on the observed sequences. In this work, predicting
future frames without conditioning is also different from the traditional method.
There are some other researchers working hard on video object tracking. Visual track-
ing refers to the automatic estimation of the trajectory of an object as it moves around in
a video. Wang and Yeung used the merits of DAE that robust features are learned [ 199].
An SDAE was trained ofﬂine to learn generic image features from a large image dataset
as auxiliary data. The knowledge learned was transferred from the ofﬂine to the online
tracking process. During the online tracking process, adding an additional classiﬁcation
layer to the encoder part of the trained SDAE resulted in a classiﬁcation neural network.
This network achieved very encouraging results with low computational costs. However,
only a linear classiﬁer for simplicity was utilized in this current tracker. As in other discrim-
inative trackers, classiﬁers can be extended to be more powerful for further performance
improvement. Inspired by the success of the SDAE and online AdaBoost, a novel object-
tracking approach was proposed by combining a family of DNN classiﬁers using online
AdaBoost [ 200]. Similar to [ 199], this work also used an SDAE to learn multi-level feature
descriptors from an auxiliary image dataset. The difference is that each layer of the SDAE
represents a different level of feature space, which is subsequently transformed into a
discriminative object/background DNN classiﬁer by adding an additional classiﬁcation
layer. Then, an online AdaBoost feature selection framework is proposed to combine these
layered classiﬁers for online updating to robustly distinguish the target from the back-
ground. This approach has two advantages. First, the SDAE is used to automatically learn
useful generic image features at different levels. Second, boosting further automatically
determined the most suitable level of features for appearance modeling.
Ref. [ 201] also presented an SAE2to learn generic invariant features ofﬂine for visual
object tracking. In addition, a logistic regression classiﬁer was used to distinguish the object
from the background. Unlike [ 199], this work adopted tracked image patches as training
data instead of an auxiliary image dataset. Different from the traditional SAE1, which
enforces sparsity in the hidden layer, this proposed SAE performed subspace pooling on
the hidden layer activations and enforced sparsity in the pooling layer, in a way identical
to ISA. Then, it trains a second AE with the convolved activations of the ﬁrst AE just
mentioned to learn more complex invariance on larger image patches. Additionally, a
temporal slowness constraint is incorporated to the proposed AE for learning generic
invariant representations.
Different from those generic object trackers mentioned above, the authors considered
motion blur in real videos and proposed a blur invariant object tracker [ 202]. The SDAE
was adopted to learn a robust appearance model. However, compared with some real-
time trackers, it is still a bit slow, and there is still a large space to speed up the tracker
by optimizing the appearance model. Ref. [ 203] introduced a new tracking framework
based on a context-aware correlation ﬁlter. This tracker can achieve high computational
speed. The main contribution to high computational speed was the proposed deep feature
compression, which was achieved using multiple expert AEs. In the pre-training phase,
an expert AE was trained for each category. During the tracking phase, selecting the best
expert AE for a given target, only this AE was used. In order to obtain high tracking
performance, an external denoising process and a new orthogonality loss term for the
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning of expert AEs were used. The framework not only achieved