Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 17 of 54
representation out of that input sequence. This network is trained to minimize the root
mean squared error (RMSE) between the input sequence and the reconstruction [ 89]. In
Ref. [ 90], the authors proposed the use of a SA to represent variable-length audio segments
with vectors of ﬁxed dimensionality. To learn more robust representations, they further
apply the denoising criterion to SA learning. The input acoustic feature sequence xis
randomly added with some noise to yield a corrupted version ex. Here, the input to SA
isex, and SA is expected to generate the output yclosest to the original xbased onex. The
SA incorporated into this denoising criterion is referred to as the denoising sequence-to-
sequence auto-encoder (DSA).
Ref. [ 121] presented the AUDEEP , which is the ﬁrst Python toolkit based on TensorFlow
for deep unsupervised representation learning from acoustic data. This toolkit used a
deep recurrent SA approach built of long short-term memory cells or gated recurrent
units. Further, Bowman et al. [ 122] drew the ideology of “variation” into the SA and
trained a sequence-to-sequence VAE successfully. This model can generate sentences from
a continuous latent space. When applying attention mechanisms [ 123] to sequence-to-
sequence VAE, however, “bypassing” has arisen. In Ref. [ 91], the authors proposed a
variational attention mechanism to address this problem. In the future, we can further
integrate other deep representation learning algorithms to extend SAs.
3. Analyses of AEs
3.1. Energy Perspective
AEs not only have a variety of forms but also can be analyzed and studied from
different perspectives. Now, we will analyze AEs from the energy point of view. What
does “energy” mean here? Ref. [ 124] proposed that the essence of the energy-based model
is to build a function that maps each point of an input space to a single scalar, which
is called “energy”. Many unsupervised models can be viewed as a scalar-valued energy
function E(X) that operates on input data vectors X[59]. As a kind of unsupervised learning
method, AEs also can be regarded as the energy function E(X). This function E(X) associates
low energies to input points Xthat are similar to training samples and high energies to
dissimilar points. AEs can extract representations Z(or codes) from which the training
samples can be reconstructed. In the energy function, Zcan be seen as a deterministic latent
variable. From the perspective of energy, AEs can be seen as using an energy function of
the following form:
E(X) =min
Z2zE(X,Z) (23)
There are several common activation functions (sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, linear
activation, square activation, rectiﬁed linear, and modulus activation) for AEs. According
to each activation function, Ref. [125] derived the respective energy functions.
3.2. Manifold Perspective
A manifold is a connected region. Mathematically, it is a set of points associated with a
neighborhood around each point. From any given point, the manifold locally appears to be
a Euclidean space [ 35]. Manifold learning is capable of ﬁnding a low-dimension basis for
describing high-dimension data. Additionally, it can uncover the intrinsic dimensionality
of high-dimension data. Many machine learning algorithms exploit the idea of a manifold.
As one of the machine learning algorithms, AEs are no exception. If you have an AE, it
will be trained in a manifold fashion such that similar input data results in output neuron
values that are at a low distance from each other. The space spanned by the output neuron
variables can be considered to be a learned manifold for the input data space.
Similar to the traditional AE, it takes an input and the input goes through an encoder,
which gives a low dimensional output y (more details can be found in Section 2.1). This
output ycan be interpreted as coordinates of the manifold. How does ydenote the coor-
dinates of a dimensional manifold? Ref. [ 81] introduces a sensitivity penalization term
in the objective function, measured as the Frobenius norm of Jacobian of the non-linear