Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 35 of 54
the result. This is because expanding the dimension of the hidden layer allows this model
to have greater ability to simulate the input features [ 224]. Both these two models are
mainly used for rating and learning a non-linear representation of the user-item matrix, and
then reconstructed it by determining the missing values. Different from these two models,
Ref. [ 225] proposed collaborative DAE, which was mainly used for ranking prediction.
Similar to the standard DAE, the collaborative DAE consists of three layers: input layer,
hidden layer, and output layer. The input of collaborative DAE is a user partial observed
implicit feedback yu, where yu= {yu1,yu2,. . .yuI} is the I-dimensional feedback vector of
user uon all the item. The main difference between the collaborative DAE and standard
DAE is the user-speciﬁc input between the input layer and the hidden layer. This input
has been corrupted by Gaussian noise forming eyu, and then collaborative DAE maps the
input into a latent representations zu. SGD is applied to learn the parameters of this model.
Different from the above three studies, Zhuang et al. [ 226] proposed the dual-AE, which is a
new representation learning framework. In this framework, the new hidden representations
of users and items are simultaneously learned using AEs. Additionally, the deviations in the
training data are minimized by the learned representations of users and items. Considering
that the optimization problem based on this framework is an unconstrained optimization,
a new gradient descent method was developed to learn hidden representations.
 Integrated AEs with traditional RSs. In order to improve the recommendation per-
formance, many researchers are trying to combine AEs with traditional RSs. In this
subsection, we will focus on analyzing several important research prototypes for
integrating AE with traditional recommendation models. There are many traditional
recommendation methods, such as MF, SVD, probability matrix factorization (PMF),
factorization machine (FM), and Latent Factor Model (LFM). MF is most widely used
in integration models therein. Ref. [ 227] proposed the Stacked Discriminative denois-
ing auto-encoder-based recommender system, which integrated the SDAE with an
MF-based recommender system to incorporate side information with rating infor-
mation effectively. The previous works have shown that by learning the corrupted
versions of training data, the SDAE can improve the performance of the models. The
authors of [ 228] have stacked multiple block models of marginalized DAEs to form
a DL architecture. Compared to the conventional DAE, the marginalized DAE has a
lower computational cost. A basic block model of this method consists of the input,
hidden and output layers, and the matrix factorization of the user-item matrix X.
This proposed method coupled the user latent factor matrix with the deepest hidden
layer in the marginalized DAE, thus it can correctly capture the complex relationships
between the selections made by social friends and those made by the user. Different
from Refs. [ 227,228], Ref. [ 229] used AE and PCA to extract potential contexts from
original data for a potential context-aware recommendation system. These explicit
contexts are then integrated into MF process to generate recommendations. Ref. [ 230]
combined an LFM and DAE to form a new architecture, which could recommend
multi-items more accurately than traditional methods. In this hybrid recommender
system, extended LFM and DAE were utilized to deal with user behavior features and
to process visual features, respectively. In addition, some researchers also combined
AEs with PMF for RSs [231–233].
 Integrated AE with other DL methods. The ﬂexibility of the AE makes it possible
to combine multiple neural building blocks to form a more powerful hybrid model.
In Ref. [ 234], the authors proposed a Collaborative Knowledge Base Embedding
(CKE) model for jointly learning the latent representations in collaborative ﬁltering
(CF) and the items’ semantic representations from the knowledge base. The textual
knowledge, structural knowledge, and visual knowledge in the knowledge base were
fully exploited. In this hybrid RS, the SDAE and SCAE were used to extract items’
textual representations and to ﬁnd the latent representation from the visual knowledge,
respectively. Unlike Ref. [ 234], Ref. [ 235] utilized deep generative modeling (DGM) to
construct a new set of model-based CF. CF always faces sparse information because of