Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 3 of 54
 Paper Organization. The basic AE and its variants will be discussed in Section 2.
In this section, we have introduced the basic AE as well as its basic concept and
structure. Additionally, different variants as well as their developments were listed. In
Section 3, we analyze and study AEs from three different perspectives. In Section 4,
the relationships between AEs, shallow models, and other DL models are described.
Section 5 discusses the basic AE and its variants that have successfully been applied in
a wide range of ﬁelds, such as pattern recognition, computer vision, data generation,
recommender systems, etc. In Section 6, we focus on the available toolkits for AEs.
Finally, this paper summarizes the future trends and challenges in designing and
training AEs.
2. Methods and Recent Developments
In recent years, AEs have been extensively studied in the ﬁeld of AI. Therefore, a large
number of related works have emerged. In this section, we divide these models into two
major categories: the basic AE and its variants. In addition, we will further review each
technology of these models and their recent developments.
2.1. The Basic AE
The idea of AEs has been part of the historical landscape of neural networks for
decades. So, what is an AE? The basic AE is an auto-associative neural network, and it
derives from the multi-layer perceptron, which attempts to reproduce its input, i.e., the
target output is the input [ 7]. Ref. [ 25] proposed another explanation: an AE network can
convert an input vector into a code vector using a set of recognition weights. Then, a set of
generative weights are used to convert the code vector into an approximate reconstruction
of the input vector. We can use the basic AE as a building block to train deep networks.
Being associated with a basic AE, each level of a deep network can be trained separately.
2.1.1. Structure and Objectives
The basic AE is composed of an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer (see
Figure 1).
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 56 
 
 contributions of this survey: (1) we conducted a  literature  review of AE models and 
highlighted many  influential research prototypes; (2) we provided an overview and 
summary of the state  of the art; and (3) we discussed promising future extensions in 
this research field to highlight the vision and expand the horizons of research on AEs.  
• Paper Organization. The basic AE and its variants will be discussed in Section 2 . In 
this section, we have introduced the basic AE as well as its basic concept and struc-
ture. Additionally, different variants as well as their developments were listed. In 
Section 3, we analyze and study AEs from three different perspectives. In Section 4, 
the relationships between AEs, shallow models , and other DL models are described. 
Section 5 discusses the basic AE and its variants  that have successfully been applied 
in a wide range of fields, such as pattern recognition, computer vision, data genera-
tion, recommender system s, etc. In Section 6 , we focus on the available toolkits for 
AEs. Finally, this paper summarize s the future trends and challenges in designing 
and training AEs.  
2. Methods and Recent Developments  
In recent years, AEs have been extens ively studied in the field of AI. Therefore, a 
large number of related works have emerged. In this section, we divide these models into 
two major categories: the basic AE and its variants. In addition , we will further review 
each technology of these models  and their recent developments.  
2.1. The Basic AE  
The idea of AEs has been part of the historical landscape of neural networks for dec-
ades. So , what is an AE? The basic AE is an auto -associative neural network , and it derives 
from the multi -layer perceptro n, which attempts to reproduce its input, i.e., the target 
output is the input [7]. Ref. [25] proposed another explanation: an AE network can convert 
an input vector into a code vector using a set of recognition weights. Then, a set of gener-
ative weights a re used to convert the code vector into an approximate reconstruction of 
the input vector. We can use the basic AE as a building block to train deep networks. Being  
associated with a basic AE, each level of a deep network can be trained separately.  
2.1.1. Structure and Objectives  
The basic AE is composed of an input layer, a hidden layer , and an output layer (see 
Figure 1).  
Input
 x
x
x
1 x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
+1y1
y2
y3
y4z1
z2
z3
z4
z5
z6+1
Feature Output
 
Figure 1. An example of the basic AE with 6 input units and 4 hidden units (features). From left to 
right, respectively, the input layer, the hidden layer , and the output layer.  xi is an input unit, yj is a 
Figure 1. An example of the basic AE with 6 input units and 4 hidden units (features). From left to
right, respectively, the input layer, the hidden layer, and the output layer. xiis an input unit, yjis
a hidden unit, and ziis an output unit. The number “1” denotes bias. Connections are exclusively
drawn between different layers.
An AE takes an input vector and then maps it to the hidden representation y2Rd0
using the deterministic mapping y=fQ(x) =sf(Wx+b).Wis ad0dweight matrix, bis a
bias vector, and sfis the encoder activation function (typically the element-wise sigmoid