Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 11 of 54
property that is shared by all the units in a code. Spatial sparsity often requires some type
of special normalization to ensure that the “on” components of the code are not always
the same. In contrast to spatial sparsity methods, this framework tackles the problem in a
different way—when encoding different samples, each unit must be sparse independently
from the activities of the other components in the code vector.
In the following, we use the feature distribution view to analyze the sparsity of an AE.
Ref. [ 100] analyzes two desirable properties of the feature distribution: population sparsity
and lifetime sparsity. The ﬁrst describes codes in which few neurons are active at any time,
and the later describes codes in which each neuron’s lifetime response distribution has
high kurtosis [ 101]. To investigate the effectiveness of sparsity by itself, Makhzani et al. [ 16]
propose the “k-sparse auto-encoder”, which is an AE with a linear activation function,
where in hidden layers, only the khighest activities are kept, and the others are set to zero.
This is performed by sorting the activities or by using ReLU hidden units with adaptively
adjusted thresholds until the klargest activities are identiﬁed. This is different from the
traditional methods [ 10,99] that reconstruct the input from all of the hidden units. This
algorithm is also typically seen as enforcing population sparsity.
A “lifetime sparsity” penalty function proportional to the KL divergence between
the target sparsity probability ( r) and the hidden unit marginals ( ˆr) is added to the cost
function: lKL(rkˆr). A major drawback of this algorithm is that it only works for certain
target sparsity, and the tuning of the lparameter is a laborious task that requires expert
knowledge. In addition, KL divergence was originally proposed for sigmoidal AEs, and it
is not clear how to apply it to ReLU AEs where ˆrcould be larger than one (in which case,
the KL divergence cannot be evaluated) [ 67]. For this reason, Ref. [ 67] proposes a Fully
Connected Winner-Take-All (FC-WTA) AE, which aims for any target sparsity rate and
has no hyper-parameter to be tuned (except the target sparsity rate). This approach uses
mini-batch statistics to directly enforce a lifetime sparsity in the activations of the hidden
units. FC-WTA imposes sparsity (lifetime sparsity) across training examples, whereas
k-sparse AEs impose sparsity (population sparsity) across different channels. When low
sparsity levels are the goal, the latter uses a scheduling technique to avoid the problem of
a dead dictionary atom. However, FC-WTA will not encounter this problem because no
matter how aggressive the sparsity rate is (no scheduling required), all the hidden units
will be updated when visiting every mini-batch.
Earlier, we discussed and analyzed the sparsity of AEs from different views. In sum-
mary, sparse over-complete representations can be regarded as an alternative “compressed”
representation. Because there are a large number of zeros, it has implicit direct compress-
ibility. This is different from an explicit lower dimensionality [ 96]. If the representation
learned by an AE is sparse, then the AE cannot reconstruct every possible input pattern
well. The reason for this is that the number of sparse conﬁgurations is necessarily smaller
than the number of dense conﬁgurations. In addition, the number of conﬁgurations in
sparse vectors is much less than when less sparsity (or no sparsity at all) is applied, so the
entropy of sparser codes is smaller [102].
2.2.2. Denoising Auto-Encoder
As previously mentioned, one strategy to avoid simply copying the input is to con-
strain the representation: the traditional bottleneck and sparse representations. Ref. [ 96]
has explored and proposed a very different strategy, which is a both more interesting and
more challenging objective. The authors change the reconstruction criterion by cleaning
partially corrupted input or, in short, “denoising”. Denoising is advocated and investi-
gated as a training criterion for learning to extract useful features. This conception leads
to a very simple variant of the basic AE. Denoising auto-encoders (DAEs) are trained to
reconstruct clean “repaired” input from corrupted versions. First, we need to corrupt the
initial input vector xintoexusing stochastic mapping exqD(exjx), where qDdenotes a
stochastically corrupted process. Each time a training example xis presented, a different
corrupted version exis generated according to qD(exjx). With the basic AE, the corrupted