Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 24 of 54
5.1.1. Image Processing
(1) Image classiﬁcation
Image classiﬁcation is one of the most important and widely used research directions
in the ﬁeld of computer vision and AI. Its research goal is to classify images into different
pre-deﬁned categories according to their attributes. Image representation is the basis of
image classiﬁcation. In order to better represent images and realize automatic classiﬁcation,
it is very important to extract a good feature description for the images. As AEs are effective
feature-learning methods, they are widely used in image classiﬁcation. Ref. [ 133] used a
traditional AE with a single hidden layer to reduce the dimensionality and further used
it for the classiﬁcation of the MNIST and Olivetti face datasets. Both these two datasets
contain gray-scale images. Because the traditional AE is a fully connected network, the
authors resized the images of the Olivetti face dataset from 64 64 to 2828 (the same
size as MNIST) to reduce the computational complexity. As described before, an AE can be
stacked to build a deep network to obtain high-level features. Refs. [ 64,161] presented a
stacked SAE1for the classiﬁcation of nuclei patches in breast cancer histopathology. They
extracted two categories of 34 34 patches from the histopathology images: nuclei and non-
nuclei patches. The authors used these two kinds of patches to construct the training set
and testing set. Similarly, Ref. [ 162] also used the stacked SAE1to train with unsupervised
learning for extracting features of halftone images. The halftone image classiﬁcation phase
consists of three modules: effective image patch extraction, feature extraction with a stacked
SAE1,and majority voting for halftone image classiﬁcation. In order to reduce the run-time
of training and improve the image-correct classiﬁcation rate, they proposed an effective
patch extraction method. Each halftone image in the training set is segmented sequentially
into patches with a size of 16 16. Another research team proposed a method called the
stacked DAE, which is a direct variant of the stacked basic AE [ 96]. Further, the stacked
DAE was tested on MINIST. Being similar to the method based on the stacked SAE, the
training and testing datasets fed into the models are relatively low in resolution, such as
small image patches and low-resolution images (e.g., hand-written digits). The AE, SAE,
and DAE used in papers [ 64,96,133,161] are common fully connected networks, which learn
features by ﬁrst encoding the vector-form input data and then reconstructing it, and cannot
scale well to realistically sized high-dimensional inputs (e.g., 256 256 images) in terms of
computational complexity [84]. Additionally, they both ignore the 2D image structure.
To solve this problem, Ref. [ 163] proposed a kind of CAE2that ﬁrst extracted patches
from the input images and used patch-wise training to optimize the weights of a basic
SAE in place of convolutional training to learn weights. The weights are then reorganized
as convolutional kernels, which are used to convolve the RGB input images for more
abstract feature maps, thus still reserving the local relevance of images. At that time, this
research achieved state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-10
and NORB using only a single layer of features (73.4% and 97.2%, respectively). Ref. [ 35]
utilized this CAE2with a single layer of features for natural scene classiﬁcation. This idea
is analogous to Coates et al.’s work [ 163]. A similar method is used for remote sensing
image classiﬁcation as reported in [ 19]. While these works [ 19,35,163] only adopted a single
layer of features, the authors of [ 154] stacked DAEs in a convolutional way to generate
a hierarchical model. This stacked convolutional DAE achieved superior classiﬁcation
performance to state-of-the-art unsupervised networks. Due to the depth structure, this
model outperforms the single-layer model of [ 163] on the CIFAR-10 dataset (ranging from
73.4% to 80.4%).
In addition to using a single type of feature to classify image data mentioned above,
multiple features can be combined for more comprehensive information. Feature fusion
aims to combine the strengths of complementary cues such as local and holistic features,
which can be combined at the feature or rank level. These attempts can be used for both
natural images and medical images. Inspired by this, Ref. [ 164] extracted both holistic
architecture features and high-dimensional local appearance features from detected cells
using a stacked SAE1. Then, a graph-based, query-speciﬁc fusion approach was used to