Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 33 of 54
5.1.3. The 3D Model Field
In computer vision and pattern recognition, sometimes we need to build and process
3D models. The AE and its variants, with various characters, also can be used in the 3D
model ﬁeld. In Ref. [ 211], a novel 3D object retrieval method was proposed based on
the stacked local convolutional auto-encoder (SLCAE). This approach applied the greedy
layer-wise strategy to train SLCAE and used a gradient descent method for training each
layer. It only needed the depth image of 2D views projected from 3D objects. It was
view-based and shared the beneﬁts of view-based 3D object analysis: ﬂexible and easy
implemented. Ref. [ 15] proposed a new method to learn the DL representation for 3D
shape retrieval using a DBN-initialized AE. By combining the global DL representation
achieved with the AE with traditional local descriptor representation, this method obtained
state-of-the-art 3D shape retrieval performance. While Ref. [ 15] used feature fusion strategy,
Ref. [ 212] proposed a rapid 3D feature learning method named the convolutional auto-
encoder extreme learning machine (CAE-ELM), which combined the advantages of the
CNN, AE, and ELM. This designed architecture performed better and faster than other
methods. Complex geometric variations of 3D models often bring great challenges in 3D
shape retrieval. Ref. [ 213] developed a novel 3D shape feature learning method based on a
discriminative deep AE, which were insensitive to geometric deformations of shapes. The
Fisher discrimination criterion was utilized on the neurons in the hidden layer to develop
a deep discriminative AE. A multi-scale shape distribution was computed to input into
this network. Finally, concatenating the outputs from the hidden layers of the network
at different scales, a global shape descriptor for retrieval was formed. Differing from all
the methods stated above in terms of using the unsupervised property of the AE, a new
supervised deep AE for depth image-based 3D model retrieval was investigated [ 214]. This
supervised deep AE was achieved by combining the supervised classiﬁcation information
with the reconstruction error for joint optimization. The objective function of this supervised
AE was deﬁned as follows:
Es=E1+E2 (30)
where the reconstruction error term E1is the sigmoid cross entropy loss function from
the AE and the classiﬁcation loss term E2is the softmax loss function from the classiﬁer.
Appropriate supervision in back-propagation provided by the AE can help the retrieval per-
formance. All the papers listed above in this subsection used the AE as a feature extraction
tool. Ref. [ 12] argued that the traditional feature aggregation algorithms (such as Bag-
of-Features [ 215], Locality-constrained Linear coding [ 216], or Fisher Vector coding [ 217])
were not necessarily optimal in terms of accuracy because their codebook learning and
the feature encoding steps were processed separately. Hence, they proposed two feature
aggregation algorithms based on k-Sparse AE: DkSA and PkSA. Multiple local features
and benchmark datasets were provided for 3D model retrieval to evaluate DkSA and PkSA
quantitatively. AEs also can be used for 3D face generation and reconstruction. The learned
3D representations of human faces are very useful for computer vision problems, such as
3D face tracking and reconstruction from images [ 218]. Traditional models use higher-order
tensor generalizations or linear subspaces to learn a latent representation of a face. Because
of this linearity, they are unable to capture extreme deformations and non-linear expres-
sions. To address this, Ref. [ 218] introduced convolutional Mesh AE (CoMA) combining
the convolutions and mesh sampling operations to learn a non-linear representation. The
experiments demonstrated that CoMA was signiﬁcantly better than the latest model in
the application of 3D face reconstruction, and the model parameters used were reduced
by 75%. Because a 3D face provides more semantic information than a 2D image, 3D face
reconstruction from a 2D face image is of great signiﬁcance for the applications of face
detection and recognition. Ref. [ 219] developed a deep learning framework for 3D face
reconstruction. A CAE adds smoothness to the original AE, which makes the learned
features robust to minor variations in data such as illumination changes and complex
surface shapes unrelated to salient facial features. The authors took advantage of this
advantage and stacked a CAE to form two deep AEs for learning the subspace from both