Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 23 of 54
Suppose that Ais an mnmatrix. Then, Uis deﬁned to be an mmunitary matrix
(i.e., UTU=I),Dto be an mnmatrix, and VTto be an nnunitary matrix (i.e., VTV=I).
Conventionally, the entries along the diagonal of D(the singular values) are sorted in
non-increasing order. Pick the klargest singular values and then deﬁne the tSVD matrix as:
eA=UkDkVT
k(28)
where Uk(VkT) is the ﬁrst kcolumns of U(VT) and Dkis our kbykmatrix of top eigenvalues.
Ifxi(i= 1, 2, . . .,m) is a row of A,zi=xiVT
kcan be deemed as the encoding of xi, and
exi=ziVkcorresponds to the decoder function. Analyzing from this point, tSVD and a
traditional AE (with linear activation and only one hidden layer) are identical [ 158]. In
other words, the tSVD is a degenerate form or a special linear case of a traditional AE [ 159].
5. Application Domains
AEs are often used for effective encoding of the original data or learning a representa-
tion, in the form of input vectors, at the hidden layers. Additionally, AE is an unsupervised
feature extraction method. In this section, we will demonstrate a plethora of applications
for AEs in various real-world domains, such as computer vision, speech recognition, fault
diagnosis, anomaly detection, etc. To do so, Figure 6 summarizes the taxonomy of the
application domains of AEs, which will be described in this section.
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  24 of 56 
 
 Suppose that A is an m × n matrix. Then , U is defined to be an m × m unitary matrix 
(i.e., UTU = I), D to be an m × n matrix, and VT to be an n × n unitary matrix (i.e. , VTV = I). 
Conventionally, the entries along the diagonal of D (the singular values) are sorted in non -
increasing order. Pick the k largest singular values and then define the tSVD matrix  as: 
T
k k k A U D V=
 (28) 
where Uk(VkT) is the first k columns of U (VT) and Dk is our k by k matrix of top eigenvalues. 
If xi (i=1, 2,…, m) is a row of A, 
T
i i kz xV
  can be deem ed as the encoding of xi, and 
i i kx z V=
  
corresponds to the decoder function. Analyzing from this point, tSVD and a traditional 
AE (with linear activation and only one hidden layer) are identical [158]. In other words, 
the tSVD is a degenerate form or a special linear case of a traditional AE [159]. 
5. Application Domains  
AEs are often used for effective encoding of the original data or learning a represen-
tation, in the form of input vectors, at  the hidden layers. Additionally, AE is an unsuper-
vised feature extraction method. In this section, we will demonstrate a plethora of appli-
cations for AEs in various real -world domains, such as computer vision, speech recogni-
tion, fault diagnosis, anomaly detection, etc. To do so, Figure 6 summarizes the taxonomy 
of the application domains of AEs, which wil l be described in this section.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Application  
Domains   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pattern  Recognition  
 Recommender System  
 Data  Generation  
 
 
 
 
 Computer  Vision  
 3D Models field  
 Image Processing  
 Video  Processing  
 Saliency Detection  
 Image  Retrieval  
 Image  Restoration  
 Video  Classification  
 Event  Detection  
 Forgery  Detection  
 Abnormal Detection  
 Object  Tracking  
 Face Recognition  
 Facial Emotion Recognition   
 Speech  Emotion Recognition  
Recognition  
 Other  Application s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Observ ing Phase  Transition s 
Recognition  
 Page  Segmentation  
 Text Classification  
 Modeling Graphs  
  
 
Figure 6. The taxonomy of the application domains of AEs. 
5.1. Computer Vision  
Computer vision is the science and technology that make s computers accurately un-
derstand and efficiently process visual data such as videos and images. As a scientific 
discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory for building artificial systems 
that obtain information from real -world , high -dimension al data. The ultimate goal of 
computer vision is to give machines the perceptual capability of human s [160]. In the fol-
lowing  section , we will provide a general review of several application domains of 
Figure 6. The taxonomy of the application domains of AEs.
5.1. Computer Vision
Computer vision is the science and technology that makes computers accurately
understand and efﬁciently process visual data such as videos and images. As a scientiﬁc
discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory for building artiﬁcial systems that
obtain information from real-world, high-dimensional data. The ultimate goal of computer
vision is to give machines the perceptual capability of humans [ 160]. In the following
section, we will provide a general review of several application domains of computer vision
for AEs including image processing, video processing, and the 3D model ﬁeld.