Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 12 of 54
inputexis then mapped to hidden representation y=fq(ex) =sf(Wex+b)from which we
reconstruct z=gq(y) =sg(W0y+b0). Just as in the case of the basic AE, the weight matrix
may also optionally be tied to weights. In Ref. [ 103], the authors justiﬁed the use of tied
weights between the encoder and decoder within the Score Matching (SM) framework
presented. Parameters qare trained to force zas close as possible to the uncorrupted input
x. As previously mentioned, the considered reconstruction error L(x,z) can be MSE, with
an afﬁne decoder, or the cross-entropy loss, equipped with an afﬁne+sigmoid decoder.
Ref. [ 96] also claims that denoising, that is, restoring the values of corrupted elements, is
only possible due to the dependencies between dimensions in high dimensional distribu-
tions. In addition, it is probably less suitable for very low dimensional problems. It has
been proven that DAEs can be viewed as an empirically successful alternative to Restricted
Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) trained with contrastive divergence for pre-training deep
networks [9,96,104].
In the corruption process, there are several types of noise such as salt-and-pepper
noise for gray-scale images, additive isotropic Gaussian noise, and masking noise (salt
or pepper only). The last type of noise has been used in most simulations [ 105]. Noise
injection, which can be much more powerful than simply shrinking the parameters, is
a way to improve the robustness of neural networks. Injecting noise in the input to a
neural network can also be seen as a form of data augmentation, which is a particularly
effective technique for a speciﬁc classiﬁcation problem—object recognition [ 33]. This well-
known data augmentation method uses stochastically “transformed” patterns to augment
the training data, such as transforming original bitmaps using small rotations, scalings,
and translations to augment a training set [ 106,107]. However, the difference between
this technique and noise injection in DAE lies in the fact that the latter does not produce
extra labeled examples for supervised training, nor does it use any prior knowledge of
image topology.
Noise injection in the input data is the key ingredient of a DAE. We can extend this
idea to apply noise to the hidden units and visible units of a neural network. This creats a
computationally inexpensive but powerful regularization—dropout [ 108,109]. The term
“dropout” means dropping out units (visible and hidden) in a neural network. Dropping a
unit out means temporarily removing it from the network together with all its incoming
and outgoing connections. The choice of which units to drop is random. Similar to the
DAE, it also can be considered as a process of constructing new inputs by multiplying with
noise. As noise is applied to the hidden units, dropout can be seen as performing dataset
augmentation at multiple levels of abstraction [33].
DAEs also can be analyzed from the following theoretical points of view: the manifold
learning perspective, information-theoretic perspective, and stochastic operator perspec-
tive [ 97]. Recently, Ref. [ 110] proposed a different probabilistic interpretation of the DAE,
which is valid for any data type, any corruption process, and any reconstruction loss (so
long as it can be viewed as a log-likelihood). In addition, Ref. [ 104] relates the DAE to
energy-based models (EBMs), which are a rich class of probabilistic models. These models
deﬁne a probability distribution using an exponentiated energy function. Using linear
reconstruction and squared error to train a DAE is equivalent to learning an energy-based
model, and its energy function is very close to that of a Gaussian RBM. The training uses a
regularized variant of the score-matching parameter estimation technique [ 111], which is
called denoising score matching. Finally, Ref. [ 62] summarized and extended the existing
results from Vincent [ 104]. They further proved that a DAE with arbitrary parametrization
with small Gaussian corruption noise is a general estimator of the score. Meanwhile, we
also can demonstrate denoising as a learning criterion that can be seen as a dynamical
system from the view of the AE [112].
2.2.3. Variational Auto-Encoder
In just four years, the variational auto-encoder (VAE), which is proposed by Ref. [ 113],
has been a slightly more modern and interesting work. So, what is a VAE? It is a model