Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 40 of 54
5.4. Data Generation
In recent years, the development in DL has promoted the progress of generative
models, which can capture the distributions of high-dimensional datasets and generate
new samples. Ref. [ 251] proposed a method that uses a VAE as an encoder and deems GAN
as a high-quality generative model. In this model, the feature representations learned in
the GAN discriminator are used as basis for the VAE reconstruction objective. Compared
to element-wise errors used in the traditional VAE, feature-wise errors can capture the data
distribution better while offering invariance towards translation. Thereby, element-wise
errors are replaced with feature-wise errors. This method outperforms VAEs with element-
wise similarity measures in terms of visual ﬁdelity. To make a VAE generate high quality
images, some approaches have been proposed to increase the network depth to improve
the capacity of decoder networks. However, deeper networks are difﬁcult to optimize.
Thankfully, the deep residual blocks can solve this problem, allowing for increasing the
capacity of the decoder. Additionally, a VAE with residual blocks in the decoder network
can generate high quality images. However, it still suffers from the effect of L2loss. In
Ref. [ 252], the authors proposed framework to generate high quality images. To make the
decoder generate better images, this multi-stage VAE concatenates the original decoder
network f1() with the residual block network f2() to increase the capacity of model. In
the ﬁrst stage, f1() is computed with a CNN to generate a coarse image using a L2loss
function. The subsequent stage uses f2() to take the generated blurry image as input and
forms a high-quality image. Because f2() is independent of the VAE model, it can use
other loss functions to solve the problem of the effect of L2loss. f2() can be considered as
a super-resolution module.
5.5. Other Applications
In addition to the domains listed above, there exist substantial studies on other do-
mains, which also apply AEs and their variants. Ref. [ 117] take advantage of VAEs to
observe phase transitions. The weights and latent parameters of the VAE can store informa-
tion about macroscopic and microscopic properties of the underlying systems. Ref. [ 253]
proposed a natural language-based text-instruction intention understanding method using
the stacked DAE. A novel variable-wise weighted stacked auto-encoder (VW-SAE), pro-
posed by Ref. [ 254], exacts hierarchical output-related feature representation layer by layer
for soft sensing applications. Moreover, Ref. [ 255] use the CAE2for page segmentation
of historical handwritten documents available as color images. In the text classiﬁcation
domain, a semi-supervised sequential variational auto-encoder (SSVAE) has been proposed
for the semi-supervised text classiﬁcation problem. Surprisingly, AEs can also be used for
modeling graphs [ 256]. As a part of the theoretical basis of machine learning and AI, the
research of AEs is of great signiﬁcance. Furthermore, their applications in various ﬁelds
also have very important practical values. In addition, AEs are also applied to the parallel
basic research ﬁelds such as clustering. In the last two years, AEs have been applied to
some new research ﬁelds. Ref. [ 257] analyzed the ﬂow-based characteristics of the network
trafﬁc data and proposed a new intrusion detection method. This method leverages a deep
metric learning methodology that originally combines autoencoders and Triplet networks.
Ref. [ 258] proposed a Crystal Diffusion Variational Autoencoder (CDVAE) for the material
design community. The CDVAE can capture the physical inductive bias of material stability
to generate the periodic structure of stable materials.
6. Available Deep Learning Toolkits
From the analysis and description in Section 5, we can conclude that AEs can dominate
many applications of AI. At the same time, with the rapid development in academic
research, there are many DL open-source development toolkits. In this section, we will
list some popular DL toolkits which are available for AEs. The candidates are listed in
alphabetical order: Caffe, CNTK, Deeplearn4J, Keras, MXNet, Pytorch, PaddlePaddle,
TensorFlow, Theano, and Torch. It goes beyond the scope of this paper to discuss all these