Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 16 of 54
2.2.8. Adversarial Auto-Encoder
In Section 2.2.4, we referred to the AAE proposed by Ref. [ 13]. The AAE is a proba-
bilistic AE that incorporates adversarial training [ 120] to match the aggregated posterior
q(z) of the hidden code vector zwith an arbitrary prior distribution p(z), such as a mul-
tivariate standard normal distribution. Hence, this probabilistic AE is trained with dual
objectives: a traditional reconstruction error criterion and an adversarial training criterion.
The architecture of the AAE is shown in Figure 3. AAE is trained with SGD in two phases:
the reconstruction phase and the regularization phase. In the former phase, the encoder
and decoder are updated to minimize the reconstruction error of the inputs. In the latter
phase, the adversarial network ﬁrstly updates its discriminative network to discriminate
the positive samples (generated using the prior distribution p(z)) from the negative samples
q(z). The generator of an AAE (which is also the encoder of AE) is updated to confuse the
discriminative network. Once the training procedure is complete, the decoder of the AE
will act as a generative model mapping the imposed prior p(z) to the data distribution.
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 56 
 
 the discriminative network. Once the training procedure is complete , the decoder of the 
AE will act as a generative model mapping the imposed prior p(z) to the data distribution.  
Variation and adversarial are the two key methods for regularizin g the encoding 
space. The AAE is similar to the VAE. The latter uses a KL divergence to impose a prior 
distribution on the hidden code vector, while the former uses adversarial training to 
match the aggregated posterior of the hidden code vector to an arbi trary prior. Compared 
with the VAE, the AAE has the following characteristics. We must have access to the func-
tional form of the prior distribution p(z) to backprop through the KL divergence. While in 
an AAE, we only need to be able to draw a sample from t he prior to induce the latent 
distribution to match the prior. Further, the adversarial method allows the encoder to be 
more expressive than the variational method [88]. In Section 2.2.2, we analyzed the bene-
fits of the denoising criterion [96], but no cor ruption process was introduced for the AAE. 
Hence, Ref. [87] combined regularization and denoising  and used adversarial training to 
shape the distribution of latent space. They incorporated denoising into the training and 
sampling of an AAE, thus formulati ng two improved versions of the denoising AAE: 
iDAAE and DAAE.  
  
  Input    
reconstruction
 
 Encoder Decoder
Draw samples 
from p(z)
Input
Adversarial cost  for 
distinguishing positive samples 
p(z) from negative samples q(z)
 
Figure 3. The architecture of an AAE [13]. The red rectangle is a standard AE with an encoder and 
decoder to reconstruct an image x from a latent code z. The encoder of the AE q(z|x) is also a gener-
ator of the adversarial network. The blue rectangle describes the discriminative network, which is 
used to predict whether a sample arises from the hidden code of the AE or from a sampled distri-
bution p(z). 
2.2.9. Sequence -to-Sequence Auto -Encoder  
In the above sections, we described several types of regularized AEs. The input of 
these AEs are vectors or 2D images. If our inputs are sequences, how can we complete the 
task? A general framework has been proposed to  encode a sequence using a sequence -to-
sequence auto -encoder (SA), in which a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used to en-
code the input sequence into a fixed-length representation and then another RNN to de-
code this representation out of that input sequen ce. This network is trained to minimize 
the root mean squared error (RMSE) between the input sequence and the reconstruction 
[89]. In Ref. [90], the authors proposed t he use of a SA to represent variable -length audio 
segments with  vectors of fixed dimensio nality. To learn more robust representation s, they 
further apply the denoising criterion to SA learning. The input acoustic feature sequence 
x is randomly added with some noise to yield a corrupted version  
x
. Here , the input to 
SA is  
x
, and SA is expected to generate the output y closest to the original  x based on  
x
. The SA incorporated into this denoising criterion is referred to as the denoising se-
quence -to-sequenc e auto -encoder (DSA).  
Ref. [121] presented  the AUDEEP, which is the first Python toolkit based on Tensor-
Flow for deep unsupervised representation learning from acoustic data. This toolkit used 
a deep recurrent SA approach built of long short -term memory ce lls or gated recurrent 
units. Further, Bowman et al. [122] drew the ideology of “variation” into  the SA and 
Figure 3. The architecture of an AAE [ 13]. The red rectangle is a standard AE with an encoder
and decoder to reconstruct an image xfrom a latent code z. The encoder of the AE q(z|x) is also
a generator of the adversarial network. The blue rectangle describes the discriminative network,
which is used to predict whether a sample arises from the hidden code of the AE or from a sampled
distribution p(z).
Variation and adversarial are the two key methods for regularizing the encoding
space. The AAE is similar to the VAE. The latter uses a KL divergence to impose a prior
distribution on the hidden code vector, while the former uses adversarial training to match
the aggregated posterior of the hidden code vector to an arbitrary prior. Compared with
the VAE, the AAE has the following characteristics. We must have access to the functional
form of the prior distribution p(z) to backprop through the KL divergence. While in
an AAE, we only need to be able to draw a sample from the prior to induce the latent
distribution to match the prior. Further, the adversarial method allows the encoder to be
more expressive than the variational method [ 88]. In Section 2.2.2, we analyzed the beneﬁts
of the denoising criterion [ 96], but no corruption process was introduced for the AAE.
Hence, Ref. [ 87] combined regularization and denoising and used adversarial training
to shape the distribution of latent space. They incorporated denoising into the training
and sampling of an AAE, thus formulating two improved versions of the denoising AAE:
iDAAE and DAAE.
2.2.9. Sequence-to-Sequence Auto-Encoder
In the above sections, we described several types of regularized AEs. The input of
these AEs are vectors or 2D images. If our inputs are sequences, how can we complete the
task? A general framework has been proposed to encode a sequence using a sequence-to-
sequence auto-encoder (SA), in which a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used to encode
the input sequence into a ﬁxed-length representation and then another RNN to decode this