Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 22 of 54
the inverse convolutional operation, which is called a convolutional encoder. Moreover,
using the standard unsupervised greedy training for AE, the parameters of the encoder
and decoder operation can be calculated. Refs. [ 84,119,153] also used this kind of CAE2
similar to [152].
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  23 of 56 
 
 decoder oper ation can be calculated. Refs. [84,119,153]  also used this kind of CAE2 similar  
to [152]. 
poolinginput image
convolutionpoolingfully connected 
layersoutput  layer
convolutionfeature map
 
Figure 5. The typical architecture of a CNN.  
Another mechanism for the CAE2 is to extract random image patches from input im-
ages, and then use these patches to train an AE. Once the training is complete, we can use 
the filters in a convolutional fashion to obtain representations of images. The works 
[19,154,155]  utilized this kin d of architecture. As discussed in Ref. [67], the key problem 
with this architecture is that if the receptive field selection is small, it will not be able to 
capture relevant features (imagine the extreme of 1  × 1 patches). If we increase the size of 
the receptive field, a very large number of features are needed to explain all the position -
specific variations within the receptive field.  
4.3. Relationship with Matrix Factorizat ion 
In this section, the relationship between matrix factorization (MF) and AE w ill be 
analyzed. Firstly, we will describe the relationship between the non -negative matrix fac-
torization (NMF) and AE. Secondly, the relationship between the truncated Singular 
Value Decomposition (TSVD) and AE will be analyzed.  
4.3.1. Relation to NMF  
MF and AE s are among the most successful approaches to unsupervised learning 
[156]. The goal of MF is to decompose a matrix into several matrices. There are several 
matrix factorization methods, such as triangular factorization, full rank factorization, QR 
factorization, NMF, and singular value decomposition (SVD). Consider a data matrix 
mnV
 with only non -negative elements and m dimensions and n data points. If defin-
ing two matrices , 
mrW
  and 
rnH
 , they also have  only non -negative ele ments. 
NMF can reduce the dimensionality of V using the approximation 
V WH . r is a preset 
dimension reduction parameter ( m and n are much larger than r). A one -hidden laye r AE 
can be used to perform NMF. Both NMF and AE can produce a lower dimensional repre-
sentation of some input data [157]. Additionally, the authors of [157] have proposed an 
architecture called PAE -NMF, which utilize s the ideas behind the VAE to perform NMF. 
The model proposed in this paper provides advantages both to  the VAE and NMF. For 
the VAE, by forcing a non -negative latent space, many of the beneficial properties of NM F 
can be inherited . For NMF, a probabilistic representation of the vectors h is used to model 
the uncertainty in the parameters of the model due to the limited data.  
4.3.2. Relation to tSVD  
tSVD is another matrix factorization method that produces a low -rank approxima-
tion to a matrix. We need to compute the SVD of the matrix A and then truncate the less -
significant singular values. The SVD of the matrix A is given by : 
TA UDV
 (27) 
Figure 5. The typical architecture of a CNN.
Another mechanism for the CAE2is to extract random image patches from input
images, and then use these patches to train an AE. Once the training is complete, we
can use the ﬁlters in a convolutional fashion to obtain representations of images. The
works [ 19,154,155] utilized this kind of architecture. As discussed in Ref. [ 67], the key
problem with this architecture is that if the receptive ﬁeld selection is small, it will not be
able to capture relevant features (imagine the extreme of 1 1 patches). If we increase the
size of the receptive ﬁeld, a very large number of features are needed to explain all the
position-speciﬁc variations within the receptive ﬁeld.
4.3. Relationship with Matrix Factorization
In this section, the relationship between matrix factorization (MF) and AE will be
analyzed. Firstly, we will describe the relationship between the non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) and AE. Secondly, the relationship between the truncated Singular
Value Decomposition (TSVD) and AE will be analyzed.
4.3.1. Relation to NMF
MF and AEs are among the most successful approaches to unsupervised learning [ 156].
The goal of MF is to decompose a matrix into several matrices. There are several matrix
factorization methods, such as triangular factorization, full rank factorization, QR factoriza-
tion, NMF, and singular value decomposition (SVD). Consider a data matrix V2Rmn
with only non-negative elements and mdimensions and ndata points. If deﬁning two
matrices, W2Rmrand H2Rrn, they also have only non-negative elements. NMF can
reduce the dimensionality of Vusing the approximation VWH .ris a preset dimension
reduction parameter ( mand nare much larger than r). A one-hidden layer AE can be used
to perform NMF. Both NMF and AE can produce a lower dimensional representation of
some input data [ 157]. Additionally, the authors of [ 157] have proposed an architecture
called PAE-NMF, which utilizes the ideas behind the VAE to perform NMF. The model pro-
posed in this paper provides advantages both to the VAE and NMF. For the VAE, by forcing
a non-negative latent space, many of the beneﬁcial properties of NMF can be inherited. For
NMF, a probabilistic representation of the vectors his used to model the uncertainty in the
parameters of the model due to the limited data.
4.3.2. Relation to tSVD
tSVD is another matrix factorization method that produces a low-rank approximation
to a matrix. We need to compute the SVD of the matrix Aand then truncate the less-
signiﬁcant singular values. The SVD of the matrix Ais given by:
A=UDVT(27)