Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 8 of 54
constraints are very successful, even when the network is over-complete [ 27]. In summary,
using comparisons of the size of the hidden layer and the input layer, the basic AE structure
can be divided into two categories: the narrow AE and wide AE (also known as under-
complete and over-complete, respectively). Using various means in the different forms, we
can achieve regularized AEs. In addition to the old bottleneck AEs with fewer hidden units
than input, there are other forms of regularize AEs, which will be discussed next.
2.2. Regularized AEs
As described in the previous section, using various regularizers in different forms,
we can achieve regularized AEs (also called “variants of the AE” [ 63]). These regularizers
include: a sparsity regularizer, a contractive regularizer, or a denoising form of regular-
ization, etc. In an AE network, inputs xcan be mapped to an internal representation
f(x) using the encoder function f, and then f(x) is mappeds back to the input space using
a decoding function g(detailed above). The regularizer basically attempts to force fto
throw away some information present in xor at least represent it with less precision. This
means that the r(orf) has to be as simple as possible, i.e., as unresponsive to xas possible,
and as constant as possible. In regularized AEs, the derivatives of f(x) orr(x) along the
manifold in the x-directions must remain large, while the derivatives of f(x) orr(x) in the
x-directions orthogonal to the manifold can be very small. Since a regularized AE with
a non-linear encoder is allowed to choose different principal directions, it can capture
non-linear manifolds [64].
In Table 1, we list the well-known regularized AEs along with some representative
works and brieﬂy summarize their characteristics and advantages. In the next sections, we
will describe each of these variants and their most recent developments.
Table 1. Various regularized AEs.
Method Remark References
Sparse Auto-encoder1. Imposes a sparsity constraint on the hidden units[65]2. Learns useful representations/features for images/audio domains
k-sparse Auto-encoder In hidden layers, only the khighest activities are kept, and the others are set to zero [16,66]
FC-WTA Auto-encoderUsing mini-batch statistics to directly enforce a lifetime sparsity in the activations of
the hidden units[67]
Denoising Auto-encoder An explicit denoising criterion helps to capture interesting structure in the input [68,69]
Variational Auto-encoder Elegant theory, but tends to generate blurry samples when applied to natural images [70,71]
Ladder Variational
Auto-encoderProviding advanced predictive log-likelihood and a tighter lower bound on the
true log-likelihood[72]
Triplet-based
Variational Auto-encoderIncorporating deep metric learning to learn latent embedding in VAE [73]
Conditional Variational
Auto-encoderA VAE architecture conditioning on another description of the data, y [74–76]
Wasserstein
Auto-encoderUsing the optimal transport cost between the model distribution and the
target distribution[77–79]
Contractive Auto-encoderAdding the Froenius norm of the Jacobian matrix of the encoder activations to the
reconstruction cost[80,81]
What and Where
Auto-encoderProviding a uniﬁed approach to unsupervised, semi-supervised, and
supervised learning[82]
Convolutional
Auto-encoderExtending the AE using convolution operation [83–86]
Adversarial
Auto-encoderTraining an auto-encoder with an adversarial loss to match the distribution in the
latent space to an arbitrary prior[87,88]
Sequence-to-sequence
Auto-encoder1. Based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
2. Learn ﬁxed-length representations of variable-length input[89–91]
2.2.1. Sparse Auto-Encoder
Sparsity has become an interesting concept recently. It is a useful and desirable con-
straint when the number of hidden units is large (even larger than the number of input