Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 15 of 54
encoder function f()rather than the whole reconstruction function. From another point of
view, a DAE is actually a particular kind of CAE1with very small Gaussian corruption and
MSE loss [ 62]. Second, the hyper-parameter controls the norm of the Jacobian penalized;
it adjusts the trade-off between reconstruction and robustness (while in the DAE, the two
are mingled). Additionally, the CAE1and VAE also have certain features in common. These
two kinds of models impose constraints on the output of hidden neurons.
Ref. [ 80] proposed a simple and computationally efﬁcient method to extend the CAE1
method. This improved method not only penalizes the ﬁrst order derivative (Jacobian) of
the mapping but also the second order (Hessian). This improvement can help to stabilize
the learned representation around training points.
2.2.6. What-Where Auto-Encoder
In 2016, Ref. [ 82] presented a novel architecture called the “stacked what-where auto-
encoder” (SWWAE). The idea of “what” and “where” has been proposed previously in
cognitive neuroscience. The “what” pathway is involved with object and visual identi-
ﬁcation. The “where” pathway is used to process the object’s spatial location relative to
the viewer. The authors have put the idea of “what” and “where” into the model of the
SWWAE. In this model, each pooling layer produces two sets of variables, namely, “what”
and “where”. The former is fed to the next layer. Its complementary variable, the “where”,
is fed to the corresponding layer in the decoder. The SWWAE integrates discriminative and
generative pathways and provides a uniﬁed approach for supervised, semi-supervised,
and unsupervised learning. The loss function of the SWWAE depicted in Equation (22) is
composed of three parts:
L=lNLLLNLL+lL2recLL2rec+lL2MLL2M (22)
where LNLLdenotes the classiﬁcation loss, LL2rec is the reconstruction loss at the input level,
and LL2Mis intermediate reconstruction terms. weights the losses against each other.
Contrary to the traditional AE, SAE, and DAE mentioned above, this model includes
a supervised loss, which can help factorize the data into semantically relevant factors of
variation. Additionally, the SWWAE uses the reconstruction term as a regularizer.
2.2.7. What-Where Auto-Encoder
In the previous section, we depicted the loss function of the SWWAE using Equation
(22). If we set LNLL= 0, then the SWWAE is equivalent to a deep convolutional auto-
encoder (CAE2). So, what kind of structure is the CAE2? It equips the convolutional neural
network (CNN) as encoders and decoders. Ref. [ 84] developed the CAE2with logistic
sigmoid units for feature learning. However, the learning properties of this model were
not fully studied, and the connections to other related models were not mentioned. Hence,
Ref. [119] proposed a convolutional sparse auto-encoder (CSAE) and built its connections
to convolutional sparse coding (CSC). The proposed CSAE includes three basic modules:
encoder, sparsifying, and decoder. Contrary to Ref. [ 84], this model has added a sparsifying
module, which can quickly predict the sparse feature maps. Additionally, they also built
connections between the CSAE and CSC. In Ref. [ 85], the authors developed several deep
CAE2models using the Caffe deep learning framework and evaluated their experiments
with MNIST.
Comparing the CAE2with the well-known SAE and DAE, there are some advantages.
First, this model can scale well to realistic-sized high-dimensional inputs. Both the SAE
and DAE, however, are common fully connected deep networks. Hence, these two models
introduce computational complexity and force each feature to be global. Additionally, the
CAE2is different from the traditional AE as it can preserve spatial locality because the
weights are shared among all locations in the input.