Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 29 of 54
wavelet transform and decomposed into wavelet coefﬁcients. The wavelet coefﬁcients
then become the input for the MIMT-DAE. The result of retrieval performance shows that
this combination of wavelet transformation and MIMT-DAE increases the performance
of image retrieval for shape and texture compared to a traditional single input single task
deep AE with far fewer training parameters required.
5.1.2. Video Process
In the ﬁeld of computer vision, various AE models have been widely used in the video
ﬁeld, including video classiﬁcation, video object tracking, video abnormal detection, etc.
Table 2 lists the speciﬁc application ﬁeld of AEs for video, the characters, and the areas for
improvement. With the rapid progress of storage devices, the internet, and social network,
a great deal of video data are generated. To bridge the semantic gap between low-level
features and high-level semantics, automatic video annotation and classiﬁcation technology
have become an important technology to improve the efﬁciency of video retrieval [ 191].
In Ref. [ 192], the authors considered three modalities in videos, i.e., image, audio, and
text. Hence, they proposed a multimodal feature learning mechanism based on the stacked
CAE1for video classiﬁcation. One stacked CAE1was built for each single modality, whose
outputs would be joint together and fed into another multimodal stacked CAE1. Compared
to other deep and shallow models, the experimental results showed multimodal integration
playing important role in video semantics classiﬁcation. Similarly, Ref. [ 193] also com-
bined both audio and visual features and learned two separate models trained on audio
and visual data of the video. The difference is that three unsupervised feature learning
algorithms (RBM, ISA, and deep SAE1) have been used. A deep convolutional RBM was
used to model the audio data and a stacked ISA network was used to extract features from
visual data. Finally, they jointly trained audio and visual features using a deep-stacked
SAE1with discriminative ﬁne-tuning. This conﬁrms the conclusion made in [ 192] that
combining multi-features can obtain better accuracy (97.22% with 40 training examples)
as compared to a single type of feature (92.65% with audio only and 88.86% with visual
feature only). Fusing multiple modalities also can be used for video event detection [ 194].
Further, the authors argued that the conventional video representation methods extracted
each modality ineffectively. Based on unconstrained minimization and using the conjugate
gradient method with a linear search for optimization, a regularized multi-modality AE
was developed for video event detection. The superiority of considering multi-modality
in the task of video event detection also exists. Compared with traditional reconstruct
Independent Components Analysis (RICA), this method is a signiﬁcant improvement as it
captures the relationships between audio and visual modalities from the same category
of videos. Because modern editing software provides powerful and easy-to-use tools to
manipulate videos, video forgery detection is becoming an important issue in recent years.
In Ref. [ 195], the authors proposed a method to perform forgery detection using an AE and
RNN. In this work, the AE can be used not only for image-based salient object detection
(SOD) but also for video-based SOD. Ref. [ 196] considered some inherent correlations
between image-based and video-based SOD, and then proposed an unsupervised baseline
approach for video-based SOD using saliency guided stacked AEs. There are many forms of
feature information present in video data. Above, we discussed the image, text, and audio
features in video data. Beyond that, it also has object identity information which is largely
static across multiple video frames, object pose, and style information which continuously
transforms from frame to frame. Recently, there is a rising interest in disentangled represen-
tations. For video sequence modeling, an ideal disentangled representation would be able
to separate time-independent concepts (e.g., the identity of the object in the scene) from
dynamical information (e.g., the time-varying position and the orientation or pose of that
object). Hence, Ref. [ 197] leveraged a hierarchical VAE for disentangling the object identity
and pose information of unsupervised video data. Differing from the conventional VAE, a
prior over latent frame features was deﬁned for entire frame sequences, not just individual
frames. This prior includes two parts: information that remains relatively constant in the