Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 31 of 54
high computing speed but also could run in real-time with a fast speed of over 100 fps.
Additionally, this work also considered the solution to the blurriness problem. Generally
speaking, as an excellent unsupervised feature extraction model, the theory of the AE is
intuitive and graceful. Hence, it has been widely used in video processing and achieved
performance results.
Video abnormal detection is one of the key components in video surveillance appli-
cations. It has gained more and more attention and became an important research topic
in computer vision. The methods for abnormal detection can be divided into the unsu-
pervised method and the supervised method. Due to the lack of human supervision, it
is challenging to learn a normal distribution when only normal data samples are given
and then identify the samples that do not conform to the normal distribution as anoma-
lies. The AE is a powerful unsupervised learning tool due to its great ﬁtting ability and
high-dimensional data modeling ability. It is widely used in video abnormal detection.
In [204], the optical ﬂow of the original video sequence is ﬁrstly calculated and visualized
as an optical ﬂow image, which is then fed into a deep AE. Then, the deep AE extracts
the features from the training samples and compresses them into three vectors, which are
drawn in a 3-dimension coordinate axis. Finally, the normal and abnormal samples are
collected, respectively, on this coordinate axis. Different from Ref. [ 204], Ref. [ 205] used a
different video reprocessing strategy that was used to generate cubic patches. This method
used different feature descriptors for local and global anomalies. They ﬁrst generated local
descriptors and used sparse DAE for global descriptors. Gaussian classiﬁers were used
to classify the local and global descriptors separately, and a fusion technique was used to
aggregate the results of both. There is a criterion for AE to identify anomalies. The AE is
expected to produce higher reconstruction errors for the abnormal inputs than the normal
ones. However, this assumption is not always valid in practice because sometimes the AE
“generalizes” very well and can reconstruct the anomaly well, resulting in the omission of
anomaly detection.
To alleviate the disadvantage of anomaly detection based on AE, Ref. [ 206] have
developed an improved AE called memory-augmented AE (MemAE) by adding a storage
module to the original AE. Given an input, this suggested MemAE ﬁrst used an encoder to
obtain the encoded representation and then used the encoding as a query to retrieve the
most relevant patterns in memory for reconstruction. Because of the memory training of
the typical normal mode, the normal sample could be reconstructed well, and the error in
the abnormal reconstruction could be increased, so that the reconstruction error could be
used as the standard of abnormal detection. Ref. [ 207] also agree that in the testing phase,
a well-trained AE has more reconstruction error on an anomaly patch than on a normal
patch. However, more than this, if a sparse AE is learned based on normal training patches,
it is expected that the representation of the given patch to the AE is sparse. If it is not sparse
enough, it is considered a good candidate for an exception. The authors took into account
two factors about the reconstruction error and sparse representation, and they introduced
two novel cubic patch-based anomaly detectors where one runs based on reconstituting an
input video patch and another one was based on the sparse representation of an input video
patch. In order to be faster, the two detectors are combined into a cascade classiﬁer. Similar
to Ref. [ 207], Ref. [ 208] also trained multiple AEs for feature learning. One AE took the
cropped images containing objects as input, and it could inherently learn latent appearance
features. The other two AEs took the gradients as the input that capture how the object
moved before and after the detection moment, respectively. These AEs learn latent motion
features. Because most existing approaches lack prior information regarding abnormal
events, they are not fully equipped to differentiate between normal and abnormal events.
Different from these existing methods, this work formalized abnormal event detection as a
one-versus-rest binary classiﬁcation problem. In the inference phase, each test sample x