Citation: Chen, S.; Guo, W.
Auto-Encoders in Deep Learning—A
Review with New Perspectives.
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777. https://
doi.org/10.3390/math11081777
Academic Editors: Ezequiel
López-Rubio, Esteban Palomo and
Enrique Dom ínguez
Received: 8 February 2023
Revised: 26 March 2023
Accepted: 29 March 2023
Published: 7 April 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
mathematics
Review
Auto-Encoders in Deep Learning—A Review with New Perspectives
Shuangshuang Chen1,2,*
and Wei Guo2
1Jiangsu Provincial Key Constructive Laboratory for Big Data of Psychology and Cognitive Science,
Yancheng Teachers University, Yancheng 224002, China
2College of Information Engineering, Yancheng Teachers University, Yancheng 224002, China
*Correspondence: chenss@yctu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-13851344541
Abstract: Deep learning, which is a subﬁeld of machine learning, has opened a new era for the
development of neural networks. The auto-encoder is a key component of deep structure, which can
be used to realize transfer learning and plays an important role in both unsupervised learning and
non-linear feature extraction. By highlighting the contributions and challenges of recent research
papers, this work aims to review state-of-the-art auto-encoder algorithms. Firstly, we introduce the
basic auto-encoder as well as its basic concept and structure. Secondly, we present a comprehensive
summarization of different variants of the auto-encoder. Thirdly, we analyze and study auto-encoders
from three different perspectives. We also discuss the relationships between auto-encoders, shallow
models and other deep learning models. The auto-encoder and its variants have successfully been
applied in a wide range of ﬁelds, such as pattern recognition, computer vision, data generation,
recommender systems, etc. Then, we focus on the available toolkits for auto-encoders. Finally, this
paper summarizes the future trends and challenges in designing and training auto-encoders. We
hope that this survey will provide a good reference when using and designing AE models.
Keywords: auto-encoder; deep learning; artiﬁcial intelligence; survey
MSC: 68V99
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), usually referred to as deep learning [ 1], are a cutting-
edge area of machine learning on the forefront of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). They are
based on algorithms for learning multiple levels of representation in order to model com-
plex relationships among data. Higher-level concepts and features are thus deﬁned in
terms of lower-level ones. Neural networks had traditionally been trained with the back-
propagation (BP) algorithm, which is so named because this algorithm propagates the
error in the neural network’s estimate backward from the output layer towards the input
layer [ 2]. We can use BP to adjust the model parameters along the way. Unfortunately,
there were several weaknesses with the BP algorithm which did not work well for DNNs.
These included the tendency for the algorithm to fall into poor local minima when the
DNNs were initialized with random weights. This is mainly because local optima and
other optimization challenges are widespread in the non-convex objective function of the
DNNs [ 3]. The severity will increase essentially as the depth of the network increases. The
requirement for labeled datasets is another problem because most data are unlabeled. In
2006, the optimization difﬁculty associated with DNNs was empirically alleviated when
Ref. [ 4] proposed the Deep Belief Network (DBN), which was a signiﬁcant advance in deep
learning (DL). This class of deep generative models, with a new learning algorithm that
greedily trains one layer at a time, exploits an unsupervised learning algorithm for each
layer called the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) [ 5]. Meanwhile, Ref. [ 6] exploited
the same principle to pre-train the network, and then the RBMs were “unrolled” to create a
deep auto-encoder (AE).
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11081777 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mathematics