Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 14 of 54
inference in a VAE, it provides advanced predictive log-likelihood and a tighter lower
bound on the true log-likelihood. A novel integrated framework called the Triplet based
Variational Auto-encoder (TVAE) was proposed in [ 73]. In this model, the authors con-
structed a new loss function (as shown in Equation (20)) that combines a triplet loss and
standard evidence lower bound (ELBO) of plain a VAE. In Equation (20), Lrecand LKLare
the reconstruction loss and the KL Divergence loss, respectively. Thereinto, Ltriplet denotes
the triplet loss. Compared to the traditional VAE, TVAEs are better at encoding more
semantic structural information in the latent embedding.
LTVAE =Lrec+LKL+Ltriplet (20)
In addition to these varieties, there is another extension of the VAE called the Condi-
tional Variational Auto-encoder (CVAE) [ 75]. Compared to the traditional VAE, it is a more
advanced model capable of modeling the distribution of high dimensional output space as
a generative model conditioned on the input observation. Taking image generation as an
example, the CVAE can generate diverse human faces given skin color.
2.2.4. Wasserstein Auto-Encoder
Ref. [ 77] proposed a new family of regularized auto-encoders called the Wasserstein
auto-encoder (WAE). There are some similarities and differences between the WAE and
VAE depicted in the last section. Similar to the VAE, the loss function of the WAE is
composed of two terms: the reconstruction cost and a regularizer. The ﬁrst reconstruction
term aligns the encoder–decoder pair so that the decoder can accurately reconstruct the
encoded image based on the measurement of the cost function. The second regularization
term forces the aggregated posterior q(z) to match the prior distribution p(z) instead of
requiring point-wise posteriors q(z|x=x(i)) to match p(z) for all data points x(i) at the
same time. This point is different from the VAE. The authors have proposed two different
regularizers. When the reconstruction cost is the squared cost and the regularizer is the
GAN objective, the WAE coincides with the adversarial auto-encoder (AAE) [ 13], which we
will more formally introduce in Section 2.2.8. Unlike the VAE, the WAE aims at minimizing
optimal transport (OT) between the probabilistic latent variable model distribution and
the unknown data distribution. The WAE shares many of the properties of the VAE, such
as the encoder–decoder architecture, stable training, and good latent manifold structure.
However, the WAE can generate samples with better quality.
Ref. [ 78] has applied a WAE to the problem of disentangled representation learning.
With satisfactory results on a benchmark disentanglement task, the potential of the WAE
is demonstrated and proven. Ref. [ 79] also studied the role of latent space dimensionality
in WAE. Using experimentation on synthetic and real datasets, it was demonstrated that
random encoders are better than deterministic encoders.
2.2.5. Contractive Auto-Encoder
Another breakthrough development in the AE ﬁeld was the contractive auto-encoder
(CAE1) proposed by Refs. [ 11,118]. We can achieve this model by adding a well-chosen
penalty term to the traditional reconstruction cost function. Further, this penalty term
corresponds to the Frobenius norm of the Jacobian matrix of the encoder activations with
respect to the input. The resulting CAE1can then be expressed as:
JCAE(q) =å
x2DL(x,g(f(x))) + lkJf(x)k2
F(21)
where Lis the reconstruction error, which can be chosen as MSE or CE loss (see Section 2.1
for a longer discussion). Jf(x) =¶y
¶x(x)is the regularization term that corresponds to the
Jacobian of the hidden representation ywith respect to the input x. Additionally, is a
hyper-parameter controlling the strength of the regularization. In Ref. [ 27], the authors
listed several core differences between the CAE1and DAE. First, CAE1only contract the