Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 38 of 54
face recognition effectively. The position variation in face recognition is mainly considered
and analyzed in Ref. [ 242]. The authors argue that the facial appearance variations caused
by poses are even larger than that caused by identities. Pose variation is one of the
largest challenges in face recognition. Similar to age variation, pose variations change
non-linearly but smoothly. Inspired by the impressive ability to handle the non-linearity
of AE, the authors proposed a progressive deep structure called the Stacked Progressive
Auto-Encoders (SPAE). Each shallow progressive AE in this stacked network is designed
to achieve part of the global non-linearity. To be speciﬁc, each shallow progressive AE is
expected to map the face images at large poses to a virtual view at smaller ones. At the
same time, these images are kept unchanged at smaller poses. Then, stacking multiple
shallow AEs can convert non-frontal face images to frontal ones progressively. This process
makes the pose variations narrow down to zero step by step. Finally, the outputs of the
topmost hidden layers in this stacked network are the pose-robust features, which contain
very small pose variations. These features can be combined with ﬁsher linear discriminate
analysis for face recognition.
Based on the analysis of above the literature, it can be seen that: ﬁrstly, modules
different from the basic AE can be constructed. Then, these modules can be stacked to form
a depth network for face recognition. Secondly, this constructed depth network can aim at
one aspect of lighting, expression, disguise, and pose in face recognition only. Similarly,
these factors can also be considered comprehensively.
5.3.2. Speech Emotion Recognition
Automatic emotion recognition from speech is a typical problem of wide interest
with implications on understanding human behavior and interaction. A classical emotion
recognition system involves using high dimensional features on a dataset. These methods
have the disadvantages of a limited dataset and difﬁcult analysis in the high dimensional
feature space. Ref. [ 243] solved these issues using the AAE framework. There are two
reasons why they used AAE. Firstly, the code vectors learned with AAE can be obtained in a
low-dimensional subspace. However, these code vectors do not lose the class discriminabil-
ity, which can be obtained in the higher dimensional feature space. Secondly, the method
using AAE to generate samples synthetically is proven to be promising for improving
the classiﬁcation of data from the real world. Different from Ref. [ 243], which used AAE
to generate samples for the scarcity of emotional speech data, the authors of Ref. [ 244]
proposed another way to alleviate this issue. They used unsupervised feature learning
techniques, such as DAE, VAE, AAE, and AVB, to learn features from widely available
general speech and utilized these features to train emotion classiﬁers. These unsupervised
methods just mentioned can capture the intrinsic structure of the data distribution in the
learned feature representation. Hence, this work designed a CNN-based automatic speech
emotion recognition (SER) system. The authors ﬁrst made the systematic exploration of
the four kinds of unsupervised learning techniques just mentioned to improve recognition
accuracy. Ref. [ 245] also focused on the problem of the relatively small emotional speech
datasets. They argued that prior works on representation learning for SER did not take
full advantage of additional unlabeled speech data and the merit of unsupervised learning
on the AE. A large dataset and integrating representations generated with an AE into a
CNN-based emotion classiﬁer have improved the recognition accuracy of the presented
SER model. Although DL algorithms have the capability for more accurate predictions,
Ref. [ 246] argue that there are still two main problems. First, the labelled speech data is
scarce, as analyzed in the previous literature. Even if they contain the trustable labelled
speech utterance, there still exits some segments with strong emotion express in same
emotion utterance. Second is how to balance the short-term characterization at the frame
level and long-term aggregation at the utterance level. Inspired by the recent success of the
SAE structure with deep semi-supervised learning and the idea of attention mechanisms
in neural machine translation, the authors proposed an SAE with an attention mecha-
nism for speech emotion recognition. The purpose of this framework can beneﬁt from