Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 39 of 54
labeled and unlabeled data with the SAE and apply the attention mechanism focusing on
speech frames with strong emotional information. Other speech frames without carrying
emotional content will be ignored. Hence, this SAE can reduce the required amount of
effective labeled data. Compared with existing speech emotion recognition algorithms, the
experimental results show that it can provide signiﬁcantly higher accuracy in the prediction
of emotion status.
According to the analysis in this subsection, we can see that it is usually relatively
difﬁcult to acquire the labeled data for an emotional speech database. Accordingly, we need
experts with psychological expertise to solve this problem. This will increase the difﬁculty
level in both expense and time consumption. In this situation, we can make full use of
the potential of AEs with unsupervised feature learning. Further, other machine learning
methods should be explored to combine existing AE models.
5.3.3. Facial Expression Recognition
Facial expression recognition (FER) is the most important way of human emotion
expression. In the past decades, it has been a very important research area in computer
vision and image recognition. The main goal of FER is to recognize the human emotional
state (such as anger, contempt, fear, disgust, sadness, happiness, and surprise) based on the
given facial images. However, it should be pointed out that FER with high accuracy is still
a challenging task. This is mainly related to different lights, postures, and environments.
In general, FER consists of three main steps. The ﬁrst step is to use image processing
technology to detect a human face from the whole image. In the second step, key features
are extracted from the detected face. Finally, the machine learning model is used to classify
the images [ 247]. Recently, many types of DNN-related algorithms have been successfully
applied to facial expression recognition tasks. The traditional DNN has the problems of
learning difﬁculty and high computing complexity. However, the AE has the ability to
reconstruct data so that data could be better represented, which can improve the efﬁciency
of data learning. Additionally, enforcing sparsity to AE can reduce the computational
complexity. Ref. [ 248] proposed an SR-based deep sparse auto-encoder network to rec-
ognize facial expressions. Firstly, the regions of interest (such as eyebrows, eyes, and
mouth) are selected for extracting the facial expression image feature. Then, the greedy
pre-trained network produces the initial weights layer by layer. Next, it optimizes the
sparse parameters, the hidden layer nodes, and the number of hidden layers to determine
the best topology of the network. Finally, SR is used to classify expression feature. The
main feature of this reference is that the preliminary application experiments are applied in
the developing emotional social robot system (ESRS) with two mobile robots, which can
recognize emotions such as happiness and anger. Ref. [ 247] developed a state-of-the-art
face detection method for face detection and extraction. Histogram of oriented gradients
(HOG) features are computed from the cropped images. Then, the SAE2is used to reduce
high-dimensional HOG features for lower dimensions. Finally, they applied SVM on these
lower dimension features to classify the facial expressions. In this work, the SAE2is used
as a tool for feature dimension reduction. Similar work has been completed by Ref. [ 249].
Three different descriptors (HOG, local binary pattern (LBP), and a gray value) are utilized
for extracting features, respectively. Then, PCA is used to compress these local features
to make them practical and efﬁcient to apply. Finally, the features compressed by PCA
are input to the deep SAE2. Similar to Ref. [ 247], Ref. [ 249] also used local descriptors to
extract features. The difference is that the role of the deep SAE2here is feature encoding.
Another interesting work was performed by Ref. [ 250]. The authors follow the idea that
initializing a CNN with ﬁlters of a stacked CAE2signiﬁcantly improves the performance of
the CNN. As opposed to traditional CNN models, this method proposed here provides
better classiﬁcation performance and has an additional advantage of learning relatively
fast. The analysis of references in this subsection demonstrates that AEs can be used for
feature extraction, reduction, and encoding in facial expression recognition. Due to the
structural characteristic of AEs, they also can be used for pre-training.