Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 7 of 54
on training the basic AE and sparse auto-encoder (SAE) [ 31]. Mini-batch L-BFGS and CG
with line search converge faster than carefully tuned plain SGDs. Compared to L-BFGS,
CG performs better because computing the conjugate information can be less expensive
than estimating the Hessian. They also reported the performance of different optimization
methods on a sparse AE. The results also show that L-BFGS and CG are much faster than
SGDs. However, the difference is more signiﬁcant than in the case of standard AEs. This is
because L-BFGS/CG prefers larger mini-batch sizes, and hence, it is easier to estimate the
expected value of the hidden activation [31].
In the preceding paragraphs, we have discussed many BP-based optimization tech-
niques commonly used in AEs. Unlike general feed-forward networks, AEs may also be
trained using recirculation [ 51]: a learning algorithm measures the gradient by measuring
the effect of a small difference in the input. Although recirculation is regarded as more
biologically plausible than BP , it is rarely used for machine-learning applications.
In the past, many genetic algorithms (GAs) have been successfully applied to training
neural networks [ 52–55]. Speciﬁcally, GAs have been used as a substitute for the BP-based
optimization algorithm or used in conjunction with BP to improve overall performance.
In [56], David et al. extend previous works and propose a GA-assisted method for a deep
AE. The experimental results indicate that this GA-assisted approach improves performance.
The improved performance in the GA-assisted AE could arise from a similar principle of
dropout [ 57] and dropconnect [ 58] since mutation randomly disables some of the weights
during training. Learning rules are the heart of ANN training algorithms. In traditional
ANN training, learning rules are previously assigned, such as the generalized chain rule of
the BP network. When using GA, we can apply it to design the learning rules of ANNs.
Because AEs are feed-forward ANNs, these learning rules also can be applied to AEs.
2.1.3. Taxonomy of the Basic AE
As discussed in Section 2.1.1, the general structure of a basic AE consists of three
layers: an input layer, a hidden layer forming the encoding, and an output layer whose
units correspond to the input layer. Since the outputs are equal to the input, this amounts
to learning an approximation of the identity function. However, copying the input to
the output may sound pointless, and we are generally not interested in the output of the
decoder. Instead, training the AE is completed to perform the input copying task to make
the hidden representation ytake on useful properties [ 33]. For that reason, we can place
various constraints on the network, as described below in more detail, and we call these
regularized AEs. One constraint is to limit the number of units in the hidden layer, which
forces the network to learn a compressed representation of the input. An AE whose hidden
dimension is less than the input dimension is called under-complete [ 33] (also dubbed
“narrow” [ 59] or “bottleneck” [ 60]). This method allows for the discovery of the most
salient features from the dataset that rely on fewer hidden layer units. In the case of a linear
AE (linear encoder and decoder) with a traditional MSE function, minimizing Equation (1)
learns the same subspace as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [ 61,62]. The same is true
when using a nonlinear function (such as sigmoid) in the encoder, but it is not true if the
weights W and W0are tied, since W cannot be forced to be small and W0large to achieve a
linear encoder [ 27] (Section 4.1.1 describes the relationship of dimension reduction between
AE and PCA in more detail). This AE can obtain a more powerful nonlinear generalization
of PCA when equipped with nonlinear encoder functions fand nonlinear decoder functions
g. Regrettably, if the encoder and decoder are allowed too much capacity, this AE will fail
to learn anything useful other than the ability to copy its input to its output [33].
If the hidden code is allowed to have dimensions equal to the input, or in the over-
complete case (or so-called “wide AE”) where the hidden units have dimensions greater
than the input, a similar problem will occur. In these cases, rather than limiting the
number of hidden units, regularized AEs can provide alternative constraints. These include
sparsity in the representation, robustness to noise, or to missing inputs and smallness in the
derivative of the representation. Recent research has demonstrated that these alternative