Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 2 of 54
Speciﬁcally, an AE is one of the basic building blocks, which can be stacked to form
hierarchical deep models to organize, compress, and extract high-level features without any
labeled training data. It allows for unsupervised learning and non-linear feature extraction.
There are some historical contexts of the AE. In the 1980s, the AE was also called an “auto-
associator” as described by Ref. [ 7]. They proposed that the optimal parameter values
can be obtained by applying the usual BP or can be derived using standard linear algebra.
Then, in 2006, Ref. [ 8] veriﬁed that the principle of the layer-wise greedy unsupervised
pre-training can be applied when an AE is used as the layer building block instead of the
RBM. In 2008, Ref. [ 9] showed a straightforward variation of ordinary AEs—the denoising
auto-encoder (DAE)—that is trained locally to denoise corrupted versions of the inputs.
Ref. [ 10] introduced a sparse auto-encoder (SAE), which is another variant of the AE.
Sparsity is a useful constraint when the number of hidden units is large. In Ref. [ 11], Rifai
et al. presented a novel method for training a deterministic AE. They show that by adding
a well-chosen penalty term to the traditional reconstruction cost function, they can achieve
results that equal or surpass those attained using DAE as well as other regularized AEs on
a range of datasets. This penalty term corresponds to the Frobenius norm of the Jacobian
matrix of the encoder activations with respect to the input. Lately, various approaches for
AEs have been extensively studied and discussed [ 12–16]. Among those, Ref. [ 16] proposed
the “k sparse auto-encoder (kSA)”, which is an AE with a linear activation function, where
in hidden layers only the k highest activities are kept. Based on Ref. [ 16], two novel feature
aggregation algorithms, called Database-adaptive kSA aggregation and Per-data adaptive
kSA aggregation, realize more accurate local feature aggregation. The two algorithms
have jointly optimized codebook learning and feature encoding. The AE and its various
variants have been widely applied in AI, such as image classiﬁcation [ 17–19], saliency
estimation [20,21], medical image analysis [22], and many more.
 Importance of this survey. There are plenty of studies that have been performed in
the ﬁeld of deep learning-based AEs. However, as far as we know, there are very few
reviews that have shaped this area well by positioning the existing works and current
progress. Although some Refs. [ 23,24] have attempted to formalize this research ﬁeld,
but few try to summarize the current efforts in depth or elaborate on the outstanding
problems in this ﬁeld. This survey will seek to provide a comprehensive summary of
the current research on deep learning based on AEs and to point out future directions
along this dimension. Because of the rising popularity and potential of AEs in deep
learning, this survey will be of high scientiﬁc and practical value. We have analyzed
these works based on AEs from different perspectives and put forward some new
insights in this area. To this end, nearly 300 studies are shortlisted and studied in
this survey.
 How were the papers collected? In this survey, we collected over three hundred related
papers. We used Google Scholar as the main search engine. Additionally, we used
the database, Web of Science, as an important tool to discover related papers. We also
focused on some high-quality academic conferences such as NIPS, ECCV , ICML, ICLR,
CVPR, IJCAI, ICCV , AAAI, etc., to ﬁnd recent works. The major keywords we used
included auto-encoder, deep learning, neural networks, overview, etc.
 Contributions of this survey. This survey provides an overview of various AE methods
and their applications; particularly, these can be applied in the computer vision
domain. It is intended to be useful for computer vision and general neural computing
researchers who are interested in state-of-the-art DL. In addition, one of our main goals
is to thoroughly review the literature, clarify less understood challenges, and offer
learned lessons from existing works. To summarize, there are three key contributions
of this survey: (1) we conducted a literature review of AE models and highlighted
many inﬂuential research prototypes; (2) we provided an overview and summary of
the state of the art; and (3) we discussed promising future extensions in this research
ﬁeld to highlight the vision and expand the horizons of research on AEs.