Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 26 of 54
ﬁelds. Comparing the classiﬁcation performance with several single-task AE models, this
multi-task AE provides better performance.
In this subsection, we have analyzed the literature based on AEs for image classiﬁca-
tion (e.g., natural images, medical images, natural scene images, and remotely sensed scene
images). We can conclude the following rules:
1. Compared with traditional hand-crafted features, these networks based on AEs pro-
vide an automatic method to learn discriminative features from the image and over-
come the weaknesses of some traditional feature extraction methods.
2. A series of AE models with different depths have proved that the depth of the network
also plays an important role in classiﬁcation accuracies.
3. The fusion of various features is widely used in image classiﬁcation. Similarly, image
features extracted using AE models can not only be fused with those extracted using
traditional methods but also can be combined with those extracted using other DL
methods. Feature fusion can further improve the accuracy of image classiﬁcation.
4. It is very important to study the architecture design of an AE according to different
classiﬁcation tasks.
(2) Saliency detection
Traditional saliency detection methods, relying on contrast inference and hand-designed
features, have been categorized into two sub-ﬁelds: 1
eye ﬁxation prediction and 2
salient object detection [ 21]. Eye ﬁxation prediction focuses on human ﬁxation locations
compared to salient object detection, which tends to extract whole meaningful objects.
With the rise of DL, many novel frameworks have used deep networks to learn saliency
detection models from raw image data, and some of the works have used AEs. Ref. [ 21]
adapted the stacked denoising auto-encoder (SDAE) for learning both optimal features
and contrast inference mechanisms from image data to predict human eye ﬁxations. In
the ﬁrst learning stage, they developed a layer-wise unsupervised learning scheme to
train the SDAE for obtaining robust representative features. In the second learning stage,
the contrast inference component and contrast integration component were embedded in
another uniﬁed SDAE network, while these two components were processed separately in
the traditional methods. Ref. [ 21] focused on saliency ﬁxation prediction. However, this
model cannot be directly applied to saliency object detection. Again, this research team
developed the SDAE for saliency object detection by ﬁrst modeling the background and
then separating salient objects from the background [ 177]. Different from the previous
works focusing on the way to calculate the similarity or distinctiveness between a certain
image patch and the image boundary, this work pays more attention to exploring the
background prior using the SDAE. Rather than using the shallow reconstruction residual,
they used the deep reconstruction residual generated with the SDAE to measure the saliency.
The similarity between these two papers [ 21,177] is that the SDAE is used to learn optimal
image features rather than to design hand-crafted features. Additionally, the SDAE is not
only used for feature extraction but also for contrast inference, contrast integration, and the
background prior. Additionally, sparsity is considered when training SDAE models, and
the effectiveness of the KL divergence used in the sparsity constraint was also demonstrated
in [177]. Compared to Ref. [ 177], Ref. [ 178] developed two individual SAE2models for
adaptive background search and foreground estimation, respectively. One model was called
the background search stacked auto-encoder (BS-SAE), which could adaptively extract the
rough background region of an image. Using the trained BS-SAE model, one can obtain
the feature representation of each image patch, and using softmax regression (SR), one can
measure the probability of each image patch being background. Hence, this trained BS-SAE
model can infer the background region from the holistic view rather than the regional
view or local view. Another model was described as the foreground estimation stacked AE
(FE-SAE), where the residual information was also inspired by [ 177]. This FE-SAE model
was constructed by the background superpixels, which had a low reconstruction residual,
while these belong to the background. Those belonging to the foreground would have