Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 20 of 54
further shows the impact of PCA-based initialization for classiﬁcation tasks. Additionally,
an SSAE-based network with SVM and PCA is proposed to improve the accuracy of fault
diagnosis in power systems [138].
4.1.2. Relationships with RBM
RBM was initially introduced as Harmonium by Paul Smolensky in 1986 [ 139]. It is a
variant of Boltzmann machines and can learn a probability distribution over a set of inputs,
which plays an important role in DL. It only has an input and hidden layer, as shown in
Figure 4. Due to this restriction, their neurons must form a bipartite graph: there are no
connections between nodes within the visible neurons or hidden neurons.
Mathematics 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  21 of 56 
 
 inputs, which plays an important role  in DL. It only has an input and hidden layer , as 
shown in Figure 4. Due to th is restriction, their neurons must form a bipartite graph: there 
are no connections between nodes within the visible neurons or hidden neurons.  
There are some relationships betwe en AE and RBM. The latter is an especially popu-
lar AE in DL [140]. Overall , these two kind of models are identical because they learn a 
good model based on the training data [125]. For an AE with sigmoid hidden units, the 
energy function is identical to th e free energy of an RBM. These two kinds of models are 
both unsupervised learning methods. Both can be understood in terms of encoder and 
decoder architectures but with different constraints on the code and learning algorithms. 
Ref. [35] also analyzed the other existing connections between AE and RBM. When apply-
ing score matching to RBM, its cost function is identical to the reconstruction error com-
bined with a regularization term, which is similar to the contractive penalty of the CAE. 
The authors also hav e illustrated that the gradient in the reconstruction error used in train-
ing AEs provides an approximation to the contrastive divergence training of RBMs. As a 
variant of  the AE, the DAE shares th is property with RBM s, and they are closely related 
to each other [141]. Firstly, the DAE is a simple and competitive alternative to the RBM 
used by Hinton [6] for pre -training deep networks [104]. Secondly, using Gaussian noise 
and MSE as the reconstruction cost to train a DAE (sigmoidal hidden units and linear 
reconstruction units) is equivalent to training  an RBM with Gaussian visible units [103]. 
Thirdly, with denoising, the DAE features perfor med similarly or better than those of the 
RBM  [27]. 
h1
v1 v2 v3 vnh2 hm ...
...hidden layer
input layer
 
Figure 4. The network structure of the RBM.  
4.1.3. ICA 
Independent component analysis (ICA) is a computational and statistical technique 
used to reveal hidden factors that underlie sets of random variab les, measurements, or 
signals. It can be interpreted as a form of the feed -forward neural network [142]. Like AE, 
ICA also can be used as a generative model for the observed multivariate data, which are 
typically given as a large database of samples. In th is generative model, it is assumed that 
the data variables are linear mixtures of some unknown latent variables, which are sup-
posed non -Gaussian and mutually independent. They are also called the independent 
components of the observed data [143]. Additiona lly, similar to AE, ICA and its variants 
have also been successfully used for unsupervised feature learning. ICA is not only sen-
sitive to whitening but also difficult to learn an over -complete basis set. Ref. [144] pro-
posed Reconstruction ICA (RICA) that n ot only addresses these shortcomings but also 
reveals strong connections with the AE. If adding a regularization term in the form 
()()t
j tjg W x
 to an AE (with a linear activation and tied weights), where g is a nonlin-
ear convex function , an efficient algorithm for learning RICA will be obtained . 
4.1.4. PSD  
Predictive sparse decomposition (PSD) is a practically successful model that is a hy-
brid of sparse coding and an AE [145]. When computing the learned features, PSD uses a 
fast non -iterative approximation to replace costly and highly non -linear encoding step s in 
sparse coding. PSD can also be seen as a kind of AE. This model consists of an encoder  
Figure 4. The network structure of the RBM.
There are some relationships between AE and RBM. The latter is an especially popular
AE in DL [ 140]. Overall, these two kind of models are identical because they learn a good
model based on the training data [ 125]. For an AE with sigmoid hidden units, the energy
function is identical to the free energy of an RBM. These two kinds of models are both
unsupervised learning methods. Both can be understood in terms of encoder and decoder
architectures but with different constraints on the code and learning algorithms. Ref. [ 35]
also analyzed the other existing connections between AE and RBM. When applying score
matching to RBM, its cost function is identical to the reconstruction error combined with a
regularization term, which is similar to the contractive penalty of the CAE. The authors
also have illustrated that the gradient in the reconstruction error used in training AEs
provides an approximation to the contrastive divergence training of RBMs. As a variant
of the AE, the DAE shares this property with RBMs, and they are closely related to each
other [ 141]. Firstly, the DAE is a simple and competitive alternative to the RBM used by
Hinton [ 6] for pre-training deep networks [ 104]. Secondly, using Gaussian noise and MSE
as the reconstruction cost to train a DAE (sigmoidal hidden units and linear reconstruction
units) is equivalent to training an RBM with Gaussian visible units [ 103]. Thirdly, with
denoising, the DAE features performed similarly or better than those of the RBM [27].
4.1.3. ICA
Independent component analysis (ICA) is a computational and statistical technique
used to reveal hidden factors that underlie sets of random variables, measurements, or
signals. It can be interpreted as a form of the feed-forward neural network [ 142]. Like
AE, ICA also can be used as a generative model for the observed multivariate data, which
are typically given as a large database of samples. In this generative model, it is assumed
that the data variables are linear mixtures of some unknown latent variables, which are
supposed non-Gaussian and mutually independent. They are also called the independent
components of the observed data [ 143]. Additionally, similar to AE, ICA and its variants
have also been successfully used for unsupervised feature learning. ICA is not only sensitive
to whitening but also difﬁcult to learn an over-complete basis set. Ref. [ 144] proposed
Reconstruction ICA (RICA) that not only addresses these shortcomings but also reveals
strong connections with the AE. If adding a regularization term in the form åtåjg(Wjx(t))
to an AE (with a linear activation and tied weights), where gis a nonlinear convex function,
an efﬁcient algorithm for learning RICA will be obtained.