Mathematics 2023 ,11, 1777 43 of 54
existing shallow models can integrate the advantages of these methods. Although there
have some relevant studies [ 261,262], this direction is still worth researcher’s attention.
Secondly, other excellent DL models can also be integrated with AEs, such as CNN [ 263]
and GAN [264]. This can improve the overall performance of the model.
 Integrating the attention mechanism into AEs
The human visual attention mechanism is a very important working mechanism in
the human visual system, which can greatly improve the working efﬁciency of the human
visual system by allocating different computing resources to different regions in the visual
scene [ 265]. Combining a visual attention mechanism with a DNN can form DL models
based on the attention mechanism. At present, the visual attention mechanism has been
applied to some DL models, such as RNN, MLP , CNN, etc. Among these models, the
RNN based on attention can better model the long-term memory in the sequence data, and
CNN based on attention can identify the most relevant information from the input data.
At present, integrating the attention mechanism into DL models has had great success in
natural language processing, computer vision, and other ﬁelds. Applying the attention
mechanism to AEs can help AEs learn the most informative features of the dataset. At
present, some researchers have applied the attention mechanism to AEs. Ref. [ 91] put
forward a variational attention mechanism for the variational encoder–decoder, where
the attention vector is also modeled as Gaussian distributed random variable. Ref. [ 196]
proposed an unsupervised baseline approach for video-based salient object detection using
saliency-guided stacked AEs. However, there are few related studies. Hence, more in-depth
and extensive studies are needed in the future.
 Integrating a supervised learning mechanism into AEs
AEs can reduce irrelevant and redundant data using unsupervised learning. In other
words, it can reduce the dimensions and better process the data with high dimensions.
Ref. [ 266] believes that the more information used in the model, generally speaking, the
better performance it can obtain. They found that the use of tag information was often
ignored in the frequently used DL methods at home and abroad. The authors have proposed
that supervised learning can effectively enhance the discriminability and performance of the
model on the basis of making full use of label information. It can obtain better results than
unsupervised learning. Ref. [267] constructed a new deep AE model based on supervised
learning for image reconstruction. Ref. [ 268] proposed supervised AE to improve the
generalization performance of the model. In order to make up for the limitations of
unsupervised learning on feature expression ability and make better use of the efﬁcient
feature coding ability of AE, we can combine the advantages of supervised learning to
build a new AE model.
 Building AE structures ﬁtting neuroscience and cognitive science
The AE is a kind of artiﬁcial neural network. Ref. [ 269] thinks that compared with the
ANN, the local error driven and associated biological realistic algorithm (Leabra) model
proposed by O’Reilly and Munakata is more in line with biological neurology. In the
Leabra model, the complex neurons make bidirectional connectivity, lateral connectivity,
and inhibition mechanisms better implement in one and the same nervous system. In the
collected references, there are only two papers [ 270,271] that use inhibition mechanism in
an AE. In the future, this neuroscientiﬁc AE will be a very worthy research direction. In
addition, in the ﬁeld of cognitive science, we have seen some preliminary attempts. For
example, Ref. [ 82] proposed the stacked what and where AE. In this model, the ﬁlters can
focus on learning the shapes (i.e., “what”) because the location information (i.e., “where”)
is encoded into feature maps, which reduces the redundancy among the ﬁlters. Hence,
this model achieves better results in image classiﬁcation. Ref. [ 272] propose that neural
computing science is a research method based on research results, hypotheses, or models
on neurophysiology and cognitive science. Using mathematical methods to study neural