Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 7
layer and embeddings of certain words in the text categorization task could be replaced by prediction results of the
predominant sense prediction task.
The direction of hierarchical pipelines is not necessarily always from low-level tasks to high-level tasks. For
example, in [ 1], the outputs of word-level tasks are fed to the char-level primary task. Rivas Rojas et al . [106] feed
the output of more general classification models to more specific classification models during training, and the
more general classification results are used to optimize beam search of more specific models at test time.
In hierarchical signal pipeline, the outputs of tasks are used indirectly as external signals to help improve the
performance of other tasks. For example, the predicted probability of the sentence extraction task can be used
to weigh sentence embeddings for a document-level classification task [ 53]. For the hashtag segmentation task,
Maddela et al . [80] first predict the probability of a hashtag being single-token or multi-token as an auxiliary task
and further use the output to combine single-token and multi-token features. In [ 115], the output of an auxiliary
entity type prediction task is used to disambiguate candidate entities for logical form prediction. The outputs of a
task can also be used for post-processing. For instance, Zeng et al . [158] use the output of NER to help extract
multi-token entities.
2.2.3 Hierarchical Interactive MTL. Different from most machine learning models that give predictions in a
single pass, hierarchical interactive MTL explicitly models the interactions between tasks via a multi-turn prediction
mechanism which allows a model to refine its predictions over multiple steps with the help of the previous outputs
from other tasks in a way similar to recurrent neural networks. He et al . [47] maintain a shared latent representation
which is updated by 𝑇iterations. In cyclic MTL [ 159], the output of one task is used as an extra input to its
successive lower-level task and the output of the last task is fed to the first one, forming a loop. Most hierarchical
interactive MTL models as introduced above report that performance converges quickly at 𝑇=2steps, showing the
benefit and efficiency of doing multi-step prediction.
2.3 Modular Architectures
The idea behind the modular MTL architecture is simple: breaking an MTL model into shared modules and
task-specific modules. The shared modules learn shared features from multiple tasks. Since the shared modules can
learn from many tasks, they can be sufficiently trained and can generalize better, which is particularly meaningful
for low-resource scenarios. On the other hand, task-specific modules learn features that are specific to a certain task.
Compared with shared modules, task-specific modules are usually much smaller and thus less likely to suffer from
overfitting caused by insufficient training data. The robustness of shared modules and the flexibility of task-specific
modules makes modular architectures suitable for learning different tasks efficiently.
The simplest form of modular architectures is a single shared module coupled with task-specific modules as in
parallel feature sharing described in Section 2.1.1. Besides, another common practice is to share the first embedding
layers across tasks [ 63,171]. Alqahtani et al . [1] share word and character embedding matrices and combines them
differently for different tasks. Sarwar et al . [111] share two encoding layers and a vocabulary lookup table between
the primary neural machine translation task and the auxiliary representation learning task. Shared embeddings
can be used alongside task-specific embeddings [ 64,151] as well. In addition to word embeddings, [ 160] shares
label embeddings between tasks. Researchers have also developed modular architectures at a finer granularity.
For example, Tong et al . [128] split the model into task-specific encoders and language-specific encoders for
multilingual dialogue evaluation. In [ 25], each task has its own encoder and decoder, while all tasks share a
representation learning layer and a joint encoding layer. Pentyala et al . [97] create encoder modules on different
levels, including task level, task group level, and universal level.
When adapting large pre-trained models to down-stream tasks, a common practice is to fine-tune a separate
model for each task. While this approach usually attains good performance, it poses heavy computational and
storage costs. A more cost-efficient way is to add lightweight task-specific trainable modules into a single shared
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.