2 • Shijie Chen, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Y ang
and zero-shot settings [ 109,142], highlighting the instrumental role of multi-task learning in building strong models
for natural language processing.
MTL trains machine learning models from multiple related tasks simultaneously or enhances the model for a
specific task using auxiliary tasks. Learning from multiple tasks makes it possible for models to capture generalized
and complementary knowledge from the tasks at hand besides task-specific features. Tasks in MTL can be tasks
with assumed relatedness [ 21,24,42,61,130], tasks with different styles of supervision (e.g., supervised and
unsupervised tasks [ 44,70,79]), tasks with different types of goals (e.g., classification and generation [ 90]), tasks
with different levels of features (e.g., token-level and sentence-level features [ 62,118]), and even tasks in different
modalities (e.g., text and image data [ 72,124]). Alternatively, we can treat the same task in multiple domains or
languages as multiple tasks, which is also known as multi-domain learning [ 153] in some literature, and learn an
MTL model from them.
MTL naturally aggregates training samples from datasets of multiple tasks and alleviates the data scarcity
problem. The benefit is escalated when unsupervised or self-supervised tasks, such as language modeling, are
included. This is especially meaningful for low-resource tasks and languages whose labeled dataset is sometimes
too small to sufficiently train a model. In most cases, the enlarged training dataset reduces the risk of the overfitting
and leads to more robust models. From this perspective, MTL acts similarly to data augmentation techniques [ 39].
However, MTL provides additional performance gain compared to data augmentation approaches, due to its ability
to learn common knowledge shared by different tasks.
While the thirst for better performance has driven people to build increasingly large models, developing more
compact and efficient models with competitive performance has also received a growing interest. Through implicit
knowledge sharing during the training process, MTL models could match or even exceed the performance of their
single-task counterparts using much less training samples [ 28,117]. Besides, multi-task adapters [ 99,122] transfer
large pre-trained models to new tasks and languages by adding a modest amount of task-specific parameters. In
this way, the costly fine-tuning of the entire model is avoided, which is important for real-world applications such
as mobile computing and latency-sensitive services. Many NLP models leverage additional features, including
hand-crafted features and those produced by automatic NLP tools. Through MTL on various linguistic tasks, such
as chunking, Part-Of-Speech (POS) tagging, Named Entity Recognition (NER), and dependency parsing, we can
reduce the reliance on external knowledge and prevent error propagation, which results in simpler models with
potentially better performance [78, 110, 120, 169].
This paper reviews the application of MTL in recent NLP research. We focus on the ways in which researchers
apply MTL to downstream NLP tasks, including model architectures, training processes, and data sources. While
most pre-trained language models take advantage of MTL during pre-training, they are not designed for specific
down-stream tasks, and thus they are not in the focus of this paper. Depending on the objective of applying MTL,
we denote by auxiliary MTL the case where auxiliary tasks are introduced to improve the performance of primary
tasks and by joint MTL the case where multiple tasks are equally important.
We first introduce popular MTL architectures used in NLP tasks and categorize them into four classes, including
parallel architecture, hierarchical architecture, modular architecture, and generative adversarial architecture (Section
2). Then we review optimization techniques of MTL for NLP tasks in terms of loss construction, data sampling, and
task scheduling (Section 3). After that, we present applications of MTL, categorized into auxiliary MTL and joint
MTL, in a variety of NLP tasks (Section 4), and introduce some MTL benchmark datasets used in NLP (Section 5).
Finally, we conclude the whole paper and discuss several possible research topics in this field.
Notations . In this paper, we use lowercase letters, such as 𝑡, to denote scalars and use lowercase letters in boldface,
such as x, to denote vectors. Uppercase letters, such as 𝑀and𝑇, are used for constants and uppercase letters in
boldface are used to represent matrices, including feature matrices like Xand weight matrices like W. In general, a
multi-task learning model, parametrized by 𝜃, handles𝑀tasks on a datasetDwith a loss function L.
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.