Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 5
where𝜎(·)denotes the sigmoid function and tanh(·)denotes the hyperbolic tangent function. When considering
all pairwise directions, the output for each task is given by the sum of each row in
Í𝑀
𝑘=1z1𝑘(1−z12)···(1−z1𝑀)
(1−z21)Í𝑀
𝑘=1z2𝑘· 1−z2𝑀)
............
(1−z𝑀1) (1−z𝑀2)···Í𝑀
𝑘=1z𝑀𝑘·h1h12··· h1𝑀
˜h𝑖
21h2··· ˜h𝑖
2𝑀............
˜h𝑖
𝑀1˜h𝑖
𝑀2··· ˜h𝑖
𝑀/𝑀.
Task routing is another method for dynamic feature fusion, where the paths that samples go through in the model
differ by their tasks. Given 𝑀tasks, the routing network in [ 157] splits RNN cells into several shared blocks with
𝑀task-specific blocks (one for each task) and then modulates the input to as well as output from each RNN block
by a learned weight. MCapsNet [ 148], which adapts CapsNet [ 108] to NLP tasks, replaces dynamic routing in
CapsNet with task routing to build different feature spaces for each task. In MCapsNet, similar to dynamic routing,
task routing computes task coupling coefficients 𝑐(𝑘)
𝑖𝑗for capsule𝑖in the current layer and capsule 𝑗in the next layer
for task𝑘. Due to the fine-grained dynamic control of information flow between tasks, LK-MTL and MCapsNet
outperform other feature fusion methods and obtain state-of-the-art performance.
2.1.3 Parallel Multi-level Supervision. While models using the parallel architecture handle multiple tasks
in parallel, these tasks may concern features at different abstraction levels. For NLP tasks, such levels can be
character-level, token-level, sentence-level, paragraph-level, and document-level. Due to the compositional nature
of language, both syntactically and semantically, it is natural to give supervision signals at different depths of
an MTL model for tasks at different levels [ 21,86,110,118] as illustrated in Fig. 1c. For example, in [ 29,62],
token-level tasks receive supervisions at lower-layers while sentence-level tasks receive supervision at higher layers.
Rawat et al. [103] supervise a higher-level QA task on both sentence and document-level features in addition to a
sentence similarity prediction task that only relies on sentence-level features. In addition, Gong et al. [35], Perera
et al. [98] add skip connections so that signals from higher-level tasks are amplified. Chaplot et al . [13] learn
semantic goal navigation at a lower level and learns the task of embodied question answering at a higher level.
In some settings where MTL is used to improve the performance of a primary task, the introduction of auxiliary
tasks at different levels could be helpful. Several works integrate a language modeling task on lower-level
encoders for better performance on simile detection [ 104], sequence labeling [ 74], question generation [ 169],
and task-oriented dialogue generation [ 169]. Li and Caragea [68] add sentence-level sentiment classification
and attention-level supervision to assist the primary stance detection task. Nishino et al . [90] add attention-level
supervision to improve consistency of the two primary language generation tasks. Chuang et al . [18] minimize an
auxiliary cosine softmax loss based on the audio encoder to learn more accurate speech-to-semantic mappings.
2.2 Hierarchical Architectures
The hierarchical architecture considers hierarchical relationships among multiple tasks. The features and output
of one task can be used by another task as an extra input or additional control signals. The design of hierarchical
architectures depends on the tasks at hand and is usually more complicated than parallel architectures. Fig. 2
illustrates different hierarchical architectures. We notice that parallel MTL architectures usually assume the features
shared are in the same feature space. Thus they should be processed by similar model architectures. In contrast,
Hierarchical MTL architectures allow independent processing for each task and could accommodate tasks with
data in heterogeneous feature spaces such as text, knowledge graphs, images, and audio.
2.2.1 Hierarchical Feature Fusion. Different from parallel feature fusion that combines features of different
tasks at the same depth, hierarchical feature fusion can explicitly combine features at different depths and allow
different processing for different features. To solve the Twitter demographic classification problem, Vijayaraghavan
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.