6 • Shijie Chen, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Y ang
(a) Hierarchical Feature Fusion
 (b) Hierarchical Pipeline
 steps (c) Hierarchical Interactive MTL
Fig. 2. Illustration for hierarchical architectures. ℎrepresents different hidden states and ˆ𝑦𝑡represents the predicted
output distribution for task 𝑡. Red boxes stand for hierarchical feature fusion mechanisms. The purple block and blue
circle in (b) stand for hierarchical feature and signal pipeline unit respectively.
et al. [130] encode the name, following network, profile description, and profile picture features of each user by
different neural models and combines the outputs using an attention mechanism. Liu et al . [74] take the hidden states
for tokens in simile extraction as an extra feature in the sentence-level simile classification task. For knowledge
base question answering, Deng et al . [25] combine lower level word and knowledge features with more abstract
semantic and knowledge semantic features by a weighted sum. [ 134] fuses topic features of different roles into the
main model via a gating mechanism. In [ 14], text and video features are combined through inter-modal attention
mechanisms of different granularity to improve performance of sarcasm detection.
2.2.2 Hierarchical Pipeline. Instead of aggregating features from different tasks as in feature fusion architectures,
pipeline architectures treat the output of a task as an extra input of another task and form a hierarchical pipeline
between tasks. In this section, we refer to output as the final result for a task, including the final output distribution
and hidden states before the last output layer. The extra input can be used directly as input features or used indirectly
as control signals to enhance the performance of other tasks. Therefore, we further divide hierarchical pipeline
architectures into hierarchical feature pipeline and hierarchical signal pipeline.
In hierarchical feature pipeline, the output of one task is used as extra features for another task. The tasks
are assumed to be directly related so that outputs instead of hidden feature representations are helpful to other
tasks. For example, Chen et al . [16] feed the output of a question-review pair recognition model to the question
answering model. He et al . [47] feed the output of aspect term extraction to aspect-term sentiment classification.
Targeting community question answering, Yang et al . [152] use the result of question category prediction to enhance
document representations. Song and Park [119] feed the result of morphological tagging to a POS tagging model
and the two models are further tied by skip connections.
Hierarchical feature pipeline is especially useful for tasks at different abstraction levels. Fei et al . [31] use the
output of neighboring word semantic type prediction as extra features for neighboring word prediction. Hashimoto
et al. [46] use skip connections to forward predictions of lower-level POS tagging, chunking, and dependency
parsing tasks to higher-level entailment and relatedness classification tasks. In addition, deep cascade MTL [ 35]
adds both residual connections and cascade connections to a single-trunk parallel MTL model with supervision
at different levels, where residual connections forward hidden representations and cascade connections forward
output distributions of a task to the prediction layer of another task. Song et al . [121] include the output of the
low-level discourse element identification task in the organization grid, which consists of sentence-level, phrase-
level, and document-level features of an essay, for the primary essay organization evaluation task. In [ 116], the
word predominant sense prediction task and the text categorization task share a transformer-based embedding
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.