Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 21
This dataset is split into a few-shot development set that has 5 questions for each subject, a validation set for
tuning hyper-parameters containing 1540 questions, and a test set with 14079 questions.
•Xtreme [51] is a multi-task benchmark dataset for evaluating cross-lingual generalization capabilities of
multilingual representations covering 9 tasks in 40 languages. The tasks include 2 classification tasks, 2
structure prediction tasks, 3 question answering tasks, and 2 sentence retrieval tasks. Out of the 40 languages
involved, 19 languages appear in at least 3 datasets and the rest 21 languages appear in at least one dataset.
•XGLUE [69] is a benchmark dataset that supports the development and evaluation of large cross-lingual
pre-trained language models. The XGLUE dataset includes 11 downstream tasks, including 3 single-input
understanding tasks, 6 pair-input understanding tasks, and 2 generation tasks. The pre-training corpus consists
of a small corpus that includes a 101G multilingual corpus covering 100 languages and a 146G bilingual
corpus covering 27 languages, and a large corpus with 2,500G multilingual data covering 89 languages.
•LSParD [113] is a multi-task semantic parsing dataset with 3 tasks, including question type classification,
entity mention detection, and question semantic parsing. Each logical form is associated with a question and
multiple human annotated paraphrases. This dataset contains 51,164 questions in 9 categories, 3361 logical
form patterns, and 23,144 entities.
•ECSA [35] is a dataset for slot filling, named entity recognition, and segmentation to evaluate online
shopping assistant systems in Chinese. The training part contains 24,892 pairs of input utterances and their
corresponding slot labels, named entity labels, and segment labels. The testing part includes 2,723 such pairs
with an Out-of-V ocabulary (OOV) rate of 85.3%, which is much higher than the ATIS dataset [ 48] whose
OOV rate is smaller than 1%.
•ABC [36], the Anti-reflexive Bias Challenge, is a multi-task benchmark dataset designed for evaluating
gender assumptions in NLP models. ABC consists of 4 tasks, including language modeling, natural language
inference (NLI), coreference resolution, and machine translation. A total of 4,560 samples are collected by a
template-based method. The language modeling task is to predict the pronoun of a sentence. For NLI and
coreference resolution, three variations of each sentence are used to construct entailment pairs. For machine
translation, sentences with two variations of third-person pronouns in English are used as source sentences.
•CompGuessWhat?! [124] is a dataset for grounded language learning with 65,700 collected dialogues. It
is an instance of the Grounded Language Learning with Attributes (GROLLA) framework. The evaluation
process includes three parts: goal-oriented evaluation (e.g., Visual QA and Visual NLI), object attribute
prediction, and zero-shot evaluation.
•SCIERC [78] is a multi-label dataset for identifying entities, relations, and cross-sentence coreference clusters
from abstracts of research papers. SCIERC contains 500 scientific abstracts collected from proceedings in 12
conferences and workshops in artificial intelligence.
6 CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we give an overview of the application of multi-task learning in recent natural language processing
research, focusing on deep learning approaches. We first present different architectures of MTL used in recent
research literature, including parallel architecture, hierarchical architecture, modular architecture, and generative
adversarial architectures. After that, optimization techniques, including loss construction, data sampling, and task
scheduling are discussed. After briefly summarizing the application of MTL in different down-stream tasks, we
describe the ways to manage data sources in MTL as well as some MTL benchmark datasets for NLP research.
There are several directions worth further investigations for future studies. Firstly, given multiple NLP tasks,
how to find a set of tasks that could take advantage of MTL remains a challenge. Besides improving performance
of MTL models, a deeper understanding of task relatedness could also help expanding the application of MTL to
more tasks. Though there are some works studying this issue, as discussed in Section 4.4, they are far from mature.
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.