Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 13
Besides probabilistic approaches, task scheduling could also use heuristics based on certain performance metrics.
By optimizing the Tchebycheff loss, Mao et al . [81] learn from the task which has the worst validation performance
at each step. The CA-MTL model [ 101] introduces an uncertainty-based sampling strategy based on Shannon
entropy for joint learning of classification tasks. Specifically, given a batch size 𝑏and𝑀tasks, a pool of 𝑏×𝑀
samples are first sampled. Then, the uncertainty measure U(𝑥)for a sample xfrom task𝑖is defined as
U(x)=𝑆𝑖(x)
ˆ𝑆×𝑆′
where𝑆denotes the Shannon entropy of the model’s prediction on x,ˆ𝑆is the model’s maximum average entropy
over the𝑏samples from each task. 𝑆′denotes the entropy of a uniform distribution and is used to normalize the
variance of the number of classes in each task. At last, 𝑏samples with the highest uncertainty measures are used
for training at the current step. Experiments show that this uncertainty-based sampling strategy could effectively
avoid catastrophic forgetting and inter-task interference when jointly learning multiple tasks, outperforming the
aforementioned annealed sampling [122].
In some cases, multiple tasks are learned sequentially. Such tasks usually form a clear dependency relationship or
are of different difficulty levels. For instance, Isonuma et al . [53] , Nishino et al . [90] train MTL models on different
tasks in the order of increasing difficulties. Similarly, Hashimoto et al . [46] train a multi-task model in the order of
low-level tasks, high-level tasks, and at last mixed-level batches. Unicoder [ 52] trains its five pre-training objectives
sequentially in each step. Pfeiffer et al. [99] first pre-train language and invertible adapters on language modeling
before training task adapters on different down-stream tasks, where the language and invertible adapters can also
receive gradient when training task adapters. To stabilize the training process when alternating between tasks with
imbalanced dataset sizes, successive regularization [ 31,46] can be added to loss functions as a regularization term,
which is defined as L𝑠𝑟=𝛿

𝜃𝑒−𝜃′
𝑒

2, where𝜃𝑒and𝜃′
𝑒are model parameters before and after the update in the
previous training step and 𝛿is a hyperparameter.
To sum up, task scheduling for MTL aims at alleviate overfitting and negative transfer caused by imbalanced
dataset size. For auxiliary MTL, depending on the relationship between tasks, we can either start with the
primary task before training primary and auxiliary tasks together or adopt a pre-train then fine-tune approach
[16,47,60,135], which bootstraps the model with auxiliary tasks that are often easier or more data-rich. For joint
MTL, we would like to choose tasks that are more likely to benefit the model. Generally, dynamic scheduling
approaches like CA-MTL performs better than using a fixed mixing ratio.
4 APPLICATION IN NLP TASKS
In this section, we summarize the application of multi-task learning in NLP tasks, including applying MTL to
optimize certain primary tasks (i.e., Auxiliary MTL), to jointly learn multiple tasks (i.e., Joint MTL), and to
improve the performance in multilingual multi-task and multimodal scenarios. Existing research works have also
explored different ways to improve the performance and efficiency of MTL models, as well as using MTL to study
the relatedness of different tasks.
4.1 Auxiliary MTL
Auxiliary MTL aims to improve the performance of certain primary tasks by introducing auxiliary tasks and is
widely used in the NLP field for different types of primary tasks, such as sequence tagging, classification, text
generation, and representation learning. Table 1 summarizes the types of auxiliary tasks used along with different
types of primary tasks. As shown in Table 1, auxiliary tasks are usually closely related to primary tasks.
Targeting sequence tagging tasks, Rei [104] adds a language modeling objective into a sequence labeling model
to counter the sparsity of named entities and make full use of training data. Augenstein and Søgaard [4]add
five auxiliary tasks for scientific keyphrase boundary classification, including syntactic chunking, frame target
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.