Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 9
2.4 Generative Adversarial Architectures
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved great success in generative tasks for computer vision.
The basic idea of GANs is to train a discriminator model that distinguishes generated images from ground truth
ones and train the generator model to fool the discriminator. By jointly optimizing both models, we can obtain a
generator that can produce more vivid images and a discriminator that is better at spotting synthesized images. A
similar idea can be used in MTL for NLP tasks. By introducing a discriminator 𝐺that predicts which task a given
training instance comes from, the shared feature extractor 𝐸is forced to produce more generalized task-invariant
features [ 76,84,128,137,151] and therefore improve the performance and robustness of the entire MTL model.
In the training process of such models, the adversarial objective is usually formulated as
L𝑎𝑑𝑣=min
𝜃𝐸max
𝜃𝐷𝑀∑︁
𝑡=1|D𝑡|∑︁
𝑖=1𝑑𝑡
𝑖log[𝐷(𝐸(X))],
where𝜃𝐸and𝜃𝐷denote model parameters for the feature extractor and discriminator, respectively, and 𝑑𝑡
𝑖denotes
the one-hot task label.
An additional benefit of generative adversarial architectures is that unlabeled data can be fully utilized. Wang
et al. [134] add an auxiliary generative model that reconstructs documents from document representations learned
by the primary model and improves the quality of document representations by training the generative model on
unlabeled documents. To improve the performance of an extractive machine reading comprehension model, Ren
et al. [105] use a self-supervised approach. First, a discriminator that rates the quality of candidate answers is
trained on labeled samples. Then, during unsupervised adversarial training, the answer extractor tries to obtain a
high score from the discriminator.
3 OPTIMIZATION FOR MTL MODELS
Optimization techniques of training MTL models are equally as important as the design of model architectures. In
this section, we summarize optimization techniques for MTL models used in recent research literatures targeting
NLP tasks, including loss construction, data sampling, and task scheduling.
3.1 Loss Construction
The most common approach to train an MTL model is to linearly combine loss functions of different tasks into a
single global loss function. In this way, the entire objective function of the MTL model can be optimized through
conventional learning techniques such as stochastic gradient descent with back-propagation. Different tasks may
use different types of loss functions. For example, in [ 154], the cross-entropy loss for the relation identification task
and the ranking loss for the relation classification task are linearly combined, which performs better than single-task
learning. Specifically, given 𝑀tasks each associated with a loss function L𝑖and a weight 𝜆𝑡, the overall lossLis
defined as
L=𝑀∑︁
𝑡=1𝜆𝑡L𝑡+∑︁
𝜆𝑎L𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑝+∑︁
𝜆𝑟L𝑟𝑒𝑔,
whereL𝑡,L𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑝, andL𝑟denotes loss functions of different tasks, adaptive losses, and regularization terms, with
𝜆𝑡,𝜆𝑎, and𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑔being their respective weights. For cases where the tasks are optimized in turns rather than joint
training [123], 𝜆𝑡is equivalent to the sampling weight 𝑝𝑡for task𝑡, which will be discussed in Section 3.3.
An important question is how to assign a proper weight 𝜆𝑡to each task. The simplest way is to set them equally
[96,136,171], i.e.,𝜆𝑡=1
𝑀. As a generalization, the weights are usually viewed as hyper-parameters and set
based on experience or through grid search [ 11,15,17,23,25,29,41,61,73–75,78,80,89,105,111,113,115,
120,134,145,146,151,158,159,159,160,163,165,169,170]. For example, to prevent large datasets from
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.