Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 3
2 MTL ARCHITECTURES FOR NLP TASKS
The architectures of MTL models depend on the characteristics of the indented tasks as well as the design of the
base models. When training generative models on instruction following, people usually train the entire model and
focus more on data curation. We refer interested readers to another survey paper on instruction tuning [ 162]. In this
work, we mainly focus on reviewing MTL architectures with task-specifc trainable parameters.
Based on how the relatedness between tasks are utilized, we categorize MTL architectures into the following
classes: parallel architecture, hierarchical architecture, modular architecture, and generative adversarial architecture.
The parallel architecture shares the bulk of the model among multiple tasks while each task has its own task-specific
output layer. The hierarchical architecture models the hierarchical relationships between tasks. Such architecture
can hierarchically combine features from different tasks, take the output of one task as the input of another task, or
explicitly model the interaction between tasks. The modular architecture decomposes the whole model into shared
components and task-specific components that learn task-invariant and task-specific features, respectively. Different
from the above three architectures, the generative adversarial architecture borrows the idea of the generative
adversarial network [ 37] to improve capabilities of existing models. Note that the boundaries between different
categories are not always solid and hence a specific model may fit into multiple classes. Still, we believe that this
taxonomy could illustrate important ideas behind the design of MTL architectures.
Before introducing MTL architectures, we would like to clarify the definitions of hard and soft parameter sharing.
In this paper, hard parameter sharing refers to sharing the same model parameters among multiple tasks, and it is
the most widely used approach in multi-task learning models. Soft parameter sharing, on the other hand, constrains
a distance metric between the intended parameters, such as the Euclidean distance [ 40] and correlation matrix
penalty [ 44], to force certain parameters of models for different tasks to be similar. Alternatively, Le et al . [63]
add a regularization term to ensure the outputs of encoders of each task to be close for similar input instances.
Differently, some researchers use hard parameter sharing to design a multi-task learning model that shares all the
hidden layers except the final task-specific output layers and use soft parameter sharing to establish a multi-task
model that partially shares its parameters [ 23], such as embedding layers and low-level encoders. In this paper,
such models fall into the ‘parallel architecture’ category.
2.1 Parallel Architectures
As its name suggests, the model for each task run in parallel under the parallel architecture, which is implemented
by sharing certain intermediate layers. In this case, there is no dependency other than layer sharing among tasks.
Therefore, there is no constraint on the order of training samples from each task. During training, the shared
parameters receive gradients from samples of each task, enabling knowledge sharing among tasks. Fig. 1 illustrates
different forms of parallel architectures.
2.1.1 Parallel Feature Sharing. The simplest form of parallel architecture is a parallel feature sharing archi-
tecture (Fig. 1a), where the models for different tasks share a base feature extractor (i.e., the trunk) followed by
task-specific encoders and output layers (i.e., the branches). A shallow trunk can be simply the word representation
layer [ 117] while a deep trunk can be the entire model except output layers. The tree-like architecture was proposed
by Caruana [9]and has been widely used in MTL [ 2,4,6,10,11,14,17,22,30,31,40,42,46,54,58,59,65,73,
75,77–79,85,89,90,95,96,103,115,116,120,125,130,135–137,141,143,154,156,163,165,166,168]. In
some literature, this architecture is also known as hard sharing architecture or multi-head architecture, where each
head corresponds to the combination of a task-specific encoder and the corresponding output layer or just a branch.
Parallel feature sharing uses a single trunk to force all tasks to share the same low-level feature representation,
which may limit the expressive power of the model for each task. A solution is to equip the shared trunk with
task-specific encoders [ 50,63,150]. For example, Lin et al . [71] combine a shared character embedding layer and
language-specific word embedding layers for different languages. Another way is to make different groups of tasks
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.