Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview • 11
whereL𝑡denotes the training loss for task 𝑡,𝜃𝑠ℎdenotes the shared model parameters, 𝜃𝑖denotes task-specific
model parameters for task 𝑖,𝑙𝑡denotes the empirical loss of task 𝑡, and𝜆𝑡=1
¯𝑙𝑡Í𝑇
𝑖=11
¯𝑙𝑖. The Tchebycheff loss can be
combined with aforementioned adversarial MTL as well [76].
Note that adjusting loss weight 𝜆𝑡of each task could guide the model to focus on different tasks during training
while still learning multiple tasks at the same time, which can be seen as implicit task scheduling, compared
to explicit task scheduling, which will be discussed in Section 3.4. In general, auxiliary MTL models are often
bootstrapped with easier or lower-level tasks. For joint MTL, one would want to emphasize difficult tasks or tasks
with lower homoscedasticity.
3.2 Gradient Regularization
Aside from studying how to combine loss functions of different tasks, some studies optimize the training process by
manipulating gradients. When jointly learning multiple tasks, the gradients from different tasks may be in conflict
with each other, causing inter-task interference that harms performance. PCGrad [ 155] resolves such conflict using
gradient projections. Specifically, given two conflicting gradients g𝑖andg𝑗from tasks𝑖and𝑗, respectively, PCGrad
projects g𝑖onto the normal plane of g𝑗as
g′
𝑖=g𝑖−g𝑖·g𝑗

g𝑗

2g𝑗.
Based on the observation that gradient similarity correlates well with language similarity and model performance,
GradVac [ 140], which targets at optimization of multilingual models, regulates parameter updates according to
geometry similarities between gradients. That is, GradVac alters both the direction and magnitude of gradients so
that they are aligned with the cosine similarity between gradient vectors by modifying g𝑖as
g′
𝑖=g𝑖+∥g𝑖∥ 
𝜙𝑇
𝑖𝑗√︃
1−𝜙2
𝑖𝑗−𝜙𝑖𝑗√︂
1−
𝜙𝑇
𝑖𝑗2!


g𝑗

√︂
1−
𝜙𝑇
𝑖𝑗2·g𝑗
where𝜙𝑖𝑗∈[− 1,1]is the cosine distance between gradients g𝑖andg𝑗. Notice that PCGrad is a special case of
GradVac when 𝜙𝑇
𝑖𝑗=0. While PCGrad does not modify positively associated gradients, GradVac aligns both
positively and negatively associated gradients, leading to a consist performance improvement for multilingual
models.
3.3 Data Sampling
Machine learning models often suffer from imbalanced data distributions. MTL further complicates this issue in
that training datasets of multiple tasks with potentially different sizes and data distributions are involved. Various
data sampling techniques have been proposed to properly construct training datasets. In practice, given 𝑀tasks and
their datasets{D1,...,D𝑀}, a sampling weight 𝑝𝑡is assigned to task 𝑡to control the probability of sampling a
data batch fromD𝑡in each training step.
In general,𝑝𝑡takes the form of:
𝑝𝑡∝|D𝑡|1
𝛼
where𝛼is the sampling temperature. When 𝛼>1, the divergence of sampling probabilities between tasks is
reduced and vice versa. 𝛼can be either a constant hyperparameter or can be changed dynamically during training.
Similar to task loss weights, researchers have proposed various techniques to adjust 𝛼. For example, the annealed
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.