Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview
SHIJIE CHEN *,The Ohio State University, USA
YU ZHANG†,Southern University of Science and Technology, China
QIANG YANG, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
Deep learning approaches have achieved great success in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, directly
training deep neural models often suffer from overfitting and data scarcity problems that are pervasive in NLP tasks. In
recent years, Multi-Task Learning (MTL), which can leverage useful information of related tasks to achieve simultaneous
performance improvement on these tasks, has been used to handle these problems. In this paper, we give an overview of the use
of MTL in NLP tasks. We first review MTL architectures used in NLP tasks and categorize them into four classes, including
parallel architecture, hierarchical architecture, modular architecture, and generative adversarial architecture. Then we present
optimization techniques on loss construction, gradient regularization, data sampling, and task scheduling to properly train a
multi-task model. After presenting applications of MTL in a variety of NLP tasks, we introduce some benchmark datasets.
Finally, we make a conclusion and discuss several possible research directions in this field.
ACM Reference Format:
Shijie Chen, Yu Zhang, and Qiang Yang. 2024. Multi-Task Learning in Natural Language Processing: An Overview. 1, 1
(April 2024), 31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, data-driven neural models have achieved great success in machine learning problems. In the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), the introduction of transformers [ 129] and pre-trained language
models (PLMs) such as BERT [ 26], T5 [ 102] and GPT-3 [ 8] has led to a huge leap in the performance on multiple
downstream tasks. While pre-training equips PLMs with general encyclopedic and linguistic knowledge, using
PLMs on downstream tasks still requires task-specific adaptation. However, sufficiently training such models
usually require a large amount of labeled training samples, which is often expensive for NLP tasks. With the
increasing size of neural models, training them on downstream datasets also demands immense computing power
as well as huge time and storage budget. To further improve model performance, combat the data scarcity problem,
and facilitate cost-efficient task adaptation, researchers have adopted Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [ 9,164] for
NLP tasks. More recently, with the uprising of generative pre-trained models [ 8,102], notably large language
models (LLMs), researchers have generalized the notion of performing tasks into following instructions [ 87,149],
which virtually makes any NLP task a text-to-text task. This further allows to fine-tune a language model on a
huge collection of tasks in a unified sequence-to-sequence framework. As a result, contemporary LLMs set new
state-of-the-art on a variety of tasks and demonstrate an impressive ability in adapting to new tasks under few-shot
*This work was done when the first author worked as a research assistant at Southern University of Science and Technology.
†Corresponding author
Authors’ addresses: Shijie Chen, chen.10216@osu.edu, The Ohio State University, USA; Yu Zhang, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, Southern
University of Science and Technology, China; Qiang Yang, qyang@cse.ust.hk, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2024/4-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, V ol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2024.arXiv:2109.09138v2  [cs.AI]  28 Apr 2024