SOLAR: Deep Structured Representations for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 6. Our method consistently solves all block stacking tasks.
The MPC baseline learns very quickly on the two easier tasks
since it can plan through the pretrained model, however, due to
the short-horizon planning, it performs signiﬁcantly worse on the
hard task on the right where the block starts on the table. The
V AE ablation performs well on the easiest task in the middle but
is unsuccessful on the two harder tasks. DVF makes progress for
each task but ultimately is not as data efﬁcient as SOLAR. The
black solid line at 0.02m denotes successful stacking.
Figure 7. Left: our method learns a policy with better ﬁnal perfor-
mance using slightly less data compared to deep visual foresight.
Right: visualizing example end states from rolling out our policy
after 200 (top), 230 (middle) and 260 (bottom) trajectories.
is noticeably worse than our method. MPC often has better
initial behavior than LQR-FLM as it uses the pretrained
models right away for planning, highlighting one beneﬁt of
planning-based methods, however the MPC baseline barely
improves past this behavior. Forward prediction with this
learned model deteriorates quickly as the horizon increases,
which makes long-horizon planning impossible. MPC is
thus limited to short-horizon planning, and this limitation
has been noted in prior work ( Nagabandi et al. ,2018 ;Fein-
berg et al. ,2018 ). SOLAR does not suffer from this as we
do not use our models for forward prediction.
Our open-source implementation of SOLAR is available at
https://github.com/sharadmv/parasol .
7.3. Analysis of Real Robot Results
The real-world Lego block stacking results are shown in
Figure 6 . Our method is successful on all tasks, where we
deﬁne success as achieving an average distance of 0.02m
which generally corresponds to successful stacking, whereas
the V AE ablation is only successful on the easiest task in the
middle plot. The MPC baseline again starts off better andlearns more quickly on the two easier tasks. However, MPC
is again limited to short-horizon planning, which causes it
to fail on the most difﬁcult task in the right plot as it simply
greedily reduces the distance between the two blocks rather
than lifting the block off the table. We can solve each block
stacking task using about two hours of robot interaction
time, though the x-axes in the plots show that we further
reduce the total data requirements by about a factor of two
by pretraining and transferring a shared representation and
global model as described in Section 5 .
As a comparison to a state-of-the-art model-based method
that has been successful in real-world image-based domains,
we evaluate DVF ( Ebert et al. ,2018 ), which learns pixel
space models and does not utilize representation learning.
We ﬁnd that this method can make progress but ultimately
is not able to solve the two harder tasks even with more
data than what we use for our method and even with a much
smaller model. This highlights our method’s data efﬁciency,
as we use about two hours of robot data compared to days
or weeks of data as in this prior work.
Finally, on the real-world pushing task, despite the addi-
tional challenge of sparse rewards, our method learns a
successful policy in about an hour of interaction time as
detailed in Figure 7 . DVF performs worse than our method
with a comparable amount of data, again even when using
a downsized model. Videos depicting the learning pro-
cess for both of the real-world tasks, as well as full size
versions of the plots and learning curves, are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/icml19solar .
8. Discussion
We presented SOLAR, a model-based RL algorithm that is
capable of learning policies in a data-efﬁcient manner di-
rectly from raw high-dimensional image observations. The
key insights in SOLAR involve learning latent representa-
tions where simple models are more accurate and utilizing
PGM structure to infer dynamics from data conditioned
on observed trajectories. Our experimental results demon-
strate that SOLAR is competitive in sample efﬁciency, while
exhibiting superior ﬁnal policy performance, compared to
other model-based methods. SOLAR is also signiﬁcantly
more data-efﬁcient compared to model-free RL methods,
especially when transferring previously learned representa-
tions and models. We show that SOLAR can learn complex
real-world robotic manipulation tasks with only image ob-
servations in one to two hours of interaction time.
Acknowledgments. MZ is supported by an NDSEG fel-
lowship. SV is supported by NSF grant CNS1446912. This
work was supported by the NSF, through IIS-1614653, and
computational resource donations from Amazon.