SOLAR: Deep Structured Representations for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Figure 4. Illustrations of the environments we test on in the top
row with example image observations in the bottow row. Left to
right: visualizing a trajectory in the nonholonomic car environment,
with the target denoted by the black dot; an illustration of the 2-DoF
reacher environment, with the target denoted by the red dot; the
different tasks that we test for block stacking, where the rightmost
task is the most difﬁcult as the policy must learn to ﬁrst lift the
yellow block before stacking it; a depiction of our pushing setup,
where a human provides the sparse reward that indicates whether
the robot successfully pushed the mug onto the coaster.
to the bottom right. Observations consist of two 32-by-32
images showing the positions of the agent and goal.
Nonholonomic car. The nonholonomic car starts in the
bottom right of the 2-dimensional space and controls its
acceleration and steering velocity in order to reach the target
in the top left. We use 64-by-64 images as the observation.
Reacher. We experiment with the reacher environment
from OpenAI Gym ( Brockman et al. ,2016 ), where a 2-DoF
arm in a 2-dimensional plane has to reach a ﬁxed target
denoted by a red dot. For observations, we directly use
64-by-64-by-3 images of the rendered environment, which
provides a top-down view of the reacher and target.
Sawyer Lego block stacking. To demonstrate a challeng-
ing domain in the real world, we use our method to learn
Lego block stacking with a real 7-DoF Sawyer robotic arm.
The observations are 64-by-64-by-3 images from a camera
pointed at the robot, and the controller only receives images
as the observation without joint angles or other information.
As shown in Figure 4 , we deﬁne different block stacking
tasks as different initial positions of the Sawyer arm.
Sawyer pushing. We also experiment with the Sawyer arm
learning to push a mug onto a white coaster, where we again
use64-by-64-by-3 images with no auxiliary information.
Furthermore, we set up this task with only sparse binary re-
wards that indicate whether the mug is on top of the coaster,
which are provided by a human labeler.
7.2. Comparisons to Prior Work
As shown in Figure 5 , we compare to prior methods only
on the simulated domains as these methods have not been
shown to solve real-world image-based domains with rea-
sonable data efﬁciency. On the 2D navigation task, our
method, the V AE ablation, and the MPC baseline are able to
learn very quickly, converging to high-performing policies
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 5. Full size versions of these plots are available on the
project website. (a): Our method, the MPC baseline, and the V AE
ablation consistently solve 2D navigation with a randomized goal,
whereas RCE is unable to make progress. The ﬁnal performance of
PPO is plotted as the dashed line, though PPO requires 1000 times
more samples than our method to reach this performance. (b): On
the nonholonomic car, both our method and the MPC baseline are
able to reach the goal, though the V AE ablation is less consistent
across seeds and RCE once again is unsuccessful at the task. PPO
requires over 25 times more episodes than our method to learn a
successful policy. (c): On reacher, we perform worse than PPO but
use about 40 times fewer episodes. RCE fails to learn at all, and
the V AE ablation and MPC baseline are noticeably worse than our
method. Here we plot reward, so higher is better.
in 200 episodes. However, these policies still exhibit some
“jittery” behavior due to modeling bias, especially for the
V AE ablation, whereas PPO learns an extremely accurate
policy that continues to improve the longer we train. This
gain in asymptotic performance is typical of model-free
methods over model-based methods, however achieving this
performance requires two to three orders of magnitude more
samples. We present log-scale plots that illustrate the full
learning progress of PPO in Appendix G .
LQR-FLM from pixels fails to learn anything meaningful,
and its performance does not improve over the initial policy.
In fact, LQR-FLM does not make progress on any of the
tasks, and for the sake of clarity in the plots, we omit these
results. Similarly, despite extensive tuning and using code
directly from the original authors, we were unable to get
RCE to learn a good model for our 2D navigation task, and
thus the learned policy also does not improve over the initial
policy. RCE did not learn successful policies for any of the
other tasks that we experiment with, though in Appendix G ,
we show that RCE can indeed learn the easier ﬁxed-target
2D navigation task from prior work.
On the nonholonomic car, our method and the MPC baseline
are able to learn with about 1500 episodes of experience,
whereas the V AE ablation’s performance is less consistent.
PPO eventually learns a successful policy for this task that
performs better than our method, however it requires over
25 times more data to reach this performance.
Our method is outperformed by the ﬁnal PPO policy on the
reacher task, however, PPO requires about 40 times more
data to learn. The V AE ablation and MPC baseline also
make progress toward the target, though the performance