SOLAR: Deep Structured Representations for
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Marvin Zhang*1Sharad Vikram*2Laura Smith1Pieter Abbeel1Matthew J. Johnson3Sergey Levine1
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) has
proven to be a data efﬁcient approach for learning
control tasks but is difﬁcult to utilize in domains
with complex observations such as images. In this
paper, we present a method for learning represen-
tations that are suitable for iterative model-based
policy improvement, even when the underlying
dynamical system has complex dynamics and im-
age observations, in that these representations are
optimized for inferring simple dynamics and cost
models given data from the current policy. This
enables a model-based RL method based on the
linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) to be used for
systems with image observations. We evaluate
our approach on a range of robotics tasks, includ-
ing manipulation with a real-world robotic arm
directly from images. We ﬁnd that our method
produces substantially better ﬁnal performance
than other model-based RL methods while being
signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than model-free RL.
1. Introduction
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods use
known or learned models in a variety of ways, such as
planning through the model and generating synthetic expe-
rience ( Sutton ,1990 ;Kober et al. ,2013 ). On simple, low-
dimensional tasks, model-based approaches have demon-
strated remarkable data efﬁciency, learning policies for sys-
tems like cart-pole swing-up with under 30 seconds of ex-
perience ( Deisenroth et al. ,2014 ;Moldovan et al. ,2015 ).
However, for more complex domains, one of the main difﬁ-
culties in applying model-based methods is modeling bias :
if control or policy learning is performed against an im-
perfect model, performance in the real world will typically
*Equal contribution1University of California, Berkeley
2University of California, San Diego3Google. Correspondence to:
Marvin Zhang <marvin@eecs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
Figure 1. Our method can learn policies for complex manipula-
tion tasks on a real Sawyer robot arm including stacking blocks
(top) and pushing a mug onto a coaster (bottom), both from only
64-by-64-by-3 image observations (right), with no additional sen-
sor information, and in one to two hours of interaction time.
degrade with model inaccuracy ( Deisenroth et al. ,2014 ).
Many model-based methods rely on accurate forward pre-
diction for planning ( Nagabandi et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,
2018 ), and for image-based domains, this precludes the use
of simple models which will introduce signiﬁcant modeling
bias. However, complex, expressive models must typically
be trained on very large datasets, corresponding to days
to weeks of data collection, in order to generate accurate
forward predictions of images ( Finn & Levine ,2017 ;Pinto
& Gupta ,2016 ;Agrawal et al. ,2016 ).
How can we use model-based methods to learn from im-
ages with similar data efﬁciency as we have seen in simpler
domains? In our work, we focus on removing the need for
accurate forward prediction, using what we term local mod-
els methods . These methods use simple models, typically
linear models, to provide gradient directions for local policy
improvement, rather than for forward prediction and plan-
ning ( Todorov & Li ,2005 ;Levine & Abbeel ,2014 ). Thus,
local model methods circumvent the need for accurate pre-
dictive models, but these methods cannot be directly applied
to image-based tasks because image dynamics, even locally
speaking, are highly non-linear.
Our main contribution is a representation learning and
model-based RL procedure, which we term stochastic op-
timal control with latent representations (SOLAR), that
jointly optimizes a latent representation and model such
that inference produces local models that provide good