Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 8 of 17
In Figure 6, this set of images shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with the same learning rate, where Figure 6a shows the acc and
loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.02;
Figure 6b shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
when the learning rate is 0.01; Figure 6c shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.005; Figure 6d shows the acc and loss
comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN when the learning rate is 0.0025; and
Figure 6e shows the acc and loss comparison between Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
when the learning rate is 0.0002.
4. Results and Discussion
Four different sets of results were selected for comparison: single crack vs. bifurcated
crack comparison, crack with or without sunlight interference comparison, deep and
shallow crack comparison, and straight and curved crack comparison.
4.1. Single Crack and Bifurcation Crack
Figure 7a shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Faster R-CNN with different
learning rates; Figure 7b shows the detection of single cracks by Faster R-CNN with
different learning rates. As seen from the detection results, Faster R-CNN has little effect on
a single crack after adjusting the learning rate, and the detection results are all better with
a higher score-thr; for the bifurcated crack, Faster R-CNN is more sensitive to the change
in learning rate and can only detect part of the crack, in which the detection results of the
transverse crack are better than those of the vertical crack. The direction of the bifurcation
crack is different, and it can be seen from the detection results that transverse cracks can
be detected, while vertical cracks, branch cracks and small cracks cannot be detected
completely. The detection results in this group of comparison tests when the learning rate
is set to 0.005 are better; all cracks can be detected, and the score-thr is also higher. Figure 7c
shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning rates;
Figure 7d shows the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning
rates. As seen from the detection results, Mask R-CNN is also more sensitive to single
cracks after adjusting the learning rate. The learning rate is set to 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, and
0.0025, most of the cracks can be detected, and only a small local area is missed. When the
learning rate is set to 0.0002, cracks are completely undetectable, and the model appears to
be overﬁtted at this point. For bifurcation cracks, the detection of the ﬁve learning rates
under this experiment is not very good, in which the detection results of vertical cracks
are worse than those of transversal cracks, the detection effect becomes signiﬁcantly worse
when the learning rate is gradually reduced, the number of cracks that can be detected
decreases, only sporadic segments of cracks can be detected, and cracks cannot be detected
at all when the learning rate is reduced to 0.0002. From the results, it can be seen that, as
in the case of Faster R-CNN, the detection results of single transverse cracks are all better;
the detection effect of transverse cracks in bifurcated cracks is better than that of other
directions. Overall, both algorithms are ideal for the detection of single cracks; complex
bifurcated cracks require more data sets for training, and the training set used in this
experiment has more transverse single cracks.
In Figure 7 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 7a for the detection
of bifurcated cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 7b for the detection of single cracks by Faster
R-CNN; Figure 7c for the detection of bifurcated cracks by Mask R-CNN; and Figure 7d for
the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN, the learning rates of each group of images
from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.