Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 2 of 17
learning [ 4]. Therefore, detection algorithms based on deep learning and convolutional
neural networks have achieved better results in the ﬁeld of crack recognition.
To quantify the defect width or length, many researchers have proposed deep learning-
based quantiﬁcation methods. Kim et al. [ 5] introduced a novel crack evaluation framework
for concrete constructions that detects cracks using masks and location-based totally convo-
lutional neural communities (Mask R-CNN) and quantiﬁes cracks using a few morphologi-
cal operations on the detected crack masks. Kalfarisi et al. [ 6] proposed a uniﬁed framework
for the usage of actuality mesh-modeling technological know-how that enables quantitative
evaluation with the integrated visualization of an inspected structure. The effectiveness
and robustness of the developed methods are evaluated, and the usage of various actual
instances, including road pavements, bridges, underground tunnels, buildings, and water
towers, is established. Wu et al. [ 7] adopted images to assemble a mesh model through a
photogrammetry approach. The model with annotated cracks allows intuitive visualization
and quantitative evaluation of thousands of detected cracks. Moreover, Peng et al. [ 8]
proposed a computer vision approach for bridge crack cognizance and width quantiﬁcation
via hybrid characteristic learning. Furthermore, Guo et al. [ 9] introduced a computer
vision approach for the identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation, and visualization of microcracks,
primarily based on deep learning. Recently, Bang et al. [ 10] proposed deep learning-based
detection and the quantiﬁcation of structural damage by adopting structured lights and a
depth camera.
Many other scholars have improved the performance of the model with better de-
tection results. Han et al. [ 11] proposed a sampling block with the implementation of
convolutional neural networks, thereby developing a novel pixel-level semantic segmenta-
tion network. Li et al. [ 12] proposed a multilayer characteristic fusion network based totally
on the faster region-based convolutional neural network (Faster R-CNN) to gain automated
tunnel surface defect detection with excessive precision. Ju Huyan et al. [ 13] proposed the
fusion of a sensitivity detection network, which is capable of monitoring unsealed and
sealed cracks with severely complicated backgrounds. Moreover, Malini et al. [ 14] used a
regularization approach to obtain greater total performance primarily based on a convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) monitoring model. Cha et al. [ 15] proposed a vision-based
approach using a deep CNN architecture for monitoring concrete cracks except for calculat-
ing the defect features. Mogalapalli et al. [ 16] proposed a quantum transfer learning-based
method for various image classiﬁcation tasks. Pang et al. [ 17] proposed a two-stage crack
defect segmentation approach based totally on the target detection community to resolve
the issue of extreme brightness imbalance and massive noise in dam surface images. Sekar
et al. [ 18] introduced a new multitasking Faster R-CNN method using the region of interest
and global average pooling align methods to monitor various road cracks.
Many researchers have added classiﬁcation functions for extraordinary defects. Trana
et al. [ 19] proposed a two-step sequential computerized method for detecting cracks and
classifying the severity of asphalt pavements. Liu et al. [ 20] introduced a new model
combining pixelwise and region-based deep learning to supply pavement inspection tech-
nological know-how for mutually acquiring misery classes, locations, and geometric infor-
mation. Moreover, Mondal et al. [ 21] analyzed visual data captured by means of sensors
established on robots, and the damages could be detected and categorized autonomously.
The current study proposes the use of deep learning-based methods to this end. Hou
et al. [ 22] introduced transfer learning with the Cascade Mask RCNN mannequin for defect
identiﬁcation and location. Dhiman et al. [ 23] proposed two methods primarily based
on stereo-vision evaluation of street environments beforehand of the vehicle, and they
additionally designed two models for deep-learning-based pothole detection. Intelligent
monitoring methods [ 24–26] will be an essential guarantee for the realization of smart
operation and maintenance.
Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN have been proven successful in the ﬁeld of general
vision, such as in [ 27]. However, the crack detection research considering the characteristics
of road images is still insufﬁcient. We experimentally validated our model using these