Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 13 of 17
In Figure 9 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results of
four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 9a for Faster R-CNN
to detect deep cracks; Figure 9b for Faster R-CNN to detect shallow cracks; Figure 9c for
Mask R-CNN to detect deep cracks; and Figure 9d for Mask R-CNN to detect shallow
cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005,
0.0025 and 0.0002.
4.4. Straight and Bending Cracks
Figure 10a shows the detection of straight cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 10b shows
the detection of curved cracks by Faster R-CNN. As seen from the results, Faster R-CNN
adjusts the learning rate and has little effect on horizontal straightaway cracks; the detection
results are better, and the score-thr is higher. When detecting bending cracks, Faster R-CNN
is more sensitive to the learning rate change. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, all the
cracks can be detected, and when the learning rate is reduced, each image will be partially
missed. Figure 10c shows the detection of straight cracks by Mask R-CNN and Figure 10d
shows the detection of bending cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask
R-CNN is used to detect transverse straight cracks with better results than bending cracks,
most of the transverse cracks—which have a simpler crack form—can be detected, and only
a small portion of them are missed. When the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the detection
effect is the worst, and the score-thr of the detection result is very low; even cracks cannot
be detected. The other four learning rates set in this experiment have similar detection
situations, and there will be small sections of missed detection, where the learning rate is
0.01, the detection result is the best, and the detected cracks are the most complete. The ﬁve
learning rates set in this experiment are not ideal for detecting bending cracks, and cracks
cannot be detected completely, as shown in the ﬁgure. Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN
both have better detection results for transverse and simple cracks, and more crack data
may be needed to train the model for complex cracks.
In Figure 10, Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 10a for Faster
R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; Figure 10b for Faster R-CNN to detect curved
cracks; Figure 10c for Mask R-CNN to detect laterally biased cracks; and Figure 10d for
Mask R-CNN to detect curved cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top
to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
4.5. Effectiveness of Detection for Other Dataset
We tested the CRACK500 dataset using the completed training model, and some of
the results are shown in Figures 11 and 12. Faster R-CNN still performs well on different
datasets with strong generalization performance. Mask R-CNN performs slightly worse,
but is still valid. It should be noted that migration-learning based ﬁnetuning methods are
very efﬁcient. It is reasonable to believe that we will obtain even better results if we train a
small amount for the CRACK500 dataset.