Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 16 of 17
cracks with the comparison of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The following points in
this study can be concluded.
(i) For the same crack image with the same set of data training, the detection bounding-
boxes of Faster R-CNN are more complete than those of Mask R-CNN, and in this study,
in which the joint training strategy leads to difﬁculties in its bounding box regression, the
score-thr of Faster R-CNN is higher. At the same time, we see that this type of training
is effective. Both models are able to detect cracks better with only 130+ images trained,
and the use of SGD optimizer makes the models insensitive to the learning rate setting.
However, the detection of more complex cracks is more sensitive to the learning rate, and
the worst detection result is obtained when the learning rate is 0.0002.
(ii) Our method works better than YOLOv3, as both models are ideal for the detection
of single cracks, and both algorithms have ideal detection results for detecting bright and
dark cracks. Additionally, both algorithms can detect straight cracks well. For the detection
of deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN performs well in this dataset.
(iii) Both Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN require more datasets to train for complex
cracks, and the dataset in this experiment has more transverse single cracks and less
complex cracks.
(iv) The acc and loss of Faster R-CNN do not differ much under the ﬁve learning rates
set in this experiment, and the case of Mask R-CNN is the same as that of Faster R-CNN.
(v) At the same learning rate, the acc of Faster R-CNN is higher than that of Mask
R-CNN when the learning rate is more than 0.005, and the learning rate of Mask R-CNN is
higher than that of Faster R-CNN when the learning rate is less than 0.005; the loss value of
Faster R-CNN is smaller than that of Mask R-CNN.
For further work, how to use a small amount of labeled data more effectively to achieve
better results will be our research goal. More suitable pre-trained models, active learning,
data augmentation, etc., may be useful for the goal. Considering that deep learning
methods are constantly evolving and the algorithms are improving, we will investigate
more perfect algorithms or improve existing algorithms to obtain more advanced detection
results in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.X. and H.Y.; methodology, X.X. and M.Z.; software, M.Z.
and R.R.; validation, X.X., M.Z. and P .S.; formal analysis, X.X. and M.Z.; investigation, X.X. and X.W.;
resources, X.X. and H.Y.; data curation, H.Y. and P .S.; writing—original draft preparation, X.X. and
M.Z.; writing—review and editing, H.Y., M.Z. and R.R.; visualization, M.Z. and X.W.; supervision,
X.X.; project administration, X.X., X.H. and P .S.; funding acquisition, X.X. and X.H. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Natural Science Foundation of China (No: U1934209).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Science
Foundation of China (No: U1934209).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Hoang, N.D. Classiﬁcation of Asphalt Pavement Cracks Using Laplacian Pyramid-Based Image Processing and a Hybrid
Computational Approach. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2018 ,2018 , 16. [CrossRef]
2. Lei, B.; Wang, N.; Xu, P .C.; Song, G.B. New Crack Detection Method for Bridge Inspection Using UAV Incorporating Image
Processing. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2018 ,31, 13. [CrossRef]
3. Ying, L.; Salari, E. Beamlet Transform-Based Technique for Pavement Crack Detection and Classiﬁcation. Comput.-Aided Civil.
Infrastruct. Eng. 2010 ,25, 572–580. [CrossRef]