Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 6 of 17
signiﬁcant; the learning rate is 0.0025 when the initial Mask R-CNN is higher, and, later,
the difference between the two is not signiﬁcant. The loss of Faster R-CNN is always lower
than that of Mask R-CNN, and the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.25,
and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.4. The loss of Faster R-CNN is
always lower than that of Mask R-CNN. Since the loss function of Mask R-CNN increases,
Lmask, the loss value of Mask R-CNN will be larger.
In Faster R-CNN, each ROI has two outputs: one output is the classiﬁcation result,
which is the label of the prediction frame, and the other output is the regression result,
which is the coordinates of the prediction frame. However, Mask R-CNN adds a third
output, the object mask, which means that a mask is output for each ROI, and the branch
is implemented through the FCN network. The loss function of Mask R-CNN is 1.2 and
consists of three parts: Lcls,Lboxand Lmask, where Lclsand Lboxare consistent with the
classiﬁcation and regression losses deﬁned in Faster R-CNN. In Mask R-CNN, for the newly
added mask branches, the output dimension of each ROI is K mm, where mm
denotes the size of the mask and K denotes K categories, so a total of K binary masks are
generated here. After obtaining the predicted mask, the sigmoid function value is found
for each pixel point value of the mask, and the obtained result is used as one of the inputs
to the Lmask (cross-entropy loss function). It should be noted that only the positive sample
ROI is used to calculate Lmask, and the deﬁnition of a positive sample is the same as the
target detection, which is deﬁned as a positive sample with an IOU greater than 0.5. In fact,
Lmask is very similar to Lcls, except that the former is calculated based on pixel points and
the latter is calculated based on images, so similar to Lcls, although K masks are obtained
here, only the mask corresponding to the ground truth is valid in the calculation of the
cross-entropy loss function.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
  
(c) ( d) 
Figure 5. Various learning rate analyses. ( a) Accuracy of various learning rates of Faster R-CNN. 
(b) Accuracy of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. ( c) Loss of various learning rates of Faster 
R-CNN. ( d) Loss of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. 
In Figure 5, different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are presented 
where Figure 5a shows the acc comparison of five learning rates for Faster R-CNN; Figure 5b shows the acc comparison of five learning rates for Mask R-CNN; Figure 5c shows the 
loss comparison of five learning rates for Faster R-CNN; and Figure 5d shows the loss 
comparison of five learning rates for Mask R-CNN. 
The comparison of accuracy vs. loss plots for the same learning rate of Faster R-CNN 
and Mask R-CNN are presented. Figure 6 shows the comparison of acc and loss plots for the same learning rate of fi ve groups of Faster R-CNN an d Mask R-CNN. As seen from 
the figure: the learning rate is 0.02, and 0.01 acc are shown as follows: the initial stage 
Mask R-CNN is higher, with the increase of iter, slightly decreases, and later Faster R-
CNN is significantly higher; the learning rate  is 0.005 when the difference between the 
two is not significant; the learning rate is 0.0025 when the initial Mask R-CNN is higher, and, later, the difference between the two is  not significant. The loss of Faster R-CNN is 
always lower than that of Mask R-CNN, and the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable, at approx-
imately 0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable, at approximately 0.4. The loss of Faster 
R-CNN is always lower than that of Mask R- CNN. Since the loss function of Mask R-CNN 
increases, 𝐿
mask , the loss value of Mask R-CNN will be larger. 
In Faster R-CNN, each ROI has two outputs:  one output is the classification result, 
which is the label of the prediction frame, and the other output is the regression result, 
which is the coordinates of the prediction frame. However, Mask R-CNN adds a third 
output, the object mask, which means that a ma sk is output for each ROI, and the branch 
Figure 5. Various learning rate analyses. ( a) Accuracy of various learning rates of Faster R-CNN.
(b) Accuracy of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN. ( c) Loss of various learning rates of Faster
R-CNN. ( d) Loss of various learning rates of Mask R-CNN.