Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 9 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 22 
 
 4.1. Single Crack and Bifurcation Crack 
Figure 7a shows the detection of bifurcatio n cracks by Faster R-CNN with different 
learning rates; Figure 7b shows the detection of single cracks by Faster R-CNN with dif-
ferent learning rates. As seen from the detection results, Faster R-CNN has little effect on 
a single crack after adjusting the learning rate, and the detection results are all better with 
a higher score-thr; for the bifurcated crack, Fa ster R-CNN is more sensitive to the change 
in learning rate and can only detect part of th e crack, in which the detection results of the 
transverse crack are better than those of the vertical crack. The direction of the bifurcation crack is different, and it can be seen from the detection results that transverse cracks can 
be detected, while vertical cr acks, branch cracks and small cracks cannot be detected com-
pletely. The detection results in this group of  comparison tests when the learning rate is 
set to 0.005 are better; all cracks can be detect ed, and the score-thr is also higher. Figure 7c 
shows the detection of bifurcation cracks by Mask R-CNN with different learning rates; 
Figure 7d shows the detection of single crac ks by Mask R-CNN with different learning 
rates. As seen from the detection results, Mask R-CNN is also more sensitive to single 
cracks after adjusting the learning rate. The learning rate is set to 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, and 0.0025, most of the cracks can be detected, an d only a small local area is missed. When the 
learning rate is set to 0.0002, cracks are completely undetectable, and the model appears 
to be overfitted at this point. For bifurcation cracks, the detection of the five learning rates 
under this experiment is not very good, in wh ich the detection results of vertical cracks 
are worse than those of transversal cracks, th e detection effect becomes significantly worse 
when the learning rate is gradually reduced,  the number of cracks that can be detected 
decreases, only sporadic segments of cracks can be detected, and cracks cannot be detected 
at all when the learning rate is reduced to 0.0002. From the results, it can be seen that, as 
in the case of Faster R-CNN, th e detection results of single tr ansverse cracks are all better; 
the detection effect of transverse cracks in bi furcated cracks is better than that of other 
directions. Overall, both algorithms are ideal for the detection of single cracks; complex 
bifurcated cracks require more data sets for tr aining, and the training set used in this ex-
periment has more transverse single cracks. 
 
 
(a) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 22 
 
  
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 22 
 
  
 
(d) 
Figure 7. Comparison of bifurcatio ns and single cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( b) 
Faster R-CNN for single crack. ( c) Mask R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( d) Mask R-CNN for single 
crack. 
In Figure 7 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CN N are compared, and the detection results 
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 7a for the detec-tion of bifurcated cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 7b for the detection of single cracks by 
Faster R-CNN; Figure 7c for the detection of  bifurcated cracks by Mask R-CNN; and Fig-
ure 7d for the detection of single cracks by Mask R-CNN, the learning rates of each group 
of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002. 
4.2. Cracks with or with out Sunlight Interference 
We selected a set of comparison pictures, one of which is a road crack with sunlight 
interference, and the other is a picture of a normal road crack. Figure 8a shows Faster R-
CNN for detecting cracks with sunlight inte rference; and Figure 8b shows Faster R-CNN 
for detecting cracks without sunlight interferen ce. From the results, it can be seen that 
Faster R-CNN has better results for different le arning rates for detecting well-lit cracks, 
and some cracks are not detected when the lear ning rate is set to 0.0002 for detecting 
poorly lit cracks. The comparison between a single crack and a bifurcated crack shows 
that the detection result of a transverse single crack is better, and a transverse single crack is chosen for this comparison, so the influence of the crack direction on the detection result 
is excluded in this experiment , and cracks with or without sunlight interference are not 
too sensitive to the learning rate. Figure 8c  shows the crack with sunlight interference 
detection by Mask R-CNN; Figure 8d shows the crack without sunlight interference de-
tection by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, when Mask R-CNN is used to detect 
well-lit cracks, the learning rate is set to 0. 02, and part of the crack on the right is not 
detected; when the learning rate is reduced to  0.01, 0.005, and 0.0025, the whole crack can 
be detected; after continuing to reduce the learning rate to 0.0002, the model shows an 
overfitting phenomenon, and the detection effect  is poor, with large segments of cracks 
not detected, and the detection score-thr is al so reduced. When used to detect cracks with-
out sunlight interference, the cracks can be det ected completely at learning rates of 0.02, 
0.01, and 0.005, and a small portion of cracks are not detected at the other two learning 
rates, where the score-thr of the model detecting cracks is very low at a learning rate of 
Figure 7. Comparison of bifurcations and single cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for bifurcation crack. (b) Faster
R-CNN for single crack. ( c) Mask R-CNN for bifurcation crack. ( d) Mask R-CNN for single crack.