Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 5 of 17
process to enhance the effect. We used PyTorch 1.8 and CUDA 11.1 for training. The task
was performed on the Ubuntu 20.04.3 working platform and trained on a single NVIDIA
GTX 1080 Ti GPU.
3. Analysis
We conducted a comparison using the popular method YOLO. The P-R curves of
bounding-box of the three methods are shown in Figure 4, and it is obvious that Faster
R-CNN has an advantage in detection, while YOLO v3 is hardly competent for our task.
In addition, YOLOv3 requires a longer training time. It seems that using YOLO v3 for the
speciﬁc task of pavement crack detection and with only a small amount of data do not
yield the desired results.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 22 
 
 performed on the Ubuntu 20.04.3 working plat form and trained on a single NVIDIA GTX 
1080 Ti GPU. 
3. Analysis 
We conducted a comparison using the popular method YOLO. The P-R curves of 
bounding-box of the three methods are shown in Figure 4, and it is obvious that Faster R-
CNN has an advantage in detection, while YOLO  v3 is hardly competent for our task. In 
addition, YOLOv3 requires a longer training time. It seems that using YOLO v3 for the 
specific task of pavement crack detection an d with only a small amount of data do not 
yield the desired results. 
   
(a) ( b) ( c) 
Figure 4. Precision-recall curve of boundi ng-boxes in different models. ( a) Faster R-CNN. ( b) Mask 
R-CNN. ( c) YOLO v3.  
Joint training is a common strategy in deep learning that can speed up training and 
often obtain good results. However, for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN models with 
upstream and downstream relationships, it is not known how much the results will be 
affected by simply summing their losses and using joint training. The following experi-ment compares the detection of cracks by Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN after setting 
different learning rates. Five learning rates were set: 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002. 
The learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are investigated and com-
pared, which are presented in Figures 5 and 6.  The comparison of acc and loss plots based 
on different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are discussed in this paper. 
From the figures, it can be seen that the a cc and loss of both algorithms do not change 
much after adjusting the learning rate. The acc values of both Faster R-CNN and Mask R-
CNN are stable at approximately 98, the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.4. However, when the learn-
ing rate is 0.0002, the results are poorer, as s een by the comparison of the previous groups 
of detection results, but the acc and loss plot s have more desirable results, which shows 
that the model will be overfitted when th e learning rate is adjusted to 0.0002. 
Figure 4. Precision-recall curve of bounding-boxes in different models. ( a) Faster R-CNN. ( b) Mask
R-CNN. ( c) YOLO v3.
Joint training is a common strategy in deep learning that can speed up training and
often obtain good results. However, for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN models with
upstream and downstream relationships, it is not known how much the results will be
affected by simply summing their losses and using joint training. The following experiment
compares the detection of cracks by Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN after setting different
learning rates. Five learning rates were set: 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
The learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are investigated and compared,
which are presented in Figures 5 and 6. The comparison of acc and loss plots based on
different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are discussed in this paper.
From the ﬁgures, it can be seen that the acc and loss of both algorithms do not change
much after adjusting the learning rate. The acc values of both Faster R-CNN and Mask
R-CNN are stable at approximately 98, the loss of Faster R-CNN is stable at approximately
0.25, and the loss of Mask R-CNN is stable at approximately 0.4. However, when the
learning rate is 0.0002, the results are poorer, as seen by the comparison of the previous
groups of detection results, but the acc and loss plots have more desirable results, which
shows that the model will be overﬁtted when the learning rate is adjusted to 0.0002.
In Figure 5, different learning rates of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are presented
where Figure 5a shows the acc comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Faster R-CNN; Figure 5b
shows the acc comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Mask R-CNN; Figure 5c shows the
loss comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Faster R-CNN; and Figure 5d shows the loss
comparison of ﬁve learning rates for Mask R-CNN.
The comparison of accuracy vs. loss plots for the same learning rate of Faster R-CNN
and Mask R-CNN are presented. Figure 5 shows the comparison of acc and loss plots for
the same learning rate of ﬁve groups of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. As seen from the
ﬁgure: the learning rate is 0.02, and 0.01 acc are shown as follows: the initial stage Mask
R-CNN is higher, with the increase of iter, slightly decreases, and later Faster R-CNN is
signiﬁcantly higher; the learning rate is 0.005 when the difference between the two is not