Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 3 of 17
two methods for the speciﬁc task of road crack detection. To speed up the training, we
trained our model by a joint training strategy using pre-training and migration learning.
The results show that we were able to make Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with good
results using only 130+ images.
2. Method
The pipeline of Faster R-CNN [ 28] and Mask R-CNN [ 29] is presented in Figure 1,
where it can be divided into three main components. (1) Feature extraction: we employed
ResNet [ 30] and FPN [ 31] as feature extractors for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The
feature extractor sends ﬁve feature maps of various sizes to the following network after
feature extraction. (2) Region proposal networks (RPNs): ﬁve identical RPNs obtained
ﬁve feature maps, which were then utilized to generate region proposals. Speciﬁcally,
RPN generates anchors of different sizes to obtain the speciﬁed number of region proposal
feature maps. (3) Region CNN (R-CNN): the R-CNN component of Faster R-CNN uniﬁes
the feature maps of the region proposal into the same size and then feeds them all into the
fully connected layer for classiﬁcation and regression. For Mask R-CNN, a full convolution
branch is added to implement the instance segmentation task.
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 22 
 
 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN have been proven successful in the field of general 
vision, such as in [27]. However, the crack detection research considering the characteris-
tics of road images is still insufficient. We experimentally validated our model using these 
two methods for the specific task of road cr ack detection. To speed up the training, we 
trained our model by a joint training strate gy using pre-training an d migration learning. 
The results show that we were able to ma ke Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN with good 
results using only 130+ images. 
2. Method 
The pipeline of Faster R-CNN [28] and Mask  R-CNN [29] is presented in Figure 1, 
where it can be divided into three main components. (1) Feature extraction: we employed 
ResNet [30] and FPN [31] as feature extrac tors for Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN. The 
feature extractor sends five feature maps of various sizes to the following network after 
feature extraction. (2) Region proposal networ ks (RPNs): five identical RPNs obtained five 
feature maps, which were then utilized to generate region proposals. Specifically, RPN 
generates anchors of different sizes to obtain the specified number of region proposal fea-
ture maps. (3) Region CNN (R-CNN): the R- CNN component of Faster R-CNN unifies the 
feature maps of the region proposal into the same size and then feeds them all into the 
fully connected layer for classification and regression. For Mask R-CNN, a full convolu-
tion branch is added to implement the instance segmentation task. 
 
Figure 1. Pipeline of Faster R -CNN and Mask R-CNN: RPN is trai ned separately. In addition, the 
mask branch and bbox branch use different RoI feature extractors, and the mask branch  obtains 
better results through a larger feature map. 
The two main differences between Mask R- CNN and Faster R-CNN are as follows. 
(1) The addition of the mask component (fully convolutional layer) to R-CNN enables the task of instance segmentation (Figure 1). (2) For the problem of misalignment between the 
feature map and the RoI on the original image, RoIAlign, which is an improved version 
of RoIPooling, is pr oposed (Figure 2). 
Figure 1. Pipeline of Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN: RPN is trained separately. In addition, the
mask branch and bbox branch use different RoI feature extractors, and the mask branch obtains better
results through a larger feature map.
The two main differences between Mask R-CNN and Faster R-CNN are as follows.
(1) The addition of the mask component (fully convolutional layer) to R-CNN enables the
task of instance segmentation (Figure 1). (2) For the problem of misalignment between the
feature map and the RoI on the original image, RoIAlign, which is an improved version of
RoIPooling, is proposed (Figure 2).