Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 10 of 17
4.2. Cracks with or without Sunlight Interference
We selected a set of comparison pictures, one of which is a road crack with sunlight
interference, and the other is a picture of a normal road crack. Figure 8a shows Faster R-
CNN for detecting cracks with sunlight interference; and Figure 8b shows Faster R-CNN for
detecting cracks without sunlight interference. From the results, it can be seen that Faster
R-CNN has better results for different learning rates for detecting well-lit cracks, and some
cracks are not detected when the learning rate is set to 0.0002 for detecting poorly lit cracks.
The comparison between a single crack and a bifurcated crack shows that the detection result
of a transverse single crack is better, and a transverse single crack is chosen for this comparison,
so the influence of the crack direction on the detection result is excluded in this experiment,
and cracks with or without sunlight interference are not too sensitive to the learning rate.
Figure 8c shows the crack with sunlight interference detection by Mask R-CNN; Figure 8d
shows the crack without sunlight interference detection by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the
results, when Mask R-CNN is used to detect well-lit cracks, the learning rate is set to 0.02,
and part of the crack on the right is not detected; when the learning rate is reduced to 0.01,
0.005, and 0.0025, the whole crack can be detected; after continuing to reduce the learning
rate to 0.0002, the model shows an overfitting phenomenon, and the detection effect is poor,
with large segments of cracks not detected, and the detection score-thr is also reduced. When
used to detect cracks without sunlight interference, the cracks can be detected completely
at learning rates of 0.02, 0.01, and 0.005, and a small portion of cracks are not detected at
the other two learning rates, where the score-thr of the model detecting cracks is very low
at a learning rate of 0.0002. In general, both cracks with and without sunlight interference
comparisons selected for this set of experiments had relatively good detection results.
In Figure 8 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN are compared, and the detection results of
four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 8a for Faster R-CNN to
detect cracks with sunlight interference; Figure 8b for Faster R-CNN to detect cracks without
sunlight interference; Figure 8c for Mask R-CNN to detect cracks with sunlight interference;
and Figure 8d for Mask R-CNN to detect cracks without sunlight interference, the learning
rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 0.0025, and 0.0002.
4.3. Deep and Shallow Cracks
Figure 9a shows the detection of deep cracks by Faster R-CNN and Figure 9b shows
the detection of shallow cracks by Faster R-CNN. From the results, it can be seen that Faster
R-CNN is used to detect deep and shallow cracks, different learning rates are set to detect
the results more satisfactorily , and the cracks can be detected completely . The crack structure
selected for this group of comparison experiments is relatively simple and belongs to a single
crack in the transverse direction. Only learning rates of 0.02 and 0.0002 in the two groups of
comparisons detect a small section of crack on the left side when a shallow crack is detected.
It can also be seen from the comparison of the two previous groups that the model trained
from this experimental data set is better for simple crack detection, and thus, for detecting deep
and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN is not sensitive to the learning rate. Figure 9c shows the
detection of deep cracks by Mask R-CNN; Figure 9d shows the detection of shallow cracks
by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask R-CNN for detecting deep cracks is more
sensitive to the change in learning rate than Faster R-CNN. When the learning rate is set to 0.02,
the most complete cracks are detected, and as the learning rate is tuned down, small sections of
cracks are missed. When the learning rate is 0.0002, the detection effect is the worst, and cracks
cannot be detected. When used to detect shallow cracks, the learning rate of 0.005 has the
best effect, and the detected cracks are the most complete. The other learning rates also have
the situation of missed detection, especially when the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the model
exhibits an overfitting phenomenon, and cracks cannot be detected. In the comparison of deep
and shallow cracks in this experiment, Faster R-CNN has better detection results than Mask
R-CNN. For deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN can basically detect them, while Mask
R-CNN is more sensitive to the change in learning rate. There are many missed detections after
setting an inappropriate learning rate, and the detection results become worse.