Sensors 2022 ,22, 1215 12 of 17
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 22 
 
 light interference; and Figure 8d for Mask R- CNN to detect cracks without sunlight inter-
ference, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 0.005, 
0.0025, and 0.0002. 
4.3. Deep and Shallow Cracks 
Figure 9a shows the detection of deep cracks by Faster R-CNN and Figure 9b shows 
the detection of shallow cracks by Faster R-CN N. From the results, it can be seen that 
Faster R-CNN is used to detect deep and sha llow cracks, different learning rates are set to 
detect the results more satisfactorily, and the cracks can be detected completely. The crack 
structure selected for this group of comparison experiments is relatively simple and be-
longs to a single crack in the transverse direction. Only learning rates of 0.02 and 0.0002 
in the two groups of comparisons detect a smal l section of crack on the left side when a 
shallow crack is detected. It can also be s een from the comparison of the two previous 
groups that the model trained from this experimental data set is better for simple crack 
detection, and thus, for detecting deep and shallow cracks, Faster R-CNN is not sensitive 
to the learning rate. Figure 9c shows the dete ction of deep cracks by Mask R-CNN; Figure 
9d shows the detection of shallow cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the results, Mask R-CNN for detecting deep cracks is more sensitive to the change in learning rate than 
Faster R-CNN. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, the most complete cracks are detected, 
and as the learning rate is tuned down, small sections of cracks are missed. When the 
learning rate is 0.0002, the de tection effect is the worst, and cracks cannot be detected. 
When used to detect shallow cracks, the learni ng rate of 0.005 has the best effect, and the 
detected cracks are the most complete. The othe r learning rates also have the situation of 
missed detection, especially when the learning rate is set to 0.0002, the model exhibits an 
overfitting phenomenon, and cracks cannot be detected. In the comparison of deep and 
shallow cracks in this experiment, Faster R-CNN has better detection results than Mask 
R-CNN. For deep and shallow cracks, Faster  R-CNN can basically detect them, while 
Mask R-CNN is more sensitive to the change in learning rate. There are many missed 
detections after setting an inappropriate lear ning rate, and the detection results become 
worse. 
 
 
(a) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 22 
 
  
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Sensors 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 22 
 
  
 
 
(d) 
Figure 9.  Comparison of deep and shallow cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for deep cracks. ( b) Faster R-
CNN for shallow cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for deep cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for shallow cracks. 
In Figure 9 Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CN N are compared, and the detection results 
of four groups with different learning rates are presented, where Figure 9a for Faster R-
CNN to detect deep cracks; Figure 9b for Fa ster R-CNN to detect shallow cracks; Figure 
9c for Mask R-CNN to detect deep cracks; an d Figure 9d for Mask R-CNN to detect shal-
low cracks, the learning rates of each group of images from top to bottom are 0.02, 0.01, 
0.005, 0.0025 and 0.0002. 
4.4. Straight and Bending Cracks 
Figure 10a shows the detection of straight cracks by Faster R-CNN; Figure 10b shows 
the detection of curved cracks by Faster R-C NN. As seen from the results, Faster R-CNN 
adjusts the learning rate and has little effect on horizontal straight away cracks; the detec-
tion results are better, and the score-thr is higher. When detecting bending cracks, Faster 
R-CNN is more sensitive to the learning rate ch ange. When the learning rate is set to 0.02, 
all the cracks can be detected, and when the learning rate is reduced, each image will be 
partially missed. Figure 10c shows the detect ion of straight cracks by Mask R-CNN and 
Figure 10d shows the detection of bending cracks by Mask R-CNN. As seen from the re-
sults, Mask R-CNN is used to detect transver se straight cracks with better results than 
bending cracks, most of the transverse crac ks—which have a simpler crack form—can be 
detected, and only a small portion of them ar e missed. When the learning rate is set to 
0.0002, the detection effect is the worst, and the score-thr of the detection result is very 
low; even cracks cannot be detected. The other four learning rates set in this experiment 
have similar detection situations, and there will be small sections of missed detection, 
where the learning rate is 0.01, the detection re sult is the best, and the detected cracks are 
the most complete. The five learning rates set in this experiment are not ideal for detecting 
bending cracks, and cracks cannot be detected completely, as shown in the figure. Faster 
R-CNN and Mask R-CNN both have better dete ction results for transverse and simple 
cracks, and more crack data may be needed to train the model for complex cracks. 
Figure 9. Comparison of deep and shallow cracks. ( a) Faster R-CNN for deep cracks. ( b) Faster
R-CNN for shallow cracks. ( c) Mask R-CNN for deep cracks. ( d) Mask R-CNN for shallow cracks.