How Powerful are Spectral Graph Neural Networks
Xiyuan Wang1Muhan Zhang1 2
Abstract
Spectral Graph Neural Network is a kind of Graph
Neural Network (GNN) based on graph signal
filters. Some models able to learn arbitrary spec-
tral filters have emerged recently. However, few
works analyze the expressive power of spectral
GNNs. This paper studies spectral GNNs’ ex-
pressive power theoretically. We first prove that
even spectral GNNs without nonlinearity can pro-
duce arbitrary graph signals and give two condi-
tions for reaching universality. They are: 1) no
multiple eigenvalues of graph Laplacian, and 2)
no missing frequency components in node fea-
tures. We also establish a connection between the
expressive power of spectral GNNs and Graph
Isomorphism (GI) testing, the latter of which is
often used to characterize spatial GNNs’ expres-
sive power. Moreover, we study the difference in
empirical performance among different spectral
GNNs with the same expressive power from an
optimization perspective, and motivate the use of
an orthogonal basis whose weight function corre-
sponds to the graph signal density in the spectrum.
Inspired by the analysis, we propose JacobiConv,
which uses Jacobi basis due to its orthogonality
and flexibility to adapt to a wide range of weight
functions. JacobiConv deserts nonlinearity while
outperforming all baselines on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.
1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-the-
art performance on almost all tasks among various graph
representation learning methods (Yao et al., 2019; Fout et al.,
2017; Chen et al., 2018). Spectral GNNs are a kind of
GNNs that design graph signal filters in the spectral domain.
1Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University2Beijing
Institute for General Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to:
Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn >.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).Though various models have emerged, spectral GNNs’ ex-
pressive power is still under-researched. Moreover, these
models differ mainly in the basis choices of the spectral fil-
ters; however, to our best knowledge, no study has systemati-
cally explained these differences and studied the advantages
and disadvantages of different bases.
Existing spectral GNNs can be summarized into a general
form: first transforming the spatial signal Xthrough an
MLP, then applying spectral filters parameterized by a poly-
nomial of the normalized Laplacian ˆL, and finally applying
another MLP to the filtered signal. By designing/learning
the polynomial coefficients, spectral GNNs can simulate
a wide range of filters (low-pass, band-pass, high-pass) in
the spectral domain, enabling GNNs to work on not only
homophilic but also heterophilic graphs (Chien et al., 2021).
However, a natural question is whether the MLPs or non-
linearity are useful at all, or are spectral filters enough? To
study this problem, we remove nonlinearity from spectral
GNNs and explore the expressive power of such linear spec-
tral GNNs whose power relies only on the spectral filters.
We prove that linear GNNs are universal under some mild
conditions, i.e., they are powerful enough to produce arbi-
trary predictions without relying on MLPs. Our results show
that nonlinearity is unnecessary for spectral GNNs to reach
high expressiveness, which is also verified in our experi-
ments. Moreover, we analyze spectral GNNs’ universality
conditions from a Graph Isomorphism (GI) testing perspec-
tive. The latter is often used to characterize spatial GNNs’
expressive power (Xu et al., 2019). Our results, for the first
time, build a bridge between the expressivity analyses of
spectral GNNs and spatial GNNs.
Next, we notice that spectral GNNs with different polyno-
mial bases of the spectral filters have the same expressive
power but different empirical performance. To study this
difference, we analyze the optimization of such models. By
checking the Hessian matrix of linear spectral GNNs near
the global minimum, we find that using an orthogonal basis
with the density of graph signal as the weight function can
maximize the convergence speed.
Inspired by these discussions, we propose a novel expressive
spectral GNN, JacobiConv. JacobiConv deserts nonlinear-
ity, approximates filter functions with Jacobi basis, and is
flexible enough in weight function choices to adapt to a