How Powerful are Spectral Graph Neural Networks
where row vector bis the learnable bias, 1nis a column
vector whose all elements are 1. Using bias is equivalent to
adding 1to the features of each node and thus still keeps
the linear GNN form. Therefore, we ignore bias in theo-
retical analysis, but by default turn on bias in experiments
for better performance. As bias introduces extra graph sig-
nals, a natural question is whether bias can complete the
frequency components missing from original node features.
The answer is no. Please see Appendix E for more details.
5. Choice of Basis for Polynomial Filters
Assume the polynomial bases are gk(λ), k= 0,1,2, ...In
this section, we discuss linear GNNs with individual filter
parameters for each output dimension, which is formulated
as
Z:l=KX
k=0αklgk(ˆL)XW :l (7)
where αklis the coefficient of polynomial filter basis gk(ˆL)
and(XW):lis the transformed node features for the lth
output dimension Z:l.
All complete polynomial bases can build PFME models.
However, models with different bases show different em-
pirical performance. This section analyzes the effect of
polynomial basis from an optimization perspective, which
motivates the use of Jacobi Polynomials in our model.
5.1. Hessian Matrix and Polynomial Basis
Following the setting in (Xu et al., 2021), we study linear
GNNs trained with the squared loss R=1
2||Z−Y||2
F,
where Yis the target. Assuming that linear GNNs can
converge to the global minimum, we study the convergence
speed near the global minimum. The rationality of this
assumption is discussed in Appendix J.
When considering the optimization of a linear GNN, both
αandWare learnable parameters. However, the gradient
of loss over Wis a function of the learnable filter function
g:l(ˆL) :=P
kαklgk(ˆL)as a whole.
∂R
∂Wjl=
g:l(ˆL)(XW):l−Y:lT
g:l(ˆL)X:j
, (8)
According to our assumption, the learned filter function is
approximately the same for different bases as they have the
same expressive power and can all converge to the global
minimum. So the optimization of Wis irrelevant to the
choice of basis near the global minimum. However, the
optimization of αheavily depends on the basis choice. To
focus on the effect of basis choice, we only analyze the
optimization of αby merging WintoX.
Consider the optimization w.r.t. α. The loss is a convex
function, and the gradient descent’s convergence rate de-pends on the Hessian matrix’s condition number (Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2009). Therefore, we analyze the Hessian
matrix of linear GNNs near the global minimum.
Since the total loss is summed over different output dimen-
sions, and each output dimension adopts a different set of
polynomial coefficients αkl, we can analyze the Hessian
w.r.t. each dimension independently. Ignoring l, the(k1, k2)
element of the Hessian matrix Hcan be written as
∂R
∂αk1∂αk2=XTgk2(ˆL)gk1(ˆL)X
=nX
i=1gk2(λi)gk1(λi)˜X2
λi.(9)
It can be equivalently expressed as a Riemann sum:
nX
i=1gk2(λi)gk1(λi)F(λi)−F(λi−1)
λi−λi−1(λi−λi−1),(10)
where F(λ) :=P
λi≤λ˜X2
λiis the accumulated amplitude
of signal with frequency lower than λ. Define f(λ) =
∆F(λ)
∆λ, which is the density of signal at frequency λ. In the
limit when n→ ∞ , we have:
Hk1k2=Z2
λ=0gk1(λ)gk2(λ)f(λ)dλ. (11)
The condition number κ(H)reaches minimum if His an
identity matrix, which is equivalent to that gk’s form an
orthonormal basis in the polynomial space whose inner
product is defined by ⟨h, g⟩=R2
0h(λ)g(λ)f(λ)dλwith
f(λ)being the weight function.
Our results show that although all complete polynomial
bases have the same expressive power, using a set of or-
thonormal bases gkwhose weight function corresponds to
the graph signal density can enable linear GNNs to achieve
the highest convergence rate. As the normalization of bases
is straightforward, we only consider orthogonality in the
analysis.
Given the weight function f(λ), we can construct an or-
thonormal basis using the Gram-Schmidt process. However,
the exact form of the weight function fdepends on the eigen-
decomposition of ˆLand cannot be calculated efficiently and
accurately for large graphs. Therefore, we choose a gen-
eral form of orthogonal polynomials with flexible enough
weight functions to adapt to different graph signal density
functions f(λ).
5.2. Jacobi Polynomial Bases
Among orthogonal polynomials, the Jacobi basis has a very
general form, whereas the Chebyshev basis is a special case.