How Powerful are Spectral Graph Neural Networks
tasks. Suppose there is an arbitrary real-valued filter func-
tion to approximate. Though PFME GNNs can only express
polynomial filter functions, as the eigenvalue λis a discrete
variable in a fixed graph, an interpolation polynomial always
exists for the arbitrary filter and can produce the same out-
put (Burden & Faires, 2005). Therefore, PFME GNNs are
FME in our problem setting. In the following analysis, we
always assume the linear GNNs have a high-enough degree
Kin their polynomial filters. Linear GNNs with a limited
degree Kare discussed in Appendix C.
3. Related Work
3.1. Spectral GNNs
Spectral GNNs are GNNs based on spectral graph fil-
ters (Wu et al., 2021). He et al. (2021) categorize spectral
GNNs by the filter operation adopted. One class is spectral
GNNs with fixed filters: APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019a)
utilizes Personalized PageRank (PPR) (Page et al., 1999)
to build filter functions. GNN-LF/HF (Zhu et al., 2021) de-
signs filter weights from the perspective of graph optimiza-
tion functions. The other class is spectral GNNs with learn-
able filters: ChebyNet (Defferrard et al., 2016) approximates
the filters with Chebyshev polynomials. GPRGNN (Chien
et al., 2021) learns a polynomial filter by directly per-
forming gradient descent on the polynomial coefficients.
ARMA (Bianchi et al., 2021) uses rational filters. Bern-
Net (He et al., 2021) expresses the filtering operation with
Bernstein polynomials. Though ARMA (Bianchi et al.,
2021) and GNN-LF/HF (Zhu et al., 2021) use rational func-
tions, they approximate the rational functions with polyno-
mials. Therefore, all these methods use some form of poly-
nomial filter despite the different bases they use. GPRGNN
is one of the most expressive models. It can express all poly-
nomial filters. So does ChebyNet, as the Chebyshev polyno-
mials also form a complete set of bases in the polynomial
space. They are both PFME. BernNet is less expressive as
it forces the coefficients of the Bernstein polynomial bases
to be positive and can only express positive filter functions.
However, such constraints are introduced for regularization,
so we ignore them when analyzing the expressive power.
The filter forms of these models are summarized in Table 5.
3.2. Removing Nonlinearity from GNNs
Various GNNs removing nonlinearity have been proposed.
Wu et al. (2019) precompute ˆAkXand perform logistic
regression on the preprocessed features. Some works lever-
age personalized PageRank (PPR) (Page et al., 1999) and
random walk on the graph. Klicpera et al. (2019b) use
generalized graph diffusion, like the heat kernel and PPR,
to reconstruct the graph. APPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019a)
replaces normalized adjacency matrix with approximate
PPR matrix to capture multi-hop neighborhood information.Some models with more complex acceleration techniques
for computing PPR are introduced, like GBP (Chen et al.,
2020a). Existing linear models are mainly motivated by im-
proving the scalability and have restricted filters. In contrast,
we analyze the expressive power and optimization property
of linear GNNs with arbitrary polynomial filters.
3.3. Expressive Power of GNNs
The Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test of graph isomor-
phism (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968) is a series of algorithms
that can distinguish almost all non-isomorphic graphs. Its
1-dimensional form ( 1-WL) iteratively aggregates neighbor-
hood labels and maps the aggregated labels into a new label
for each node, which is similar to GNNs based on neighbor-
hood node feature aggregation. The node labels assigned
by1-WL test can also be used to check if two nodes are
isomorphic (Babai & Kucera, 1979; Srinivasan & Ribeiro,
2020), as two isomorphic nodes always have the same label
while two non-isomorphic ones mostly have different labels.
Xu et al. (2019) show that the 1-WL test bounds the expres-
sive power of GNNs to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs.
Since then, various works have attempted to analyze GNNs
with the WL test and graph isomorphism testing (Zhang
et al., 2018; Morris et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019a; Chen
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Sato et al., 2019; 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021; Zhang & Li, 2021). Other than the WL test
and graph isomorphism, some works measure the expres-
sive power in different ways, such as expressing universal
invariant functions (Maron et al., 2019b; Keriven & Peyr ´e,
2019), counting substructures (Chen et al., 2020b), simu-
lating Turing Machine (Loukas, 2020), computing graph
properties (Garg et al., 2020), and differentiating rooted
graphs (Chen et al., 2021). Balcilar et al. (2021) analyze
the expressive power from a spectral perspective, but the
discussion is constrained to concluding former models to
spectral forms. Our study provides conditions for spectral
GNNs to approximate any functions and discuss the relation
between these conditions and graph isomorphism.
4. Expressive Power of Linear GNNs
In this section, we prove that linear GNNs are universal
under three conditions and discuss these conditions to char-
acterize how powerful spectral GNNs can reach. All proofs
are in the appendix.
There are two components in a linear GNN Z=g(ˆL)XW :
Linear Transformation W. Since XW =U(˜XW), a
linear transformation in the spatial domain is also a linear
transformation in the frequency domain, which produces a
linear combination of signals in different channels.
Filter g(ˆL). Since g(ˆL)X=U(g(Λ)˜X), the filtering oper-
ation scales the frequency component corresponding to λof