In Defense of Grid Features for Visual Question Answering
Huaizu Jiang1,2∗, Ishan Misra2, Marcus Rohrbach2, Erik Learned-Miller1, and Xinlei Chen2
1UMass Amherst,2Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
{hzjiang,elm }@cs.umass.edu ,{imisra,mrf,xinleic }@fb.com
Abstract
Popularized as ‘bottom-up’ attention [ 2], bounding box
(or region) based visual features have recently surpassed
vanilla grid-based convolutional features as the de facto
standard for vision and language tasks like visual question
answering (VQA). However, it is not clear whether the ad-
vantages of regions ( e.g. better localization) are the key rea-
sons for the success of bottom-up attention. In this paper,
we revisit grid features for VQA, and ﬁnd they can work
surprisingly well – running more than an order of magni-
tude faster with the same accuracy ( e.g. if pre-trained in a
similar fashion). Through extensive experiments, we ver-
ify that this observation holds true across different VQA
models (reporting a state-of-the-art accuracy on VQA 2.0
test-std ,72.71 ), datasets, and generalizes well to other
tasks like image captioning. As grid features make the
model design and training process much simpler, this en-
ables us to train them end-to-end and also use a more ﬂex-
ible network design. We learn VQA models end-to-end,
from pixels directly to answers, and show that strong perfor-
mance is achievable without using any region annotations
in pre-training. We hope our ﬁndings help further improve
the scientiﬁc understanding and the practical application of
VQA. Code and features will be made available.
1. Introduction
After the introduction of deep learning [ 9,42] and at-
tention mechanisms [ 45,46] to multi-modal vision and lan-
guage research, perhaps one of the most signiﬁcant develop-
ments was the discovery of ‘bottom-up’ attention [ 2]. Un-
like normal attention that uses ‘top-down’ linguistic inputs
to focus on speciﬁc parts of the visual input, bottom-up
attention uses pre-trained object detectors [ 31] to identify
salient regions based solely on the visual input itself. As a
result, images are represented by a collection of bounding
box or region1-based features [ 2,37]–in contrast to vanilla
grid convolutional feature maps from ConvNets [ 33,15]–
∗This work was done when Huaizu Jiang was an intern at FAIR.
1We use the terms ‘region’ and ‘bounding box’ interchangeably.
Pipeline Running Timeimageregion
selection
region 
featuresgrid 
featuresVQA
imagegrid 
featuresVQA
0.02sBottom-Up
(region)Ours
(grid)
0.89sBottom-Up
(66.13) Ours
(66.27)
Figure 1: We revisit grid-based convolutional features for VQA, and ﬁnd
they can match the accuracy of the dominant region -based features from
bottom-up attention [ 2], provided that one closely follow the pre-training
process on Visual Genome [ 21]. As computing grid features skips the ex-
pensive region-related steps (shown in colors), it leads to signiﬁcant speed-
ups (all modules run on GPU; timed in the same environment).
for follow-up tasks. These region features have since then
gained wide popularity and dominated vision and language
leader boards [ 16,48] for major tasks like visual question
answering (VQA).
So what makes these region features successful? Natu-
rally, one would assume a major reason is better localization
of individual objects, as the regions are direct bounding box
outputs from detectors. Another plausible answer is that a
number of regions can easily capture both the coarse-level
information and ﬁne-grained details in the image – even if
they overlap. However, do these potential advantages actu-
ally demonstrate that region features are superior to grids?
Surprisingly, we discovered that grid features extracted
from exactly the same layer of the pre-trained detector can
perform competitively against their region-based counter-
parts for VQA. Moreover, with simple modiﬁcations dur-
ing training, the same grid features can be made even
more effective and that they consistently achieve compa-
rable and sometimes better VQA accuracy than region fea-
tures. In fact, our ablative analysis suggests that the key
factors which contributed to the high accuracy of existing
10267