ResNet C1-5
𝐻×𝑊 grids
1x1
RoIPool
𝐻×𝑊 grids
ResNet C1-5
C5AvgPool
ResNet C1-414x14
RoIPool
C5AvgPool
…𝑁regions
…
2-FC
 2-FC
…𝑁regions
…
ResNet C1-4Dilated C5
Figure 2: From regions to grids. Left : We convert the original region feature extractor used by bottom-up attention [ 2] back to the ResNet [ 15] grid feature
extractor for the same layer (see Sec. 3.2, weights in blue are transferred), and ﬁnd it works surprisingly well for VQA [ 11].Right : We build a detector
based on 1 ×1RoIPool while keeping the output architecture ﬁxed for grid features (see Sec. 3.3), and the resulting grid features consistently perform
at-par with region features.
3.1. Bottom­Up Attention with Regions
The bottom-up attention method [ 2] uses a Faster R-
CNN [ 31] detection model. The detector is trained on a
cleaned version of Visual Genome [ 21], with thousands of
object categories and hundreds of attributes with bounding
box (region) annotations.
In order to obtain bottom-up attention features for tasks
like VQA, two region-related steps are needed:
Region selection. As Faster R-CNN is a two-stage detector,
region selection happens twice in the pipeline. The ﬁrst is
through a region proposal network [ 31], which deforms and
selects prominent candidate ‘anchors’ as Regions of Inter-
est (RoIs). Another selection is done as post-processing to
aggregate top Nboxes in a per-class manner. In both steps,
non-maximal suppression (NMS) is used, which keeps the
region with the highest classiﬁcation score and removes
other near-duplicates in a local neighborhood.
Region feature computation. Given regions from the ﬁrst
stage (up to thousands), RoIPool operations [ 31] are used
to extract the initial region-level features. Additional net-
work layers then compute the output representation of re-
gions separately . Finally, region features that survive both
rounds of selection are stacked together as the bottom-up
features to represent an image.
It is important to note that due to the complexity of
the VG dataset ( e.g. thousands of classes) and the speciﬁc
Faster R-CNN detector used [ 2] (described next), both steps
are computationally intensive. In contrast, directly using
grid features can skip or accelerate these steps and offer po-
tentially signiﬁcant speed-ups.3.2. Grid Features from the Same Layer
The simplest way to convert region features to grids is
to see if one can directly compute outputs of the same net-
work layer, but in a shared , fully convolutional manner. To
this end, we take a closer look at the speciﬁc Faster R-CNN
architecture used by the original bottom-up attention [ 2].
The Faster R-CNN is a variant of the c4model [ 15] with
an extra branch for attribute classiﬁcation. It divides the
weights from a ResNet [ 15] into two separate sets: given
an input image, it ﬁrst computes feature maps using the
lower blocks of ResNet up to C4. This feature map is
shared among all regions. Then, separately, per-region fea-
ture computations are performed by applying the C5block
on the 14 ×14RoIPool -ed features. The output of C5
is then AvgPool -ed to a ﬁnal vector for each region as the
bottom-up features [ 2]. Since all the ﬁnal region features
are from C5, it is easy to convert the detector back to the
ResNet classiﬁer and take the same C5layer as our output
grid features. Fig. 2(left) illustrates our conversion process.
As our experiments will show, directly using the con-
vertedC5output already works surprisingly well. Any per-
formance drop from doing so may be because Faster R-
CNN is highly optimized for region -based object detection,
and likely not so much for grids. Therefore, we next see
if some minimal adjustments to the model can be made to
improve grid features.
3.3. 1×1RoIPool for Improved Grid Features
Our idea is to simply use 1 ×1RoIPool . This means
representing each region with a single vector , rather than a
10269