100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
Maximum Number of Regions/Grids as Input for VQA
63.6
63.8
64.0
64.2
64.4Accuracy
VQA2 vqa-eval set
region features
grid featuresFigure 3: VQA accuracy vs. number of features Nas input to the VQA
model. We report the average accuracy and standard deviation across 5
independent runs on the VQA 2.0 vqa-eval set. We observe that the
VQA accuracy of region features saturates around 200 regions. In contrast,
the grid features beneﬁt from a larger N(translates from a larger input size)
and in this case stays better than regions even when Nis the same (608).
regions) to represent ‘R’, and the 4throw (best for grids)
to represent ‘G’, to perform a more in-depth study and fair
comparison between the two through the rest of the paper.
4.3. Number of Regions
Apart from architectural differences in training, another
factor that can affect VQA accuracy is the number of feature
vectorsNused to represent images. Our region model from
Pythia [ 16] has a default setting that uses the top 100 boxes
to represent region features, increasing it from the original
36 boxes in [ 2] to improve the accuracy. On the other hand,
since grid features are convolutional feature maps for a pre-
set layer, the number of features is determined by the input
size to the network. As our largest input size is 600 ×1000,
a 32-stride feature map ( C5) results in 608 grid features –
much larger than the number of region features. To under-
stand how these different numbers of region features affect
the accuracy, we ran experiments with varying number of
featuresNand show the results in Figure 3.
As for the region features, we observe an improvement in
accuracy as the number of regions increases from 30 to 200,
beyond which the accuracy saturates. Interestingly, our grid
features are better even when compared to the highest num-
ber of regions3. Thus, the higher number of feature vectors
used in our grid method compared to the baseline region
method, is not the reason for its improved VQA accuracy.
4.4. Test Accuracy and Inference Time
We now report results on the VQA 2.0 test-dev set
to quantify the difference in performance between region
3Since NMS is used in selecting regions, the maximum number N
varies across images. Therefore we 1) cannot directly set it to the same
number as grids and 2) report maximum Ninstead (zero paddings are
used for images with fewer regions).# features
(N)test-dev
accuracyinference time breakdown (ms)
shared
conv.region
feat. comp.region
selectionVQA total
R100 66.13 9 326 548 6 889
608 66.22 9 322 544 7 882
G 608 66.27 11 - - 7 18
Table 2: Region vs. grid features on the VQA 2.0 test-dev with ac-
curacy and inference time breakdown measured in milliseconds per image.
Our grid features achieve comparable VQA accuracy to region features
while being much faster without region feature computation and region
selection.
and grid features. Note that different from previous setups,
we usetrainval +vqa-eval for training. We report the
VQA accuracy and the inference time breakdown in Ta-
ble2. Unlike our grid features which directly use convo-
lutional feature maps, region features involve additional op-
erations of region selection and region feature computation.
These additional operations take 98.3% of the total infer-
ence time for a region-based model. As a result, the VQA
model that takes our grid features as input runs 48×faster
than its counterpart using bottom-up region features.
4.5. Qualitative Comparison
We visualize attention maps over input images from the
top-down attention module [ 2], together with answers from
both regions and grids in Fig. 4. Source images are taken
from COCO [ 25] on which VQA 2.0 [ 11] benchmark is
built. To obtain the attention map, we propagate the at-
tention value of each region or grid to its corresponding
pixels, and then average the attention value for each pixel
(normalizing them individually to [0, 1]). As can be seen,
both types of features are able to capture relevant concepts
in input images ( e.g., snowﬁeld in the top left). Naturally,
attention maps of region features tend to cover object-like
regions, while for grid features the attention does not nec-
essarily cover the full area the supporting concept ( e.g., the
snowﬁeld), which can be used to answer the question. How-
ever, both features are able to answer visual questions well,
suggesting that localization is important, but accurate object
detection of individual objects is not crucial for VQA [ 11].
We show failure cases of region and grid features in
Fig. 4(b)(c)(d). In most examples, the models attend to
the supporting concepts but still give wrong answers. In
the cases where both region and grid features fail, speciﬁ-
cally designed modules may be needed ( e.g., counting mod-
ule [51,39] in the bottom right example) to answer the ques-
tion correctly.
5. Why do Our Grid Features Work?
As we mentioned in Sec. 2, grid features are not new – in
fact, they were widely used in vision and language tasks be-
fore the introduction of bottom-up attention features. Com-
10271