What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
ularization is replaced with dropout (Figures 3 4, A.4). In
this case, the classiﬁers behave similar to the unregularized
models.
5. Related Work
To our knowledge, no previous paper explicitly studies the
effects of importance weighting on the decision boundaries
learned by modern deep neural networks. In Section 1, we
referenced numerous papers applying importance weighting
in a variety of contexts to both to classical and deep models
and in Section 2 we referenced those papers whose theo-
retical contributions motivated our study. Here, we brieﬂy
recap the most related works.
Theoretical Inspiration Our experiments draw inspira-
tion primarily from the works of Soudry et al. (2017); Gu-
nasekar et al. (2018), who proved that deep linear nets are
(importance) weight-agnostic when optimized by SGD to
minimize cross entropy loss on (linearly) separable data, and
the work of (Shimodaira, 2000) which clearly motivates the
efﬁcacy of importance weighting to model misspeciﬁcation.
Importance weighting and deep learning A number
of papers have employed IW-ERM with varying results.
Joachims et al. (2018) uses deep networks to learn from
logged contextual bandit feedback, and Murali et al. (2016)
weight certain training demonstrations in the context of deep
imitation learning. Interestingly, Kostrikov et al. (2019) pro-
pose an imitation learning algorithm that ought to require
importance sampling, but omit it, noting that empirically the
algorithm works regardless. Schaul et al. (2016) propose
a heuristic algorithm that up-samples experiences from the
replay buffer. In the case of domain adaptation, Azizzade-
nesheli et al. (2019); Lipton et al. (2018) use IW-ERM to cor-
rect classiﬁers to account for label shift. Investigating deep
nets for causal inference, (Shalit et al., 2017) weights the
loss function to account for the sample size of the treatment
group. In curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009);(Mati-
isen et al., 2017);(Jiang et al., 2015), training examples are
re-weighted by a teacher during the training process with
the objective of improving or accelerating training.
6. Conclusions
Our experiments suggest that effects from importance
weighting on deep networks may only occur in conjunction
with early stopping, disappearing asymptotically. For these
over-parameterized models, capable of ﬁtting any training
set, the learned solution may be determined solely by the
location of training examples, independent of their density.
For example, when correcting for label shift in test data,
test accuracy may deteriorate over training epochs even as
the classiﬁer improves owing to the diminishing effect ofimportance weighting. Not only do we fail to ﬁnd any clear
correlation between importance weighting and the fraction
of test examples partitioned to each class, but models with
different importance weightings also have high agreement
even on out-of-domain images, providing further evidence
that the learned decision boundaries are similar. Our ﬁnd-
ings should raise concerns amongst practitioners who might
re-evaluate its use on the various problems for which impor-
tance weighting is a standard tool.
We ﬁnd similar patterns across various models (MLPs, con-
volutional networks, and attention-based transformer net-
works) and domains (synthetic 2D data, images, and natural
language). While importance weighting does appear to have
some effect when applied with residual networks we ob-
serve that these effects vanish when batch normalization
is removed. Batch normalization counteracts the effect of
exploding weight norms by normalizing the magnitude of
weights for all but the ﬁnal classiﬁcation layer. However, in
our experiments, we observe that models with batch normal-
ization, still have large ﬁnal-layer weights, resulting in large
logit values after training. Thus we speculate that it may be
possible for batch normalization to interact with importance
weighting by some other mechanism.
Some effect of importance weighting can be realized when
applied in combination with L2 regularization. We believe
that in this case, the L2 penalty prevents SGD from reach-
ing the large norm solutions whose loss is dominated by
the support vectors, thus preventing convergence to max-
margin-like solutions. This aligns with our related ﬁnding
that dropout, which does not penalize such large-norm solu-
tions, does not affect the fractions of examples partitioned
to each class (for importance-weighted classiﬁers) in the
limit.
We ﬁnd that weighting the loss function of deep networks
fails to correct for training set class imbalance. However,
sub-sampling a class in the training set clearly affects the
network’s predictions. This ﬁnding indicates that perhaps
sub-sampling can be an alternative to importance weighting
for deep networks on sufﬁciently large training sets.
While as previously noted, importance weighting has been
shown (empirically) to be useful for deep networks by sev-
eral others (Lipton et al., 2018; Schaul et al., 2016; Burda
et al., 2015), our ﬁndings nevertheless support rethinking the
standard application of importance weighting in combina-
tion with deep learning, suggesting that practitioners should
exercise caution when making use of them and raising new
questions such as: if importance weighting is only useful
for deep networks in conjunction with early stopping or
weight decay, then is there a principled way to choose stop-
ping times or weight decay coefﬁcients when importance
weighting is desired?