What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
remained a standard technique. (Shalit et al., 2017) employ
neural networks to estimate individual treatment effects by
weighting their loss function to compensate for differences
in treatment group size. In a work on deep learning and
crowdsourcing, Khetan et al. (2018) proposed a weighted
loss as part of an iterative scheme for jointly estimating
worker quality and learning a classiﬁer from noisy data. In
recent work on label shift, Lipton et al. (2018); Azizzade-
nesheli et al. (2019), propose adapting deep networks with
importance-weighted risk minimization.
Applications of importance weighting also abound in deep
reinforcement learning. For example, Joachims et al. (2018)
use the technique to learn from logged contextual bandit
feedback. Other applications include deep imitation learning
(Murali et al., 2016). In one paper, Schaul et al. (2016),
employ a weighted sampling to choose experiences from the
replay buffer for performing TD updates. These weights are
not based on likelihood ratios, but are chosen heuristically
to be proportional to the Bellman errors.
Despite the popularity of importance sampling in combi-
nation with deep neural networks, how and when it works
remain open questions. Unlike linear models, deep neu-
ral networks are generally over-parameterized, capable of
ﬁtting training datasets to perfect accuracy (Zhang et al.,
2017). Moreover, it is now recognized that for many tasks
deep neural networks continue to improve generalization
error past the point of achieving zero training error (Soudry
et al., 2017). Thus they are not only capable of separat-
ing the training set (given enough epochs) but actually are
trained to do so in common practice. Since neural networks
are capable of shattering the training set (and often do), it
is not clear that any trade-offs must be made among clas-
sifying each of the training points. Thus any effects of
importance weighting depend crucially on how they impact
the dynamics of optimization, an actively-studied but still
poorly-understood topic.
1.2. Salient ﬁndings
In this paper, we investigate the effects of importance
weighting in deep learning across a variety of architectures,
tasks, and data sets. We present the surprising result that
importance weighting may or may not have any effect in the
context of deep learning, depending on particular choices
regarding early stopping, regularization, and batch normal-
ization. Our experiments focus on classiﬁcation problems:
we apply class-conditioned weights of various strengths,
evaluating the impact of the weights on the learned deci-
sion boundaries. We consider the effect of weighting on
both how training and test points are classiﬁed, and also the
effect on off-manifold data points and random noise. Our
experiments address both the classiﬁcation of CIFAR-10
images and paraphrase detection using data from the Mi-crosoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC). We also build
intuition by considering 2D synthetic datasets for which we
can visualize decision boundaries.
Across tasks, architectures and datasets, our results conﬁrm
that for standard neural networks, weighting has a signiﬁ-
cant effect early in training. However, as training progresses
the effect dissipates and for most weight ratios considered
(between 256:1 and 1:256) the effect of importance weight-
ing is indistinguishable from unweighted risk minimization
after sufﬁcient training epochs. While L2 regularization
restores some of the impact of importance weighting, this
has the perplexing consequence of expressing the amount
by which importance weights affect the learned model in
terms of a seemingly unrelated quantity—the degree of
regularization—prompting the question: how does one ap-
propriately choose the L2 regularization given importance
weights? Interestingly, dropout regularization, which is
often used interchangeably with L2 regularization, does
not exhibit any such interaction with importance weighting.
Batch normalization also appears to interact with impor-
tance weights, although as we will discuss later, the precise
mechanism remains unclear.
1.3. Contributions
In summary, our contributions are the following:
1.We demonstrate the surprising ﬁnding that for unregu-
larized neural networks optimized by stochastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) , the impact of importance weighting
diminishes over epochs of training.
2.We show that L2 regularization and batch normal-
ization, (but not dropout) interact with importance
weights, restoring (some) impact on learned models.
3.We replicate our results across a variety of networks,
tasks, and datasets.
4.Our results call into question the standard application
of importance weighting when applied to deep net-
works, a ﬁnding with practical consequences on the
ﬁelds of causal inference, domain adaptation, and off-
policy reinforcement learning.
2. Theoretical Motivation
The empirical questions addressed in this paper draw in-
spiration from recent developments in the theory of deep
learning. In particular we are motivated by ﬁnds of Soudry
et al. (2017) and Gunasekar et al. (2018), who investigate
the decision boundaries learned by neural networks. Note
that although these theoretical analyses cover only shallow
linear ,deep linear , and deep convolutional linear neural
networks, our experiments draw intuition from the results