What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
epoch0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction of sentence pairs classified as paraphrasespos/neg weight ratio
256:1
64:1
16:1
4:1
1:1
1:4
1:16
1:64
1:256
Figure 6. Relationship between early stopping and importance
weighting on MRPC dataset. We plot the fraction of sentence
pairs in the test set, classiﬁed as paraphrases (y-axis) vs training
epochs (x-axis) with different importance weights.
(MRPC) (Dolan & Brockett, 2005), where the task is to
identify whether or not a pair of sentences have the same
meaning (Figure 6). We ﬁne-tune the BERT BASE model as
described in Devlin et al. (2018), except without weight de-
cay and using SGD with a learning rate of 0.01instead of the
Adam optimizer. Our implementation is adapted from Wolf
& Sanh (2018). Experiments were run with importance
weights of inverse powers of 4for each class, including
with no importance weighting. All classiﬁers achieved test
accuracies between 78% and85%.
4. Discussion
Our results show that as training progresses, the effects
due to importance weighting vanish (Figures 1, 4, 5, 6
). While weighting impacts a model’s decision boundary
early in training, in the limit, models with widely-varying
weights appear to approach similar solutions. After many
epochs of training, there is no clear correlation between the
class-based importance weights and the classiﬁcation ratios
on either test set images, out-of-domain images, or random
vectors. When correcting for label shift, IW-ERM confers
a beneﬁt early on that dissipates over epochs of training
as the impact of the weighting wears off (Figure 5). In
the previous section, we noted that not only do differently-
weighted CIFAR models converge to similar classiﬁcation
ratios, but they also tend to agree on example labels, i.e.,
they learn similar separators.
We show that these ﬁndings hold for both simple convolu-
tional networks trained on images, as well state-of-the-art
attention/transformer-based models ﬁned-tuned in a transfer
learning scheme to text data (Figures 4 and 6). These ef-fects are present when training on other pairs of CIFAR-10
classes such as cars/trucks (Figure A.8), and continue to
hold when models are optimized by the Adam optimizer, al-
though the motivating theory applies to SGD but not ADAM
(Soudry et al., 2017) (Figure A.9).
In contrast, sub-sampling the training set instead of down-
weighting the loss function, does have a noticeable effect
on classiﬁcation ratios. Models assign more CIFAR-10 test
images from all classes (both in-domain and out-of-domain)
as well as more random noise images to the majority class.
(Figure A.6). Notably, weighting the loss function to coun-
teract this imbalance during training does not balance the
classiﬁcation ratios.
One might note that because the true labeling function is
deterministic, and because our models are sufﬁciently ex-
pressive to avoid phenomena due to model misspeciﬁcation,
perhaps we should not be surprised that import weighting
has no effect. Indeed, for our examples of separable Gaus-
sians and CIFAR images, we have not altered the Bayes
optimal predictions. To address the matter, we conducted
experiments where CIFAR images are corrupted by label
noise. Thus the true classes are no longer separable but
owing to the ﬁnite sample and the expressive power of deep
nets, our training data is still nevertheless separable by our
model. Indeed, our experiments showed that under label
noise, IW-ERM still does not meaningfully impact classiﬁ-
cation ratios (Figure A.7).
In all experiments, models with more extreme weighting
converge more slowly in decision boundary, and conver-
gence in classiﬁcation ratio begins to occur long after per-
fect training accuracy is achieved. For example, the BERT
model is typically ﬁne-tuned for 3or4epochs (Devlin et al.,
2018), however it took over 100epochs for the test clas-
siﬁcation ratios of models with more extreme importance
weights to stabilise (Figure 6). Lipton et al. (2018) trained
neural networks with importance weights on CIFAR-10 for
10epochs to correct for test label shift, but we ﬁnd that it
can take up to 200epochs for some networks to converge in
test accuracy.
An effect of importance weighting on classiﬁcation ratios
is present after training ResNet models for 1000 epochs.
However, when batch normalization is removed from the
model, classiﬁcation ratios during training resemble those
of the ordinary convolutional network (Figure A.5).
We also show that the presence of L2 regularization impacts
importance-weighted classiﬁers (Figure 4). For the syn-
thetic data, both logistic regression and the neural network
partition less of the sample space to the down-weighted class
(Figure 2). In the CIFAR experiments, L2 regularization
slows the convergence in classiﬁcation ratios of all models
(Figure A.3). However, these effects diminish when L2 reg-