What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
Figure 1. Convergence of decision boundaries over epochs of training with different importance weights (top to bottom). Points are
colored according to their true labels, with background shading depicting the decision surface of an MLP with a single hidden layer of
size64. The red line shows the logistic regression decision boundary. The dotted black line shows the max-margin separator.
trained with SGD use a constant learning rate of 0.1, ex-
cept for the dropout models with no importance weighting
which used a learning rate of 0.05due to weight divergence
issues. We also ran experiments with the Adam optimizer
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) with learning rate 1e−4,β1= 0.9,
β2= 0.999, and/epsilon1= 1e−8(Figure A.9). Experiments were
run with importance weights of inverse powers of 2up to
2−8for each class, as well as with no importance weighting
for unregularized models. Results are given for importance
weights of inverse powers of 4for regularized models. Fig-
ure A.7 shows results on CIFAR-10 cats and dogs with
label noise in the training data where the underlying noisy
distributions are not separable, but the ﬁnite sample is sep-
arable. We create samples with label noise by ﬂipping the
labels of 5%of training examples from each class. Figure
A.8 shows results from training the convolutional network
model on CIFAR-10 images labeled automobile or truck.
All unregularized classiﬁers without data sub-sampling or la-
bel noise achieve (unweighted) test accuracy between 80%
and85%. In addition to noting the similarity of models
across important weightings both in terms of accuracy and
the fraction of examples predicted to belong to each cate-
gory, we investigated the extent to which the models agreed
with each other on precisely which examples belonged to
each class. We compare (i) the agreement between models
with different importance weights with (ii) the agreement be-tween models run with different random seeds. To compute
(i), we ﬁrst compute test set predictions for each importance
weighting by taking a majority vote over 9different random
seeds. We ﬁnd that, on average, 82% of the 17differently-
weighted models agree on the label of a given test set exam-
ple (74% agreement on out-of-sample CIFAR images from
the other 8classes). For (ii), we calculate the fraction of
random initializations that agree on each example for each
importance weighting. Then we average over both examples
and importance weightings to ﬁnd that, on average, 78% of
random initializations agree on the label of a given test set
example ( 71% agreement on out-of-sample images). We
note that all models have near-perfect agreement on random
noise images which are nearly-always classiﬁed as cats.
We repeat the same CIFAR experiment using the popular
deep residual network (ResNet) architecture (He et al., 2016)
consisting of a 5×5convolution with 64ﬁlters followed by
two residual blocks with 64ﬁlters, then two residual blocks
with128ﬁlters, then two residual blocks with 256ﬁlters,
followed by average pooling, a dense layer with 512nodes,
and ﬁnally, the output layer. Each residual block consists of
two3×3convolution layers. The ﬁrst layer with 128ﬁlters
and the ﬁrst layer with 512ﬁlters have stride of 2. All other
hyperparameters were left unchanged. Figure A.5 shows
results both with and without batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015) applied between all convolution layers.