What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
and conﬁrm empirically that the hypotheses hold on more
practical nonlinear networks.
Soudry et al. (2017) note that it is common practice to train
neural network classiﬁers to overﬁt badly, and that even
past the point (in terms of training epochs) of achieving
zero training error, although the negative log-likelihood on
holdout data begins to increase, the generalization error
often continues to decrease. To analyze this phenomenon,
they restrict their attention to linear networks which are
presently more amenable to the available tools of analysis.
They consider the simple case where the model consists of a
linear separator, the data is linearly separable, the optimiza-
tion objective is cross-entropy loss, and the optimization
algorithm is SGD. Notably, there is no ﬁnite minimizer w∗
of the objective, since for any wthat separates the data, an
even lower loss could be achieved by scaling up the weights
w. Thus the weights themselves do not converge. How-
ever, noting that the learned decision boundary depends
only on the direction of the weights (but not their magni-
tude), Soudry et al. (2017) examine what, if anything, the
directionwt/||wt||converges to (over training iterations
of SGD). Surprisingly, they conclude that the weights con-
verge in direction to the solution of the hard-margin support
vector machine . In short, the proof follows because over
epochs of training, the norm of the weight vector increases,
causing the support vectors to dominate the loss function
(under a set of conditions satisﬁed by the cross-entropy loss).
Subsequent results conﬁrm that this ﬁnding holds for deep
fully-connected networks of linear units (Gunasekar et al.,
2018), and that for deep convolutional networks of linear
units, a related result holds (Gunasekar et al., 2018), show-
ing implicit bias towards minimizing the /lscript2/Lbridge penalty
in the frequency domain of the corresponding single-layer
linear predictor.
One interesting ramiﬁcation of this theoretical result is
that the hard-margin solution depends only on the location
of data points, and thus is unaffected by oversampling/re-
weighting . While Soudry et al. (2017) and Gunasekar et al.
(2018)’s analyses only address linear networks and linearly-
separable data, their ﬁndings motivate our hypothesis that
a similar weight-invariance property might hold for typical
modern deep (nonlinear) neural networks, for which many
datasets of practical interest are separable (Zhang et al.,
2017).
These results also motivate our follow-up questions con-
cerning the effect of regularization. Common regulariza-
tion methods like L2 regularization penalize the large-norm
solutions that minimize cross-entropy on separable data.
Since L2 regularization prevents such large-norm solutions,
what if anything is the impact of importance weights in this
case? Moreover, while dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is
often thought of as a regularization method for deep net-works, it does not penalize large-norm solutions. Thus we
hypothesize that these regularization methods would have
differential impacts on the solutions found by SGD on deep
networks in conjunction with importance weighting.
3. Experiments
We investigate the effects of importance weighting on neural
networks on two-dimensional toy datasets, the CIFAR-10
image dataset, and the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Cor-
pus (MRPC) text dataset. Our experiments address the label
shift scenario, weighting examples based on their class.
Speciﬁcally, we down-weight the loss contributions of ex-
amples from a particular class. We also test the combination
of regularization and IW-ERM on both CIFAR-10 and a toy
dataset. For L2 regularization, we set the penalty coefﬁ-
cient as 0.001, and when using dropout on deep networks,
we set the values of hidden units to 0during training with
probability1
2.
Synthetic Data In order to visualize decision surfaces,
we conduct an experiment with a synthetic two-dimensional
linearly-separable dataset. To form the positive examples ,
we sample 512points from a 2D truncated normal distribu-
tion. To generate negative examples , we rotate and translate
the positive examples (see Figure 1). We train both a logistic
regression model (without regularization) and a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) using minibatch SGD for 10,000 epochs
with a batch size of 8. The MLP has a single hidden layer
of64hidden units with ReLU activations. Both models
use a ﬁxed learning rate of1
σmax (X), whereσmax(X)is the
maximum singular value of the data matrix. This learning
rate was chosen to match the experiments of Soudry et al.
(2017), and took a value of ≈0.045on our dataset. Results
are shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3. We also present results
for experiments on a two-dimensional moons dataset and a
two-dimensional overlapping Gaussian distribution dataset
that are not linearly-separable (Figures A.1 and A.2).
CIFAR-10 Binary Classiﬁcation We also conduct exper-
iments on the CIFAR-10 dataset (see results in Figure 4).
Here, we train a binary classiﬁer on training images labeled
as cats or dogs ( 5000 per class), evaluating on all 10000 test
images from all 10classes as well as 1000 random noise
images. The classiﬁer is a convolutional network with the
following structure: two convolution layers with 64 3×3
ﬁlters each and stride 1, followed by a 2×2max pooling
layer, followed by three convolution layers with 128 3×3
ﬁlters each and stride 1, followed by a second 2×2max
pooling layer, followed by two dense layers with 512and
128hidden units respectively, and ﬁnally the binary output
layer. All hidden layers employ ReLU activation functions.
The models are trained for 1000 epochs using minibatch
SGD with a batch size of 16and no momentum. All models