What is the Effect of Importance Weighting in Deep Learning?
Jonathon Byrd1Zachary C. Lipton1
Abstract
Importance-weighted risk minimization is a key
ingredient in many machine learning algorithms
for causal inference, domain adaptation, class im-
balance, and off-policy reinforcement learning.
While the effect of importance weighting is well-
characterized for low-capacity misspeciﬁed mod-
els, little is known about how it impacts over-
parameterized, deep neural networks. Inspired
by recent theoretical results showing that on (lin-
early) separable data, deep linear networks opti-
mized by SGD learn weight-agnostic solutions,
we ask, for realistic deep networks, for which
many practical datasets are separable, what is the
effect of importance weighting? We present the
surprising ﬁnding that while importance weight-
ing impacts deep nets early in training, so long as
the nets are able to separate the training data, its ef-
fect diminishes over successive epochs. Moreover,
while L2 regularization and batch normalization
(but not dropout), restore some of the impact of
importance weighting, they express the effect via
(seemingly) the wrong abstraction: why should
practitioners tweak the L2 regularization, and by
how much, to produce the correct weighting ef-
fect? We experimentally conﬁrm these ﬁndings
across a range of architectures and datasets.
1. Introduction
Importance sampling is a fundamental tool in statistics and
machine learning often used when we want to estimate
a quantity on some target distribution, but can only sam-
ple from a different source distribution (Horvitz & Thomp-
son, 1952; Kahn & Marshall, 1953; Rubinstein & Kroese,
2016; Koller et al., 2009). Concretely, given nsamples
x1,...,xn∼p(x), and the task of estimating some func-
tion of the data, say f(x), under the target distribution
1Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Jonathon
Byrd <jabyrd@cmu.edu>, Zachary C. Lipton <zlipton@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).Eq[f(x)], importance sampling produces an unbiased esti-
mate by weighting each sample xaccording to the likelihood
ratioq(x)/p(x):
Ep/bracketleftbiggq(x)
p(x)f(x)/bracketrightbigg
=/integraldisplay
xf(x)q(x)
p(x)p(x)dx
=/integraldisplay
xf(x)q(x)dx=Eq[f(x)]
Machine learning practitioners commonly exploit this idea
in two ways: (i) by re-sampling to correct for the discrep-
ancy in likelihood or (ii) by weighting examples according
to the likelihood ratio (Rubinstein & Kroese, 2016; Shi-
modaira, 2000; Koller et al., 2009). For this reason, among
others, weighted risk minimization is a standard tool that
emerges in a wide variety of machine learning tasks.
In domain adaptation, when source and target data share
support, practitioners commonly adjust for distribution shift
by estimating likelihood ratios. This is done either as a
function of the input x:q(x)/p(x)(in the case of covariate
shift) or of the label y:q(y)/p(y)(in the case of label shift),
training a corrected classiﬁer with importance-weighted
empirical risk minimization (IW-ERM) (Shimodaira, 2000;
Gretton et al., 2009; Lipton et al., 2018). One related use of
IW-ERM is to correct for sampling bias in active learning
(Beygelzimer et al., 2009; Settles, 2010). The technique is
also frequently employed in off-policy reinforcement learn-
ing (Precup, 2000; Mahmood et al., 2014; Swaminathan
& Joachims, 2015), where we desire to learn a new policy
given ofﬂine samples collected from a preexisting policy.
Weighted loss functions also arise in a number of other
contexts, including label noise and crowdsourcing.
1.1. Deep learning and weighted risk minimization
When our hypothesis class consists of low-capacity mod-
els that are misspeciﬁed, importance weighting has well-
known beneﬁts. Consider the simple case of ﬁtting a linear
model to data generated by a higher-order polynomial. For
a reasonably large training set, our model must make errors
somewhere. By altering the relative contribution of mistakes
on various training points to our loss function, importance
weights typically lead us to ﬁt a different model.
As deep learning has come to dominate a broad set of pre-
diction tasks, importance-weighted risk minimization has