K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
Banach spaces, and in particular maps deﬁned through parametric dependence of PDEs; see [23] for
an overview of this work.
Ideas from model reduction have been combined with data-driven learning in the sequence of pa-
pers [6, 59, 64, 65, 66]. The setting is the learning of data-driven approximations to time-dependent
PDEs. Model reduction is used to ﬁnd a low-dimensional approximation space and then a system of
ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) is learned in this low-dimensional latent space. These ODEs
are assumed to have vector ﬁelds from a known class with unknown linear coeﬃcients; learning is thus
reduced to a least squares problem. The known vector ﬁelds mimic properties of the original PDE (for
example are restricted to linear and quadratic terms for the equations of geophysical ﬂuid dynamics);
additionally transformations may be used to render the original PDE in a desirable form (such as
having only quadratic nonlinearities.)
The development of theoretical analyses to understand the use of neural networks to approximate
PDEs is currently in its infancy, but interesting results are starting to emerge [35, 45, 46, 72]. A
recurrent theme in the analysis of neural networks, and in these papers in particular, is that the
work typically asserts the existence of a choice of neural network parameters which achieve a certain
approximation property; because of the non-convex optimization techniques used to determine the
network parameters, the issue of ﬁndingthese parameters in practice is rarely addressed. Recent works
take a diﬀerent perspective on data-driven approximation of PDEs, motivated by small-data scenarios;
see the paper [15] which relates, in part, to earlier work focused on the small-data setting [8, 56]. These
approaches are more akin to data assimilation [48, 69] where the data is incorporated into a model.
1.2.Our Contribution
The primary contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) we propose a novel data-driven methodology capable of learning mappings between Hilbert
spaces;
(2) the proposed method combines model reduction with neural networks to obtain algorithms
with controllable approximation errors as maps between Hilbert spaces;
(3) as a result of this approximation property of maps between Hilbert spaces, the learned maps
exhibit desirable mesh-independence properties;
(4) we prove that our architecture is suﬃciently rich to contain approximations of arbitrary accu-
racy, as a mapping between function spaces;
(5) we present numerical experiments that demonstrate the eﬃcacy of the proposed methodology,
demonstrate desirable mesh-indepence properties, elucidate its properties beyond the conﬁnes
of the theory, and compare with other methods for parametric PDEs.
Section 2 outlines the approximation methodology, which is based on use of principal component
analysis (PCA) in a Hilbert space to ﬁnite-dimensionalize the input and output spaces, and a neural
network between the resulting ﬁnite-dimensional spaces. Section 3 contains statement and proof of our
main approximation result, which invokes a global Lipschitz assumption on the map to be approxi-
mated. In Section 4 we present our numerical experiments, some of which relax the global Lipschitz
assumption, and others which involve comparisons with other approaches from the literature. Sec-
tion 5 contains concluding remarks, including directions for further study. We also include auxiliary
results in the appendix that complement and extend the main theoretical developments of the article.
Appendix A extends the analysis of Section 3 from globally Lipschitz maps to locally Lipschitz maps
with controlled growth rates. Appendix B contains supporting lemmas that are used throughout the
124