K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 4.6. Relative test errors on the Darcy ﬂow problem with log-normal coeﬃ-
cients. Using N= 1024training examples, panel (a) shows the errors as a function of
the resolution while panel (b) ﬁxes a 421×421mesh and shows the error as a function
of the reduced dimension. Panel (c) only shows results for our method using a neural
network, ﬁxing a 421×421mesh and showing the error as a function of the reduced
dimension for diﬀerent amounts of training data.
(inherited from (/bardblφj/bardblL∞)j≥1∈/lscriptp(N;R)) implies that our power series (4.3) is summable in H1
0(D;R).
Combining the two observations yields analyticity of Ψwith the same rates as in [18] obtained via
Stechkin’s inequality. For a proof, see Theorem C.1.
We employ the method of Chkifa simply by truncation of (4.3) to delements, noting that in this
simple linear setting there is no longer a need for greedy selection of the index set. We note that this
truncation requires dPDE solves of the Poisson equation hence we compare to our method when using
N=ddata points, since this also counts the number of PDE solves. Since the problem is linear, we use
a linear map to interpolate the PCA latent spaces and furthermore set the reduced dimension of our
PCA(s) toN. Panel (c) of Figure 4.5 shows the results. We see that the method of Chkifa outperforms
our method for any ﬁxed number of PDE solves, although the empirical rate of convergence appears
very similar for both methods. Furthermore we highlight that while our method appears to have a
larger error constant than that of Chkifa, it has the advantage that it requires no knowledge of the
model 4.2 or of the Poisson equation; it is driven entirely by the training data.
4.3.Darcy Flow
We now consider the input-output map Ψ :L∞(D;R+)→H1
0(D;R)mappinga/mapsto→uin (1.1) with
f(s) = 1∀s∈Dﬁxed. In this setting, the solution operator is nonlinear and is locally Lipschitz as a
mapping from L∞(D;R+)toH1
0(D;R)[20]. However our results require a Hilbert space structure, and
we view the solution operator as a mapping from L2(D;R+)⊃L∞(D;R+)intoH1
0(D;R+), noting
that we will choose the probability measure µonL2(D;R+)to satisfyµ(L∞(D;R+)) = 1.In this
setting, Ψis not locally Lipschitz and hence Theorem 3.5 is not directly applicable. Nevertheless,
our methodology exhibits competitive numerical performance. See rows 3 and 4 of Figure 4.2 for an
example.
Figure 4.6 (a) shows the relative test errors as a function of the resolution when a∼µ=µLis
log-normal while Figure 4.7 (a) shows them when a∼µ=µPis piecewise constant. In both settings,
we see that the error in our method is invariant to mesh-reﬁnement. Since the problem is nonlinear,
the neural network outperforms the linear map. However we see the same issue as in Figure 4.3
where increasing the reduced dimension does not necessarily improve the error due to the increased
complexity of the optimization problem. Panels (b) of Figures 4.6 and 4.7 conﬁrm this observation.
142