Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
X RdXX
Y RdYYFX
ΨGX
ϕΨ
FY GY
Figure 2.1. A diagram summarizing various maps of interest in our proposed ap-
proach for the approximation of input-output maps between inﬁnite-dimensional
spaces.
paper while Appendix C proves an analyticity result pertaining to the solution map of the Poisson
equation that is used in one of the numerical experiments in Section 4.
2.Proposed Method
Our method combines PCA-based dimension reduction on the input and output spaces X,Ywith a
neural network that maps the dimension-reduced spaces. After a pre-amble in Subsection 2.1, giving
an overview of our approach, we continue in Subsection 2.2 with a description of PCA in the Hilbert
space setting, including intuition about its approximation quality. Subsection 2.3 gives the background
on neural networks needed for this paper, and Subsection 2.4 compares our methodology to existing
methods.
2.1.Overview
LetX,Ybe separable Hilbert spaces and Ψ :X →Y be some, possibly nonlinear, map. Our goal
is to approximate Ψfrom a ﬁnite collection of evaluations {xj,yj}N
j=1whereyj= Ψ(xj). We assume
that thexjare i.i.d. with respect to (w.r.t.) a probability measure µsupported onX. Note that with
this notation the output samples yjare i.i.d. w.r.t. the push-forward measure Ψ/sharpµ. The approximation
ofΨfrom the data{xj,yj}N
j=1that we now develop should be understood as being designed to be
accurate with respect to norms deﬁned by integration with respect to the measures µandΨ/sharpµon the
spacesXandYrespectively.
Instead of attempting to directly approximate Ψ, we ﬁrst try to exploit possible ﬁnite-dimensional
structure within the measures µandΨ/sharpµ. We accomplish this by approximating the identity mappings
IX:X→XandIY:Y→Yby a composition of two maps, known as the encoderand thedecoderin
the machine learning literature [33, 38], which have ﬁnite-dimensional range and domain, respectively.
We will then interpolate between the ﬁnite-dimensional outputs of the encoders, usually referred to
as thelatent codes . Our approach is summarized in Figure 2.1.
Here,FXandFYare the encoders for the spaces X,Yrespectively, whilst GXandGYare the
decoders, and ϕis the map interpolating the latent codes. The intuition behind Figure 2.1, and, to
some extent, the main focus of our analysis, concerns the quality of the approximations
GX◦FX≈IX, (2.1a)
GY◦FY≈IY, (2.1b)
GY◦ϕ◦FX≈Ψ. (2.1c)
In order to achieve (2.1c) it is natural to choose ϕas
ϕ:=FY◦Ψ◦GX; (2.2)
125