SMAI Journal of Computational Mathematics
Vol. 7, 121-157 (2021)
Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
Kaushik Bhattacharya1
Bamdad Hosseini2
Nikola B. Kovachki3
Andrew M. Stuart4
1Mechanical and Civil Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
E-mail address : bhatta@caltech.edu
2Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
E-mail address : bamdadh@caltech.edu
3Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
E-mail address : nkovachki@caltech.edu
4Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
E-mail address : astuart@caltech.edu.
Abstract. We develop a general framework for data-driven approximation of input-output maps between inﬁnite-
dimensional spaces. The proposed approach is motivated by the recent successes of neural networks and deep
learning, in combination with ideas from model reduction. This combination results in a neural network approxi-
mation which, in principle, is deﬁned on inﬁnite-dimensional spaces and, in practice, is robust to the dimension of
ﬁnite-dimensional approximations of these spaces required for computation. For a class of input-output maps, and
suitably chosen probability measures on the inputs, we prove convergence of the proposed approximation methodol-
ogy. We also include numerical experiments which demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the method, showing convergence
and robustness of the approximation scheme with respect to the size of the discretization, and compare it with ex-
isting algorithms from the literature; our examples include the mapping from coeﬃcient to solution in a divergence
form elliptic partial diﬀerential equation (PDE) problem, and the solution operator for viscous Burgers’ equation.
2020 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 65N75, 62M45, 68T05, 60H30, 60H15.
Keywords. approximationtheory,deeplearning,modelreduction,neuralnetworks,partialdiﬀerentialequa-
tions.
1.Introduction
Atthecoreofmanycomputationaltasksarisinginscienceandengineeringistheproblemofrepeatedly
evaluatingtheoutputofanexpensiveforwardmodelformanystatisticallysimilarinputs.Suchsettings
include the numerical solution of parametric partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs), time-stepping for
evolutionary PDEs and, more generally, the evaluation of input-output maps deﬁned by black-box
computer models. The key idea in this paper is the development of a new data-driven emulator which
is deﬁned to act between the inﬁnite-dimensional input and output spaces of maps such as those
deﬁned by PDEs. By deﬁning approximation architectures on inﬁnite-dimensional spaces, we provide
the basis for a methodology which is robust to the resolution of the ﬁnite-dimensionalizations used to
create implementable algorithms.
This work is motivated by the recent empirical success of neural networks in machine learning
applications such as image classiﬁcation, aiming to explore whether this success has any implications
for algorithm development in diﬀerent applications arising in science and engineering. We further wish
to compare the resulting new methods with traditional algorithms from the ﬁeld of numerical analysis
The work is supported by MEDE-ARL funding (W911NF-12-0022). AMS is also partially supported by NSF (DMS
1818977) and AFOSR (FA9550-17-1-0185). BH is partially supported by a Von Kármán instructorship at the California
Institute of Technology.
121