K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
for the Burgers’ equation; this leads to non-Lipschitz input-output maps, beyond our theoretical
developments. We emphasize that while our method is designed for approximating nonlinear operators
Ψ,weincludesomenumericalexampleswhere Ψislinear.Doingsoishelpfulforconﬁrmingsomeofour
theory and comparing against other methods in the literature. Notethat when Ψis linear, each piece in
the approximate decomposition (2.3) is also linear, in particular, ϕis linear. Therefore it is suﬃcient to
parameterize ϕasalinearmap(matrixofunknowncoeﬃcients)insteadofaneuralnetwork.Weinclude
such experiments in Section 4.2 revealing that, while a neural network approximating ϕarbitrarily well
exists, the optimization methods used for training the neural network fail to ﬁnd it. It may therefore be
beneﬁcial to directly build into the parametrization known properties of ϕ, such as linearity, when they
are known. We emphasize that, for general nonlinear maps, linear methods signiﬁcantly underperform
in comparison with our neural network approximation and we will demonstrate this for the Darcy ﬂow
problem, and for Burgers’ equation.
We use standard implementations of PCA, with dimensions speciﬁed for each computational exam-
ple below. All computational examples use an identical neural network architecture: a 5-layer dense
network with layer widths 500,1000,2000,1000,500, ordered from ﬁrst to last layer, and the SELU
nonlinearity [43]. We note that Theorem 3.5 requires greater depth for greater accuracy but that we
have found our 5-layer network to suﬃce for all of the examples described here. Thus we have not
attempted to optimize the architecture of the neural network. We use stochastic gradient descent with
Nesterov momentum ( 0.99) to train the network parameters [33], each time picking the largest learning
rate that does not lead to blow-up in the error. While the network must be re-trained for each new
choice of reduced dimensions dX,dY, initializing the hidden layers with a pre-trained network can help
speed up convergence.
4.1.PDE Setting
We will consider a variety of solution maps deﬁned by second order elliptic PDEs of the form (1.1).
which are prototypical of many scientiﬁc applications. We take D= (0,1)2to be the unit box,
a∈L∞(D;R+),f∈L2(D;R), and letu∈H1
0(D;R)be the unique weak solution of (1.1). Note
that, since Dis bounded, L∞(D;R+)is continuously embedded within the Hilbert space L2(D;R+).
We will consider two variations of the input-output map generated by the solution operator for (1.1);
in one, it is Lipschitz and lends itself to the theory of Subsection 3.2 and, in the other, it is not
Lipschitz. We obtain numerical results which demonstrate our theory as well as demonstrating the
eﬀectiveness of our proposed methodology in the non-Lipschitz setting.
Furthermore, we consider the one-dimensional viscous Burgers’ equation on the torus given as
∂
∂tu(s,t) +1
2∂
∂s(u(s,t))2=β∂2
∂s2u(s,t), (s,t)∈T1×(0,∞)
u(s,0) =u0(s), s∈T1(4.1)
whereβ >0is the viscosity coeﬃcient and T1is the one dimensional unit torus obtained by equipping
the interval [0,1]with periodic boundary conditions. We take u0∈L2(T1;R)and have that, for any
t >0,u(·,t)∈Hr(T1;R)for anyr >0is the unique weak solution to (4.1) [78]. In Subsection 4.4,
we consider the input-output map generated by the ﬂow map of (4.1) evaluated at a ﬁxed time which
is a locally Lipschitz operator.
We make use of four probability measures which we now describe. The ﬁrst, which will serve as
a base measure in two dimensions, is the Gaussian µG=N(0,(−∆ + 9I)−2)with a zero Neumann
boundary condition on the operator ∆. Then we deﬁne µLto be the log-normal measure deﬁned as the
push-forward of µGunder the exponential map i.e. µL= exp/sharpµG. Furthermore, we deﬁne µP=T/sharpµG
138