Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
to be the push-forward of µGunder the piecewise constant map
T(s) =/braceleftBigg12s≥0,
3s<0.
Lastly, we consider the Gaussian µB=N(0,74(−d2
ds2+ 72I)−2.5)deﬁned on T1. Figure 4.1 shows an
example draw from each of the above measures. We will use as µone of these four measures in each
experiment we conduct. Such probability measures are commonly used in the stochastic modeling of
physical phenomenon [53]. For example, µPmay be thought of as modeling the permeability of a
porous medium containing two diﬀerent constituent parts [41]. Note that it is to be expected that
a good choice of architecture will depend on the probability measure used to generate the inputs.
Indeed good choices of the reduced dimensions dXanddYare determined by the input measure and
its pushforward under Ψ, respectively.
For each subsequently described problem we use, unless stated otherwise, N= 1024training ex-
amples from µand its pushforward under Ψ, from which we construct ΨNN, and then 5000unseen
testing examples from µin order to obtain a Monte Carlo estimate of the relative test error:
Ex∼µ/bardbl(G2◦χ◦F1)(x)−Ψ(x)/bardblY
/bardblΨ(x)/bardblY.
For problems arising from (1.1), all data is collected on a uniform 421×421mesh and the PDE
is solved with a second order ﬁnite-diﬀerence scheme. For problems arising from (4.1), all data is
collected on a uniform 4096point mesh and the PDE is solved using a pseudo-spectral method. Data
for all other mesh sizes is sub-sampled from the original. We refer to the size of the discretization in
one direction e.g. 421, as the resolution . We ﬁxdX=dY(the dimensions after PCA in the input and
output spaces) and refer to this as the reduced dimension . We experiment with using a linear map
as well as a dense neural network for approximating ϕ; in all ﬁgures we distinguish between these by
referring to Linear or NN approximations respectively. When parameterizing with a neural network,
we use the aforementioned stochastic gradient based method for training, while, when parameterizing
with a linear map, we simply solve the linear least squares problem by the standard normal equations.
We also compare all of our results to the work of [83] which utilizes a 19-layer fully-connected
convolutional neural network, referencing this approach as Zhu within the text. This is done to show
that the image-to-image regression approach that many such works utilize yields approximations
that are not consistent in the continuum, and hence across diﬀerent discretizations; in contrast, our
methodology is designed as a mapping between Hilbert spaces and as a consequence is robust across
diﬀerent discretizations. For some problems in Subsection 4.2, we compare to the method developed
in [14], which we refer to as Chkifa. For the problems in Subsection 4.3, we also compare to the reduced
basis method [23, 67] when instantiated with PCA. We note that both Chkifa and the reduced basis
method are intrusive, i.e., they need knowledge of the governing PDE. Furthermore the method of
Chkifaneedsfullknowledgeofthegeneratingprocessoftheinputs.Were-emphasizethatourproposed
method is fully data-driven.
4.2.Globally Lipschitz Solution Map
We consider the input-output map Ψ :L2(D;R)→H1
0(D;R)mappingf/mapsto→uin (1.1) with the
coeﬃcientaﬁxed. Since (1.1) is a linear PDE, Ψis linear and therefore Lipschitz. We study two
instantiations of this problem. In the ﬁrst, we draw a single a∼µPand ﬁx it. We then solve (1.1) with
dataf∼µG. We refer to this as the linear elliptic problem. See row 1 of Figure 4.2 for an example.
In the second, we set a(w) = 1∀w∈D, in which case (1.1) becomes the Poisson equation which we
solve with data f∼µ=µG. We refer to this as the Poisson problem. See row 2 of Figure 4.2 for an
example.
139