K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
for the approximation of inﬁnite-dimensional maps, such as the maps deﬁned by parametric PDEs
or the solution operator for time-dependent PDEs. We propose a method for approximation of such
solution maps purely in a data-driven fashion by lifting the concept of neural networks to produce
maps acting between inﬁnite-dimensional spaces. Our method exploits approximate ﬁnite-dimensional
structure in maps between Banach spaces of functions through three separate steps: (i) reducing the
dimension of the input; (ii) reducing the dimension of the output, and (iii) ﬁnding a map between
the two resulting ﬁnite-dimensional latent spaces. Our approach takes advantage of the approximation
power of neural networks while allowing for the use of well-understood, classical dimension reduction
(and reconstruction) techniques. Our goal is to reduce the complexity of the input-to-output map by
replacing it with a data-driven emulator. In achieving this goal we design an emulator which enjoys
mesh-independentapproximationproperties,afactwhichweestablishthroughacombinationoftheory
and numerical experiments; to the best of our knowledge, these are the ﬁrst such results in the area
of neural networks for PDE problems.
To be concrete, and to guide the literature review which follows, consider the following prototypical
parametric PDE
(Pxy)(s) = 0,∀s∈D,
whereD⊂Rdis a bounded open set, Pxis a diﬀerential operator depending on a parameter x∈X
andy∈Yis the solution to the PDE (given appropriate boundary conditions). The Banach spaces
XandYare assumed to be spaces of real-valued functions on D.Here, and in the rest of this paper,
we consistently use sto denote the independent variable in spatially dependent PDEs, and reserve x
andyfor the input and output of the PDE model of interest. We adopt this idiosyncratic notation
(from the PDE perspective) to keep our exposition in line with standard machine learning notation
for input and output variables.
Example 1.1. Consider second order elliptic PDEs of the form
−∇· (a(s)∇u(s)) =f(s), s∈D
u(s) = 0, s∈∂D(1.1)
which are prototypical of many scientiﬁc applications. As a concrete example of a mapping deﬁned by
this equation, we restrict ourselves to the setting where the forcing term fis ﬁxed, and consider the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient aas the input parameter xand the PDE solution uas outputy. In this setting,
we haveX=L∞(D;R+),Y=H1
0(D;R), andPx=−∇s·(a∇s·)−f, equipped with homogeneous
Dirichlet boundary conditions. This is the Darcy ﬂow problem which we consider numerically in
Section 4.3.
1.1.Literature Review
The recent success of neural networks on a variety of high-dimensional machine learning problems [49]
has led to a rapidly growing body of research pertaining to applications in scientiﬁc problems [1, 7, 13,
25, 30, 39, 68, 76, 83]. In particular, there is a substantial number of articles which investigate the use
of neural networks as surrogate models, and more speciﬁcally for obtaining the solution of (possibly
parametric) PDEs.
We summarize thetwo most prevalentexisting neural network based strategies in the approximation
of PDEs in general, and parametric PDEs speciﬁcally. The ﬁrst approach can be thought of as image-
to-image regression. The goal is to approximate the parametric solution operator mapping elements
ofXtoY. This is achieved by discretizing both spaces to obtain ﬁnite-dimensional input and output
spaces of dimension K. We assume to have access to data in the form of observations of input xand
outputydiscretized on K-points within the domain D. The methodology then proceeds by deﬁning a
neural network F:RK→RKand regresses the input-to-output map by minimizing a misﬁt functional
122