Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 4.5. Panel (a) shows a sample drawn from the model (4.2) while panel (b)
shows the solution of the Poisson equation with the sample from (a) as the r.h.s. Panel
(c)showstherelativetesterrorasafunctionoftheamountofPDEsolves/trainingdata
for the method of Chkifa and our method respectively. We use the reduced dimension
d=N.
of the linear map, in practice, the non-convexity of the associated optimization problem can cause
non-optimal behavior. Panels (b) of Figures 4.3 and 4.4 show the relative error as a function of the
reduced dimension for a ﬁxed mesh size. We see that while the linear maps consistently improve with
the reduced dimension, the neural networks struggle as the complexity of the optimization problem is
increased. This problem can usually be alleviated with the addition of more data as shown in panels
(c), but there are still no guarantees that the optimal neural network is found. Since we use a highly-
nonlinear 5-layer network to represent the linear ϕ, this issue is exacerbated for this problem and
the addition of more data only slightly improves the accuracy as seen in panels (c). In Appendix D,
we show the relative test error during the training process and observe that some overﬁtting occurs,
indicating that the optimization problem is stuck in a local minima away from the optimal linear
solution. This is an issue that is inherent to most deep neural network based methods. Our results
suggest that building in a priori information about the solution map, such as linearity, can be very
beneﬁcial for the approximation scheme as it can help reduce the complexity of the optimization.
To compare to the method of Chkifa [14], we will assume the following model for the inputs,
f=∞/summationdisplay
j=1ξjφj (4.2)
whereξj∼U(−1,1)is an i.i.d. sequence, and φj=/radicalbigλjψjwhereλj,ψjare the eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the operator (−∆ + 100I)−4.1with a zero Neumann boundary. This construction
ensures that there exists p∈(0,1)such that (/bardblφj/bardblL∞)j≥1∈/lscriptp(N;R)which is required for the theory
in [18]. We assume this model for f, the r.h.s. of the Poisson equation, and consider the solution
operator Ψ :/lscript∞(N;R)→H1
0(D;R)mapping (ξj)j≥1/mapsto→u. Figure 4.5 panels (a)-(b) show an example
input from (4.2) and its corresponding solution u. Since this operator is linear, its Taylor series
representation simply amounts to
Ψ((ξj)j≥1) =∞/summationdisplay
j=1ξjηj (4.3)
whereηj∈H1
0(D;R)satisfy
−∆ηj=φj.
This is easily seen by plugging in our model (4.2) for finto the Poisson equation and formally
inverting the Laplacian. We further observe that the /lscript1(N;R)summability of the sequence (/bardblηj/bardblH1
0)j≥1
141