K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
then the approximation (2.1c) is limited only by the approximations (2.1a), (2.1b) of the identity maps
onIXandIY. We further label the approximation in (2.1c) by
ΨPCA:=GY◦ϕ◦FX, (2.3)
since we later choose PCA as our dimension reduction method. We note that ΨPCAis not used in
practical computations since ϕis generally unknown. To make it practical we replace ϕwith a data-
driven approximation χ≈ϕobtaining,
ΨNN:=GY◦χ◦FX. (2.4)
Later we choose χto be a neural network, hence the choice of the subscript NN. The combination of
PCA for the encoding/decoding along with the neural network approximation χforϕ, forms the basis
of our computational methodology.
The compositions GX◦FXandGY◦FYare commonly referred to as autoencoders . There is a
large literature on dimension-reduction methods [5, 19, 38, 63, 71] both classical and rooted in neural
networks. In this work, we will focus on PCA which is perhaps one of the simplest such methods
known [63]. We make this choice due to its simplicity of implementation, excellent numerical perfor-
mance on the problems we study in Section 4, and its amenability to analysis. The dimension reduction
in the input and output spaces is essential, as it allows for function space algorithms that make use
of powerful ﬁnite-dimensional approximation methods, such as the neural networks we use here.
Many classical dimension reduction methods may be seen as encoders. But not all are as easily
inverted as PCA – often there is no unambiguous, or no eﬃcient, way to obtain the decoder. Whilst
neural network based methods such as deep autoencoders [38] have shown empirical success in ﬁnite
dimensional applications they currently lack theory and practical implementation in the setting of
function spaces, and are therefore not currently suitable in the context of the goals of this paper.
Nonetheless methods other than PCA are likely to be useful within the general goals of high or
inﬁnite-dimensional function approximation. Indeed, with PCA, we approximate the solution manifold
(image space) of the operator Ψby thelinearspace deﬁned in equation (2.7). We emphasize however
that, usually, Ψis a nonlinear operator and our approximation succeeds by capturing the induced
nonlinear input-output relationship within the latent codes by using a neural network. We will show
in Section 3.2 that the approximation error of the linear space to the solution manifold goes to zero as
the dimension increases, however, this decay may be very slow [16, 22]. Therefore, it may be beneﬁcial
to construct nonlinear dimension reducing maps such as deep autoencoders on function spaces. We
leave this as an interesting direction for future work.
Regarding the approximation of ϕby neural networks, we acknowledge that there is considerable
scope for the construction of the neural network, within diﬀerent families and types of networks,
and potentially by using other approximators. For our theory and numerics however we will focus on
relatively constrained families of such networks, described in the following Subsection 2.3.
2.2.PCA On Function Space
Since we will perform PCA on both XandY, and since PCA requires a Hilbert space setting, the
development here is in a generic real, separable Hilbert space Hwith inner-product and norm denoted
by/angbracketleft·,·/angbracketrightand/bardbl·/bardblrespectively. We let νdenote a probability measure supported on H, and make the
assumption of a ﬁnite fourth moment: Eu∼ν/bardblu/bardbl4<∞. We denote by{uj}N
j=1a ﬁnite collection of N
i.i.d. draws from νthat will be used as the training data on which PCA is based. Later we apply the
PCA methodology in two distinct settings where the space His taken to be the input space Xand
the data{uj}are the input samples {xj}drawn from the input measure µ, orHis taken to be the
output spaceYand the data{uj}are the corresponding outputs {yj= Ψ(xj)}drawn from the push-
forward measure Ψ/sharpµ. The following exposition, and the subsequent analysis in Section 3.1, largely
126