K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 4.3. Relative test errors on the linear elliptic problem. Using N= 1024train-
ing examples, panel (a) shows the errors as a function of the resolution while panel (b)
ﬁxesa 421×421meshandshowstheerrorasafunction ofthereduceddimension. Panel
(c) only shows results for our method using a neural network, ﬁxing a 421×421mesh
and showing the error as a function of the reduced dimension for diﬀerent amounts of
training data.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 4.4. Relative test errors on the Poisson problem. Using N= 1024training
examples, panel (a) shows the errors as a function of the resolution while panel (b) ﬁxes
a421×421mesh and shows the error as a function of the reduced dimension. Panel
(c) only shows results for our method using a neural network, ﬁxing a 421×421mesh
and showing the error as a function of the reduced dimension for diﬀerent amounts of
training data.
Figure 4.3 (a) shows the relative test errors as a function of the resolution on the linear elliptic
problem, while Figure 4.4 (a) shows them on the Poisson problem. The primary observation to make
about panel (a) in these two ﬁgures is that it shows that the error in our proposed method does
not change as the resolution changes. In contrast, it also shows that the image-to-image regression
approach of Zhu [83], whilst accurate at low mesh resolution, fails to be invariant to the size of the
discretization and errors increase in an uncontrolled fashion as greater resolution is used. The fact
that our dimension reduction approach achieves constant error as we reﬁne the mesh, reﬂects its
design as a method on Hilbert space which may be approximated consistently on diﬀerent meshes.
Since the operator Ψhere is linear, the true map of interest ϕgiven by (2.2) is linear since FYand
GXare, by the deﬁnition of PCA, linear. It is therefore unsurprising that the linear approximation
consistently outperforms the neural network, a fact also demonstrated in panel (a) of the two ﬁgures.
While it is theoretically possible to ﬁnd a neural network that can, at least, match the performance
140