Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 4.10. Relative test errors on the Burgers’ Equation problem. Using N= 1024
training examples, panel (a) shows the errors as a function of the resolution while panel
(b) ﬁxes a 4096mesh and shows the error as a function of the reduced dimension. Panel
(c) only shows results for our method using a neural network, ﬁxing a 4096mesh and
showing the error as a function of the reduced dimension for diﬀerent amounts of
training data.
in Figure 4.9 for both Darcy ﬂow problems. We note that when training on a small mesh, the error
increases as we move to larger meshes, reﬂecting the interpolation error of the basis. Nevertheless, this
increase is rather small: as shown in Figure 4.9, we obtain a 3%and a 1%relative error increasing
when transferring solutions trained on a 61×61grid to a 421×421grid on each respective Darcy ﬂow
problem. On the other hand, when training on a large mesh, we see almost no error increase on the
small meshes. This indicates that the neural network learns a property that is intrinsic to the solution
operator and independent of the discretization.
4.4.Burgers’ Equation
We now consider the input-output map Ψ :L2(T1;R)→Hr(T1;R)mappingu0/mapsto→u|t=1in (4.1) with
β= 10−2ﬁxed.Inthissetting, ΨisnonlinearandlocallyLipschitzbutsincewedonotknowtheprecise
Lipschitz constant as deﬁned in Appendix A, we cannot verify that the assumptions of Theorem A.1
hold; nevertheless the numerical results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our methodology. We take
u0∼µ=µB; see rows 5 of Figure 4.2 for an example. Figure 4.10 (a) shows the relative test errors
as a function of the resolution again demonstrating that our method is invariant to mesh-reﬁnement.
We note that, for this problem, the linear map does signiﬁcantly worse than the neural network in
contrast to the Darcy ﬂow problem where the results were comparable. This is likely attributable to
the fact that the solution operator for Burgers’ equation is more strongly nonlinear. As before, we
observe from Figure 4.10 panel (b) that increasing the reduced dimension does not necessarily improve
the error due to the increased complexity of the optimization problem. This can again be mitigated
by increasing the volume of training data, as indicated in Figure 4.10 (c); the curve of error versus
reduced dimension is ﬂattened as Nincreases.
5.Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a general data-driven methodology that can be used to learn mappings
between separable Hilbert spaces. We proved consistency of the approach when instantiated with PCA
in the setting of globally Lipschitz forward maps. We demonstrated the desired mesh-independent
145