Model Reduction And Neural Networks For Parametric PDEs
deﬁned using the point values of xandyon the discretization grid. The articles [1, 7, 29, 39, 83] apply
this methodology for various forward and inverse problems in physics and engineering, utilizing a
variety of neural network architectures in the regression step; the related paper [42] applies a similar
approach, but the output space is R.This innovative set of papers demonstrate some success. However,
from the perspective of the goals of our work, their approaches are not robust to mesh-reﬁnement: the
neural network is deﬁned as a mapping between two Euclidean spaces of values on mesh points. The
rates of approximation depend on the underlying discretization and an overhaul of the architecture
would be required to produce results consistent across diﬀerent discretizations. The papers [54, 55]
make a conceptual step in the direction of interest to us in this paper, as they introduce an architecture
based on a neural network approximation theorem for operators from [12]; but as implemented the
method still results in parameters which depend on the mesh used. Applications of this methodology
may be found in [11, 52, 58].
The second approach does not directly seek to ﬁnd the parametric map from XtoYbut rather
is thought of, for ﬁxed x∈ X, as being a parametrization of the solution y∈ Yby means of a
deep neural network [24, 25, 40, 47, 68, 75]. This methodology parallels collocation methods for the
numerical solution of PDEs by searching over approximation spaces deﬁned by neural networks. The
solution of the PDE is written as a neural network approximation in which the spatial (or, in the
time-dependent case, spatio-temporal) variables in Dare inputs and the solution is the output. This
parametric function is then substituted into the PDE and the residual is made small by optimization.
The resulting neural network may be thought of as a novel structure which composes the action of the
operatorPx, for ﬁxedx, with a neural network taking inputs in D[68]. While this method leads to an
approximate solution map deﬁned on the input domain D(and not on a K−point discretization of the
domain), the parametric dependence of the approximate solution map is ﬁxed. Indeed for a new input
parameterx, one needs to re-train the neural network by solving the associated optimization problem
in order to produce a new map y:D→R; this may be prohibitively expensive when parametric
dependence of the solution is the target of analysis. Furthermore the approach cannot be made fully
data-driven as it needs knowledge of the underlying PDE, and furthermore the operations required to
apply the diﬀerential operator may interact poorly with the neural network approximator during the
back-propagation (adjoint calculation) phase of the optimization.
The work [70] examines the forward propagation of neural networks as the ﬂow of a time-dependent
PDE, combining the continuous time formulation of ResNet [34, 80] with the idea of neural networks
acting on spaces of functions: by considering the initial condition as a function, this ﬂow map may be
thought of as a neural network acting between inﬁnite-dimensional spaces. The idea of learning PDEs
from data using neural networks, again generating a ﬂow map between inﬁnite dimensional spaces,
was studied in the 1990s in the papers [32, 44] with the former using a PCA methodology, and the
latter using the method of lines. More recently the works [37, 79] also employ a PCA methodology
for the output space but only consider very low dimensional input spaces. Furthermore the works [28,
28, 31, 50] proposed a model reduction approach for dynamical systems by use of dimension reducing
neural networks (autoencoders). However only a ﬁxed discretization of space is considered, yielding a
method which does not produce a map between two inﬁnite-dimensional spaces.
The development of numerical methods for parametric problems is not, of course, restricted to the
use of neural networks. Earlier works in the engineering literature started in the 1970s focused on
computational methods which represent PDE solutions in terms of known basis functions that contain
information about the solution structure [2, 61]. This work led to the development of the reduced
basis method (RBM) which is widely adopted in engineering; see [3, 36, 67] and the references therein.
The methodology was also used for stochastic problems, in which the input space Xis endowed with
a probabilistic structure, in [10]. The study of RBMs led to broader interest in the approximation
theory community focusing on rates of convergence for the RBM approximation of maps between
123