K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, et al.
(a)µL
 (b)µP
Figure 4.9. Relative test errors on both Darcy ﬂow problems with reduced dimension
d= 70, training on a single mesh and transferring the solution to other meshes. When
the training mesh is smaller than the desired output mesh, the PCA basis are inter-
polated using cubic splines. When the training mesh is larger than the desired output
mesh, the PCA basis are sub-sampled.
using the weak form of (1.1) to ﬁnd the coeﬃcients. We note that the errors of both methods are
very close, but we ﬁnd that the online runtime of our method is signiﬁcantly better. Letting Kdenote
the mesh-size and dthe reduced dimension, the reduced basis method has a runtime of O(d2K+d3)
while our method has the runtime O(dK)plus the runtime of the neural network which, in practice,
we have found to be negligible. We show the online inference time as well as the oﬄine training time
of the methods in Figure 4.8. While the neural network has the highest oﬄine cost, its small online
cost makes it a more practical method. Indeed, without parallelization when d= 150, the total time
(online and oﬄine) to compute all 5000 test solutions is around 28 hours for the RBM. On the other
hand, for the neural network, it is 28 minutes. The diﬀerence is pronounced when needing to compute
many solutions in parallel. Since most modern architectures are able to internally parallelize matrix-
matrix multiplication, the total time to train and compute the 5000 examples for the neural network is
only 4 minutes. This issue can however be slightly alleviated for the reduced basis method with more
stringent multi-core parallelization. We note that the linear map has the lowest online cost and only a
slightly worse oﬄine cost than the RBM. This makes it the most suitable method for linear operators
such as those presented in Section 4.2 or for applications where larger levels of approximation error
can be tolerated.
We again note that the image-to-image regression approach of [83] does not scale with the mesh
size. We do however acknowledge that for the small meshes for which the method was designed, it does
outperform all other approaches. This begs the question of whether one can design neural networks
that match the performance of image-to-image regression but remain invariant with respect to the
size of the mesh. The contemporaneous work [51] takes a step in this direction.
Lastly, we show that our method also has the ability to transfer a solution learned on one mesh
to another. This is done by interpolating or sub-sampling both of the input and output PCA basis
from the training mesh to the desired mesh. Justifying this requires a smoothness assumption on the
PCA basis; we are, however, not aware of any such results and believe this is an interesting future
direction. The neural network is ﬁxed and does not need to be re-trained on a new mesh. We show this
144