Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 10 of 14
is possible to take a trained model and re-initialize each module at once and compare the
amount of model accuracy drop. Adopting this technique, the authors of [ 51] discovered:
(i) fully connected layers (near to the model output) become critical for the P-T model, and
the(ii) module criticality increases moving from the input side of the model towards the
output, which is consistent with the concept of earlier layers (near the input), extracting
more general features, while lateral layers have features that are more specialized for the
target domain. Ref. [ 52] is another experimental analysis of transfer learning in visual tasks
with the title of “Factors of Inﬂuence for Transfer Learning across Diverse Appearance
Domains and Task Types”. Three factors of inﬂuence are investigated in this study: (i) image
domain, the difference in image domain between source and target tasks, (ii) task type,
the difference in task type, and (iii) dataset size, the size of the source, and target training
sets. They perform over 1200 transfer learning experiments on 20 datasets spanning seven
diverse image domains (consumer, driving, aerial, underwater, indoor, synthetic, and
closeups) and four task types (semantic segmentation, object detection, depth estimation,
and keypoint detection) [52].
They use data normalization (e.g., Illumination normalization) and augmentation
techniques to improve the models’ accuracy. They adopt recent high-resolution backbone
HRNetV2, which consists of 69M parameters. This backbone is easily adjustable for
different datasets by simply replacing the head of the backbone. To make a fair comparison,
they pre-trained (to be used for transfer learning) their models from scratch and evaluated
their performance using a top-1 accuracy on the ILSVRC’12 validation set [52].
The transfer learning experiments are mainly divided into two settings of the (i) trans-
fer learning with a small target training set and (ii) with the full target set. The evaluation
of transfer learning models is based on the gain obtained from ﬁnetuning from a speciﬁc
source model compared to ﬁnetuning from ILSVRC’12 image classiﬁcation with the main
question of “are additional gains possible, by picking a good source?”. Furthermore, they
added a series of experiments for multi-source training to investigate the impact of using
multi-source training for a speciﬁc task [52].
Such an exhaustive experimental analysis resulted in following observations: (i) all
experiments proved that transfer learning outperforms training from scratch (random
initialization); (ii) for 85% of target tasks there exists a source task which tops ILSVCR’12
pre-training; (iii) the most transfer gain happens when the source and target tasks are in
the same image domain (within-domain), which is even more important than the source
size; (iv) positive transfer gain is possible when the source image domain includes the
target domain; (v) although multisource models bring good transfer, they are outperformed
by the largest within-domain source; (vi) “for 65% of the targets within the same image
domain as the source, cross-task-type transfer results in positive transfer gains”; (vii) as
naturally expected, the larger datasets positively transfer towards the smaller datasets;
(viii) transfer effects are stronger for a small target training set, which helps the process
of choosing the transfer learning model by testing several models with a small section of
target data [52].
7. Discussion
The Deep Transfer Learning (DTL) research ﬁeld is thriving because of the motivation
to handle the limitations of Deep Learning (DL) models, which are the dependency on
extensive labeled data and training costs. The main idea is to use the obtained knowledge
from source data in the training process on target data. Another possible impactful outcome
of the DTL research line is to achieve continual learning, which brings the Artiﬁcial General
Intelligence [ 1] a step closer to reality. Continual learning can be achieved simply through
a chain of transfer learning processes, while the end model is still valid on all previous
training sources.
As we reviewed in previous sections, model-based approaches are the most commonly
used approaches in DTL, since deep learning models have the capacity to be adjusted to