Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 4 of 14
approaches are the most applied techniques in DTL since they can tackle the domain
adaptation between the source and target data by adjusting the network (model). In other
words, deep transfer learning is mainly focused on model-based approaches. Remarkably,
model-based approaches in deep learning models can even tackle the adaptation of a very
distant source and target data [2,9].
In deep transfer learning (DTL), different techniques are applied for model-based
approaches, although generally, they are combinations of pre-training, freezing, ﬁnetuning,
and/or adding a fresh layer(s). A deep learning network (DL model) trained on source data
is called a pre-trained model consisting of pre-trained layers. Freezing and ﬁnetuning are
techniques using some or all layers of pre-trained models to train the model on target data.
Freezing some layers means the parameters/weights will not change and are constant val-
ues for frozen layers from a pre-trained model. Finetuning means the parameters/weights
are initialized with the pre-trained values instead of random initialization for the whole
network or some selected layers. Another recent DTL technique is based on freezing a
pre-trained model and adding new layers to that model for training on target data; Google’s
deep mind project introduces this technique in 2016 as Progressive Learning/progressive
neural networks (PNNs) [5,10].
The concept of progressive learning mimics human skill learning, which is adding
a new skill on top of previously learned skills as a foundation to learn a new one. E.g.,
a child learns how to run after learning to crawl and walk and using all the skills obtained
in the process. Similarly, PNNs prevent catastrophic forgetting in DTL versus ﬁnetuning
techniques by freezing the whole pre-trained model and learning (adjusting to) the new
task by training the newly added layers on top of the previously trained layers [5,10].
In deep learning models, usually, the earlier layers conduct the feature extraction at a
high level of detail, further layers towards the end extract the information and conceptualize
the given data, and lateral layers conduct the classiﬁcations or predictions. For instance,
in the image-related model, the earlier layers of CNN extract the edges, corners, and tiny
patches of a given image. Further layers put those details together to detect objects or
faces, and the lateral layers, usually fully connected layers, conduct the classiﬁcation [ 11].
Given this process, the most effective and efﬁcient approach for DTL, to our knowledge, is
to freeze the earlier and middle layers from a related pre-trained model and ﬁnetune the
lateral layers for the new task/dataset [ 12]. Similarly, the new layers are added to the last
part of a pre-trained model in progressive learning.
Nonetheless, some other research in this area use combinational and sophisticated
methods to tackle transfer learning in deep learning such as ensembled networks, weighting
strategies, etc. [ 2]. However, to our knowledge, the search for recent advancements in DTL
for practical tasks ends up with methods based on mostly the model-based and limited
number of adversarial-based approaches.
5. Review of Recent Advancements in DTL
We limited our selection to the last five years of published studies on deep transfer
learning for various tasks and data types. Table 1 shows the list of selected works from
hundreds of reviewed literature sorted by their DTL approaches. We used the systematic
literature review (SLR) technique [ 13] for the process of finding and selecting these
thirty-eight publications. The inclusion criteria that we used for our selection process are
as follows: (a) published in the past five years, (b) reproducible (detailed implementation
and models), (c) applied to practical ML problems, and (d) generalizable. We found that
all reviewed studies mostly fall into three categories of model-based approaches and
some into the adversarial-based approach, which are explained in the previous section.
We name these approaches as (i) Finetuning: finetuning a pre-trained model on target
data; (ii) freezing CNN layers: the earlier CNN layers are frozen, and only the lateral
fully connected layers are finetuned; (iii) progressive learning: some or all layers of a
pre-trained model are selected and used frozen, and some fresh layers will be added to
the model to be trained on target data; and (iv) adversarial-based: extracting transferable