Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 2 of 14
intuitive and sophisticated AI systems since it considers learning a continuous task. A great
example of this idea is Google’s deep mind project and advancements such as progressive
learning [ 5]. All this is bringing DTL to the forefront of research in artiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning.
This review aims to answer the following research questions: (i) What is DTL, and how
does it differ from semi-supervised, multiview, and multitask learning? (ii) What are dif-
ferent transfer learning methods and their taxonomy? (iii) What are the most applied
DTL methods, and how are they effective? (iv) What is the best practice of DTL model-
based approaches in practice? (v) What are the limitations of DTL and possible solu-
tions/research trends?
In this paper, ﬁrst, the deﬁnition of DTL is reviewed, followed by the taxonomy of DTL.
Then, the selected recent practical studies of DTL are listed, categorized, and summarized.
Moreover, two experimental evaluations of DTL and their conclusions are reviewed. Last
but not least, we discuss the limitations of today’s DTL techniques and possible ways to
tackle them.
2. Deep Learning
Deep learning (DL) or deep neural network (DNN) is a machine learning subcategory,
which can deal with nonlinear datasets. DNNs consist of layers of stacked nodes, with ac-
tivation function and associated weights, (fully/partially) connected and usually trained
(weight adjustments) by back-propagation and optimization algorithms. During the past
two decades, DNNs were developed rapidly and are used in many aspects of our daily
lives today. For instance, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) layers have improved
deep learning models for visual-related tasks since 2011, and as of today, most DLs use
CNN layers [ 1]. For more details about machine learning and deep learning, please refer
to [1], since this paper is focused on deep transfer learning, and we assume that the reader
should have a thorough understanding of machine learning and deep learning.
3. Deep Transfer Learning (DTL)
Deep transfer learning is about using the obtained knowledge from another task and
dataset (even one not strongly related to the source task or dataset) to reduce learning
costs. In many ML problems, arranging a large amount of labeled data is impossible,
which is mandatory for most DL models. For instance, at the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic or even a year into it, providing enough chest X-ray-labeled data for training
a deep learning model was still challenging, while when using deep transfer learning,
the AI succeeded in detecting the disease with a very high accuracy with a limited training
set [6,7]. Another application is applying machine learning on edge devices such as phones
for variant tasks by taking advantage of deep transfer learning to reduce the need for
processing power.
An untrained DL uses a random initializing weight for nodes, and during the ex-
pensive training process, those weights adjust to the most optimized values by applying
an optimization algorithm for a speciﬁc task (dataset). Remarkably, Ref. [ 8] proved that
initializing those weights based on a trained network with even a very distant dataset
improves the training performance compared to the random initialization.
Deep transfer learning differs from semi-supervised learning since, in DTL, the source
and target datasets can have a different distribution and just be related to each other, while
in semi-supervised learning, the source and target data are from the same dataset, only
the target set does not have the labels [2]. DTL is also not the same as Multiview learning,
since Multiview learning uses two or more distinct datasets to improve the quality of one
task, e.g., video datasets can be separated into image and audio datasets [ 2]. Last but not
least, DTL differs from Multitask learning despite many shared similarities. The most
fundamental difference is that in Multitask learning, the tasks use interconnections to
boost each other, and knowledge transfer happens concurrently between related tasks.
In contrast in DTL, the target domain is the focus, and the knowledge has already been