Citation: Iman, M.; Arabnia, H.R.;
Rasheed, K. A Review of Deep
Transfer Learning and Recent
Advancements. Technologies 2023 ,11,
40. https://doi.org/10.3390/
technologies11020040
Academic Editor: Mohammed
Mahmoud
Received: 2 February 2023
Revised: 6 March 2023
Accepted: 13 March 2023
Published: 14 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
technologies
Review
A Review of Deep Transfer Learning and Recent Advancements
Mohammadreza Iman1,*
, Hamid Reza Arabnia1
and Khaled Rasheed2
1School of Computing, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; hra@uga.edu
2Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Franklin College of Arts and Sciences, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA 30602, USA; khaled@uga.edu
*Correspondence: m.iman@uga.edu
Abstract: Deep learning has been the answer to many machine learning problems during the past
two decades. However, it comes with two signiﬁcant constraints: dependency on extensive labeled
data and training costs. Transfer learning in deep learning, known as Deep Transfer Learning (DTL),
attempts to reduce such reliance and costs by reusing obtained knowledge from a source data/task in
training on a target data/task. Most applied DTL techniques are network/model-based approaches.
These methods reduce the dependency of deep learning models on extensive training data and
drastically decrease training costs. Moreover, the training cost reduction makes DTL viable on edge
devices with limited resources. Like any new advancement, DTL methods have their own limitations,
and a successful transfer depends on speciﬁc adjustments and strategies for different scenarios. This
paper reviews the concept, deﬁnition, and taxonomy of deep transfer learning and well-known
methods. It investigates the DTL approaches by reviewing applied DTL techniques in the past ﬁve
years and a couple of experimental analyses of DTLs to discover the best practice for using DTL in
different scenarios. Moreover, the limitations of DTLs (catastrophic forgetting dilemma and overly
biased pre-trained models) are discussed, along with possible solutions and research trends.
Keywords: machine learning; deep learning; transfer learning; deep transfer learning; progressive
learning
1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Learning (DL) has successfully addressed a number of chal-
lenging and interesting applications; in particular, problems that involved non-linearity of
datasets. Recent advancements in deep learning methods deliver various usages and appli-
cations in extremely different areas such as image processing, natural language processing
(NLP), numerical data analysis and predictions, and voice recognition. However, deep
learning comes with restrictions, such as expensive training processes (time and processing)
and the requirement of extensive training data (labeled data) [1].
Since the start of the Machine Learning (ML) era, transfer learning has been a neat
exploration for scientists. Before the rise of deep learning models, transfer learning was
known as domain adaptation and focused on homogeneous data sets and how to relate
such sets to each other because of the nature of ML algorithms [ 2,3]. Traditional ML models
have less dependency on the dataset size, and usually, their training is less costly than
deep learning models since they have been mostly designed for linear problems. Therefore,
the motivation for using transfer learning in deep learning is higher than ever in the AI
(Artiﬁcial Intelligence) and ML ﬁelds since it can address the two restraints of extensive
training data and training costs.
Recent transfer learning methods on deep learning aim to reduce the training process
time and cost, and the necessity of extensive training datasets which can be hard to harvest
in some areas such as medical images. Moreover, a pre-trained model for a speciﬁc job can
be run on a simple edge device such as a cellphone with limited processing capacity and
limited training time [ 4]. Moreover, developments in DTL are opening the door to more
Technologies 2023 ,11, 40. https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies11020040 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/technologies