Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 11 of 14
transfer knowledge. However, there are two main constraints in such approaches—the
catastrophic forgetting dilemma and an overly biased pre-trained model.
In the case of ﬁnetuning a pre-trained model, there is a high chance of the drastic
changes of weights through the whole model resulting in the catastrophic forgetting
dilemma. Therefore, the obtained knowledge could be partially or even completely wiped
out, resulting in unsuccessful training and no possibility of continual learning. This
constraint limits the success of the ﬁnetuning approach to the tightly related source and
target data. Moreover, a very well-known technique to reduce the forgetting effect is to add
a limited number of source samples to the target training data.
Freezing the pre-trained CNN layers technique tries to tackle the catastrophic forget-
ting by freezing the obtained knowledge on earlier layers and ﬁnetuning the fully-connected
lateral layers to achieve transfer learning for target data. Given the fact that earlier lay-
ers in DL models extract detailed features and move towards the output, more abstract
knowledge is extracted [ 11]; freezing the earlier layers limits the ability of the model to
learn any new features from target data, which is known as an overly biased pre-trained
model. Having extensive source data or access to a pre-trained model on a large dataset
is critical for a successful transfer using this technique. In this way, there is a high chance
that the pre-trained model has already learned any possible detailed features, and simply
by ﬁnetuning, the lateral layers can perform on target data. However, even tackling the
ﬁrst obstacle, this solution is still imperiled by the catastrophic forgetting in lateral layers.
This technique is still successful in the case of the related source and target data and tasks
despite the limitations mentioned above.
Progressive learning tries to ﬁnd a middle ground between catastrophic forgetting
and a biased model by adding a new layer(s) to the end of a frozen pre-trained model. This
technique is successful in the case of a task transfer for the related source and target data.
It cannot deal with the distant source and target data since the earlier layers are frozen
and cannot learn new features; however, the new lateral layer helps the model adjust to a
new task.
A possible solution to address both catastrophic forgetting and an overly biased pre-
trained model in DTL is to increase the learning capacity of a pre-trained model by vertically
expanding it. In another research paper, we propose expanding the model vertically in
training on target data, adding new nodes on frozen pre-trained layers throughout the
model instead of adding a new layer(s) to the end of the model [ 53]. The vertical expansion
increases the model learning capacity while keeping the previously obtained knowledge
intact. Therefore, not only do we achieve successful transfer learning, our ﬁnal model is
still valid on the source data, opening the door to deep continual learning [53].
8. Conclusions
This paper reviews the taxonomy of deep transfer learning (DTL) and the deﬁnitions of
different approaches. Moreover, we review, list, categorize and analyze over thirty recently
applied DTL research studies. Then, we investigate the methodology and limitations
of the three most common model-based deep transfer learning methods: (i) Finetuning,
(ii) Freezing CNN Layers, and (iii) Progressive Learning. These techniques have proven
their ability and effectiveness for various machine learning problems. The simplicity of
ﬁnetuning publicly available pre-trained models on extensive datasets is the reason for it
being the most common transfer learning technique. Moreover, two thorough experimental
studies in DTL are summarized; their discoveries clarify the details of a successful deep
transfer learning approach for different scenarios. Last but not least, the limitations of
current DTLs, catastrophic forgetting dilemma, and overly biased pre-trained models are
discussed, along with possible solutions.