Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 9 of 14
sparse auto-encoder to extract the features of raw data, and applies the maximum mean
discrepancy term to minimizing the discrepancy penalty between the features from training
data and target data.” They tailor that method for smart industry fault diagnosis problems
and achieve a 99.82% accuracy which is better than other approaches such as the deep
belief network, sparse ﬁlter, deep learning, and support vector machine. Such tailored DTL
approaches are not usually easy to generalize for different tasks or datasets. Nonetheless,
they can open the door to interesting and new techniques in deep transfer learning’s future.
6. Experimental Analyzations of Deep Transfer Learning
In this section, we review two remarkable experimental evaluations of DTL techniques.
The tests’ setup, analysis, and conclusions are noteworthy for applying DTL techniques in
different scenarios.
“What is being transferred in transfer learning?” [ 51] is a recent experimental study
which uses a series of tests on visual domain and deep learning models and tries to investi-
gate what makes a successful transfer and which part of the network is responsible for that.
To do so, they analyze networks in four different cases: (i) pre-trained network, (ii) random
initialized network, (iii) ﬁnetuned network on target domain after pretraining on source
domain, and (iv) trained network from random initialization [ 51]. Moreover, to characterize
the role of the feature reuse, they use a source (pre-train) domain containing natural images
(IMAGENET), and a few target (downstream) domains with decreasing visual similarities
from natural images: DOMAINNET real, DOMAINNET clipart, CHEXPERT (medical chest
X-rays) and DOMAINNET quickdraw [51].
The study demonstrates that feature reuse plays a key role in deep transfer learning as
a pre-trained model on IMAGENET, and shows the largest performance improvement on
the real domain, which shares similar visual features (natural images) with IMAGENET in
comparison to randomly initialized models. Moreover, they run a series of experiments
by shufﬂing the image blocks (different block sizes). These experiments prove that feature
reuse plays a very important role in transfer learning, particularly when the target domain
shares visual features with the source domain. However, they realize that feature reuse is
not the only reason for deep transfer learning success, since even for distant targets such
as CHEXPERT and quickdraw, they still observe performance boosts from deep transfer
learning. Additionally, in all cases pre-trained models converge way faster than random
initialized models [51].
Further, they manually analyze common and uncommon mistakes in the training of
randomly initialized versus pre-trained models. They observe that data samples marked
incorrect in the pre-trained model and correct in the randomly initialized model are mostly
ambiguous samples. On the other hand, the majority of the samples that a pre-trained
model marked correct and a randomly initialized model marked incorrect are straight-
forward samples. This means that a pre-trained model has a stronger prior, and it is
harder to adapt to the target domain. Moreover, using the centered kernel alignment to
measure feature similarities, they conclude that the initialization point drastically impacts
feature similarity, and two networks with a high accuracy can have a different feature
space. Moreover, they discover similar results for distance in the parameter space, in which
two random-initialized models are farther from each other compared to two pre-trained
models [51].
In regards to performance barriers and basins in the loss landscape, they have con-
cluded that the network stays in the same basin of the solution when ﬁnetuning a pre-
trained network. They reached this conclusion by training pre-trained models from two
random runs as well as training random initialized models twice and comparing. Even
when training a random initialized model two times with the same random values, the
models end up in different basins [51].
Module criticality is an interesting analysis of deep learning models. Usually, in a deep
CNN model, each layer of CNN considers a module, while in some models a component
of the network can be considered as a module. To measure the criticality of a module, it