Technologies 2023 ,11, 40 3 of 14
obtained for target data from source data, and they do not need to be related or function
simultaneously [2].
4. From Transfer Learning to Deep Transfer Learning, Taxonomy
It is possible to categorize Deep Transfer Learnings (DTLs) in different ways by
various criteria, similar to Transfer Learnings. DTLs can be divided into two categories of
homogeneous and heterogenous based on the homogeneity of source and target data [ 2].
However, this categorization can be conducted differently because it is subjective and
relative. For example, a dataset of X-ray photos can be considered heterogeneous to a
dataset of tree species photos when the comparison domain is limited to only image data.
In contrast, it can be considered homogeneous to the same tree species photo dataset when
the domain consists of audio and text datasets.
Moreover, DTLs can be categorized into three groups based on label-setting aspects:
(i) transductive, (ii) inductive, and (iii) unsupervised [ 2]. Brieﬂy, transductive is when only
the source data is labeled; if both source and target data are labeled it is inductive; if none
of the data are labeled, it is unsupervised deep transfer learning [2].
Refs. [ 2,9] mention and deﬁne another categorization of DTLs through the aspect of
applied approaches. They similarly categorized DTLs into four groups of: (i) instance-based,
(ii) feature-based/mapping-based, (iii) parameter-based/model-based, and (iv) relational-
based/adversarial-based approaches. Instance-based transfer learning approaches are
based on using the selected parts of instances (or all) in source data and applying different
weighting strategies to be used with target data. Feature-based approaches map instances
(or some features) from both source and target data into more homogeneous data. Further,
the [ 2] survey divides the feature-based category into asymmetric and symmetric feature-
based transfer learning subcategories. “Asymmetric approaches transform the source
features to match the target ones. In contrast, symmetric approaches attempt to ﬁnd a
common latent feature space and then transform both the source and the target features
into a new feature representation” [ 2]. The model-based (parameter-based) methods are
about using the obtained knowledge in the model (network) with different combinations
of pre-trained layers: freezing some and/or ﬁnetuning some and/or adding some fresh
layers. Relational/adversarial-based approaches focus on extracting transferable features
from both source and target data either using the logical relationship or rules learned in
the source domain or by applying methods inspired by generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [2,9]. Figure 1 shows the taxonomy of the above-mentioned categories [2].
Figure 1. Taxonomy of Transfer Learning which is extendable to Deep Transfer Learning as well.
Other than the model-based and adversarial-based approaches, all other categories
have been explored deeply during the last couple of decades for different ML techniques
known as domain adaptation or transfer learning [ 2,3]. However, most of those techniques
are still applicable to deep transfer learning (DTL) as well. Model-based (parameter-based)