182 I. Guyon et al.
10.2.2 Full Model Selection
We refer to participant solutions as hyper-models to indicate that they are built
from simpler components. For instance, for classiﬁcation problems, participants
might consider a hyper-model that combines several classiﬁcation techniques such
as nearest neighbors, linear models, kernel methods, neural networks, and randomforests. More complex hyper-models may also include preprocessing, feature
construction, and feature selection modules.
Generally, a predictive model of the form y=f(x;α)has:
• a set of parameters α=[α
0,α1,α2,...,α n];
• a learning algorithm (referred to as trainer), which serves to optimize the
parameters using training data;
• a trained model (referred to as predictor) of the form y=f(x)produced by the
trainer;
• a clear objective function J(f) , which can be used to assess the model’s
performance on test data.
Consider now the model hypothesis space deﬁned by a vector θ=
[θ1,θ2,...,θ n]of hyper-parameters. The hyper-parameter vector may include
not only parameters corresponding to switching between alternative models, but
also modeling choices such as preprocessing parameters, type of kernel in a kernelmethod, number of units and layers in a neural network, or training algorithm
regularization parameters [ 59]. Some authors refer to this problem as full model
selection [24,62], others as the CASH problem (Combined Algorithm Selection
and Hyperparameter optimization) [ 65]. We will denote hyper-models as
y=f(x;θ)=f(x;α(θ),θ), (10.1)
where the model parameter vector αis an implicit function of the hyper-parameter
vector θobtained by using a trainer for a ﬁxed value of θ, and training data
composed of input-output pairs {x
i,yi}. The participants have to devise algorithms
capable of training the hyper-parameters θ. This may require intelligent sampling
of the hyper-parameter space and splitting the available training data into subsetsfor both training and evaluating the predictive power of solutions—one or multiple
times.
As an optimization problem, model selection is a bi-level optimization pro-
gram [ 7,18,19]; there is a lower objective J
1to train the parameters αof the
model, and an upper objective J2to train the hyper-parameters θ, both optimized
simultaneously (see Fig. 10.1). As a statistics problem, model selection is a problem
of multiple testing in which error bars on performance prediction /epsilon1degrade with the
number of models/hyper-parameters tried or, more generally, the complexity of the
hyper-model C2(θ). A key aspect of AutoML is to avoid overﬁtting the upper-level
objective J2by regularizing it, much in the same way as lower level objectives J1
are regularized.