1 Hyperparameter Optimization 23
1.6.3 Scalability
Despite recent successes in multi-ﬁdelity optimization, there are still machine
learning problems which have not been directly tackled by HPO due to their scale,
and which might require novel approaches. Here, scale can mean both the size of the
conﬁguration space and the expense of individual model evaluations. For example,there has not been any work on HPO for deep neural networks on the ImageNet
challenge dataset [ 127] yet, mostly because of the high cost of training even a
simple neural network on the dataset. It will be interesting to see whether methodsgoing beyond the blackbox view from Sect. 1.3, such as the multi-ﬁdelity methods
described in Sect. 1.4, gradient-based methods, or meta-learning methods (described
in Chap. 2) allow to tackle such problems. Chap. 3describes ﬁrst successes in
learning neural network building blocks on smaller datasets and applying them to
ImageNet, but the hyperparameters of the training procedure are still set manually.
Given the necessity of parallel computing, we are looking forward to new
methods that fully exploit large-scale compute clusters. While there exists much
work on parallel Bayesian optimization [ 12,24,33,44,54,60,135,140], except
for the neural networks described in Sect. 1.3.2.2 [141], so far no method has
demonstrated scalability to hundreds of workers. Despite their popularity, and with
a single exception of HPO applied to deep neural networks [ 91],
3population-
based approaches have not yet been shown to be applicable to hyperparameteroptimization on datasets larger than a few thousand data points.
Overall, we expect that more sophisticated and specialized methods, leaving the
blackbox view behind, will be needed to further scale hyperparameter to interestingproblems.
1.6.4 Overﬁtting and Generalization
An open problem in HPO is overﬁtting. As noted in the problem statement (see
Sect. 1.2), we usually only have a ﬁnite number of data points available for
calculating the validation loss to be optimized and thereby do not necessarilyoptimize for generalization to unseen test datapoints. Similarly to overﬁtting a
machine learning algorithm to training data, this problem is about overﬁtting the
hyperparameters to the ﬁnite validation set; this was also demonstrated to happenexperimentally [ 20,81].
A simple strategy to reduce the amount of overﬁtting is to employ a different
shufﬂing of the train and validation split for each function evaluation; this wasshown to improve generalization performance for SVM tuning, both with a holdout
and a cross-validation strategy [ 95]. The selection of the ﬁnal conﬁguration can
3See also Chap. 3where population-based methods are applied to Neural Architecture Search
problems.