204 I. Guyon et al.
test data. Under-ﬁtting is difﬁcult to test. Its symptoms may be that the variance or
the entropy of the predictions is less than those of the target values.
Evaluating the modeling difﬁculty is also impossible unless we know Fand
the model class. In the absence of knowledge on the model class, data scientists
often use generic predictive models, agnostic with respect to the data generating
process. Such models range from very basic models that are highly biased towards“simplicity” and smoothness of predictions (e.g., regularized linear models) to
highly versatile unbiased models that can learn any function given enough data
(e.g., ensembles of decision trees). To indirectly assess modeling difﬁculty, weresorted to use the difference in performance between the method of the challenge
winner and that of (a) the best of four “untuned” basic models (taken from classical
techniques provided in the scikit-learn library [ 55] with default hyper-parameters)
or (b) Selective Naive Bayes (SNB) [ 12,13], a highly regularized model (biased
towards simplicity), providing a very robust and simple baseline.
Figs. 10.5 and 10.6 give representations of our estimates of intrinsic and
modeling difﬁculties for the 2015/2016 challenge datasets. It can be seen that
the datasets of round 0 were among the easiest (except perhaps NEWSGROUP).
Those were relatively small (and well-known) datasets. Surprisingly, the datasetsof round 3 were also rather easy, despite the fact that most participants failed on
them when they were introduced (largely because of memory limitations: scikit-
learn algorithms were not optimized for sparse datasets and it was not possible to ﬁtin memory the data matrix converted to a dense matrix). Two datasets have a small
intrinsic difﬁculty but a large modeling difﬁculty: MADELINE and DILBERT.
MADELINE is an artiﬁcial dataset that is very non-linear (clusters or 2 classespositioned on the vertices of a hyper-cube in a 5 dimensional space) and therefore
very difﬁcult for Naïve Bayes. DILBERT is an image recognition dataset with
images of objects rotated in all sorts of positions, also very difﬁcult for Naïve Bayes.The datasets of the last 2 phases seem to have a large intrinsic difﬁculty compared
to the modeling difﬁculty. But this can be deceiving because the datasets are new to
the machine learning community and the performances of the winners may still befar from the best attainable performance.
We attempted to predict the intrinsic difﬁculty (as measured by the winners’
performance) from the set of meta features used by AAD Freiburg for meta-learning [ 25], which are part of OpenML [ 67], using a Random Forest classiﬁer
and ranked the meta features in order of importance (most selected by RF). The list
of meta features is provided in the online appendix. The three meta-features thatpredict dataset difﬁculty best (Fig. 10.7)a r e :
• LandmarkDecisionTree: performance of a decision tree classiﬁer.
• Landmark1NN: performance of a nearest neighbor classiﬁer.
• SkewnessMin: min over skewness of all features. Skewness measures the
symmetry of a distribution. A positive skewness value means that there is moreweight in the left tail of the distribution.