108 B. Komer et al.
suggest that existing hyperopt-sklearn components cannot be assembled to match
its level of performance. Perhaps when it is implemented, Hyperopt may ﬁnd a set
of parameters that provides even greater classiﬁcation accuracy.
Fig. 5.3 Comparison of F1-Score on the 20 Newsgroups dataset using either the default
parameters of scikit-learn or the default search space of hyperopt-sklearn. The results fromhyperopt-sklearn were obtained from a single run with 25 evaluations, restricted to either SupportVector Classiﬁer, Stochastic Gradient Descent, K-Nearest Neighbors, or Multinomial Naive Bayes
On the Convex Shapes data set, our Hyperopt-sklearn experiments revealed a
more accurate model than was previously believed to exist in any search space,let alone a search space of such standard components. This result underscores the
difﬁculty and importance of hyperparameter search.
Hyperopt-sklearn provides many opportunities for future work: more classiﬁers
and preprocessing modules could be included in the search space, and there are
more ways to combine even the existing components. Other types of data require
different preprocessing, and other prediction problems exist beyond classiﬁcation.In expanding the search space, care must be taken to ensure that the beneﬁts of
new models outweigh the greater difﬁculty of searching a larger space. There are
some parameters that scikit-learn exposes that are more implementation details thanactual hyperparameters that affect the ﬁt (such as algorithm andleaf_size in
the KNN model). Care should be taken to identify these parameters in each model
and they may need to be treated differently during exploration.
It is possible for a user to add their own classiﬁer to the search space as long as
it ﬁts the scikit-learn interface. This currently requires some understanding of how
hyperopt-sklearn’s code is structured and it would be nice to improve the supportfor this so minimal effort is required by the user. It is also possible for the user
to specify alternate scoring methods besides the default accuracy or F-measure, as
there can be cases where these are not best suited to the particular problem.