6 Auto-sklearn: Efﬁcient and Robust Automated Machine Learning 125
drastic improvements starting with the ﬁrst conﬁguration it selected and lasting until
the end of the experiment. We note that the improvement was most pronounced in
the beginning and that over time, vanilla Auto-sklearn also found good solutionswithout meta-learning, letting it catch up on some datasets (thus improving its
overall rank).
Moreover, both of our methods complement each other: our automated ensemble
construction improved both vanilla Auto-sklearn and Auto-sklearn with meta-
learning. Interestingly, the ensemble’s inﬂuence on the performance started earlier
for the meta-learning version. We believe that this is because meta-learningproduces better machine learning models earlier, which can be directly combined
into a strong ensemble; but when run longer, vanilla Auto-sklearn without meta-
learning also beneﬁts from automated ensemble construction.
6.7 Detailed Analysis of Auto-sklearn Components
We now study Auto-sklearn’s individual classiﬁers and preprocessors, comparedto jointly optimizing all methods, in order to obtain insights into their peak
performance and robustness. Ideally, we would have liked to study all combinations
of a single classiﬁer and a single preprocessor in isolation, but with 15 classiﬁersand 14 preprocessors this was infeasible; rather, when studying the performance
of a single classiﬁer, we still optimized over all preprocessors, and vice versa. To
obtain a more detailed analysis, we focused on a subset of datasets but extended theconﬁguration budget for optimizing all methods from one hour to one day and to two
days for Auto-sklearn. Speciﬁcally, we clustered our 140 datasets with g-means [ 26]
based on the dataset meta-features and used one dataset from each of the resulting13 clusters. We give a basic description of the datasets in Table 6.3. In total, these
extensive experiments required 10.7 CPU years.
Table 6.4compares the results of the various classiﬁcation methods against
Auto-sklearn. Overall, as expected, random forests, extremely randomized trees,
AdaBoost, and gradient boosting, showed the most robust performance, and SVMs
showed strong peak performance for some datasets. Besides a variety of strongclassiﬁers, there are also several models which could not compete: The decision
tree, passive aggressive, kNN, Gaussian NB, LDA and QDA were statistically
signiﬁcantly inferior to the best classiﬁer on most datasets. Finally, the tableindicates that no single method was the best choice for all datasets. As shown in
the table and also visualized for two example datasets in Fig. 6.4, optimizing the
joint conﬁguration space of Auto-sklearn led to the most robust performance. Aplot of ranks over time (Fig. 2 and 3 in the supplementary material of the original
publication [ 20]) quantiﬁes this across all 13 datasets, showing that Auto-sklearn
starts with reasonable but not optimal performance and effectively searches its moregeneral conﬁguration space to converge to the best overall performance over time.
Table 6.5compares the results of the various preprocessors against Auto-sklearn.
As for the comparison of classiﬁers above, Auto-sklearn showed the most robust