10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 183
Input
OutputHyperparameters
Parameters
(a)Hyperparameters ( )
Parameters ( )argmin Rcv[f( . ; , )] argmin Rtr[f( . ; , )] J2 J1
(b)
Fig. 10.1 Bi-level optimization. (a) Representation of a learning machine with parameters and
hyper-parameters to be adjusted. ( b) De-coupling of parameter and hyper-parameter adjustment in
two levels. The upper level objective J2optimizes the hyper-parameters θ; the lower objective J1
optimizes the parameters α
The problem setting also lends itself to using ensemble methods, which let
several “simple” models vote to make the ﬁnal decision [ 15,16,29]. In this case,
the parameters θmay be interpreted as voting weights. For simplicity we lump all
parameters in a single vector, but more elaborate structures, such as trees or graphs
can be used to deﬁne the hyper-parameter space [ 66].
10.2.3 Optimization of Hyper-parameters
Everyone who has worked with data has had to face some common modeling
choices: scaling, normalization, missing value imputation, variable coding (for
categorical variables), variable discretization, degree of nonlinearity and model
architecture, among others. ML has managed to reduce the number of hyper-
parameters and produce black-boxes to perform tasks such as classiﬁcation and
regression [ 21,40]. Still, any real-world problem requires at least some preparation
of the data before it can be ﬁtted into an “automatic” method, hence requiring some
modeling choices. There has been much progress on end-to-end automated ML for
more complex tasks such as text, image, video, and speech processing with deep-
learning methods [ 6]. However, even these methods have many modeling choices
and hyper-parameters.
While producing models for a diverse range of applications has been a focus
of the ML community, little effort has been devoted to the optimization of hyper-
parameters. Common practices that include trial and error and grid search may lead
to overﬁtting models for small datasets or underﬁtting models for large datasets.
By overﬁtting we mean producing models that perform well on training data but
perform poorly on unseen data, i.e., models that do not generalize. By underﬁtting