6 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
1.2.1 Alternatives to Optimization: Ensembling and
Marginalization
Solving Eq. 1.1with one of the techniques described in the rest of this chapter
usually requires ﬁtting the machine learning algorithm Awith multiple hyperpa-
rameter vectors λt. Instead of using the argmin-operator over these, it is possible
to either construct an ensemble (which aims to minimize the loss for a given
validation protocol) or to integrate out all the hyperparameters (if the model underconsideration is a probabilistic model). We refer to Guyon et al. [ 50] and the
references therein for a comparison of frequentist and Bayesian model selection.
Only choosing a single hyperparameter conﬁguration can be wasteful when
many good conﬁgurations have been identiﬁed by HPO, and combining them
in an ensemble can improve performance [ 109]. This is particularly useful in
AutoML systems with a large conﬁguration space (e.g., in FMS orCASH ), where
good conﬁgurations can be very diverse, which increases the potential gains from
ensembling [ 4,19,31,34]. To further improve performance, Automatic Franken-
steining [155] uses HPO to train a stacking model [ 156] on the outputs of the
models found with HPO; the 2nd level models are then combined using a traditional
ensembling strategy.
The methods discussed so far applied ensembling after the HPO procedure.
While they improve performance in practice, the base models are not optimized
for ensembling. It is, however, also possible to directly optimize for models which
would maximally improve an existing ensemble [ 97].
Finally, when dealing with Bayesian models it is often possible to integrate
out the hyperparameters of the machine learning algorithm, for example using
evidence maximization [98],Bayesian model averaging [56],slice sampling [111]
orempirical Bayes [103].
1.2.2 Optimizing for Multiple Objectives
In practical applications it is often necessary to trade off two or more objectives,
such as the performance of a model and resource consumption [ 65] (see also
Chap. 3) or multiple loss functions [ 57]. Potential solutions can be obtained in two
ways.
First, if a limit on a secondary performance measure is known (such as the
maximal memory consumption), the problem can be formulated as a constrained
optimization problem. We will discuss constraint handling in Bayesian optimization
in Sect. 1.3.2.4 .
Second, and more generally, one can apply multi-objective optimization to search
for the Pareto front, a set of conﬁgurations which are optimal tradeoffs between the
objectives in the sense that, for each conﬁguration on the Pareto front, there is noother conﬁguration which performs better for at least one and at least as well for all
other objectives. The user can then choose a conﬁguration from the Pareto front. We
refer the interested reader to further literature on this topic [ 53,57,65,134].