10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 181
In [32] and [ 34] we review milestone and ﬁnal results presented at the ICML 2015
and 2016 AutoML workshops. The 2015/2016 AutoML challenge had 6 rounds
introducing 5 datasets each. We also organized a follow-up event for the PAKDDconference 2018
7in only 2 phases, with 5 datasets in the development phase and 5
datasets in the ﬁnal “blind test” round.
Going beyond the former published analyses, this chapter presents systematic
studies of the winning solutions on all the datasets of the challenge and conducts
comparisons with commonly used learning machines implemented in scikit-learn.
It provides unpublished details about the datasets and reﬂective analyses.
This chapter is in part based on material that has appeared previously [ 32–34,36].
This chapter is complemented by a 46-page online appendix that can be accessed
from the book’s webpage: http://automl.org/book .
10.2 Problem Formalization and Overview
10.2.1 Scope of the Problem
This challenge series focuses on supervised learning in ML and, in particular, solv-
ing classiﬁcation and regression problems, without any further human intervention,
within given constraints. To this end, we released a large number of datasets pre-
formatted in given feature representations (i.e., each example consists of a ﬁxednumber of numerical coefﬁcients; more in Sect. 10.3).
The distinction between input and output variables is not always made in ML
applications. For instance, in recommender systems, the problem is often stated asmaking predictions of missing values for every variable rather than predicting the
values of a particular variable [ 58]. In unsupervised learning [ 30], the purpose is
to explain data in a simple and compact way, eventually involving inferred latentvariables (e.g., class membership produced by a clustering algorithm).
We consider only the strict supervised learning setting where data present them-
selves as identically and independently distributed input-output pairs. The modelsused are limited to ﬁxed-length vectorial representations, excluding problems of
time series prediction. Text, speech, and video processing tasks included in the chal-
lenge have been preprocessed into suitable ﬁxed-length vectorial representations.
The difﬁculty of the proposed tasks lies in the data complexity (class imbalance,
sparsity, missing values, categorical variables). The testbed is composed of data
from a wide variety of domains. Although there exist ML toolkits that can tackleall of these problems, it still requires considerable human effort to ﬁnd, for a
given dataset, task, evaluation metric, the methods and hyper-parameter settings
that maximize performance subject to a computational constraint. The participantchallenge is to create the perfect black box that removes human interaction,
alleviating the shortage of data scientists in the coming decade.
7https://www.4paradigm.com/competition/pakdd2018