208 I. Guyon et al.
• NB: Naive Bayes
• SGD-linear: Linear model (trained with stochastic gradient descent)
• KNN: K-nearest neighbors• RF: Random Forest
We used the implementation of the scikit-learn library with default hyper-parameter
settings. In Fig. 10.10 , we show the two ﬁrst Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
components, when training an LDA classiﬁer on the meta-features to predict which
basic classiﬁer will perform best. The methods separate into three distinct clusters,one of them grouping the non-linear methods that are poorly separated (KNN and
RF) and the two others being NB and linear-SGD.
The features that are most predictive all have to do with “ClassProbability”
and “PercentageOfMissingValues”, indicating that the class imbalance and/or large
number of classes (in a multi-class problem) and the percentage of missing values
might be important, but there is a high chance of overﬁtting as indicated by anunstable ranking of the best features under resampling of the training data.
10.5.6 Methods Used in the Challenges
Ab r i e f description of methods used in both challenges is provided in the online
appendix, together with the results of a survey on methods that we conducted after
the challenges. In light of the overview of Sect. 10.2 and the results presented in
the previous section, we may wonder whether a dominant methodology for solvingthe AutoML problem has emerged and whether particular technical solutions were
widely adopted. In this section we call “model space” the set of all models under
consideration. We call “basic models” (also called elsewhere “simple models”,“individual models”, “base learners”) the member of a library of models from which
our hyper-models of model ensembles are built.
Ensembling: dealing with over-ﬁtting and any-time learning Ensembling is the
big AutoML challenge series winner since it is used by over 80% of the participants
and by all the top-ranking ones. While a few years ago the hottest issue in model
selection and hyper-parameter optimization was over-ﬁtting, in present days theproblem seems to have been largely avoided by using ensembling techniques. In
the 2015/2016 challenge, we varied the ratio of number of training examples over
number of variables ( Ptr/N ) by several orders of magnitude. Five datasets had
a ratio Ptr/N lower than one (dorothea, newsgroup, grigoris, wallis, and ﬂora),
which is a case lending itself particularly to over-ﬁtting. Although Ptr/N is the
most predictive variable of the median performance of the participants, there is noindication that the datasets with Ptr/N < 1 were particularly difﬁcult for the partic-
ipants (Fig. 10.5). Ensembles of predictors have the additional beneﬁt of addressing
in a simple way the “any-time learning” problem by growing progressively a biggerensemble of predictors, improving performance over time. All trained predictors are
usually incorporated in the ensemble. For instance, if cross-validation is used, the