186 I. Guyon et al.
variance in regions of the hyper-parameter space that are under-sampled to guide
the search towards regions of high variance. These methods are inspirational and
some of the ideas can be adopted in the frequentist setting. For instance, the random-forest-based SMAC algorithm [ 41], which has helped speed up both local search and
tree search algorithms by orders of magnitude on certain instance distributions, has
also been found to be very effective for the hyper-parameter optimization of machinelearning algorithms, scaling better to high dimensions and discrete input dimensions
than other algorithms [ 23]. We also notice that Bayesian optimization methods are
often combined with other techniques such as meta-learning and ensemble methods[25] in order to gain advantage in some challenge settings with a time limit [ 32].
Some of these methods consider jointly the two-level optimization and take time
cost as a critical guidance for hyper-parameter search [ 45,64].
Besides Bayesian optimization, several other families of approaches exist in the
literature and have gained much attention with the recent rise of deep learning.
Ideas borrowed from reinforcement learning have recently been used to construct
optimal neural network architectures [ 4,70]. These approaches formulate the hyper-
parameter optimization problem in a reinforcement learning ﬂavor, with for example
states being the actual hyper-parameter setting (e.g., network architecture), actionsbeing adding or deleting a module (e.g., a CNN layer or a pooling layer), and reward
being the validation accuracy. They can then apply off-the-shelf reinforcement
learning algorithms (e.g., RENFORCE, Q-learning, Monte-Carlo Tree Search) tosolve the problem. Other architecture search methods use evolutionary algorithms
[3,57]. These approaches consider a set (population) of hyper-parameter settings
(individuals), modify (mutate and reproduce) and eliminate unpromising settingsaccording to their cross-validation score (ﬁtness). After several generations, the
global quality of the population increases. One important common point of rein-
forcement learning and evolutionary algorithms is that they both deal with theexploration-exploitation trade-off. Despite the impressive results, these approaches
require a huge amount of computational resources and some (especially evolution-
ary algorithms) are hard to scale. Pham et al. [ 56] recently proposed weight sharing
among child models to speed up the process considerably [ 70] while achieving
comparable results.
Note that splitting the problem of parameter ﬁtting into two levels can be
extended to more levels, at the expense of extra complexity—i.e., need for a hier-
archy of data splits to perform multiple or nested cross-validation [ 22], insufﬁcient
data to train and validate at the different levels, and increase of the computationalload.
Table 10.1 shows a typical example of multi-level parameter optimization in a
frequentist setting. We assume that we are using an ML toolbox with two learningmachines: Kridge (kernel ridge regression) and Neural (a neural network a.k.a.
“deep learning” model). At the top level we use a test procedure to assess the
performance of the ﬁnal model (this is not an inference level). The top-levelinference algorithm Validation({GridCV(Kridge, MSE), GridCV(Neural, MSE)},
MSE) is decomposed into its elements recursively. Validation uses the data split
D=[D
Tr,DVa]to compare the learning machines Kridge and Neural (trained