210 I. Guyon et al.
that the scikit-learn version of Random Forest (an ensemble of homogeneous basic
models—decision trees) does not usually perform as well as the winners’ version,
hinting that there is a lot of know-how in the Intel solution, which is also based onensembles of decision tree, that is not captured by a basic ensemble of decision trees
such as RF. We hope that more principled research will be conducted on this topic
in the future.
Search strategies: Filter, wrapper, and embedded methods With the availability
of powerful machine learning toolkits like scikit-learn (on which the starting kit
was based), the temptation is great to implement all-wrapper methods to solve
the CASH (or “full model selection”) problem. Indeed, most participants went that
route. Although a number of ways of optimizing hyper-parameters with embedded
methods for several basic classiﬁers have been published [ 35], they each require
changing the implementation of the basic methods, which is time-consuming and
error-prone compared to using already debugged and well-optimized library version
of the methods. Hence practitioners are reluctant to invest development time inthe implementation of embedded methods. A notable exception is the software of
marc.boulle , which offers a self-contained hyper-parameter free solution based on
Naive Bayes, which includes re-coding of variables (grouping or discretization) andvariable selection. See the online appendix.
Multi-level optimization Another interesting issue is whether multiple levels of
hyper-parameters should be considered for reasons of computational effectiveness
or overﬁtting avoidance. In the Bayesian setting, for instance, it is quite feasibleto consider a hierarchy of parameters/hyper-parameters and several levels of
priors/hyper-priors. However, it seems that for practical computational reasons,
in the AutoML challenges, the participants use a shallow organization of hyper-parameter space and avoid nested cross-validation loops.
Time management: Exploration vs. exploitation tradeoff With a tight time
budget, efﬁcient search strategies must be put into place to monitor the explo-ration/exploitation tradeoff. To compare strategies, we show in the online appendix
learning curves for two top ranking participants who adopted very different
methods: Abhishek andaad_freiburg . The former uses heuristic methods based on
prior human experience while the latter initializes search with models predicted
to be best suited by meta-learning, then performs Bayesian optimization of hyper-
parameters. Abhishek seems to often start with a better solution but explores less
effectively. In contrast, aad_freiburg starts lower but often ends up with a better
solution. Some elements of randomness in the search are useful to arrive at better
solutions.
Preprocessing and feature selection The datasets had intrinsic difﬁculties that
could be in part addressed by preprocessing or special modiﬁcations of algorithms:
sparsity, missing values, categorical variables, and irrelevant variables. Yet it
appears that among the top-ranking participants, preprocessing has not been afocus of attention. They relied on the simple heuristics provided in the starting kit:
replacing missing values by the median and adding a missingness indicator variable,