2 Meta-Learning 39
deems tasks to be similar if the relative landmarks of all evaluated conﬁgurations
are similar, i.e., if the conﬁgurations perform similarly on both tjandtnewthen
the tasks are deemed similar. Next, it evaluates the competitor θc, yielding Pc,new ,
updates the task similarities, and repeats. A limitation of this method is that it can
only consider conﬁgurations θithat were evaluated on many prior tasks.
2.2.3.2 Surrogate Models
A more ﬂexible way to transfer information is to build surrogate models sj(θi)=
Pi,jfor all prior tasks tj, trained using all available P. One can then deﬁne task
similarity in terms of the error between sj(θi)andPi,new : if the surrogate model
fortjcan generate accurate predictions for tnew, then those tasks are intrinsically
similar. This is usually done in combination with Bayesian optimization (see
Chap. 1) to determine the next θi.
Wistuba et al. [ 187] train surrogate models based on Gaussian Processes (GPs)
for every prior task, plus one for tnew, and combine them into a weighted,
normalized sum, with the (new) predicted mean μdeﬁned as the weighted sum
of the individual μj’s (obtained from prior tasks tj). The weights of the μj’s are
computed using the Nadaraya-Watson kernel-weighted average, where each task
is represented as a vector of relative landmarks, and the Epanechnikov quadratickernel [ 104] is used to measure the similarity between the relative landmark vectors
oft
jandtnew. The more similar tjis totnew, the larger the weight sj, increasing the
inﬂuence of the surrogate model for tj.
Feurer et al. [ 45] propose to combine the predictive distributions of the individual
Gaussian processes, which makes the combined model a Gaussian process again.
The weights are computed following the agnostic Bayesian ensemble of Lacoste etal. [81], which weights predictors according to an estimate of their generalization
performance.
Meta-data can also be transferred in the acquisition function rather than the
surrogate model [ 187]. The surrogate model is only trained on P
i,new ,b u tt h en e x t
θito evaluate is provided by an acquisition function which is the weighted average
of the expected improvement [ 69]o nPi,new and the predicted improvements on all
priorPi,j. The weights of the prior tasks can again be deﬁned via the accuracy of the
surrogate model or via relative landmarks. The weight of the expected improvement
component is gradually increased with every iteration as more evidence Pi,new is
collected.
2.2.3.3 Warm-Started Multi-task Learning
Another approach to relate prior tasks tjis to learn a joint task representation using
Pprior evaluations. In [ 114], task-speciﬁc Bayesian linear regression [ 20]s u r r o g a t e
models sj(θz
i)are trained in a novel conﬁguration θzlearned by a feedforward
Neural Network NN(θi)which learns a suitable basis expansion θzof the original