98 B. Komer et al.
The Auto-Weka project [ 19] was the ﬁrst to show that an entire library of machine
learning approaches (Weka [ 8]) can be searched within the scope of a single run of
hyperparameter tuning. However, Weka is a GPL-licensed Java library, and wasnot written with scalability in mind, so we feel there is a need for alternatives to
Auto-Weka. Scikit-learn [ 16] is another library of machine learning algorithms. It is
written in Python (with many modules in C for greater speed), and is BSD-licensed.Scikit-learn is widely used in the scientiﬁc Python community and supports many
machine learning application areas.
This chapter introduces Hyperopt-Sklearn: a project that brings the bene-
ﬁts of automated algorithm conﬁguration to users of Python and scikit-learn.
Hyperopt-Sklearn uses Hyperopt [ 3] to describe a search space over possible
conﬁgurations of scikit-learn components, including preprocessing, classiﬁcation,and regression modules. One of the main design features of this project is to
provide an interface that is familiar to users of scikit-learn. With very little
changes, hyperparameter search can be applied to an existing code base. Thischapter begins with a background of Hyperopt and the conﬁguration space it uses
within scikit-learn, followed by example usage and experimental results with this
software.
This chapter is an extended version of our 2014 paper introducing hyperopt-
sklearn, presented at the 2014 ICML Workshop on AutoML [10].
5.2 Background: Hyperopt for Optimization
The Hyperopt library [ 3] offers optimization algorithms for search spaces that
arise in algorithm conﬁguration. These spaces are characterized by a variety oftypes of variables (continuous, ordinal, categorical), different sensitivity proﬁles
(e.g. uniform vs. log scaling), and conditional structure (when there is a choice
between two classiﬁers, the parameters of one classiﬁer are irrelevant when the otherclassiﬁer is chosen). To use Hyperopt, a user must deﬁne/choose three things:
• A search domain,
• An objective function,• An optimization algorithm.
The search domain is speciﬁed via random variables, whose distributions should
be chosen so that the most promising combinations have high prior probability.
The search domain can include Python operators and functions that combine
random variables into more convenient data structures for the objective function.Any conditional structure is deﬁned within this domain. The objective function
maps a joint sampling of these random variables to a scalar-valued score that the
optimization algorithm will try to minimize.