Chapter 8
TPOT: A Tree-Based Pipeline
Optimization Tool for Automating
Machine Learning
Randal S. Olson and Jason H. Moore
Abstract As data science becomes increasingly mainstream, there will be an
ever-growing demand for data science tools that are more accessible, ﬂexible,
and scalable. In response to this demand, automated machine learning (AutoML)
researchers have begun building systems that automate the process of designing and
optimizing machine learning pipelines. In this chapter we present TPOT v0.3, an
open source genetic programming-based AutoML system that optimizes a series of
feature preprocessors and machine learning models with the goal of maximizing
classiﬁcation accuracy on a supervised classiﬁcation task. We benchmark TPOT
on a series of 150 supervised classiﬁcation tasks and ﬁnd that it signiﬁcantly
outperforms a basic machine learning analysis in 21 of them, while experiencing
minimal degradation in accuracy on 4 of the benchmarks—all without any domain
knowledge nor human input. As such, genetic programming-based AutoML systems
show considerable promise in the AutoML domain.
8.1 Introduction
Machine learning is commonly described as a “ﬁeld of study that gives computers
the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed” [ 19]. Despite this common
claim, experienced machine learning practitioners know that designing effective
machine learning pipelines is often a tedious endeavor, and typically requires
considerable experience with machine learning algorithms, expert knowledge of the
problem domain, and time-intensive brute force search to accomplish [ 13]. Thus,
contrary to what machine learning enthusiasts would have us believe, machine
learning still requires considerable explicit programming.
R. S. Olson (/envelopeback)
Life Epigenetics, Minneapolis, MN, USA
e-mail: rso@randalolson.com
J. H. Moore
Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_8151