2 Meta-Learning 41
2.2.4 Learning Curves
We can also extract meta-data about the training process itself, such as how fast
model performance improves as more training data is added. If we divide the
training in steps st, usually adding a ﬁxed number of training examples every step,
we can measure the performance P(θi,tj,st)=Pi,j,tof conﬁguration θion task
tjafter step st, yielding a learning curve across the time steps st. As discussed in
Chap. 1, learning curves are also used to speed up hyperparameter optimization on a
given task. In meta-learning, learning curve information is transferred across tasks.
While evaluating a conﬁguration on new task tnew, we can halt the training after
a certain number of iterations r<t , and use the partially observed learning curve
to predict how well the conﬁguration will perform on the full dataset based on priorexperience with other tasks, and decide whether to continue the training or not. This
can signiﬁcantly speed up the search for good conﬁgurations.
One approach is to assume that similar tasks yield similar learning curves. First,
deﬁne a distance between tasks based on how similar the partial learning curves are:
dist(t
a,tb)=f( Pi,a,t,Pi,b,t)witht=1,...,r . Next, ﬁnd the kmost similar tasks
t1...kand use their complete learning curves to predict how well the conﬁguration
will perform on the new complete dataset. Task similarity can be measured by
comparing the shapes of the partial curves across all conﬁgurations tried, and the
prediction is made by adapting the ‘nearest’ complete curve(s) to the new partialcurve [ 83,84]. This approach was also successful in combination with active testing
[86], and can be sped up further by using multi-objective evaluation measures that
include training time [ 134].
Interestingly, while several methods aim to predict learning curves during neural
architecture search (see Chap. 3), as of yet none of this work leverages learning
curves previously observed on other tasks.
2.3 Learning from Task Properties
Another rich source of meta-data are characterizations (meta-features) of the taskat hand. Each task t
j∈Tis described with a vector m(tj)=(mj,1,...,m j,K)of
Kmeta-features mj,k∈M, the set of all known meta-features. This can be used
to deﬁne a task similarity measure based on, for instance, the Euclidean distance
between m(ti)andm(tj), so that we can transfer information from the most similar
tasks to the new task tnew. Moreover, together with prior evaluations P, we can train
ameta-learner Lto predict the performance Pi,new of conﬁgurations θion a new
tasktnew.