100 B. Komer et al.
5.3 Scikit-Learn Model Selection as a Search Problem
Model selection is the process of estimating which machine learning model
performs best from among a possibly inﬁnite set of options. As an optimizationproblem, the search domain is the set of valid assignments to the conﬁguration
parameters (hyperparameters) of the machine learning model.The objective function
is typically the measure of success (e.g. accuracy, F1-Score, etc) on held-outexamples. Often the negative degree of success (loss) is used to set up the task
as a minimization problem, and cross-validation is applied to produce a more robust
ﬁnal score. Practitioners usually address this optimization by hand, by grid search,or by random search. In this chapter we discuss solving it with the Hyperopt
optimization library. The basic approach is to set up a search space with random
variable hyperparameters, use scikit-learn to implement the objective function thatperforms model training and model validation, and use Hyperopt to optimize the
hyperparameters.
Scikit-learn includes many algorithms for learning from data (classiﬁcation or
regression), as well as many algorithms for preprocessing data into the vectors
expected by these learning algorithms. Classiﬁers include for example, K-Nearest-
Neighbors, Support Vector Machines, and Random Forest algorithms. Prepro-cessing algorithms include transformations such as component-wise Z-scaling
(Normalizer) and Principle Components Analysis (PCA). A full classiﬁcation
algorithm typically includes a series of preprocessing steps followed by a classiﬁer.For this reason, scikit-learn provides a pipeline data structure to represent and use a
sequence of preprocessing steps and a classiﬁer as if they were just one component
(typically with an API similar to the classiﬁer). Although hyperopt-sklearn doesnot formally use scikit-learn’s pipeline object, it provides related functionality.
Hyperopt-sklearn provides a parameterization of a search space over pipelines, that
is, of sequences of preprocessing steps and classiﬁers or regressors.
The conﬁguration space provided at the time of this writing currently includes
24 classiﬁers, 12 regressors, and 7 preprocessing methods. Being an open-source
project, this space is likely to expand in the future as more users contribute.Upon initial release, only a subset of the search space was available, consisting
of six classiﬁers and ﬁve preprocessing algorithms. This space was used for initial
performance analysis and is illustrated in Fig. 5.1. In total, this parameterization
contains 65 hyperparameters: 15 boolean variables, 14 categorical, 17 discrete, and
19 real-valued variables.
Although the total number of hyperparameters in the full conﬁguration space
is large, the number of active hyperparameters describing any one model is
much smaller: a model consisting of PCA and a RandomForest for example,
would have only 12 active hyperparameters (1 for the choice of preprocessing, 2internal to PCA, 1 for the choice of classiﬁer and 8 internal to the RF). Hyperopt
description language allows us to differentiate between conditional hyperparameters
(which must always be assigned) and non-conditional hyperparameters (whichmay remain unassigned when they would be unused). We make use of this