212 I. Guyon et al.
10.6 Discussion
We brieﬂy summarize the main questions we asked ourselves and the main
ﬁndings:
1.Was the provided time budget sufﬁcient to complete the tasks of the
challenge? We drew learning curves as a function of time for the winning
solution of aad_freiburg (auto-sklearn, see the online appendix). This revealed
that for most datasets, performances still improved well beyond the time limit
imposed by the organizers. Although for about half the datasets the improvement
is modest (no more that 20% of the score obtained at the end of the imposedtime limit), for some datasets the improvement was very large (more than 2 ×the
original score). The improvements are usually gradual, but sudden performance
improvements occur. For instance, for Wallis, the score doubled suddenly at 3 ×
the time limit imposed in the challenge. As also noted by the authors of the auto-
sklearn package [ 25], it has a slow start but in the long run gets performances
close to the best method.
2.Are there tasks that were signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult than others for the
participants? Yes, there was a very wide range of difﬁculties for the tasks
as revealed by the dispersion of the participants in terms of average (median)and variability (third quartile) of their scores. Madeline, a synthetic dataset
featuring a very non-linear task, was very difﬁcult for many participants. Other
difﬁculties that caused failures to return a solution included large memoryrequirements (particularly for methods that attempted to convert sparse matrices
to full matrices), and short time budgets for datasets with large number of training
examples and/or features or with many classes or labels.
3.Are there meta-features of datasets and methods providing useful insight to
recommend certain methods for certain types of datasets? Theaad_freiburg
team used a subset of 53 meta-features (a superset of the simple statisticsprovided with the challenge datasets) to measure similarity between datasets.
This allowed them to conduct hyper-parameter search more effectively by
initializing the search with settings identical to those selected for similar datasetspreviously processed (a form of meta-learning). Our own analysis revealed
that it is very difﬁcult to predict the predictors’ performances from the meta-
features, but it is possible to predict relatively accurately which “basic method”will perform best. With LDA, we could visualize how datasets recoup in two
dimensions and show a clean separation between datasets “preferring” Naive
Bayes, linear SGD, or KNN, or RF. This deserves further investigation.
4.Does hyper-parameter optimization really improve performance over using
default values? The comparison we conducted reveals that optimizing hyper-
parameters rather than choosing default values for a set of four basic predictivemodels (K-nearest neighbors, Random Forests, linear SGD, and Naive Bayes) is
generally beneﬁcial. In the majority of cases (but not always), hyper-parameter
optimization (hyper-opt) results in better performances than default values.