5 Hyperopt-Sklearn 107
Table 5.1 Hyperopt-sklearn scores relative to selections from literature on the three data sets used
in our experiments. On MNIST, hyperopt-sklearn is one of the best-scoring methods that does notuse image-speciﬁc domain knowledge (these scores and others may be found at http://yann.lecun.
com/exdb/mnist/ ). On 20 Newsgroups, hyperopt-sklearn is competitive with similar approaches
from the literature (scores taken from [ 7]). In the 20 Newsgroups data set, the score reported
for hyperopt-sklearn is the weighted-average F1 score provided by sklearn. The other approachesshown here use the macro-average F1 score. On Convex Shapes, hyperopt-sklearn outperformsprevious automated algorithm conﬁguration approaches [ 6] and manual tuning [ 11]
MNIST 20 Newsgroups Convex shapes
Approach Accuracy Approach F-Score Approach Accuracy
Committee of convnets 99.8% CFC 0.928 hyperopt-sklearn 88.7%
hyperopt-sklearn 98.7% hyperopt-sklearn 0.856 hp-dbnet 84.6%
libSVM grid search 98.6% SVMTorch 0.848 dbn-3 81.4%
Boosted trees 98.5% LibSVM 0.843
Fig. 5.2 Left: Best model performance. For each data set, searching the full conﬁguration space
(“Any Classiﬁer”) delivered performance approximately on par with a search that was restrictedto the best classiﬁer type. Each bar represents the score obtained from a search restricted to thatparticular classiﬁer. For the “Any Classiﬁer” case there is no restriction on the search space. Inall cases 300 hyperparameter evaluations were performed. Score is F1 for 20 Newsgroups, andaccuracy for MNIST and Convex Shapes.Right: Model selection distribution. Looking at the best models from all optimization runsperformed on the full search space (Any Classiﬁer, using different initial conditions, and differentoptimization algorithms) we see that different data sets are handled best by different classiﬁers.SVC was the only classiﬁer ever chosen as the best model for Convex Shapes, and was often foundto be best on MNIST and 20 Newsgroups, however the best SVC parameters were very differentacross data sets
The CFC model that performed quite well on the 20 newsgroups document
classiﬁcation data set is a Class-Feature-Centroid classiﬁer. Centroid approachesare typically inferior to an SVM, due to the centroids found during training being
far from the optimal location. The CFC method reported here uses a centroid
built from the inter-class term index and the inner-class term index. It uses anovel combination of these indices along with a denormalized cosine measure to
calculate the similarity score between the centroid and a text vector [ 7]. This style
of model is not currently implemented in hyperopt-sklearn, and our experiments