Chapter 2
Meta-Learning
Joaquin Vanschoren
Abstract Meta-learning, or learning to learn , is the science of systematically
observing how different machine learning approaches perform on a wide range of
learning tasks, and then learning from this experience, or meta-data ,t ol e a r nn e w
tasks much faster than otherwise possible. Not only does this dramatically speed up
and improve the design of machine learning pipelines or neural architectures, it also
allows us to replace hand-engineered algorithms with novel approaches learned in
a data-driven way. In this chapter, we provide an overview of the state of the art in
this fascinating and continuously evolving ﬁeld.
2.1 Introduction
When we learn new skills, we rarely – if ever – start from scratch. We start from
skills learned earlier in related tasks, reuse approaches that worked well before,
and focus on what is likely worth trying based on experience [ 82]. With every skill
learned, learning new skills becomes easier, requiring fewer examples and less trial-
and-error. In short, we learn how to learn across tasks. Likewise, when building
machine learning models for a speciﬁc task, we often build on experience with
related tasks, or use our (often implicit) understanding of the behavior of machine
learning techniques to help make the right choices.
The challenge in meta-learning is to learn from prior experience in a systematic,
data-driven way. First, we need to collect meta-data that describe prior learning
tasks and previously learned models. They comprise the exact algorithm con-
ﬁgurations used to train the models, including hyperparameter settings, pipeline
compositions and/or network architectures, the resulting model evaluations , such
as accuracy and training time, the learned model parameters, such as the trained
weights of a neural net, as well as measurable properties of the task itself, also
J. Vanschoren (/envelopeback)
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, Eindhoven, North Brabant,
The Netherlands
e-mail: j.vanschoren@tue.nl
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_235