170 C. Steinruecken et al.
In interactive systems, a data loading stage provides an instant summary about
the uploaded dataset, and allows the user to correct any assumptions about the
format of the data. The user can make type annotations, remove columns from thedataset, choose an output variable (e.g. for classiﬁcation), and specify the analyses
that should be run.
9.4.2 Design Challenges
9.4.2.1 User Interaction
While the aim of an Automatic Statistician is to automate allaspects of data
handling (from low-level tasks such as formatting and clean-up, to high-level taskssuch as model construction, evaluation, and criticism), it is also useful to give
users the option to interact with the system and inﬂuence the choices it makes. For
example, users might want to specify which parts or which aspects of the data theyare interested in, and which parts can be ignored. Some users might want to choose
the family of models that the system will consider in the model construction or
evaluation phase. Finally, the system may want to engage in a dialogue with theuser to explore or explain what it found in the data. Such interactivity needs to be
supported by the underlying system.
9.4.2.2 Missing and Messy Data
A common problem with real-world datasets is that they may have missing or
corrupt entries, unit or formatting inconsistencies, or other kinds of defects. These
kinds of defects may require some pre-processing of the data, and while manydecisions could be made automatically, some might beneﬁt from interaction with
the user. Good models can handle missing data directly, and as long as the missing
data is detected correctly by the data loading stage, everything should be ﬁne.But there are some data models that cannot handle missing data natively. In such
cases, it might be useful to perform data imputation to feed these models a version
of the dataset that has the missing values ﬁlled in. This imputation task itself isperformed by a model that is trained on the data. Examples of such techniques
include e.g. MissForest [ 31], MissPaLasso [ 30], mice [ 3], KNNimpute [ 34], and
Bayesian approaches [ 1,7].
9.4.2.3 Resource Allocation
Another important aspect of an Automatic Statistician is resource usage .F o r
example, a user might only have a limited number of CPU cores available, ormight be interested to get the best possible report within a ﬁxed time limit,