10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 211
one-hot-encoding of categorical variables. Simple normalizations were used. The
irrelevant variables were ignored by 2/3 of the participants and no use of feature
selection was made by top-ranking participants. The methods used that involveensembling seem to be intrinsically robust against irrelevant variables. More details
from the fact sheets are found in the online appendix.
Unsupervised learning Despite the recent regain of interest in unsupervised
learning spurred by the Deep Learning community, in the AutoML challenge series,
unsupervised learning is not widely used, except for the use of classical space
dimensionality reduction techniques such as ICA and PCA. See the online appendixfor more details.
Transfer learning and meta learning To our knowledge, only aad_freiburg relied
on meta-learning to initialize their hyper-parameter search. To that end, they used
datasets of OpenML.
13The number of datasets released and the diversity of tasks
did not allow the participants to perform effective transfer learning or meta learning.
Deep learning The type of computations resources available in AutoML phases
ruled out the use of Deep Learning, except in the GPU track. However, even inthat track, the Deep Learning methods did not come out ahead. One exception is
aad_freiburg , who used Deep Learning in Tweakathon rounds three and four and
found it to be helpful for the datasets Alexis, Tania and Yolanda.
Task and metric optimization There were four types of tasks (regression, binary
classiﬁcation, multi-class classiﬁcation, and multi-label classiﬁcation) and six
scoring metrics (R2, ABS, BAC, AUC, F1, and PAC). Moreover, class balance and
number of classes varied a lot for classiﬁcation problems. Moderate effort has beenput into designing methods optimizing speciﬁc metrics. Rather, generic methods
were used and the outputs post-ﬁtted to the target metrics by cross-validation or
through the ensembling method.
Engineering One of the big lessons of the AutoML challenge series is that most
methods fail to return results in all cases, not a “good” result, but “any” reasonable
result. Reasons for failure include “out of time” and “out of memory” or variousother failures (e.g., numerical instabilities). We are still very far from having “basic
models” that run on all datasets. One of the strengths of auto-sklearn is to ignore
those models that fail and generally ﬁnd at least one that returns a result.
Parallelism The computers made available had several cores, so in principle, the
participants could make use of parallelism. One common strategy was just to
rely on numerical libraries that internally use such parallelism automatically. The
aad_freiburg team used the different cores to launch in parallel model search for
different datasets (since each round included ﬁve datasets). These different uses of
computational resources are visible in the learning curves (see the online appendix).
13https://www.openml.org/