3 Neural Architecture Search 67
when using a cell-based search space, namely how to choose the meta-architecture :
how many cells shall be used and how should they be connected to build the
actual model? For example, Zoph et al. [ 75] build a sequential model from cells,
in which each cell receives the outputs of the two preceding cells as input, while
Cai et al. [ 11] employ the high-level structure of well-known manually designed
architectures, such as DenseNet [ 29], and use their cells within these models. In
principle, cells can be combined arbitrarily, e.g., within the multi-branch space
described above by simply replacing layers with cells. Ideally, the meta-architecture
should be optimized automatically as part of NAS; otherwise one easily ends updoing meta-architecture engineering and the search for the cell becomes overly
simple if most of the complexity is already accounted for by the meta-architecture.
One step in the direction of optimizing meta-architectures is the hierarchical
search space introduced by Liu et al. [ 38], which consists of several levels of motifs.
The ﬁrst level consists of the set of primitive operations, the second level of different
motifs that connect primitive operations via a direct acyclic graphs, the third levelof motifs that encode how to connect second-level motifs, and so on. The cell-based
search space can be seen as a special case of this hierarchical search space where
the number of levels is three, the second level motifs corresponds to the cells, andthe third level is the hard-coded meta-architecture.
The choice of the search space largely determines the difﬁculty of the optimiza-
tion problem: even for the case of the search space based on a single cell withﬁxed meta-architecture, the optimization problem remains (i) non-continuous and
(ii) relatively high-dimensional (since more complex models tend to perform better,
resulting in more design choices). We note that the architectures in many searchspaces can be written as ﬁxed-length vectors; e.g., the search space for each of the
two cells by Zoph et al. [ 75] can be written as a 40-dimensional search space with
categorical dimensions, each of which chooses between a small number of differentbuilding blocks and inputs. Similarly, unbounded search spaces can be constrained
to have a maximal depth, giving rise to ﬁxed-size search spaces with (potentially
many) conditional dimensions.
In the next section, we discuss Search Strategies that are well-suited for these
kinds of search spaces.
3.3 Search Strategy
Many different search strategies can be used to explore the space of neural archi-
tectures, including random search, Bayesian optimization, evolutionary methods,reinforcement learning (RL), and gradient-based methods. Historically, evolution-
ary algorithms were already used by many researchers to evolve neural architectures
(and often also their weights) decades ago [see, e.g., 2,25,55,56]. Yao [ 67] provides
a literature review of work earlier than 2000.
Bayesian optimization celebrated several early successes in NAS since 2013,
leading to state-of-the-art vision architectures [ 7], state-of-the-art performance for
CIFAR-10 without data augmentation [ 19], and the ﬁrst automatically-tuned neural