188 I. Guyon et al.
learning algorithm to make the search more efﬁcient. For instance, some embedded
methods compute the leave-one-out solution in a closed form, without leaving
anything out, i.e., by performing a single model training on all the training data (e.g.,[38]). Other embedded methods jointly optimize parameters and hyper-parameters
[44,50,51].
In summary, many authors focus only on the efﬁciency of search, ignoring the
problem of overﬁtting the second level objective J
2, which is often chosen to be
k-fold cross-validation with an arbitrary value for k. Bayesian methods introduce
techniques of overﬁtting avoidance via the notion of hyper-priors, but at the expenseof making assumptions on how the data were generated and without providing
guarantees of performance. In all the prior approaches to full model selection
we know of, there is no attempt to treat the problem as the optimization of aregularized functional J
2with respect to both (1) modeling choices and (2) data
split. Much remains to be done to jointly address statistical and computational
issues. The AutoML challenge series offers benchmarks to compare and contrastmethods addressing these problems, free of the inventor/evaluator bias.
10.3 Data
We gathered a ﬁrst pool of 70 datasets during the summer 2014 with the help
of numerous collaborators and ended up selecting 30 datasets for the 2015/2016
challenge (see Table 10.2 and the online appendix), chosen to illustrate a wide
variety of domains of applications: biology and medicine, ecology, energy and
sustainability management, image, text, audio, speech, video and other sensor data
processing, internet social media management and advertising, market analysis andﬁnancial prediction. We preprocessed data to obtain feature representations (i.e.,
each example consists of a ﬁxed number of numerical coefﬁcients). Text, speech,
and video processing tasks were included in the challenge, but not in their nativevariable-length representations.
For the 2018 challenge, three datasets from the ﬁrst pool (but unused in the ﬁrst
challenge) were selected and seven new datasets collected by the new organizersand sponsors were added (see Table 10.3 and the online appendix).
Some datasets were obtained from public sources, but they were reformatted
into new representations to conceal their identity, except for the ﬁnal round of the2015/2016 challenge and the ﬁnal phase of the 2018 challenge, which included
completely new data.
In the 2015/2016 challenge, data difﬁculty progressively increased from round
to round. Round 0 introduced ﬁve (public) datasets from previous challenges
illustrating the various difﬁculties encountered in subsequent rounds:
Novice Binary classiﬁcation problems only. No missing data; no categorical
features; moderate number of features ( <2,000); balanced classes. Challenge