2 Meta-Learning 45
values can differ greatly between tasks. A GP regression converts the ranks to
probabilities to do Bayesian optimization, and each new Pi,new is used to retrain
the surrogate model after every step.
Schilling et al. [ 148] use a modiﬁed multilayer perceptron as a surrogate model,
of the form sj(θi,m(t j),b(t j))=Pi,jwhere m(tj)are the meta-features and b(tj)
is a vector of jbinary indications which are 1 if the meta-instance is from tj
and 0 otherwise. The multi-layer perceptron uses a modiﬁed activation function
based on factorization machines [ 132] in the ﬁrst layer, aimed at learning a latent
representation for each task to model task similarities. Since this model cannotrepresent uncertainties, an ensemble of 100 multilayer perceptrons is trained to get
predictive means and simulate variances.
Training a single surrogate model on all prior meta-data is often less scalable.
Yogatama and Mann [ 190] also build a single Bayesian surrogate model, but only
include tasks similar to t
new, where task similarity is deﬁned as the Euclidean
distance between meta-feature vectors consisting of 3 simple meta-features. TheP
i,jvalues are standardized to overcome the problem of different scales for each tj.
The surrogate model learns a Gaussian process with a speciﬁc kernel combination
on all instances.
Feurer et al. [ 48] offer a simpler, more scalable method that warm-starts
Bayesian optimization by sorting all prior tasks tjsimilar to [ 59], but including
46 simple, statistical, and landmarking meta-features, as well as H(C).T h etbest
conﬁgurations on the dmost similar tasks are used to warm-start the surrogate
model. They search over many more hyperparameters than earlier work, including
preprocessing steps. This warm-starting approach was also used in later work [ 46],
which is discussed in detail in Chap. 6.
Finally, one can also use collaborative ﬁltering to recommend promising con-
ﬁgurations [ 162]. By analogy, the tasks tj(users) provide ratings ( Pi,j)f o rt h e
conﬁgurations θi(items), and matrix factorization techniques are used to predict
unknown Pi,jvalues and recommend the best conﬁgurations for any task. An
important issue here is the cold start problem, since the matrix factorization requiresat least some evaluations on t
new. Yang et al. [ 189] use a D-optimal experiment
design to sample an initial set of evaluations Pi,new . They predict both the predictive
performance and runtime, to recommend a set of warm-start conﬁgurations thatare both accurate and fast. Misir and Sebag [ 102,103] leverage meta-features to
solve the cold start problem. Fusi et al. [ 54] also use meta-features, following the
same procedure as [ 46], and use a probabilistic matrix factorization approach that
allows them to perform Bayesian optimization to further optimize their pipeline
conﬁgurations θ
i. This approach yields useful latent embeddings of both the tasks
and conﬁgurations, in which the bayesian optimization can be performed moreefﬁciently.