118 M. Feurer et al.
6.3.2 Automated Ensemble Construction of Models Evaluated
During Optimization
While Bayesian hyperparameter optimization is data-efﬁcient in ﬁnding the best-
performing hyperparameter setting, we note that it is a very wasteful procedurewhen the goal is simply to make good predictions: all the models it trains during
the course of the search are lost, usually including some that perform almost as
well as the best. Rather than discarding these models, we propose to store themand to use an efﬁcient post-processing method (which can be run in a second
process on-the-ﬂy) to construct an ensemble out of them. This automatic ensemble
construction avoids to commit itself to a single hyperparameter setting and isthus more robust (and less prone to overﬁtting) than using the point estimate that
standard hyperparameter optimization yields. To our best knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to make this simple observation, which can be applied to improve any Bayesianhyperparameter optimization method.
1
It is well known that ensembles often outperform individual models [ 24,31], and
that effective ensembles can be created from a library of models [ 9,10]. Ensembles
perform particularly well if the models they are based on (1) are individually strong
and (2) make uncorrelated errors [ 6]. Since this is much more likely when the
individual models are different in nature, ensemble building is particularly wellsuited for combining strong instantiations of a ﬂexible ML framework.
However, simply building a uniformly weighted ensemble of the models found
by Bayesian optimization does notwork well. Rather, we found it crucial to adjust
these weights using the predictions of all individual models on a hold-out set. We
experimented with different approaches to optimize these weights: stacking [44],
gradient-free numerical optimization, and the method ensemble selection [10].
While we found both numerical optimization and stacking to overﬁt to the validation
set and to be computationally costly, ensemble selection was fast and robust. In
a nutshell, ensemble selection (introduced by Caruana et al. [ 10]) is a greedy
procedure that starts from an empty ensemble and then iteratively adds the model
that minimizes ensemble validation loss (with uniform weight, but allowing for
repetitions). We used this technique in all our experiments—building an ensembleof size 50 using selection with replacement [ 10]. We calculated the ensemble loss
using the same validation set that we use for Bayesian optimization.
1Since the original publication [ 20] we have learned that Escalante et al. [ 16]a n dB ü r g e r
and Pauli [ 8] applied ensembles as a post-processing step of an AutoML system to improve
generalization as well. However, both works combined the learned models with a pre-deﬁnedstrategy and did not adapt the ensemble construction based on the performance of the individualmodels.