10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 195
Table 10.4 Phases of round n in the 2015/2016 challenge. For each dataset, one labeled training
set is provided and two unlabeled sets (validation set and test set) are provided for testing
Phase in round[n]
Goal Duration Submissions DataLeader-boardscores
Prizes
* AutoML[n] Blind Short NONE New datasets, Test Yes
test (code not set
of code migrated) downloadable results
Tweakathon[n] Manual Months Code and/ Datasets Validation No
tweaking or results downloadable set results
*F i n a l [ n ] Results of Short NONE NA Test Yes
Tweakathon (results set
revealed migrated) results
In order to encourage participants to try GPUs and deep learning, a GPU track
sponsored by NVIDIA was included in Round 4.
To participate in the Final[n], code or results had to be submitted in
Tweakathon[n]. If both code and (well-formatted) results were submitted, theresults were used for scoring rather than rerunning the code in Tweakathon[n]
and Final[n]. The code was executed when results were unavailable or not well
formatted. Thus, there was no disadvantage in submitting both results and code. Ifa participant submitted both results and code, different methods could be used to
enter the Tweakathon/Final phases and the AutoML phases. Submissions were made
only during Tweakathons, with a maximum of ﬁve submissions per day. Immediatefeedback was provided on the leaderboard on validation data. The participants were
ranked on the basis of test performance during the Final and AutoML phases.
We provided baseline software using the ML library scikit-learn [ 55]. It uses
ensemble methods, which improve over time by adding more base learners. Other
than the number of base learners, the default hyper-parameter settings were used.
The participants were not obliged to use the Python language nor the main Pythonscript we gave as an example. However, most participants found it convenient to
use the main python script, which managed the sparse format, the any-time learning
settings and the scoring metrics. Many limited themselves to search for the bestmodel in the scikit-learn library. This shows the importance of providing a good
starting kit, but also the danger of biasing results towards particular solutions.
10.4.4 Phases in the 2018 Challenge
The 2015/2016 AutoML challenge was very long and few teams participated in
all rounds. Further, even though there was no obligation to participate in previousrounds to enter new rounds, new potential participants felt they would be at a
disadvantage. Hence, we believe it is preferable to organize recurrent yearly events,
each with their own workshop and publication opportunity. This provides a goodbalance between competition and collaboration.