3 Neural Architecture Search 73
it unlikely that NAS will ﬁnd architectures that substantially outperform existing
ones considerably since the found architectures cannot differ fundamentally. We
thus consider it important to go beyond image classiﬁcation problems by applyingNAS to less explored domains. Notable ﬁrst steps in this direction are applying
NAS to language modeling [ 74], music modeling [ 48], image restoration [ 58]
and network compression [ 3]; applications to reinforcement learning, generative
adversarial networks, semantic segmentation, or sensor fusion could be further
promising future directions.
An alternative direction is developing NAS methods for multi-task problems
[36,42] and for multi-objective problems [ 20,22,73], in which measures of
resource efﬁciency are used as objectives along with the predictive performance
on unseen data. Likewise, it would be interesting to extend RL/bandit approaches,such as those discussed in Sect. 3.3, to learn policies that are conditioned on a state
that encodes task properties/resource requirements (i.e., turning the setting into a
contextual bandit). A similar direction was followed by Ramachandran and Le [ 47]
in extending one-shot NAS to generate different architectures depending on the task
or instance on-the-ﬂy. Moreover, applying NAS to searching for architectures that
are more robust to adversarial examples [ 17] is an intriguing recent direction.
Related to this is research on deﬁning more general and ﬂexible search spaces.
For instance, while the cell-based search space provides high transferability between
different image classiﬁcation tasks, it is largely based on human experience onimage classiﬁcation and does not generalize easily to other domains where the hard-
coded hierarchical structure (repeating the same cells several times in a chain-like
structure) does not apply (e.g., semantic segmentation or object detection). A searchspace which allows representing and identifying more general hierarchical structure
would thus make NAS more broadly applicable, see Liu et al. [ 38] for ﬁrst work
in this direction. Moreover, common search spaces are also based on predeﬁnedbuilding blocks, such as different kinds of convolutions and pooling, but do not
allow identifying novel building blocks on this level; going beyond this limitation
might substantially increase the power of NAS.
The comparison of different methods for NAS is complicated by the fact that
measurements of an architecture’s performance depend on many factors other than
the architecture itself. While most authors report results on the CIFAR-10 dataset,experiments often differ with regard to search space, computational budget, data
augmentation, training procedures, regularization, and other factors. For example,
for CIFAR-10, performance substantially improves when using a cosine annealinglearning rate schedule [ 40], data augmentation by CutOut [ 18], by MixUp [ 70]o r
by a combination of factors [ 16], and regularization by Shake-Shake regularization
[26] or scheduled drop-path [ 75]. It is therefore conceivable that improvements in
these ingredients have a larger impact on reported performance numbers than the
better architectures found by NAS. We thus consider the deﬁnition of common
benchmarks to be crucial for a fair comparison of different NAS methods. Aﬁrst step in this direction is the deﬁnition of a benchmark for joint architecture
and hyperparameter search for a fully connected neural network with two hidden
layers [ 33]. In this benchmark, nine discrete hyperparameters need to be optimized