Chapter 6
Auto-sklearn: Efﬁcient and Robust
Automated Machine Learning
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger,
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank Hutter
Abstract The success of machine learning in a broad range of applications has led
to an ever-growing demand for machine learning systems that can be used off the
shelf by non-experts. To be effective in practice, such systems need to automatically
choose a good algorithm and feature preprocessing steps for a new dataset at hand,
and also set their respective hyperparameters. Recent work has started to tackle this
automated machine learning (AutoML) problem with the help of efﬁcient Bayesian
optimization methods. Building on this, we introduce a robust new AutoML system
based on the Python machine learning package scikit-learn (using 15 classiﬁers, 14
feature preprocessing methods, and 4 data preprocessing methods, giving rise to a
structured hypothesis space with 110 hyperparameters). This system, which we dub
Auto-sklearn , improves on existing AutoML methods by automatically taking into
account past performance on similar datasets, and by constructing ensembles from
the models evaluated during the optimization. Our system won six out of ten phases
of the ﬁrst ChaLearn AutoML challenge, and our comprehensive analysis on over
100 diverse datasets shows that it substantially outperforms the previous state of
the art in AutoML. We also demonstrate the performance gains due to each of our
contributions and derive insights into the effectiveness of the individual components
of Auto-sklearn.
6.1 Introduction
Machine learning has recently made great strides in many application areas, fueling
a growing demand for machine learning systems that can be used effectively by
novices in machine learning. Correspondingly, a growing number of commercial
M. Feurer (/envelopeback) · A. Klein · K. Eggensperger · J. T. Springenberg · M. Blum
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Baden-Württemberg,
Germany
e-mail: feurerm@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
F. Hutter
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_6113