140 H. Mendoza et al.
to use PyTorch because of its ability to dynamically construct computational graphs.
For this reason, we also started referring to Auto-Net 2.0 as Auto-PyTorch.
The search space of AutoNet 2.0 includes both hyperparameters for module
selection (e.g. scheduler type, network architecture) and hyperparameters for each
of the speciﬁc modules. It supports different deep learning modules, such as network
type, learning rate scheduler, optimizer and regularization technique, as describedbelow. Auto-Net 2.0 is also designed to be easily extended; users can add their own
modules to the ones listed below.
Auto-Net 2.0 currently offers four different network types:
Multi-Layer Perceptrons This is a standard implementation of conventional
MLPs extended by dropout layers [ 38]. Similar as in AutoNet 1.0, each layer
of the MLP is parameterized (e.g., number of units and dropout rate).
Residual Neural Networks These are deep neural networks that learn residual
functions [ 47], with the difference that we use fully connected layers instead
of convolutional ones. As is standard with ResNets, the architecture consists
ofMgroups, each of which stacks Nresidual blocks in sequence. While the
architecture of each block is ﬁxed, the number Mof groups, the number of
blocks Nper group, as well as the width of each group is determined by
hyperparameters, as shown in Table 7.2.
Shaped Multi-Layer Perceptrons To avoid that every layer has its own hyper-
parameters (which is an inefﬁcient representation to search), in shaped MLPs
the overall shape of the layers is predetermined, e.g. as a funnel, long funnel,
diamond, hexagon, brick, or triangle. We followed the shapes from https://
mikkokotila.github.io/slate/#shapes ; Ilya Loshchilov also proposed parameteri-
zation by such shapes to us before [ 25].
Shaped Residual Networks A ResNet where the overall shape of the layers is
predetermined (e.g. funnel, long funnel, diamond, hexagon, brick, triangle).
The network types of ResNets and ShapedResNets can also use any of the
regularization methods of Shake-Shake [ 13] and ShakeDrop [ 46]. MixUp [ 49] can
be used for all networks.
The optimizers currently supported in Auto-Net 2.0 are Adam [ 21] and SGD
with momentum. Moreover, Auto-Net 2.0 currently offers ﬁve different schedulers
that change the optimizer’s learning rate over time (as a function of the number ofepochs):
Exponential This multiplies the learning rate with a constant factor in each
epoch.
Step This decays the learning rate by a multiplicative factor after a constant
number of steps.
Cyclic This modiﬁes the learning rate in a certain range, alternating between
increasing and decreasing [ 37].
Cosine Annealing with Warm Restarts [24] This learning rate schedule imple-
ments multiple phases of convergence. It cools down the learning rate to zero
following a cosine decay [ 24], and after each convergence phase heats it up to
start a next phase of convergence, often to a better optimum. The network weights