1 Hyperparameter Optimization 11
uncertainty estimates and closed-form computability of the predictive distribution.
A Gaussian process G/parenleftbig
m(λ),k(λ,λ/prime)/parenrightbig
is fully speciﬁed by a mean m(λ)and a
covariance function k(λ,λ/prime), although the mean function is usually assumed to be
constant in Bayesian optimization. Mean and variance predictions μ(·)andσ2(·)
for the noise-free case can be obtained by:
μ(λ)=kT
∗K−1y,σ2(λ)=k(λ,λ)−kT
∗K−1k∗, (1.4)
where k∗denotes the vector of covariances between λand all previous observations,
Kis the covariance matrix of all previously evaluated conﬁgurations and yare
the observed function values. The quality of the Gaussian process depends solely
on the covariance function. A common choice is the Mátern 5 /2 kernel, with its
hyperparameters integrated out by Markov Chain Monte Carlo [ 140].
One downside of standard Gaussian processes is that they scale cubically in
the number of data points, limiting their applicability when one can afford manyfunction evaluations (e.g., with many parallel workers, or when function evaluations
are cheap due to the use of lower ﬁdelities). This cubic scaling can be avoided
by scalable Gaussian process approximations, such as sparse Gaussian processes.These approximate the full Gaussian process by using only a subset of the original
dataset as inducing points to build the kernel matrix K. While they allowed Bayesian
optimization with GPs to scale to tens of thousands of datapoints for optimizing theparameters of a randomized SAT solver [ 62], there are criticism about the calibration
of their uncertainty estimates and their applicability to standard HPO has not been
tested [ 104,154].
Another downside of Gaussian processes with standard kernels is their poor
scalability to high dimensions. As a result, many extensions have been proposed
to efﬁciently handle intrinsic properties of conﬁguration spaces with large numberof hyperparameters, such as the use of random embeddings [ 153], using Gaussian
processes on partitions of the conﬁguration space [ 154], cylindric kernels [ 114], and
additive kernels [ 40,75].
Since some other machine learning models are more scalable and ﬂexible than
Gaussian processes, there is also a large body of research on adapting these models
to Bayesian optimization. Firstly, (deep) neural networks are a very ﬂexible andscalable models. The simplest way to apply them to Bayesian optimization is as a
feature extractor to preprocess inputs and then use the outputs of the ﬁnal hidden
layer as basis functions for Bayesian linear regression [ 141]. A more complex, fully
Bayesian treatment of the network weights, is also possible by using a Bayesian
neural network trained with stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [ 144].
Neural networks tend to be faster than Gaussian processes for Bayesian optimizationafter∼250 function evaluations, which also allows for large-scale parallelism. The
ﬂexibility of deep learning can also enable Bayesian optimization on more complex
tasks. For example, a variational auto-encoder can be used to embed complex inputs(such as the structured conﬁgurations of the automated statistician, see Chap. 9)
into a real-valued vector such that a regular Gaussian process can handle it [ 92].
For multi-source Bayesian optimization, a neural network architecture built on