154 R. S. Olson and J. H. Moore
In order for these tree-based pipelines to operate, we store three additional
variables for each record in the dataset. The “class” variable indicates the true label
for each record, and is used when evaluating the accuracy of each pipeline. The“guess” variable indicates the pipeline’s latest guess for each record, where the
predictions from the ﬁnal classiﬁcation operator in the pipeline are stored as the
“guess”. Finally, the “group” variable indicates whether the record is to be used asa part of the internal training or testing set, such that the tree-based pipelines are
only trained on the training data and evaluated on the testing data. We note that the
dataset provided to TPOT as training data is further split into an internal stratiﬁed75%/25% training/testing set.
8.2.3 Optimizing Tree-Based Pipelines
To automatically generate and optimize these tree-based pipelines, we use a genetic
programming (GP) algorithm [ 1] as implemented in the Python package DEAP [ 7].
The TPOT GP algorithm follows a standard GP process: To begin, the GP algorithmgenerates 100 random tree-based pipelines and evaluates their balanced cross-
validation accuracy on the dataset. For every generation of the GP algorithm, the
algorithm selects the top 20 pipelines in the population according to the NSGA-II selection scheme [ 4], where pipelines are selected to simultaneously maximize
classiﬁcation accuracy on the dataset while minimizing the number of operators
in the pipeline. Each of the top 20 selected pipelines produce ﬁve copies (i.e.,offspring) into the next generation’s population, 5% of those offspring cross over
with another offspring using one-point crossover, then 90% of the remaining
unaffected offspring are randomly changed by a point, insert, or shrink mutation(1/3 chance of each). Every generation, the algorithm updates a Pareto front of the
non-dominated solutions [ 4] discovered at any point in the GP run. The algorithm
repeats this evaluate-select-crossover-mutate process for 100 generations—addingand tuning pipeline operators that improve classiﬁcation accuracy and pruning
operators that degrade classiﬁcation accuracy—at which point the algorithm selects
the highest-accuracy pipeline from the Pareto front as the representative “best”pipeline from the run.
8.2.4 Benchmark Data
We compiled 150 supervised classiﬁcation benchmarks1from a wide variety of
sources, including the UCI machine learning repository [ 11], a large preexisting
benchmark repository from [ 18], and simulated genetic analysis datasets from [ 20].
1Benchmark data at https://github.com/EpistasisLab/penn-ml-benchmarks