14 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
1.4 Multi-ﬁdelity Optimization
Increasing dataset sizes and increasingly complex models are a major hurdle in HPO
since they make blackbox performance evaluation more expensive. Training a singlehyperparameter conﬁguration on large datasets can nowadays easily exceed several
hours and take up to several days [ 85].
A common technique to speed up manual tuning is therefore to probe an
algorithm/hyperparameter conﬁguration on a small subset of the data, by training
it only for a few iterations, by running it on a subset of features, by only using one
or a few of the cross-validation folds, or by using down-sampled images in computervision. Multi-ﬁdelity methods cast such manual heuristics into formal algorithms,
using so-called low ﬁdelity approximations of the actual loss function to minimize.
These approximations introduce a tradeoff between optimization performance andruntime, but in practice, the obtained speedups often outweigh the approximation
error.
First, we review methods which model an algorithm’s learning curve during
training and can stop the training procedure if adding further resources is predicted
to not help. Second, we discuss simple selection methods which only choose
one of a ﬁnite set of given algorithms/hyperparameter conﬁgurations. Third, wediscuss multi-ﬁdelity methods which can actively decide which ﬁdelity will provide
most information about ﬁnding the optimal hyperparameters. We also refer to
Chap. 2(which discusses how multi-ﬁdelity methods can be used across datasets)
and Chap. 3(which describes low-ﬁdelity approximations for neural architecture
search).
1.4.1 Learning Curve-Based Prediction for Early Stopping
We start this section on multi-ﬁdelity methods in HPO with methods that evaluate
and model learning curves during HPO [ 82,123] and then decide whether to
add further resources or stop the training procedure for a given hyperparameter
conﬁguration. Examples of learning curves are the performance of the same con-
ﬁguration trained on increasing dataset subsets, or the performance of an iterativealgorithm measured for each iteration (or every i-th iteration if the calculation of
the performance is expensive).
Learning curve extrapolation is used in the context of predictive termination [26],
where a learning curve model is used to extrapolate a partially observed learning
curve for a conﬁguration, and the training process is stopped if the conﬁguration
is predicted to not reach the performance of the best model trained so far in theoptimization process. Each learning curve is modeled as a weighted combination of
11 parametric functions from various scientiﬁc areas. These functions’ parameters
and their weights are sampled via Markov chain Monte Carlo to minimize the lossof ﬁtting the partially observed learning curve. This yields a predictive distribution,