178 I. Guyon et al.
a one-round AutoML challenge (PAKDD 2018). The AutoML setting differs from
former model selection/hyper-parameter selection challenges, such as the one we
previously organized for NIPS 2006: the participants aim to develop fully automatedand computationally efﬁcient systems, capable of being trained and tested without
human intervention, with code submission. This chapter analyzes the results of these
competitions and provides details about the datasets, which were not revealed to theparticipants. The solutions of the winners are systematically benchmarked over all
datasets of all rounds and compared with canonical machine learning algorithms
available in scikit-learn. All materials discussed in this chapter (data and code) havebeen made publicly available at http://automl.chalearn.org/ .
10.1 Introduction
Until about 10 years ago, machine learning (ML) was a discipline little known
to the public. For ML scientists, it was a “seller’s market”: they were producing
hosts of algorithms in search for applications and were constantly looking for new
interesting datasets. Large internet corporations accumulating massive amounts ofdata such as Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon have popularized the use
of ML and data science competitions have engaged a new generation of young
scientists in this wake. Nowadays, government and corporations keep identifyingnew applications of ML and with the increased availability of open data, we have
switched to a “buyer’s market”: everyone seems to be in need of a learning machine.
Unfortunately however, learning machines are not yet fully automatic: it is stilldifﬁcult to ﬁgure out which software applies to which problem, how to horseshoe-ﬁt
data into a software and how to select (hyper-)parameters properly. The ambition
of the ChaLearn AutoML challenge series is to channel the energy of the MLcommunity to reduce step by step the need for human intervention in applying ML
to a wide variety of practical problems.
Full automation is an unbounded problem since there can always be novel
settings, which have never been encountered before. Our ﬁrst challenges AutoML1
were limited to:
•Supervised learning problems (classiﬁcation and regression).
•Feature vector representations.
•Homogeneous datasets (same distribution in the training, validation, and test
set).
A. Statnikov
SoFi San Francisc, California, USA
W.-W. Tu
4Paradigm, Beijing, Republic of China
E. Viegas
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA