10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 209
predictors of all folds are directly incorporated in the ensemble, which saves the
computational time of retraining a single model on the best HP selected and may
yield more robust solutions (though slightly more biased due to the smaller samplesize). The approaches differ in the way they weigh the contributions of the various
predictors. Some methods use the same weight for all predictors (this is the case
of bagging methods such as Random Forest and of Bayesian methods that samplepredictors according to their posterior probability in model space). Some methods
assess the weights of the predictors as part of learning (this is the case of boosting
methods, for instance). One simple and effective method to create ensembles ofheterogeneous models was proposed by [ 16]. It was used successfully in several
past challenges, e.g., [ 52] and is the method implemented by the aad_freibug
team, one of the strongest participants in both challenges [ 25]. The method consists
in cycling several times over all trained model and incorporating in the ensemble
at each cycle the model which most improves the performance of the ensemble.
Models vote with weight 1, but they can be incorporated multiple times, whichde facto results in weighting them. This method permits to recompute very fast the
weights of the models if cross-validated predictions are saved. Moreover, the method
allows optimizing the ensemble for any metric by post-ﬁtting the predictions of theensemble to the desired metric (an aspect which was important in this challenge).
Model evaluation: cross-validation or simple validation Evaluating the pre-
dictive accuracy of models is a critical and necessary building block of anymodel selection of ensembling method. Model selection criteria computed from
the predictive accuracy of basic models evaluated from training data, by training
a single time on all the training data (possibly at the expense of minor additionalcalculations), such as performance bounds, were not used at all, as was already the
case in previous challenges we organized [ 35]. Cross-validation was widely used,
particularly K-fold cross-validation. However, basic models were often “cheaply”evaluated on just one fold to allow quickly discarding non-promising areas of model
space. This is a technique used more and more frequently to help speed up search.
Another speed-up strategy is to train on a subset of the training examples andmonitor the learning curve. The “freeze-thaw” strategy [ 64] halts training of models
that do not look promising on the basis of the learning curve, but may restart training
them at a later point. This was used, e.g., by [ 48] in the 2015/2016 challenge.
Model space: Homogeneous vs. heterogeneous An unsettled question is whether
one should search a large or small model space. The challenge did not allow us
to give a deﬁnite answer to this question. Most participants opted for searching a
relatively large model space, including a wide variety of models found in the scikit-learn library. Yet, one of the strongest entrants (the Intel team) submitted results
simply obtained with a boosted decision tree (i.e., consisting of a homogeneous set
of weak learners/basic models). Clearly, it sufﬁces to use just one machine learningapproach that is a universal approximator to be able to learn anything, given enough
training data. So why include several? It is a question of rate of convergence: how
fast we climb the learning curve. Including stronger basic models is one way toclimb the learning curve faster. Our post-challenge experiments (Fig. 10.9) reveal