92 L. Kotthoff et al.
In contrast, we gave each of the other methods only 4 ×30 CPU hours per dataset;
nevertheless, they still yielded substantially better performance than grid search,
outperforming it in 14/21 cases. Random search outperforms grid search in 9/21cases, highlighting that even exhaustive grid search with a large time budget is not
always the right thing to do. We note that sometimes Auto-WEKA’s performance
improvements over the baselines were substantial, with relative reductions of thecross-validation loss (in this case the misclassiﬁcation rate) exceeding 10% in 6/21
cases.
4.5.3 Results for Test Performance
The results just shown demonstrate that Auto-WEKA is effective at optimizing its
given objective function; however, this is not sufﬁcient to allow us to conclude thatit ﬁts models that generalize well. As the number of hyperparameters of a machine
learning algorithm grows, so does its potential for overﬁtting. The use of cross-
validation substantially increases Auto-WEKA’s robustness against overﬁtting, butsince its hyperparameter space is much larger than that of standard classiﬁcation
algorithms, it is important to carefully study whether (and to what extent) overﬁtting
poses a problem.
To evaluate generalization, we determined a combination of algorithm and
hyperparameter settings A
λby running Auto-WEKA as before (cross-validating
on the training set), trained Aλon the entire training set, and then evaluated the
resulting model on the test set. The right portion of Table 4.2reports the test
performance obtained with all methods.
Broadly speaking, similar trends held as for cross-validation performance: Auto-
WEKA outperforms the baselines, with grid search and random search performing
better than Ex-Def. However, the performance differences were less pronounced:
grid search only yields better results than Ex-Def in 15/21 cases, and randomsearch in turn outperforms grid search in 7/21 cases. Auto-WEKA outperforms
the baselines in 15/21 cases. Notably, on 12 of the 13 largest datasets, Auto-
WEKA outperforms our baselines; we attribute this to the fact that the risk ofoverﬁtting decreases with dataset size. Sometimes, Auto-WEKA’s performance
improvements over the other methods were substantial, with relative reductions of
the test misclassiﬁcation rate exceeding 16% in 3/21 cases.
As mentioned earlier, Auto-WEKA only used 70% of its training set during
the optimization of cross-validation performance, reserving the remaining 30%
for assessing the risk of overﬁtting. At any point in time, Auto-WEKA’s SMBOmethod keeps track of its incumbent (the hyperparameter conﬁguration with the
lowest cross-validation misclassiﬁcation rate seen so far). After its SMBO procedure
has ﬁnished, Auto-WEKA extracts a trajectory of these incumbents from it andcomputes their generalization performance on the withheld 30% validation data.