10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 187
Table 10.1 Typical example of multi-level inference algorithm. The top-level algorithm Vali-
dation({GridCV(Kridge, MSE), GridCV(Neural, MSE)}, MSE) is decomposed into its elementsrecursively. Calling the method “train” on it using data D
TrVa results in a function f,t h e nt e s t e d
with test (f,MSE,D Te). The notation [.]CVindicates that results are averages over multiple data
splits (cross-validation). NA means “not applicable”. A model family Fof parameters αand
hyper-parameters θis represented as f (θ,α). We derogate to the usual convention of putting
hyper-parameters last, the hyper-parameters are listed in decreasing order of inference level. F,
thought of as a bottom level algorithm, does not perform any training: train( f(θ,α))just returns
the function f(x;θ,α)
Parameters
Level Algorithm Fixed Varying Optimization performed Data split
NA f All All Performance assessment
(no inference)DTe
4 Validation None All Final algorithm
selection using
validation dataD=[DTr,DVa]
3 GridCV Model index iθ,γ,α10-fold CV on regularly
sampled values of θDTr=[Dtr,Dva]CV
2 Kridge (θ)
Neural (θ)i,θ γ,α Virtual LOO CV to
select regularizationparameter γDtr=[D\{d}
tr,d]CV
1 Kridge (θ,γ)
Neural (θ,γ)i,θ,γ α Matrix inversion of
gradient descent tocompute αDtr
0 Kridge (θ,γ,α)
Neural (θ,γ,α)All None NA NA
usingDTron the validation set DVa, using the mean-square error) (MSE) evaluation
function. The algorithm GridCV , a grid search with 10-fold cross-validation (CV)
MSE evaluation function, then optimizes the hyper-parameters θ. Internally, both
Kridge and Neural use virtual leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation to adjust γand
a classical L2regularized risk functional to adjust α.
Borrowing from the conventional classiﬁcation of feature selection methods
[11,38,46], model search strategies can be categorized into ﬁlters, wrappers,
and embedded methods (see Fig. 10.2).Filters are methods for narrowing down
the model space, without training the learner. Such methods include prepro-cessing, feature construction, kernel design, architecture design, choice of prior
or regularizers, choice of noise model, and ﬁlter methods for feature selection.
Although some ﬁlters use training data, many incorporate human prior knowledgeof the task or knowledge compiled from previous tasks. Recently, [ 5] proposed to
apply collaborative ﬁltering methods to model search. Wrapper methods consider
learners as a black-box capable of learning from examples and making predictionsonce trained. They operate with a search algorithm in the hyper-parameter space
(grid search or stochastic search) and an evaluation function assessing the trained
learner’s performance (cross-validation error or Bayesian evidence). Embedded
methods are similar to wrappers, but they exploit the knowledge of the machine