1 Hyperparameter Optimization 17
HyperBand [ 90] is a hedging strategy designed to combat this problem when
selecting from randomly sampled conﬁgurations. It divides the total budget into
several combinations of number of conﬁgurations vs. budget for each, to then callsuccessive halving as a subroutine on each set of random conﬁgurations. Due to the
hedging strategy which includes running some conﬁgurations only on the maximal
budget, in the worst case, HyperBand takes at most a constant factor more timethan vanilla random search on the maximal budget. In practice, due to its use
of cheap low-ﬁdelity evaluations, HyperBand has been shown to improve over
vanilla random search and blackbox Bayesian optimization for data subsets, featuresubsets and iterative algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent for deep neural
networks.
Despite HyperBand’s success for deep neural networks it is very limiting to not
adapt the conﬁguration proposal strategy to the function evaluations. To overcome
this limitation, the recent approach BOHB [ 33] combines Bayesian optimization and
HyperBand to achieve the best of both worlds: strong anytime performance (quickimprovements in the beginning by using low ﬁdelities in HyperBand) and strong
ﬁnal performance (good performance in the long run by replacing HyperBand’s
random search by Bayesian optimization). BOHB also uses parallel resourceseffectively and deals with problem domains ranging from a few to many dozen
hyperparameters. BOHB’s Bayesian optimization component resembles TPE [ 12],
but differs by using multidimensional kernel density estimators. It only ﬁts a modelon the highest ﬁdelity for which at least |/Lambda1|+1 evaluations have been performed
(the number of hyperparameters, plus one). BOHB’s ﬁrst model is therefore ﬁtted
on the lowest ﬁdelity, and over time models trained on higher ﬁdelities take over,while still using the lower ﬁdelities in successive halving. Empirically, BOHB was
shown to outperform several state-of-the-art HPO methods for tuning support vector
machines, neural networks and reinforcement learning algorithms, including mostmethods presented in this section [ 33]. Further approaches to combine HyperBand
and Bayesian optimization have also been proposed [ 15,151].
Multiple ﬁdelity evaluations can also be combined with HPO in other ways.
Instead of switching between lower ﬁdelities and the highest ﬁdelity, it is possible to
perform HPO on a subset of the original data and extract the best-performing con-
ﬁgurations in order to use them as an initial design for HPO on the full dataset [ 152].
To speed up solutions to the CASH problem, it is also possible to iteratively remove
entire algorithms (and their hyperparameters) from the conﬁguration space based on
poor performance on small dataset subsets [ 159].
1.4.3 Adaptive Choices of Fidelities
All methods in the previous subsection follow a predeﬁned schedule for the
ﬁdelities. Alternatively, one might want to actively choose which ﬁdelities to
evaluate given previous observations to prevent a misspeciﬁcation of the schedule.