86 L. Kotthoff et al.
4.3.1 Sequential Model-Based Algorithm Conﬁguration
(SMAC)
Sequential model-based algorithm conﬁguration (SMAC) [ 16] supports a variety
of models p(c|λ)to capture the dependence of the loss function con hyper-
parameters λ, including approximate Gaussian processes and random forests. In
this chapter we use random forest models, since they tend to perform well with
discrete and high-dimensional input data. SMAC handles conditional parameters byinstantiating inactive conditional parameters in λto default values for model training
and prediction. This allows the individual decision trees to include splits of the kind
“is hyperparameter λ
iactive?”, allowing them to focus on active hyperparameters.
While random forests are not usually treated as probabilistic models, SMAC obtains
a predictive mean μλand variance σλ2ofp(c|λ)as frequentist estimates over the
predictions of its individual trees for λ; it then models pML(c|λ)as a Gaussian
N(μλ,σλ2).
SMAC uses the expected improvement criterion deﬁned in Eq. 4.2, instantiating
cminto the loss of the best hyperparameter conﬁguration measured so far. Under
SMAC’s predictive distribution pML(c|λ)=N(μλ,σλ2), this expectation is the
closed-form expression
EML[Icmin(λ)]=σλ·[u·/Phi1(u)+ϕ(u)],
where u=cmin−μλ
σλ, and ϕand/Phi1denote the probability density function and
cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution, respectively [ 18].
SMAC is designed for robust optimization under noisy function evaluations,
and as such implements special mechanisms to keep track of its best knownconﬁguration and assure high conﬁdence in its estimate of that conﬁguration’s
performance. This robustness against noisy function evaluations can be exploited in
combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization, since the functionto be optimized in Eq. ( 4.1) is a mean over a set of loss terms (each corresponding
to one pair of D
(i)
trainandD(i)
validconstructed from the training set). A key idea in
SMAC is to make progressively better estimates of this mean by evaluating these
terms one at a time, thus trading off accuracy and computational cost. In order fora new conﬁguration to become a new incumbent, it must outperform the previous
incumbent in every comparison made: considering only one fold, two folds, and
so on up to the total number of folds previously used to evaluate the incumbent.Furthermore, every time the incumbent survives such a comparison, it is evaluated
on a new fold, up to the total number available, meaning that the number of folds
used to evaluate the incumbent grows over time. A poorly performing conﬁgurationcan thus be discarded after considering just a single fold.
Finally, SMAC also implements a diversiﬁcation mechanism to achieve robust
performance even when its model is misled, and to explore new parts of thespace: every second conﬁguration is selected at random. Because of the evaluation
procedure just described, this requires less overhead than one might imagine.