106 B. Komer et al.
messages ([ 13], we did not remove the headers for our experiments). Convex Shapes
is a binary classiﬁcation task of distinguishing pictures of convex white-colored
regions in small (32 ×32) black-and-white images [ 11].
Fig. 5.2(left) shows that there was no penalty for searching broadly. We
performed optimization runs of up to 300 function evaluations searching the
subset of the space depicted in Fig. 5.1, and compared the quality of solu-
tion with specialized searches of speciﬁc classiﬁer types (including best known
classiﬁers).
Fig. 5.2(right) shows that search could ﬁnd different, good models. This
ﬁgure was constructed by running hyperopt-sklearn with different initial con-
ditions (number of evaluations, choice of optimization algorithm, and random
number seed) and keeping track of what ﬁnal model was chosen after each run.Although support vector machines were always among the best, the parameters
of best SVMs looked very different across data sets. For example, on the image
data sets (MNIST and Convex) the SVMs chosen never had a sigmoid or lin-ear kernel, while on 20 newsgroups the linear and sigmoid kernel were often
best.
Sometimes researchers not familiar with machine learning techniques may
simply use the default parameters of the classiﬁers available to them. To look at
the effectiveness of hyperopt-sklearn as a drop-in replacement for this approach,
a comparison between the performance of the default scikit-learn parametersand a small search (25 evaluations) of the default hyperopt-sklearn space was
conducted. The results on the 20 Newsgroups dataset are shown in Fig. 5.3.
Improved performance over the baseline is observed in all cases, which sug-gests that this search technique is valuable even with a small computational
budget.
5.6 Discussion and Future Work
Table 5.1lists the test set scores of the best models found by cross-validation,
as well as some points of reference from previous work. Hyperopt-sklearn’s
scores are relatively good on each data set, indicating that with hyperopt-sklearn’s
parameterization, Hyperopt’s optimization algorithms are competitive with humanexperts.
The model with the best performance on the MNIST Digits data set uses
deep artiﬁcial neural networks. Small receptive ﬁelds of convolutional winner-take-all neurons build up the large network. Each neural column becomes an
expert on inputs preprocessed in different ways, and the average prediction
of 35 deep neural columns to come up with a single ﬁnal prediction [ 4].
This model is much more advanced than those available in scikit-learn. The
previously best known model in the scikit-learn search space is a radial-basis
SVM on centered data that scores 98.6%, and hyperopt-sklearn matches thatperformance [ 15].