214 I. Guyon et al.
a ﬁxed maximum computational time elapsed). We ended up favoring the second
solution for practical reasons. Examining after the challenge the learning curves
of some participants, it is quite clear that the two problems are radically different,particularly with respect to strategies mitigating “exploration” and “exploitation”.
This prompted us to think about the differences between “ﬁxed time” learning (the
participants know in advance the time limit and are judged only on the solutiondelivered at the end of that time) and “any time learning” (the participants can
be stopped at any time and asked to return a solution). Both scenarios are useful:
the ﬁrst one is practical when models must be delivered continuously at a rapidpace, e.g. for marketing applications; the second one is practical in environments
when computational resources are unreliable and interruption may be expected (e.g.
people working remotely via an unreliable connection). This will inﬂuence thedesign of future challenges.
The two versions of AutoML challenge we have run differ in the difﬁculty of
transfer learning. In the 2015/2016 challenge, round 0 introduced a sample of alltypes of data and difﬁculties (types of targets, sparse data or not, missing data or
not, categorical variables of not, more examples than features or not). Then each
round ramped up difﬁculty. The datasets of round 0 were relatively easy. Then ateach round, the code of the participants was blind-tested on data that were one
notch harder than in the previous round. Hence transfer was quite hard. In the 2018
challenge, we had 2 phases, each with 5 datasets of similar difﬁculty and the datasetsof the ﬁrst phase were each matched with one corresponding dataset on a similar
task. As a result, transfer was made simpler.
Concerning the starting kit and baseline methods, we provided code that ended
up being the basis of the solution of the majority of participants (with notable
exceptions from industry such as Intel and Orange who used their own “in
house” packages). Thus, we can question whether the software provided biased theapproaches taken. Indeed, all participants used some form of ensemble learning,
similarly to the strategy used in the starting kit. However, it can be argued that this
is a “natural” strategy for this problem. But, in general, the question of providingenough starting material to the participants without biasing the challenge in a
particular direction remains a delicate issue.
From the point of view of challenge protocol design, we learned that it is
difﬁcult to keep teams focused for an extended period of time and go through
many challenge phases. We attained a large number of participants (over 600) over
the whole course of the AutoML challenge, which lasted over a year (2015/2016)and was punctuated by several events (such as hackathons). However, it may be
preferable to organize yearly events punctuated by workshops. This is a natural way
of balancing competition and cooperation since workshops are a place of exchange.Participants are naturally rewarded by the recognition they gain via the system of
scientiﬁc publications. As a conﬁrmation of this conjecture, the second instance
of the AutoML challenge (2017/2018) lasting only 4 months attracted nearly 300participants.
One important novelty of our challenge design was code submission. Having
the code of the participants executed on the same platform under rigorously similarconditions is a great step towards fairness and reproducibility, as well as ensuring the