116 M. Feurer et al.
lems [ 15]—such as the CASH problem—and are also used in the AutoML system
HYPEROPT -SKLEARN [30]. Among the tree-based Bayesian optimization methods,
Thornton et al. [ 42] found the random-forest-based SMAC [ 27] to outperform
the tree Parzen estimator TPE [ 5], and we therefore use SMAC to solve the
CASH problem in this paper. Next to its use of random forests [ 6], SMAC’s main
distinguishing feature is that it allows fast cross-validation by evaluating one fold ata time and discarding poorly-performing hyperparameter settings early.
6.3 New Methods for Increasing Efﬁciency and Robustness
of AutoML
We now discuss our two improvements of the AutoML approach. First, we include a
meta-learning step to warmstart the Bayesian optimization procedure, which resultsin a considerable boost in efﬁciency. Second, we include an automated ensemble
construction step, allowing us to use all classiﬁers that were found by Bayesian
optimization.
Fig. 6.1summarizes the overall AutoML workﬂow, including both of our
improvements. We note that we expect their effectiveness to be greater for ﬂexible
ML frameworks that offer many degrees of freedom (e.g., many algorithms,hyperparameters, and preprocessing methods).
6.3.1 Meta-learning for Finding Good Instantiations
of Machine Learning Frameworks
Domain experts derive knowledge from previous tasks: They learn about the per-
formance of machine learning algorithms . The area of meta-learning (see Chap. 2)
mimics this strategy by reasoning about the performance of learning algorithms
across datasets. In this work, we apply meta-learning to select instantiations of ourgiven machine learning framework that are likely to perform well on a new dataset.
More speciﬁcally, for a large number of datasets, we collect both performance data
AutoML
system
ML framework{Xtrain,Ytrain,
Xtest,b ,L}meta-
learningdata pre-
processorfeature
preprocessorclassifierbuild
ensembleˆYtestBayesian optimizer
Fig. 6.1 Our improved AutoML approach. We add two components to Bayesian hyperparameter
optimization of an ML framework: meta-learning for initializing the Bayesian optimizer andautomated ensemble construction from conﬁgurations evaluated during optimization