Chapter 7
Towards Automatically-Tuned Deep
Neural Networks
Hector Mendoza, Aaron Klein, Matthias Feurer, Jost Tobias Springenberg,
Matthias Urban, Michael Burkart, Maximilian Dippel, Marius Lindauer,
and Frank Hutter
Abstract Recent advances in AutoML have led to automated tools that can
compete with machine learning experts on supervised learning tasks. In this work,
we present two versions of Auto-Net, which provide automatically-tuned deep
neural networks without any human intervention. The ﬁrst version, Auto-Net 1.0,
builds upon ideas from the competition-winning system Auto-sklearn by using
the Bayesian Optimization method SMAC and uses Lasagne as the underlying
deep learning (DL) library. The more recent Auto-Net 2.0 builds upon a recent
combination of Bayesian Optimization and HyperBand, called BOHB, and uses
PyTorch as DL library. To the best of our knowledge, Auto-Net 1.0 was the ﬁrst
automatically-tuned neural network to win competition datasets against human
experts (as part of the ﬁrst AutoML challenge). Further empirical results show that
ensembling Auto-Net 1.0 with Auto-sklearn can perform better than either approach
alone, and that Auto-Net 2.0 can perform better yet.
7.1 Introduction
Neural networks have signiﬁcantly improved the state of the art on a variety of
benchmarks in recent years and opened many new promising research avenues
[22,27,36,39,41]. However, neural networks are not easy to use for non-experts
since their performance crucially depends on proper settings of a large set of
hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate and weight decay) and architecture choices
(e.g., number of layers and type of activation functions). Here, we present work
H. Mendoza · A. Klein · M. Feurer · J. T. Springenberg · M. Urban · M. Burkart · M. Dippel
M. Lindauer
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Baden-Württemberg,
Germany
e-mail: fh@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
F. Hutter (/envelopeback)
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_7135