38 J. Vanschoren
An alternative approach is to ﬁrst learn an optimal hyperparameter default
setting, and then deﬁne hyperparameter importance as the performance gain that
can be achieved by tuning the hyperparameter instead of leaving it at that defaultvalue. Indeed, even though a hyperparameter may cause a lot of variance, it may
also have one speciﬁc setting that always results in good performance. In [ 120],
this was done using about 500,000 OpenML experiments on 6 algorithms and 38datasets. Default values are learned jointly for all hyperparameters of an algorithm
by ﬁrst training surrogate models for that algorithm for a large number of tasks.
Next, many conﬁgurations are sampled, and the conﬁguration that minimizes theaverage risk across all tasks is the recommended default conﬁguration. Finally, the
importance (or tunability ) of each hyperparameter is estimated by observing how
much improvement can still be gained by tuning it.
In [183], defaults are learned independently from other hyperparameters, and
deﬁned as the conﬁgurations that occur most frequently in the top- Kconﬁgurations
for every task. In the case that the optimal default value depends on meta-features(e.g. the number of training instances or features), simple functions are learned that
include these meta-features. Next, a statistical test deﬁnes whether a hyperparameter
can be safely left at this default, based on the performance loss observed when not
tuning a hyperparameter (or a set of hyperparameters), while all other parameters are
tuned. This was evaluated using 118,000 OpenML experiments with 2 algorithms
(SVMs and Random Forests) across 59 datasets.
2.2.3 Conﬁguration Transfer
If we want to provide recommendations for a speciﬁc task tnew, we need additional
information on how similar tnewis to prior tasks tj. One way to do this is to evaluate
a number of recommended (or potentially random) conﬁgurations on tnew, yielding
new evidence Pnew. If we then observe that the evaluations Pi,new are similar to Pi,j,
thentjandtnewcan be considered intrinsically similar, based on empirical evidence.
We can include this knowledge to train a meta-learner that predicts a recommended
set of conﬁgurations /Theta1∗
newfortnew. Moreover, every selected θ∗
newcan be evaluated
and included in Pnew, repeating the cycle and collecting more empirical evidence to
learn which tasks are similar to each other.
2.2.3.1 Relative Landmarks
A ﬁrst measure for task similarity considers the relative (pairwise) performance
differences, also called relative landmarks ,RLa,b,j=Pa,j−Pb,jbetween two
conﬁgurations θaandθbon a particular task tj[53].Active testing [85] leverages
these as follows: it warm-starts with the globally best conﬁguration (see Sect. 2.2.1 ),
calls it θbest, and proceeds in a tournament-style fashion. In each round, it selects
the ‘competitor’ θcthat most convincingly outperforms θbeston similar tasks. It