For a better prediction, recent deep learning studies have started to utilize not
only the historical speed data but also the spatial information of the road networks.
To manipulate spatial information into a format which can be used for deep networks
like image-based CNNs, [6{17] simply unfold the road network and [18{23] use a
grid-based representation resulting in map-like images. However, these image-like rep-
resentations cannot fully capture the complex spatial relationships of trac networks,
such as driving directions and on-path proximity. To better understand the non-grid
spatial characteristics of the trac networks, recent works have started to employ the
graph convolutional networks (GCNs).
While most of the previous works are limited by using Euclidean distance as the
only graph element for GCNs [24{28], some studies expand GCNs to include non-
Euclidean dependencies. [29] provides one of the earliest GCN applications in trac
forecasting where graphs are dened by several types of non-Euclidean dependencies,
such as total demand between stations, average trip duration, and demand correlation
coecient. [30,31] modied distance graph with non-Euclidean relationships, such as
in
ow/out
ow and reachability. For bike demand forecasting, [32{34] implemented
multi-graph convolution based on the three types of graph elements, such as trans-
portation connectivity and functional similarity, in addition to the distance. To adapt
multi-graph convolution to trac forecasting, we rst need to understand which non-
Euclidean dependencies are important for trac networks.
Figure 1: An example of the importance of non-Euclidean and directional char-
acteristics of trac networks. Target link is colored in red.
Figure 1 shows a simple example. Here we want to gure out how the speed pattern
of the target link(colored in red) is related to the other four links, A,B,C, andD. If
we consider the distance only, the directly neighbored links AandBmight be the most
related links to the target. However, due to the dierent driving direction ,Amight
show quite a dierent speed pattern. Compared to A,Ccould have a more consistent
speed pattern with the target, because Cshares the target's direction. Additionally,
Dcould also share a similar speed pattern with the target because they are heading
to the same area . These properties might be more pronounced during commute hours.
In order to utilize these concepts, we dene two types of spatial dependencies in our
work in addition to distance :direction andpositional relationship . Then, we propose a
new type of trac prediction network called DDP-GCN (Distance, Direction, and Po-
sitional relationship Graph Convolutional Network). In DDP-GCN, the non-Euclidean
characteristics of direction and positional relationship of the complex road networks
are described through multi-graphs . In previous studies [32{34], multi-graph convo-
lution has been dened using undirected graphs consisting of links without direction
2