DDP-GCN: Multi-Graph Convolutional Network
for Spatiotemporal Trac Forecasting
Kyungeun Lee1, Wonjong Rhee1;2
1GSCST, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2GSAI & AIIS, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Corresponding author: Wonjong Rhee, wrhee@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
Trac speed forecasting is one of the core problems in transportation
systems. For a more accurate prediction, recent studies started using not
only the temporal speed patterns but also the spatial information on the
road network through the graph convolutional networks. Even though the
road network is highly complex due to its non-Euclidean and directional
characteristics, previous approaches mainly focused on modeling the spa-
tial dependencies using the distance only. In this paper, we identify two
essential spatial dependencies in trac forecasting in addition to distance,
direction and positional relationship , for designing basic graph elements
as the fundamental building blocks. Using the building blocks, we sug-
gest DDP-GCN (Distance, Direction, and Positional relationship Graph
Convolutional Network) to incorporate the three spatial relationships into
deep neural networks. We evaluate the proposed model with two large-
scale real-world datasets, and nd positive improvements for long-term
forecasting in highly complex urban networks. The improvement can be
larger for commute hours, but it can be also limited for short-term fore-
casting.
Keywords| Trac forecasting, graph convolutional network, trac direction,
positional relationship, spatiotemporal prediction
1 Introduction
Trac forecasting is a crucial task for Intelligent Transportation Systems(ITS) [1{5].
Improving these forecasting systems is important for a wide range of applications, such
as autonomous vehicles operations, route optimization, and transportation system
management. In this work, we focus on the trac speed forecasting , which predicts
the future trac speeds for each segment of road using historical speed data. Accurate
trac speed forecasting can help prevent trac congestion, shorten travel time, and
reduce carbon emissions.
1arXiv:1905.12256v3  [cs.LG]  25 Sep 2022