Figure 7: The four positional relationships. Each represents a dierent type of
WP, depending on where the two extended link vectors meet.
dataset of Seoul where some of the business districts can become major destination
locations or some of the commuter towns can become major departure locations. For
such a crowded city, WPmight be able to play an essential role, especially when the
model is 
exible enough to extract the complicated positional relationship patterns in
a useful way. For the highly complex urban network of Seoul, often there are multiple
major routes that connect from or to a commuter town or a business district, and the
routes are likely to have a strong correlation with the positional relationship. Indeed,
the positional relationship turned out to be useful for our dataset as will be shown
in Section 5.4. In general, however, the new spatial relationship has not been studied
before and there is a risk that its eectiveness might not transfer well to other traf-
c environments. Similar to our positional relationship, several new types of spatial
relationships have been studied in recent years. Examples include speed limit [54],
functional similarity [55], and transportation connectivity [33]. With the increasing
data size, some of these new endeavors might turn out to be generally eective.
4.3 Partition Filters
Urban road networks are often based on grid structure where most of the roads head
into one of the four directions. Rather than hoping deep learning models to learn
such a grid concept through data, we propose a method to indicate the four directions
explicitly into the spatial graph elements. For this purpose, we dene a set of partition
ltersftmgthat can be used over Wto createtm(W) =Wm2 fW1;:::;WMg.
tm(:) is a scalar-input scalar-output function, and tm(W) describes the element-wise
application of lter tm(:). We constrain the set of partition lters TM=ft1;:::;tMg
to satisfyPM
m=1tm(W) =Win order to make sure that Wis spread over the M
partitioned matrices without any increase or decrease in the element-wise sum. M
can be designed based on the histogram analysis. To smoothly handle the boundary
values, we choose triangular partition lters.
In our work, only W2fW;WDgare considered for applying the partition lters.
When four partition lters are applied to Wwith appropriate lter shapes, we can
help deep neural network learn the concept of grid in the dataset. Figure 8 shows
4-directional triangular partition lters, TM=4, that we have used in our experiments.
We have also applied partition lters to WD. ForWD, appropriate partition lters can
be designed by investigating the density in a similar way as in Figure 8. In this case,
the partition lters are used to group link pairs according to their distance range. We
note that the partition lter has an analogy to the edge-conditioned lters introduced
in [56] for convolutional neural networks on graphs. Our partition lters, however, are
11