in Figure 2(c), a vast majority of grid points do not correspond to any road link and
zero needs to be inserted to indicate the absence of road link. The ineciency can
be aggravated when there is a need for a higher resolution. When each grid point
corresponds to a large square area, for instance 30m 30m, some of the grid points
can include multiple road links where only one or average of all can be expressed. To
mitigate the problem, the resolution needs to be suciently increased resulting in even
worse eciency in terms of the 2D matrix size for the representation. This can be a
serious problem especially when a pair of road links heading to the opposite directions
need to be represented.
The last representation method is shown in Figure 2(d) where the road network
data is represented as a graph . A graph consists of nodes (vertices) and edges, and
each node in Figure 2(d) corresponds to a road link in Figure 2(a). With graph
representation, information can be represented in two dierent forms. When simple
per-node information needs to be represented, a stacked vector can be used as in Figure
2(b). When complex pair-wise information needs to be represented, a NNmatrix
can be used where Nis the number of nodes. The matrix is typically called adjacency
matrix , and its (i,j) element represents the pair-wise relationship between links iandj.
Examples of complex pair-wise information include distance, connectivity, and other
spatial relationship. Graph representation has become popular in recent works [24{28,
30,31], because the NNmatrix is an ecient way of representing spatial relationship
and because the resulting DNN models have shown a promising performance.
2.2 2D Convolution vs. Graph Convolution
Similar to the typical convolution operation on image data, graph convolution can
be described as a weighted averaging over the neighborhood nodes [40] where graph
locality is used as the inductive bias. For image data as illustrated in Figure 3(a),
dening a neighborhood with a 3 3 lter is straightforward where the adjacent eight
pixels are chosen as the neighbors. To adapt the image convolution operation to the
graph convolution, we rst need to dene a proper neighborhood for applying a lter
as the example shown in Figure 3(b). Unlike images, however, graphs have irregular
and unordered data structures and a neighborhood cannot be simply dened as in the
image convolution. Instead, the inter-node relationships need to be identied rst.
Typically domain knowledge is required, and usually proximity and on-path distance
are used for dening a neighborhood within a road network. As an example, we can
consider the road network shown in Figure 2 again. If we are interested in dening
one-hop neighborhood, the graph convolution lter for learning the representation of
link A will contain the links B, C, and E.
2.3 Brief History of Graph Convolutional Networks
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) was rst introduced in [41] where spectral graph
theory and deep neural networks were bridged. Then [42] proposed ChebNet, which
improved GCNs with fast localized convolution lters using Chebyshev polynomials.
ChebNet implicitly avoided the computation of graph Fourier basis and signicantly
reduced the computational complexity. [43] introduced 1stChebNet, as an extension
of ChebNet. 1stChebNet not only provided a competitive performance for a variety
of tasks but also greatly reduced the computational cost by avoiding the eigenvalue
decomposition that was required for calculating the Fourier basis. Additional details
on the history of GCN can be found in [40,43] with further explanations.
5