Figure 8: Creating partition lters from W. X axis shows angles and Y axis
showstm(W) values for the choice of partition lters. The direction histogram
of the links is properly scaled for plotting purpose and smoothed with a Gaussian
kernel. In our work, the four directions f0;90;180;270gdegrees, happened
to coincide with the histogram peaks, however, this is not the only possible
choice, and the design of the partition lter allows any number and any choice
of directions based on the histogram analysis.
static while the lter weights in [56] are dynamically generated for each specic input
sample.
4.4 Building a Spatial Block
With the newly dened graph elements, we are ready to build spatial blocks for ex-
tracting complex spatial relationships. Spatial blocks are based on the three graph
elementsWD;W, andWP, and their partitioned versions. We use fWDWPgin-
stead ofWPto exploit the hybrid information.
In Figure 9, each gray box represents a single graph convolution as described in
Eq. (4), and we only denote the weighted adjacency matrix in the gure for simplicity.
The number of convolutional operation and the choice of weight matrices can vary
depending on the dataset or the prediction task.
We designed three types of spatial blocks, as shown in Figure 9. Single (Figure
9(a)) refers to the simple graph convolution considering only the Euclidean distance.
Parallel (Figure 9(b)) and Stacked (Figure 9(c)) refer to the multi-graph convolution
including distance, direction, and positional relationship information. While both
utilize four convolutional operations with dierent graph elements individually, they
have dierent structures for connecting the graph elements. Parallel structure can
be regarded as equivalent to multi-graph convolution structure as dened in previous
works [32{34].
4.5 Building a Temporal Block
We conducted extensive experiments to design the temporal blocks, including graph
convolution, self-attention [57], multi-convolution [58], and temporal relational rea-
soning [59]. But it turns out that simple convolution showed the best performance
with the shortest training time. Based on the empirical results, we adapt the simple
12