each dataset as described in Section 4.2. We set Mto be 4 (Urban1, Urban2) and
M0to be 3 (Urban1) and 4 (Urban2). We set both T0andTas 12 samples, where 12
corresponds to an one hour span. All experiments were implemented using Tensor
ow
1.15 on a Linux cluster(CPU: Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E6-2620 v4 @ 2.10GHz, GPU:
NVIDIA TITAN V).
We compared the proposed model (DDP-GCN) with the following baslines: (1)
HA: Historical Average; (2) VAR: Vector Auto-Regression [60]; (3) LSVR: Linear
Support Vector Regression; (4) ARIMA: Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
model; (5) FC-LSTM: Recurrent Neural Network with fully connected LSTM hid-
den units [61]; (6) DCRNN: Diusion Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks [30],
which manipulates bidirectional diusion convolution on the graph for capturing spa-
tial dependency and uses sequence-to-sequence architecture with gated recurrent units
to capture temporal dependency, and (7) STGCN: Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolu-
tional Networks [24], which is composed of spatiotemporal convolutional blocks includ-
ing two gated sequential convolution layers and one spatial graph convolution layer in
between.
5.3 Performance Comparison
Table 2 shows the performance results of DDP-GCN and the baseline models. Each
model predicted all 12 sequential trac speed values of all the links simultaneously, and
the accuracy of 30 minute, 45 minute, and 60 minute predictions are summarized in
Table 2. Three commonly used metrics in trac forecasting were evaluated, including
(1) Mean Absolute Error (MAE), (2) Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), and
(3) Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). We have repeated each experiment ve times,
and the average performance is reported in Table 2. For all the experiments and all
three metrics, the standard deviation was very small (less than 0.05 except for STGCN
that had up to 0.2 of standard deviation).
One of our proposed models, DDP-GCN(Stacked), achieved the best performance
for all cases except for the case of 30 minute MAPE of Urban1. For 60 minute forecast-
ing, our model showed an improvement of 7.52% on average (10.14% maximum) when
compared to the previous state-of-the-art performance. Among our three models, the
stacked spatial block, rstly introduced in our work, outperformed the parallel spatial
block for all cases. While the previous state-of-the-art GCN methods, i.e. DCRNN
and STGCN, suer when forecasting horizon is increased, DDP-GCN(Stacked)'s per-
formance is sustained even when the prediction time is increased from 30 minutes to
60 minutes.
Interestingly, we can observe that HA tends to be reasonably accurate even though
the method is extremely simple. We believe that this result is mainly due to the strong
weekly periodicity of our dataset. While the other methods utilize only the last 1-hour
data to predict the future 1-hour period, HA utilizes a dierent type of information.
It looks up the speed information of the same day and same time of the previous
weeks. While our DDP-GCN models exploit only the last 1-hour information, our
model almost always outperformed the other methods including HA. It suggests that
it might be possible to further improve DDP-GCN's performance by utilizing weekly
data in addition to the last 1-hour data. Also, it suggests that the non-Euclidean
spatial relationships, direction, and positional relationship, are quite powerful priors
for the accurate speed forecasting.
When DDP-GCN(Stacked) is compared to the other two graph convolution based
methods only (the better performing one between DCRNN and STGCN for each cat-
15