information for the bike demand prediction task. However, the same approach cannot
be directly applied to trac forecasting on the directed graphs, especially consisting
of links with direction information. In this work, we dene multi-graphs based on link
vectors and link directions. We also suggest partition lters for further improving the
graph elements. A partition lter can be used to sub-divide each spatial graph ele-
ment into multiple components with similar characteristics. When evaluated on two
large-scale real-world datasets that are highly complex urban networks, DDP-GCN
outperformed the state-of-the-art baselines.
Our main contributions are in two-folds.
•We identify non-Euclidean spatial relationships, direction and positional rela-
tionship , and propose to encode them using multiple graphs. We also suggest
partition lters.
•We propose a trac forecasting network(DDP-GCN) which exploits the desired
spatial dependencies eectively. This model is especially benecial for long-term
forecasting in a highly complex urban network, known as the most challenging
problem.
The rest of this paper is organized as following. Section 2 investigates how the
spatial dependencies are represented in trac forecasting. We also describe the graph
convolutional networks and how they are used for trac forecasting. Section 3 denes
the key concepts and formulates the research problem. Section 4 elaborates our model
DDP-GCN. Section 5 reports the prediction performance and ablation test results for
two real-world large-scale datasets. Section 6 provides the conclusions.
2 Graph Convolutional Networks for Trac Fore-
casting
The goal of trac forecasting is to model spatiotemporal relationships and complex
interplay of road networks. Traditional methods such as Auto Regressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) and Kalman lters have mainly focused on temporal re-
lationships under the time stationary process assumption. Later, their extensions
were studied to include spatial relationships or to relax the stationarity assumption.
For instance, [35{38] enhanced the basic ARIMA model to spatiotemporal ARIMA
(ST-ARIMA).
While the traditional methods and their extensions have been used with a great
success, they are limited in that the methods do not have enough 
exibility to model
the trac network with highly nonlinear and complex spatiotemporal characteris-
tics [24]. Instead, recent works have begun to apply deep learning approaches to
trac forecasting. Unlike the traditional models, Deep Neural Network (DNN) mod-
els have suciently large capacity and thus a potential for a large improvement. In
this section, we brie
y summarize the fundamentals of applying DNN to the trac
data modeling, including input data representation and graph convolutional network.
2.1 Representing Trac Data for DNN
As the rst step, we explain the most common techniques for representing road network
data as the input to the DNNs. In theory, deep learning has the capability to learn any
sophisticated spatiotemporal relationship within the data. In practice, however, the
3