(a)
(b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 2: Three ways of representing a road network as an input to deep neural
networks. (a) Illustration of an exemplary road network with six road links.
(b) Representation as a simple vector. viis the value of speed or other value
of interest for the link i. (c) Image-like representation using a two-dimensional
matrix.mi1;:::;iNis the average value of fvi1;:::;viNg. (d) Representation as a
graph. The spatial relationship information contained in the graph is converted
to a 66 matrix where ( i;j) value represents distance, connectivity, or any other
relational information between road links iandj.
actual performance after training is heavily dependent on how the data is presented
to the deep neural networks and therefore the data representation is an important
matter. A brief summary of the three most common techniques are shown in Figure
2.
The rst representation method is shown in Figure 2(b) where the road network
data is simply organized into a vector form. Most of the initial DNN works followed
this practice of stacked vector [6{17]. While no clear rule has been established on
how to stack the data into a single vector, human intuition has been utilized when
possible. For instance, a circular road network was considered in [6] and the stacking
was performed over 352 links in a clockwise order. The vector stacking is a simple
and 
exible method, but it does not provide principled procedures of determining the
representation.
The second representation method is shown in Figure 2(c) where the road network
data is organized into a two dimensional grid data. The 2D-grid representation, also
known as grid-based map segmentation [18,39] or grid map [21{23], has become pop-
ular because of its image-like representation. For image data, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) has been extremely successful. By representing road network data
into a 2D-grid, it becomes possible to directly apply the well developed CNN solu-
tions to the trac forecasting. [18{23] are examples where 2D-grid representation was
adopted. The downside of 2D-grid lies in its ineciency in representation. As shown
4