(a) 2D Convolution
 (b) Graph Convolution
Figure 3: Illustration of a typical 2D convolution and a graph convolution. For
both, the information of the neighboring nodes dened as the nodes inside the
lter (orange box) is used for processing the information of the node of interest
(shown in red). (a) 2D convolution - Dening lter shape and size is straightfor-
ward because the underlying data is well structured. All the neighboring nodes
connected with blue lines are located inside the lter. (b) Graph convolution -
Unlike grid data, trac network data is not well structured and a node's neigh-
borhood size can vary. Instead of dening a small and common lter for all
nodes,NNmatrix is used as the spatial lter where the varying neighbor-
hood information is collectively represented in the matrix. In the column jof
the matrix, all the neighboring nodes connected with blue lines from node jare
represented with non-zero weight values while the others are marked with zero.
(The gures were adapted from Figure 1 of [40].)
2.4 Trac Forecasting with GCN
As GCNs heavily depend on the Laplacian matrix of a graph, it is crucial to determine
a proper edge weighting that re
ects the network geometry suciently well. For
trac forecasting problems, [44{46] dene the road network as an undirected binary
graph where each edge indicates if the two nodes are directly adjacent or not. [24,
26{28] expand the road network graph as a weighted graph where each edge weight
is determined to be inversely proportional to the physical distance or the travel time
between the corresponding two nodes in the network.
Some of the recent studies have started to re
ect other factors additional to the
distance information. [30,31] modied the distance graph with additional relationships
such as in
ow/out
ow and reachability. For the case of bike demand forecasting,
[32{34] considered three types of graph elements including transportation connectivity
and functional similarity, and implemented a multi-graph convolution as the sum of
the individual operations. For trac 
ow prediction, multi-graph convolution was
considered in [47] recently. In the paper, four types of graphs were applied to address
semantic pair-wise correlations among possibly distant roads. In this work, we newly
dene two non-Euclidean graph elements and suggest a partition lter that can be used
to modify each graph element. Then, we investigate possible designs of multi-graph
convolution for incorporating the newly developed graph elements.
6