(a) Urban1
 (b) Urban2
Figure 13: Performance with K-hops. DDP-GCN(Stacked) can outperform the
previously state-of-the-art GCN methods even when they utilize K-hops. For
DCRNN, the results for K > 5 were not available due to the long and unstable
training process.
the best when the partition lters were utilized.
Finally, we have examined the eect of using a larger number of hops. For the
investigation, we have used K-polynomial ChebNet [42] instead of the 1stChebNet.
K-hops were applied to the distance ( WD) element only. As shown in Figure 13, DDP-
GCN(Stacked) outperformed the other GCN models even when they used a large K
value. Moreover, the performance of DDP-GCN(Stacked) was not improved for larger
K. The results indicate that the stacked elements are already performing better than
K-hops and the stacking of spatial elements outperforms simple K-hops.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, we proposed a new trac speed forecasting network utilizing three spatial
dependencies, namely distance, direction, and positional relationships. Our model is
constructed using multi-graph convolution with spatial graph elements as the building
blocks. We also introduced partition lters that can be used to sub-divide each spatial
graph element into multiple components with similar characteristics. We have evalu-
ated our models together with popular baseline models, and have found improvements
especially for long-term forecasting of highly complex urban networks.
In our study, we have focused on developing graph convolutional networks that can
specically handle spatial dependencies of trac datasets. Temporal dependencies are
also utilized by the networks, but the input was limited to be a consecutive time
sequence and thus daily periodicity and weekly periodicity were not utilized. While
periodicity is an important temporal characteristics to take advantage of, it requires
a careful thinking to modify graph convolutional networks because simply increasing
the input sequence size will most likely cause a performance degradation instead of a
performance enhancement. This is in contrast to a simple model like Historical Av-
erage that can take advantage of weekly periodicity essentially at zero computational
overhead. For our highly complex urban networks, weekly periodicity turned out to
have a signicant forecasting power and thus the performance of Historical Average
turned out to be competitive. As a future work, it will be promising to consider other
19