Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
ExperimentationTrainingInference
Storage –Network --Compute
ManufacturingTransport Product UseRecycling
Deep Learning Framework & Library
(b) Fleet View(c) Machine Learning Task View [Section 3.1](d) Infrastructure View
-2024681012
20162017201820192020Metric Tons CO2e Millions[Use] Operational (renewable)[Use] Operational Scope 1,2[Manufacturing] Value Chain CO2 Scope 3Carbon Removal0%20%40%60%80%100%DataTraining (Offline)Training (Online/Evaluation)DeploymentRM1Machine Learning Model Development and Deployment Phases [Section 2.1]
System Life Cycle [Section 2.2]
DataData Efficiency[Section 4.1]Resource-Efficient Experimentation, Algorithms, and Model Architectures [Section 4.2]
Efficient, Environmentally-Sustainable AI System Hardware [Section 4.3](a)
Figure 3. (a) Model Development Phases over AI System Hardware Life Cycle. (b) At Meta, we observe a rough power capacity
breakdown of 10:20:70 for AI infrastructures devoted to the three key phases — Experimentation ,Training , and Inference ; (c)
Considering the primary stages of the machine learning pipeline end-to-end, the energy footprint of RM1 is roughly 31:29:40 over Data ,
Experimentation/Training , and Inference ; (d) Despite the investment to neutralize the operational footprint with carbon-free energy, the
overall data center electricity use continues to grow, demanding over 7.17 million MWh in 2020 (Meta, 2021).
2MODEL DEVELOPMENT PHASES AND AI
SYSTEM HARDWARE LIFECYCLE
Figure 3(a) depicts the major development phases for ML
—Data Processing ,Experimentation ,Training , and In-
ference (Section 2.1) — over the life cycle of AI system
hardware (Section 2.2). Driven by distinct objectives of AI
research and advanced product development, infrastructure
is designed and built specifically to maximize data storage
and ingestion efficiency for the phase of Data Process-
ing, developer efficiency for the phase of Experimentation ,
training throughput efficiency for the phase of Training , and
tail-latency bounded throughput efficiency for Inference .
2.1 Machine Learning Model Development Cycle
ML researchers extract features from data during the Data
Processing phase and apply weights to individual features
based on feature importance to the model optimization ob-
jective. During Experimentation , the researchers design,
implement and evaluate the quality of proposed algorithms,
model architectures, modeling techniques, and/or training
methods for determining model parameters. This model
exploration process is computationally-intensive, where a
large collection of diverse ML ideas are explored simultane-
ously at-scale. Thus, during this phase, we observe diverse
system resource requirements from the large pool of training
experiments. Within Meta’s ML research cluster, 50% (p50)
of ML training experiments take up to 1.5 GPU days while
99% (p99) of training experiments complete within 24 GPU
days. There are a number of large-scale, trillion parameter
models which require over 500 GPUs days.
Once a ML solution is determined as promising, it moves
intoTraining where the ML solution is evaluated using ex-tensive production data — data that is more recent , islarger
in quantity , and contains richer features . The process often
requires additional hyper-parameter tuning. The majority of
data ingestion at Meta is from model training. This has mo-
tivated a redesign of the warehouse-scale database and data
ingestion pipeline specific for ML. Figure 3(c) illustrates
that the power footprint of data ingestion is already higher
than that of model training for certain large-scale ML tasks.
Depending on the ML task requirement, the models can
be trained/re-trained at different frequencies. For example,
models supporting Meta’s Search service were trained at
an hourly cadence whereas the Language Translation mod-
els were trained weekly. A p50 production model training
workflow takes 2.96 GPU days while a training workflow at
p99 can take up to 125 GPU days. Finally, for Inference ,
the best-performing model is deployed for production ML
use cases, producing trillions of daily predictions to serve
billions of users on the Meta platform. The total compute
cycles for inference predictions are expected to exceed the
corresponding training cycles for the deployed model.
2.2 Machine Learning System Life Cycle
Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) is a commonly-used method-
ology to assess the carbon emissions over a product’s life
cycle. There are four major phases: manufacturing ,trans-
port,product use , and recycling . In this work, we consider
the overall carbon footprint of AI by including manufac-
turing — carbon emissions from building infrastructures
specifically for AI (i.e., embodied carbon footprint ) and
product use — carbon emissions from the use of AI (i.e.,
operational carbon footprint ).
While quantifying the exact breakdown between operational