Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
FL-1-CSL
FL-1-CSH
FL-2
TPU-Base
TPU-Green
P100-Base
P100-Green020406080100CO2e (kg)Communication
Computation
Meta (FL) Google TransformerBig (Non-FL)
Figure 11. Federated learning can result in a non-negligible amount
of carbon emissions, comparable to the carbon footprint of training
Transformer Big.
et al., 2019b; Cai et al., 2020b) while improving data pri-
vacy (Hard et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Ramaswamy et al.,
2019; Huba et al., 2022), yet its impact in terms of carbon
emission is often overlooked. Especially, federated learn-
ing (FL), which trains local models on client devices and
periodically aggregates the model parameters for a global
model without collecting raw user data, is becoming widely
adopted in industry for user privacy (Hard et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2018; Ramaswamy et al., 2019; Huba et al., 2022).
The FL process can emit non-negligible carbon at the edge
due to both computation and wireless communication.
To estimate the carbon emission of FL, we analyzed data
of representative federated learning application use cases
at Meta, such as (Huba et al., 2022). First, energy con-
sumption of FL is estimated based on the time spent on FL
computation, the number of participants on each model ag-
gregation round (i.e. cohort sizes), the number of rounds to
model convergence, the model sizes, and a carbon intensity
of 0.429 kilogram CO2e per KWh (representative of the
average energy mix of the United States).
Computation energy is estimated as the product of device
power and the computation time of each client. For device
power, we used 3W (Wang et al., 2019a).
Communication energy is modeled as the sum of energy
spent by the client device and energy spent by the communi-
cation infrastructure, including the Wi-Fi access point, edge
router, core router, broadband network gateway, and Ether-
net switch (Vishwanath et al., 2015). Appendix C provides
further methodology detail.
Model training on client edge devices is inherently less
energy-efficient because of the high wireless communica-
tion overheads, sub-optimal training data distribution in
individual client devices, large degree of system heterogene-
ity among client edge devices, and highly-fragmented edge
device architectures that make system-level optimization
significantly more challenging (Wu et al., 2019). Figure 11compares the carbon footprint of two FL applications (FL-1;
FL-2) at Meta with that of training Transformer Big(Pat-
terson et al., 2021) on a centralized server. FL-1- CSLand
FL-1- CSHrepresent two different configurations of FL-1:
FL-1- CSLcorresponds to a smaller cohort size whereas FL-
1-CSHa larger cohort size. FL-1- CSHconverges roughly
2×faster but results in higher energy consumption, as
large cohort training is known to be less efficient (Charles
et al., 2021). P100-Base represents the carbon footprint
ofTransformer Bigtraining on P100 GPU whereas TPU-
base is Transformer Bigtraining on TPU. P100-Green
and TPU-Green consider renewable energy at the cloud. The
figure shows that FL can result in a non-negligible amount
of carbon emissions comparable to that of training a much
larger model on a centralized setup, i.e., Transformer Big.
Also, the computation and communication energy consump-
tion ratios differ between the use cases. Communication
energy dominates for FL-2 use cases while computation
energy dominates for FL-1.
It is important to reduce AI’s environmental footprint at the
edge. With the ever-increasing demand for on-device use
cases over billions of client devices, such as teaching AI
to understand the physical environment from first-person
perception (Grauman et al., 2021) or personalizing AI tasks,
the carbon footprint for on-device AI can add up to a dire
amount quickly. Also, renewable energy is far more limited
for client devices compared to data centers. Optimizing
the overall energy efficiency of FL and on-device AI is
an important first step (Kang et al., 2017; Stamoulis et al.,
2018; Kim & Wu, 2020; 2021). Reducing embodied carbon
cost for edge devices is also important, as manufacturing
carbon cost accounts for 74% of the total footprint (Gupta
et al., 2021) of client devices. However, amortizing the
embodied carbon footprint is particularly challenging due to
significant under-utilization (Gao et al., 2015), motivating
new environmentally-sustainable system design.
4.4 Carbon Footprint Telemetry for AI
While the open source community has started building tools
to enable automatic measurement of AI training’s environ-
mental footprint (Lacoste et al., 2019; Henderson et al.,
2020; Schmidt et al., 2021) and the ML research commu-
nity requiring a broader impact statement for the submitted
research manuscript, more can be done in order to incor-
porate efficiency and sustainability into the design process.
Enabling carbon accounting methodologies and telemetry
that is easy to adopt is an important step to quantify the
significance of our progress in developing AI technologies
in an environmentally-responsible manner. While assessing
the novelty and quality of ML solutions, it is crucial to con-
sider sustainability metrics including energy consumption
andcarbon footprint along with measures of model qual-
ityandsystem performance . Note, while embodied carbon
footprints for AI hardware may not be readily available,