Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
lines capture data scaling while the model size is kept fixed.
The dashed black line captures the performance scaling
trend as we scale data and model sizes in tandem. This rep-
resents the energy-optimal scaling approach. Scaling data
sizes or model sizes independently deviates from the energy-
optimal trend. We highlight two energy-optimal settings
along the Pareto-frontier curve. The yellow star uses the
scaling setting of Data scaling 2 ×andModel scaling 2 ×
whereas the green star adopts the setting of Data scaling 8 ×
andModel scaling 16 ×. The yellow star consumes roughly
4×lower energy as compared to the green star with only
0.004 model quality degradation. Overall model quality per-
formance has a (diminishing) power-law relationship with
the corresponding energy consumption and the power of the
power law is extremely small (0.002-0.004). This means
achieving higher model quality through model-data scaling
for recommendation use cases incurs significant energy cost.
When designed well, however, data scaling, sampling and
selection strategies can improve the competitive analysis
for ML algorithms, reducing the environmental footprint of
the process. For instance, Sachdeva et al. (2021) demon-
strated that intelligent data sampling with merely 10% of
data sub-samples can effectively preserve the relative rank-
ing performance of different recommendation algorithms.
This ranking performance is achieved with an average of
5.8 times execution time speedup, leading to significant
operating carbon footprint reduction.
Data Perishability: Understanding key characteristics of
data is fundamental to efficient data utilization for AI appli-
cations. Not all data is created equal and data collected over
time loses its predictive value gradually. Understanding the
rate at which data loses its predictive value has strong im-
plications on the resulting carbon footprint. For example,
natural language data sets can lose half of their predictive
value in the time period of less than 7 years (the half-life
time of data) (Valavi et al., 2020). The exact half-life pe-
riod is a function of context. If we were able to predict
the half-life time of data, we can devise effective sampling
strategies to subset data at different rates based on its half-
life. By doing so, the resource requirement for the data
storage and ingestion pipeline can be significantly reduced
— lower training time (operational carbon footprint) as well
as storage needs (embodied carbon footprint).
4.2 Efficiency in Experimentation and Training
The experimentation and training phases are closely cou-
pled (Section 2). There is a natural trade-off between the
investment in experimentation and the subsequent training
cost (Section 3). Neural architecture search (NAS) and
hyperparameter optimization (HPO) are techniques that
automate the design space exploration. Despite their capa-
bility to discover higher-performing neural networks, NAS
and HPO can be extremely resource-intensive, involvingtraining many models, especially when using simple ap-
proaches. Strubell et al. (2019) show that grid-search NAS
can incur over 3000×environmental footprint overhead.
Utilizing much more sample-efficient NAS and HPO meth-
ods (Turner et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2021) can translate
directly into carbon footprint improvement. In addition to
reducing the number of training experiments, one can also
reduce the training time of each experiment. By detecting
andstopping under-performing training workflows early ,
unnecessary training cycles can be eliminated.
Multi-objective optimization explores the Pareto frontier of
efficient model quality and system resource trade-offs. If
used early in the model exploration process, it enables more
informed decisions about which model to train fully and
deploy given certain infrastructure capacity. Beyond model
accuracy and timing performance (Joglekar et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2020; Tan & Le, 2020; Eriksson et al., 2021),
energy and carbon footprint can be directly incorporated
into the cost function as optimization objectives (Yang et al.,
2021) to enable discovery of environmentally-friendly mod-
els. Furthermore, when training is decoupled from NAS,
sub-networks tailoring to specialized system hardware can
be selected without additional training (Stamoulis et al.,
2019; Cai et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2021; Mellor et al.,
2021). Such approaches can significantly reduce the overall
training time, however, at the expense of increased embod-
ied carbon footprint.
Developing resource-efficient model architectures funda-
mentally reduce the overall system capacity need of ML
tasks. From the systems perspective, accelerator memory
is scarce. However, DNNs, such as neural recommenda-
tion models, require significantly higher memory capacity
and bandwidth (Ke et al., 2020; Acun et al., 2021). This
motivates researchers to develop memory-efficient model
architectures. For example, the Tensor-Train compression
technique (TT-Rec) achieves more than 100 ×memory ca-
pacity reduction with negligible training time and accuracy
trade-off (Yin et al., 2021). Similarly, the design space
trade-off between memory capacity requirement, training
time, and model accuracy is also explored in Deep Hash
Embedding (DHE) (Kang et al., 2021). While training time
increases lead to higher operational carbon footprint, in the
case of TT-Rec and DHE, the memory-efficient model archi-
tectures require significantly lower memory capacity while
better utilizing the computational capability of training ac-
celerators, resulting in lower embodied carbon footprint.
Developing efficient training algorithms is a long-time
objective of research in optimization and numerical meth-
ods (Nemirovskij & Yudin, 1983). Evaluations of opti-
mization methods should account for allexperimentation
efforts required to tune optimizer hyperparameters, not just
the method performance after tuning (Choi et al., 2019;