Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
describing hardware platforms, the number of machines,
total runtime used to produce results presented in a research
manuscript is an important first step.
Metrics for AI Model and System Life Cycles: Standard
carbon footprint accounting methods for AI’s overall carbon
footprint are at a nascent stage. We need simple, easy-to-
adopt metrics to make fair and useful comparisons between
AI innovations. Many different aspects must be accounted
for, including the life cycles of both AI models ( Data ,Ex-
perimentation ,Training ,Deployment ) and system hardware
(Manufacturing andUse).
In addition to incorporating an efficiency measure as part
of leader boards for various ML tasks, data (Kiela et al.,
2021), models4, training algorithms (Hernandez & Brown,
2020b), environmental impact must also be considered and
adopted by AI system hardware developers, using standard
AI system performance benchmarks, such as MLPerf (Matt-
son et al., 2020; Reddi et al., 2021). Moreover, an algo-
rithm efficiency benchmark is under development. The
MLPerf benchmark standards can advance the field of AI in
an environmentally-competitive manner.
5 K EYTAKEAWAYS
The Growth of AI: Deep learning has witnessed an ex-
ponential growth in training data, model parameters, and
system resources over the recent years. The amount of data
for AI has grown by 2.4×, leading to 3.2×increase in the
data ingestion bandwidth demand. Recommendation model
sizes have increased by 20×between 2019 and 2021. The
explosive growth in AI use cases has driven 2.9×and2.5×
capacity increases for AI training and inference at Meta
over the recent 18 months, respectively. The environmental
footprint of AI is staggering (Figure 4, Figure 5).
A Holistic Approach: To ensure an environmentally-
sustainable growth of AI, we must consider the AI ecosys-
tem holistically going forward. We must look at the machine
learning pipelines end-to-end — data collection, model ex-
ploration and experimentation, model training, optimization
and run-time inference (Section 2). The frequency of train-
ing and scale of each stage of the ML pipeline must be
considered to understand salient bottlenecks to sustainable
AI. From the system’s perspective, the life cycle of model
development and system hardware, including manufactur-
ingandoperational use , must also be accounted for.
Efficiency Optimization: Optimization across the axes
of algorithms, platforms, infrastructures, hardware can sig-
nificantly reduce the operational carbon footprint for the
universal translation model by 810×. Along with other effi-
ciency optimization at-scale, this has translated into 25.8%
4Papers with code: https://paperswithcode.com/s
ota/image-classification-on-imagenetoperational energy footprint reduction over the two-year pe-
riod. More must be done to bend the environmental impact
from the exponential growth of AI (Figure 6).
An Sustainability Mindset for AI: Optimization beyond
efficiency across the software and hardware stack at scale
is crucial to enabling future sustainable AI systems. To
develop AI technologies responsibly, we must achieve com-
petitive model accuracy at a fixed or even reduced compu-
tational and environmental cost. We chart out potentially
high-impact research and development directions across the
data,algorithms and model ,experimentation andsystem
hardware , and telemetry dimensions for AI at datacenters
and at the edge (Section 4).
We must take a deliberate approach when developing AI
research and technologies, considering the environmental
impact of innovations and taking a responsible approach to
technology development (Wu et al., 2021). That is, we need
AI to be green and environmentally-sustainable.
6 C ONCLUSION
This paper is the first effort to explore the environmental im-
pact of super-linear trends for AI growth from a holistic per-
spective, spanning data,algorithms , and system hardware .
We characterize the carbon footprint of AI computing by ex-
amining the model development cycle across industry-scale
ML use cases at Meta while considering the life cycle of
system hardware. Furthermore, we capture the operational
and manufacturing carbon footprint of AI computing and
present an end-to-end analysis for what andhow hardware-
software design and at-scale optimization can help reduce
the overall carbon footprint of AI. We share key challenges
and chart out important directions across all dimensions of
AI—data, algorithms, systems, metrics, standards, and best
experimentation practices. Advancing the field of machine
intelligence must not in turn make climate change worse.
We must develop AI technologies with a deeper understand-
ing of the societal and environmental implications.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable feedback. We also thank Nikhil Gupta, Lei Tian,
Weiyi Zheng, Manisha Jain, Adnan Aziz, and Adam Lerer
for their discussions around ML efficiency; Adina Williams,
Emily Dinan, Mona Diab, Ashkan Yousefpour, Mark Zhou,
Niket Agarwal, Jongsoo Park, Michael Anderson, Xiaodong
Wang for the valuable discussions and insights on AI and
environmental responsibility; John Nguyen, Kunal Bhalla,
Haiyu Lu, Kaikai Wang, Jesik Min, and Dzmitry Huba for
their help in the federated learning and mobile AI measure-
ment; Yatharth Saraf, Hagay Lupesco, Jigar Desai, Ram
Valliyappan, Rajesh Mosur, Ananth Sankarnarayanan, Ey-
tan Bakshy, and Joelle Pineau for their support without
which this work would not have been possible.