Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
to labels for just 10% of the training images in ImageNet,
a ResNet-50 achieves 75.5% top-1 accuracy after just 200
epochs of PAWS pre-training. Running on 64 V100 GPUs,
this takes roughly 16 hours. Similar observations have
recently been made for language model pre-training as
well (Dery et al., 2021).
Self-supervised pre-training potentially has advantages in
that a single foundation model can be trained (expensive) but
then fine-tuned (inexpensive), amortizing the up front cost
across many tasks (Bommasani et al., 2021). Substantial
additional research is needed to better understand the cost-
benefit trade-offs for this paradigm.
C C ARBON EMISSION ESTIMATES FOR
FEDERATED LEARNING
Carbon emissions of FL are based on the energy consump-
tion of computation and communication. Computation en-
ergy is estimated as the product of device power and the
computation time of each client. For device power, we
used 3W (Wang et al., 2019a). Communication energy is
modeled as the sum of energy spent by the client device and
energy spent by the communication infrastructure, including
the Wi-Fi access point, edge router, core router, broadband
network gateway, and Ethernet switch (Vishwanath et al.,
2015).
Communication power of client devices was estimated based
on the vendor-provided power models of Android phones
(power profile.xml ) over 52,000 Android devices.
We then estimated the time taken for model parameter up-
load/download based on the model size of the FL use cases
and the expected bandwidth available (Speed Index, 2022),
resulting in the client device communication energy.
Energy consumed at the Wi-Fi access point was modeled as
a linear model, where energy consumption linearly increases
with the transmitted data size (Vishwanath et al., 2015). We
used the measured maximum and idle power consumption
data of 20 common Wi-Fi devices (TPCDB, 2022) to create
the power model. Note, we exclude the idle power of the
Wi-Fi hardware unlike prior work (Qiu et al., 2021). For the
energy per bit transmission for the rest of the communication
infrastructure, we directly used measurements from prior
work (Vishwanath et al., 2015).