Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
81012112511101001,000
CPU BaselineCPU DataManagementGPU FP32GPU FP16FasterTransformerOperational Power Footprint Normalized to Optimized Transformer on GPUs 
Platform-Level CachingGPU AcceleratorsNumerical OptimizationPlatform+ Hardware +Algorithm810 x
OptimizedTransformer
Figure 8. For the cross-lingual ML task (LM), the operational en-
ergy footprint can be significantly reduced by more than 800×
using platform-level caching ,GPUs ,low precision data format ,
andadditional algorithmic optimization .
format on accelerator , and model optimization . In aggre-
gate the optimizations reduce the infrastructure resources
required to serve LMat scale by over 800 ×. We outline the
optimization benefits from each area below.
Platform-Level Caching. Starting with a CPU server base-
line, application-level caching improves power efficiency
by 6.7×. These improvements are a result of pre-computing
and caching frequently accessed embeddings for language
translation tasks. Using DRAM and Flash storage devices
as caches, these pre-computed embeddings can be shared
across applications and use cases.
GPU acceleration. In addition to caching, deploying LM
across GPU-based specialized AI hardware unlocks an ad-
ditional 10.1 ×energy efficiency improvement.
Algorithmic optimization. Finally, algorithmic optimiza-
tions provide an additional 12 ×energy efficiency reduction.
Halving precision, from 32-bit to 16-bit operations, provides
a 2.4×energy efficiency improvement on GPUs. Another
5×energy efficiency gain can be achieved by using custom
operators to schedule encoding steps within a single kernel
of the Transformer module, such as (NVIDIA, 2021b).
Optimizing the Carbon Footprint of RMs :A major in-
frastructure challenge faced by deep RM training and de-
ployment ( RM1 –RM5 ) is the fast-rising memory capacity
and bandwidth demands. There are two primary sub-nets in
a RM: compute-intensive, dense fully-connected network
and the memory capacity and bandwidth-intensive, sparse
embedding-based network. For a number of important rec-
ommendation and ranking use cases, embedding operations
dominate model execution time (Gupta et al., 2020; Ke et al.,
2020; Wilkening et al., 2021; Sethi et al., 2022).
To tackle the significant memory capacity and bandwidth
requirement, we deploy model quantization for RMs (Denget al., 2021). Quantization offers two primary efficiency
benefits: the low-precision data representation reduces the
amount of computation requirement and, at the same time,
lowers the overall memory capacity need. By converting
32-bit floating-point numerical representation to 16-bit, we
can reduce the overall RM2 model size by 15%. This has
led to 20.7% reduction in memory bandwidth consumption.
Furthermore, the memory capacity reduction enabled by
quantization unblocks novel systems with lower on-chip
memory. For example, for RM1, quantization has enabled
RM deployment on highly power-efficient systems with
smaller on-chip memory, leading to an end-to-end inference
latency improvement of 2.5 times.
3.3 Machine Learning Infrastructures at Scale
ML Accelerators: GPUs are the de-facto training accel-
erators at Meta, contributing to significant power capacity
investment in the context of Meta’s data centers. However,
GPUs can be severely under-utilized during both the ML
Experimentation and Training phases (Wesolowski et al.,
2021). To amortize the upfront embodied carbon cost of
every accelerator deployed into Meta’s datacenters, maxi-
mizing accelerator utilization is a must.
At-Scale Efficiency Optimization: Servers in Meta data
center fleets are customized for internal workloads only —
machine learning tasks (Hazelwood et al., 2018) and oth-
ers (Sriraman et al., 2019; Sriraman & Dhanotia, 2020).
Compared to public cloud providers, this puts Meta at a
unique position for at-scale resource management design
and optimization. First, Meta customizes server SKUs —
compute, memcached, storage tiers and ML accelerators —
to maximize performance and power efficiency.
Furthermore, the large-scale deployment of servers of dif-
ferent types provides an opportunity to build performance
measurement and optimization tools to ensure high utiliza-
tion of the underlying infrastructure. For data center fleets
in different geographical regions where the actual server
utilization exhibits a diurnal pattern, Auto-Scaling frees the
over-provisioned capacity during off-peak hours, by up to
25% of the web tier’s machines (Tang et al., 2020). By
doing so, it provides opportunistic server capacity for others
to use, including offline ML training. Furthermore, static
power consumption plays a non-trivial role in the context of
the overall data center electricity footprint. This motivates
more effective processor idle state management.
Finally, large data center operators have invested in carbon
free energy sources to neutralize its operational carbon foot-
print. Reaching net zero emissions entails matching every
unit of energy consumed by data centers with 100% re-
newable energy purchased. Remaining emissions are often
offset with various sustainability programs, further reducing
the operational carbon footprint of AI computing.