Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
3.4 Going Beyond Efficiency Optimization
Despite the opportunities for optimizing energy efficiency
and reducing environmental footprint at scale, there are
many reasons why we must care about scaling AI in a more
environmentally-sustainable manner. AI growth is multi-
plicative beyond current industrial use cases. Although
domain-specific architectures improve the operational en-
ergy footprint of AI model training by more than 90% (Pat-
terson et al., 2021), these architectures require more system
resources, leading to larger embodied carbon footprints.
While shifting model training and inference to data centers
with carbon-free energy sources can reduce emissions, the
solution may not scale to all AI use cases. Infrastructure for
carbon free energy is limited by rare metals and materials,
and takes significant economic resources and time to build.
Furthermore, the carbon footprint of federated learning and
optimization use cases at the edge is estimated to be similar
to that of training a Transformer Bigmodel (Figure 11).
As on-device learning becomes more ubiquitous to improve
data privacy, we expect to see more computation being
shifted away from data centers to the edge, where access to
renewable energy may be limited. The edge-cloud space for
AI opens interesting design opportunities (Section 4.3).
The growth of AI in all dimensions outpaces the efficiency
improvement at-scale. Embodied carbon cost is becoming
the dominating source of AI’s overall carbon footprint. To
curb the rising carbon footprint of AI at-scale, we must
look beyond efficiency optimization and complement effi-
ciency and utilization optimization with efforts to tackle the
remaining embodied carbon footprint of AI systems.
4 A S USTAINABILITY MINDSET FOR AI
To tackle the environmental implications of AI’s exponen-
tial growth, the first key step requires ML practitioners and
researchers to develop and adopt an sustainability mindset .
The solution space is wide open—while there are significant
efforts looking at AI system and infrastructure efficiency
optimization, the AI data, experimentation, and training
algorithm efficiency space (Sections 4.1 and 4.2) beyond
system design and optimization (Section 4.3) is less well
explored. We cannot optimize what cannot be measured
— telemetry to track the carbon footprint of AI technolo-
gies must be adopted by the community (Section 4.4). We
identify a number of important directions to scale AI in
asustainable manner and to minimize the environmental
impact of AI for the next decades.
The field of AI is currently primarily driven by research
that seeks to maximize model accuracy — progress is of-
ten used synonymously with improved prediction quality.
This has led to a decade of AI achieved through the use of
massive computational power while disregarding resources
or environmental footprint. To develop AI technologies re-
y = 0.7892x-0.004R²= 0.9969y = 0.7903x-0.002R²= 0.99860.7870.7890.7910.7930.7950.797
0.1250.250.5124Model Error  (Lower is Better)Energy/Step (J)Data Scale: 1XData Scale: 2XData Scale: 4XData Scale: 8XData Scale: 16XModel Scale: 2XModel Scale: 4XModel Scale: 8XModel Scale: 16XModel Scale: 32XModel Scale: 64XModel Scale: 128X0   0.0020.0040.0060.0080.010Figure 9. Model quality of recommendation use cases improves
as we scale up the amount of data and/or the number of model
parameters (e.g., embedding dimension), leading to higher energy
and carbon footprint. Maximizing model accuracy for the specific
recommendation use case comes with significant energy cost —
Roughly 4 ×energy saving can be achieved with only 0.004 model
quality degradation (green vs. yellow stars).
sponsibly, we must achieve competitive model accuracy at
a fixed or even reduced computational and environmental
cost. Despite the recent calls-to-action (Strubell et al., 2019;
Lacoste et al., 2019; Henderson et al., 2020; Bender et al.,
2021; Patterson et al., 2021), the overall community remains
under-invested in research that aims at deeply understand-
ing and minimizing the cost of AI. To bend the exponential
growth curve of AI and its environmental footprint, we must
build a future, where efficiency is an evaluation criterion
for publishing ML research on computationally-intensive
models beyond accuracy-related measures.
4.1 Data Utilization Efficiency
Data Scaling and Sampling: No data is like more data
— data scaling is the de-facto approach to increase model
quality, where the primary factor for accuracy improvement
is driven by the size and quality of training data, instead
of algorithmic optimization. However, data scaling has sig-
nificant environmental footprint implications. To keep the
model training time manageable, overall system resources
must be scaled with the increase in the data set size, resulting
in larger embodied carbon footprint and operational carbon
footprint from the data storage and ingestion pipeline and
model training. Alternatively, if training system resources
are kept fixed, data scaling increases training time, resulting
in a larger operational energy footprint.
Figure 9 depicts energy footprint reduction potential when
data and model scaling is performed in conjunction. The x-
axis represents the energy required per training step whereas
the y-axis represents model error. The blue solid lines cap-
ture model size scaling (through embedding hash scaling)
while the training data set size is kept fixed. The reddashed