Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
APPENDIX
A E FFICIENT , SUSTAINABLE AI S YSTEMS
General-Purpose Processors, General-Purpose Accelera-
tors, Reconfigurable Systems, and ASICs for AI: There
is a wide variety of system hardware choices for AI from
general-purpose processors (CPUs), general-purpose accel-
erators (GPUs or TPUs), field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) (Putnam et al., 2015), to application-specific inte-
grated circuit (ASIC), such as Eyeriss (Chen et al., 2016).
The exact system deployment choice can be multifaceted —
the cadence of ML algorithm and model architecture evo-
lution, the diversity of ML use cases and the respective
system resource requirements, and the maturity of the soft-
ware stack. While ML accelerator deployment brings a
step-function improvement in operational energy efficiency ,
it may not necessarily reduce the carbon footprint of AI
computing overall. This is because of the upfront embod-
ied carbon footprint associated with the different system
hardware choices. From the environmental sustainability
perspective, the optimal point depends on the compounding
factor of operational efficiency improvement over genera-
tions of ML algorithms/models, deployment lifetime and
embodied carbon footprint of the system hardware. Thus,
to design for environmental sustainability, one must strike a
careful balance between efficiency andflexibility and, at the
same time, consider environmental impact as a key design
dimension for next-generation AI systems.
Disaggregating Machine Learning Pipeline Stages: As
depicted in Figure 3, the overall training throughput effi-
ciency for large-scale ML models depends on the through-
put performance of both data ingestion and pre-processing
andmodel training . Disaggregating the data ingestion and
pre-processing stage of the machine learning pipeline from
model training is the de-facto approach for industry-scale
machine learning model training. This allows training ac-
celerator, network and storage I/O bandwidth utilization to
scale independently, thereby increasing the overall model
training throughput by 56% (Zhao et al., 2021). Disaggre-
gation with well-designed check-pointing support (Maeng
et al., 2021; Eisenman et al., 2021) improves training fault
tolerance as well. By doing so, failure on nodes that are
responsible for data ingestion and pre-processing can be
recovered efficiently without requiring re-runs of the en-
tire training experiment. From a sustainability perspective,
disaggregating the data storage and ingestion stage from
model training maximizes infrastructure efficiency by using
less system resources to achieve higher training throughput ,
resulting in lower embodied carbon footprint. By increasing
fault tolerance, the operational carbon footprint is reduced
at the same time.
Fault-Tolerant AI Systems and Hardware: One way toamortize the rising embodied carbon cost of AI infrastruc-
tures is to extend hardware lifetime. However, hardware
ages — depending on the wear-out characteristics, increas-
ingly more errors can surface over time and result in silent
data corruption , leading to erroneous computation, model
accuracy degradation, non-deterministic ML execution, or
fatal system failure. In a large fleet of processors, silent
data corruption can occur frequently enough to have dis-
ruptive impact on service productivity (Dixit et al., 2021;
Hochschild et al., 2021). Decommissioning an AI system
entirely because of hardware faults is expensive from the
perspective of resource and environmental footprints. Sys-
tem architects can design differential reliability levels for
micro architectural components on an AI system depending
on the ML model execution characteristics. Alternatively,
algorithmic fault tolerance can be built into deep learning
programming frameworks to provide a code execution path
that is cognizant of hardware wear-out characteristics.
B E FFICIENCY AND SELF-SUPERVISED
LEARNING
Self-supervised learning (SSL) have received much attention
in the research community in recent years. SSL methods
train deep neural networks without using explicit supervi-
sion in the form of human-annotated labels for each training
sample. Having humans annotate data is a time-consuming,
expensive, and typically noisy process. SSL methods are
typically used to train foundation models — models that
can readily be fine-tuned using a small amount of labeled
data on a down-stream task (Bommasani et al., 2021). SSL
methods have been extremely successful for pre-training
large language models, becoming the de-facto standard, and
they have also attracted great interest in computer vision.
When comparing supervised and self-supervised methods,
there is a glaring trade-off between having labels and the
amount of computational overhead involved in pre-training.
For example, Chen et al. (2020) report achieving 69.3%
top-1 validation accuracy with a ResNet-50 model after SSL
pre-training for 1000 epochs on the ImageNet dataset and
using the linear evaluation protocol, freezing the pre-trained
feature extractor, and fine-tuning a linear classifier on top
for 60 epochs using the full ImageNet dataset with all labels.
In contrast, the same model typically achieves at least 76.1%
top-1 accuracy after 90 epochs of fully-supervised training.
Thus, in this example, using labels and supervised training is
worth a roughly 10 ×reduction in training effort, measured
in terms of number of passes over the dataset.
Recent work suggests that incorporating even a small
amount of labeled data can significantly bridge this gap.
Assran et al. (2021) describe an approach called Predict-
ing view Assignments With Support samples (PAWS) for
semi-supervised pre-training inspired by SSL. With access