Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
Probability           GPU Utilization           
Figure 10. A vast majority of model experimentation (over tens of
thousands of training workflows) utilizes GPUs at only 30-50%,
leaving room for utilization and efficiency improvements.
Sivaprasad et al., 2020). In addition, significant research
has gone into algorithmic approaches to efficiently scale
training (Goyal et al., 2017; Ott et al., 2018) by reducing
communication cost via compression (Alistarh et al., 2017;
V ogels et al., 2019), pipelining (Huang et al., 2019), and
sharding (Rajbhandari et al., 2020; Rasley et al., 2020). The
advances have enabled efficient scaling to larger models
and larger datasets. We expect efficient training methods
to continue as an important domain. While this paper has
focused on supervised learning relying labeled data, algo-
rithmic efficiency extends to other learning paradigms in-
cluding self-supervised and semi-supervised learning. We
discuss promising efficiency scaling opportunities for self-
and semi-supervised learning in Appendix B.
4.3 Efficient and Environmentally-Sustainable AI
Infrastructure and System Hardware
To amortize the embodied carbon footprint, model devel-
opers and system architects must maximize the utilization
of accelerator and system resources when in use and pro-
long the lifetime of AI infrastructures . Existing practices
such as the move to domain-specific architectures at cloud
scale (Jouppi et al., 2017; Hamilton, 2018; Azure, 2019) re-
duce AI computing’s footprint by consolidating computing
resources at scale and by operating the shared infrastructures
more environmentally-friendly with carbon free energy3.
Accelerator Virtualization and Multi-Tenancy Support:
Figure 10 illustrates the utilization of GPU accelerators in
Meta’s research training infrastructure. A significant por-
tion of machine learning model experimentation utilizes
GPUs at only 30-50%, leaving significant room for improve-
ments to efficiency and overall utilization. Virtualization
and workload consolidation technologies can help maximize
accelerator utilization (NVIDIA, 2021a). Google’s TPUs
have also recently started supporting virtualization (Spiri-
donov, 2021). Multi-tenancy for AI accelerators is gaining
traction as an effective way to improve resource utilization,
3We discuss additional directions for enabling environmentally-
sustainable systems in Appendix A: implications of general-
purpose processors, accelerators, reconfigurable hardware for AI;
infrastructure disaggregation; fault tolerant, resilient AI systems.thereby amortizing the upfront embodied carbon footprint of
customized system hardware for AI at the expense of poten-
tial operational carbon footprint increase (Gschwind et al.,
2017; Jeon et al., 2019; Yu & Chowdhury, 2019; Ghodrati
et al., 2020; Kao & Krishna, 2021).
Environmental Sustainability as a Key AI System De-
sign Principle: Today, servers are designed to optimize
performance and power efficiency. However, system de-
sign with a focus on operational energy efficiency optimiza-
tion does not always produce the most environmentally-
sustainable solution (Jain & Wullert, 2002; Chang et al.,
2010; Gupta et al., 2021). With the rising embodied car-
bon cost and the exponential demand growth of AI, system
designers and architects must re-think fundamental system
hardware design principles to minimize computing’s foot-
print end-to-end, considering the entire hardware and ML
model development life cycle. In addition to the respective
performance, power, and cost profiles, the environmental
footprint characteristics of processors over the generations
of CMOS technologies, DDRx and HBM memory technolo-
gies, SSD/NAND-flash/HDD storage technologies can be
orders-of-magnitude different (Bardon et al., 2020). Thus,
designing AI systems with the least environmental impact
requires explicit consideration of environmental footprint
characteristics at the design time.
Carbon-Efficient Scheduling for AI Computing At-Scale:
As the electricity consumption of hyperscale data centers
continues to rise, data center operators have devoted signifi-
cant investment to neutralize operational carbon footprint.
By operating large-scale computing infrastructures with
carbon free energy, technology companies are taking an
important step to address the environmental implications of
computing. More can be done however .
As the renewable energy proportion in the electricity grid
increases, fluctuations in energy generation will increase
due to the intermittent nature of renewable energy sources
(i.e. wind, solar). Elastic carbon-aware workload schedul-
ing techniques can be used in and across datacenters to
predict and exploit the intermittent energy generation pat-
terns (Radovanovic et al., 2021). However such schedul-
ing algorithms might require server over-provisioning to
allow for flexibility of shifting workloads to times when
carbon-free energy is available. Furthermore, any addi-
tional server capacity comes with manufacturing carbon
cost which needs to be incorporated into the design space.
Alternatively, energy storage (e.g. batteries, pumped hy-
dro, flywheels, molten salt) can be used to store renewable
energy during peak generation times for use during low
generation times. There is an interesting design space to
achieve carbon-efficient AI computing (Acun et al., 2022).
On-Device Learning is becoming more ubiquitous to en-
able model personalization (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Wang