Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
Performance-per-Watt[Domain-Specific Acceleration]Utilization[At-Scale Data Center Optimization;Low-Precision Hardware]0.80.911.11.21.3
Yr1-H1Yr1-H2Yr2-H1Yr2-H2Operational Power FootprintBaselineOptimized (Section 3.2)28.5% improvement 
Figure 6. The iterative optimization process has led to 28.5% oper-
ational energy footprint reduction over the two-year time period
(Section 3.2). Despite the significant operational power footprint
reduction, we continue to see the overall electricity demand for AI
to increase over time — an example of Jevon’s Paradox , where
efficiency improvement stimulates additional novel AI use cases.
inference resources (65%) as compared to training (35%).
Operational Carbon Footprint: Across the life cycle of
the six Meta models in Figure 4, the average carbon foot-
print is 1.8 ×higher than that of the open-source Meena
model (Adiwardana & Luong, 2020) and one-third of GPT-
3’s training footprint. To quantify the emissions of Meta’s
models, we measure the total energy consumption, assume
location-based carbon intensities for energy mixes, and use
Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) of 1.1. In addition to
model- and hardware-level optimizations, Meta’s renewable
energy procurement programs mitigates these emissions.
Embodied Carbon Footprint: To quantify the embodied
carbon footprint of AI hardware, we use LCA (Section 2.2).
We assume GPU-based AI training systems have similar
embodied footprint as the production footprint of Apple’s
28-core CPU with dual AMD Radeon GPUs (Apple, 2019)2.
For CPU-only systems we assume half the embodied emis-
sions. Based on the characterization of model training and
inference at Meta, we assume an average utilization of 30-
60% over the 3- to 5-year lifetime for servers. The embodied
carbon footprint is estimated as follows:
COembodied
2 =P
iTime
LifetimeCOembodied
2 (AISystem )(i)(1)
Figure 5 presents the carbon footprint estimation for the
large scale ML tasks at Meta, spanning both operational and
embodied carbon footprint. Based on the assumptions of
location-based renewable energy availability, the split be-
tween the embodied and (location-based) operational carbon
footprint is roughly 30% / 70% for the large scale ML tasks.
Taking into account carbon-free energy, such as solar, the
operational carbon footprint can be significantly reduced,
2Ideally, the embodied carbon analysis should be based on
the LCA for the AI system hardware. However, LCA for GPUs
and domain-specific accelerators is limited — an important future
direction to enabling environmentally-sustainable AI systems.
0%5%10%15%20%25%Operational Power Footprint Improvement Normalized to Overall AI Infrastructure2-year time periodOptimization is an Iterative Process
ModelPlatformInfrastructureHardwarePerformance-per-Watt[Moore’s Law]Performance-per-Watt[Domain-Specific Acceleration]Utilization[At-Scale Data Center Optimization;Low-Precision Hardware]Resource-Efficient AI ModelsFigure 7. Optimization is an iterative process — we have achieved
an average of 20% operational energy footprint reduction every 6
months across the machine learning hardware-software stack.
leaving the manufacturing carbon cost as the dominating
source of AI’s carbon footprint. The operational carbon foot-
print (rest) portion of the bars represent the carbon intensity
of renewable energy which has been further mitigated by
Meta’s carbon removal programs.
3.2 Carbon Footprint Optimization from
Hardware-Software Co-Design
Optimization is an iterative process — we reduce the power
footprint across the machine learning hardware-software
stack by 20% every 6 months. But at the same time, AI
infrastructure continued to scale out. The net effect, with
Jevon’s Paradox, is a 28.5% operational power footprint
reduction over two years (Figure 6).
Optimization across AI Model Development and System
Stack over Time: Figure 7 shows the operational power
footprint reduction across Meta’s AI fleet over two years.
The improvement come from four areas of optimizations:
model (e.g., designing resource-efficient models), platform
(e.g., PyTorch’s support for quantization), infrastructure
(e.g., data center optimization and low-precision hardware),
andhardware (e.g., domain-specific acceleration). Each bar
illustrates the operational power reduction across Meta’s
AI fleet over 6-month period from each of the optimization
areas. The optimizations in aggregate provide, on average,
a 20% reduction in operational power consumption every
six months. The compounded benefits highlight the need
for cross-stack optimizations.
Optimizing the Carbon Footprint of LM:Figure 8 shows
a deep dive into a specific, yet important, machine learning
task at Meta: language translation using a Transformer-
based architecture ( LM).LM is designed based on the
state-of-the-art cross-lingual understanding through self-
supervision. Figure 8 analyzes the power footprint im-
provements over a collection of optimization steps for LM:
platform-level caching ,GPU acceleration ,low precision