SUSTAINABLE AI: E NVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATIONS ,
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Carole-Jean Wu1Ramya Raghavendra1Udit Gupta1 2Bilge Acun1Newsha Ardalani1Kiwan Maeng1
Gloria Chang1Fiona Aga Behram1James Huang1Charles Bai1Michael Gschwind1Anurag Gupta1
Myle Ott1Anastasia Melnikov1Salvatore Candido1David Brooks1 2Geeta Chauhan1Benjamin Lee1 3
Hsien-Hsin S. Lee1Bugra Akyildiz1Max Balandat1Joe Spisak1Ravi Jain1Mike Rabbat1Kim Hazelwood1
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the environmental impact of the super-linear growth trends for AI from a holistic perspective,
spanning Data ,Algorithms , and System Hardware . We characterize the carbon footprint of AI computing by
examining the model development cycle across industry-scale machine learning use cases and, at the same time,
considering the life cycle of system hardware. Taking a step further, we capture the operational and manufacturing
carbon footprint of AI computing and present an end-to-end analysis for what andhow hardware-software design
and at-scale optimization can help reduce the overall carbon footprint of AI. Based on the industry experience
and lessons learned, we share the key challenges and chart out important development directions across the many
dimensions of AI. We hope the key messages and insights presented in this paper can inspire the community to
advance the field of AI in an environmentally-responsible manner.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is one of the fastest growing do-
mains spanning research and product development. The
significant investment in AI has also stimulated novel appli-
cations of AI in domains such as science, medicine, finance,
and education. AI-powered robots are deployed by the farm-
ing industry to grow plants using less resources (Sheikh,
2020). AI is applied to tackle the protein structure predic-
tion challenge, which can lead to revolutionary advances for
biological sciences (Jumper et al., 2021). AI is also used
to discover new electrocatalysts for efficient and scalable
ways to store and use renewable energy (Zitnick et al., 2020)
while also being applied to predict renewable energy avail-
ability in advance to improve energy utilization (Elkin &
Witherspoon, 2019). All of these investments in research,
development, and deployment have led to a super-linear
growth in AI data, models, and infrastructure capacity.
This work explores the environmental impact of AI from
aholistic perspective. More specifically, we present the
challenges and opportunities to designing sustainable AI
computing across the key phases of the machine learning
(ML) development process — Data ,Experimentation ,Train-
ing, and Inference — for a variety of AI use cases at Meta.
1Meta AI2Harvard University3University of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Carole-Jean Wu <carolejeanwu@fb.com >,
Ramya Raghavendra <rramya@fb.com >.
Proceedings of the 5thMLSys Conference , Santa Clara, CA, USA,
2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
x
2019-210.511.522.533.544.5Data Size & Ingestion Bandwidth Growth
TimeDLRM1 DataDLRM2 DataData Ingestion BWFigure 1. The amount of data for recommendation use cases has
roughly doubled, leading to 3.2 times increase in the data ingestion
bandwidth demand (2019-21). The ingestion bandwidth here refers
to the I/O bandwidth requirement of the data ingestion stage.
The solution space spans across our fleet of datacenters
and on-device computing. Given particular use cases, we
consider the impact of AI data,algorithms , and system hard-
ware . Finally, we consider emissions across the life cycle of
hardware systems, from manufacturing to operational use.
AI Data Growth. In the past decade, we have seen an
exponential increase in AI training data and model capacity.
Figure 1 illustrates that the amount of training data at Meta
for two recommendation use cases — one of the fastest
growing areas of ML usage at Meta (Gupta et al., 2020).
Data has increased by 2.4 ×and 1.9 ×in the last two years,
reaching exabyte scale. The data size increase has led to
a 3.2×increase in the data ingestion bandwidth demand.
Given this increase, data storage and the ingestion pipeline