Sustainable AI: Environmental Implications, Challenges and Opportunities
*Training footprint only0.000.501.00LMRM-1RM-2RM-3RM-4RM-5BERT-NASEvolved TransformerT5MeenaGShard-600BSwitch TransformerGPT3FacebookOSS Large-Scale ML ModelsCO2e (kg)MillionsOperational Carbon Footprint of Large-Scale ML TasksOffline TrainingOnline TrainingInference
Meta          
Figure 4. The carbon footprint of the LM model is dominated
by Inference whereas, for RM1 – RM5, the carbon footprint of
Training versus Inference is roughly equal. The average carbon
footprint for ML training tasks at Meta is 1.8 times larger than
that of Meena used in modern conversational agents and 0.3 times
of GPT-3’s carbon footprint. Carbon footprint for inference tasks
is included for models that are used in production. Note: the
operational carbon footprint of AI does not correlate with the
number of model parameters. The open-source large-scale ML
tasks (OSS) are based on the vanilla model architectures and may
not be reflective of production use cases.
and embodied carbon footprint is a complex process, we
estimate the significance of embodied carbon emissions
using Meta’s Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission statistics.
More than 50% of Meta’s emissions owe to its value chain
— Scope 3 of Meta’s GHG emission . As a result, a signifi-
cant embodied carbon cost is paid upfront for every system
component brought into Meta’s fleet of data centers, where
AI is the biggest growth driver.
3 AI C OMPUTING ’SCARBON FOOTPRINT
3.1 Carbon Footprint Analysis for Industry-Scale ML
Training and Deployment
Figure 4 illustrates the operational carbon emissions for
model training and inference across the ML tasks. We
analyze six representative machine learning models in pro-
duction at Meta1.LMrefers to Meta’s Transformer-based
Universal Language Model for text translation (Conneau
et al., 2020). RM1 –RM5 represent five unique deep learn-
ing recommendation and ranking models for various Meta
products (Naumov et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2020).
1In total, the six models account for a vast majority of compute
resources for the overall inference predictions at Meta, serving
billions of users world wide.
00.20.40.60.811.21.4
LMRM-1RM-2RM-3RM-4RM-5CO2e (kg)MillionsOverall Carbon Footprint of Large-Scale ML TasksOperational Carbon Cost (Offset with solar)Operational Carbon Cost (Rest)Projected Embodied Carbon Costrenewable energyFigure 5. When considering the overall life cycle of ML models
and systems in this analysis, manufacturing carbon cost is roughly
50% of the (location-based) operational carbon footprint of large-
scale ML tasks (Figure 4). Taking into account carbon-free energy,
such as solar, the operational energy consumption can be signif-
icantly reduced, leaving the manufacturing carbon cost as the
dominating source of AI’s carbon footprint.
We compare the carbon footprint of Meta’s production ML
models with seven large-scale, open-source (OSS) models:
BERT-NAS, T5, Meena, GShard-600B, Switch Transformer,
and GPT-3. Note, we present the operational carbon foot-
print of the OSS model training from (Strubell et al., 2019;
Patterson et al., 2021). The operational carbon footprint
results can vary based on the exact AI systems used and
the carbon intensity of the energy mixture. Models with
more parameters do not necessarily result in higher carbon
emissions (Artetxe et al., 2021). Training the Switch Trans-
former model equipped with 1.5 trillion parameters (Fedus
et al., 2021) produces significantly less carbon emission
than that of GPT-3 (750 billion parameters) (Brown et al.,
2020). This illustrates the carbon footprint advantage of
operationally-efficient model architectures.
Both Training andInference can contribute significantly
to the overall carbon footprint of machine learning tasks at
Meta. The exact breakdown between the two phases varies
across ML use cases.
The overall operational carbon footprint is categorized into
offline training ,online training , and inference . Offline train-
ing encompasses both experimentation and training models
with historical data. Online training is particularly relevant
to recommendation models where parameters are continu-
ously updated based on recent data. The inference footprint
represents the emission from serving production traffic. The
online training and inference emissions are considered over
the period of offline training. For recommendation use cases,
we find the carbon footprint is split evenly between training
and inference. On the other hand, the carbon footprint of
LM is dominated by the inference phase, using much higher