D-V AE: A Variational Autoencoder for Directed
Acyclic Graphs
Muhan Zhang, Shali Jiang, Zhicheng Cui, Roman Garnett, Yixin Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
{muhan, jiang.s, z.cui, garnett}@wustl.edu ,chen@cse.wustl.edu
Abstract
Graph structured data are abundant in the real world. Among different graph
types, directed acyclic graphs ( DAGs) are of particular interest to machine learning
researchers, as many machine learning models are realized as computations on
DAGs, including neural networks and Bayesian networks. In this paper, we study
deep generative models for DAGs, and propose a novel DAG variational autoencoder
(D-VAE). To encode DAGs into the latent space, we leverage graph neural networks.
We propose an asynchronous message passing scheme that allows encoding the
computations on DAGs, rather than using existing simultaneous message passing
schemes to encode local graph structures. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed D-VAE through two tasks: neural architecture search and Bayesian
network structure learning. Experiments show that our model not only generates
novel and valid DAGs, but also produces a smooth latent space that facilitates
searching for DAGs with better performance through Bayesian optimization.
1 Introduction
Many real-world problems can be posed as optimizing of a directed acyclic graph ( DAG) representing
some computational task. For example, the architecture of a neural network is a DAG. The problem
of searching optimal neural architectures is essentially a DAG optimization task. Similarly, one
critical problem in learning graphical models – optimizing the connection structures of Bayesian
networks [ 1], is also a DAG optimization task. DAG optimization is pervasive in other ﬁelds as well.
In electronic circuit design, engineers need to optimize DAG circuit blocks not only to realize target
functions, but also to meet speciﬁcations such as power usage and operating temperature.
DAG optimization is a hard problem. Firstly, the evaluation of a DAG’s performance is often time-
consuming (e.g., training a neural network). Secondly, state-of-the-art black-box optimization
techniques such as simulated annealing and Bayesian optimization primarily operate in a continuous
space, thus are not directly applicable to DAG optimization due to the discrete nature of DAGs. In
particular, to make Bayesian optimization work for discrete structures, we need a kernel to measure
the similarity between discrete structures as well as a method to explore the design space and
extrapolate to new points. Principled solutions to these problems are still lacking.
Is there a way to circumvent the trouble from discreteness? The answer is yes. If we can embed all
DAGs to a continuous space and make the space relatively smooth, we might be able to directly use
principled black-box optimization algorithms to optimize DAGs in this space, or even use gradient
methods if gradients are available. Recently, there has been increased interest in training generative
models for discrete data types such as molecules [ 2,3], arithmetic expressions [ 4], source code
[5], undirected graphs [ 6], etc. In particular, Kusner et al. [3]developed a grammar variational
autoencoder ( G-VAE) for molecules, which is able to encode and decode molecules into and from
acontinuous latent space , allowing one to optimize molecule properties by searching in this well-
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.