each step according to the decoding distributions described in Section 3.2 and calculate subsequent
decoding distributions based on the sampled results.
3.4 Discussion and model extensions
Relation with RNNs. The D-VAE encoder and decoder can be reduced to ordinary RNNs when the
input DAG is reduced to a chain of nodes. Although we propose D-VAE from a GNN’s perspective,
our model can also be seen as a generalization of traditional sequence modeling frameworks [ 55,56]
where a timestamp depends only on the timestamp immediately before it, to the DAG case where a
timestamp has multiple previous dependencies. As special DAGs, similar ideas have been explored
for trees [57, 17], where a node can have multiple incoming edges yet only one outgoing edge.
Bidirectional encoding. D-VAE’s encoding process can be seen as simulating how an input signal
goes through a DAG, with hvsimulating the output signal at each node v. This is also known as
forward propagation in neural networks. Inspired by the bidirectional RNN [58], we can also use
another GRU to reversely encode a DAG (i.e., reverse all edge directions and encode the DAG again),
thus simulating the backward propagation too. After reverse encoding, we get two ending states,
which are concatenated and linearly mapped to their original size as the ﬁnal output state. We ﬁnd this
bidirectional encoding can increase the performance and convergence speed on neural architectures.
Incorporating vertex semantics. Note that D-VAE currently uses one-hot encoding of node types
asxv, which does not consider the semantic meanings of different node types. For example, a
33convolution layer might be functionally very similar to a 55convolution layer, while being
functionally distinct from a max pooling layer. We expect incorporating such semantic meanings of
node types to be able to further improve D-VAE’s performance. For example, we can use pretrained
embeddings of node types to replace the one-hot encoding. We leave it for future work.
4 Experiments
We validate the proposed DAG variational autoencoder ( D-VAE) on two DAG optimization tasks:
•Neural architecture search. Our neural network dataset contains 19,020 neural architectures from
theENAS software [ 33]. Each neural architecture has 6 layers (excluding input and output layers)
sampled from: 33and55convolutions, 33and55depthwise-separable convolutions
[59],33max pooling, and 33average pooling. We evaluate each neural architecture’s
weight-sharing accuracy [ 33] (a proxy of the true accuracy) on CIFAR-10 [ 60] as its performance
measure. We split the dataset into 90% training and 10% held-out test sets. We use the training set
forVAE training, and use the test set only for evaluation.
•Bayesian network structure learning. Our Bayesian network dataset contains 200,000 random
8-node Bayesian networks from the bnlearn package [ 61] in R. For each network, we compute the
Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC) score to measure the performance of the network structure
for ﬁtting the Asia dataset [ 62]. We split the Bayesian networks into 90% training and 10% test
sets. For more details, please refer to Appendix I.
Following [3], we do four experiments for each task:
•Basic abilities of V AE models. In this experiment, we perform standard tests to evaluate the
reconstructive and generative abilities of a VAE model for DAGs, including reconstruction accuracy,
prior validity, uniqueness and novelty.
•Predictive performance of latent representation. We test how well we can use the latent embed-
dings of neural architectures and Bayesian networks to predict their performances.
•Bayesian optimization. This is the motivating application of D-VAE. We test how well the learned
latent space can be used for searching for high-performance DAGs through Bayesian optimization.
•Latent space visualization. We visualize the latent space to qualitatively evaluate its smoothness.
Since there is little previous work on DAG generation, we compare D-VAE with four generative
baselines adapted for DAGs:S-VAE,Graph RNN,GCN and DeepGMG . Among them, S-VAE [56] and
Graph RNN [13] are adjacency-matrix-based methods; GCN [22] and DeepGMG [6] are graph-based
methods which use simultaneous message passing to embed DAGs. We include more details about
these baselines and discuss D-VAE’s advantages over them in Appendix J. The training details are in
Appendix K. All the code and data are available at https://github.com/muhanzhang/D-VAE .
6