conv3max3conv5conv5max3conv3outputconv5conv5max3conv3conv5max3conv5inputinputmax3conv5max3conv3inputconv3conv3max3conv5inputconv5conv3max3inputconv5conv3max3conv5max3inputconv3inputinput1234567
Aggregatemessages from predecessorsUpdatethe hidden state of this nodeoutputconv5max3conv5max3conv3outputconv5conv5max3conv3outputconv5max3conv3outputmax3conv3outputconv3outputconv5Figure 2: An illustration of the encoding procedure for a neural architecture. Following a topological ordering,
we iteratively compute the hidden state for each node (red) by feeding in its predecessors’ hidden states (blue).
This simulates how an input signal goes through a computation, with hvsimulating the output signal at node v.
After all nodes’ hidden states are computed, we use hvn, the hidden state of the ending node vn
without any successors, as the output of the encoder. Then we feed hvnto two MLPs to get the mean
and variance parameters of the posterior approximation q(zjG)in (1). If there are multiple nodes
without successors, we again add a virtual ending node connecting from all of them.
Note that although topological orderings are usually not unique for a DAG, we can take any one of
them as the message passing order while ensuring the encoder output is always the same, revealed by
the following theorem. We include all theorem proofs in the appendix.
Theorem 1. The D-VAEencoder is invariant to node permutations of the input DAG if the aggregation
functionAis invariant to the order of its inputs.
Theorem 1 means isomorphic DAGs are always encoded the same, no matter how we index the nodes.
It also indicates that so long as we encode a DAG complying with its partial order, we can perform
message passing in arbitrary order (even parallelly for some nodes) with the same encoding result.
The next theorem shows another property of D-VAE that is crucial for its success in modeling DAGs,
i.e., it is able to injectively encode computations on DAGs.
Theorem 2. LetGbe any DAG representing some computation C. Letv1;:::;vnbe its nodes
following a topological order each representing some operation oi;1in, wherevnis the ending
node. Then, the encoder of D-VAE mapsCtohvninjectively ifAis injective andUis injective.
The signiﬁcance of Theorem 2 is that it provides a way to injectively encode computations on
DAGs, so that every computation has a unique embedding in the latent space. Therefore, instead of
performing optimization in the original discrete space, we may alternatively perform optimization
in the continuous latent space . In this well-behaved Euclidean space, distance is well deﬁned, and
principled Bayesian optimization can be applied to search for latent points with high performance
scores, which transforms the discrete optimization problem into an easier continuous problem.
Note that Theorem 2 states D-VAE injectively encodes computations on graph structures, rather
than graph structures themselves. Being able to injectively encode graph structures is a very strong
condition, as it implies an efﬁcient algorithm to solve the challenging graph isomorphism ( GI)
problem. Luckily, here what we really care about are computations instead of structures, since we
do not want to differentiate two different structures G1andG2as long as they represent the same
computation . Figure 1 shows such an example. Our D-VAE can identify that the two DAGs in
Figure 1 actually represent the same computation by encoding them to the same vector, while those
encoders focusing on encoding structures might fail to capture the underlying computation and output
different vectors. We discuss more advantages of Theorem 2 in optimizing DAGs in Appendix G.
To model and learn the injective functions AandU, we resort to neural networks thanks to the
universal approximation theorem [52]. For example, we can let Abe a gated sum:
hin
v=X
u!vg(hu)m(hu); (4)
wheremis a mapping network and gis a gating network. Such a gated sum can model injective
multiset functions [ 53], and is invariant to input order. To model the injective update function U, we
can use a gated recurrent unit ( GRU) [54], with hin
vtreated as the input hidden state:
hv= GRUe(xv;hin
v): (5)
Here the subscript edenotes “encoding”. Using a GRU also allows reducing our framework to
traditional sequence to sequence modeling frameworks [55], as discussed in 3.4.
4