2437 Machine Learning (2023) 112:2433–2467 
1 3
require the Markov transition density to mix at an exponentially fast rate in order to estab-
lish convergence. Thus, while i.i.d. sampling may be difficult to justify, exponentially fast 
mixing often does not hold either, unless algorithm step-sizes are sent to null at an expo-
nential rate. These intricacies have motivated experimental techniques to mitigate correla-
tion among samples using replay buffers (Wang et al., 2017b) and parallelization of queries 
to a generative model (Gruslys et al., 2018). However, their exact relationship to mixing 
rates is opaque. Therefore, for simplicity, in this work we focus on the i.i.d. case.
Moreover, sharper sample complexities for actor-critic have been developed (Qiu et al. 
2021; Xu et  al. 2020; Wu et  al. 2020); however, they do not address the possibility of 
designing alternate policy evaluation schemes than TD(0) updates, and instead focus only 
on actor-critic in its vanilla form. This is because their perspective is on understanding the 
sample complexity of actor-critic alone, whereas we provide a unified perspective upon the 
basis of biased stochastic gradient iteration. In doing so, we are able incorporate a variety 
of critic updates and illuminate the interplay of problem smoothness, cardinality, and the 
choice of critic parameterization. In particular, the sample complexity of actor-critic with 
TD(0) updates for the tabular case given in Corollary 4 matches Xu et al. (2020); Wu et al. 
(2020), but in continuous spaces, depending on the conditioning of the feature map covari-
ance and other problem smoothness conditions, GTD or A-GTD may yield faster conver -
gence, a facet elsewhere unaddressed in the literature.
Even more recently, efforts have been made to improve upon the rate of convergence 
by considering regularized MDP’s with overparametrized networks (Cayci et  al., 2022), 
single critic step (Olshevsky & Gharesifard, 2022), and single trajectory actor updates 
(Chen et  al., 2022a). Decentralized convergence rates have also been established (Chen 
et al., 2022b; Zeng et al., 2022). Shen et al. (2020) show that for both i.i.d. and markovian 
sampling, there is a linear speedup for the decentralized setting whose is bottleneck is the 
slowest mixing chain. All of the aforementioned results require the assumption that the 
probability for any action given a state is strictly positive, which we do not require.
We evaluate actor-critic with TD, GTD, and A-GTD critic updates on both a navigation 
problem and the canonical pendulum problem. For the navigation problem, we find that 
indeed A-GTD converges faster than both GTD and TD. Interestingly, the stationary point 
it reaches is worse than GTD or TD. This suggests that the choice of critic scheme illu-
minates an interplay between optimization and generalization that is less-well understood 
in reinforcement learning (Boyan & Moore, 1995; Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002). For the 
pendulum problem, we also find that A-GTD converges fastest with respect to the gradient 
norm, which is consistent with our main convergence results. In particular, we again find 
that the faster convergence in gradient norm results the stationary point having a lower 
cumulative reward. We additinally consider advantage actor-critic in our simulations (Mnih 
et al., 2016). A detailed discussion on the results and implications can be found in Sect.  7. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 describes the problem of 
reinforcement learning and defines common assumptions which we use in our analysis. In 
Sect.  3, we derive a generic actor-critic algorithm from an optimization perspective and 
describe how the algorithm would be amended given different policy evaluation methods. 
The derivation of the convergence rate for generic actor-critic is presented in Sect.  4, and 
the specific analysis for Gradient, Accelerated Gradient, and vanilla Temporal Difference 
are characterized in Sects. 5 and 6.