2434 Machine Learning (2023) 112:2433–2467
1 3
Mnih et  al., 2016; Silver et  al., 2017). While their asymptotic stability has been known 
for decades (Konda & Borkar, 1999; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000), their sample complexity 
is relatively unexplored. In this work, we establish the statistical behavior of actor-critic 
algorithms for a number of canonical settings, which to our knowledge is the first time a 
comprehensive accounting has been conducted.
We focus on reinforcement learning problems over possibly continuous state and action 
spaces, which are defined by a Markov Decision Process (Puterman, 2014): each time, start-
ing from one state, an agent selects an action, and then it transitions to a new state accord-
ing to a distribution Markov in the current state and action. Then, the environment reveals 
a reward informing the quality of that decision. The goal of the agent is to select an action 
sequence which yields the largest expected accumulation of rewards, defined as the value 
(Bellman, 1954; Bertsekas, 2005). Actor-critic algorithms adapt the merits of reinforcement 
learning algorithms based on approximate dynamic programming with those based on pol-
icy search, the two dominant model-free approaches in the literature (Sutton et al., 2017).
For finite spaces, one may obtain the globally optimal policy, and therefore it is possible 
quantify sample complexity in terms of the gap to the optimal value function (regret) as, 
e.g., a polynomial function of the cardinality of the state and action spaces–see Jin et al. 
(2018) and references therein. This is possible because these quantities have finite cardinal-
ity; however, in continuous spaces, these analyses break down because policy parameteri-
zation is required, and the value function becomes non-convex with respect to the policy 
parameters (unless it is parameterized by a sufficiently high-dimensional neural model 
(Wang et al., 2019)).
More specifically, in the actor step of actor-critic, stochastic gradient steps with respect 
to the value function over a parameterized family of policies are conducted. Via the Policy 
Gradient Theorem (Sutton et al., 2000), the gradient with respect to policy parameters (pol-
icy gradient) is the product of two factors: the score function and the Q function. One may 
employ Monte Carlo rollouts to estimate Q-factors, which under careful choice of rollout 
horizon, can be shown to be unbiased (Paternain, 2018). As a result, linking policy gra-
dient methods to more standard stochastic programming results for non-convex optimiza-
tion, namely, sublinear O(k−1∕2) rates to stationarity have recently been established (Zhang 
et al., 2019). Doing so, however, requires an inordinate amount of querying to the environ-
ment in order to generate trajectory data. In actor-critic, we replace Monte Carlo rollouts 
with online estimates for the action-value function.
More specifically, in actor-critic, the critic step estimates the action-value (Q) function 
through stochastic approximation, i.e., temporal difference (TD) (Sutton, 1988), approaches 
to solving Bellman’s evaluation equation (Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Tsitsiklis, 1994). Com-
bining temporal difference iterations with nonlinear function parameterizations may cause 
instability, as shown by Baird (1995); Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1997). This motivates the 
majority of TD algorithms to focus on the case where the Q function is parameterized by a 
linear basis expansion over given universal features, which is common in practice (Sutton 
et al., 2017), and can be satisfied by radial basis function (RBF) networks or auto-encoders 
Park and Sandberg (1991). We consider this setting of universal features given a priori.
The asymptotic stability of linear TD algorithms hinges upon dynamical systems tools 
to encapsulate the mean estimation error sequence–see Borkar and Meyn (2000); Kushner 
and Yin (2003). By contrast, a number of finite-time characterizations of various TD algo-
rithms have appeared recently, i.e., those based on stochastic fixed point iterations and gra-
dient-based approximations known as gradient temporal difference (GTD) (Sutton et al., 
2009a). For TD algorithms, finite-time sublinear rates have been derived both in the case 
where samples (state-action-reward triples) are independent and identically distributed