Vol.:(0123456789)Machine Learning (2023) 112:2433–2467
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-023-06303-2
1 3
Editor: Scott Sanner.
Extended author information available on the last page of the articleOn the sample complexity of actor‑critic method 
for reinforcement learning with function approximation
Harshat Kumar1  · Alec Koppel2 · Alejandro Ribeiro1
Received: 18 December 2019 / Revised: 3 January 2023 / Accepted: 12 January 2023 /  
Published online: 16 February 2023 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
Reinforcement learning, mathematically described by Markov Decision Problems, may be 
approached either through dynamic programming or policy search. Actor-critic algorithms 
combine the merits of both approaches by alternating between steps to estimate the value func-
tion and policy gradient updates. Due to the fact that the updates exhibit correlated noise and 
biased gradient updates, only the asymptotic behavior of actor-critic is known by connecting its 
behavior to dynamical systems. This work puts forth a new variant of actor-critic that employs 
Monte Carlo rollouts during the policy search updates, which results in controllable bias that 
depends on the number of critic evaluations. As a result, we are able to provide for the first 
time the convergence rate of actor-critic algorithms when the policy search step employs pol-
icy gradient, agnostic to the choice of policy evaluation technique. In particular, we establish 
conditions under which the sample complexity is comparable to stochastic gradient method for 
non-convex problems or slower as a result of the critic estimation error, which is the main com-
plexity bottleneck. These results hold in continuous state and action spaces with linear func-
tion approximation for the value function. We then specialize these conceptual results to the 
case where the critic is estimated by Temporal Difference, Gradient Temporal Difference, and 
Accelerated Gradient Temporal Difference. These learning rates are then corroborated on a 
navigation problem involving an obstacle and the pendulum problem which provide insight into 
the interplay between optimization and generalization in reinforcement learning.
Keywords Actor-critic · Reinforcement learning · Markov decision process · Non-convex 
optimization · Stochastic programming
1 Introduction
Actor-critic refers to a family of two time-scale algorithms for reinforcement learning 
where one alternates between policy gradient updates (actor) and action-value function 
estimation in an online fashion (critic). These approaches form the bedrock of several prac-
tical advances in reinforcement learning, as in supply chain management (Giannoccaro & 
Pontrandolfo, 2002), power systems (Jiang et  al., 2014), robotic manipulation (Kober & 
Peters, 2012), and games of various kinds (Tesauro et al., 1995; Brockman et al., 2016;