2435 Machine Learning (2023) 112:2433–2467 
1 3
(i.i.d.) (Dalal et al., 2018b; Bhandari et al., 2018; Lakshminarayanan & Szepesvari, 2018) 
and when they exhibit Markovian dependence (Srikant & Ying, 2019). Further, the conver -
gence of GTD was established in Koppel et al. (2017); Tolstaya et al. (2018) by employing 
coupled supermartingales (Wang et  al., 2017a), which permits us to derive the rates of 
convergence in expectation of GTD as corollaries. As a result, we may explicitly derive the 
bias due to critic estimation error in terms of the number of critic steps. This is in contrast 
to the use of an unbiased estimate from a Monte Carlo rollout, as in pure policy gradient 
methods. We further note that contemporaneously of beginning this work, several analy -
ses of GTD have been developed (Liu et al., 2015; Dalal et al., 2018b, 2020) that refine 
the rates employed in this analysis; however, these results focus on concentration bounds 
(“lock-in probability"), a weaker metric of stability than convergence in mean, i.e., conver -
gence in Lebesgue integral implies convergence in measure. Since in this work we focus 
on the intuitive and broadly interpretable global convergence to stationarity in terms of the 
expected gradient norm of the value function, we seek to employ policy evaluation rates 
that are compatible with this goal, and defer refined lock-in probability results, for which 
tighter bounds of convergence on the critic exist, to future work.
Convergence of Actor-Critic In this work, we link the behavior of actor-critic to 
gradient ascent algorithms with biased gradient directions. This bias is controllable and 
depends on the step-size and number of critic iterations per actor update. We perform this 
analysis for the setting that samples are i.i.d, which may be explicitly guaranteed through 
the introduction of a new Monte Carlo rollout step for each actor update. As a result, we 
establish that actor-critic, independent of any critic method, exhibits convergence to sta-
tionary points of the value function that are comparable to stochastic gradient ascent in 
the non-convex regime. A key distinguishing feature from standard non-convex stochastic 
programming is that the rates are inherently tied to the bias of the search direction which 
is determined by the choice of critic scheme. In fact, our methodology is such that a rate 
for actor-critic can be derived for any critic-only method for which a convergence rate in 
expectation on the parameters can be expressed. In particular, we establish the rates for 
actor-critic with temporal difference (TD) (Sutton, 1988) and gradient TD (GTD) (Sutton 
et al., 2009a) critic steps. Furthermore, we propose an Accelerated GTD (A-GTD) method 
derived from accelerations of stochastic compositional gradient descent (Wang et  al., 
2017a), which converges faster than TD and GTD.
In summary, for the continuous spaces, we establish that A-GTD converges faster 
than GTD, and the effective convergence rate of TD(0) varies as a result of the feature 
space representation selected a priori. In particular, this introduces a trade off between the 
smoothness assumptions and the rates derived (see Table  1). TD has no additional smooth-
ness assumptions, and it achieves a rate of O(/u1D716−2∕/u1D70E) . This rate is analogous to the non-
convex analysis of stochastic compositional gradient descent when /u1D70E is equal to 0.5, which 
is a conservative estimate (see Fig.  1). Adding a smoothness assumption, GTD achieves 
the faster rate of O(/u1D716−3) . By requiring an additional smoothness assumption, we find that 
A-GTD achieves the fastest convergence rate of O(/u1D716−5∕2) . For the case of finite state action 
space, actor critic achieves a convergence rate of O(/u1D716−2) . Overall, the contribution in terms 
of sample complexities of different actor-critic algorithms may be found in Table 1.
Relative to existing convergence results, actor-critic is classically studied as a form of 
two time-scale algorithm (Borkar, 1997), whose asymptotic stability is well-known via 
dynamical systems (Kushner & Yin, 2003; Borkar, 2009). To wield these approaches to 
establish finite-time performance, however, concentration probabilities and geometric 
ergodicity assumptions of the Markov dynamics are required–see Borkar (2009). We obvi-
ate these complications by focusing on the case where independent trajectory samples are