11
Fig. 9: Illustration of the internal architecture of different two and single stage object detectors2.
classes, removing fully connected layers to increase speed and
using learnt anchor boxes to improve recall and have better
priors. Redmon et al. also combined the classiﬁcation and
detection datasets in hierarchical structure using WordNet [66].
This WordTree can be used to predict a higher conditional
probability of hypernym, even when the hyponym is not
classiﬁed correctly, thereby increasing the overall performance
of the system.
YOLOv2 provided better ﬂexibility to choose the model
on speed and accuracy, and the new architecture had fewer
parameters. As the title of the paper suggests, it was “better,
faster and stronger” [59].
4)RetinaNet :Given the difference between the accuracies
of single and two stage detectors, Lin et al. suggested that the
reason single stage detectors lag is the “extreme foreground-
background class imbalance” [67]. They proposed a reshaped
cross entropy loss, called Focal loss as the means to remedy the
imbalance. Focal loss parameter reduces the loss contribution
from easy examples. The authors demonstrate its efﬁcacy with
the help of a simple, single stage detector, called RetinaNet
[67], which predicts objects by dense sampling of the input
image in location, scale and aspect ratio. It uses ResNet [21]
augmented by Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [45] as the
backbone and two similar subnets - classiﬁcation and bounding
box regressor. Each layer from the FPN is passed to the
subnets, enabling it to detect objects as various scales. The
classiﬁcation subnet predicts the object score for each location
while the box regression subnet regresses the offset for each
anchor to the ground truth. Both subnets are small FCN and
share parameters across the individual networks. Unlike mostprevious works, the authors employ a class-agnostic bounding
box regressor and found them to be equally effective.
RetinaNet is simple to train, converges faster and easy to
implement. It achieved better performance in accuracy and run
time than the two stage detectors. RetinaNet also pushed the
envelope in advancing the ways object detectors are optimized
by the introduction of a new loss function.
5)YOLOv3 :YOLOv3 had “incremental improvements”
from the previous YOLO versions [57], [59]. Redmon et al.
replaced the feature extractor network with a larger Darknet-53
network [64]. They also incorporated various techniques like
data augmentation, multi-scale training, batch normalization,
among others. Softmax in classiﬁer layer was replaced by a
logistical classiﬁer.
Even though YOLOv3 was faster than YOLOv2 [59], it
lacked any ground breaking change from its predecessor. It
even had lesser accuracy than an year old state-of-the-art
detector [67].
6)CenterNet :Zhou et al. in [68] takes a very different
approach of modelling objects as points, instead of the con-
ventional bounding box representation. CenterNet predicts the
object as a single point at the center of the bounding box.
The input image is passed through the FCN that generates a
heatmap, whose peaks correspond to center of detected object.
It uses a ImageNet pretrained stacked Hourglass-101 [69] as
the feature extractor network and has 3 heads – heatmap head
to determine the object center, dimension head to estimate
size of object and offset head to correct offset of object point.
Multitask loss of all three heads is back propagated to feature
2Features created using: https://poloclub.github.io/cnn-explainer/