13
A. SqueezeNet
Recent advances in the ﬁeld of CNNs had mostly focused
on improving the state-of-the-art accuracy on the benchmark
datasets, which led to an explosion of model size and their
parameters. But in 2016, Iandola et al. proposed a smaller,
smarter network called SqueezeNet [91], which reduced the
parameters while maintaining the performance. They achieved
it by employing three main design strategies viz. using smaller
ﬁlters, decreasing the number of input channels to 3x3ﬁlters
and placing downsampling layers later in the network. The
ﬁrst two strategies decrease the number of parameters while
attempting to preserve the accuracy and the third strategy
increases the accuracy of the network. The building block
of SqueezeNet is called a ﬁre module, which consist of two
layers: a squeeze layer and an expand layer, each with a
ReLU activation. The squeeze layer is made up of multiple
1x1 ﬁlters while the expand layer is a mix of 1x1 and 3x3
ﬁlters, thereby limiting the number of input channels. The
SqueezeNet architecture is composed of a stack of 8 Fire
modules squashed in between the convolution layers. Inspired
by ResNet [21], SqueezeNet with residual connections was
also proposed which increased the accuracy over the vanilla
model. The authors also experimented with Deep Compression
[87] and achieved 510reduction in model size compared to
AlexNet, while maintaining the baseline accuracy. SqueezeNet
presented a good candidate for improving the hardware efﬁ-
ciency of the neural network architectures.
B. MobileNets
MobileNet [92] moved away from the conventional meth-
ods of small models like shrinking, pruning, quantization or
compressing, and instead used efﬁcient network architecture.
The network used depthwise separable convolution, which
factorizes a standard convolution into a depthwise convolution
and a 1x1pointwise convolution. A standard convolution uses
kernels on all input channels and combines them in one step
while the depthwise convolution uses different kernels for
each input channel and uses pointwise convolution to combine
inputs. This separation of ﬁltering and combining of features
reduces the computation cost and model size. MobileNet
consists of 28 separate convolutional layers, each followed by
batch normalization and ReLU activation function. Howard et
al. also introduced the two model shrinking hyperparameters:
width and resolution multiplier, in order to further improve
speed and reduce size of the model. The width multiplier
manipulates the width of the network uniformly by reducing
the input and output channels while the resolution multiplier
inﬂuences the size of the input image and its representations
throughout the network. MobileNet achieves comparable ac-
curacy to some full-ﬂedged models while being a fraction of
their size. Howard et al. also showed how it could generalize
over various applications like face attribution, geolocalization
and object detection. However, it was too simple and linear
like VGG and therefore had fewer avenues for gradient ﬂow.
These were ﬁxed in later iterations of this model [93], [94].C. ShufﬂeNet
In 2017, Zhang et al. introduced ShufﬂeNet [95], an ex-
tremely computationally efﬁcient neural network architecture,
speciﬁcally designed for mobile devices. They recognized
that many efﬁcient networks become less effective as they
scale down and purported it to be caused by expensive 1x1
convolutions. In conjunction with channel shufﬂe, they pro-
posed the use of group convolution to circumvent its drawback
of limited information ﬂow. ShufﬂeNet consists mainly of a
standard convolution followed by stacks of ShufﬂeNet units
grouped in three stages. The ShufﬂeNet unit is similar to
the ResNet block where they use depthwise convolution in
the3x3layer and replace the 1x1layer with pointwise group
convolution. The depthwise convolution layer is preceded by
a channel shufﬂe operation. The computation cost of the
ShufﬂeNet can be administered by two hyperparameters: group
number to control the connection sparsity and scaling factor
to manipulate the model size. As group numbers become
large, the error rate saturates as the input channels to each
group decreases and therefore may reduce the representational
capabilities. ShufﬂeNet outperformed contemporary models (
[3], [18], [91], [92]) while having considerably smaller size.
As the only advancement in ShufﬂeNet was channel shufﬂe,
there isn’t any improvement in inference speed of the model.
D. MobileNetv2
Improving on MobileNetv1 [92], Sandler et al. proposed
MobileNetv2 [93] in 2018. It introduced the inverted residual
with linear bottleneck, a novel layer module to reduce com-
putation and improve accuracy. The module expands a low-
dimensional representation of the input into high dimension,
ﬁlters with a depthwise convolution and then projects it
back to low dimension, unlike the common residual block
which performs compression, convolution and then expansion
operations. The MobileNetv2 contains a convolution layer
followed by 19 residual bottleneck modules and subsequently
two convolutional layers. The residual bottleneck module has
a shortcut connection only when the stride is 1. For higher
stride, the shortcut is not used because of the difference in
dimensions. They also employed ReLU6 as the non-linearity
function, instead of simple ReLU, to limit computations. For
object detection, the authors used MobileNetv2 as the feature
extractor of a computationally efﬁcient variant of the SSD
[62]. This model, called SSDLite, claimed to have 8x fewer
parameters than the original SSD while achieving competitive
accuracy. It generalizes well over on other datasets, is easy to
implement and hence, was well-received by the community.
E. PeleeNet
Existing lightweight deep learning models like [92], [93],
[95] relied heavily on depthwise separable convolution, which
lacked efﬁcient implementation. Wang et al. proposed a
novel efﬁcient architecture based on conventional convolution,
named PeleeNet [96], using an assortment of computation
conserving techniques. PeleeNet was centered around the
DenseNet [23] but looked at many other models for inspira-
tion. It introduced two-way dense layers, stem block, dynamic