8
B. Two-Stage Detectors
1)R-CNN :The Region-based Convolutional Neural Net-
work (R-CNN) [36] was the ﬁrst paper in the R-CNN family,
and demonstrated how CNNs can be used to immensely im-
prove the detection performance. R-CNN use a class agnostic
region proposal module with CNNs to convert detection into
classiﬁcation and localization problem. A mean-subtracted
input image is ﬁrst passed through the region proposal module,
which produces 2000 object candidates. This module ﬁnd
parts of the image which has a higher probability of ﬁnding
an object using Selective Search [37]. These candidates are
then warped and propagated through a CNN network, which
extracts a 4096-dimension feature vector for each proposal.
Girshick et al. used AlexNet [3] as the backbone architecture
of the detector. The feature vectors are then passed to the
trained, class-speciﬁc Support Vector Machines (SVMs) to
obtain conﬁdence scores. Non-maximum suppression (NMS)
is later applied to the scored regions, based on its IoU and
class. Once the class has been identiﬁed, the algorithm predicts
its bounding box using a trained bounding-box regressor,
which predicts four parameters i.e., center coordinates of box
along with its width and height.
R-CNN has a complicated multistage training process. The
ﬁrst stage is pre-training the CNN with a large classiﬁcation
dataset. It is then ﬁne-tuned for detection using domain-
speciﬁc images (mean-subtracted, warped proposals) by re-
placing of the classiﬁcation layer with a randomly initialized
N+1-way classiﬁer, Nbeing the number of classes, using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [38]. One liner SVM and
bounding box regressor is trained for each class.
R-CNN ushered a new wave in the ﬁeld of object detection,
but it was slow (47 sec per image) and expensive in time and
space [39]. It had complex training process and took days to
train on small datasets even when some of the computations
were shared.
2)SPP-Net :He et al. proposed the use of Spatial Pyramid
Pooling (SPP) layer [40] to process image of arbitrary size
or aspect ratio. They realized that only the fully connected
part of the CNN required a ﬁxed input. SPP-net [41] merely
shifted the convolution layers of CNN before the region
proposal module and added a pooling layer, thereby making
the network independent of size/aspect ratio and reducing the
computations. The selective search [37] algorithm is used to
generate candidate windows. Feature maps are obtained by
passing the input image through the convolution layers of a
ZF-5 [16] network. The candidate windows are then mapped
on to the feature maps, which are subsequently converted into
ﬁxed length representations by spatial bins of a pyramidal
pooling layer. This vector is passed to the fully connected
layer and ultimately, to SVM classiﬁers to predict class and
score. Similar to R-CNN [36], SPP-net has as post processing
layer to improve localization by bounding box regression. It
also uses the same multistage training process, except that the
ﬁne tuning is done only on the fully connected layers.
SPP-Net is considerably faster than the R-CNN model
with comparable accuracy. It can process images of any
shape/aspect ratio and thus, avoid object deformation due toinput warping. However, as its architecture is analogous to
R-CNN, it shared R-CNN’s disadvantages too like multistage
training, computationally expensive and training time as well.
3)Fast R-CNN :One of the major issues with R-CNN/SPP-
Net was the need to train multiple systems separately. Fast
R-CNN [39] solved this by creating a single end-to-end
trainable system. The network takes as input an image and
its object proposals. The image is passed through a set of
convolution layers and the object proposals are mapped to the
obtained feature maps. Girshick replaced pyramidal structure
of pooling layers from SPP-net [41] with a single spatial
bin, called RoI pooling layer. This layer is connected to 2
fully connected layer and then branches out into a N+1-class
SoftMax layer and a bounding box regressor layer, which has
a fully connected layer as well. The model also changed the
loss function of bounding box regressor from L2 to smooth
L1 to better performance, while introducing a multi-task loss
to train the network.
The authors used modiﬁed version of existing state-of-art
pre-trained models like [3], [17] and [42] as backbone. The
network was trained in a single step by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and a mini-batch of 2 images. This helped
the network converge faster as the back-propagation shared
computations among the RoIs from the two images.
Fast R-CNN was introduced as an improvement in speed
(146x on R-CNN) while the increase in accuracy was supple-
mentary. It simpliﬁed training procedure, removed pyramidal
pooling and introduces a new loss function. The object detec-
tor, without the region proposal network, reported near real
time speed with considerable accuracy.
4)Faster R-CNN :Even though Fast R-CNN inched closer
to real time object detection, its region proposal generation
was still an order of magnitude slower (2 sec per image
compared to 0.2 sec per image). Ren et al. suggested a fully
convoluted network [43] as a region proposal network (RPN)
in [44] that takes an arbitrary input image and outputs a set
of candidate windows. Each such window has an associated
objectness score which determines likelihood of an object.
Unlike its predecessors like [21], [34], [39] which used image
pyramids to solve size variance of objects, RPN introduces
Anchor boxes. It used multiple bounding boxes of different
aspect ratios and regressed over them to localize object. The
input image is ﬁrst passed through the CNN to obtain a set of
feature maps. These are forwarded to the RPN, which produces
bounding boxes and their classiﬁcation. Selected proposals are
then mapped back to the feature maps obtained from previous
CNN layer in RoI pooling layer, and ultimately fed to fully
connected layer, which is sent to classiﬁer and bounding box
regressor. Faster R-CNN is essentially Fast R-CNN with RPN
as region proposal module.
Training of Faster R-CNN is more convoluted, due to the
presence of shared layers between two models which perform
very different tasks. Firstly, RPN is pre-trained on ImageNet
dataset [12] and ﬁne-tuned on PASCAL VOC dataset [8]. A
Fast R-CNN is trained from the region proposals of RPN from
ﬁrst step. Till this point, the networks do not have shared
convolution layer. Now, we ﬁx the convolution layers of the
detector and ﬁne-tune the unique layers in RPN. And ﬁnally,