14
number of channels in a bottleneck, transition layer compres-
sion and conventional post activation to reduce computation
cost and increase speed. Inspired from [18], the two-way
dense layer helps in getting different scales of the receptive
ﬁeld, making it easier to identify larger objects. To reduce
information loss, a stem block was used in the same way
to [20], [97]. They also parted way with the compression
factor used in [23] as it hurts the feature expression and
reduces accuracy. PeleeNet consists of a stem block, four
stages of modiﬁed dense and transition layers, and ultimately
the classiﬁcation layer. The authors also proposed a real-time
object detection system, called Pelee, which was based on
PeleeNet and a variant of SSD [62]. Its performance against
the contemporary object detectors on mobile and edge devices
was incremental but showed how simple design choices can
make a huge difference in overall performance.
F . ShufﬂeNetv2
In 2018, Ningning Ma et al. present a set of comprehensive
guidelines for designing efﬁcient network architectures in
ShufﬂeNetv2 [98]. They argued for the use of direct metrics
like speed or latency to measure computational complexity,
instead of indirect metrics like FLOPs. ShufﬂeNetv2 is built
on four guiding principles – 1) equal width for input and
output channels to minimize memory access cost, 2) carefully
choosing group convolution based on the target platform and
task, 3) multi-path structures achieve higher accuracy at the
cost of efﬁciency and 4) element-wise operations like add
and ReLU are computationally non-negligible. Following the
above principles, they designed a new building block. It split
the input into two parts by a channel split layer, followed by
three convolutional layers which are then concatenated with
the residual connection and passed through a channel shufﬂe
layer. For the downsampling model, channel split is removed
and residual connection has depthwise separable convolution
layers. An ensemble of these blocks slotted in between a
couple of convolutional layers results in ShufﬂeNetv2. The au-
thors also experimented with larger models (50/162 layers) and
obtained superior accuracy with considerably fewer FLOPs.
ShufﬂeNetv2 punched above its weight and outperformed
other state-of-the-art models at comparable complexity.
G. MnasNet
With the increasing need for accurate, fast and low latency
models for various edge devices, designing such a neural
network is becoming more challenging than ever. In 2018,
Tan et al. proposed Mnasnet [28] designed from an automated
neural architecture search (NAS) approach. They formulate
the search problem as multi-object optimization aimed at
both high accuracy and low latency. It also factorized the
search space by partitioning the CNN into unique blocks and
subsequently searching for operations and connections in those
blocks separately, thereby reducing the search space. This
also allowed each block to have a distinctive design, unlike
the earlier models [99]–[101] which stacked the same blocks.
The authors used RNN-based reinforcement learning agent as
controller along with a trainer to measure accuracy and mobiledevices for latency. Each sampled model is trained on a task to
get its accuracy and run on the real devices for latency. This
is used to achieve a soft reward target and the controller is
updated. The process is repeated until the maximum iterations
or a suitable candidate is derived. It is composed of 16
diverse blocks, some with residual connections. MnasNet was
almost twice as fast as MobileNetv2 while having higher
accuracy. However, like other reinforcement learning based
neural architecture search models, the search time of MnasNet
requires astronomical computational resources.
H. MobileNetv3
At the heart of MobileNetv3 [94] is the same method used
to create MnasNet [28] with some modiﬁcations. A platform
aware automated neural architecture search is performed in
a factorized hierarchical search space and consequently opti-
mized by NetAdapt [102], which removes the underutilized
components of the network in multiple iterations. Once an
architecture proposal is obtained, it trims the channels, ran-
domly initialize the weights and then ﬁne-tunes it to im-
prove the target metrics. The model was further modiﬁed to
remove some expensive layer in the architecture and gain
additional latency improvement. Howard et al. argued that
the ﬁlters in the architecture are often mirrored images of
each other, and that accuracy can be maintained even after
dropping half of these ﬁlters. Using this technique reduced
the computations. MobileNetv3 used a blend of ReLU and
hard swish as activation ﬁlters, the latter is mostly employed
towards the end of the model. Hard swish has no noticeable
difference from the swish function but is computationally
cheaper while retaining the accuracy. For different resource
use cases, [94] introduced two models – MobileNetv3-Large
and MobileNetv3-Small. MobileNetv3-Large is composed of
15 bottleneck blocks while MobileNetv3-Small has 11. It also
included squeeze and excitation layer [56] on its building
blocks. Similar to [93], these model act as a feature detector
in SSDLite and is 35% faster than earlier iterations [28], [93],
whilst achieving higher mAP .
I. Once-For-All (OFA)
The use of neural architecture search (NAS) for architecture
design has produced state-of-the-art models in the past few
years, however, they are compute expensive because of the
sampled model training. Cai et al. in [103] proposed a novel
method of decoupling model training stage and the neural
architecture search stage. The model is trained only once and
sub-networks can be distilled from it as per the requirements.
Once-for-all (OFA) network provides ﬂexibility for such sub-
networks in four important dimension of a convolutional
neural network – depth, width, kernel size and dimension. As
they are nested within the OFA network and interfere with
the training, progressive shrinking was introduced. First, the
largest network is trained with all parameters set to maximum.
Subsequently, network is ﬁne-tuned by gradually reducing the
parameter dimensions like kernel size, depth and width. For
elastic kernel, a center of the large kernel is used as the
small kernel. As the center is shared, a kernel transformation