2
(a) PASCAL VOC 12
 (b) MS-COCO
 (c) ILSVRC
 (d) OpenImage
Fig. 2: Sample images from different datasets.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Problem Statement
The object detection is the natural extension of object
classiﬁcation, which aims only at recognizing the object in the
image. The goal of the object detection is to detect all instances
of the predeﬁned classes and provide its coarse localization
in the image by axis-aligned boxes. The detector should be
able to identify all instances of the object classes and draw
bounding box around it. It is generally seen as a supervised
learning problem. Modern object detection models have access
to large sets of labelled images for training and are evaluated
on various canonical benchmarks.
B. Key challenges in Object Detection
Computer vision has come a long way in the past decade,
however it still has some major challenges to overcome. Some
of these key challenges faced by the networks in real life
applications are:
Intra class variation : Intra class variation between
the instances of same object is relatively common in
nature. This variation could be due to various reasons
like occlusion, illumination, pose, viewpoint, etc. These
unconstrained external can have dramatic effect of the
object appearance [5]. It is expected that the objects could
have non-rigid deformation or be rotated, scaled or blurry.
Some objects could have inconspicuous surroundings,
making the extraction difﬁcult.
Number of categories : The sheer number of object classes
available to classify makes it a challenging problem to
solve. It also requires more high-quality annotated data,
which is hard to come by. Using fewer examples for
training a detector is an open research question.
Efﬁciency : Present day models need high computation
resources to generate accurate detection results. With mo-
bile and edge devices becoming common place, efﬁcient
object detectors are crucial for further development in the
ﬁeld of computer vision.III. D ATASETS AND EVALUATION METRICS
A. Datasets
This section presents an overview of the datasets that are
available, and have been most commonly used for object
detection tasks.
1) PASCAL VOC 07/12: The Pascal Visual Object Classes
(VOC) challenge was a multiyear effort to accelerate the
development in the ﬁeld of visual perception. It started in
2005 with classiﬁcation and detection tasks on four object
classes [8], but two versions of this challenges are mostly
used as a standard benchmark. While the VOC07 challenge
had 5k training images and more than 12k labelled objects [9],
the VOC12 challenge increased them to 11k training images
and more than 27k labelled objects [10]. Object classes was
expanded to 20 categories and the tasks like segmentation
and action detection were included as well. Pascal VOC
introduced the mean Average Precision ( mAP ) at 0.5 IoU
(Intersection over Union) to evaluate the performance of the
models. Figure 3 depicts the distribution of the number of
images w.r.t. to the different classes in the Pascal VOC dataset.
2) ILSVRC: The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (ILSVRC) [11] was an annual challenge running
from 2010 to 2017 and became a benchmark for evaluating
algorithm performance. The dataset size was scaled up to more
than a million images consisting of 1000 object classiﬁcation
classes. 200 of these classes were hand-picked for object detec-
tion task, constitute of more than 500k images. Various sources
including ImageNet [12] and Flikr, were used to construct
detection dataset. ILSVRC also updated the evaluation metric
by loosening the IoU threshold to help include smaller object
detection. Figure 4 depicts the distribution of the number of
images w.r.t. to the different classes in the ImageNet dataset.
3) MS-COCO: The Microsoft Common Objects in Context
(MS-COCO) [13] is one of the most challenging datasets
available. It has 91 common objects found in their natural
context which a 4-year-old human can easily recognize. It
was launched in 2015 and its popularity has only increased
since then. It has more than two million instances and an