6
Fig. 6: (This image is best viewed in PDF form with magniﬁcation) Number of images for different classes annotated in the
Open Images dataset [15]
F . CSPNet
Existing neural networks have shown incredible results in
achieving high accuracy in computer vision tasks; however,
they rely on excessive computational resources. Wang et al.
believe that heavy inference computations can be reduced
by cutting down the duplicate gradient information in the
network. They proposed CSPNet [25] which creates differ-
ent paths for the gradient ﬂow within the network. CSPNet
separates feature maps at the base layer into two parts. One
part is passed through the partial convolution network block
(e.g., Dense and Transition block in DenseNet [23] or Res(X)
block in ResNeXt [24]) while the other part is combined
with its outputs at a later stage. This reduces the number of
parameters, increases the utilization of computation units and
eases memory footprint. It is easy to implement and general
enough to be applicable on other architectures like ResNet
[21], ResNeXt [24], DenseNet [23], Scaled-YOLOv4 [26] etc.
Applying CSPNet on these networks reduced computations
from 10% to 20%, while the accuracy remained constant or
improved. Memory cost and computational bottleneck is also
reduced signiﬁcantly with this method. It is leveraged in many
state of the art detector models, while also being used for
mobile and edge devices.G. EfﬁcientNet
Tan et al. systematically studied network scaling and its
effects on the model performance. They summarized how
altering network parameters like depth, width and resolution
inﬂuence its accuracy. Scaling any parameter individually
comes with an associated cost. Increasing depth of a network
can help in capturing richer and more complex features, but
they are difﬁcult to train due to vanishing gradient problem.
Similarly, scaling network width will make it easier to capture
ﬁne grained features but have difﬁculty in obtaining high
level features. Gains from increasing the image resolution,
like depth and width, saturate as model scales. In the paper
[27], Tan et al. proposed the use of a compound coefﬁcient
that can uniformly scale all three dimensions. Each model
parameter has an associated constant, which is found by ﬁxing
the coefﬁcient as 1and performing a grid search on a baseline
network. The baseline architecture, inspired by their previous
work [28], is developed by neural architecture search on a
search target while optimizing accuracy and computations.
EfﬁcientNet is a simple and efﬁcient architecture. It outper-
formed existing models in accuracy and speed while being
considerably smaller. By providing a monumental increase in
efﬁciency, it could potentially open a new era in the ﬁeld of