9
Fig. 8: Illustration of the internal architecture of different two stage object detectors2.
Fast R-CNN is ﬁne-tuned from the updated RPN.
Faster R-CNN improved the detection accuracy over the
previous state-of-art [39] by more than 3% and decreased
inference time by an order of magnitude. It ﬁxed the bottleneck
of slow region proposal and ran in near real time at 5 frames
per second. Another advantage of having a CNN in region
proposal was that it could learn to produce better proposals
and thereby increase accuracy.
5)FPN :Use of image pyramid to obtain feature pyramid
(orfeaturized image pyramids ) at multiple levels is a common
method to increase detection of small objects. Even though it
increases Average Precision of the detector, the increase in the
inference time is substantial. Lin et al. proposed the Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN) [45], which has a top-down archi-
tecture with lateral connections to build high-level semantic
features at different scales. The FPN has two pathways, a
bottom-up pathway which is a ConvNet computing feature
hierarchy at several scales and a top-down pathway which
upsamples coarse feature maps from higher level into high-
resolution features. These pathways are connected by lateral
connection by a 1x1 convolution operation to enhance the
semantic information in the features. FPN is used as a region
proposal network (RPN) of a ResNet-101 [21] based Faster
R-CNN here.
FPN could provide high-level semantics at all scales, which
reduced the error rate in detection. It became a standard build-
ing block in future detections models and improved accuracy
their accuracy across the table. It also lead to development ofother improved networks like PANet [46], NAS-FPN [47] and
EfﬁcientNet [27], which is current state of art detector.
6)R-FCN :Dai et al. proposed Region-based Fully Convo-
lutional Network (R-FCN) [48] that shared almost all compu-
tations within the network, unlike previous two stage detectors
which applied resource intensive techniques on each proposal.
They argued against the use of fully connected layers and
instead used convolutional layers. However, deeper layers in
the convolutional network are translation-invariant, making
them ineffective for localization tasks. The authors proposed
the use of position-sensitive score maps to remedy it. These
sensitive score maps encode relative spatial information of
the subject and are later pooled to identify exact localization.
R-FCN does it by dividing the region of interest into k
x k grid and scoring the likeliness of each cell with the
detection class feature map. These scores are later averaged
and used to predict the object class. R-FCN detector is a
combination of four convolutional networks. The input image
is ﬁrst passed through the ResNet-101 [21] to get feature maps.
An intermediate output (Conv4 layer) is passed to a Region
Proposal Network (RPN) to identify RoI proposals while the
ﬁnal output is further processed through a convolutional layer
and is input to classiﬁer and regressor. The classiﬁcation layer
combines the generated the position-sensitive map with the
RoI proposals to generate predictions while the regression
network outputs the bounding box details. R-FCN is trained
in a similar 4 step fashion as Faster-RCNN [44] whilst using a
combined cross-entropy and box regression loss. It also adopts