1
A Survey of Modern Deep Learning based Object
Detection Models
Syed Sahil Abbas Zaidi, Mohammad Samar Ansari, Asra Aslam,
Nadia Kanwal, Mamoona Asghar, and Brian Lee
Abstract —Object Detection is the task of classiﬁcation and
localization of objects in an image or video. It has gained
prominence in recent years due to its widespread applications.
This article surveys recent developments in deep learning based
object detectors. Concise overview of benchmark datasets and
evaluation metrics used in detection is also provided along with
some of the prominent backbone architectures used in recognition
tasks. It also covers contemporary lightweight classiﬁcation mod-
els used on edge devices. Lastly, we compare the performances
of these architectures on multiple metrics.
Index Terms —Object detection and recognition, convolutional
neural networks (CNN), lightweight networks, deep learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Object detection is a trivial task for humans. A few months
old child can start recognizing common objects, however
teaching it to the computer has been an uphill task until the
turn of the last decade. It entails identifying and localizing all
instances of an object (like cars, humans, street signs, etc.)
within the ﬁeld of view. Similarly, other tasks like classiﬁ-
cation, segmentation, motion estimation, scene understanding,
etc, have been the fundamental problems in computer vision.
Early object detection models were built as an ensemble of
hand-crafted feature extractors such as Viola-Jones detector
[1], Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [2] etc. These
models were slow, inaccurate and performed poorly on un-
familiar datasets. The re-introduction of convolutional neural
network (CNNs) and deep learning for image classiﬁcation
changed the landscape of visual perception. Its use in the Im-
ageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC)
2012 challenge by AlexNet [3] inspired further research of
its application in computer vision. Today, object detection
ﬁnds application from self-driving cars and identity detection
to security and medical uses. In recent years, it has seen
exponential growth with rapid development of new tools and
techniques.
This survey provides a comprehensive review of deep
learning based object detectors and lightweight classiﬁcation
architectures. While existing reviews are quite thorough [4]–
[7], most of them lack new developments in the domain. The
main contributions of this paper are as follows:
S.S.A. Zaidi, N. Kanwal, M Asghar and B. Lee are with the Athlone
Institute of Technology, Ireland. M.S. Ansari is with the Aligarh Muslim
University, India. A. Aslam is with the Insight Center for Data Analytics,
National University of Ireland, Galway. (Emails: sahilzaidi78@gmail.com,
samar.ansari@zhect.ac.in, asra.aslam@insight-centre.org, nkanwal@ait.ie,
masghar@ait.ie, blee@ait.ie)
Fig. 1: Structure of the paper.
1) This paper provides an in-depth analysis of major object
detectors in both categories – single and two stage
detectors. Furthermore, we take historic look at the
evolution of these methods.
2) We present a detailed evaluation of the landmark back-
bone architectures and lightweight models. We could not
ﬁnd any paper which provides a broad overview of both
these topics.
In this paper, we have systematically reviewed various object
detection architectures and its associated technologies, as
illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Rest of this paper is organized as
follows. In section II, the problem of object detection and
its associated challenges are discussed. Various benchmark
datasets and evaluation metrics are listed in Section III. In
Section IV, several milestone backbone architectures used in
modern object detectors are examined. Section V is divided
into three major sub-section, each studying a different category
of object detectors. This is followed by the analysis of a special
classiﬁcation of object detectors, called lightweight networks
in section VI and a comparative analysis in Section VII. The
future trends are mentioned in Section VIII while the paper is
concluded in Section IX.
Preprint submitted to IET Computer Vision.arXiv:2104.11892v2  [cs.CV]  12 May 2021