3
average of 3.5 categories per images. Furthermore, it contains
7.7 instances per image, comfortably more than other popular
datasets. MS COCO comprises of images from varied view-
points as well. It also introduced a more stringent method to
measure the performance of the detector. Unlike the Pascal
VOC and ILSVCR, it calculates the IoU from 0.5 to 0.95 in
steps of 0.5, then using a combination of these 10 values as
ﬁnal metric, called Average Precision (AP). Apart from this, it
also utilizes AP for small, medium and large objects separately
to compare performance at different scales. Figure 5 depicts
the distribution of the number of images w.r.t. to the different
classes in the MS-COCO dataset.
4) Open Image: Google’s Open Images [14] dataset is
composed of 9.2 million images, annotated with image-
level labels, object bounding boxes, and segmentation masks,
among others. It was launched in 2017 and has received six
updates. For object detection, Open Images has 16 million
bounding boxes for 600 categories on 1.9 million images,
which makes it the largest dataset of object localization. Its
creators took extra care to choose interesting, complex and
diverse images, having 8.3 object categories per image. Several
changes were made to the AP introduced in Pascal VOC like
ignoring un-annotated class, detection requirement for class
and its subclass, etc. Figure 6 depicts the distribution of the
number of images w.r.t. to the different classes in the Open
Images dataset.
5) Issues of Data Skew/Bias: While observing Fig. 3
through Fig. 6, an alert reader would certainly notice that
the number of images for difference classes vary signiﬁcantly
in all the datasets [15]. Three (Pascal VOC, MS-COCO, and
Open Images Dataset) of the four datasets discussed above
have a very signiﬁcant drop in the number of images beyond
the top-5 most frequent classes. As can be readily observed for
Fig. 3, there are 13775 images which contain a ‘person’ and
then 2829 images which contain a ‘car’. The number of images
for the remaining 18 classes in this dataset almost fall linearly
to the 55 images of ‘sheep’. Similarly, for the MS-COCO
dataset, the class ‘person’ has 262465 images, and the next
most-frequent class ‘car’ has 43867 images. The downward
trend continues till there are only 198 images for the class
‘hair drier’. A similar phenomenon is also observed in the
Open Images Dataset, wherein the class ‘Man’ is the most
frequent with 378077 images, and the class ‘Paper Cutter’ has
only 3 images. This clearly represents a skew in the datasets
and is bound to create a bias in the training process of any
object detection model. Therefore, an object detection model
trained on these skewed datasets will in all probability show
better detection performance for the classes with more number
of images in the training data. Although still present, this issue
is slightly less pronounced in the ImageNet dataset, as can
be observed from Fig. 4 from where it can be seen that the
most frequent class i.e. ‘koala’ has 2469 images, and the least
frequent class i.e. ‘cart’ has 624 images. However, this leads
to another point of concern in the ImageNet dataset: the most
frequent class is for ‘koala’ and the next most-appearing class
is ‘computer keyboard’, which are clearly not the most sought
after objects in a real-world object detection scenario (where
person, cars, trafﬁc signs, etc. are of higher concern).B. Metrics
Object detectors use multiple criteria to measure the perfor-
mance of the detectors viz., frames per second (FPS), precision
and recall. However, mean Average Precision ( mAP ) is the
most common evaluation metric. Precision is derived from
Intersection over Union (IoU), which is the ratio of the area of
overlap and the area of union between the ground truth and the
predicted bounding box. A threshold is set to determine if the
detection is correct. If the IoU is more than the threshold, it is
classiﬁed as True Positive while an IoU below it is classiﬁed
as False Positive. If the model fails to detect an object present
in the ground truth, it is termed as False Negative. Precision
measures the percentage of correct predictions while the recall
measure the correct predictions with respect to the ground
truth.
Precision =True Positive
True Positive +False Positive
=True Positive
All Observations(1)
Recall =True Positive
True Positive +False Negative
=True Positive
All Ground Truth(2)
Based on the above equation, average precision is computed
separately for each class. To compare performance between the
detectors, the mean of average precision of all classes, called
mean average precision ( mAP ) is used, which acts as a single
metric for ﬁnal evaluation.
IV. B ACKBONE ARCHITECTURES
Backbone architectures are one of the most important
component of the object detector. These networks extract
feature from the input image used by the model. Here, we
have discussed some milestone backbone architectures used
in modern detectors:
A. AlexNet
Krizhevsky et al. proposed AlexNet [3], a convolutional
neural network based architecture for image classiﬁcation, and
won the ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) 2012 challenge. It achieved a considerably higher
accuracy (more than 26%) than the contemporary models.
AlexNet is composed of eight learnable layers - ﬁve convolu-
tional and three fully connected layers. The last layer of the
fully connected layer is connected to an N-way (N: number
of classes) softmax classiﬁer. It uses multiple convolutional
kernels throughout the network to obtain features from the
image. It also uses dropout and ReLU for regularization and
faster training convergence respectively. The convolutional
neural networks were given a new life by its reintroduction in
AlexNet and it soon became the go-to technique in processing
imaging data.