10
online hard example mining (OHEM) [49] during the training.
Dai et al. offered a novel method to solve the problem
of translation invariance in convolutional neural networks. R-
FCN combines Faster R-CNN and FCN to achieve a fast, more
accurate detector. Even though it did not improve accuracy by
much, but it was 2.5-20 times faster than its counterpart.
7)Mask R-CNN :Mask R-CNN [50] extends on the Faster
R-CNN by adding another branch in parallel for pixel-level
object instance segmentation. The branch is a fully connected
network applied on RoIs to classify each pixel into segments
with little overall computation cost. It uses similar basic Faster
R-CNN architecture for object proposal, but adds a mask head
parallel to classiﬁcation and bounding box regressor head. One
major difference was the use of RoIAlign layer, instead of
RoIPool layer, to avoid pixel level misalignment due to spatial
quantization. The authors chose the ResNeXt-101 [24] as its
backbone along with the feature Pyramid Network (FPN) for
better accuracy and speed. The loss function of Faster R-CNN
is updated with the mask loss and as in FPN, it uses 5 anchor
boxes with 3 aspect ratio. Overall training of Mask R-CNN is
similar to faster R-CNN.
Mask R-CNN performed better than the existing state of the
art single-model architectures, added an extra functionality of
instance segmentation with little overhead computations. It is
simple to train, ﬂexible and generalizes well in applications
like keypoint detection, human pose estimation, etc. However,
it was still below the real time performance ( >30 fps).
8)DetectoRS :Many contemporary two stage detectors like
[44], [51], [52] use the mechanism of looking and thinking
twice i.e. calculating object proposals ﬁrst and using them to
extract features to detect objects. DetectoRS [53] applies this
mechanism at both macro and micro level of the network. At
macro level, they propose Recursive Feature Pyramid (RFP),
formed by stacking multiple feature pyramid network (FPN)
with extra feedback connection from the top-down level path
in FPN to the bottom-up layer. The output of the FPN is
processed by the Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling layer (ASPP)
[54] before passing it to the next FPN layer. A Fusion module
is used to combine FPN outputs from different modules by cre-
ating an attention map. At micro level, Qiao et al. presented the
Switchable Atrous Convolution (SAC) to regulate the dilation
rate of convolution. An average pooling layer with 5x5ﬁlter
and a 1x1convolution is used as a switch function to decide
the rate of atrous convolution [55], helping the backbone detect
objects at various scale on the ﬂy. They also packed the SAC
in between two global context modules [56] as it helps in
making more stable switching. The combination of these two
techniques, Recursive Feature Pyramid and Switchable Atrous
Convolution results in DetectoRS. The authors incorporated
the above techniques with the Hybrid Task Cascade (HTC)
[51] as the baseline model and a ResNext-101 backbone.
DetectoRS combined multiple systems to improve perfor-
mance of the detector and sets the state-of-the-art for the two
stage detectors. Its RFP and SAC modules are well generalized
and can be used in other detection models. However, it is not
suitable for real time detections as it can only process about
4 frames per second.C. Single Stage Detectors
1)YOLO :Two stage detectors solve the object detection
as a classiﬁcation problem, a module presents some candidates
which the network classiﬁes as either an object or background.
However, YOLO or You Only Look Once [57] reframed it as
a regression problem, directly predicting the image pixels as
objects and its bounding box attributes. In YOLO, the input
image is divided into a S x S grid and the cell where the
object’s center falls is responsible for detecting it. A grid cell
predicts multiple bounding boxes, and each prediction array
consists of 5 elements: center of bounding box – x and y,
dimensions of the box – w and h, and the conﬁdence score.
YOLO was inspired from the GoogLeNet model for image
classiﬁcation [18], which uses cascaded modules of smaller
convolution networks [58]. It is pre-trained on ImageNet
data [12] till the model achieves high accuracy and then
modiﬁed by adding randomly initialized convolution and fully
connected layers. At training time, grid cells predict only one
class as it converges better, but it is be increased during the
inference time. Multitask loss, combined loss of all predicted
components, is used to optimize the model. Non maximum
suppression (NMS) removes class-speciﬁc multiple detections.
YOLO surpassed its contemporary single stage real time
models by a huge margin in both accuracy and speed. How-
ever, it had signiﬁcant shortcomings as well. Localization
accuracy for small or clustered objects and limitation to
number of objects per cell were its major drawbacks. These
issues were ﬁxed in later versions of YOLO [59]–[61].
2)SSD:Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [62] was
the ﬁrst single stage detector that matched accuracy of con-
temporary two stage detectors like Faster R-CNN [44], while
maintaining real time speed. SSD was built on VGG-16 [17],
with additional auxiliary structures to improve performance.
These auxiliary convolution layers, added to the end of the
model, decrease progressively in size. SSD detects smaller
objects earlier in the network when the image features are
not too crude, while the deeper layers were responsible for
offset of the default boxes and aspect ratios [63].
During training, SSD match each ground truth box with
the default boxes with the best jaccard overlap and train the
network accordingly, similar to Multibox [63]. They also used
hard negative mining and heavy data augmentation. Similar
to DPM [33], it utilized weighted sum of the localization and
conﬁdence loss to train the model. Final output is obtained by
performing non maximum suppression.
Even though SSD was signiﬁcantly faster and more accurate
than both state-of-art networks like YOLO and Faster R-CNN,
it had difﬁculty in detecting small objects. This issue was later
solved by using better backbone architectures like ResNet and
other small ﬁxes.
3)YOLOv2 and YOLO9000 :YOLOv2 [59], an improve-
ment on the YOLO [57], offered an easy tradeoff between
speed and accuracy while the YOLO9000 model could pre-
dict 9000 object classes in real time. They replaced the
backbone architecture of GoogLeNet [18] with DarkNet-19
[64]. It incorporated many impressive techniques like Batch
Normalization [65] to improve convergence, joint training
of classiﬁcation and detection systems to increase detection