12
extractor while training. During inference, the output from
offset head is used to determine the object point and ﬁnally a
box is generated. As the predictions, not the result, are points
and not bounding boxes, non-maximum suppression (NMS) is
not required for post-processing.
CenterNet brings a fresh perspective and set aside years of
progress in the ﬁeld of object detection. It is more accurate
and has lesser inference time than its predecessors. It has
high precision for multiple tasks like 3D object detection,
keypoint estimation, pose, instance segmentation, orientation
detection and others. However, it requires different backbone
architectures as general architectures that work well with other
detectors give poor performance with it and vice-versa.
7)EfﬁcientDet :EfﬁcientDet [70] builds towards the idea
of scalable detector with higher accuracy and efﬁciency. It
introduces efﬁcient multi-scale features, BiFPN and model
scaling. BiFPN is bi-directional feature pyramid network with
learnable weights for cross connection of input features at
different scales. It improves on NAS-FPN [47], which required
heavy training and had complex network, by removing one-
input nodes and adding an extra lateral connection. This
eliminates less efﬁcient nodes and enhances high-level feature
fusion. Unlike existing detectors which scale up with bigger,
deeper backbone or stacking FPN layers, EfﬁcientDet intro-
duces a compounding coefﬁcient which can be used to “jointly
scale up all dimensions of backbone network, BiFPN network,
class/box network and resolution” [70]. EfﬁcientDet utilizes
EfﬁcientNet [27] as the backbone network with multiple sets of
BiFPN layers stacked in series as feature extraction network.
Each output from the ﬁnal BiFPN layer is sent to class and box
prediction network. The model is trained using SGD optimizer
along with synchronized batch normalization and uses swish
activation [71], instead of the standard ReLU activation, which
is differentiable, more efﬁcient and has better performance.
EfﬁcientDet achieves better efﬁciency and accuracy than
previous detectors while being smaller and computationally
cheaper. It is easy to scale, generalizes well for other tasks
and is the current state-of-the-art model for single-stage object
detection.
8)YOLOv4 :YOLOv4 [61] incorporated a lot of exciting
ideas to design a fast and easy to train object detector that
could work in existing production systems. It utilizes “bag of
freebies” i.e., methods that only increase training time and do
not affect the inference time. YOLOv4 utilizes data augmenta-
tion techniques, regularization methods, class label smoothing,
CIoU-loss [72], Cross mini-Batch Normalization (CmBN) ,
Self-adversarial training, Cosine annealing scheduler [73] and
other tricks to improve training. Methods that only affect the
inference time, called “Bag of Specials”, are also added to the
network, including Mish activation [74], Cross-stage partial
connections (CSP) [25], SPP-Block [41], PAN path aggregated
block [46] , Multi input weighted residual connections (Mi-
WRC), etc. It also used genetic algorithm for searching hyper-
parameter. It has an ImageNet pre-trained CSPNetDarknet-53
backbone, SPP and PAN block neck and YOLOv3 as detection
head.
Most existing detection algorithms require multiple GPUs
to train model, but YOLOv4 can be easily trained on a singleGPU. It is twice as fast as EfﬁcientDet with comparable
performance. It is the state-of-the-art for real time single stage
detectors.
9)Swin Transformer :Transformers [75] have had a pro-
found impact in the Natural Language Processing (NLP)
domain since its inception. Its application in language models
like BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Trans-
formers) [76], GPT (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) [77],
T5 (Text-To-Text Transfer Transformer) [78] etc. have pushed
the state of the art in the ﬁeld. Transformers [75] uses the
attention model to establish dependencies among the elements
of the sequence and can a attend to longer context than other
sequential architectures. The success of transformers in NLP
sparked interest in its application in computer vision. While
CNNs have been the backbone on advancement in vision, they
have some inherent shortcomings like the lack of importance
of global context, ﬁxed post-training weights [79] etc.
Swin Transformer [80] seeks to provide a transformer based
backbone for computer vision tasks. It splits the input images
in multiple, non-overlapping patches and converts them into
embeddings. Numerous Swin Transformer blocks are then
applied to the patches in 4 stages, with each successive
stage reducing the number of patches to maintain hierarchical
representation. The Swin Transformer block is composed of
local multi-headed self-attention (MSA) modules, based on
alternating shifted patch window in successive blocks. Com-
putation complexity becomes linear with image size in local
self-attention while shifted window enables cross-window
connection. [80] also shows how shifted windows increase
detection accuracy with little overhead.
Transformers present a paradigm shift from the CNN based
neural networks. While its application in vision is still in a
nascent stage, its potential to replace convolution from these
tasks is very real. Swin Transformer achieved the state-of-the-
art on MS COCO dataset, but utilises comparatively higher
parameters than convolutional models.
VI. L IGHTWEIGHT NETWORKS
A new branch of research has shaped up in recent years,
aimed at designing small and efﬁcient networks for resource
constrained environments as is common in Internet of Things
(IoT) deployments [81]–[84]. This trend has percolated to the
design of potent object detectors too. It is seen that although
a large number of object detectors achieve excellent accuracy
and perform inference in real-time, a majority of these models
require excessive computing resources and therefore cannot be
deployed on edge devices.
Many different approaches have shown exciting results in
the past. Utilization of efﬁcient components and compression
techniques like pruning ( [85], [86]), quantization ( [87],
[88]), hashing [89], etc. have improved the efﬁciency of deep
learning models. Use of trained large network to train smaller
models, called distillation [90], has also shown interesting
results. However in this section, we explore some prominent
examples of efﬁcient neural network design for achieving high
performance on edge devices.