One primitive way to seek assurance is through a large number of realis -
tic tests. For self-driving cars, this is known as “collecting mil es” and involves
real and simulated driving through many scenarios and over large distance s [1].
However, studies including one by the RAND Corporation [2], show that th e
quantity of testing required to substantiate acceptable safety is i nfeasibly vast,
ranging from hundreds of millions to tens of billions of test miles.
An alternative that is endorsed for unmanned aircraft [3], for example, is to
use conventional software as a monitor1for autonomous functions. The monitor
is assured by conventional methods and overrides the autonomous softwar e when
it detects a potential safety violation and substitutes safe alternati ve behavior.
Monitors have their own diﬃculties, however, but to examine the m we ﬁrst need
to review the architecture of autonomous systems.
The functions of an autonomous system generally can be partitioned into
thoseconcernedwithperceptionandthoseconcernedwithaction.The purposeof
perception is to build a model of the system’s “world” (i.e., its e nvironment) that
is used for planning and executing actions to accomplish a goal establish ed by
human supervisors (e.g., the destination of a self-driving car) whi le maintaining
required invariants, such as safety. This is an instance of model-bas ed control,
where the novelty is that the model is built with the aid of percep tion functions
that employ AI and ML.
Theoverallcaseforsafetydependsonbothperception(howgoodisthe model
of the world?) and action (how safe are the selected actions, given the mo del of
the world?). Although AI and ML may be needed to construct an action plan,
conventional software can check its safety, given a model of the world. B ecause it
operates in uncertain environments (e.g., a self-driving car does not know what
other road users may do) the checking software needs to consider all pos sibilities.
Mobileye promote a safety model of this kind: “Responsibility-Sens itive Safety”
(RSS) requires that the action software, and hence its monitor, should not be the
cause of an accident no matter what other vehicles do [4]. With these in terpreta-
tions,theactionfunctionsofanautonomoussystemcanbecheckedormonitor ed
by conventional software that can be assured by conventional means. Howeve r,
the monitors also need a model of the environment and this complicates the
argument for their assurance.
One possibility is that a monitor builds its own model, which might be very
crude. For example, the monitor for a self-driving car might comprise a set of
functions similar to those of an “Advanced Driver Assistance System” (AD AS)
for human drivers, including “Forward Collision Warning,” “Automatic Eme r-
gency Braking,” “Blind Spot Warning,” and “Rear Cross Traﬃc Warning and
Rear Automatic Emergency Braking.” Here, the “models” are derived very di-
rectly from radar and other sensors. These “last second” protections work well
for human drivers but might be less eﬀective for the unpredictable failures of
autonomous systems. Furthermore, because they are unconnected to th e larger
plan constructed by action software, these protections may sometimes prove
counterproductive. For example, the primary system might choose t o give a cy-
1The terms “guard,” or “shield,” or “safety bag” are also used.
2