search for defeaters and quantiﬁable assessment of conﬁdence and risks . A crit-
ical next step will be to assess conﬁdence that surprises are always generated
when they should be, which might be done by fault injection (e.g., pe rturbing
interpretation of sensors, or the modeled world presented to them) in simulation.
4 Conclusion
We have described an architecture for autonomous systems that promotes their
safety and assurance. The focus of the architecture is the “safely appr oximate”
accuracy of an assured world model maintained by the perception functi ons.
Given this model, the action functions can be guarded by monitors driv en by
traditional software and assured in traditional ways.
In the proposed architecture, sensor interpretation is driven top- down from
themodel—thereverseoftheusualdirection—usingpredictivepr ocessing.Small
prediction errors conﬁrm accuracy of the model and sensor interpretat ion, given
that testing conﬁrms absence of systemic faults. Large prediction err ors indicate
either a fault in sensor interpretation, or a departure between the model and
the world (a surprise). The uniformity of prediction error as the si ngle basis for
runtimeassuranceandfaultdetectionmeansthatassuranceisitselfau tonomous.
AI functions located at a second level provide situation awareness and other
measures to reduce future surprise and to deal with it when it occ urs.
Although this dual-process architecture with predictive proces sing is derived
by engineering considerations, it corresponds with current theori es of human
cognition and suggests fruitful comparisons. Mathematical formulations of p re-
dictive processing are well-developed in cognitive science [26] an d in machine
learning,whereitisassociatedwith“generative”and“variational”meth ods[16].
In current work, we are performing experimental evaluations of the app roach
and plan to report our experience and propose key challenges.
Acknowledgments. We thank the reviewers for their constructive comments,
and Bev Littlewood of City, University of London, and Wilfried Steiner of TT-
TechViennafortheirchallengesanddiscussion.Theworkwasfundedb yDARPA
contract FA8750-19-C-0089. We would also like to acknowledge support from
the US Army Research Laboratory Cooperative Research Agreement W911NF-
17-2-0196, and National Science Foundation (NSF) grant 1740079. The views,
opinions and/or ﬁndings expressed are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the oﬃcial views or policies of the Dep artment of
Defense or the U.S. Government.
References
1. Thorn, E., Kimmel, S., Chaka, M.: A framework for automated drivi ng system
testable cases and scenarios. DOT HS 812 623, NHTSA, Washingto n DC (2018)
2. Kalra, N., Paddock, S.M.: Driving to safety: How many miles of d riving would it
take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability? Transport ation Research Part
A: Policy and Practice 94(2016) 182–193
3. ASTM: Standard Practice for Methods to Safely Bound Flight Beh avior of Un-
manned Aircraft Systems Containing Complex Functions. (2017) ASTM F3269-17.
4. Shalev-Shwartz, S., Shammah, S., Shashua, A.: On a formal mod el of safe and
scalable self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06374 (201 7)
14