clist or pedestrian a wide berth, but a “lane keeping assist” ADAS-li ke function
operatingasamonitorcouldoverrideandsteerbacktowardthecyclist orwalker.
We can distinguish “independent” vs. “integrated” monitors at this poi nt.
An independent monitor uses its own sensing and decides whether or not to
intervene without much reference to the primary action system. I n addition to
“last second” protections, a second function of an independent monitor could be
to check whether the primary system is operating within speciﬁe d “Operational
Design Domains” (ODDs) [5]; these are circumstances, such as “on a free way,
in daylight,” for which the system was designed and is considered saf e. In both
cases, since it is performing diﬀerent functions than the primary , it is plausible
that such a monitor could provide strong protection using only assured conven-
tional software in its sensing and interpretation (i.e., model-bui lding) functions.
We endorse such monitors for “within ODD” and “last second” protection, b ut
prefer integrated monitors for overall assurance.
An integrated monitor evaluates the plan produced by action software, look -
ing several time units ahead. To do this, it needs a model of the worl d and this
model needs to resemble that of the primary system more than do the m odels
of independent monitors. If an integrated monitor builds its own mode l using
assured conventional software, then it seems this is likely to gener ate false alarms
as it will be less accurate than the ML-enabled model of the primary sys tem,
or else it invites the question why the primary could not also use conv entional
software. On the other hand, if the monitor itself uses AI and ML software then
we face the original problem of how this can be assured. And if the monitor d oes
use AI and ML software, then a case can be made that it should use some or all
of the same sensors and software as the primary system, because a redund ant
system will be expensive yet surely the recipient of less deve lopment and vali-
dation resources than the primary system, and therefore less capable an d less
trustworthy.
In the following, we will assume an integrated monitor that either uses the
same model as the primary system or uses much the same sensors and softw are
to build an alternative “shadow” model optimized for its diﬀerent fu nction. We
will refer to the model used by the monitor, whether it be the pri mary model or
its own specialized one, as the assured model because it is the focus for safety
and therefore the architecture of the system should be directed to ensuring its
accuracy. We call this “model-centered assurance” and it is the approac h that
we advocate. If the assured and primary models are separate, they both w ill be
constructed and maintained in the way we describe below, but the d etails will
be adjusted for their diﬀerent functions.
The next section develops the idea of model-centered assurance an d its key
components: predictive processing and the dual-process archite cture. Section 4
outlines the case for assurance, and Section 5 provides brief conclus ions. The
paper provides neither mathematics nor a case study. We are grateful t o the or-
ganizers and reviewers for allowing us to present a purely conceptu al paper. The
underlying mathematics is well known in other ﬁelds and we provid e references
later; we are working on a case study and hope to report soon.
3