detected if we knew where to look, or could even be extrapolated from p revious
images. A better approach builds a model of the road and its traﬃc lanes and
projects this forward in time to guide the algorithm in its search for l anes in the
current image by predicting their location. The lanes found by the al gorithm
will generally be very close to those predicted by the model, so t he information
returned by the vision system to the system that maintains the mod el could be
just thediﬀerence between them: that is, the prediction error .
In general, there will be uncertainty in the world model. This migh t be repre-
sentedasacollectionofcandidatemodels:forexample,onemodelmight suppose
that a detected object is a bicycle, another that it is a pedestrian, and we will
favor the one that has the least prediction error (bicycles generally go in the
same direction as the traﬃc, while pedestrians tend to go across it, so the two
models will predict diﬀerent locations for the object in the next frame).
This is an example of “analysis by synthesis,” meaning that we formulate
hypotheses (i.e., candidate world models) and favor those whose (syn thesized)
predictions match the sensed data. Enabling this approach is the secon d reason
why PP is so valuable. In practical applications, we need to consider the level of
the predictions concerned: do we use the world model to synthesi ze the raw data
(e.g., pixels) that we predict the sensor will detect (which can b e done using
autoencoders), or do we target some higher level of its local interpre tation (e.g.,
detected objects)? The best choice is a topic for experimental res earch, but we
would expect a level of representation comparable to that produced by an object
detector to be suitable.
Rather than (or in addition to) multiple candidate models, we could use
probability distributions to represent uncertainty about model p arameters. Im-
plementations of this approach often employ Bayesian methods, although there
are many variations [21]. The component that maintains the model will then
send its predictions to the vision (or other sensor) component as a priordistri-
bution and the vision system will return a posterior one. This kind of Bayesian
inference typically generates intractable integrals, so implemen tations employ
methods known as Variational Bayes that turn the problem into iterative opti-
mization of the posterior models to minimize prediction error [16].
There is strong similarity between this approach and a Kalman Filter. As
here, a Kalman ﬁlter maintains a model of the system state, which is t he esti-
matedvalueofeachofitsstatevariablestogetherwiththeirestimatedac curacies,
and predicts their values at the next timestep. Sensors sample the se values, and
the state variables are updated in a way that favors their predicted v alues when
these are believed to have high accuracy, and the sensor values otherw ise.
In a further, and perhaps surprising similarity, the top-down app roach is
widely believed to be the way perception works in human (and other) brains,
as ﬁrst proposed by Helmholtz in the 1860s [22]. Predictive Processing [23], also
known as predictive coding[24] and predictive error minimization [25], posits
that the brain builds models of its environment and uses these to pr edict its
sensory input, and that much of its activity can be seen as (an approximat ion
to)iterativeBayesianoptimizationofitsmodelstominimizepredi ctionerror.PP
8