Some such methods attempt to assess “conﬁdence” in the quality of the
current learning-enabled judgment. One way to do this is to estim ate whether
the current input is similar to those encountered during trainin g. Pimentel et al
review methods for doing this [15]. A popular modern method uses a var iational
autoencoder [16] to learn the training data distribution and to compre ss it to
a smaller “latent” space, from which a decoder can reconstruct the ori ginal
input. In live operation, encoding and decoding the current inpu t will usually
result in an image close to the original if it is similar to the training d ata, and
distantifnot.Measuressuchas“Mahalanobisdistance”canbeusedtoasse ssthe
distance between an image and its reconstruction. Another approach attemp ts
to locate the portions of the input that most directly contribute to t he current
judgment and checks that these are related to the feature concerned [ 17]. We
consideritprudenttoemploymethodssuchasthesebut,aswithd efensesagainst
adversarial examples, we note that they can often be defeated by changes t o a
few pixels and do not contribute greatly to assurance.
A diﬀerent class of methods employs diversity and fault tolerance. All fault
tolerance is based on redundancy, but it requires more than mere repl ication.
For example, some of the best performing learning-enabled systems for image
and speech recognition employ “ensembles” in which several diﬀere nt systems
cooperate or compete to generate results [18]. However, while this appr oach can
improve already impressive behavior, it does not deliver assuranc e—because we
have no reason to suppose that failures of the component systems are ind epen-
dent, and no reason to trust any individual system.
However, although diverse interpretations of the same sensors may not f ail
independently, it is plausible that diﬀerent sensors, particul arly diﬀerent kinds
of sensors, may do so. Hence, sensor fusion over diﬀerent kinds of sen sor may be
able to detect or mask some failures, although this may not be straightforw ard
to achieve, as illustrated by the fatal accident between an Uber self- driving car
and a pedestrian in Arizona on 18th March 2018 [19]. The Uber car used three
sensor systems to build a simple object tracker model (recall Lin’ s vision process-
ing pipeline [6]): cameras, radars, and lidar. In each of these sensor sy stems, its
own object detector indicates the position of each detected object and attempts
to classify it as, for example, a vehicle, a pedestrian, a bicycle, or other. The
object tracker fuses these inputs using a “prioritization schema t hat promotes
certain tracking methods over others, and is also dependent on the r ecency of
the observation” [19, page 8]. In the case of the Arizona crash, this resulte d
in a “ﬂickering” identiﬁcation of the victim as the sensor systems’ o wn classi-
ﬁers changed their identiﬁcations, and as fusion performed by the obj ect tracker
preferred ﬁrst one sensor system, then another, as listed below [19, Table 1].
–5.6 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as vehicle, by radar
–5.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as other, by lidar
–4.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as vehicle, by lidar
–Between 3.8 and 2.7 seconds before impact,
classiﬁcation alternated between vehicleandother, by lidar
–2.6 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as bicycle, by lidar
6