–1.5 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as unknown , by lidar
–1.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as bicycle, by lidar
The deeper harm of this “ﬂickering” identiﬁcation is that “if the perc eption
system changes the classiﬁcation of a detected object, the tracking h istory of
that object is no longer considered when generating new trajectories ” [19, page
8]. Consequently, the object tracker never established a traject ory for the victim
and the vehicle collided with her even though she had been detected in some
form or other for several seconds.
There are two related problems here: one is that the object tracker mai ntains
a rather impoverished model of the world, the other is that its meth od of sensor
fusion and model update pays no attention to the prior state of the mode l. The
purpose of perception in autonomous systems is to build a model that acc urately
reﬂects the world; the model therefore encodes a lot more informati on than
does an individual sensor sample and we should be cautious about making lar ge
updates to the model on the basis of such an individual sample.
The tenet of Model-Centered Assurance is that the model is the foc us of
attention, and the goal of perception is to ensure that it is an accurate (or “s afely
approximate”) representation of the world. When a sensor samples the w orld,
its interpretation software delivers some representation and we nee d to decide
how to incorporate this into the world model. On the one hand, the inf ormation
from the sensor is new but, on the other, its interpretation is possib ly erroneous.
Furthermore, the model is the repository of much accumulated inform ation, so
the method of model update must maintain its overall accuracy and coher ence.
These considerations suggest a radical alternative to the traditional re lation-
ship between sensors and model: instead of operating “bottom up,” we in vert
this to derive a framework for perception known as predictive processing (PP).
2.1 Predictive Processing
The world causes the sense impressions that our sensors report, but s tandard
bottom-up methods of sensor interpretation attempt to reason backwards or
“anti-causally” from sense impressions to their causes. This is inh erently fraught
with diﬃculty because many diﬀerent conﬁgurations in the world can cau se the
same sense impressions. The idea of predictive processing is to reason causally: if
we have an accurate model of the world, we can use it to predict the imp ressions
that the world will cause our sensors to perceive. This is valuable f or several
reasons. The ﬁrst is that it assists the lower levels of sensor inter pretation (which
may still operate anti-causally) by telling them what to look for,
Consider the component of a car’s vision system concerned with detec ting
traﬃc lanes. This can be accomplished by a computer vision algorithm (e. g.,
based on the Hough Transform [20]) that looks for more-or-less straight lines
painted on the road. A bottom-up approach will perform this algorithm afresh
as each camera frame is processed. But this is ineﬃcient—the traﬃc l anes in the
current image frame are likely to be similar to those in the previous f ew frames
and we should surely use this to seed the search—and it is fragile, as mi ssing
or scuﬀed lane markers might cause lanes to go undetected where they c ould be
7