refer to these perception faults as systemic and their characteristic is that they
occur in some signiﬁcant region of the input space and for signiﬁcant peri ods of
time, leading to misperception of the world. Other systemic fault s might concern
measurement rather than existence: for example, a sensor might disp lace objects
10 feet to the left or miscalculate bounding boxes by 10%; and others migh t
concern identiﬁcation, such as misreading stop signs as something els e.
Systemic faults must be excluded or eliminated during developme nt. A rea-
sonable way to detect residual systemic faults—and to provide evid ence for their
absence—is by testing, and a plausible way to perform this is in simu lation. We
generate a simulated model of the world and a rendering of it is presen ted to the
sensor interpretation and model construction functions under test ; the model
they construct is then compared to the original. A few million miles of simu-
lated travel through representative scenarios [1] with some injecti on of degrada-
tion (e.g., rain and fog) into the rendering, could provide reasonable ass urance
for the absence of systemic faults. Note that this is not the same as “collec ting
miles” as we are looking only for systemic faults, whereas those who col lect miles
are also seeking exceptionally rare “corner case” and “fat tail” failures.
Assumingadequateevidencethatsmallpredictionerrorsguaranteeth emodel
is safely approximate, the next major branch in the assurance case is t o show
thattheresponsestolargepredictionerrors(i.e.,surprise)main taintheproperty.
This divides into case analysis over the causes of surprise. First is a hardware
fault of some kind, and we assume that this is safely handled by the unde rlying
fault-tolerant platform (possibly in coordination with Level 2 model r eﬁnement).
Next is some fault in sensor interpretation or model construction that i s lo-
calized in space and time (i.e., not systemic); we call these localperception faults
and rely on assumed local continuity of the world to justify freezing or extrap-
olating aﬄicted values for a few frames; alternatively, if redundant s ensors are
available, we assume failure independence and favor these. Failure independence
seems a plausible assumption, especially for sensors using diﬀere nt phenomena.
When prediction errors persist for more than a few frames, or are shared by
multiple sensors, then we have a genuine surprise (the model is inaccurate, or
the world has not evolved as expected) and Level 2 functions will orches trate
repair or regeneration of the model, or take action in the world, as describ ed
in the previous section. We will not drive this sketch of an assurance case into
these details as they will be speciﬁc to each system. However, we note that
the primary purpose of the AI functions at Level 2 is to resolve uncertai nties
in sensor interpretation (e.g., the bicycle/van example mentioned e arlier), and
to reduce future surprise through augmentations to the model that ant icipate
its evolution and promote situation awareness. These activities all in crease the
conservatism of the model and can only enhance the safety of its approxim ation
to the real world.
This safety argument is quite diﬀerent than could be constructed for tra-
ditional bottom-up sensor interpretation and fusion: predictive pro cessing pro-
vides an intrinsic structure to the case analysis that suggests the ar gument can
be made deductive [30]. Of course, much remains to be investigated, i ncluding a
13