takes the form of a large prediction error from one sensor, or group of similar s en-
sors, it is reasonable to assume it is a temporary glich in sensing (e. g., reﬂections
confusing radar) or interpretation (e.g., adversarial-type inputs) an d to ignore
the aﬄicted sensor(s) for a while and trust to local continuity in th e world, or
diversity and redundancy among other sensors, to maintain an accurate mo del.
Alternatively, analysis may suggest that prediction errors are due to a persis-
tent cause in the external world, such as cameras dazzled by the sun. A suitable
response might then be to change lanes to get in the shade of a nearby truc k—in
other words, to make a change in the world (speciﬁcally, our location in i t).
If prediction errors persist, or aﬄict an entire class of sensor, then it may
be a hardware or system problem—in which case Level 2 may coordinate wi th
the fault tolerance functions of the underlying platform—or it may be some
environmental challenge, such as fog. In this situation, lane-detecti on by cameras
may fail, but Level 2 may be able to substitute some alternative meth od of
“sensing” for model update, such as inferring location of the traﬃc lane s from
the motions of neighboring cars as revealed by radar and proximity sensors .
When many sensors register large prediction errors, then the cause of t he
surprise is likely to be that the world did not evolve as the model pr edicted, and
the appropriate response is to make changes in the model so that it conf orms to
information from the sensors. In extreme cases, this may require re building the
model from scratch, using some frames of bottom-up anti-causal interpr etation.
We have motivated and introduced the two key aspects of our model-ce ntered
approach for autonomous systems: predictive processing and dual-proc ess archi-
tecture. We now develop an outline assurance argument.
3 Toward An Assurance Argument
In routine operation, an autonomous system employing our model-center ed ap-
proach will maintain a comprehensive naturalistic model of the world, possibly
comprised of several components including (e.g., for cars) a detecte d objects
list and an occupancy grid. The model is updated in an automated and regular
manner using predictive processing, which provides continuous feedback on the
quality of the model and available sensor data. For each sensor, the syste m will
generate a prediction for the interpretation of its next frame. This c an allow the
sensor to focus its resources and interpretation in the most produc tive manner.
Each sensor will report its prediction error; a small error indicates the model
is aligned with the world and will cause a modest update to the model; a large
error indicates a “surprise” that could be due to either a fault in th e sensor or its
interpretation, a ﬂaw in the model, or an unexpected development i n the world.
The most basic branch in an assurance case for this architecture is to be
sure that small prediction errors really do guarantee that the model is a safely
approximate representation of the world. The primary hazard to this cl aim is
that the system’s perception of the world could be systematically di storted—a
hallucination.Forexampleitcouldbeblindtoredcars:sensorswill reportnored
cars, leading to construction of a world model without red cars; this w ill generate
predictionslackingredcarsthatareconﬁrmedbythesensors.Soalls eemswell—
until we collide with a red car, or are otherwise surprised by their existence. We
12