assured model is separate from the primary model, then it and its mec hanisms
are indicated by the “shadows” behind the corresponding primaries.
The third and perhaps most crucial beneﬁt of PP in a model-centered ap-
proach to assured autonomy is that prediction error provides a continuou s as-
sessment of the accuracy of the model and a systematic purchase on situ ations
that warrant further investigation. Small prediction errors indicate that all is
proceeding satisfactorily (we will see later that this may not be so and we need
to separately verify the absence of systemic misinterpretations, but the basic
inference is correct). Large prediction errors constitute surprise and indicate
a failure of some kind, a ﬂaw in the model, or an unexpected developme nt in
the world. Prediction error thus provides a single, uniform metho d for runtime
veriﬁcation and failure detection, so that assurance for the autonomous sy stem
is itself autonomous. For example, disappearance of previously detecte d objects
because they are occluded by an overturned truck will trigger surp rise even if
our object detector fails to recognize the truck (cf. Tesla crash, Tai wan 1Jun20).
There are just three possible responses to surprise: we can adjust the sen-
sor(s), adjust the model, or adjust the world. Selection and coordinat ion among
these is best performed by a separate function that has access to know ledge and
more comprehensive methods for reasoning about the world, as we now des cribe.
2.2 Dual-Process Architecture
Suppose we are driving on a freeway when the object detector of a camer a
indicates a bicycle in front of us. In fact, what has been seen is a pic ture of a
bicycle painted on the rear of a van. The object detector has seen the van in
earlier frames and correctly labeled it but, now that we are closer, it is able to
resolve the picture and labels the object as a bicycle, or perhaps as a v an with
conﬁdence xand bicycle with conﬁdence y. PP will have predicted it is deﬁnitely
a van, so we have a large prediction error and need to decide how to pro ceed.
Now, we are on a freeway and the local “Laws and Rules of the Road”
specify that bicycles are not allowed on freeways (this is not always so, but we
will ignore special cases for the purpose of illustration). If our object detector
had access to this information it could make the inference that the det ected
object cannot be a bicycle and must be a van. Such knowledge and method s of
inferenceseemausefulaugmentationtomodel-centeredassurance —themorethe
system knows, the less it needs to sense—but pose the question ho w they should
be incorporated into the architecture. The capabilities seem too ge neral and
universal to be added to the interpretation functions of individual sensors, so it
seems they could be added to the model construction function. Howev er, we now
thinkofmodelconstructionasapredictiveprocessingloopthatse ndspredictions
to sensors and updates the model according to prediction errors. The higher
level knowledge and inferences that we now contemplate seem asynch ronous to
this loop and more focused on analysis and augmentation of the world model
and the response to surprise. Accordingly, we propose that these capabi lities—
essentially, the deductive AI functions of the system—are located i n a separate
“modelreﬁnement”functionthatisshownasdarkpinkinFigure1.Fur thermore,
we suggest that it is useful to think of the two methods of model updat e as
10