2 Model-Centered Assurance
If a world model is to be the focus for assurance, we need to consider the proper-
ties needed for safety, and the hazards to these. The intuitive prop erty required
of the model is ﬁdelity to the real world, at least insofar as required t o plan safe
actions. In particular, if Mis a model of world W,then any actions planned
and shown to be safe using Mshould be safe when executed in W.The inverse
need not be true; that is, there can be safe actions in the real world that do
not appear so in the model. Thus, the model does not need to be a stri ctly
accurate representation of the world: it can be conservative or, as we say ,safely
approximate .
In the absence of monitors, the model could be expressed in the variab les of
some latent space discovered by ML. But monitors for assurance will sur ely be
expressed in naturalistic terms (“don’t hit a pedestrian”) and the m odel must
therefore represent these fairly directly. Hence, in model-ce ntered assurance, the
model must be a naturalistic one. Beyond that, the content of the model and
submodels constructed by perception functions will be determi ned by the system
and its purpose and goals. For a self-driving car, the overall model wil l represent
something like an annotated map of its surroundings: it will include th e layout of
thelocalroadsandjunctions,informationaboutnearbyvehiclesandpede strians,
locations of ﬁxed objects (e.g., mailboxes), road signs and their inter pretation,
traﬃc signals, and so on. It is a design choice whether there is one mode l or
a coordinated collection of submodels. A typical submodel is a list of detected
objects in the vicinity of the egovehicle, giving the location, size, velocity, type,
and inferred intent of each; another might be an occupancy grid (a discr etized
probabilistic 2D map, describing the occupancy of each “square”); and anot her
might be a representation of traﬃc lanes. Inputs from many diﬀerent se nsors
(e.g., GPS location and map data, odometry, lidar, radar, proximity sens ors,
cameras etc.) will be interpreted and fused to create the world mod el and its
submodels. All of these data sources present challenges in interpr etation but we
will focus on image data from cameras since this is the most widely stud ied and
discussed, and among the most challenging.
Lin and colleagues [6] outline a representative vision processing pip eline for
a self-driving car: image data from the cameras are fed in parallel to an obj ect
detector and a localizer; the object detector discovers the objec ts of interest
around the vehicle, such as other vehicles, pedestrians, and traﬃc s ignals; the
detected objects are then passed to an object tracker that associates ob jects with
their past movements and predicts the future trajectories of mov ing objects [7];
in parallel, the localizer determines the location of the egovehicle. Subsequently,
the object movement information from the object tracker and vehicle l ocation
information from the localizer are combined and projected onto the same 2 or 3
dimensional coordinate space by a sensor fusion engine to create the mo del used
by the action functions.
The object detector is usually based on (semi) supervised learning using a
convolutionalneuralnetwork.Thisisadeeplearningneuralnetworkar chitecture
that typically comprises some layers of artiﬁcial neurons arranged to pe rform
4