Model-Centered Assurance
For Autonomous Systems
Susmit Jha, John Rushby, Natarajan Shankar
Computer Science Laboratory
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Avenue
Menlo Park, CA 94025 USA
Abstract. The functions of an autonomous system can generally be
partitioned into those concerned with perception and those con cerned
with action. Perception builds and maintains an internal mode l of the
world (i.e., the system’s environment) that is used to plan and execute
actions to accomplish a goal established by human supervisors .
Accordingly, assurance decomposes into two parts: a) ensuring t hat the
model is an accurate representation of the world as it changes thro ugh
time and b) ensuring that the actions are safe (and eﬀective), gi ven the
model. Both perception and action may employ AI, including ma chine
learning (ML), and these present challenges to assurance. Howe ver, it is
usually feasible to guard the actions with traditionally engin eered and
assured monitors, and thereby ensure safety, given the model. Thu s, the
model becomes the central focus for assurance.
We propose an architecture and methods to ensure the accuracy of mo d-
els derived from sensors whose interpretation uses AI and ML. Rathe r
than derive the model from sensors bottom-up, we reverse the process
and use the model to predict sensor interpretation. Small predic tion er-
rors indicate the world is evolving as expected and the model is u pdated
accordingly. Large prediction errors indicate surprise, which may b e due
to errors in sensing or interpretation, or unexpected changes in t he world
(e.g., a pedestrian steps into the road). The former initiate error masking
or recovery, while the latter requires revision to the model. High er-level
AI functions assist in diagnosis and execution of these tasks .
Although this two-level architecture where the lower level doe s “pre-
dictive processing” and the upper performs more reﬂective tasks, b oth
focused on maintenance of a world model, is derived by engineerin g con-
siderations, it also matches a widely accepted theory of human cognition.
1 Introduction
Autonomous systems—those, such as self-driving cars, that are capable of i nde-
pendent decision making—typically use software that employs method s of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) such as Machine Learning (ML) and time-const rained
best-eﬀorts deduction. It is generally impossible to predict the behavior of such
software in all cases, as it can diﬀer from case to case with little general ization.
Consequently, it is diﬃcult to provide assurance to justify conﬁ dence that an
autonomous system is ﬁt for use in critical contexts.