occurring on two levels: basic (PP) model construction at Level 1, and more
inferential reﬁnement at the higher Level 2.
Just as predictive processing has independent engineering jus tiﬁcation, but
also happens to coincide with a current theory of human cognition, so th e two-
level architecture coincides with a related “dual-process” theor y [27,28], re-
cently popularized by Kahneman as separate “fast and slow” systems of hum an
thought [29]. In human cognition, System 1 is unconscious, fast, and specialized
for routine tasks; System 2 is conscious, slow, easily fatigued, and capable of de-
liberation and reasoning—it is what we mean by “thinking.” These correspon d
to Levels 1 and 2 in the architecture of Figure 1.
We have implicitly suggested that Level 1 Model Construction maintai ns a
single assured world model (that may have several components) and that Level 2
ModelReﬁnementembellishesthis.However,itisbelievedth athumansmaintain
a hierarchy of models [24,26] and this seems a good approach for autonomous
systems as well. The idea is that a PP loop operates between each adjace nt pair
(in the hierarchy) of models, so that the lower level is like a sen sor for the upper
level, with priority and update frequency determined by the siz e of prediction
errors. We will not pursue this more elaborate architecture here, bu t it seems an
interesting prospect for future consideration.
In general, the purpose of Level 2 Model Reﬁnement is to respond to and
minimize “surprise” and one way to approach the latter is to augment the world
model with additional information that encodes “situation awareness.” This can
be the result of hypothetical and counterfactual reasoning, so that thin gs not
seen but “that might be there” are explicitly added to the model as “gh osts”
(objectswithlowprobability).Forexample,byreasoningaboutlines ofsightand
occluded vision, we could deduce that “we will be unable to see any ve hicle that
mightbebehindthattruck.”Wecouldthenaddaghostvehicletotheo ccupancy
grid location behind the truck and this will inﬂuence the action fun ctions. When
the truck no longer occludes our vision, sensors will conﬁrm or deny p resence of
the ghost, but neither outcome will constitute a surprise or a hazard b ecause the
action functions will not have committed to a choice that would be danger ous
for either outcome. Dually, we might determine that a detected veh icle may be
unable to see us because atruck is in the way, and this can be incorpor ated in the
model as increased uncertainty on the likely motions of the vehicle c oncerned.
In another example, detection of many brake lights up ahead can be used to
infer some kind of problem and this will be represented as increased uncertainty
in the world model. In this way, what might otherwise be the surpri sing mani-
festation of an unanticipated situation will instead develop as gradual chan ges
in uncertainty or the resolution of ghosts into real objects. Observe t hat these
reﬁnements to the world model make it more conservative: that is, th ey reduce
the options available to action functions, so that faults in this type of Level 2
reasoning cannot make the world model less safe.
Level 2 aims to minimize surprise but, when surprise happens, it must deal
with it. We noted earlier that there are three possible responses: w e can adjust
the sensors, the model, or the world (or a combination of these). When surprise
11