convolution, some to do pooling, and some fully connected. The number an d
arrangement of layers of each type are determined by experiment and con stitute
the developer’s “secret sauce.” During subsequent training, a vas t number of
images are fed to the network together with correct (human generated) dat a on
the objects they contain. During the training process, the weight s in the neural
network are adjusted until it detects objects with high accuracy and r eliability.
Now although deep neural networks such as those employed in object de-
tectors are astonishingly eﬀective at their tasks, we must heed Jude a Pearl’s
observation that at bottom all they are doing is extremely sophisticated c urve
ﬁtting [8]. We tune the network architecture and its weights so th at training
data is detected and classiﬁed with high accuracy and reliability (bu t without
“overﬁtting”) and we hope that live data is detected equally well. Thi s hope has
to rest on the assumption that real world data is smooth in a way that match es
the implicit curve of the neural network. But the lesson from safety -critical sys-
tems is that their failures are often associated with unanticipated c ases that are
discontinuous from their neighbors.
This concern is exempliﬁed by so-called “adversarial examples” [9]. T hese are
typicallyminormodiﬁcationstoaninputimagethatareindiscernible toahuman
observer but cause an image classiﬁer to change its output, often drastic ally
and inappropriately. Masks have been developed that will cause miscl assiﬁcation
when overlayed on any image input to a given classiﬁer, and there are un iversal
examples that will disrupt any classiﬁer [10]. Furthermore, there ar e patterns
that can be applied to real world artifacts (e.g., small images that can be st uck
to traﬃc signs) that will cause them to be misread by an object classiﬁe r [11].
There is much work on detection and defense against such attacks but the ir
eﬀectiveness is limited: for example, Carlini and Wagner [12] demonst rate that
ten diﬀerent methods for detecting adversarial examples are easily bypassed.
In our opinion these concerns and defenses miss the true signiﬁcance of ad-
versarial examples. Their signiﬁcance is not that a classiﬁer can be mi slead by
carefully manipulated inputs, but that they demonstrate that classi ﬁcations are
fragile: that is, for every correctly classiﬁed image, there may be se veral incor-
rectly classiﬁed ones just a few pixel changes away. And why wouldn’ t this be,
when all that the learning-enabled components are doing is curve ﬁttin g? Shamir
and colleagues present an analysis that conﬁrms and quantiﬁes this inter preta-
tion [13], while Kilburtus and colleagues argue that this kind of “anti-caus al”
learning via curve-ﬁtting has inherent challenges in achieving ge neralization [14].
The inevitable conclusion is that although many learning-enabled syste ms
driven by neural networks exhibit amazing performance, it is reckl ess to assume
this performance is robust. These systems will always exhibit mor e failures than
can be tolerated in safety-critical systems and this cannot be ﬁxed by adjust-
ments to the interpretation function because it derives from the f act that the
learning-enabled software is not interpreting the world in any meanin gful sense,
but merely applying statistical correlation to patterns of pixels. T he question
then is: can we locate these learning-enabled components in an archite cture or
context where their failures can be detected and masked or tolerated?
5