Empirically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of XL-
Editor in two set of experiments.
•Firstly, we devise three simple tasks including Locate
(which position to insert), Text Inﬁlling (what tokens to be
inserted), and Text Deletion (what tokens to be deleted) to
examine the post-editing capabilities. The proposed XL-
Editor achieve better performance compared to the vanilla
XLNet baselines.
•Secondly, we demonstrate the potential of post-editing on
the unpaired text style transfer problem, where transfer-
ring the target style onto a given sentence can be naturally
viewed as post-editing the sentence into the target style.
We train conditional version of the probability estimation
based on different styles and make our XL-Editor exe-
cute post-editing operations on the system outputs from
the state-of-the-art methods. We show that signiﬁcant im-
provement in style accuracy can be achieved with little
sacriﬁce in content preservation.
2 Background and Related Work
In the heart of XL-Editor model is to estimate the variable-
length insertion probability for post-editing process. We be-
gin with the objective of estimating the variable-length in ser-
tion probability, connected it with existing sequence mode l-
ing techniques, and point out their weakness in estimating
such probabilities. Finally, we brieﬂy summarize some re-
lated works in the post-editing literature.
Variable-length Insertion Probability Estimation
Given two sequences x(l)andx(r)as the left and the right
contexts, respectively, we aim to estimate the probability of
inserting a certain sequence ybetweenx(l)andx(r), where
ycan have arbitrary length. We denote such probability as
q(y|x(l)↓x(r)), and factorize it in the following manner,
q(y|x(l)↓x(r)) =|y|/productdisplay
t=1ˆq(yt|x(l)⊕y<t↓x(r))
×ˆq(/an}bracketle{tEND/an}bracketri}ht|x(l)⊕y↓x(r)),
where⊕denotes the concatenation operator, the special to-
ken,/an}bracketle{tEND/an}bracketri}ht, denotes the end of insertion, and ˆq(·)denotes
the probability of inserting a single token. Note that this i s
similar to the autoregressive modeling methods but with ad-
ditional left context x(l)and right context x(r).
Letx= (x1,x2,···,xT)be a sequence of length T,xi
be thei-th token in x, andxi:jbe(xi,xi+1,···,xj), a sub-
sequence of x, whose length is exactly j−i+1. We could
denote the probability of inserting ybetween the i-th and
the(i+1) -th tokens of xasq(y|x1:i↓xi+1:T).
Existing Sequence Modeling Techniques
Masked Sequence Modeling Given a masked sequence
ˆxand denote the masked tokens as y, masked sequence
modeling methods aim to reconstruct the masked tokens y
fromˆx. The objective being optimized can be denoted as
maxθpθ(y|ˆx). BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) is one of the most
prominent examples that utilizes masked sequences. WhileBERT achieves strong results in various discriminative
downstream tasks, estimating variable-length insertion p rob-
abilities with masked sequence modeling remains challeng-
ing. Firstly, the probability estimation is only deﬁned whe n
the number of masked tokens in yis exactly the same as the
number of masking tokens in ˆx, and thus it’s unsuitable for a
variable-length y. Secondly, BERT assumed all tokens in y
are independent when making the prediction, which limits
its modeling capacity. Fedus, Goodfellow, and Dai (2018)
proposed a masked sequence modeling method that does not
have the independence assumption. However, their method
still requires a predetermined length before making a predi c-
tion.
Permutation Sequence Modeling Yang et al. (2019) pro-
posed XLNet to estimate the probability of a sequence
based on any factorization orders. In particular, given
a sequence x, XLNet can model the probability of
pθ(xi:j|x1:i−1,xj+1:T), whereTis the length of xandxi:j
is any subsequence of x. While it’s tempting to utilize the
modeling capacity of XLNet to estimate variable-length in-
sertion probability, this is actually problematic because the
probability estimation of XLNet also has an implicit as-
sumption on the length of the subsequence being estimated
just like masked sequence modeling methods if both the left
and the right contexts are non-empty. The implicit length
assumption is encoded by the relative positional encoding,
which conveys the fact that the distance between the left
contextx1:i−1and right context xj+1:Tis exactly j−i+2.
Insertion-based Sequence Modeling The Insertion
Transformer (Stern et al. 2019; Chan et al. 2019) directly
models insertion operations with a joint probability over
where to insert and which token to be inserted. Although
Insertion Transformer offers to predict the insertion po-
sition, it’s unclear what’s the best insertion order to be
used for training the model to make such predictions.
One advantage of Insertion Transformer and other non-
autoreressive methods (Stern, Shazeer, and Uszkoreit 2018 ;
Gu et al. 2018) is that they allow parallel decoding in
multiple positions, which could potentially shorten the
decoding time with some sacriﬁce in generation quality.
While our method may also generalize to multiple inser-
tion positions, in this work we only focus on one insertion
position at a time. On the other hand, our method has two
major advantages over their model. Firstly, our method uti-
lizes the variable-length insertion probability estimati on for
executing post-editing operations such as deletion and re-
placement, while their model does not offer a clear way to
execute such operations. Due to their joint probability for -
mulation, estimation for the variable-length insertion pr ob-
ability requires a marginalization over all possible inser tion
orders, which might be intractable when then sequence be-
ing estimated is too long. Secondly, their method requires
re-computation of all hidden vectors for every new token in-
serted, which creates computation bottleneck in their trai n-
ing procedure. Our implementation, which will be discussed
later, does not suffer from such issues.