arXiv:1910.10479v1  [cs.CL]  19 Oct 2019XL-Editor: Post-editing Sentences with XLNet
Yong-Siang Shih, Wei-Cheng Chang, Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University
{yongsias,wchang2,yiming }@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
While neural sequence generation models achieve initial su c-
cess for many NLP applications, the canonical decoding pro-
cedure with left-to-right generation order (i.e., autoreg res-
sive) in one-pass can not reﬂect the true nature of human re-
vising a sentence to obtain a reﬁned result. In this work, we
propose XL-Editor, a novel training framework that enables
state-of-the-art generalized autoregressive pretrainin g meth-
ods, XLNet speciﬁcally, to revise a given sentence by the
variable-length insertion probability. Concretely, XL-E ditor
can (1) estimate the probability of inserting a variable-le ngth
sequence into a speciﬁc position of a given sentence; (2) ex-
ecute post-editing operations such as insertion, deletion , and
replacement based on the estimated variable-length insert ion
probability; (3) complement existing sequence-to-sequen ce
models to reﬁne the generated sequences. Empirically, we
ﬁrst demonstrate better post-editing capabilities of XL-E ditor
over XLNet on the text insertion and deletion tasks, which
validates the effectiveness of our proposed framework. Fur -
thermore, we extend XL-Editor to the unpaired text style
transfer task, where transferring the target style onto a gi ven
sentence can be naturally viewed as post-editing the senten ce
into the target style. XL-Editor achieves signiﬁcant impro ve-
ment in style transfer accuracy and also maintains coherent
semantic of the original sentence, showing the broad applic a-
bility of our method.
1 Introduction
Neural sequence generation is an essential component
of modern deep learning models for applications such
as machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014),
image captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015), text summa-
rization (Nallapati et al. 2016), and speech synthesis
(Oord et al. 2016). The most popular models often rely on
the left-to-right autoregressive factorization of probab ility
estimation, and decode/generate the output sequence token
by token in a ﬁxed order. By contrast, humans are more
ﬂexible in text writing, and are capable of making multiple
revisions to the same text on arbitrary positions to obtain a
reﬁned result.
Very recently, the NLP community is witnessing ground-
breaking progress in unsupervised pretraining models,
where XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) stands as one of themost advanced development that signiﬁcantly outperforms
many competitors such as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), GPT-2
(Radford et al. 2019) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018). In the
heart of XLNet is the generalized autoregressive pretraini ng
objective that optimizes the language modeling likelihood
under all permutation factorization orders, which in expec -
tation better captures the bidirectional context for each t oken
position compared to BERT.
While these pretraining models reach state-of-the-art per -
formance in many discriminative downstream tasks in-
cluding sentence classiﬁcation, question answering and
sequence tagging, the text generation ability of these
pretraining models remain under explored. For exam-
ple, initial investigation showed the generation qual-
ity of BERT is not satisfactory (Wang and Cho 2019;
Mansimov, Wang, and Cho 2019). More importantly, both
BERT and XLNet implicitly requires prior knowledge of the
sequence length to estimate the generated sequence proba-
bility given the context, which makes it difﬁcult to sample
variable-length sequences for post-editing generation.
Motivated by the pros and cons of XLNet for text gener-
ation, in this work, we propose XL-Editor, a novel training
framework that extends XLNet to revise a given sentence via
the generalized insertion operation.
•Firstly, to estimate any variable-length subsequence give n
the context, XL-Editor incorporates a novel insertion-
based relative positional encoding scheme to learn
the variable-length insertion probability estimation efﬁ -
ciently. This overcomes the computation bottleneck ex-
isted in earlier insertion-based models (Stern et al. 2019)
as well as the limitation caused by the implicit length as-
sumption in XLNet.
•Secondly, by solving variable-length insertion probabil-
ity estimation, XL-Editor endows three post-editing op-
erations (i.e., insertion, deletion, and replacement), wh ich
enables revision of a given sentence for higher text gener-
ation quality.
•Thirdly, our training framework can leverage the power of
pretrained XLNet. By enabling XLNet with post-editing
operations, we unlock the applicability of XLNet for
wider range of tasks.