Locate The artiﬁcial test set for the Locate task is con-
structed by sampling 5,000 sentences from the test split,
and for each sentence, a randomly selected subsequence is
deleted. The model is given 5 positions in the resulting se-
quence and is asked to detect which position to insert texts.
For example, given the ﬁve positions in the following sen-
tence, an insertion operation is required for the 4-th position
to make the sentence grammatical.
The▽1state and EPA ▽2have found ▽3poor air qual-
ity▽4San Joaquin ▽5Valley.
For both XL-Editor and transformer, the prediction is
made by selecting argminiˆqθ(/an}bracketle{tEND/an}bracketri}ht|x1:i↓xi+1:T). The
XLNet does not offer a method for detecting insertion po-
sitions, so we use argminipθ(xi:i+1|x1:i−1,xi+2:T)as its
prediction. The intuition is that if it is required to insert
something between xiandxi+1, thenxi:i+1would have a
low probability. The evaluation metrics is the accuracy for
position prediction.
Text Inﬁlling In the earlier works of text inﬁlling
(Zhu, Hu, and Xing 2019; Liu et al. 2019), the evaluation
was mainly based on the ﬂuency of the system outputs be-
cause there are many alternative ways to inﬁll a given text,
and there are no consistent criteria to determine which are
more desirable. We instead restrict the possibilities of pl ausi-
ble insertions by providing more context. In particular, 5, 000
test instances are created, and each consists of three conse c-
utive sentences, where the middle sentence has some ran-
dom subsequence deleted. The model is asked to inﬁll the
deleted subsequence. The left and the right sentences restr ict
the search space of the insertion because the inserted text
must make the paragraph coherent.
For both the transformer and XL-Editor, prediction is
made by greedy decoding. However, there is no clear way
for XLNet to determine the length of the inserted sequence.
So we allow XLNet to enumerate all possible lengths up to
max(10,2×truth length )and predict an inserted sequence
for each length. The prediction ythat has the lowest per-
plexity for pθ(y|x1:i,xi+1:|x|)is selected as the output. In
addition, we try a different ranking criterion by actually i n-
sertyinto the sequence and select the one with the lowest
perplexity for the whole sequence pθ(x1:i⊕y⊕xi+1:|x|),
this method is denoted as XLNet L2R+ rank .
We evaluate the system outputs by computing the BLEU
scores between the inserted sequence generated by each
model against the originally deleted subsequence.1A sam-
ple test instance and models’ prediction are shown in Ta-
ble 1. Although none of the models can reproduce the
deleted subsequence, the inserted output from the ﬁne-tune d
XL-Editor is more semantically coherent with the nearby
context of the given paragraph compared to other baselines.
Text Deletion For text deletion, 5,000 test instances are
created, and each consists of 5 consecutive sentences sam-
pled from the testing articles. However, one of the 3 sen-
1Note that this is different from earlier works in which the
BLEU scores were computed against the whole completed se-
quences and they also used many sampled reference sequences so
as to focus the evaluation on the ﬂuency.Input: Until last year, Samoa and American Samoa cel-
ebrated the new year on the same day. But then Samoa
[] more easily with countries such as Australia and New
Zealand. Because the date line is not ﬁxed by any inter-
national law or agreement, it can zig and zag to accom-
modate such government and business interests.
Answer: hopped west of the line so it could trade
Transformer ’s ” re-engagement ” is
XLNet L2R+ rank ’s decision to return to the islands is
XL-Editor , the country’s largest economy, has
XLNet BASE ﬁne-tuned as
→XLNet L2R+ rank ’s government and business interests
began to clash
→XL-Editor ’s new date line has been changed to
coincide
Table 1: Inﬁlled text from different models.
tences in the middle was actually randomly sampled from a
different article, and therefore needs to be deleted to make
the text coherent. The model is asked to determine which
sentence is the randomly inserted one.
For both transformer and XL-Editor, the prediction is de-
termined by the perplexity ratio:
argmax
i,jPPL(qθ(xi:j|x1:i−1↓xj+1:T))
PPL(ˆqθ(/an}bracketle{tEND/an}bracketri}ht|x1:i−1↓xj+1:T)),
while for XLNet, the prediction is made with,
argmax
i,jPPL(qθ(xi−1:j+1|x1:i−2↓xj+2:T))
PPL(qθ(xi−1⊕xj+1|x1:i−2↓xj+2:T)).
In addition, we test a different ranking strategy by actuall y
delete the subsequence and compute the perplexity of the
whole sequence and select the one with lowest perplexity.
This is denoted with + rank in the evaluation results.
Discussions The results are reported in Table 2. As we
could see, XL-Editor has comparable or better performance
in all three tasks. In addition, the best results are achieve d
by ﬁne-tuning the XLNet BASE model with the XL-Editor ob-
jective, showing XL-Editor’s cabability to leverage the pr e-
trained XLNet to enable post-editing capabilities.
4 Unpaired Text Style Transfer
GivenMpredeﬁned text styles, and a corpus D=
{(x(i),s(i))}N
i=1consisting of Ntraining instances, where
x(i)is thei-th sequence while s(i)∈{1,...,M}is the style
ofx(i). The text style transfer task aims to learn a model that
can transform any given sequence xinto a target sequence
so that the style of the target sequence will become a desired
target style s tgt. Moreover, the target sequence should pre-
serve as much semantic meaning from the original sequence
as possible. For example, given a negative product review,
we ask the model to transform it into a positive product
review in which the same aspects of the same product are