9
(a) Symptoms (b) PubMed20K
 (c) Amazon
Fig. 3. We employed two evaluation metrics to assess the faithfulness and compactness of our newly augmented data. The top left plot displays
the cosine similarity metric and ﬁnal accuracy of all data augmentation methods on the Symptoms dataset, and the bottom left plot shows the
TransRate metric and ﬁnal accuracy of all data augmentation methods on the Symptoms dataset. In the middle and bottom panels, we plotted the
cosine similarity and TransRate values of all data augmentation methods on the Amazon and PubMed20K datasets, respectively. On the right side
of the picture, we listed all the augmented methods with different colors and shapes.
for prompting. For the Symptoms dataset, we employed
the following prompt instruction: ”Given a person’s health
description or symptom, predict the corresponding illness
from the following categories: CLASSES.” Additionally, we
used ”Description: DESCRIPTION. Typically, this symptom
corresponds to CLASS” as the prompt for each example in
the dataset. In this way, We can include few-shot examples
(in this work, we used two) to facilitate the model’s adap-
tation to downstream tasks. We used similarly-designed
prompt instructions for the other two tasks and the corre-
sponding example prompt to implement the few-shot in-
context learning by ChatGPT.
5 E XPERIMENT RESULTS
In our experiments, we use BERT as the base model.
Firstly, we train our model on the base dataset to produce
the pre-trained model. Then we ﬁne-tune the model with
the combination of few-shot samples and the augmented
samples generated from various data augmentation meth-
ods. Speciﬁcally, in all three FSL tasks, we perform 2-shot
learning, i.e., there would be two real samples used for
each class in the target domain. Afterward, We use those
samples to ﬁne-tune the pre-trained models. To evaluate
the effectiveness of different data augmentation methods,
we apply two different settings. The ﬁrst one is the vanilla
BERT model. In the second setting, we add a contrastive loss
to the training objective function. In our experiments on the
Symptoms dataset, we use a batch size of 8 for 150 epochs,
set the maximum sequence length to 25, as 1, and use a
learning rate of 4e-5. In our experiments on the PubMed20K
dataset, we adopt the same training conﬁguration, with the
maximum sequence length set to 40. For all three tasks, we
will generate six augmented samples per class. Examples
of the augmented samples generated by AugGPT and other
selected baseline methods can be found in the appendix.5.1 Classiﬁcation Performance Comparison
Table 2 shows the accuracy of different data augmenta-
tion methods. As shown in Table 2, AugGPT achieves the
highest accuracy for Amazon, Symptoms and PubMed20K
datasets. For the Amazon dataset, AugGPT and InsertWord-
ByGoogleNewsEmbeddings achieve the best performance
for BERT, and AugGPT achieve the best performance for
BERT with contrastive loss. In the PubMed20K dataset, Aug-
GPT achieves 83.5% accuracy for both BERT and BERT with
contrastive loss, whereas without data augmentation, the
accuracy values are only 79.2% and 79.8%, respectively. For
the Symptoms dataset, the accuracy for BERT downstream
augmentation is only 63.6%, and 60.6% with contrastive loss.
However, our AugGPT approach signiﬁcantly improves the
accuracy to 88.9% and 89.9%, respectively. These results
suggest that data augmentation using ChatGPT is more
effective in enhancing the performance of machine learning
models in various applications.
5.2 Evaluation of Augmented Datasets
In addition to the classiﬁcation accuracy, we evaluate the
augmented data in the latent space and visualize the results
in Fig 3. Latent embeddings are evaluated using cosine
similarity and the TransRate metric (see section 4.6 for more
details). The horizontal axis represents the cosine similarity
values and Transrate values, and the vertical axis describes
the classiﬁcation accuracy. Since embedded similarity mea-
sures the similarity between the generated data and the test
dataset, high similarity means that the generated data are
close to real input data and with higher faithfulness and
compactness. Higher TransRate indicates better learnability
of the data. Therefore, a higher TransRate score indicates
that the augmented data are of higher quality. The most
ideal candidate method should be positioned at the top-
right of the visualization. As shown in Fig 3, AugGPT pro-