2
erating text samples that resemble human-labeled data [18],
which signiﬁcantly alleviates the burden of human anno-
tators [19]. LLMs are trained in self-supervised manners,
which scale up with the amount of text corpus available in
the open domains. The large parameter space of LLMs also
allows them to store a large amount of knowledge, while
large-scale pre-training (e.g., the autoregressive objective in
training GPTs) enables LLMs to encode rich factual knowl-
edge for language generation even in very speciﬁc domains
[20]. Furthermore, the training of ChatGPT follows that
of Instruct-GPT [21], which utilizes reinforcement learning
with human feedback (RLHF), thus enabling it to produce
more informative and impartial responses to input.
Inspired by the success of language models in text
generation, we propose a new data augmentation method
named AugGPT, which leverages ChatGPT to generate aux-
iliary samples for few-shot text classiﬁcation. We test the
performance of AugGPT via experiments on both general
domain and medical domain datasets. Performance compar-
ison of the proposed AugGPT approach with existing data
augmentation methods shows double-digit improvements
in sentence classiﬁcation accuracy. Further investigation
into the faithfulness and compactness of the generated text
samples reveals that AugGPT can generate more diversiﬁed
augmented samples while simultaneously maintaining their
accuracy (i.e., semantic similarity to the original labels). We
envision that the development of LLMs will lead to human-
level annotation performance, thus revolutionizing the ﬁeld
of few-shot learning and other tasks in NLP .
2 R ELATED WORK
2.1 Data Augmentation
Data augmentation, the artiﬁcial generation of new text
through transformations, is widely used to improve model
training in text classiﬁcation. In NLP , existing data aug-
mentation methods work at different granularity levels:
characters, words, sentences, and documents.
Data augmentation at the character level refers to the
randomly inserting, exchanging, replacing, or deleting of
characters in the text [22], which improves the robustness
of the NLP model against noises. Another method called
optical character recognition (OCR) data augmentation gen-
erates new text by simulating the errors that occur when
using OCR tools to recognize text from pictures. Spelling
augmentation [23] deliberately misspells some frequently
misspelled words. Keyboard augmentation [22] simulates
random typo errors by replacing a selected key with another
key close to it on the QWERTY layout keyboard.
Data augmentation also works at the word level. Ran-
dom swap augmentation randomly exchanges two words
in the text, and random deletion augmentation randomly
deletes some words [24]. Synonym augmentation uses syn-
onym databases such as PPDB [25] to replace randomly
selected words [26]. WordNet [27] is also widely used as a
reference for synonym augmentation. These methods main-
tain semantic consistency and are suitable for text classiﬁ-
cation tasks. Wang et al. [28] proposed a data augmentation
method based on word embeddings, replacing words with
their top-nsimilar words to create a new sentence. Differentpre-trained word embeddings are considered (e.g., Google-
News Lexical Embeddings [29]). This method is based on
the principle that words close to each other in the embed-
ding space often appear in similar contexts, which might
help with maintaining grammatical consistency.
However, a serious limitation of word embedding-based
methods is that close words in the embedding space are
not necessarily semantically similar, yet semantic changes
can affect the classiﬁcation results. For example, “hot” and
“cold” usually appear in similar contexts, so their word em-
beddings are close, but they have exactly opposite seman-
tic meanings. The counter-ﬁtting embedding augmentation
[30], [31] solves this problem by using a synonym dictio-
nary and an antonym dictionary to adjust the initial word
embeddings. Speciﬁcally, the distance between embeddings
of synonyms will be shortened, and the distance between
embeddings of antonyms will become enlarged.
Contextual augmentation [32], [33] is another word-
level data augmentation method, which uses masked lan-
guage models (MLMs) such as BERT [34], [35], DistilBERT
[36] and RoBERTA [37] to generate new text based on the
context. Speciﬁcally, they insert < mask > tokens in some
positions of the text, or replace some words in the text
with< mask > tokens, and then let the MLM predict
what words should be put in these masked positions. Since
MLMs are pre-trained on a large number of texts, contextual
augmentation can usually generate meaningful new texts.
Some text data augmentation methods work at the
sentence and document level. For example, back transla-
tion [38] uses translation models for data augmentation.
Speciﬁcally, the language model ﬁrst translates the text into
another language and then translates it back to the original
language. Due to the randomness of the translation process,
the augmented text is different from the original text, but
semantic consistency is maintained. At the document level,
Gangal et al. [39] proposed a method to paraphrase the
entire document to preserve document-level consistency.
In general, regardless of the granularity level or the text
generation backbone (i.e., rule-based or language models),
the goal of data augmentation is to produce sensible and
diverse new samples that maintain semantic consistency.
2.2 Few-shot Learning
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various
data-intensive applications. However, the performance of
deep models could be affected if the dataset size is small
in the downstream tasks. Few-shot Learning is a branch
of science that focuses on developing solutions to address
the challenge of small sample sizes [1], [40]. FSL research
aims to leverage prior knowledge to rapidly generalize to
new tasks that contain only a few labeled samples. A classic
application scenario for few-shot learning is when obtaining
supervised examples is difﬁcult or not possible due to
privacy, safety, or ethical considerations. The development
of few-shot learning enables practitioners to improve the
efﬁciency and accuracy of text classiﬁcation in various sce-
narios and deploy practical applications.
Recent advances in few-shot learning have shown
promising results in overcoming the challenges of limited
training data for text classiﬁcation. For example, a common