1
AugGPT: Leveraging ChatGPT for Text Data
Augmentation
Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Wenxiong Liao, Xiaoke Huang, Yihan Cao, Zihao Wu, Lin Zhao,
Shaochen Xu, Wei Liu, Ninghao Liu, Sheng Li, Dajiang Zhu, Hongmin Cai, Lichao Sun, Quanzheng Li,
Dinggang Shen, Tianming Liu, and Xiang Li
Abstract —Text data augmentation is an effective strategy for overcoming the challenge of limited sample sizes in many natural language
processing (NLP) tasks. This challenge is especially prominent in the few-shot learning scenario, where the data in the target domain
is generally much scarcer and of lowered quality. A natural and widely-used strategy to mitigate such challenges is to perform data
augmentation to better capture the data invariance and increase the sample size. However, current text data augmentation methods
either can’t ensure the correct labeling of the generated data (lacking faithfulness) or can’t ensure sufﬁcient diversity in the generated
data (lacking compactness), or both. Inspired by the recent success of large language models, especially the development of ChatGPT,
which demonstrated improved language comprehension abilities, in this work, we propose a text data augmentation approach based on
ChatGPT (named AugGPT). AugGPT rephrases each sentence in the training samples into multiple conceptually similar but semantically
different samples. The augmented samples can then be used in downstream model training. Experiment results on few-shot learning
text classiﬁcation tasks show the superior performance of the proposed AugGPT approach over state-of-the-art text data augmentation
methods in terms of testing accuracy and distribution of the augmented samples.
Index Terms —Large language model, few-shot learning, natural language processing, data augmentation.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
THEeffectiveness of natural language processing (NLP)
heavily relies on the quality and quantity of the train-
ing data. With limited training data available, which is a
common issue in practice due to privacy concerns or the
cost of annotations, it can be challenging to train an accu-
rate NLP model that generalizes well to unseen samples.
The challenge of training data insufﬁciency is especially
  These authors contributed equally to this paper.
Haixing Dai, Zhengliang Liu, Zihao Wu, Lin Zhao, Shaochen Xu, Ning-
hao Liu, and Tianming Liu are with the School of Computing, University
of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. (e-mail: fhd54134, zl18864 ,zw63397,
lin.zhao, shaochen.xu25, ninghao.liu, tliu g@uga.edu).
Wenxiong Liao, Xiaoke Huang, Hongmin Cai are with the
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China Uni-
versity of Technology, China. (e-mail: fcswxliao@mail.scut.edu.cn,
csxkhuang@mail.scut.edu.cn, hmcai@scut.edu.cn).
Yihan Cao and Lichao Sun are with the Department of Computer Sci-
ence and Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, P A, USA. (e-mail:
fyihanc@andrew.cmu.edu, lis221@lehigh.edu).
Yihan Cao is also with the Heinz College of Information Systems and
Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, P A, USA (e-mail:
femail yihanc@andrew.cmu.edu).
Wei Liu is with the Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Phoenix, AZ, USA. (e-mail: liu.wei@mayo.edu)
Sheng Li is with the School of Data Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, V A, USA. (email: shengli@virginia.edu)
Dajiang Zhu is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
ing, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA. (e-mail:
dajiang.zhu@uta.edu)
Quanzheng Li and Xiang Li are with the Department of Radiol-
ogy, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (e-mail: li.quanzheng@mgh.harvard.edu, xian-
gli.shaun@gmail.com)
Dinggang Shen is with the School of Biomedical Engineering, Shang-
haiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. He is also with Shanghai
United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200230, China, and
Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center, Shanghai, 201210, China.
(e-mail: Dinggang.Shen@gmail.com)prominent in few-shot learning (FSL) scenarios, where the
model trained on the original (source) domain data is
expected to generalize from only a few examples in the
new (target) domain [1]. Many FSL methods have shown
promising results in overcoming this challenge in various
tasks. Existing FSL methods mainly focus on improving
the learning and generalization capability of the model via
better architectural design [2], [3], leveraging pre-trained
language models as the basis and then ﬁne-tuning it using
limited samples [4] with meta-learning [2], [5] or prompt-
based methods [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, the performance of
these methods is still intrinsically limited by the data quality
and quantity in both the source and target domains.
Besides model development, text data augmentation can
also overcome the sample size limit and work together with
other FSL methods in NLP [10], [11]. Data augmentation
is usually model-agnostic and involves no change to the
underlying model architecture, which makes this approach
particularly practical and applicable to a wide range of
tasks. In NLP , there are several types of data augmentation
methods. Traditional text-level data augmentation methods
rely on direct operations on the existing sample base. Some
frequently used techniques include synonym replacement,
random deletion, and random insertion [12]. More recent
methods utilize language models to generate reliable sam-
ples for more effective data augmentation, including back-
translation [13] and word vector interpolation in the latent
space [14]. However, existing data augmentation methods
are limited in the accuracy and diversity of the generated
text data, and human annotation is still mandatory in many
application scenarios [12], [15], [16].
The advent of (very) large language models (LLMs) such
as the GPT family [6], [17] brings new opportunities for gen-arXiv:2302.13007v3  [cs.CL]  20 Mar 2023