10
duces high-quality samples in terms of both faithfulness and
compactness on the Symptoms dataset and the PubMed20K
dataset. On the open-domain Amazon dataset, AugGPT also
produces high-quality samples with a higher TransRate.
5.3 Performance Comparison with ChatGPT
Furthermore, we used ChatGPT to directly perform the
downstream text data classiﬁcation tasks under a 5-shot
learning scheme. We used in-house designed instructions
with few-shot in-context examples to prompt ChatGPT as
described in 4.7. The performance of ChatGPT for the down-
stream tasks is listed in Table 2. The result reveals that state-
of-the-art large language models such as ChatGPT tend
to perform better on relatively easier tasks, for example,
identifying symptoms according to a one-sentence descrip-
tion. However, when it comes to complicated tasks such
like PubMed, model ﬁne-tuning is still needed and could
achieve better performance compared to few-shot prompts.
6 C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel data augmentation
approach for few-shot classiﬁcation. Unlike other methods,
our model expands the limited data at the semantic level
to enhance data consistency and robustness, which results
in a better performance than most of the current text data
augmentation methods. With the advancement of LLM and
its nature of a multi-task learner [77], we envision that a
series of tasks in NLP can be enhanced or even replaced in
a similar fashion.
Although AugGPT has shown promising results in data
augmentation, it has certain limitations. For example, when
recognizing and augmenting medical texts, AugGPT may
produce incorrect augmentation results due to the lack of
domain knowledge of ChatGPT. In future works, we will
investigate adapting the general-domain LLMs, such as
ChatGPT, to domain-speciﬁc data, such as medical texts, via
model ﬁne-tuning, in-context learning (prompt engineer-
ing), knowledge distillation, style transfer, etc.
AugGPT has demonstrated that the augmentation re-
sults can effectively improve the performance of the down-
stream classiﬁcation task. A promising direction for future
research is to investigate AugGPT against a wider range of
downstream tasks. For example, given the strong ability of
ChatGPT to extract key points and understand sentences,
it can be utilized in tasks such as text summarization.
Speciﬁcally, ChatGPT might be valuable for domain-speciﬁc
science paper summarization [90] and clinical report sum-
marization [91]. Publicly available domain-speciﬁc science
paper summarization datasets and clinical report datasets
are rare and often provided at small scales due to privacy
concerns and the need for expert knowledge to generate
annotated summaries. However, ChatGPT could address
this challenge by generating diverse augmented summa-
rization samples in different representation styles. The data
generated from ChatGPT are typically concise, which can be
valuable for further enhancing the generalization capabili-
ties of the trained model.
The dramatic rise of generative image models such as
DALLE2 [92] and Stable Diffusion [93] provides oppor-
tunities for applying AugGPT to few-shot learning tasksin computer vision. For example, accurate language de-
scriptions may be used to guide the generative model to
generate images from text or to generate new images based
on existing images as a data augmentation method for few-
shot learning tasks, especially when combined with efﬁcient
ﬁne-tuning methods [94], [95] such as LoRA for Stable
Diffusion. Thus, prior knowledge from a large language
model can facilitate faster domain adaptation and better
few-shot learning of generative models in computer vision.
Recent research shows that large language models
(LLMs), such as GPT-3 and ChatGPT, are capable of solv-
ing Theory of Mind (ToM) tasks, which were previously
thought to be unique to humans [96]. While the ToM-like
capabilities of LLMs may be an unintended byproduct of
improved performance, the underlying connection between
cognitive science and the human brain is an area ripe for
exploration. Advancements in cognitive and brain science
can also be used to inspire and optimize the design of
LLMs. For example, it has been suggested that the activation
patterns of the neurons in the BERT model and those in
the human brain networks may share similarities and could
be coupled together [97]. This presents a promising new
direction for developing LLMs by utilizing prior knowledge
from brain science. As researchers continue to investigate
the connections between LLMs and the human brain, we
may discover new means to enhance the performance and
capabilities of AI systems, leading to exciting breakthroughs
in the ﬁeld.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wang, Q. Yao, J. T. Kwok, and L. M. Ni, “Generalizing from a
few examples: A survey on few-shot learning,” ACM computing
surveys (csur) , vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2020.
[2] W. Yin, “Meta-learning for few-shot natural language processing:
A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09604 , 2020.
[3] C. Wang, J. Wang, M. Qiu, J. Huang, and M. Gao, “Transprompt:
Towards an automatic transferable prompting framework for few-
shot text classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2021, pp. 2792–
2802.
[4] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[5] H.-y. Lee, S.-W. Li, and N. T. Vu, “Meta learning for natural
language processing: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01500 ,
2022.
[6] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P . Dhari-
wal, A. Neelakantan, P . Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al. , “Lan-
guage models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[7] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale
for parameter-efﬁcient prompt tuning,” in Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
2021, pp. 3045–3059.
[8] X. Han, W. Zhao, N. Ding, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Ptr: Prompt tuning
with rules for text classiﬁcation,” AI Open , vol. 3, pp. 182–192,
2022.
[9] J. Wang, C. Wang, F. Luo, C. Tan, M. Qiu, F. Yang, Q. Shi, S. Huang,
and M. Gao, “Towards uniﬁed prompt tuning for few-shot text
classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05313 , 2022.
[10] J. Wei and K. Zou, “Eda: Easy data augmentation techniques for
boosting performance on text classiﬁcation tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.11196 , 2019.
[11] V . Kumar, H. Glaude, C. de Lichy, and W. Campbell, “A closer look
at feature space data augmentation for few-shot intent classiﬁca-
tion,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Deep Learning Approaches
for Low-Resource NLP (DeepLo 2019) , 2019, pp. 1–10.