4
TABLE 1
Generated Samples From ChatGPT on PubMed20K
Original Text Altered Text
The follow-up rate after 5 years was 85%.1. The study showed a follow-up rate of 85% after 5 years.
2. The 5-year follow-up rate was found to be signiﬁcantly high at 85%.
3. The participants had an impressive follow-up rate of 85% after 5 years.
4. The data indicated a follow-up rate of 85% 5 years post-study.
5. The 5-year follow-up rate was recorded as 85%, according to the ﬁndings.
6. The results of the study showed a follow-up rate of 85% after a 5-year period.
This means that the maturation of calluses
was 27% faster in the LIPUS group.1. The LIPUS group showed a 27% acceleration in callus maturation.
2. The results revealed that the callus maturation process was 27% faster in the LIPUS group.
3. The study found that the callus maturation rate in the LIPUS group was 27% quicker.
4. Callus maturation was 27% more rapid in the LIPUS group compared to others.
5. The callus maturation process in the LIPUS group was 27% more efﬁcient, according to the
results.
Test Registration: IRCT.ir
IRCT2012071010230N1.1. The trial was registered with the IRCT under the identiﬁer IRCT2012071010230N1.
2. The study was ofﬁcially registered with IRCT.ir, with the registration number
IRCT2012071010230N1.
3. The trial was documented with IRCT.ir with the identiﬁcation code IRCT2012071010230N1.
4. IRCT.ir served as the ofﬁcial registrar for the trial, with the registration number
IRCT2012071010230N1.
5. The study was recorded with IRCT under the registration number IRCT2012071010230N1.
6. IRCT.ir recorded the trial with the identiﬁer IRCT2012071010230N1.
While behavioral and technological
interventions can lead to some modest
improvements in glycemic control,
these interventions have not performed
much better than conventional prevention
in achieving glycemic control.1. The study found that although behavioral and technological interventions led to some
slight improvements in glycemic control, they were not signiﬁcantly more effective
than typical care.
2. Despite the modest improvement in glycemic control through behavioral and
technological interventions, they did not perform better than the standard care.
3. The results showed that while behavioral and technological interventions resulted
in some minimal gains in glycemic control, they did not surpass the usual care in
achieving glycemic control.
4. Although behavioral and technological interventions showed some improvement
in glycemic control, they were not found to be signiﬁcantly superior to the usual care.
5. The study showed that the usual care was not outperformed by behavioral and
technological interventions in terms of achieving glycemic control, despite some
small improvements.
similar semantic meaning [12], [16], which is of signiﬁcant
practical value to real-world applications. In this study,
we aim to use ChatGPT, a popular LLM to conduct data
augmentation. ChatGPT is based on GPT-3 [6], which was
trained on massive web data with diverse and rich infor-
mation. Furthermore, ChatGPT was trained through Rein-
forcement learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). During
RLHF, human feedback is incorporated into the process of
generating and selecting the best results. More speciﬁcally,
a reward model is trained based on human annotators’
ranking or generated results. In turn, this reward model
rewards model outputs that are most aligned with human
preference and human values. We believe these innovations
make ChatGPT the best candidate for generating human-
level quality data samples.
2.4 ChatGPT: Present and Future
ChatGPT is a game changer in natural language processing.
For the ﬁrst time in human history, the power of large
language models is accessible to the general public through
a user-friendly chatbot interface. In turn, this common acces-
sibility contributes to ChatGPT’s unprecedented popularity.
ChatGPT has emerged as a general-purpose problem solver
for many NLP applications [56]. Qin et al. [56] evaluated
ChatGPT on a comprehensive set of NLP tasks, includ-
ing common benchmarks in natural language inference,
arithmetic reasoning, named entity recognition, sentiment
analysis, question answering, dialogue and summarization.They conclude that ChatGPT excels in most tasks, except for
tasks that focus on speciﬁc details (e.g., sequence tagging).
ChatGPT is also a valuable solution for multilingual
tasks. A recent empirical study [57] reports that ChatGPT
excels at tasks involving high-resource languages (various
European languages and Chinese) and is comparable with
Google Translate, DeepL Translate and Tencent TranSmart.
Nonetheless, ChatGPT performs poorly on low-resource
languages and faces extra challenges handling distant lan-
guage translation (i.e., English-German translation is con-
sidered to be less ”distant”, compared to English-Hindi
translation). A later study [58] conﬁrms that ChatGPT strug-
gles with low-resource languages, although the authors
observe that ChatGPT does better in understanding non-
Latin scripts than generating them.
In addition, it is also possible to use the purely text-
based ChatGPT to interact with multi-modal data. A group
of researchers [58] use HTML Canvas and Python Turtle
graphics as media for text-to-image generation. ChatGPT
can faithfully generate HTML and Python code, which
can be then used to generate desired images. The authors
designed a ﬂag drawing task that required ChatGPT to
generate code that can generate country ﬂags. It was found
that ChatGPT could generate better ﬂags when the prompt
for code was preceded by a prompt that queries ChatGPT
for the ﬂag’s description. In other words, descriptive text
prompts could improve multimodal task performance.
Beyond computer science, ChatGPT can be readily ap-
plied to medical report generation and comprehension [59],