2 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
create, consume, and share art, from real-time entertainment to
concept design. Since neural style transfer [Chen et al .2017b; Gatys
et al .2016; Sheng et al .2018; Shu et al .2021; Zhao et al .2014]
shows the potential of encoding and changing visual styles via deep
neural networks, a significant amount of effort has been devoted
to effectively and efficiently migrating the style of an arbitrary
image [Gatys et al .2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al .2017;
Liao et al .2017] or a specific domain [Lee et al .2020; Zhu et al .2017]
to the content image. Despite impressive results, these methods are
limited to stylizing a single view captured by the content image.
Motivated by the increasing demand for 3D asset creation, our
goal is to stylize 3D content from multi-view input , in contrast to
single-image stylization. In the domain of 3D representation, previ-
ous methods typically take explicit models (e.g., meshes [Han et al .
2021a; Höllein et al .2021; Kato et al .2018; Ye et al .2021; Zhang
et al.2020a], voxels [Guo et al .2021; Klehm et al .2014], and point
clouds [Cao et al .2020; Lin et al .2018]) followed by differentiable
rendering for multi-view stylization. These methods enable intu-
itive control over the geometry but suffer from the limited capacity
for modeling and rendering complex scenes. The recent implicit
representation of neural radiance field (NeRF) [Deng et al .2022;
Mildenhall et al .2020; Wang et al .2022; Yang et al .2022; Zhang et al .
2022b] significantly improves the quality of novel view synthesis,
satisfying our needs for a general representation of various scenes
and objects. However, while enjoying the superior scene reconstruc-
tion quality of NeRF, the curse of its highly implicit volumetric
representation of appearance and geometry, parameterized and en-
tangled by dense MLP networks, makes NeRF more challenging to
stylize through jointly transforming the encoded color and shape.
Very recently, pioneering NeRF stylization works [Chiang et al .
2022; Fan et al .2022] have made exhilarating progress on appear-
ance style transfer of 3D scenes. However, their style guidance is
limited to image reference, which, although being adopted as one
common way to specify the target style, is not always a perfect
solution for every scenario—obtaining appropriate style images that
both reflect the target style and match the source content might
not be easy or even possible in many cases. Therefore, finding an-
other simple, natural, and expressive form of guidance becomes an
attractive idea. Thanks to the parallel advances in language-vision
models, stylization with natural language is no longer a fantasy.
As demonstrated by recent text-guided stylization works [Gal et al .
2021; Hong et al .2022; Michel et al .2021; Wei et al .2021], com-
pared to image-guided approaches, short text prompts provide 1)
an extremely intuitive and user-friendly way to specify styles, 2) a
flexible control over various styles from abstract ones like a certain
concept to very concrete ones like a famous painting or character,
and 3) a view-independent representation that is free from content
alignment and naturally benefits cross-view consistency.
Yet, with the existing approaches, it is still challenging to styl-
ize the implicit representation of NeRF via a simple text prompt.
Learning a latent space helps constrain the geometry and texture
modulations [Wang et al .2021a], but it is often data-dependent and
laborious. Some efforts directly enforce style directions (Figure 3) be-
tween the rendered views of NeRF and the text in the CLIP [Radford
et al.2021] embedding space. In addition, background augmenta-
tion [Jain et al .2022] and mesh guidance [Hong et al .2022] havebeen proposed to improve the geometry and texture modulations.
However, they still suffer from insufficient geometry deformations
and texture details.
In this work, we propose NeRF-Art , a new text-driven NeRF styl-
ization method. Given a pre-trained NeRF model and a single text
prompt, our method enables consistent novel view synthesis with
both appearance and geometry transformed, adhering to the spec-
ified style. This is achieved by combining the recent large-scale
Language-Vision model (i.e., CLIP) with NeRF, which is non-trivial
due to several challenges. Directly applying the supervision from
CLIP to NeRF by constraining the similarity between the rendered
views and the text in the embedding space as [Gal et al .2021] is
insufficient to ensure the desired style strength. To tackle this prob-
lem, we design a CLIP-based contrastive loss to properly strengthen
the stylization, by bringing the results closer to the target style and
farther away from other styles pre-defined as negative samples. To
further ensure the uniformity of the style over the whole scene, we
extend our contrastive constraint to a hybrid global-local frame-
work to cover both global structures and local details. In addition,
to support geometry stylization jointly with appearance, we relax
the constraints on the density of the pre-trained NeRF and adopt
a weight regularization to effectively reduce cloudy artifacts and
geometry noises when altering the density field. In experiments,
we first evaluate text description selection for stylization and then
test our method on various styles and demonstrate text guidance’s
effectiveness and flexibility for NeRF stylization. Furthermore, we
conduct a user study to show that our method achieves the best
visual-pleasing results compared to related methods. We also extract
the mesh from the stylized NeRF to show the geometry modula-
tion ability of our method and integrate with different baselines
to demonstrate the generalization ability of our method to various
NeRF-like models.
2 RELATED WORK
Neural Style Transfer on Images and Videos. Artistic image
stylization is a long-standing research area. Traditional methods
use handcrafted features to simulate styles [Hertzmann 1998; Hertz-
mann et al .2001]. With the fast development of deep learning, neural
networks have been applied to style transfer from either an arbitrary
image [Gatys et al .2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Johnson et al .
2016; Kolkin et al. 2019; Li et al. 2017; Liao et al. 2017] or a specific
domain [Huang et al .2021a, 2018; Lee et al .2020; Zhu et al .2017],
and achieved impressive results. By enforcing temporal smooth-
ness constraints defined on optical flows, neural style transfer has
been successfully extended to videos [Chen et al .2017a, 2020; Ruder
et al.2016]. However, both image and video stylization methods
are restricted to the given views. Simply combining the neural style
transfer and novel view synthesis methods without considering 3D
geometry will lead to blurriness or view inconsistencies.
Neural Stylization on Explicit 3D Representations. With the
increasing demand for 3D content, neural style transfer has been
extended to explicit 3D representations. The work [Chen et al .2018]
first considers the cross-view disparity consistency and applies style
transfer on stereoscopic images or videos. Later, considering the
voxel is the most compatible representation for CNNs, SKPN [Guo