NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •5
loss is proposed, which transfers the source image 𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐to the target
domain guided by the CLIP-space trajectory embedded by a pair of
text prompts(𝒕𝑠𝑟𝑐,𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)instead of a single one (Figure 3(b)). This
relative directional CLIP loss for our NeRF stylization is defined as:
ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡h
1−
ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡)−ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐),ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)−ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑠𝑟𝑐)i
.(4)
Different from the single-image setting of StyleGAN-NADA , here, the
training target 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡stands for an arbitrarily sampled view rendered
by the stylized NeRF of the same scene, and the source image 𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐
is produced by the pre-trained NeRF model and shares the identical
view as 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡. We will follow this convention hereinafter.
4.2 Strength Control w/ Glocal Contrastive Learning
As the directional CLIP loss (Equation (4)) works by measuring the
similarity between the normalized unit directions of the embedded
vectors, it can enforce the relative stylization trajectory. However,
it struggles with preserving enough stylization strength in altering
the pre-trained NeRF model.
To address this issue, we propose a contrastive learning strategy
to control the stylization strength (Figure 3(c)). Specifically, in the
framework of contrastive learning, with the rendered view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡as
the query target, we set positive samples to the target text prompt
𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡with the desired style and construct negative samples 𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔∈
𝒯𝑛𝑒𝑔by sampling a set of text prompts semantically irrelevant to
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡. In general, our contrastive loss in the CLIP space is defined as:
ℒ𝑐𝑜𝑛=−∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡log"
exp(𝒗·𝒗+/𝜏)
exp(𝒗·𝒗+/𝜏)+Í
𝒗−exp(𝒗·𝒗−/𝜏)#
,(5)
where{𝒗,𝒗+,𝒗−}are query, positive sample, and negative sample,
respectively, and temperature 𝜏is set to 0.07in all our experiments.
When defining the loss globally by treating the entire view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡as
the query anchor, we have the global contrastive loss ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛with
{𝒗=ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗+=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗−=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔)}.
Ideally, this global contrastive loss cooperates with the direc-
tional CLIP loss, where the former defines the style trajectory that
aligns with the target text, and the latter, at the same time, en-
sures the proper stylization magnitude by pushing along the style
trajectory. However, the global contrastive loss still has trouble
achieving sufficient and uniform stylization on the entire NeRF
scene, leading to excessive stylization on certain parts and insuf-
ficient stylization in other regions. This may be attributed to the
fact that CLIP focuses more attention on local regions with dis-
tinguishable features than the entire scene. Thus, this global con-
trastive loss can deliver a small value even when the overall styl-
ization is insufficient or non-uniform. To achieve a more sufficient
and balanced stylization, enforced by a more locally-attended con-
trastive learning approach, inspired by PatchNCE loss [Park et al .
2020], we propose a complementary local contrastive loss ℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛
which sets queries to random local patches 𝑷𝑡𝑔𝑡cropped from 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡:
{𝒗=ˆℰ𝑖(𝑷𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗+=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗−=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔)}.
Overall, we combine the global and local terms as our final global-
local contrastive loss:
ℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛=𝜆𝑔ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛+𝜆𝑙ℒ𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛. (6)4.3 Artifact Suppression w/ Weight Regularization
Our pipeline aims to change not only the color but also the density
of the pre-trained NeRF to achieve a joint stylization of appearance
and geometry. However, allowing the training process to alter the
density may lead to cloud-like semi-transparent artifacts near the
camera and geometry noises, even if the pre-trained NeRF is per-
fectly clean. To alleviate that, we adopt a weight regularization loss
to suppress geometric noises and encourage a more concentrated
density distribution that better resembles real-world scenes.
Based on our NeRF notations (Equation (1)), weight of each ray
sample is defined as the contribution to the final ray color: 𝑤𝑘=
𝑇𝑘(1−𝜔𝑘), whereÍ
𝑘𝑤𝑘≤1. Similar to the distortion loss in
mip-NeRF 360 [Barron et al .2022], the weight regularization loss is
defined as:
ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡∑︁
𝒓∑︁
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐾𝑤𝑖𝑤𝑗

𝑑𝑖−𝑑𝑗

, (7)
where for each ray 𝒓of a randomly sampled view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡, pairs of
samples(𝑖,𝑗)with distances∥𝑑𝑖−𝑑𝑗∥are sampled. But different
from mip-NeRF 360 [Barron et al .2022] that optimizes the distances,
we penalize those pairs with scattered large weights to suppress
noise peeks and aggregate weights to the correct object surface.
4.4 Training
During training, we finetune the pre-trained NeRF model for styl-
ization. The overall objective consists of three parts: text-guided
stylization losses (including directional CLIP loss and global-local
contrastive loss to control style trajectory and strength, respec-
tively), content-preservation loss (we adopt VGG-based perceptual
loss), and artifact suppression regularization loss:
ℒ=(ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟+ℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛)+𝜆𝑝ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟+𝜆𝑟ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔. (8)
Here we define the perceptual loss ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟between the original and
stylized NeRF renderings on certain pre-defined VGG layers 𝜓∈Ψ:
ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡∑︁
𝜓∈Ψ∥𝜓(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡)−𝜓(𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐)∥2
2. (9)
It’s practically infeasible to train stylization on all rays due to
backward gradient propagation’s prohibitively huge memory con-
sumption. To address this issue, previous works either sample sparse
rays to obtain coarse images or patches [Chiang et al .2022; Hong
et al.2022; Jain et al .2021; Schwarz et al .2020] or render all rays to
low resolution and then upsample with CNN networks [Niemeyer
and Geiger 2021]. However, coarse renderings or patches lose style
details and semantic structures, while upsampling harms the cross-
view consistency. Instead, we adopt a much easier solution, which
first renders all rays to obtain the whole image of an arbitrary view,
calculates the stylization loss gradients in the forward process, and
then back-propagates the gradients through NeRF at the patch level.
This significantly reduces memory consumption and allows render-
ing high-resolution images for better stylization training.
5 EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Implementation Details
We implement our framework using Pytorch . In the reconstruction
training stage, we sample 192points for each ray and train our
model for 6epochs. We set the learning rate as 0.0005 and adopt