10 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
NeuS VolSDF
Source “Lord Voldemort” “Tolkien Elf” “Pixar”
Fig. 10. Geometry Evaluation. Our method modulates the geometry and color simultaneously of a pre-trained NeRF to match the desired style described
by a text prompt.
“Disney 2D Superman”
“Groot, Guardians of the Galaxy”
w/oℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔 w/ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔
Fig. 11. Ablations on Weight Regularization. The cloudy artifacts near
the corner or geometric noises are observed without the weight regulariza-
tion loss.
color network to constrain the general shape of the avatar as well
as introducing random shading and lighting augmentations on the
textured renderings to strengthen the stylization. Even with these
augmentations, AvatarCLIP still fails to produce satisfying texture
and geometry details. In contrast, ours reveals a fine-grained beard,
detailed wrinkles of garments, and clearer face attributes. Note-
worthy, our NeRF-Art supports stylizing in-the-wild faces, while
0 %50 %100 %
29.1
70.9
Ours StyleGAN -NADA20.9
79.1
Text2Mesh Avg.
CLIP -NeRF DreamField AvatarCLIP23.0
77.017.8
82.238.2
61.825.8
74.2Fig. 12. User Study. Our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
text-guided stylization methods on user preference rates (%).
AvatarCLIP requires a 3D mesh as input to conduct these augmen-
tations. Finally, AvatarCLIP can still generate random bumps in the
background and make the extracted surface noisy. This is because
AvatarCLIP sampled a sparse rays ( 112×112) to construct a coarse
renderings for CLIP constraints, due to OOM problem. We found
worse results with more noise when reducing sampled ray numbers.
In contrast, our method supports training stylization on all rays
by imposing a memory-saving technique. In conclusion, NeRF-Art
achieves better stylization using the proposed contrastive learning
strategies without any mesh guidance.
5.5 User Study
To evaluate stylization quality from human perception, we con-
ducted a user study. For each compared category, we used two
subjects. For each subject, we selected 5prompts from our text de-
scriptions dataset and finally obtained 10test cases for each category
and50in total. For every test case, we showed one sample of input