4 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
(a)ℒ𝑎
𝑑𝑖𝑟(b)ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟(c)ℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛&ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛
Fig. 3. CLIP-Guided Stylization Losses. (a) The absolute directional loss; (b) The relative directional loss; (c) The global and local contrastive loss.
geometry deformation and vertex colors for texture stylization. The
contemporary work AvatarCLIP [Hong et al .2022] further supports
driving a stylized human mesh using natural languages. Despite
their success, these methods are limited to mesh input. In contrast,
our method is able to stylize 3D scenes with better visual quality
and view consistency without any mesh input.
3 OVERVIEW
As illustrated in Figure 2, our approach is simply decomposed into
reconstruction and stylization stages. In what follows, after briefly
reviewing our 3D photography representation with NeRF (§ 3.1), we
focus on introducing our text-guided stylization method. Specifically,
we first formulate the directional CLIP loss for stylization, which
leverages the power of the pre-trained Language-Vision model
(§ 4.1). Then, we introduce our global-local contrastive learning
framework to cope with the stylization strength issue of the direc-
tional CLIP loss (§ 4.2). Next, we introduce a weight regularization
term to alleviate the cloudy artifacts caused and geometry noises
by the stylization process (§ 4.3). Finally, we conclude this section
with the overall training strategy of the entire pipeline (§ 4.4).
3.1 Preliminary on NeRF Scene Representation
We take NeRF as our 3D scene representation, which defines a
continuous volumetric field as implicit functions, parameterized by
MLP networks ℱ. Given a single spatial coordinate 𝒙=(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)and
its corresponding view direction d=(𝜙,𝜃), the network predicts
the density𝜎and view-dependent radiance 𝒄=(𝑟,𝑔,𝑏), leading to
the final color 𝐶(𝒓)of the camera ray 𝒓(𝑡)=𝒐+𝑡dby accumulating
𝐾sample points along it, given the target view:
𝐶(𝒓)=∑︁𝐾
𝑘=1𝑇𝑘(1−𝜔𝑘)𝒄𝑘, (1)
where𝜔𝑘=exp(−𝜎𝑘(𝑑𝑘+1−𝑑𝑘))represents the transmittance of
the ray segment(𝑘,𝑘+1)and𝑇𝑘=Î𝑘−1
𝑖𝜔𝑖is the accumulated
transmittance from the origin to the sample 𝑘.
To train NeRF from a set of multi-view photos, a simple supervised
reconstruction loss is adopted between the ground-truth pixel colorsˆ𝐶(𝒓)from the training view and the NeRF prediction 𝐶(𝒓):
ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑐=∑︁
𝒓

𝐶(𝒓)−ˆ𝐶(𝒓)

2
2. (2)
4 TEXT-GUIDED NERF STYLIZATION
After optimizing the reconstructed NeRF model ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐from the multi-
view input (§ 3.1), our goal is to train a stylized NeRF model ℱ𝑠𝑡𝑦,
which satisfies the style control of the target text prompt 𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡while
preserving the content from ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐(Figure 2).
The CLIP model aligns the semantics of image and text in a joint
embedding space, by utilizing the image encoder ˆℰ𝑖(·)and the text
encoder ˆℰ𝑡(·). The semantic power of CLIP bridges the gap between
natural language prompts and synthesized image pixels, making it
possible to stylize NeRF scenes with text controls.
However, even with the powerful embedding space of CLIP, it
remains challenging to achieve text-guided NeRF stylization that 1)
preserves the original content from being washed away by the new
style, 2) reaches the target style with proper strength that satisfies
the semantics of the input text prompt, and 3) maintains cross-view
consistency and avoids artifacts in the final NeRF model.
4.1 Trajectory Control w/ Directional CLIP Loss
An intuitive strategy for text-guided NeRF stylization would be to
enforce the trajectory of the stylization in the CLIP space with an
absolute directional CLIP loss that measures the cosine similarity
(⟨·,·⟩) between the stylized NeRF rendering 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡and the target text
prompt 𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡(Figure 3(a)):
ℒ𝑎
𝑑𝑖𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡h
1−
ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡),ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)i
, (3)
which guides NeRF rendering with a global direction of the target
text, not depending on any reference starting point. This loss is
first designed in StyleCLIP [Patashnik et al .2021] to guide face
image editing and further extended to generative NeRF editing in
CLIP-NeRF [Wang et al. 2021a].
However, as observed in StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021], this
global loss could easily mode-collapse the generator and hurt the
generation diversity of stylization. Therefore, a relative directional