NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization
CAN WANG, City University of Hong Kong
RUIXIANG JIANG, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
MENGLEI CHAI, Snap Inc.
MINGMING HE, Netflix
DONGDONG CHEN, Microsoft Cloud AI
JING LIAO∗,City University of Hong Kong
Source “Vincent van Gogh” “Tolkien Elf” “Fauvism” “Lord Voldemort” “Edvard Munch”
Source “Cubism Painting” “Pixar 3D Style” “Colorful Galaxy”
Fig. 1. NeRF-Art Results. OurNeRF-Art stylizes a pre-trained NeRF to match the desired style described by a text prompt. It modulates not only appearance
but also geometry of NeRF.
As a powerful representation of 3D scenes, the neural radiance field (NeRF)
enables high-quality novel view synthesis from multi-view images. Stylizing
NeRF, however, remains challenging, especially on simulating a text-guided
style with both the appearance and the geometry altered simultaneously. In
this paper, we present NeRF-Art , a text-guided NeRF stylization approach that
manipulates the style of a pre-trained NeRF model with a simple text prompt.
Unlike previous approaches that either lack sufficient geometry deformations
and texture details or require meshes to guide the stylization, our method
can shift a 3D scene to the target style characterized by desired geometry
and appearance variations without any mesh guidance. This is achieved by
introducing a novel global-local contrastive learning strategy, combined with
the directional constraint to simultaneously control both the trajectory and
the strength of the target style. Moreover, we adopt a weight regularization
*Corresponding Author.
Authors’ addresses: Can Wang, City University of Hong Kong, cwang355-c@my.cityu.
edu.hk; Ruixiang Jiang, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, cwang355-c@my.
cityu.edu.hk; Menglei Chai, Snap Inc. cmlatsim@gmail.com; Mingming He, Netflix,
hmm.lillian@gmail.com; Dongdong Chen, Microsoft Cloud AI, cddlyf@gmail.com; Jing
Liao∗, City University of Hong Kong, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk.method to effectively suppress cloudy artifacts and geometry noises which
arise easily when the density field is transformed during geometry stylization.
Through extensive experiments on various styles, we demonstrate that our
method is effective and robust regarding both single-view stylization quality
and cross-view consistency. The code and more results can be found in our
project page: https://cassiepython.github.io/nerfart/.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Computer graphics .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Stylization, Neural Radiance Fields, CLIP
1 INTRODUCTION
Artistic works depict the world in various creative and imaginative
styles, evolving along with human progress. While primarily driven
by professionals, the generation of artistic content is now more
accessible to average users than ever before, empowered by the
recent research on visual artistic stylization. In the era of deep
learning, technical advances are gradually reshaping how peoplearXiv:2212.08070v1  [cs.CV]  15 Dec 2022