NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •11
frames, the textual prompt, and the results of different methods in
two views and random order. The participants were given unlimited
time to select the best stylization results by jointly considering three
aspects: preservation of the content, faithfulness to the style, and
view consistency. We finally collected 23questionnaires completed
by10male and 13Lady participants. Statistics of the user study
are shown in Figure 12. Our method outperforms StyleGAN-NADA ,
CLIP-NeRF ,Text2Mesh ,DreamField , and AvatarCLIP by achieving
much higher user preference rates.
5.6 Ablation Study
Why global-local contrastive learning? A straightforward way
to stylize NeRFs is to apply the directional CLIP loss proposed by
StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021] to the rendered views. Unfortu-
nately, the directional CLIP loss can enforce the right stylization
trajectory but struggles to reach a sufficient magnitude, as shown in
the 2nd column of Figure 9. This is because the loss only measures
the directional similarity between the normalized embedded vectors
but ignores their actual distances. In contrast, our global contrastive
loss (3rd column of Figure 9) can ensure the proper stylization mag-
nitude by pushing it as close as possible to the target. However,
the global contrastive loss still cannot guarantee a sufficient and
uniform stylization of the whole scene. The stylization shows excess
on certain parts and insufficiency on others, e.g., insufficient styl-
ized faces and excessively stylized eyes in the “Tolkien Elf” example
in the 3rd column of Figure 9. This may attribute to the fact that
CLIP focuses more attention on regions with distinguishable fea-
tures than on other regions. Our local contrastive loss helps achieve
more balanced stylized results by stylizing every local region of the
scene (4th column of Figure 9). However, this local contrastive loss
without global information may produce excessive facial attributes,
e.g., generating more eyes in the “White Walker” example and two
left ears in the “Tolkien Elf” example. This attributes to insufficient
semantics involved in a local patch. This problem can be avoided
by adding the global contrastive loss at the same time.
By combining both global and local contrastive loss with the
directional CLIP, our method successfully achieves uniform styliza-
tion with both correct stylization direction and sufficient magnitude
(5th column of Figure 9).
Why weight regularization? Altering the geometry of NeRF may
potentially cause cloudy artifacts. In Figure 11, we demonstrate
that the weight regularization loss can suppress cloudy artifacts
and geometric noises by encouraging a more concentrated density
distribution for stylization.
5.7 Generalization Evaluation
We conduct a generalization evaluation on VolSDF and NeuS in
Figure 8 to evaluate NeRF-Art ’s ability in adapting to different NeRF-
like models. As NeuS reconstructs a coarse result on our in-the-wild
data without a mask may due to inaccurate camera estimations,
we conduct a segmentation using RVM [Lin et al .2022] for better
reconstruction and dilate the mask using OpenCV with 3×3kernel
and two iterations to allow geometry variations. In Figure 8, our
method presents similar stylization results on VolSDF and NeuS,
Source “Digital painting” Source “Mouth Batman”
Fig. 13. Limitations. Linguistic ambiguity (left) or semantically meaning-
less words (right) may lead to unexpected results.
which demonstrates that our NeRF-Art has the ability to adapt to
different NeRF-like models.
5.8 Geometry Evaluation
To evaluate whether the geometry will be correctly modulated in
the stylization process, we show the geometry evaluation results
in Figure 10. We extract meshes using Marching Cubes [Lorensen
and Cline 1987] before and after the stylization for comparison and
report results on two widely-used NeRF-like models VolSDF [Yariv
et al.2021] and NeuS [Wang et al .2021b]. We clearly see geometry
changes by comparison with the source mesh. For example, “Lord
Voldemort” flattens the girl’s nose, “Tolkien Elf” sharpens the girl’s
ears, and “Pixar” rounds the jaw. Moreover, we find the same obser-
vations on both VolSDF and NeuS. In summary, we conclude that
our method can correctly modulate the geometry of NeRF to match
the desired style.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present NeRF-Art , the text-guided NeRF stylization
approach based on CLIP. Unlike existing approaches that require
the mesh guidance in the stylization process or traps in insufficient
geometry deformations and texture details in stylization, ours mod-
ulate its geometry and appearance simultaneously to match the
desired style and show visual-pleasing results of geometry deforma-
tions and texture details with only a text guidance. To achieve it, we
introduce a carefully-designed combination of directional constraint
to control the style trajectory and novel global-local contrastive loss
to enforce the proper style strength. Moreover, we propose a weight
regularization strategy to alleviate the cloudy artifacts and geom-
etry noises in deforming the geometry. Extensive experiments on
real faces and general scenes show that our method is effective and
robust in both stylization quality and view consistency.
Limitations. Despite the success in most cases, our method still
has some limitations. First, some text prompts are linguistically
ambiguous, like “Digital painting” , which describes a wide range of
styles, including oil paintings, pencil sketches, 3D rendering images,
cartoon drawings, etc. This ambiguity might confuse the CLIP and
make the final result unexpected, as shown in Figure 13. Semanti-
cally meaningless words cause another kind of unexpected result.
For example, if we combine the words “Mouth” and“Batman” as
a prompt, the result unexpectedly puts a bat shape on the mouth,
which may not be what the user desires. These are interesting prob-
lems worth exploring in the future.