NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •9
Source w/oℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛 w/oℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛 w/oℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛 Full
Fig. 9. Ablations on CLIP-Guided Losses. Without our global-local con-
trastive losses, the results suffer from insufficient or non-uniform stylization.
The target prompts are “White Walker” and“Tolkien Elf” respectively.
use the same prompt augmentation strategy for other painting styles,
including “Edvard Munch” and“Fernando Botero” .
5.4 Comparisons
We compare with most related works following three categories: 1)
Text-driven image stylization: StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021]; 2)
Text-driven mesh-based stylization: Text2Mesh [Michel et al. 2021]
andAvatarCLIP [Hong et al .2022]; and 3) Text-driven NeRF styl-
ization: CLIP-NeRF [Wang et al .2021a] and DreamField [Jain et al .
2022]. To make fair comparisons with these methods, we adopt
author-released codes and accommodate the input to each method
as required. For StyleGAN-NADA , we follow its steps to first con-
duct a face alignment under the setting of FFHQ [Karras et al .2019]
and then invert these faces using e4e[Tov et al .2021] into latent
codes, before inputting them to StyleGAN-NADA . We have also tried
pSp[Richardson et al .2021] to invert latent codes but finally adopt
e4eto obtain better stylization results. Per the authors’ advice, we
trained 600 iterations and sampled faces present visual-pleasing
stylized results. We place final stylized faces back on the input im-
ages by inversing the face alignment process. As for Text2Mesh , the
input mesh of one example ( ‘Lady’ ) is provided by the H3DS [Ramon
et al.2021], while the input mesh of another example ( ‘Human’ )
is fetched from AvatarCLIP . Both meshes are normalized into -1
to 1, before inputting them to Text2Mesh . We follow the training
setting of Text2Mesh in stylizing the person object to stylize ‘Lady’
and‘Human’ . We compare to DreamField andAvatarCLIP following
the shape sculpting and texture generation process of AvatarCLIP .
Similar to AvatarCLIP , we also adopt prompt augmentations when
stylizing the ‘Human’ . For example, we use text prompts including
“Tolkien Elf” ,“the back of Tolkien Elf” , and “the face of Tolkien Elf”
for the detailed refinement.The visual comparisons are demonstrated in Figure 5, Figure 6,
and Figure 7. For video results, please see the supplementary mate-
rial.
Comparisons to text-driven image stylization. Compared to StyleGAN-
NADA , our method can better ensure the desired style strength
in all examples by introducing global-local contrastive learning.
StyleGAN-NADA achieves visual-pleasing results on sampled faces
but reflects a degradation for in-the-wild faces partly due to the
latent code inversion. Moreover, as a 3D stylization method, ours
can preserve view consistencies in the stylized results. In contrast,
StyleGAN-NADA stylizes each view independently, thus introducing
inconsistent shapes or textures to different views. This may lead to
flickering artifacts when applied to video applications. Moreover,
StyleGAN-NADA is less friendly to real faces as the input image
has to be inverted back to the StyleGAN latent space before styl-
ization, which will inevitably lead to some detail loss and identity
change. Unlike it, NeRF-Art is not constrained by any latent space
of pre-trained networks and does not need the inversion step.
Comparisons to text-driven NeRF stylization. Compared with
CLIP-NeRF , our advantages are two-fold. First, CLIP-NeRF stylizes
NeRF using the absolute directional loss, which does not put enough
stylizations. Moreover, it suffers from uneven stylizations. For ex-
ample, we only see enough stylizations on the nose and hair for
style “Fauvism” , but the man’s cheek has not been fully stylized.
In contrast, we design a global-local contrastive learning strategy
to ensure the desired style strength. Second, as no weight regu-
larization is used in CLIP-NeRF , its results may appear as severe
geometry noises. In contrast, our weight regularization suppresses
geometric noises by encouraging a more concentrated density dis-
tribution. DreamField also adopts the absolute directional loss to
stylize NeRF, which cannot guarantee sufficient and uniform styl-
ization. DreamField adopts a random background augmentation to
CLIP’s attention on the foreground, which requires view-consistent
masks, while ours does not. Moreover, our method consistently
outperforms DreamField in detailed cloth wrinkles, facial attributes,
and fine-grained geometry deformations, like muscle shapes and
antennas. In summary, our NeRF-Art outperforms these methods
by proposing a contrastive learning technique to achieve sufficient
and uniform stylization and designing a weight regularization to
remove cloudy artifacts and geometry noises.
Comparisons to text-driven mesh-based stylization. Text2Mesh
also supports geometry deformation and texture stylization of a 3D
model like ours. However, it assumes there exists a synergy between
the input 3D geometry and the target prompt and is more likely to
fail when stylizing a 3D mesh towards a less related prompt, such
as“Pixar” for the ‘Lady’ model in Figure 6. With carefully-designed
loss constraints, ours is more robust to different prompts, either
related to the 3D scenes or not. Moreover, limited by the expres-
sivity of the mesh representation, Text2Mesh fails most runs and
presents unstable stylization results, resulting in irregular deforma-
tions and indentations on the edge or surface. Authors of AvatarCLIP
also report similar results when comparing to Text2Mesh . Similar to
DreamField ,AvatarCLIP adopts a random background augmentation
to lead CLIP to focus on the foreground and prevents floating arti-
fact generations. Nevertheless, this process requires view-consistent
masks while ours does not. Moreover, AvatarCLIP adds an additional