6 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
“Fauvism” “Fauvism painting”“painting, Fauvism
style”“painting, oil on
canvas, Fauvism
style”
“Lord Voldemort”“Head of Lord
Voldemort”“Head of Lord
Voldemort in fantasy
style”“Head of Lord
Voldemort in fantasy
style, Harry Potter
Film”
“Chinese Painting” “Chinese Ink Painting”
“Pixar Style” “3D Render in the Style of Pixar”
Fig. 4. Text Evaluation. We present descriptions at different detail levels
for a specific style.
the Adam optimizer. While in the stylization training stage, we
train our model for 4epochs with the learning rate of 0.001and
use the Adam optimizer. We set hyper-parameters 𝜆𝑔,𝜆𝑙,𝜆𝑝and
𝜆𝑟as0.2,0.1,2.0, and 0.1, respectively. To construct the negative
samples, we manually collect around 200 text descriptions from
Pinterest website, describing various styles, like “Zombie” ,“Tolkien
elf”, and “Self-Portrait by Van Gogh” . We set the patch size as the
1/10of the original input in the local contrastive loss. Without loss
of generality, we adopt VolSDF [Yariv et al .2021] as the basic NeRF
model for stylization.
5.2 Data Collection
Three self-portrait datasets are gathered under an in-the-wild con-
dition by asking three users to capture selfies video for around 10
seconds with the front-facing camera. We finally received six video
clips in around 10 seconds. After collecting these video clips under
different views and expressions, we extract 100 frames for eachSource “Joker” “Fernando Botero”
Source “Bear” “Vincent van Gogh”
StyleGAN-
NADAOursStyleGAN-
NADAOurs
Fig. 5. Comparisons. Comparisons with the text-guided image stylization
method StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al. 2021].
video clip using FFmpeg with 15 fps. Then these frames are resized
to 270×480. Then we estimate camera poses for these frames using
COLMAP [Schonberger and Frahm 2016] with rigid relative camera
pose constraints. We suppose frames in a video share the same in-
trinsics. We also reconstruct a lady from the H3DS dataset [Ramon
et al.2021]. We remove noise frames and obtain 31 sparse views.
Moreover, we use the image size with 256 ×256 for stylization. We
also adopt the Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF) dataset [Mildenhall
et al.2019] to stylize non-face scenes. LLFF dataset is composed of
forward-facing scenes, with around 20 to 60 images.
5.3 Text Evaluation
As CLIP [Park et al .2020] is sensitive to text prompts, we conduct
a text description evaluation in Figure 4. When a text description
refers to a style in general, not anyone in particular, the stylization