Factorizing Knowledge in Neural Networks 3
In this paper, we introduce a novel task, termed Knowledge Factorization (KF),
that alleviates the aforementioned 
aws of KD at a problem-setup level. The
core idea of KF regards the modularization and assemblability of knowledge:
given a pretrained teacher, KF decomposes it into several factor networks , each
of which masters one specic knowledge factorized from the teacher, while re-
maining disentangled with respect to others. Moreover, these factor networks
are expected to be readily integratable, meaning that we may directly assemble
multiple factor networks, without any ne-tuning, to produce a more competent
multi-talented network. As shown in Fig. 1(d), those factor networks can be
organized into a open-sourced model hub. At the same time, users could treat
them as Lego-brick-like units of knowledge to build customized networks in a
plug-and-play fashion, thereby lending itself to great scalability. Furthermore,
the disentanglement property eectively enables the IP protection of network
knowledge: since the factor networks are learned in a disentangled manner, they
possess only task-specic knowledge, allowing the network owners to selectively
conduct knowledge transfer without leaking knowledge of other tasks.
Admittedly, the aims of KF are unarguably ambitious, since the factor net-
works are, again, expected to be modularized and readily integratable, and mean-
while knowledge-wise disentangled and hence more interpretable. Notably, de-
spite orthogonal in expertise, these factor networks will inherit the common
knowledge shared by all tasks. As such, each factor network should be designed
to account for both the task-agnostic commonality and its task-relevant spe-
cialization, which in turn reduces the overall parameter overhead for KF. As
demonstrated in Fig 1, given ntypes of knowledge, sub-KD requires an expo-
nential number of 2nmodels, each with Sparameters, while KF reduces the
model number to a linear scale, with one full-sized common knowledge model
andnmini models, each with sparameter, where sS.
To this end, we propose a dedicated scheme for conducting KF, that com-
prises two mechanisms, namely structural factorization and representation fac-
torization .
{ Structural Factorization. Structural factorization decomposes the teacher
network into a set of factor networks with dierent functionalities. Each
factor network comprises a shared common-knowledge network (CKN) and
atask-specic network (TSN). CKN extracts task-agnostic representations
to capture the commonality among tasks, whereas the TSN accounts for
task-specic information. Factor networks are trained to specialize in an
individual task via fusing task-agnostic and task-specic knowledge.
{ Representation Factorization. Representation factorization disentangles
the shared knowledge and task-level representations into statistically inde-
pendent components. For this purpose, we introduce a novel information-
theoretical objective, termed InfoMax Bottleneck (IMB). It maximizes the
mutual information between input and the common features to encourage
the lossless information transmission in CKN. Meanwhile, IMB minimizes
data-task mutual information to ensure that, the task features are only pre-