Factorizing Knowledge in Neural Networks
Xingyi Yang, Jingwen Ye, and Xinchao Wang
National University of Singapore
xyang@u.nus.edu, fjingweny,xinchao g@nus.edu.sg
Abstract. In this paper, we explore a novel and ambitious knowledge-
transfer task, termed Knowledge Factorization (KF). The core idea of
KF lies in the modularization and assemblability of knowledge: given a
pretrained network model as input, KF aims to decompose it into several
factor networks, each of which handles only a dedicated task and main-
tains task-specic knowledge factorized from the source network. Such
factor networks are task-wise disentangled and can be directly assembled,
without any ne-tuning, to produce the more competent combined-task
networks. In other words, the factor networks serve as Lego-brick-like
building blocks, allowing us to construct customized networks in a plug-
and-play manner. Specically, each factor network comprises two mod-
ules, a common-knowledge module that is task-agnostic and shared by all
factor networks, alongside with a task-specic module dedicated to the
factor network itself. We introduce an information-theoretic objective,
InfoMax-Bottleneck (IMB), to carry out KF by optimizing the mutual
information between the learned representations and input. Experiments
across various benchmarks demonstrate that, the derived factor networks
yield gratifying performances on not only the dedicated tasks but also
disentanglement, while enjoying much better interpretability and mod-
ularity. Moreover, the learned common-knowledge representations give
rise to impressive results on transfer learning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Adamdad/KnowledgeFactor .
Keywords: Transfer Learning, Knowledge Factorization
1 Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have evolved to the de
facto a standard approach for most if not all computer vision tasks, yielding
unprecedentedly promising results. Due to the time- and resource-consuming
DNN training process, many developers have generously released their pretrained
models online, so that users may adopt these models in a plug-and-play manner
without training from scratch. Nevertheless, pretrained DNNs often come with
heavy architectures, making them extremely cumbersome to be deployed in real-
world scenarios, especially resource-critical applications such as edge computing.
Numerous endeavors have thus been made towards reducing the sizes of DNNs,
among which one mainstream scheme is known as Knowledge Distillation (KD).
The goal of KD is to \distill" knowledge from a large pre-trained model knownarXiv:2207.03337v2  [cs.CV]  10 Oct 2022