4 Xingyi Yang, Jingwen Ye, and Xinchao Wang
dictive for a specic task. Specically, we derive a variational lower bound
for IMB to practically optimize this loss.
By integrating both mechanisms, we demonstrate in the experiments that
KF indeed achieves architecture-level and representation-level disentanglement.
Dierent from KD that transmits holistic knowledge in a black-box manner,
KF oers unique interpretability for the factor networks through the knowledge
transfer. Moreover, the learned common-knowledge representations facilitate the
transfer learning to unseen downstream tasks, as will be veried empirically in
our experiments.
Our contribution are therefore summarized as follows
{We introduce a novel knowledge-transfer task, termed Knowledge Factoriza-
tion(KF), which accounts for learning factor networks that are modularized
and interpretable. Factor networks are expected to be readily integratable,
without any retraining, to assemble multi-task networks.
{We propose an eective solution towards KF. Our approach decomposes a
pretrained teacher into factor networks that are task-wise disentangled.
{We design an InfoMax Bottleneck objective to disentangle the representation
between common knowledge and the task-specic representations, by exert-
ing control over the mutual information between input and representations.
We derive its variational bound for its numerical optimization.
{Our method achieves strong performance and disentanglement capability
across various benchmarks, with better modularity and transferability.
2 Related work
Knowledge Distillation. Knowledge distillation (KD) [20] refers to the process
to transfer the knowledge from one model or an ensemble of models to a student
model. KD is originally designed for model compression [5,56,32,37,64,51,22],
but it has been found to be benecial in other tasks like adversarial defense [47],
domain adaptation [15,44], continual learning [33,68] and amalgamate the knowl-
edge from multiple teachers [39,65,24]. Dierent from the common KD methods
that disseminates knowledge as a whole, we factorize the knowledge of a multi-
talented teacher to factor networks with disentangled representations.
Disentangled representation learning. It is often assumed that real-world
observations should be controlled by factors. Therefore, a recent line of research
argues the importance of nding disentangled variables in representation learn-
ing [4,49,45,36,63,13] while providing invariance in learning [14,1,23]. The disen-
tanglement are usually done through adversarial learning [59,35,41,10] or vari-
ational auto-encoder [19,7,27]. In this work, we aim to disentangle the task-
agnostic and task-related representation by optimizing the mutual information.
InfoMax principle and Information bottleneck. As one of the founda-
tions of machine learning, information theory has promoted a series of learning
algorithms. InfoMax [34] is a core principle of representation learning that en-
courages the mutual information should be maximized between multi-views or