Factorizing Knowledge in Neural Networks 5
Minimize MIPredict Task 1 Predict Task 2 Predict Task 1 Predict Task 2Knowledge Transfer Loss
Common Knowledge
Network
Maximize MIz 𝑡1𝑡2
Maximize MIMaximize MIMaximize MI
Factor Network 2Task -Specific
Network -1Task -Specific
Network -2
Factor Network 1Multi -task Teacher Model
Structural 
Factorization…Representation 
Factorization…Task Head 
Fig. 2: The overall framework of the proposed knowledge factorization. The factor
networks are trained to mimic the prediction of the teacher. The CKN learns to
maximize the mutual information between input and its features, whereas the
TSNs are dedicated to minimizing the task-wise mutual information.
between representation and input. This principle gave birth to the recent trend
on self-supervised learning [2,21,60] and contrastive learning [46,9,17,26,57,16].
On the contrary, Information Bottleneck (IB) [58] aims to compress the repre-
sentation while achieving realistic reconstruction results. In this study, we take
a unied view of the two principles in multi-task learning. Infomax guarantees
the learning of common knowledge across tasks, while IB promotes task-specic
knowledge for an individual task.
Multi-task learning. Multi-task learning (MTL) is designed to train mod-
els that handle multiple tasks by taking advantage of the common information
among tasks. Some recent solutions explore on the decomposition between shared
and task-specic processing [40,25,69]. Unlike conventional methods, we decom-
pose a pre-training model into knowledge modules according to tasks.
3 Method
The essence of this work is to factorize a multi-task teacher into independent
students by posing ne-grained control of the information among teacher and
students. Figure 2 provides an overall sketch of our proposed KF. In what follows,
we rst give a denition of knowledge factorization, and then introduce the
general procedure to decompose a teacher into factorized students.
3.1 Knowledge Factorization in Neural Network
We dene Knowledge Factorization (KF) to be the process of subdividing a
teacher network into multiple factor networks , each of which possesses distinctive
knowledge to handle one task. Formally, assume we have a multi-task dataset
D=f(xi;y1
i;:::;yK
i)g, where each input sample xmay take one of Kdierent
labelsfyjgK
j=1sampled from the joint probability P(X;Y 1;:::;Y K). With a loose
denition, we also deem the multi-classing as a special case for multi-tasking, by