6 Xingyi Yang, Jingwen Ye, and Xinchao Wang
considering each or a group of categories as a task. Given a multi-task teacher
modelTthat is able to predict Ktasks simultaneously, KF aims to construct K
factor networksfSjgK
j=1, each of which, again, tackles one task independently.
Specically, we focus on decomposing the teacher knowledge into task-specic
and common representations, meaning that each factor network not only masters
task-specic knowledge, but also benets from a shared common feature to make
nal predictions. To this end, we design two mechanisms to factorize knowledge:
structural factorization to decompose the teacher network into a set of factor
networks , as well as representation factorization to disentangle the common
features from task-specic features by optimizing mutual information.
3.2 Structural Factorization
The goal of structural factorization is to endow dierent sub-networks with func-
tional distinctions. Each factor networks is expected to inherit only a portion
of the knowledge from the teacher, and specializes in an individual task. Specif-
ically, a factor network Sjfor thej-th task comprises two modular networks:
a Common Knowledge Network (CKN) SC(;SC) which is shared across all
tasks, and a Task-specic Network (TSN) STj(;STj) which is task-exclusive.
SCandSTjare the model parameters for CKN and TSN respectively. For
each input sample, SCis adopted to extract the task-agnostic feature z:
z=SC(x;SC): (1)
On the contrary,STjlearns the task-related knowledge tjfrom the input x, which
together with zis processed by a task head Hjto make the nal prediction:
tj=STj(x;STj); ^yj
S=Hj(z;tj;Hj); (2)
which constrains each factor network Sjto share the same common knowledge
network but maintain the task-specic one to handle dierent tasks.
Intuitively, we expect that Sjonly masters the knowledge about task jby
using the common knowledge zandtj. We accordingly dene a structure factor-
ization objective L(j)
sfto enforce each single-task factor network to imitate the
teacher's prediction while minimizing the supervised loss:
L(j)
sf=L(j)
sup+ktL(j)
kt; (3)
whereL(j)
supandL(j)
ktdenote the supervised loss and the knowledge transfer loss
for thej-th task, respectively, and ktis the weight coecient. Notably, we
may readily adopt various implementations for each of the loss terms here. For
example,L(j)
supmay take the form of L2 norm for regression and cross-entropy for
classication, while L(j)
ktmay take the form of of soft-target [20], hint-loss [52],
or attention transfer [67]. More details can be found in the supplement.
Structure factorization therefore enables us to construct new combined-task
models by assembling multiple networks without retraining. If, for example, a
3-category classier is needed, we can readily integrate CKN and the correspond-
ing 3 TSNs from the pre-dened network pool. This property, in turn, greatly
improves the scalability of the model.