Factorizing Knowledge in Neural Networks 9
4 Experiments
In this section, we investigate how factorization works to promote the perfor-
mance, modularity and transferability of the model. Defaultly, we set =1.0 and
=1e-3,I=1 andkt=0.1. Due to the space limit, more hyper-parameter set-
tings, distillation loss, implementation details, data descriptions, and denitions
of the metrics are listed in supplementary material.
4.1 Factor Networks Make Strong Task Prediction
We conduct comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-world classica-
tion and multi-task benchmarks to investigate whether the factorized networks
still maintain competitive predictive performance, especially on each subtask.
Synthetic Evaluation. We rst evaluate our KF on two synthetic imagery
benchmarks dSprites [42] and Shape3D [6]. Two datasets are both generated by
6 ground truth independent latent factors. We dene each latent factor as a pre-
diction target and treat both datasets as multi-label classication benchmarks.
We compare our KF with 4 other baseline methods: single-task baseline, multi-
task baselines, MTL2MTL KD and MTL2STL KD. Single-task baseline denotes
training 6 single-task networks, while multi-task denotes that one model trained
to predict all 6 tasks. MTL2MTL KD distill a multi-tasked student, whereas
MTL2STL KD refers to distilling 6 single-tasked students. KF represents our
results with factor networks. We train a teacher network as 6-layer CNN model.
Besides, all students network encoders, including both the CKN and TSNs, are
parametrized by the 3-layer CNN. We take a random train-test split of 7:3 on
each dataset and report the ROC-AUC score on the test split.
Results. Figure 3 visualizes the bar plots for the ROC-AUC scores for our KF
and its KD opponents on two datasets. Though all method achieves a high AUC
score larger than 0 :92 on both datasets, it is evident that our KF not only sur-
passes the multi-tasked baseline but also exceeds two distillation paradigms. In
addition, it is noted that multi-tasked models generally achieves better perfor-
mance than their single-task counterpart, revealing that the prediction perfor-
mance benets from learning from multiple labels on two datasets.
Real Image Classication. We further evaluate our KF on two real image
classication CIFAR-10 [30] and ImageNet1K [53]. To apply factorization, we
construct two Pseudo-Multi-task Datasets by considering the category hierarchy.
MTL 6-layer (Teacher)Single-Task (3-layer)Multi-Task (3-layer)MTL2MTL-KD (3-layer)KF (3-layer)(a) dSprites(b) Shape3DMTL2STL-KD (3-layer)
Fig. 3: Test ROC-AUC comparison on dSprites and Shape3D datasets.