Apruzzee et al. [49] presented a Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing to automatically generate adversarial examples in the form
of network flows against botnet detectors. The adversarial ex-
amples were generated by altering a few essential tra ffic flow
features (e.g., duration, sent bytes, received bytes, and trans-
mitted packets). The generated adversarial examples were de-
ployed to create an augmented dataset that, via adversarial train-
ing, can enhance the resilience of botnet detectors. The au-
thors utilized two datasets in their experiments, CTU and Bot-
net, and two ML botnet detectors based on RF and Wide and
Deep Learning (WnD)15. The evaluation results concluded that
the hardened botnet detectors increased the detection rate from
0.58 to 0.88 against the adversarial examples without a ffecting
the performance when tested with non-adversarial examples.
Towards the same direction, Anthi et al. [25] utilized adver-
sarial training to improve the robustness of two classifiers (J48
decision tree and RF) designed to detect attacks on ICS. The
authors performed a data poisoning attack based on the gray-
box adversary’s knowledge; they only had access to the dataset
and the features, while they had not any other knowledge about
the model. The adversarial examples that were utilized to per-
form the AML attack were generated using the JSMA method,
and the detection performance of RF and J48 models decreased
by 6% and 11%, respectively. As a countermeasure to this data
poisoning attack, the authors employed the adversarial training
method using 10% of the adversarial examples to retrain the
classifiers. Afterward, the RF and J48 models were applied to
the unknown adversarial examples, where they accomplished
11% and 17% higher F1-scores respectively.
Vitorino et al. [50] introduced the Adaptive Perturbation
Pattern Method (A2PM) to generate realistic adversarial exam-
ples. The authors showcased their method on two scenarios
(i.e., Enterprise and IoT in a gray-box attack setting) using the
MLP and RF models, where they only had knowledge about
the features. The adversarial examples significantly lowered
the performance of MLP and RF in both scenarios. Further-
more, the authors evaluated the models also using adversarial
training and concluded that when the models are adversarially
trained their robustness against adversarial examples is signifi-
cantly improved.
Debicha et al. [35] studied the e ffect of adversarial training
in a DL-based IDS. More specifically, the authors performed
white-box AML attacks using the FGSM, BIM, and PGD meth-
ods. The experiments were performed on the NSL-KDD dataset,
where the baseline model reached 99.61% detection accuracy.
The FGSM attack decreased the accuracy to 14.13%, while
BIM and PGD reduced it even more to 8.85%. After the adver-
sarial training using the PGD adversarial examples, the model’s
robustness increased significantly (it is not mentioned exactly
how much); nevertheless, the authors highlighted that there is a
trade-o ffof slightly decreasing the detection accuracy on clean
data, namely when there are no adversarial examples. In ad-
dition, the authors concluded that increasing the percentage of
adversarial examples in the training phase does not necessarily
enhance the model’s robustness.
15A deep learning approach proposed by GoogleRashid et al. [34] investigated the e ffects of AML attacks
on ML /DL-based IDSs designed to detect attacks against IoT
smart city applications and proposed a defense method based
on adversarial training to enhance the models’ robustness. The
authors utilized three classifiers (MLP, DT, and RF) and trained
them using the DS2OS dataset16. Moreover, they evaluated the
five most known AML attacks (JSMA, FGSM, BIM, DeepFool,
and C&W); however, it is not mentioned what the adversary’s
knowledge is (e.g., white-box, black-box, etc.). All the AML
attacks significantly decreased the performance of the models
varying from 36% to 78%; however, the JSMA and C&W at-
tacks were the most successful. The authors concluded that the
MLP shows relatively higher robustness than the other shal-
low ML classifiers. For the adversarial training, the authors
deployed the adversarial examples that were generated by the
C&W method, where 60% of the samples were added to the
training set, and the remaining 40% was included in the testing
set. The authors concluded that the adversarial training is su ffi-
cient to maintain the classifier’s performance against adversar-
ial AML attacks. The baseline classifiers MLP, DT, and RF ac-
complished 99.43%, 99.35%, and 99.41% accuracy, while the
re-trained classifiers achieved 99.20%, 99.19%, and 99.19%,
respectively.
Natural Language Processing
In the NLP domain, there are several works in the liter-
ature, such as [51, 52, 53, 54] that deploy adversarial train-
ing as a mean to improve the prediction performance of NLP
models rather than enhancing their robustness against AML at-
tacks. Furthermore, other works that aim to enhance the NLP
model’s robustness are usually focused on BERT NLP mod-
els [55]. Subsequently, the following part will focus on the ad-
versarial training methods that aim to mitigate AML attacks in
the NLP domain.
Liu et al. [56] presented a comprehensive study on adversar-
ial pre-training aiming to enhance both the generalization and
robustness of NLP models even though prior works treat them
as inversely related terms. The authors proposed an algorithm,
which combines the training process with applying perturba-
tions in the embedding space. The algorithms were applied to
BERT and RoBERTa NLP models and tested against various
NLP tasks using three adversarial NLP benchmarks and con-
cluded that they could improve both the generalization and ro-
bustness of BERT and RoBERTa models.
Yoo et al. [57] argued that in NLP the generation of adver-
sarial examples is a combinatorial optimization problem, which
is solved by deploying a heuristic algorithm. To this end, the
authors proposed two methods to generate adversarial exam-
ples and improve the adversarial training process: ( i) a cheaper
gradient-based word importance ranking to sequentially replace
each word with a synonym (A2T) and ( ii) a masked language
model-based word replacement (A2T-MLM). The proposed meth-
ods tested both BERT and RoBERTa NLP models on text clas-
sification tasks using well-known datasets (e.g., IMDB, Rotten
16https: //www.kaggle.com /francoisxa /ds2ostra ffictraces
9