attacks and concluded that both methods can attain high predic-
tion accuracy with some trade-o ffin efficiency.
4.2.2. Distance-based
In the Distance-based category, the detection of AML at-
tacks is performed by measuring the distance between adver-
sarial and original samples.
Paudice et al. [98] proposed an outlier detection method for
poisoning attacks. Particularly, the authors deployed a distance-
based anomaly detection for the detection of adversarial train-
ing samples using a part of original (i.e., trusted) data sam-
ples. The evaluation was performed on two benchmark datasets
in spam filtering and computer vision domains as well as on
KNN and SVM ML algorithms. The results concluded that the
proposed method is capable of mitigating poisoning attacks.
Furthermore, the authors evaluated their detection method for
label-flipping attacks; however, the results were not encourag-
ing because the generated adversarial examples were closer to
the original, and the proposed detection method failed to detect
them e ffectively.
Meng et al. [99] presented a framework, named MagNet, for
defending ANNs image classifiers against AML attacks that are
independent of the target classifier and the deployed adversarial
examples generation process (i.e., it is attack-agnostic). Mag-
Net consists of two components, the detector and the reformer .
The detector rejects a sample that exceeds the boundary, while
the reformer finds an alternative example closer to the boundary
and sends that to the ANN classifier. More specifically, MagNet
models only the original samples and estimates the distance of
the test samples and the boundary of the manifold of the orig-
inal samples. The authors used various AML attacks to gen-
erate the adversarial examples (e.g., C&W, FGSM, DeepFool,
etc.) as well as the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. The re-
sults showed that MagNet significantly increased the accuracy
against all the attacks, while the accuracy only on original sam-
ples was reduced by 3.8%.
Esmaeilpour et al. [100] proposed a detection method that
explores subspaces of adversarial examples in the unitary vector
domain and developed a detector based on LR to defend mod-
els on environmental sound classification field. Specifically, the
authors calculated chordal distance eigenvalues of legitimate
and adversarial examples, which were deployed to train the LR
classifier. The experiments were performed on three datasets
(ESC-10, ESC-50, and UrbanSound8k) using eight di fferent
types of AML attacks (e.g., FGSM, BIM, JSMA, label flipping,
etc.). The results concluded that the proposed detector achieved
high performance in detecting all the attacks as well as it out-
performed other detectors (e.g., kernel density, Bayesian un-
certainty, and local intrinsic dimensionality) in six out of eight
adversarial attacks.
The authors in [101] introduced a distance-based method
for the detection of adversarial inputs in audio samples. The
method is based on a recognition model, which performs clas-
sification to first characterize the original audio, and then it re-
ceives the modified audio as input. The modified audio is gener-
ated using low-pass filtering mechanisms, where the spectrum,
waveform, and accuracy rate of the audio signal are analyzed.If the di fference between the modified and the original audio
is sufficiently large, then the original audio sample is regarded
as an adversarial example. Similarly, if the di fference is small,
the original audio sample is regarded as a normal sample. The
method is evaluated on the Mozilla Common V oice dataset17,
where the C&W attack is performed to generate the adversar-
ial audio samples and the results concluded that it outperforms
other detection methods, such as white noise, denoise down-
sampling, and temporal dependency. Another defense approach
for adversarial audio detection is illustrated in [102], where
distance-based techniques were followed to perform the detec-
tion. The authors introduced a novel ASR framework that per-
forms similarity calculation through binary classification. The
similarity is measured using the Jaro-Winkler distance method
[103]. The method uses multiple ASRs to achieve a higher ac-
curacy reaching even up to 99.88%.
Yang et al. [104] proposed a detection method against AML
attacks for ASR models. The proposed method relied on the
temporal dependency in speech signals. The audio sample is
split into portions, and the defense framework evaluates the
transcription of the portion against the original sample. The
portion transcription is based on di fferent transformation func-
tions, such as quantization, down-sampling, local smoothing,
and auto-encoder reformation of audio signals. The authors ver-
ified the portions that are not similar using the Word Error Rate
(WER) and the Character Error Rate (CER). The results showed
that the proposed temporal dependency detection method could
effectively detect adversarial audio examples.
A similar approach that detects audio AML attacks in ASR
models is the WaveGuard framework [105]. WaveGuard uses
transformation functions and analyses the ASR transcriptions
of the original and transformed audio. These functions are lever-
aging Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for the
detection of AML attacks. WaveGuard is able to detect AML
attacks with a variety of audio transformation functions.
Chen et. al [106] introduced a stateful method for detect-
ing black-box AML attacks in image classification tasks. The
authors based their work on the argument that the generation
process of adversarial examples requires a sequence of simi-
lar queries to the classifier and developed a detection method
deploying a neural network similarity-detector and proved that
this approach can detect existing state-of-the-art black-box at-
tack algorithms. Towards the same direction, Li et al. [107]
introduced a detection-based defense method for query-based
black-box AML attacks using a content-similarity approach,
named Blacklight. Blacklight was driven by the fact that query-
based black-box attacks result in highly similar queries and is
comprised of two components: the probabilistic content fin-
gerprinting that aims at fast and scalable attack detection, and
thesalted pixel quantization that aims at providing resistance
against adaptive attacks. Blacklight was evaluated against var-
ious black-box attacks on several datasets and image classifi-
cation models and showed that it can detect all the attacks after
2-9 queries (except boundary attack that takes 50 queries on av-
erage) and that it consistently reduces the attack success rate to
17https: //commonvoice.mozilla.org /
14