0% for all the tested attack. Finally, the authors showed that
Blacklight can generalize also to other domains and employed
a text-classification task as an example.
Song et al. [108] proposed three mutation-based evasion
attacks that were evaluated under white-box, black-box, and
gray-box attack settings on ML-based phishing website clas-
sifiers and are highly e ffective in accomplishing 100% success
rate on Google’s phishing page filter (GPPF). The authors ex-
pand their research by introducing also two similarity-based
detection mechanisms (i.e., DOM tree and personalized simi-
larity) to tackle these attacks. The experimental results on large
phishing and legitimate URL corpus concluded that both DOM
tree and personalized similarity achieved over 90% similarity
on most of the adversarial samples in white-box and black-box
settings, while in gray-box settings personalized similarity sig-
nificantly outperformed DOM tree.
4.2.3. Feature Squeezing
Xu et al. [80] introduced Feature Squeezing , a method to de-
tect adversarial examples in the computer vision domain. The
method is based on two-dimensionality reduction techniques:
i) Color bit depth reduction (from 24-bit to 8-bit) and ii) spa-
tial smoothing (i.e., blur). The first technique is based on the
fact that the image’s colors are unrelated to the classification;
hence they will not a ffect the model’s classification accuracy
when reduced. Spatial smoothing, on the other hand, employs
local smoothing and non-local smoothing to reduce the image’s
noise. During the Feature Squeezing process, two versions of
the input image are produced based on the two aforementioned
techniques. A DNN classifies the original image and the two
generated images, and their outputs are compared using the L1
metric. If L1exceeds a threshold, the image is classified as ad-
versarial and discarded.
4.2.4. Statistical
Grosse et al. [109] proposed a detection method based on
Statistical tests for adversarial examples. Two statistical dis-
tance metrics (Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and En-
ergy Distance (ED)) were employed to measure the distance of
adversarial and original samples, namely to identify their dif-
ferences. The authors evaluated their method on four classifiers
(ANN, DT, LR, SVM), three di fferent domains, such as im-
age classification (MNIST), malware detection (Drebin), and
cancer detection (MicroRNA), as well as four AML attacks
(FGSM, JSMA, SVM attack, and Decision Tree attack) and
concluded that it could e ffectively detect the adversarial exam-
ples.
Table 4 summarizes all the above-mentioned defense meth-
ods based on key traits, such as year, deployed attack type (i.e.,
poisoning or evasion), attacker’s knowledge (i.e., black /white /gray-
box), application domain, evaluated ML /DL algorithms, as well
as the employed defense method (e.g., adversarial training, en-
semble methods, pre-processing, etc.).5. Evaluation of Defense Methods
This section aims to provide insights regarding the e fficient
evaluation of defenses (both mitigation and detection methods)
against AML attacks. However, in order to accurately evaluate
the defense methods and avoid misleading results, it should be
assured that the attack has been implemented correctly. Several
works in the literature highlight that existing defenses fail to
perform successful attacks resulting in misleading results and
suggest guidelines that aim to lead to unbiased results. Car-
lini et al. [110] performed a large-scale analysis of commonly
accepted best practices discussing their limitations and intro-
duced new methods for accurately evaluating defenses against
adversarial examples. Moreover, Pintor et al. [111] proposed
a framework to automatically detect erroneous evaluations of
adversarial robustness that researchers could employ to build
robust defenses. In the rest of this section, datasets from the lit-
erature that contain both original and adversarial samples (here-
after AML datasets ) have been gathered and presented. In ad-
dition, evaluation metrics that have been specifically created to
assess the robustness of AI systems or defense methods against
AML attacks have been collected and discussed. Finally, the
importance of evaluating the economic viability when propos-
ing a new defense has been highlighted. It should be noted that
common evaluation metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall ,
andF1-score are not considered in this section since they are
not appropriate for measuring the robustness of AI systems in
adversarial settings [112].
5.1. Dataset Gathering
In this section, we gathered the AML datasets that have
been introduced by existing works and are publicly available
to evaluate ML /DL models’ robustness. To the best of our
knowledge, only seven AML datasets are publicly available, six
of them belong to the computer vision domain and one to the
sound classification. These datasets are presented below:
1. DAmageNet [113] is an AML dataset that provides black-
box AML attack images. It contains 96,020 adversarial
samples generated from the original samples of the Ima-
geNet dataset. DAmageNet is appropriate for testing and
improving the robustness of DNN in image classification
tasks18.
2. In [114] four variations of the CIFAR dataset have been
proposed in order for the authors to demonstrate that ad-
versarial samples are a result of non-robust features (i.e.,
features that can be easily predicted but are incomprehen-
sible to humans). The datasets are publicly available19
and contain both robust and non-robust features (i.e., both
original and adversarial samples) appropriate for image
classification tasks.
3. The authors of [39] generated two AML datasets based
on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 using PGD AML at-
tack to produce the adversarial examples20. These datasets
18http://www.pami.sjtu.edu.cn /Show /56/122
19https: //github.com /MadryLab /constructed-datasets
20https: //github.com /ashafahi /free advtrain/tree/master /datasets
15