Table 1: Allocation of the surveyed papers per year
Year # Papers Year # Papers Year # Papers
2014 1 2017 6 2020 14
2015 2 2018 6 2021 15
2016 1 2019 8 2022 8
Based on the selected criteria, 68 articles were selected from
which seven are existing surveys in AML field that mainly fo-
cus on the attacks and not the defenses (see Section 2.2), and 61
are proposing a defense method against one or more AML at-
tacks in the fields of computer vision, cybersecurity, NLP, and
audio classification. The selected papers were published be-
tween 2014 and 2022. More specifically, the allocation of the
number of surveyed papers per year and domain is depicted in
Tables 1 and 2, respectively. To enhance the comprehension of
the tables, it shall be noted that some defenses have been eval-
uated on several domains (e.g., image and audio classification),
hence in Table 2, some papers are categorized in more than one
domain.
2.2. Related Work
Currently, only a handful of surveys have been published
that mostly concentrate on examining the features of AML at-
tacks and their applicability to di fferent domains. This section
elaborates on previous surveys in the AML domain. More pre-
cisely, the strengths and weaknesses of each work were dis-
cussed, and the identified gaps in the literature were highlighted.
Wang et al. [8] presented a survey regarding the security
of ML /DL models under adversarial settings. The authors pro-
vided background information about the field of ML, the treated
model, and the attack surface. Nevertheless, this research’s
backbone was the analysis of AML attacks and their possible
defense strategies. The survey concluded that future work on
ML security should pay more attention to the defense strate-
gies of DL techniques, data privacy, and the security evaluation
of ML /DL methods. One major limitation of this work is that
the authors mainly focused on AML attacks in the computer
vision domain. Notably, they elaborated on common AML at-
tacks (e.g., L-BFGS, FGSM, and C&W) that applied to image
classification or visual recognition.
Qiu et al. [9] reviewed the literature on the AML attack
field, performing a thorough analysis of its characteristics. The
authors also discussed the application of the various AML at-
tacks on di fferent domains, such as Computer Vision, NLP, and
Cyberspace Security, as well as in the physical world. Further,
the paper shortly presented some research focusing on the mit-
igation of common AML attacks and stressed that defenses are
mainly focused on a particular adversarial attack type as well
as that none of the current defense methods aiming at tackling
multiple AML attacks.
Pitropakis et al. [10] performed a thorough taxonomy of
the AML attacks features. The authors broke down the key
features of the attacks and categorized them based on the ap-
plication of ML that compromises such as intrusion detection,Table 2: Allocation of the surveyed papers per domain
Domain # Papers
Computer Vision 22
Cybersecurity 22
NLP 7
Audio 13
spam filtering, visual recognition, other applications, and mul-
tipurpose. This survey discusses various attack types on the do-
mains mentioned above and it considers the ML algorithms that
each attack targets. Also, the authors provided useful statistics
about the distribution of the investigated papers regarding the
attackers’ knowledge (e.g., 64% focused on white-box attacks,
56% focused on black-box attacks), the AML attack type (e.g.,
52% related with evasion attacks and 56% with poisoning at-
tacks), the targeted domain (e.g., 88% dealt with classification
tasks and 17% dealt with clustering). Finally, the paper high-
lighted that future research should focus on creating immunity
to perturbations, multiple adversaries, randomized adversarial
approaches, and digital forensics for AML.
Martins et al. [15] explored the application of AML attacks
on intrusion and malware detection fields. The authors sur-
veyed works that employed AML methods, such as FGSM,
JSMA, C&W, and GAN, to attack ML-based IDS and mal-
ware detectors. The paper also presented some general defense
strategies for AML attacks but it did not elaborate on them. To-
wards the same direction, Rosenberg et al. [16] discussed the
risk posed by AML attacks in the cybersecurity domain and
presented state-of-the-art AML research papers focused on cy-
bersecurity. The authors highlighted the di fferences between
the AML attacks in the computer vision and cybersecurity do-
mains, concluding that it is more di fficult to perform an AML
attack on malware or intrusion detection ML models. More-
over, the paper covered several AML attacks in the cyberse-
curity domain, analyzing multiple fields such as malware de-
tection, malicious URL detection, network intrusion detection,
spam filtering, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Industrial Con-
trol Systems (ICS), as well as biometric systems. The authors
emphasized that only a limited number of defense methods have
been proposed to tackle AML attacks or develop more robust
solutions in the cybersecurity domain.
Qayyum et al. [17] discussed the challenges aroused by
AML in the Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CA V) do-
main. The authors elaborated on the ML pipeline deployed in
CA V, the existing AML attacks on CA V, and methods to in-
crease the robustness of the ML models. Moreover, the au-
thors also mentioned open research issues and provided future
directions to raise awareness among the readers toward the de-
velopment and application of robust and e ffective ML models
in CA V. Even though this work gives readers a comprehensive
view of AML attacks and defenses, it is limited to their appli-
cation in CA V.
Bai et al. [18] presented a taxonomy of adversarial training
methods in the computer vision domain. The taxonomy classi-
fies previous works on Adversarial Regularization, Curriculum-
3