Tomatoes, and SNLI). The experimental results showed that the
A2T method could improve the NLP model’s robustness against
several attacks of the literature (e.g., [58, 59, 60, 61]) that target
NLP models.
Pan et al. [62] proposed an adversarial training method for
text classification models. The authors based their method on
white-box adversary’s knowledge. The adversarial sample gen-
eration process was based on FGSM and [51], but instead of
applying the perturbations to the word embeddings, they ap-
plied them to the word embedding matrix of Transformer en-
coders. The experiments were performed using the BERT and
RoBERTa NLP models on three datasets and compared on sev-
eral tasks with other adversarial learning methods (e.g., PGD,
FreeAT, FreeLB) [54]. The results showed that the proposed
method outperforms PGD and FreeAT, while accomplishing the
same performance as FreeLB.
Kitada et al. [52] introduced an adversarial training method
that can be applied to various NLP tasks. The proposed ad-
versarial training method is focused on the attention mecha-
nism. More specifically, the generated adversarial perturbations
are added to the attention mechanism to increase the model’s
prediction performance and robustness. To test their method,
the authors deployed a Bidirectional RNN (BiRNN) model and
three di fferent NLP tasks, text classification, question answer-
ing (QA), and natural language inference (NLi). The evaluation
experiments concluded that the proposed adversarial training
on the attention mechanism managed to improve the model’s
performance on the three NLP tasks and outperformed other
training techniques.
Finally, Morandi and Samwald [63] performed a large-scale
investigation of the robustness of the biomedical NLP models
against AML attacks. The authors performed white-box and
black-box attack scenarios on both character-level and word-
level AML attacks. More specifically, five biomedical /clinical
textual datasets were used and four di fferent NLP models were
deployed based on BERT. Moreover, four AML attacks were
performed and the results indicated that the NLP models are
not robust to AML attacks. The authors employed adversarial
training using adversarial examples generated by all the tested
attacks and evaluated the performance of the models against ad-
versarial and clean test samples to measure the robustness and
generalization, respectively. The proposed approach tested sev-
eral NLP tasks, such as question answering, semantic similarity
estimation, natural language inference, text classification, and
relation classification. The experimental results demonstrated
that adversarial training improves the robustness and the gener-
alization ability of biomedical NLP models.
Audio
In the audio domain, adversarial training has not received
much attention, since it has been employed only in a few exist-
ing works.
Pal et al. [64] proposed a hybrid adversarial training method
to improve the robustness of speaker recognition systems. For
this purpose, the authors provide diverse and robust adversar-
ial perturbations for adversarial training as a defense for deepspeaker recognition systems against various types of attacks.
Experiments were conducted on various white-box and black-
box attacks, such as the FGSM, the C&W, the PGD, and the
Feature Scattering attack (FS) [65]. The proposed hybrid adver-
sarial training approach outperformed other adversarial training
methods (e.g., using only FGSM, PGD, or FS adversarial exam-
ples) on all the testing AML attacks as well as on the detection
of original examples.
Other defense methods against audio AML attacks relied
on adversarial training in audio signals using a denoiser model
[66]. The proposed defense is based on the adversarial training
proposed in [37]. However, instead of adversarially training a
model from scratch that leads to convergence issues in Auto-
matic Speech Recognition (ASR), the authors present a method
to fine-tune a pre-trained ASR model using PGD adversarial ex-
amples. Then, the denoiser, which is pre-trained using deep re-
gression, maps adversarial signals to benign ones. Experiments
have been conducted using the FGSM and the PGD methods
and demonstrated promising results. Nevertheless, more exten-
sive tests still have to be conducted.
4.1.2. Defensive Distillation
The term distillation originally refers to the training proce-
dure where a DNN model (student) is trained using knowledge
transferred from a di fferent DNN (teacher) [67]. The motiva-
tion for the use of distillation stems from the deployment of DL
models in smaller devices (e.g., smartphones) that do not have
the resources to perform complex computations, hence via dis-
tillation during the training phase, the knowledge is transferred
from more complex DNN models.
Papernot et al. [68] employed an alternative to the distilla-
tion method to protect DNN against adversarial examples in the
computer vision domain. They proposed the defensive distilla-
tionwhere instead of transferring knowledge between di fferent
DNN models, they extracted knowledge from a DNN to en-
hance its robustness against adversarial examples. The authors
deployed the JSMA method to craft adversarial examples and
two datasets (MNIST and CIFAR-10) to evaluate the defensive
distillation. The defensive distillation method reduced the suc-
cess rate of the adversarial examples from 95.89% to 0.45% on
the MNIST dataset and from 87.89% to 5.11% on the CIFAR-
10 dataset. Another work that studies the distillation method in
AML domain is proposed in [69]. The authors presented the
Adversarially Robust Distillation (ARD) method that combines
distillation with adversarial training to transfer knowledge from
robust teacher against AML attacks DNN models to student
models. The experiments were performed using the adversar-
ial training method proposed in [37] to train DNN models both
with and without the ARD method on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets. The evaluation concluded that the ARD-trained
models outperform the adversarially trained models.
Soll et al. [70] applied the defensive distillation method of
the image classification domain to text classification. Particu-
larly, the authors generated the text adversarial examples based
on [71] and deployed two datasets (AG’s corpus of news articles
and Amazon movie reviews) to test the defensive distillation on
10