based Adversarial Training, Ensemble Adversarial Training, Ad-
versarial Training with Adaptive ϵ,Αdversarial Training with
Semi-supervised /Unsupervised Learning, e fficient Adversarial
Training, and other variants. This survey provides a compre-
hensive view of works on the adversarial training domain; how-
ever, it only focuses on the computer vision domain without
elaborating on the pros and cons of each work.
A recent survey with the same grounds as the proposed pa-
per was presented by Machado et al. [19]. The authors reviewed
the latest studies on AML attacks that target image classifica-
tion tasks from the defender’s perspective. This work, except
for studying AML attacks on the Computer Vision domain,
elaborates on a taxonomy of defenses against adversarial im-
ages. The AML attacks on the Computer Vision domain mainly
target DL models (e.g., CNN, DNN); hence the authors did not
elaborate on attacks against ML models. Furthermore, the au-
thors discussed possible reasons for the existence of adversarial
examples and presented directions for future works. Finally,
this work highlights the importance of extensive and up-to-date
review papers in AML to direct researchers toward tackling
this ongoing threat and protecting ML /DL models. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the only article that thoroughly an-
alyzes and categorizes the defense solutions against AML at-
tacks; nevertheless, it is limited to the Computer Vision domain
and DL models.
Table 3 summarizes the existing surveys in terms of general
features, such as the application domain as well as whether they
present also the defenses, discuss adversarial example genera-
tion methods, provide insights about the evaluation (e.g., met-
rics to evaluate the attack performance or robustness), and focus
on the attack surface.
To sum up, almost all the surveys [10, 15, 16, 17, 19] em-
phasize the fact that future works in the AML domain should
focus on developing defense methods to tackle the expansion
of AML attacks. However, there is a clear gap in the literature
regarding the surveys that elaborate exclusively on the exist-
ing defense solutions, since all the surveys in the AML domain
delve into various types of AML attacks dealing with the prob-
lem of AML attacks from the attackers’ perspective [10, 17].
Only a limited number of works briefly present some defense
solutions, but their e fforts were focusing on a particular domain
(e.g., Martins et al. [15] presented a limited number of defense
methods to tackle AML attacks in the fields of intrusion and
malware detection). Overall, existing surveys in the area of-
ten neglect to investigate the defense solutions in a domain-
agnostic manner (e.g., studying the defenses against AML at-
tacks regardless of their application domain). Based on this
observation, this article focuses exclusively on the available de-
fenses against AML attacks. To this end, it studies the avail-
able defenses of the literature in various domains (as explained
in Section 2.1) to provide a thorough taxonomy and system-
atize the existing knowledge in order to facilitate researchers in
developing new defense methods and building robust ML /DL
models. Towards this direction, this paper also presents insights
into the evaluation of AML defense methods. More specifi-
cally, the publicly available AML datasets are discussed along
with evaluation metrics appropriate for testing the robustness ofTable 3: Summarizing existing surveys
Paper /Year Domain Defense Adversarial Examples Evaluation Attack Surface
Wang et al. (2019) [8] Computer Vision ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Qiu et al. (2019) [9] Multi-domain ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
Pitropakis et al. (2019) [10] Multi-domain ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Martins et al. (2020) [15] Intrusion & malware ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Qayyum et al. (2020) [17] CA V ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Bai et al. (2021) [18] Computer Vision ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
Machado et al. (2021) [19] Image Classification ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Rosenberg et al. (2021) [16] Cybersecurity ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
ML and DL models as well as the e fficacy of defense methods
against AML attacks.
3. Adversarial Machine Learning Attacks
The AML attacks have been thoroughly discussed in previ-
ous literature works [8, 10, 16]. Thus, this article does not focus
on introducing the numerous attacks that are available in liter-
ature. Instead, in this section fundamental information about
AML attacks are analyzed, which are essential for the reader to
grasp the proposed concept. Figure 2 presents an overview of
AML attacks against ML /DL models. The rest of the section
presents the adversary’s knowledge, capability, and possible at-
tack types for AML attacks.
Adversary
Training
DatasetModel TestingWrong
OutputPoisoning EvasionBlack-boxWhite-box
Gray-box
Figure 2: Adversary attacking AI models
3.1. Adversary’s Knowledge
An essential factor of an AML attack is the knowledge that
the adversary has about the target model. Based on the amount
of the adversary’s knowledge and, as an extension, the access
she has to the model, AML attacks can be classified into three
categories: white-box ,black-box , and gray-box .
White-box. In white-box attacks, the adversary has complete
knowledge of the system, the algorithm’s architecture, hyper-
parameters, and training data. While the amount of knowledge
that white-box attacks require is rarely available in real-life sce-
narios, it is not unrealistic to occur. This knowledge can be ac-
quired either by reverse engineering the model or by an insider.
For example, via reverse engineering, adversaries might recover
the model’s components (e.g., architecture, hyperparameters)
4