DefensesMitigation
DetectionAdversarial T raining
Defense Distillation
Ensemble Learning
Pre-processing
Distance-basedSupervised/Semi-supervised
Learning
StatisticalFeature Reduction
Sequence
SqueezingCybersecurity
Computer V ision
NLP
Feature Obfuscation
Feature SqueezingFigure 3: Taxonomy of AML defense methods
Figure 4: Traditional VS adversarial training
where in adversarial training both original and perturbated data
are deployed in the learning phase.
Specifically, given a training dataset Dthat contains the tu-
pleX=(x,y) (where xis the sample and yis the label), an ad-
versarial sample x∗is crafted by an algorithm Abased on xand
forms a new tuple X∗that has the same label ( y) asX, namely
X∗=(x∗,y). Later, the training dataset Dwill be expanded with
X∗resulting in T={X,X∗}. The ML /DL algorithm is then re-
trained using the expanded dataset, which will result in a more
robust model in theory.
Adversarial training is the literature’s most well-known de-
fense method against AML attacks. To this end, most of the
existing defenses are based on di fferent variations of adversar-
ial training. It should be noted that because the majority of de-
fenses are based on adversarial training, this section categorizes
the defenses of this category based on their application domain.
Computer Vision
Adversarial training was first introduced in the computer vi-
sion domain [28]; hence it has received considerable attention
from the research community during these years. Goodfellow et
al. [28] were among the first that raised the adversarial training
defense in the computer vision field. The authors deploy the
FGSM method to generate adversarial examples and, via ad-
versarial training, managed to decrease the error rate of a DNNimage classifier from 89.4% to 17.9%. The experiments were
performed on the MNIST dataset8.
Huang et al. [36] studied the role of adversarial training on
classifiers’ robustness and proposed a new approach to gener-
ate adversarial examples. The authors employed a min-max
adversarial training approach, i.e., Learning With an Adver-
sary (LWA), to train a DNN image classifier. The experimental
results indicate that LWA accomplishes better robustness and
high accuracy on original samples compared to existing meth-
ods (e.g., [28]) on both MNIST and CIFAR-109datasets.
Madry et al. [37] deployed PGD and FGSM methods to
generate adversarial examples, which were used to retrain a
DNN. The authors deployed black-box and white-box adver-
sary’s knowledge and proved that the proposed adversarial train-
ing approach could achieve robustness against di fferent attacks.
Notably, the DNN trained with the MNIST dataset accomplished
89% accuracy on the strongest AML attack (white-box & PGD),
while on the same attack, the DNN trained with CIFAR-10
dataset achieved 46%. The drawback of the proposed defense
is that it is computationally complex; thus, it is di fficult to test
it on large datasets.
Sankaranarayanan et al. [38] proposed a new regularization
approach for DNN image classifiers that improves the adversar-
ial robustness in comparison with traditional adversarial train-
ing methods. More specifically, the authors compared the pro-
posed layer-wise adversarial training with FGSM and FGSM-
inter (i.e., a variation of FGSM where intermediate layer acti-
vations are perturbed). They concluded that when perturbating
intermediate layers and not only the input layer of a DNN, the
classification performance is improved. However, when per-
turbating only the input layer the adversarial robustness is im-
proved. Thus, there is a trade-o ffbetween the adversarial ro-
bustness and the regularization e ffect on original data.
The authors of [39] proposed an adversarial training algo-
rithm that eliminates the additional time that emerges from the
generation of adversarial examples. The algorithm eliminates
this overhead by recycling the gradient information computed
when updating the model’s parameters. The proposed algo-
rithm needs almost the same training time as in original train-
ing to produce robust DNN models, and it is 3 – 30 times
faster than previous works (e.g., [37]). The experimental results
concluded that the produced models accomplish slightly better
accuracy on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets than conven-
tional adversarial training methods. Furthermore, the proposed
algorithm can also be applied on large-scale datasets, like Ima-
geNet10attaining 40% accuracy against PGD attacks.
Xie et al. [40] combined feature denoising with adversarial
training to enhance CNNs’ adversarial robustness. The pro-
posed method improves the adversarial robustness in white-box
and black-box adversarials’ knowledge against PGD AML at-
tacks. More specifically, the authors deployed the large Ima-
geNet dataset, and in a 10-iteration PGD white-box attack, the
8http://yann.lecun.com /exdb/mnist /
9https: //www.cs.toronto.edu /kriz/cifar.html
10https: //www.image-net.org /
7