equipped with adversarial examples, which can serve as a
benchmark evaluation dataset to train robust sound clas-
sification models. Adv-ESC is based on two environmen-
tal sound classification datasets (ESC-10 and DCASE task
1A) and is comprised of adversarial examples generated
by FGSM, PGD, and BIM methods.
It has been observed that only a few AML datasets are pub-
licly available, where the vast majority can only be applied to
the computer vision domain and, more specifically, to image
classification and object detection tasks. There is a clear need
for more AML datasets that can also be applied to other do-
mains, such as cybersecurity, where AML attacks are on the
rise. Hence, future research on AML should also consider the
introduction of benchmark AML datasets in various domains
to facilitate researchers evaluating their defense methods and
comparing them with existing works on common ground.
5.2. Evaluation Metrics
This section elaborates on metrics that existing works uti-
lized to measure the e fficacy of their defense solutions against
AML attacks. Most works employ common metrics to evaluate
the robustness against AML attacks (e.g., accuracy, F1-score,
AUC); however, a few introduce new metrics. Accordingly
these metrics are discussed.
Malicious tra ffic Evasion Rate (MER) [83]. It measures how
much original malicious network tra ffic can be evasive. MER is
the percentage of undetected mutated malicious tra ffic to origi-
nally detectable tra ffic.
MER =1−PUMT mal
PDT(5)
Detection Evasion Rate (DER) [83]. This metric is similar to
MER but measures how much of the mutated tra ffic can be eva-
sive. DER also measures whether the adversarially generated
traffic is detected as malicious. DER is the percentage of unde-
tected mutated tra ffic to originally detectable tra ffic.
DER =1−PUMT
PDT(6)
Malicious Probability Decline Rate (PDR) [83]. PDR mea-
sures the decline rate of the malicious probabilities produced
by the classifier.
PDR =1−E(f,ˆf)∈(Fmal,ˆFmal,)C(ˆf)
C(f)(7)
Malicious features Mimicry Rate (MMR) [83]. This metric
measures the extent to which adversarial crafted features are
close to malicious features extracted from mutated tra ffic.
MMR =1−E(f,ˆf,fa)∈(Fmal,ˆFmal,Fadv)L(ˆf,fa)
L(f,fa)(8)
Fooling Rate(FR) [82]. This metric is based on the error rate
and computes the ratio of successful fooling adversarial sam-
ples (SAS) over the total number of adversarial samples (TAS).FR=S AS im
T AST
i(9)
Attack Success Rate (ASR) [118]. The ratio of misclassified
adversarial samples (MAS) to the total number of adversarial
samples (TAS).
AS R =MAS im
T AST
i(10)
Attack Severity (AS) [75]. AS measures the e fficacy of an eva-
sion AML attack considering the detection rate (DR) before and
after the attack.
AS=1−DR a f ter
DR be f ore(11)
6. Discussion
Even though AML has received significant attention in the
last five years and new AML attacks are constantly introduced
or existing attacks are applied to di fferent fields, the defense
methods against AML attacks are still in their infancy. Based
on the surveyed articles limited research is available regard-
ing mitigating or detecting AML attacks. Table 5 provides a
comparison of the existing defenses in the AML field based
on numerous criteria, such as whether the defense method is
attack-agnostic (i.e., can mitigate /detect multiple AML attacks)
or domain-agnostic (i.e., it has been tested on several domains),
whether it was evaluated using AML evaluation metrics (dis-
cussed in section 5.2), the application domain, the defense method
category (i.e., mitigation or detection), and the evaluated mod-
els (i.e., ML or DL). Moreover, Table 5 (Code and Dataset
columns) presents which of the surveyed existing works pub-
licly release the source code and the dataset. It should be clearly
mentioned that the dataset criterion refers to the deployed AML
dataset. For instance, the authors of [50] utilized a publicly
available dataset to generate an AML dataset; however, they
did not share the generated dataset.
As can be observed by Table 5, most existing defense meth-
ods focus on improving the resiliency of ML /DL models (i.e.,
on the mitigation category) against AML attacks rather than
detecting them. More specifically, approximately 78% of the
surveyed defenses deal with the mitigation of AML attacks.
This can be attributed to the fact that adversarial training is
one of the first defense methods that are still extremely pop-
ular because researchers strive to introduce adversarial train-
ing methods which do not a ffect the model’s performance in
non-adversarial settings. Furthermore, only 6.55% of the sur-
veyed defenses are attack-agnostic, and almost 5% are domain-
agnostic, indicating that most of the existing defenses cannot
cope with multiple AML attacks neither can be applied to more
than one domain. Most previous works were not validated us-
ing appropriate evaluation metrics since the works that have
been evaluated using AML evaluation metrics are only 14.75%
17