FGSM, except for its application in the image classification
field, has also been employed in other fields, for instance, cy-
bersecurity [29, 30]. However, as mentioned by Rosenberg et
al. [16], the application of FGSM in the cybersecurity domain
is more challenging than in computer vision due to the nature
of the samples.
Jacobian based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA). Papernot et al. [31]
presented the JSMA method that produces adversarial exam-
ples using saliency maps and employs the Jacobian matrix of
the model to calculate the sensitivity direction. The Jacobian
matrix of a model Fwith respect to the input samples Xis cal-
culated via the equation 2:
JF=δF(X)
δX(2)
Later, JFis deployed to generate adversarial saliency maps
used to identify the features of the input data most relevant to
the model’s decision. Namely, the features that should be per-
turbed to a ffect the model’s classification. Finally, the JSMA
method checks whether the alterations have a ffected the model
to misclassify the input. If they have not a ffected it, another
set of features is selected, and the process repeats until an ad-
versarial saliency map arises that can be utilized to generate an
adversarial example.
Limited-memory Broyden Fletcher Goldfarb Shanno (L-BFGS).
Szegedy et al. [20] was one of the first who observed that adding
perturbations to images can deceive DL models and lead to mis-
classifications. Notably, the authors generate adversarial exam-
ples by adding perturbations to an image having as a scope to
reduce the added perturbation runder L2distance:
min||r||2,f(x+r)=y, (3)
where ris the perturbation, fis the loss function of the model,
xis the original image, and yis the incorrect prediction label.
Because Equation 3 is non-trivial, the authors deployed a box-
constrained L-BFGS to solve it. A drawback of the L-BFGS
method is that even though it is e fficient at generating adversar-
ial examples, it is computationally ine ffective.
DeepFool. Moosavi et al. [32] proposed a repetitive procedure
for creating adversarial examples. This method minimizes the
Euclidean distance between the adversarial and original sam-
ples. DeepFool is comprised of the calculation of a linear de-
cision limit, which divides the samples that belong to di fferent
classes. In DNN, it is challenging to find linear decision limits;
hence the perturbations are added repetitively by applying this
method multiple times. The robustness of a classifier is calcu-
lated by Equation 4.
∆(x,F)=min r||r||2,F(x+r),F(x), (4)
where ∆(x,F) is the robustness of classifier Fgiven a sample
xandris the minimal perturbation that it can alter the esti-
mated label F(x). DeepFool is a powerful method for generat-
ing adversarial examples with fewer perturbations than FGSM
and JSMA; however, it is computationally expensive.Carlini &Wagner (C &W).Carlini & Wagner introduced an ef-
fective adversarial example generation method that identifies
the less possible perturbations based on a distance metric ( L0,
L2,L∞). The L0andL2concluded to have much fewer pertur-
bations than SOTA (FGSM and JSMA). The aim of C&W is to
minimize D(x,x+δ) such that C(x+δ)=t,x+δ∈[0,1]n,
where (x) is the sample, δis the perturbation, and ∆is the dis-
tance metric. Namely, the goal is to find a small alteration δto
make on the sample that will change its classification without
ruining its type (e.g., if the sample is an image and a perturba-
tionδis added, then the result should be still a valid image).
Basic Interaction Method (BIM). Kurakin et al. [33] proposed
an adversarial example generation method based on FGSM.
More specifically, BIM is an extension of FGSM, meaning that
it adopts an iteration process to perturbate the pixels of an im-
age, ensuring that the values are pruned within a certain mar-
gin of the source image. Even though BIM has been originally
tested in the image classification domain, it has also been ap-
plied in the IoT domain [34] and intrusion detection [35].
At this point, it should be noted that there are also other
methods for adversarial example generation in the literature,
such as Projected Gradient Descent (PGD), Bit Coordinate As-
cent (BCA), and Bit Gradient Ascent (BGA). However, this pa-
per does not elaborate on them mainly for two reasons. First,
they are not widely used, i.e., they have been deployed by a few
previous works. Second, they are based on other adversarial
example generation methods (e.g., PGD is based on FGSM).
4. Adversarial Machine Learning Defenses
The rise of AML attacks has inspired the scientific commu-
nity to drive more research on designing and developing novel
defense methods against such attacks. This section elaborates
on a taxonomy of AML defense methods, which to the best of
our knowledge, is the first large-scale taxonomy of the available
defenses against AML attacks. As it is shown in Figure 3, the
taxonomy includes two main axes based on the defense objec-
tive: ( i) Mitigation and ( ii) Detection, also included in the fol-
lowing part of this section in 4.1 and 4.2 respectively. Finally,
the taxonomy analyzes various types of defenses against AML
attacks on four pioneer domains that gather the most works of
the literature (i.e., cybersecurity, computer vision, NLP, and au-
dio). Figure 3 provides an overview of the AML defense meth-
ods that are present in literature.
4.1. Mitigation
The mitigation category refers to proactive defenses that
strive to enhance the robustness of ML /DL models against AML
attacks. The available mitigation methods are presented below.
4.1.1. Adversarial Training
The adversarial training defense method aims to enhance
the model’s robustness by utilizing a training dataset that con-
tains both benign and adversarial examples. The di fference be-
tween traditional and adversarial training is shown in Figure 4,
6