proposed method achieved 55.7% accuracy (the prior state-of-
the-art has 27.9% accuracy). Moreover, in the extreme case of
2000-iterations PGD white-box attacks, the proposed method
attained 42.6% accuracy, while in a black-box setting against
48 unknown attackers, the proposed method achieved 50.6%
accuracy, and it was ranked first in Competition on Adversarial
Attacks and Defenses 2018.
The authors of [41] introduced the concept of combining
ensemble learning with adversarial training. Their approach
merges the training data with adversarial perturbations gener-
ated from three di fferent AML attacks instead of one. Specif-
ically, the authors deployed the FGSM, the Single-step Least-
Likely Class Method (Step-LL), and the iterative I-FGSM. The
experiments were performed using several variations of Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) and Fully Connected Net-
work (FCN) models on the ImageNet dataset with white-box
and black-box adversary’s knowledge. The results indicate that
ensemble adversarial training is not robust against white-box I-
FGSM and Step-LL, while it enhances the models’ robustness
against black-box attacks.
Lal et al. [42] proposed a robust image classification frame-
work for detecting Diabetic Retinopathy. The authors employed
a CNN model (Darknet53) to perform the classification and de-
ployed an adversarial training approach to enhance the model’s
robustness against AML attacks. The FGSM, DeepFool, and
Speckle Noise AML attacks have been used to evaluate their
framework. Four di fferent adversarial training methods were
employed, and the best robustness was accomplished by mixed
adversarial training (MAT) in which the training dataset in-
cluded adversarial examples from all the AML attacks. To be
more precise, MAT achieved 92% correct label prediction.
Ding et al. [43] developed a method for restoring images
from degradation focusing on visual context prediction in the
case of autonomous vehicles. The proposed method is based
on a multi-stage conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(cGAN) for image restoration that employs adversarial training
to detect images from various types of degradation. The au-
thors performed the adversarial training using both original and
degraded images using various degradation methods, such as
motion blurring, Gaussian filtering, average filtering, Gaussian
noising, oversharpening, and JPEG compression. The evalua-
tion results concluded that the proposed method is more e ffi-
cient for image restoration than the existing works and other
methods (CycleGAN, DeblurGAN).
Xu et al. [44] proposed a Fair-Robust-Learning (FRL) frame-
work to mitigate the disparity of accuracy and robustness be-
tween di fferent classes introduced by adversarial training. The
authors increased the perturbation margin ϵduring training in
the generation of adversarial examples process for a specific
class. This way, the class’s robustness is improved, and the
boundary error is reduced. The FRL framework employed a
DNN model and was evaluated using the CIFAR-10 and SVHN11
datasets. Moreover, FRL improved the lower robust error of
[37] and [45] by 10% – 15%.
11http://ufldl.stanford.edu /housenumbers /Cybersecurity
Khamis et al. [29] proposed one of the first adversarial train-
ing approaches in the cybersecurity domain. Their approach
was based on the min-max formulation aiming to enhance the
robustness of ML /DL-based IDSs. The authors developed sev-
eral ML and DL classifiers, such as DNN, RF, AdaBoost (AB),
Naive Bayes (NB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM), which
were trained on the UNSW-NB1512dataset. Four AML attacks
were investigated (dFGSM, rFGSM, BCA, and BGA) in white-
box adversary’s knowledge that was performed in the DNN. In
the baseline model, the dFGSM attack reached the higher eva-
sion rate (100%), rFGSM and BGA yielded 99%, while BCA
attained 64.4%. Using min-max adversarial training, the exper-
imental results show that the evasion rate was significantly re-
duced. Moreover, the authors also concluded that the PCA fea-
ture selection method enhances the model’s robustness against
AML attacks.
An extension of the previous work was proposed in [46],
where the authors deployed three di fferent DNN DL-based IDS
on Artificial Neural Network (ANN), CNN, and Recurrent Neu-
ral Network (RNN). The IDSes were trained to detect malicious
network tra ffic on two well-known datasets (UNSW-NB15 and
NSL-KDD13). Using white-box adversary’s knowledge, the au-
thors performed five AML attacks (FGSM, BIM, PGD, C&W,
and DeepFool). The AML attacks were highly e ffective since
the accuracy of the IDSes decreased from approximately 20%
to 90% (C&W AML attack against RNN on the NSL-KDD
dataset). However, in many cases, the adversarial training-based
min-max formulation managed to reach the baseline results of
the DL-based IDSes showing that it could be considered a re-
liable defense method. Furthermore, the authors highlight that
C&W and DeepFool AML attacks on RNN are the most di ffi-
cult to tackle.
Fu et al. [47] studied the robustness of three DL-based IDS
against AML attacks. Particularly, the authors utilized the FGSM
method to generate adversarial examples to evaluate the robust-
ness of the CNN, LSTM, and GRU models. The models were
trained with three di fferent methods (normal training, adver-
sarial training, and adversarial re-training). The experiments
were performed on the CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 dataset14. After
the FGSM attack, the models’ accuracy decreased by 20-40%,
while the least a ffected model was the CNN. After the adversar-
ial training and adversarial re-training, the models’ robustness
increased significantly. However, a drawback of this work is
that the performance against the original samples was decreased
compared to the results when trained only with the original
samples. Another work along the same line is proposed in [48],
where the authors also deployed min-max adversarial training.
In this work, only a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) classifier was
evaluated using three AML attacks, named FGSM, PGD-K L2,
and PGD-K L∞, without discussing the adversary’s knowledge.
The authors concluded that PGD with a larger Kvalue (e.g.,
PGD-40 min-max training) o ffers increased robustness.
12https: //research.unsw.edu.au /projects /unsw-nb15-dataset
13http://www.di.uniba.it /andresini /datasets.html
14https: //www.unb.ca /cic/datasets /ids-2018.html
8