and gain white-box access. As one can understand, white-box
attacks are the most potent type of AML attacks; thus, they are
usually deployed to evaluate the robustness of ML /DL models
and defenses. Namely, if a model is robust against white-box
attacks, it will also be robust against gray-box and black-box
attacks.
Black-box. In a black-box attack, the adversary has no knowl-
edge of the system or the deployed defenses. The only infor-
mation the adversary has is that, given the input, she can mon-
itor the outcome of the system. Nevertheless, in some cases,
the number of queries she can perform is limited (e.g., it might
arouse suspicion), which hardens her work. Szegedy et al. [20]
was the first that observed the adversarial example transfer-
ability , namely adversarial examples created to be misclassi-
fied by a model are possible to be also misclassified by a dif-
ferent model, even when the models are trained on di fferent
datasets. Papernot et al. [21] carried out black-box attacks on
a Deep Neural Network (DNN), based on the adversarial ex-
ample transferability e ffect. The authors conducted the attacks
by only observing the outputs of the DNN given particular in-
puts. Their attack strategy included a substitute model, which
was trained using synthetic inputs labeled by the DNN model
to craft adversarial examples that were used to attack the DNN
model.
Gray-box. The gray-box attack refers to the attack paradigm,
where the adversary has some degree of knowledge about the
system or the deployed defenses. In real-life scenarios, com-
monly, the adversary cannot obtain white-box access; however,
it may receive partial pieces of information, such as some of the
classifier’s features, the class label, or in the case of DNN, the
results of the hidden layers.
3.2. Adversary’s Capability
An adversary’s capabilities can be grouped into two cate-
gories: attack influence anddata manipulation . The attack in-
fluence can be further divided into causative attacks that hap-
pen when the adversary modifies the training data (e.g., in case
a system is retrained) or exploratory attacks that occur when
the adversary skews the data during the testing phase. On the
other hand, data manipulation is the process that defines how
the samples or features can be modified. For instance, it deter-
mines which features can be altered without compromising the
scope of the original sample.
3.3. Attack Types
According to previous works [9, 10], there are two major
types of attacks that an adversary can perform on ML /DL mod-
els:poisoning attacks andevasion attacks . Both attacks aim to
maximize the generalization error of the decision-making pro-
cess to a ffect the system’s decision.
3.3.1. Poisoning Attacks
The poisoning attack is the attack type that targets the sys-
tem’s learning process during the training phase. The poisoning
attacks can be further classified into three categories.Training Data Modification was the first type of poisoning at-
tack proposed in the literature. The modification of training
data includes modifying or deleting training data or injecting
adversarial examples on the training dataset [3].
Label Manipulation or Label Flipping occurs when the ad-
versary alters the labels of the training samples. Hence, this
method is only applicable to supervised learning tasks. Biggio
et al. [22] presented that randomly flipping 40% of the training
labels can significantly reduce the performance of SVM classi-
fiers.
Input Feature Manipulation is similar to label manipulation at-
tacks; however, instead of altering the labels, the adversary can
manipulate the training samples’ features parsed by the ML /DL
algorithm [23].
3.3.2. Evasion Attacks
An evasion attack targets the testing phase of already trained
ML/DL classifiers by manipulating the samples without hav-
ing access to the training data aiming at violating the system’s
integrity [4]. Since these attacks are performed in the testing
phase, they are the most practical attack types and are widely
used. For instance, the injection of adversarial examples dur-
ing the testing phase to a ffect the prediction performance of a
classifier is considered an evasion attack. A typical evasion at-
tack is an input /output black-box attack, where the adversary
inserts arbitrary inputs on an ML /DL model to observe its out-
put [24]. The attacker’s objective hence violates the integrity
of the system, either by conducting a targeted or an indiscrim-
inate attack, depending on whether she is targeting a particular
system or not.
3.4. Adversarial Example Generation Methods
This section presents the most known adversarial example
generation methods in the literature. These methods were ini-
tially developed to be applied in the computer vision domain
(e.g., to attack image classifiers); however, in the last couple of
years they have been also implemented in other domains, such
as intrusion detection [25], environmental sound classification
[26], and question answering [27].
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM). Goodfellow et al. [28]
introduced the FGSM method that computes the gradient of the
cost function based on the model’s input. More specifically,
FGSM generates adversarial examples that are the original sam-
ples with a small perturbation (i.e., modification) to a ffect the
prediction of the model (i.e., classifier). The adversarial exam-
ples are generated by Equation 1:
X∗=X+ϵsign(∇xJ(θ,X,y)), (1)
where X∗is the adversarial example, ϵindicates the value that
controls the magnitude of the perturbation (i.e., the noise that
will be applied), Jrepresents the cost function of the model, ∇x
is the gradient of the model based on the sample Xand its label
y, andθis the model’s hyper-parameters.
5