to employ evenly-distributed feature weights to make the ad-
versary alter more features to evade detection. The experiments
were performed on an SVM classifier trained to detect Android
malware. The authors concluded that the proposed approach
enhances the classifier’s security by about ten times when con-
sidering the number of modifications required to create a mal-
ware sample that evades detection.
Esmaeilpour et al. [82] proposed an environmentally sound
classification approach that is robust against AML attacks with-
out incorporating any defense method (reactive or proactive).
The SVM classifier was deployed since the authors argued that
due to the fact that learns for low-dimensional feature vectors
is less sensitive to adversarial perturbations compared to DNN.
Before extracting the robust features, the authors employed a
pre-processing approach named spectrogram pre-processing that
aimed to enhance the resilience of the SVM model against AML
attacks. Moreover, the authors focused on the feature extraction
process by evaluating several handcrafted features to conclude
on the Speed Up Robust Features (SURF). Several experiments
were carried out to assess the performance of the proposed clas-
sification approach in both original and adversarial examples
(in black-box adversary knowledge). The authors concluded
that CNN models could accomplish comparable performance in
audio classification tasks, but they can be easily fooled by ad-
versarial examples achieving more than 94% fooling rate, while
the proposed approach reduced the fooling rate to 50%.
Han et al. [83] proposed a defense method based on feature
reduction to protect an ML-based malicious network tra ffic de-
tector against the gray and black-box AML attacks. The authors
calculated the adversarial robustness scores of the features and
reduced the feature set by deleting the features with the lowest
adversarial robustness scores. A thorough evaluation was per-
formed, where six ML /DL algorithms (two of them were un-
supervised) were deployed, namely Logistic Regression (LR),
MLP, DT, SVM, Deep Autoencoders (DAE), and Isolation For-
est (IF). Furthermore, the proposed defense method was com-
pared with adversarial training and feature selection defenses,
and the results indicate that feature reduction is more e ffective
in accomplishing better results in reducing the malicious Tra ffic
Evasion Rate (MER), Probability Decline Rate (PDR), Mali-
cious features Mimicry Rate (MMR). However, the authors did
not evaluate whether the proposed defense a ffects the perfor-
mance of the original samples.
Weerasinghe et al. [84] introduced a defense method for
SVM classifiers to tackle poisoning and label flipping attacks
based on Local Intrinsic Dimensionality (LID) (i.e., a measure-
ment to characterize the outlierness of data samples). The au-
thors proposed the K-LID estimation to distinguish the adver-
sarial and original samples based on their traits, which was de-
ployed to enhance the resistance of an SVM classifier against
training data manipulations. Several experiments were performed
on various real-world datasets (e.g., image, audio classifica-
tion) to assess the performance of the K-LID SVM (i.e., testing
against five di fferent label-flipping attacks and one poisoning
attack). The experiments concluded that the proposed defense
could reduce the classification error rates by 10% on average.
Chen et al. [85] introduced a detection system for Androidmalware, named KuafuDet that contains an adversarial detec-
tion mechanism (camouflage) to protect the system against poi-
soning attacks. The camouflage detection deploys similarity-
based filtering analysis to detect malicious data distortions. Kua-
fuDet were tested against three threat models (weak attacker,
strong attacker, and sophisticated attacker) that di ffer in the way
they generate the adversarial examples. The experimental re-
sults concluded that KuafuDet enhances the detection accuracy
by at least 15%, reducing the false negatives.
Liao et al. [86] introduced the concept of denoising adver-
sarial examples as a defense against adversarial attacks that tar-
get ANN models in image classification tasks. The key inno-
vation of the proposed method, name High-level representation
Guided Denoiser (HGD) is that instead of using a pixel-level
reconstruction loss function, they employed a loss function that
considers the variations between top-level outputs of the target
model activated by original and adversarial examples. The au-
thors compared HGD with state-of-the-art ensemble adversarial
training in both white-box and black-box attacks. Finally, they
concluded that the proposed method accomplished higher accu-
racy while it requires less training data and training time.
Jia et al. [87] presented a defense method against black-box
membership inference attacks, named MemGuard that lever-
ages adversarial examples. In membership inference attacks the
attacker deploys a binary classifier that takes input from the data
sample’s confidence score vector predicted by the target classi-
fier and predicts whether the data sample is a member of the
training dataset of the target classifier. MemGuard adds noise
to the confidence score vector, which is predicted by the tar-
get classifier converting it to an adversarial example that mis-
leads the attacker’s classifier. The authors evaluated their ap-
proach in various experiments in the image classification field
and showed that MemGaurd and in consequence, adversarial
examples can be an e ffective defense against membership in-
ference attacks.
Zhang et al. [88] investigated the e fficacy of feature selec-
tion as a defense against adversarial evasion attacks. To this
end, the authors proposed a wrapper-based adversarial feature
selection approach based on forward selection and backward
elimination methods that not only improves the generalization
capabilities of the classifier but also it optimizes its performance
against black-box evasion attacks. The experiments were per-
formed on two di fferent use cases (e.g., spam and pdf malware
detection) using a linear SVM classifier and concluded that can
enhance the classifier’s security without significantly a ffecting
its performance on normal settings (i.e., without the evasion at-
tack).
Apruzzese et al. [89] proposed a set of gray-box attacks
on phishing detectors and presented the concept of Protective
Operation Chain (POC) as an e ffective mitigation technique
against such attacks. The authors proposed four di fferent gray-
box attacks that were divided into simple and complex attacks
based on the features that an attacker alters. The POC method
is basically an obfuscation method that is based on the gen-
eration of a new feature space by randomly mixing a portion
of the features that the phishing detector employs in order to
make it harder for the attacker to comprehend which features
12