are deployed by the detector and how these features indicate
the phishing or benign websites. A comprehensive evaluation
of the proposed defense solution was performed using four dif-
ferent phishing datasets and 13 ML classifiers. The authors
concluded that POC is robust to all 13 classifiers. Moreover,
to demonstrate the significance of POC against existing base-
lines, the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was employed along with
the Bonferroni correction and showed that POC improves the
robustness of the existing baselines at the p<0.001 level.
4.2. Detection
In contrast to the Mitigation category, the Detection cate-
gory focuses on reactive defenses whose purpose is to detect
AML attacks (e.g., detection of adversarial examples) before
they reach the ML /DL models.
4.2.1. Supervised /Semi-supervised Learning
The category Supervised /Semi-supervised Learning includes
methods that detect AML deploying an auxiliary ML /DL model
that has been trained using supervised or semi-supervised learn-
ing.
Pawlick et al. [90] developed a detection method for AML
attacks against ANN-NIDS. The authors specifically utilized
four well-known adversarial attacks (C&W, FGSM, BIM, and
PGD) to generate adversarial examples. The original samples
(both malicious and benign) are labeled as “non-adversarial”
based on the activation of each neuron of the ANN-IDS. The
generated adversarial examples, along with the “non-adversarial”,
deployed to form a new adversarial dataset that contains the la-
bels adversarial andnon-adversarial . Moreover, the authors
deployed five ML algorithms (ANN, RF, KNN, SVM, AB) to
detect whether a sample is related to an AML attack and evalu-
ated them on the CIC-IDS dataset. The best results were accom-
plished with RF and k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithms
that attained 99% recall for AML attacks.
Taheri et al. [91] presented a label-flipping attack (Silhouette-
based Label Flipping) along with two defense methods (label-
based semi-supervised and clustering-based semi-supervised de-
fense) that applied on a CNN classifier. The authors deployed
their approach on the Android malware detection field using
three di fferent datasets (i.e., Drebin, Contagio, and Genome).
The experimental results concluded that using clustering-based
semi-supervised along with RF feature selection, the accuracy
improved by 19% in comparison with state-of-the-art defenses.
The authors of [92] proposed a detection method, named
PDGAN, to defend poisoning attacks against Federated Learn-
ing models. The attacker’s goal is to compromise the global
model by uploading malicious updates from the poisoned lo-
cal model. This is achieved by performing a label-flipping at-
tack on the training dataset of the local model and computing
the poisoned local updates. The PDGAN detection method im-
plements a GAN on the server to reconstruct the training data.
Then, the training data are fed to each participant model to get
the labels of each sample and calculate the accuracy of the par-
ticipants’ models. First, the participant’s models were classified
as benign and attackers (based on a threshold value), and laterthe PDGAN considers only the updates that the benign partic-
ipants have performed. The authors evaluate the PDGAN on
the image classification field using two datasets (MNIST and
Fashion-MNIST). The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method can immediately reduce the poisoning accu-
racy from almost 90% to 3.1% and accomplish an overall accu-
racy of almost 90%.
Recent defenses in the audio domain are based on random-
ization schemes to mitigate the e ffects of AML attacks on the
audio samples. The authors in [93] use a randomization tech-
nique based on recursive filters. The technique first transforms
the audio waveform into the frequency domain, resulting in a
signal spectrogram. In parallel, recursive filters that are incor-
porating randomness are applied in the original audio to pro-
duce a new spectrogram that is di fferent from the original. Ran-
domness is considered in the form of probabilistic distributions.
Both spectrograms are fed into an ASR system which com-
pares them and derives their transcribed sentences using the
word error rate. In the same manner, the ASR system can de-
tect changes if the original audio is malformed due to an AML
attack. This ASR system technique provides protection against
both high-frequency and low-frequency audio signals and is re-
silient to adaptive attacks. The evaluation is performed in the
C&W and PsyImp [94] AML attacks using DeepSpeech as well
as Lingvo ASR systems and demonstrates a good detection per-
formance for di fferent probabilistic distributions (e.g., Gamma,
Uniform, Normal).
Lin et al. [95] treat the defense as a functional high-order
function that parses each adversarial sample and returns a new
defender function for each particular sample. The proposed
defense approach deploys an iterative self-supervised learning
model based on Denoising Autoencoder to identify the origi-
nal (unattacked) data for each adversarial sample to recover the
prediction. This defense works in white-box and gray-box ad-
versarial settings and was tested on image classification tasks
using a strong white-box attack (i.e., BPDA), accomplishing
98%, 76%, and 43% accuracy on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and Ima-
geNet datasets respectively.
In [96], the authors investigated the performance of self-
supervised learning models against black-box AML attacks in
ASR tasks. During the training phase, these models are also
learning a mapping function that maps the input to high-level
representations. This work showed that self-supervised learn-
ing models can be used as filters that extract pivotal information
from the contaminated input spectrograms to tackle AML at-
tacks. The experiments contacted using DL anti-spoofing mod-
els and well-known AML attacks (e.g., FGSM and PGD) con-
cluded that the proposed defense is very e ffective regardless of
the amount of attack signal.
Tuinen et al. [97] proposed two methods for the detection of
adversarial examples that target image classifiers using white-
box adversary’s knowledge. The first method employs a CNN
model that is trained to detect adversarial examples that have
been generated by a distribution, while the second method down-
samples the images to a lower dimension using the Discrete
Cosine Transform method and performs the detection using an
SVM classifier. The experiments performed on PGD white-box
13