a CNN model. The experimental results indicated that the de-
fensive distillation method did not have the same e ffect in the
text classification domain as in image classification since the ro-
bustness of the CNN against the adversarial examples slightly
increased.
Apruzzese et al. [72] proposed a defensive distillation ap-
proach for enhancing the robustness of RF in the cybersecu-
rity domain (botnet network tra ffic detection). More specifi-
cally, the authors employed two RF models, one model to gen-
erate probability labels, namely they used the result of each
Decision Tree (DT) of the RF ensemble algorithm to gener-
ate the probability for each sample to be malicious or benign,
and then a second model was trained based on these proba-
bilities. The proposed method evaluated adversarial examples
only in the testing phase (i.e., the authors performed an evasion
attack) generated by altering specific features of the dataset.
The results concluded that it outperformed an undistilled model
on both adversarial and non-adversarial examples. Moreover,
the authors compared their method with other defense methods
against AML attacks (e.g., adversarial training and feature re-
duction) and concluded that the proposed defensive distillation
provides more resilience to RF against AML attacks.
Sidi et al. [73] presented MaskDGA, an evasion technique
that is based on adversarial learning to alter Algorithmically
Generated Domain (AGD) names to evade Domain Generation
Algorithm (DGA) DL classifiers having knowledge only about
the dataset that deployed to train the classier (i.e., gray-box).
The authors also employed the defensive distillation and ad-
versarial training defenses to enhance the classifiers and test
their performance against MaskDGA. The results regarding the
deployed defenses concluded that distillation is an unreliable
defense since it either improved or degrade the detection of ad-
versarial samples, while adversarial training improved the accu-
racy of the classifiers against the specific attack in which they
were trained; however, it did not generalize on other evasion
attacks.
4.1.3. Ensemble Methods
TheEnsemble Methods category is based on the concept of
Ensemble Learning, namely multiple ML algorithms are com-
bined to solve a learning problem (e.g., classification) [74]. Ex-
isting works in this category employ Ensemble Learning to en-
hance the resilience of ML and DL models against AML at-
tacks.
Appruzzese et al. [75] proposed an approach named Ap-
pCon to enhance the resilience of ML (DT, RF, and AB) and
DL (MLP and WnD) network IDS. AppCon is based on the
paradigm of Ensemble Learning, namely, it employs an ensem-
ble of detectors, where each detector is devoted to a particular
web application (e.g., Skype, WhatsApp. etc.), and the results
of the detectors are used to train and test a hardened detector.
The authors performed a gray-box adversarial attack adding
small perturbations on specific features of the original botnet
detection dataset (CTU-13). The experimental results indicated
that AppCon could prevent the 75% of adversarial examples
without a ffecting the performance in non-adversarial settings.Jiang et al. [76] proposed a framework, named FGMD, which
can e ffectively detect malicious IoT network tra ffic while it is
also robust against AML evasion attacks. The authors proposed
an adversarial sample generation approach that considers the
constraints that arise due to the inherent properties of the net-
work tra ffic (e.g., it cannot modify all the features of the net-
work tra ffic, the attack function of the original malicious sam-
ples must be preserved, etc.). To this end, the authors altered
only four features (from 23) to generate the adversarial exam-
ples and perform an evasion attack with black-box adversary
knowledge. The FGMD framework is based on feature group-
ing and ensemble learning (referred to as model fusion). More
specifically, the authors grouped the features into three cate-
gories and parsed them by three di fferent LSTM models to per-
form the detection. The final prediction of the FGMD is cal-
culated based on the average of the classification of the three
models. The evaluation experiments were performed on two
IoT datasets (MedBloT and IoTID) and FGMD compared with
baseline models (LSTM, RNN, DT), both original and adver-
sarially trained. The results indicate that FGMD can achieve
higher scores (accuracy, F1-score, precision, recall, FPR) than
other models in the presence of AML evasion attack.
Ensemble methods are also used for the detection of adver-
sarial audio samples. In [77], the authors investigate the impact
of Gaussian smoothing on the DeepSpeech and Lingvo ASRs.
Specifically, the authors present four defense systems, namely
randomized smoothing, Defense GAN (uses the same technique
as with images [78]), Variational autoencoder (V AE), and Par-
allel WaveGAN vocoder (PWG). The systems were compared
with the standard defense systems for adversarial training. As
an outcome, the authors propose a hybrid system where PWG is
combined with randomized smoothing to provide 93% accuracy
and 90% detection improvement for C&W and BIM attacks,
which impose the greatest highest risk against audio systems.
4.1.4. Pre-processing
ThePre-processing category is comprised of existing works
that utilize a pre-processing technique (e.g., feature reduction)
to improve the model’s robustness against AML attacks.
Rosenberg et al. [79] proposed an attack-agnostic defense
method for RNN classifiers against AML attacks that are named
Sequence Squeezing based on an existing work proposed in
[80]. However, it does not detect adversarial examples. In-
stead, this method merges semantically similar features (i.e.,
API call sequences) into a single representative feature. The
evaluation experiments were performed on a dataset that in-
cludes API calls of benign and malware activity. The Sequence
Squeezing method was also compared with other defense meth-
ods (e.g., adversarial training, adversarial signatures, RNN en-
semble, Nearest Neighbor, defense sequence GAN) in four AML
attacks (black-box gradient-based, white-box gradient-based,
adaptive white-box attacker, and random perturbation). The
experimental results concluded that sequence squeezing is the
only method that balances low overhead and high robustness.
Demontis et al. [81] delved into the evasion of AML attacks
by investigating the concept of bounding classifier sensitivity to
feature changes to improve the classifier’s security. The idea is
11