The taxonomy introduced in this work revealed several gaps
and open problems in the existing literature that paved the way
for identifying some directions for future research in the AML
defense domain. ML /DL models are utilized almost in every
technological domain. Consequently, the surface of AML at-
tacks is massive; hence, it is crucial to develop domain-agnostic
defenses (i.e., a defense that can be applied to several domains).
From the surveyed defenses, only two works ([98] and [109])
evaluated their defenses on more than one domain. Thus, one
direction for future research could focus on developing domain-
agnostic defenses. Towards the same direction, AML attacks
are evolving as new attacks are continuously emerging. There-
fore, it is crucial to develop defense methods that are attack-
agnostic. However, currently, only a few existing defense meth-
ods are attack-agnostic (e.g., [79], [99], [100], [109]). Hence,
a second direction for future research is designing new attack-
agnostic defenses. Moreover, since existing defenses mostly
deal with mitigating AML attacks, there is a gap in defense
methods that concentrate on detecting AML attacks. To this
end, a possible third future research direction could focus on
proposing innovative detection methods for AML attacks or hy-
brid solutions that will combine both mitigation and detection.
Finally, several works in the literature (e.g., [120, 121]) high-
light the fact that time performance is a significant parameter
that should be examined during the evaluation of ML and DL
models. However, existing literature in the field of AML de-
fense usually omits to include this information. In addition,
evaluating the robustness of ML /DL models is a critical is-
sue, and proper evaluation metrics and datasets for AML at-
tacks should be considered. Hence, a fourth research direction
could emphasize considering time complexity in the evaluation
of AML attacks and defense solutions as well as proposing new
AML evaluation metrics and datasets.
Along with the AML attack and defense taxonomy intro-
duced in this article, the attackers’ motivations should be also
studied in terms of economic viability aspects [14, 122]. This
is performed in the form of a cost-benefit analysis to determine
the potential gains of launching an AML cyber-attack against
a specific target. Specifically, if a target has higher potential
economic or reputation rewards or even is prone to multiple
vulnerabilities that can be exploited, this target will be selected
over an attack that requires significant e ffort and time with a
lower potential reward. To cope with economic viability as-
pects, research e fforts should focus on building a cost-based
AML threat model [123]. This model will allow the compu-
tation of likelihood (based on AML threats as well as system
vulnerabilities) and impact of AML cyber-attacks in the finan-
cial, reputational, legal, and regulatory domains. Then, it is
able to prioritize the AML defense methods (both mitigation
and detection categories), which should be enabled to avoid the
potential damages of AML threats in terms of organization re-
sources, and assets. A well-known approach for conducting
a prioritization is the use of risk assessment procedures based
on the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Special Publication (SP) 800-30 standard [124]. This standard
identifies risks in the form of a risk heatmap, where the highest
priority risks are to be immediately procured for implement-ing AML defense methods. An example of such a heatmap
is illustrated in Figure 5. The heatmap defines four individual
categories: 1) normal , which indicates no risk, 2) low, which
indicates minimal risk, 3) medium , which indicates that the risk
is adequate, 4) high, which needs indicates a clear and severe
threat to the system and 5) critical , which is the highest risk and
needs to be treated immediately.
Figure 5: Risk Heatmap
7. Conclusion
AML attacks are constantly enhanced compromising the ef-
ficacy of AI systems. In the last couple of years, the research
is focusing on the defenses against AML, introducing innova-
tive methods that either delve into increasing the robustness of
ML/DL models or detecting AML attacks. Even though numer-
ous surveys exist in the literature that elaborates on novel AML
attack methods, no surveys focus solely on the existing defenses
against AML. To the best of our knowledge, this article intro-
duced the first large-scale and domain-agnostic survey of AML
defenses aiming to address the current knowledge gap and pro-
vide directions for future research. Particularly, a taxonomy
of the existing works was introduced, where the defenses were
grouped into two major categories mitigation and detection .
The strengths and weaknesses of each work were discussed,
providing a comprehensive view of the existing defenses and
identifying limitations and gaps in the literature. Moreover, the
article collected and presented novel metrics developed to eval-
uate the robustness of ML /DL models against AML attacks and
the efficacy of detection systems focusing on detecting AML at-
tacks as well as AML datasets ready to be deployed for the eval-
uation of defense methods. Finally, based on the gaps identified
by the proposed taxonomy, this article discussed the directions
that future research should focus on to facilitate the scientific
community proposing new defense solutions to tackle AML.
A final takeaway derived from our survey is that AML at-
tack landscape grows exponentially and becomes increasingly
sophisticated threatening AI systems regardless of their applica-
tion domain, while on the other hand, the defense methods are
inadequate to address this threat since existing methods mainly
19