Defense Strategies for Adversarial Machine Learning: A Survey
Panagiotis Bountakasa, Apostolis Zarrasa, Alexios Lekidisa, Christos Xenakisa
aDepartment of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli &Dimitriou Piraeus, 18534, Attica, Greece
Abstract
Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) is a recently introduced technique, aiming to deceive Machine Learning (ML) models
by providing falsified inputs to render those models ine ffective. Consequently, most researchers focus on detecting new AML
attacks that can undermine existing ML infrastructures, overlooking at the same time the significance of defense strategies. This
article constitutes a survey of the existing literature on AML attacks and defenses with a special focus on a taxonomy of recent
works on AML defense techniques for di fferent application domains, such as audio, cyber-security, NLP, and computer vision. The
proposed survey also explores the methodology of the defense solutions and compares them using several criteria, such as whether
they are attack- and /or domain-agnostic, deploy appropriate AML evaluation metrics, and whether they share their source code
and/or their evaluation datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this article constitutes the first survey that seeks to systematize the
existing knowledge focusing solely on the defense solutions against AML and providing innovative directions for future research
on tackling the increasing threat of AML.
Keywords: Literature Survey, Adversarial Machine Learning, Defense Methods, Adversarial Training
1. Introduction
The adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) principles and
mechanisms led to the revolution of various technological do-
mains by introducing automation and self-managed operation
for the society, including novel advances as smart cities, self-
driving cars, autonomous ships, 5G /6G networks as well as In-
dustry 4.0 systems. However, the utilization of AI almost in ev-
ery aspect of society’s daily activities has introduced a new and
enormous attack surface that targets Machine Learning (ML)
and Deep Learning (DL) algorithms compromising their func-
tionality and a ffecting their performance, which are termed in
literature as Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) [1]. Con-
sidering the heavy applicability of ML and DL also in critical
tasks (e.g., cancer diagnosis) [2], AML can lead to severe con-
sequences, varying from data privacy leakage to even loss of
life.
Even though AI is heavily applied to critical tasks, the se-
curity of AI systems takes a back seat when developing and
evaluating ML /DL models. These models are usually devel-
oped based on the assumption that both the datasets using for
training are trustworthy and the evaluating environment is se-
cure. Hence, most AI systems are vulnerable to various attacks
that aim to impact the algorithms’ decisions by modifying the
training data (known as poisoning attacks [3]) or altering the
output of the model (known as evasion attacks [4]). Current
research delves into attacking ML /DL models rather than de-
fending them. More specifically, existing works mainly focus
∗Corresponding author: P. Bountakas
Email addresses: bountakas@unipi.gr (Panagiotis Bountakas),
zarras@unipi.gr (Apostolis Zarras), alexios.lekidis@ssl-unipi.gr
(Alexios Lekidis), xenakis@unipi.gr (Christos Xenakis)on the computer vision domain by introducing various methods
for the generation of adversarial samples, which, when injected
in the testing phase, can reduce the algorithms’ performance
significantly [5]. Nevertheless, novel AML attacks have been
recently expanded also in other domains, including health, au-
dio, Natural Language Processing (NLP), and cybersecurity, as
well as in various algorithms (e.g., Convolutional Neural Net-
works, Random Forest, and Support Vector Machines), indicat-
ing the severity of AML [6, 7].
The major part of current surveys in the field of AML focus
only on a specific domain (e.g., computer vision or cybersecu-
rity) and elaborate on the attacks against AI systems without
delving into the possible defenses. In addition, several articles
in the literature highlight that the research on the defense so-
lutions against AML attacks is still in its infancy and further
research should be conducted to tackle the growth of AML at-
tacks [8, 9, 10]. Additionally, to the best of our knowledge,
the existing AML survey articles do not focus on the existing
defense methods to counter AML attacks, leaving a knowledge
gap for researchers aiming at the development of new detection
and mitigation methods.
To this end, this article introduces a domain-agnostic and
large-scale survey of the defense methods designed to tackle
AML attacks. Specifically, it aims to organize the existing knowl-
edge and provide directions for future research to facilitate the
scientific community towards proposing more e fficient and ro-
bust defense solutions to address the ongoing threat of AML.
Thus, the methodological steps depicted in Figure 1 have been
followed. More specifically, in Step 1 , the existing literature
was collected utilizing a systematic methodology discussed in
Section 2.1. In Step 2 , the current surveys in AML field were
studied, highlighting their strengths and weaknesses as well as
Preprint submitted to Computer Science Review August 15, 2023