1. Literature
Collection2. Survey
Collected Papers3. Taxonomy
Creation4. Identification of
Evaluation
Datasets & Metrics5. Discussion &
Open ProblemsFigure 1: Methodological steps
their directions for future research, where almost all the surveys
identified that further research is needed to minimize the threat
of AML. Later, the existing defenses aiming to tackle AML
were examined to identify common methods and traits based
on which they will be categorized. In Step 3 , a taxonomy of
the existing defenses that aim to counter AML attacks was cre-
ated. To the best of our knowledge, this article constitutes the
first attempt to introduce a domain-agnostic taxonomy of AML
defenses. This allows to systematize the existing knowledge
and extract insights about the current AML defense state using
a comparison against several criteria, such as whether the de-
fenses are attack and /or domain-agnostic, their application do-
main, and their defense category (see Section 6). The taxonomy
is domain-agnostic since, instead of focusing on the defense
methods of a particular domain, four di fferent domains (cyber-
security, computer vision, NLP, and audio) have been consid-
ered. The selection of these domains was performed based on
the prominence of AML attacks against them [11]. In Step 4 ,
the evaluation datasets and metrics were identified based on the
existing literature in order to present the datasets and metrics
that already exist and can be deployed for validating AML de-
fense solutions. Finally, in Step 5 , relying on the knowledge
obtained from the taxonomy, numerous directions for future re-
search were proposed.
The novelty of this work mainly focuses on studying the
available defense solutions of the literature that aim to tackle
AML attacks and put them under a common taxonomy based on
their primary traits, regardless their application domain. Please
note that some of the presented categories of the taxonomy
(e.g., adversarial training, feature reduction) have been presented
in previous works that emphasize more on AML attacks than on
the defenses against AML attacks [5, 8]; however, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the first attempt for creating a domain-
agnostic taxonomy of AML defenses contributing on enhancing
the efforts on tackling AML attacks. Moreover, another novelty
of this work is that based on the analysis of the existing de-
fenses and the taxonomy, several gaps have been identified in
the literature which translated into directions for future research
(see Section 6).
Concretely, the article builds upon the following contributions:
•A domain-agnostic survey on the defense strategies against
AML attacks is conducted, including both mitigation and
defense methods.
•The defense methods against AML attacks that are present
in literature are presented in terms of a taxonomy, focus-
ing on di fferent domains, such as cybersecurity, computer
vision, NLP, and audio.
•The currently faced issues and challenges for the protec-
tion of ML /DL systems against AML attacks are thor-
oughly discussed, including mitigation methods as ad-
versarial training, defense distillation, ensemble methods
and defense methods as distance-based, feature squeez-ing, statistical.
•Innovative research directions for building a research frame-
work on AML defense strategies based on existing AML
datasets and evaluation metrics on the e ffectiveness of de-
tection methods against AML attacks are illustrated.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 describes the methodology followed to collect the sur-
veyed papers and presents the existing surveys in the AML
field. Section 3 delves into the AML attacks. Section 4 in-
troduces a taxonomy of the existing defenses against AML at-
tacks. Section 5 gathers the existing AML evaluation metrics
and datasets, while Section 6 elaborates on the findings of the
proposed work and provides directions for future research. Fi-
nally, Section 7 outlines the critical points of the proposed sur-
vey.
2. Literature Collection and Related Work
This section elaborates on the systematic methodology that
was followed to collect the existing works that were discussed
in this survey as well as it presents the existing surveys in the
AML domain along with the limitations of the literature that
this work aims to address.
2.1. Literature Collection
Threat to validity: A systematic methodology was followed
in order for this survey to detect and collect related research pa-
pers and surveys that tackle AML attacks as well as defenses [12,
13]. In particular, the following academic platforms: Google
Scholar1, ACM Digital Library2, IEEE Xplore3, ScienceDirect4,
SpringerLink5, arXiv6, and Nicholas Carlini website7were scru-
tinized. In more detail, to collect the research papers for this
study, the following queries were deployed: ( i) adversarial ma-
chine learning defense, ( ii) adversarial machine learning miti-
gation, ( iii) adversarial training, ( iv) adversarial machine learn-
ing survey, ( v) defense against black-box attacks, ( vi) defense
against gray-box attacks, ( vii) defense against white-box at-
tacks, ( viii) defense against poisoning attacks, and ( ix) defense
against evasion attacks as well as three selection criteria: (1) the
subject of the paper aligns with the topic of the proposed sur-
vey; (2) the article was published after 2014; (3) the article is
applied to one of the following domains: computer vision, cy-
bersecurity, NLP, and audio. Please note that even using nine
different queries some relevant papers might have been missed
since authors often deploy a di fferent terminology that is not
commonly used [14].
1https: //scholar.google.com
2https: //dl.acm.org /
3https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org /
4https: //www.sciencedirect.com /
5https: //link.springer.com /
6https: //arxiv.org /
7https: //nicholas.carlini.com /writing /2019/all-adversarial-example-
papers.html
2