2082 CMC, 2022, vol.71, no.1
4Experiments and Results
4.1Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted on a system running Windows 10, equipped with a Core i5 CPU,
16 GB RAM, and a GeForce RTX 2060 Super GPU with 8 GB of VRAM. Images were capturedusing a variety of smartphone cameras including Samsung Galaxy S8 (16 MP), Huawei (5 MP), OppoA33 (8 MP), and some (4 MP) cameras so that a varying degree of image quality could be obtained.Captured image resolutions were 3456 ×4608 (16 MP), 1920 ×2560 (5 MP), 2400 ×3200 (8 MP), and
2560 ×1440 (4 MP) in size, respectively. TensorFlow v2.4.1 [ 33] library was used to train and evaluate
all the CNN models used in this study.
4.2Experiment Design
A number of experiments were designed to evaluate performance of the proposed framework in
terms of robustness in disease detection and capability of avoiding misdetections. The augmenteddataset was used to train and evaluate several state-of-the-art CNN models. The original dataset,though had sufficiently large number of images per category, we felt it would be best to make itmore challenging in terms of simulating real world image capturing scenarios in the field. In the firstexperiment, we fine-tuned a number of pre-trained CNNs by training only the classification layer andfreezing the rest of the layers using the augmented dataset and evaluated their performance on thetest set. This experiment was designed to evaluate the features extraction pipeline of the CNNs fordetection of diseases in peach plants. Though all CNNs have very capable features extraction layers,
their suitability for the proposed study required detailed assessment. In the second experiment, we fine-
tuned the entire networks with a smaller learning rate for a limited number of epochs on the targetdataset in order to allow the network to learn specific features across the feature extraction layers. Thiscould help boost the performance of networks.
4.3Performance Evaluation Metrics
Performance of all the CNNs used in this study were measured using a variety of metrics including
accuracy, precision, sensitivity, and specificity. All these metrics are determined from the confusionmatrix consisting of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP) and false negatives(FN). Accuracy indicates the rate of correctly classified samples out of all the samples in a test set fora particular class. Sensitivity measures the ratio of accurately predicted positives to all true positives.This determines the robustness of the model to detect diseases in positive image samples. Specificityon the other hand measures the ratio of correctly classified negative samples out of all true negatives,exhibiting the capability of the model to avoid misdetections in samples. Precision determines the rateof correct prediction of positive samples out of all positive identifications. The wider set of evaluationmetrics ensure the robustness and effectiveness of detections as well as avoiding misdetections. Foreach class k, these metrics are measured as follows.
Acc (k)=TP(k)+TN (k)
TP(k)+FN (k)+TN (k)+FP(k)(1)
Sen (k)=TP(k)
TP(k)+FN (k)(2)
Spec (k)=TN (k)
TN (k)+FP(k)(3)