2080 CMC, 2022, vol.71, no.1
3.4State of the Art CNN Architectures as Base Models
Convolutional neural networks were developed decades ago, however, their superior performance
was demonstrated in the current decade when a deep CNN outperformed all other traditionalapproaches in large scale image recognition problem in 2012 [ 30]. Since then, researchers have been
extensively investigating CNNs to solve challenging problems in computer vision and other fields.Krizhevsky et al. [ 30] won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRS) [ 31]
with his AlexNet architecture, which consisted of five convolutional layers and three fully connected
layers. Deeper models were later developed exhibiting superior performance compared to shallower
models [ 20]. In He et al. [ 21], showed that increasing the depth does not always guarantee superior
performance. They exhibited that performance plateaus or even declines when depth increases afterachieving a peak performance. In their work, they introduced residual connections and proved thatdeeper networks can be designed with residual blocks without loss of performance as the networkdepth increases. Highly complex CNN architectures have been developed over the years, whereresearchers exhaustively attempt to tune hyper-parameters like network width, depth, resolution,and number and size of convolutional kernels. Recently, research has been carried out to investigateand develop hyper-parameter optimization methods which can automatically tune them on sampledatasets. In this regard, Zoph et al. [ 15] developed Neural Architecture Search (NAS) method which
allowed researchers to automatically develop convolutional building blocks, balancing the tradeoffbetween performance and efficiency. Recently, EfficientNet architectures were developed by Tan etal. [18] who proposed systematic model scaling by identifying optimized network depth, width and
resolution, thereby leading to superior performance and higher efficiency than existing state-of-the-art methods. EfficientNets have exhibited superior performance in image classification and objectdetection in a wide variety of challenging image datasets. Their superior feature extraction capabilitieshave also been used in transfer learning to address a variety of computer vision and related problems.
3.5Disease Detection with EfficientNets
EfficientNets have been introduced recently as a group of 8 models named from B0 to B7. The
model B7 have exhibited state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet dataset by achieving 84.4%Top-1 accuracy while utilizing only 66 Million parameters. With EfficientNets, a new activationfunction was introduced known as Swish f(x) =x.sigmoid(x) [32]. This activation function is known
to perform better than ReLU activation in a number of networks/datasets. EfficientNet architectures
were developed by searching a grid for optimal performer under a fixed resource constraint. Utilizingthe neural architecture (NAS) mechanism, a suitable scaling factor for depth, width, and inputresolution is determined for a particular dataset. The network is then scaled according to the targetdataset in order to achieve optimal performance at optimal cost.
The main building block in EfficientNet is the inverted bottleneck block (MBConv), which was
initially introduced with MobileNetV2. These blocks first expand the channels and then compressesthem, thereby reducing the number of channels for the subsequent layer. Furthermore, this architectureuses in-depth separable convolutions that further reduces computational burden by a factor of k
2,
where k is the kernel size.
In this study, we utilized the EfficientNet architectures to detect diseases in Peach plants in order
to determine the best model for deployment on a mobile device. All the models from B0 to B5 werefine-tuned using transfer learning on the augmented dataset. The reason for not training them on theoriginal dataset was that it mostly consisted of images having more than one fruit, often belonging todifferent categories. Using that dataset was prone to create a model with greater confusion. Therefore,