2074 CMC, 2022, vol.71, no.1
their proper functioning [ 1]. However, low nutrient or inadequate fruits consumption can have adverse
effects on the human body which may lead to chronic diseases such as cardiovascular, diabetes, renaland retinopathy [ 2]. Fruit farming is therefore an important area of research that plays a fundamental
and healthy role in fresh fruit production and in the management of various fruit diseases. Thesediseases are a major contributor to the crop losses if they are left untreated which may lead to severe
damage to fruit plants. Around 10–15% of the yield is wasted due to diseases [ 3], which is a big concern
for farmers.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) forecasts a 70% rise in
agriculture demand by 2050. Due to this growing increase in demand, it in inevitable to minimize the
effects of diseases on crops especially on fruits. FAO warns that peach crops are confronted with severe
diseases, such as bacterial canker, bacterial spot, crown gall, and peach scab causing inadequate healthand quality problems [ 4]. Peach is Pakistan’s second most important fruit after plum, which faces
the same severe threat due to lack of technological resources in predicting early infections to preventand control threats and also reduce financial liability. Machine learning and Internet of Things (IoT)have significantly improved smart agriculture where diseases are identified in real-time by a single tapwith acceptable accuracy. Considerable progress has been made in the field of computer vision, inparticular in the detection and recognition of objects [ 5–8]. Variety of Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) techniques are available in literature for the detection and identification of fruit diseases [ 9].
However, CNN is computationally complex and resource hungry, particularly when deployed overresource constrained devices. CNN’s performance is enhanced by Transfer Learning (TL) techniqueson large datasets to process input data and classify into modified classes, with no hand-engineeredfeatures extraction involved [ 10,11]. One of these modern approaches is the use of ICT assisted disease
diagnosis and management thus eliminating hurdles in conventional disease control approaches. Thetechnology is an end-to-end application that can be used efficiently on readily available devices suchas smartphones or tablets. In this paper, our main contributions are as follows:
•Collected and annotated peach images dataset containing healthy and infected fruits and leaves
by capturing images under true field conditions.
•Trained and fine-tuned a wide variety of powerful deep learning model for disease identification
in peach plants utilizing extensive data augmentation techniques to search for optimal model.
•Experimented with frozen and fine-tuned models to determine optimal features extraction
pipeline for disease detection in peach plants. We also utilized class activation maps (CAM) todemonstrate the effectiveness of the feature extraction of the optimal model.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Relevant literature is briefly discussed in Section 2.
Section 3 presents the proposed method in detail, followed by experimental results and discussionsin Section 4. The paper concludes with limitations of the proposed method along with future worksuggestions in Section 5.
2Related Work
In literature, deep learning approaches have been widely adopted to identify diseases in crops.
Most of the techniques have used image recognition using a classifier to get the desired results [ 6].
In [12], the authors carried out a detailed survey to determine fruit type and estimate yields. All
existing research is summarized for easy realization and implementation to choose the best cropdetection system. The authors recommend the use of neural networks due to their capability todetect and recognize objects. Neural networks are also capable of detecting and learning rudimentary