CMC, 2022, vol.71, no.1 2075
features from visual inputs such as shapes and patterns. In addition, the authors recommend transfer
learning as a basic approach in primary layers to find optimal weights for parameters by tuning thehyperparameters like learning rate, momentum, initialization, and activation function.
Syamsuri et al. [ 13] proposed a detection system with optimal performance and latency for
both personal computers and mobile phones. The authors investigated MobileNet [ 14], Mobile
NASNet [ 15], and InceptionV3 [ 16] for resource constrained devices for the development of various
applications. Resource utilization comparison is made for memory, CPU, and battery use. The coffeeleaf infection dataset is extracted from the PlantVillage repository. Accuracy and time delay results arecompared to the models mentioned above. The authors recommend the use of smartphones for the
detection of plant disease due to easy handling, low resource utilization, and negligible degradation of
accuracy compared to desktop CPUs. In another work targeting efficiency for resource constraineddevices, Duong et al. [ 17] developed an expert system for the recognition of fruits from input images
through image processing and machine learning. The authors used two classifiers namely EfficeintNet[18] and MixNet to identify fruits using limited computational resources in a real-time environment.
Performance is evaluated using a real dataset of 48,905 images for training purposes and 16,421images for testing purposes through randomization and transfer learning approaches. The authorsalso endorse the role of pre-trained weights in transfer learning in the detection of plant disease.
An EfficientNet based method is introduced in [ 19] to identify and classify maize plant leaf
infections. A trivial dataset sample is extracted from the AI Challenger dataset and few web imagesof maize disease. Images are initially processed for cleaning and screening in order to prepare asample dataset, augmented using scaling, translation, and rotation transformations. A total of 9279images are collected of which 6496 are used for training and 2783 are used for testing. Transferlearning is used to improve the accuracy and recognition speed based on the EfficientNet model. Theproposed model scores 98.85% accuracy compared to EfficientNet, VGG-16 [ 20], Inception-V3, and
Resnet-50 [ 21].
In [22], Liu et al. proposed a model namely Leaf Generative Adversarial Networks (Leaf GAN)
to identify grape leaf disease. The model generates rich grapes leaf disease images in four categoriesand is also capable of distinguishing between fake and true disease images. The dataset extractedfrom PlantVillage consists of 4062 images of grape leaf disease mixed with 8124 images generated.The overfitting problem is recovered by data augmentation and deep regret analytic gradient penalty.The proposed method has a maximum accuracy of 98.7% on the Xception model alongside otherclassification models.
The authors in [ 23] proposed a method to identify rice disease in a fast, automatic, less expensive,
and accurate manner. The authors preferred to benefit from the DenseNet [ 24] and Inception modules.
Dataset is extracted from ImageNet which is used in transfer learning a new Inception module calledDENS-INCEP . The authors take 500 images having 120 color leaf images of rice plant diseaseswith uneven illumination intensities. The images are initially processed for resizing, edge filling, andsharpening through Photoshop to be configured in a proper RGB model with size adjustments. Theproposed model has an accuracy of 98.63% compared to DenseNet and Inception.
In a similar study [ 25], the authors proposed an identification technique to detect rice and maize
diseases. The proposed method enhances learning capability through the use of deep CNN withtransfer learning. The dataset is extracted from the PlantVillage dataset consisting of 54306 plant leafimages. The authors prefer to plan positioning and visualization with pre-trained MobileNet-V2 [ 26]
using two-fold transfer learning. The first approach is aimed at concluding initial weights by keepingthe lower layers of CNN frozen, while the second is to retrain weights of transfer learning by loading