Add&NormAdd&Norm
Add&NormAdd&Norm
Add&NormAdd&Norm
Graph T ransformer LayerGraph T ransformer Layer
with edge features+ +
Laplacian	EigV ecs	as
Positional	Encoding++Figure 1: Block Diagram of Graph Transformer with Laplacian Eigvectors ( ) used as positional encoding (LapPE). LapPE
is added to input node embeddings before passing the features to the ﬁrst layer. Left: Graph Transformer operating on node
embeddings only to compute attention scores; Right : Graph Transformer with edge features with designated feature pipeline to
maintain layer wise edge representations. In this extension, the available edge attributes in a graph is used to explicitly modify
the corresponding pairwise attention scores.
training and parallelized learning using a subgraph batch-
ing scheme that creates ﬁxed-size linkless subgraphs to be
passed to the model instead of the original graph. Graph-
BERT employs a combination of several positional encod-
ing schemes to capture absolute node structural and rela-
tive node positional information. Since the original graph is
not used directly in Graph-BERT and the subgraphs do not
have edges between the nodes ( i.e., linkless), the proposed
combination of positional encodings attempts at retaining
the original graph structure information in the nodes. We
perform detailed analysis of Graph-BERT positional encod-
ing schemes, along with experimental comparison with the
model we present in this paper in Section 4.1.
Yun et al. (2019) developed Graph Transformer Networks
(GTN) to learn on heterogeneous graphs with a target to
transform a given heterogeneous graph into a meta-path
based graph and then perform convolution. Notably, their
focus behind the use of attention framework is for inter-preting the generated meta-paths. There is another trans-
former based approach developed for heterogeneous in-
formation networks, namely Heterogeneous Graph Trans-
former (HGT) by Hu et al. (2020). Apart from its ability
of handling arbitrary number of node and edge types, HGT
also captures the dynamics of information ﬂow in the hetero-
geneous graphs in the form of relative temporal positional
encoding which is based on the timestamp differences of the
central node and the message-passing nodes. Furthermore,
Zhou et al. (2020) proposed a transformer based generative
model which generates temporal graphs by directly learn-
ing from dynamic information in networks. The architecture
presented in Nguyen, Nguyen, and Phung (2019) somewhat
proceeds along our goal to develop graph transformer for ar-
bitrary homogeneous graphs with a coordinate embedding
based positional encoding scheme. However, their experi-
ments show that the coordinate embeddings are not universal
in performance and only helps in a couple of unsupervised