A Generalization of Transformer Networks to Graphs
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi,¶Xavier Bresson¶
¶School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
vijaypra001@e.ntu.edu.sg ,xbresson@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
We propose a generalization of transformer neural network
architecture for arbitrary graphs. The original transformer
was designed for Natural Language Processing (NLP), which
operates on fully connected graphs representing all connec-
tions between the words in a sequence. Such architecture does
not leverage the graph connectivity inductive bias, and can
perform poorly when the graph topology is important and
has not been encoded into the node features. We introduce a
graph transformer with four new properties compared to the
standard model. First, the attention mechanism is a function
of the neighborhood connectivity for each node in the graph.
Second, the positional encoding is represented by the Lapla-
cian eigenvectors, which naturally generalize the sinusoidal
positional encodings often used in NLP. Third, the layer
normalization is replaced by a batch normalization layer,
which provides faster training and better generalization per-
formance. Finally, the architecture is extended to edge feature
representation, which can be critical to tasks s.a. chemistry
(bond type) or link prediction (entity relationship in knowl-
edge graphs). Numerical experiments on a graph benchmark
demonstrate the performance of the proposed graph trans-
former architecture. This work closes the gap between the
original transformer, which was designed for the limited case
of line graphs, and graph neural networks, that can work with
arbitrary graphs. As our architecture is simple and generic,
we believe it can be used as a black box for future applica-
tions that wish to consider transformer and graphs.1
1 Introduction
There has been a tremendous success in the ﬁeld of nat-
ural language processing (NLP) since the development of
Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) which are currently the
best performing neural network architectures for handling
long-term sequential datasets such as sentences in NLP.
This is achieved by the use of attention mechanism (Bah-
danau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) where a word in a sentence
attends to each other word and combines the received in-
formation to generate its abstract feature representations.
From a perspective of message-passing paradigm (Gilmer
AAAI’21 Workshop on Deep Learning on Graphs: Methods and
Applications (DLG-AAAI’21). Copyright © 2021, Association for
the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All
rights reserved.
1https://github.com/graphdeeplearning/graphtransformer.et al. 2017) in graph neural networks (GNNs), this process
of learning word feature representations by combining fea-
ture information from other words in a sentence can alter-
natively be viewed as a case of a GNN applied on a fully
connected graph of words (Joshi 2020). Transformers based
models have led to state-of-the-art performance on several
NLP applications (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2018;
Brown et al. 2020). On the other hand, graph neural net-
works (GNNs) are shown to be the most effective neural
network architectures on graph datasets and have achieved
signiﬁcant success on a wide range of applications, such
as in knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Chami
et al. 2020), in social sciences (Monti et al. 2019), in physics
(Cranmer et al. 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2020), etc.
In particular, GNNs exploit the given arbitrary graph struc-
ture while learning the feature representations for nodes and
edges and eventually the learned representations are used for
downstream tasks. In this work, we explore inductive biases
at the convergence of these two active research areas in deep
learning towards presenting an improved version of Graph
Transformer (see Figure 1) which extends the key design
components of the NLP transformers to arbitrary graphs.
1.1 Related Work
As a preliminary, we highlight the most recent research
works which attempt to develop graph transformers (Li et al.
2019; Nguyen, Nguyen, and Phung 2019; Zhang et al. 2020)
with few focused on specialized cases such as on heteroge-
neous graphs, temporal networks, generative modeling, etc.
(Yun et al. 2019; Xu, Joshi, and Bresson 2019; Hu et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2020).
The model proposed in Li et al. (2019) employs attention
to all graph nodes instead of a node’s local neighbors for
the purpose of capturing global information. This limits the
efﬁcient exploitation of sparsity which we show is a good in-
ductive bias for learning on graph datasets. For the purpose
of global information, we argue that there are other ways to
incorporate the same instead of letting go sparsity and local
contexts. For example, the use of graph-speciﬁc positional
features (Zhang et al. 2020), or node Laplacian position
eigenvectors (Belkin and Niyogi 2003; Dwivedi et al. 2020),
or relative learnable positional information (You, Ying, and
Leskovec 2019), virtual nodes (Li et al. 2015), etc. Zhang
et al. (2020) propose Graph-BERT with an emphasis on pre-arXiv:2012.09699v2  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2021