Figure 2. Violations of the three similarities for negative pairs. Case-1: The negative pairs’ cosine similarities increase as they come closer
to the anchor; case-2: Relative similarity compared with negatives decreases as the other negatives’ cosine similarities increase; case-3:
Relative similarity decrease as relevant positive pairs become closer.
N-pairs NCA Histogram contrastive Triplet LiftedStruct Binomial BinLifted MS
S ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
N ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
P ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Table 1. This table shows similarities that these pair-based methods utilize to assign weight on one negative pair. In the ﬁrst column of this
table is the three perspectives ‘S’ : the Similarity of itself; ‘N’: similarity compared with remaining Negative pairs shared the anchor point;
‘P’: similarity compared with Positive pairs of the same anchor.
Obviously, self-similarity is difﬁcult to fully describe
sample distribution in an embedding space, and correlations
of other pairs can make signiﬁcant impact to similarity mea-
surement. We introduce relative similarities by considering
all pairs which have a same anchor with current pair, and
deﬁne two type of relative similarities.
N: Negative relative similarity. It is computed by con-
sidering the relationship from neighboring negative pairs.
As described in case-2 of Fig .2, the relative similarity
of a pair is decreased, even when its self-similarity is un-
changed. This is because its neighboring negative samples
move closer, which increases the self-similarities of these
neighboring pairs, and thus reduce the relative similarity.
Lifted structure loss [ 25] is based on this relative similarity,
as shown in Eq .8.
P: Positive relative similarity. Similarly, the relative
similarity also considers the relationship from other positive
pairs (with a same anchor). As shown in case-3 of Fig .2,
when these positive samples become closer to the anchor,
the relative similarity of current pair is decreased, and thus
the pair weight should be reduced accordingly. Triplet loss
is computed based on this similarity, as indicated in Eq .5.
With our GPW framework, we analyze a number of ex-
isting pair-based loss functions based on the three similari-
ties deﬁned, and compare them in Table 1. Detailed formu-
lations of these functions are presented in Supplementary
Material. As can be found, lifted structure loss only con-
siders the negative relative similarity, by comparing with
the negative neighboring pairs for weighting. The weight
of current pair will be unchanged, when all positive sam-ples (in case-1 of Fig .2) or all negative samples (in case-3
of Fig.2) move synchronously to the anchor. This conclu-
sion can also be derived directly from Eq .8, which only de-
pends on/summationtext
yk=yieSij−Sik. Obviously, such relevant sam-
ples (positive or negative) often include meaningful infor-
mation, and are of great importance to learning discrimi-
native features, but are discarded arbitrarily, which may re-
duce model capability considerably. While a weighting or
sampling method based on each individual similarity has
been explored previously, to the best of our knowledge,
none of existing pair-based methods have assigned weights
on pairs making full use of all the three similarities.
4.2. Multi­Similarity Loss
As discussed, unlike sampling or weighting schemes de-
veloped for classiﬁcation and detection tasks in [ 2,20],
where the weight of an instance is computed individually
based on a cross entropy loss, it is difﬁcult to precisely mea-
sure the informativeness of a pair based on its individual co-
sine similarity. Pair-wise similarity between relevant sam-
ples or pairs should be considered, making the measurement
and weighting problems more complicated and challenging.
As shown in Table 1, each of the listed approaches can
consider one or two of the three similarities. To the best
our knowledge, none of the existing pair-based methods
can consider all of the three similarities simultaneously. To
this end, we propose a Multi-Similarity (MS) loss, which
consider all three perspectives by implementing a new pair
weighting scheme using two iterative steps: mining and
weighting. (i) informative pairs are ﬁrst sampled by mea-
5026