ample, Chopra et al. [3] introduced a contrastive loss which
discards negative pairs whose similarities are smaller than a
given threshold. In triplet loss [ 10], a negative pair is sam-
pled by using a margin computed from the similarity of a
randomly selected positive pair. Alternatively, lifted struc-
ture loss [ 25] and N-pairs loss [ 29] introduced new weight-
ing schemes by designing a smooth weighting function to
assign a larger weight to a more informative pair. Though
driven by different motivations, these methods share a com-
mon goal of learning from more informative pairs. Thus,
sampling such informative pairs is the key to pair-based
deep metric learning, while precisely identifying these pairs
is particularly challenging, especially for the negative pairs
whose number is quadratic to the size of dataset.
In this work, we cast the sampling problem of deep met-
ric learning into a general pair weighting formulation. We
investigated various weighting schemes of recent pair-based
loss functions, attempted to understand their insights more
deeply, and identify key limitations of these approaches.
We observed that a key factor that impacts pair weight-
ing is to compute multiple types of similarities for a pair,
which can be deﬁned as self-similarity and relative similar-
ity, where the relative similarity is heavily dependent on the
other pairs. Furthermore, we found that most existing meth-
ods only explore this factor partially, which limits their ca-
pability considerably. For example, contrastive loss [ 6] and
binomial deviance loss [ 40] only consider the cosine sim-
ilarity of a pair, while triplet loss [ 10] and lifted structure
loss [ 25] mainly focus on the relative similarity. We pro-
pose a multi-similarity loss which fully considers multiple
similarities during sample weighting. The major contribu-
tions of this paper are summarized as follows.
– We establish a General Pair Weighting (GPW) frame-
work, which formulates deep metric learning into a
uniﬁed view of pair weighting. It provides a general
formulation for understanding and explaining various
pair-based loss functions through gradient analysis.
– We analyze the key factor that impacts pair weight-
ing with GPW, where various pair-based methods can
be analyzed comprehensively, with main differences
and key limitations clearly identiﬁed. This allows us
to deﬁne three types of similarities for a pair: a self-
similarity and two relative similarities. The relative
similarities are computed by comparing to other pairs,
which are of great importance to existing pair-based
methods.
– We propose a new multi-similarity (MS) loss, which is
implemented using two iterative steps with sampling
and weighting, as shown in Fig .1. MS loss consid-
ers both self-similarity and relative similarities which
enables the model to collect and weight informativepairs more efﬁciently and accurately, leading to boosts
in performance.
– MS loss is evaluated extensively on a number of bench-
marks for image retrieval, where it outperforms cur-
rent state-of-the-art approaches by a large margin, e.g.,
improving recent ABE [ 14] with +5.0% Recall@ 1on
CUB200, and HTL [ 4] with +7.1% Recall@ 1on In-
Shop Clothes Retrieval dataset.
2. Related Work
Classical pair-based loss functions. Siamese network
[6] is a representative pair-based method that learns an em-
bedding via contrastive loss. It encourages samples from a
positive pair to be closer, and pushes samples from a neg-
ative pair apart from each other, in the embedding space.
Triplet loss was introduced in [ 10] by using triplets as train-
ing samples. Each triplet consists of a positive pair and a
negative pair by sharing the same anchor point. Triplet loss
aims to learn an embedding space where the similarity of a
negative pair is lower than that of a positive one, by giving
a margin. Extended from triplet loss, quadruplets were also
applied in recent work, such as histogram loss [ 32].
Recently, Song et al. [25] argued that both contrastive
loss and triplet loss are difﬁcult to explore full pair-wise re-
lations between samples in a mini-batch. They proposed
a lifted structure loss attempted to fully utilize such pair-
wise relations. However, the lifted structure loss only sam-
ples approximately an equal number of negative pairs as
the positive ones randomly, and thus discards a large num-
ber of informative negative pairs arbitrarily. In [ 40], Dong
et al. proposed a binomial deviance loss by using a bino-
mial deviance to evaluate the cost between labels and sim-
ilarity, which emphasizes harder pairs. In this work, we
propose a multi-similarity loss able to explore more mean-
ingful pair-wise relations by jointly considering both self-
similarity and the relative similarities.
Hard sample mining. Pair-based metric learning of-
ten generates a large amount of pair-wise samples, which
are highly redundant and include many uninformative sam-
ples. Training with random sampling can be overwhelmed
by these redundant samples, which signiﬁcantly degrade the
model capability and also slows the convergence. There-
fore, sampling plays a key role in pair-based metric learn-
ing.
The importance of hard negative mining has been dis-
cussed extensively [ 28,7,38,4]. Schroff et al. [28] pro-
posed a semi-hard mining scheme by exploring semi-hard
triplets, which are deﬁned to have a negative pair farther
than the positive one. However, such semi-hard mining
method only generates a small number of valid semi-hard
triplets, so that it often requires a large batch-size to gener-
ate sufﬁcient semi-hard triplets, e.g., 1800 as suggested in
5023