CNN-Based Chinese NER with Lexicon Rethinking
Tao Gui1,Ruotian Ma1,Qi Zhang1,Lujun Zhao1,Yu-Gang Jiang1;2and Xuanjing Huang1
1School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2Jilian Technology Group (Video++), Shanghai, China
ftgui16, rtma15, qz, ljzhao16, ygj, xjhuangg@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Character-level Chinese named entity recognition
(NER) that applies long short-term memory
(LSTM) to incorporate lexicons has achieved
great success. However, this method fails to fully
exploit GPU parallelism and candidate lexicons
can conﬂict. In this work, we propose a faster
alternative to Chinese NER: a convolutional neural
network (CNN)-based method that incorporates
lexicons using a rethinking mechanism. The
proposed method can model all the characters and
potential words that match the sentence in parallel.
In addition, the rethinking mechanism can address
the word conﬂict by feeding back the high-level
features to reﬁne the networks. Experimental
results on four datasets show that the proposed
method can achieve better performance than both
word-level and character-level baseline methods.
In addition, the proposed method performs up to
3.21 times faster than state-of-the-art methods,
while realizing better performance.
1 Introduction
The task of named entity recognition (NER) involves the
determination of entity boundaries and the recognition of
categories of named entities, which is a fundamental task
in the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP). NER
plays an important role in many downstream NLP tasks,
including information retrieval [Chen et al., 2015 ], relation
extraction [Bunescu and Mooney, 2005 ], question answering
systems [Diefenbach et al., 2018 ], and other applications.
Compared with English NER, Chinese named entities are
more difﬁcult to identify due to their uncertain bound-
aries, complex compositions, and NE deﬁnitions within the
nest [Duan and Zheng, 2011 ]. Hence, one intuitive way to
perform Chinese NER is to ﬁrst perform word segmentation
and then apply word sequence labeling [Yang et al., 2016;
He and Sun, 2017 ].
However, gold-standard segmentation is rarely available
in NER datasets, and word segmentation errors negatively
impact the identiﬁcation of named entities [Peng and Dredze,
Equal contributions
⼴广 州 市 ⻓长 隆隆 公 园
Wide State City Long Grand Public Garden
Chimelong Park⼴广州 ⼴广州市 市⻓长 ⻓长隆隆 公园
Guangzhou Major Guangzhou CityE-GPE M-GPE O B-GPE？ ？Figure 1: Example of word character lattice. RNN-based methods
must recurrently encode each character with potential words in the
lexicon, which reduces their speed. In addition, they may suffer
from conﬂicts between potential words.
2015; He and Sun, 2016 ]. The development of ways to
use lexicon features to better leverage word information for
NER has attracted research attention [Passos et al., 2014;
Zhang and Yang, 2018 ]. In particular, to exploit explicit word
information, Zhang and Yang [2018 ]introduced a variant of
LSTM (lattice-structured LSTM) that encodes all potential
words that match a sentence. Because of its rich lexicon
information, the lattice LSTM model has achieved state-of-
the-art results on various datasets.
Although previous work using RNNs to incorporate
lexicons has achieved great success, these methods continue
to have difﬁculty with two issues. First, RNN-based
methods fail to fully exploit GPU parallelism because of
the recurrent structure, which limits their computational
efﬁciency [Strubell et al., 2017 ]. Speciﬁcally, lattice
LSTM [Zhang and Yang, 2018 ]employs double recurrent
transition computation across the length of the input, one
for each character in a sentence and the other for matched
potential words in the lexicon. As such, their speeds are
limited. Second, they have difﬁculty dealing with conﬂicts
between potential words being incorporated in the lexicon:
one character may correspond to couples of potential words
in the lexicon, and this conﬂict can misguide the model such
that it predicts different labels, as shown in Figure 1. Because
of the nature of the sequential processing in RNNs, it is
difﬁcult to determine which word is correct based only on the
previous inputs. For example, given part of the sentence “广
州市长隆(Guangzhou Chimelong),” an RNN-based model
would be uncertain whether the character “ 长” is part of the
word “市 长(Major)” or “长 隆(Chimelong).” The matching
of the words “市 长(Major)” and “长 隆(Chimelong)” would
guide the character “长” to be identiﬁed as ‘O’ and ‘B-GPE,’Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
4982