LAGRANGIAN NEURAL NETWORKS
Miles Cranmer
Princeton University
mcranmer
@princeton.eduSam Greydanus
Oregon State University
greydanus.17
@gmail.comStephan Hoyer
Google Research
shoyer
@google.comPeter Battaglia
DeepMind
peterbattaglia
@google.com
David Spergel
Flatiron Institute
davidspergel
@flatironinstitute.orgShirley Hoy
Flatiron Institute
shirleyho
@flatironinstitute.org
ABSTRACT
Accurate models of the world are built upon notions of its underlying symmetries.
In physics, these symmetries correspond to conservation laws, such as for energy
and momentum. Yet even though neural network models see increasing use in
the physical sciences, they struggle to learn these symmetries. In this paper, we
propose Lagrangian Neural Networks (LNNs), which can parameterize arbitrary
Lagrangians using neural networks. In contrast to models that learn Hamiltonians,
LNNs do not require canonical coordinates, and thus perform well in situations
where canonical momenta are unknown or difﬁcult to compute. Unlike previous
approaches, our method does not restrict the functional form of learned energies
and will produce energy-conserving models for a variety of tasks. We test our
approach on a double pendulum and a relativistic particle, demonstrating energy
conservation where a baseline approach incurs dissipation and modeling relativity
without canonical coordinates where a Hamiltonian approach fails. Finally, we
show how this model can be applied to graphs and continuous systems using a
Lagrangian Graph Network, and demonstrate it on the 1D wave equation.
Figure 1: Physicists use Lagrangians to describe the dynamics of physical systems like the double
pendulum (black). Neural networks struggle to model these dynamics over long time periods due to
their inability to conserve energy (red). In this paper, we show how to learn arbitrary Lagrangians
with neural networks, inducing a strong physical prior on the learned dynamics (blue).
Also afﬁliated with Princeton University
yAlso afﬁliated with New York University, Princeton University, and Carnegie Mellon University
1arXiv:2003.04630v2  [cs.LG]  30 Jul 2020