S1551 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
multi-mode evaluation given by ensembles is a powerful property for real life applications. 
Nevertheless, Bayesian approaches have delivered strong results as well and furthermore 
come along with a strong theoretical foundation (Lee et al. 2020; Hobbhahn et al. 2022; 
Eggenreich et  al. 2020; Gal et  al. 2017b). As a way to go, the combination of efficient 
ensemble strategies and Bayesian approaches could combine the variability in the model 
parameters while still considering several modes for a prediction. Also, single determin-
istic approaches as the prior networks (Malinin and Gales 2018; Nandy et al. 2020; Sen-
soy et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019) deliver comparable results while consuming significantly 
less computation power. However, this efficiency often comes along with the problem that 
separated sets of in- and out-of-distribution samples have to be available for the training 
process (Zhao et al. 2019; Nandy et al. 2020). In general, the development of new problem 
and loss formulations such as given in Nandy et al. (2020) leads to a better understanding 
and description of the underlying problem and forms an important field of research.
4  Uncertainty measures and quality
In Sect.  3, we presented different methods for modeling and predicting different types of 
uncertainty in neural networks. In order to evaluate these approaches, measures have to 
be applied to the derived uncertainties. In the following, we present different measures 
for quantifying the different predicted types of uncertainty. In general, the correctness and 
trustworthiness of these uncertainties are not automatically given. In fact, there are several 
reasons why evaluating the quality of the uncertainty estimates is a challenging task.
• First, the quality of the uncertainty estimation depends on the underlying method for 
estimating uncertainty. This is exemplified in the work undertaken by Yao et al. (2019), 
which shows that different approximates of Bayesian inference (e.g. Gaussian and 
Laplace approximates) result in different qualities of uncertainty estimates.
• Second, there is a lack of ground truth uncertainty estimates (Lakshminarayanan et al. 
2017), and defining ground truth uncertainty estimates is challenging. For instance, if 
we define the ground truth uncertainty as the uncertainty across human subjects, we 
still have to answer questions as “How many subjects do we need?” or “How to choose 
the subjects?”.
• Third, there is a lack of a unified quantitative evaluation metric (Huang et al. 2019b). 
To be more specific, uncertainty is defined differently in different machine learning 
tasks such as classification, segmentation, and regression. For instance, prediction 
intervals or standard deviations are used to represent uncertainty in regression tasks, 
while entropy (and other related measures) are used to capture uncertainty in classifica-
tion and segmentation tasks.
4.1  Evaluating uncertainty in classification tasks
For classification tasks, the network’s softmax output already represents a measure of 
confidence. But since the raw softmax output is neither very reliable (Hendrycks and 
Gimpel 2017) nor can it represent all sources of uncertainty (Smith and Gal 2018), further 
approaches and corresponding measures were developed.