S1573 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
8.2  Outlook
• Generic evaluation framework
  As already discussed above, there are still problems regarding the evaluation of 
uncertainty methods, such as the lack of ’ground truth’ uncertainties, the inabil-
ity to test on single instances, and standardized benchmarking protocols. To cope 
with such issues, the provision of an evaluation protocol containing various con-
crete baseline data sets and evaluation metrics that cover all types of uncertainty 
would undoubtedly help to boost research in uncertainty quantification. Also, the 
evaluation with regard to risk-averse and worst case scenarios should be consid-
ered there. This means, that uncertainty predictions with a very high predicted 
uncertainty should never fail, such as for a prediction of a red or green traffic 
light. Such a general protocol would enable researchers to easily compare different 
types of methods against an established benchmark as well as on real world data 
sets. The adoption of such a standard evaluation protocol should be encouraged by 
conferences and journals.
• Expert & systematic comparison of baselines 
  A broad and structured comparison of existing methods for uncertainty estima-
tion on real world applications is not available yet. An evaluation of real world 
data is even not standard in current machine learning research papers. As a result, 
given a specific application, it remains unclear which method for uncertainty esti-
mation performs best and whether the latest methods outperform older methods 
also on real world examples. This is also partly caused by the fact, that researchers 
from other domains that use uncertainty quantification methods, in general, pre-
sent successful applications of single approaches on a specific problem or a data 
set by hand. Considering this, there are several points that could be adopted for 
a better comparison within the different research domains. For instance, domain 
experts should also compare different approaches against each other and present 
the weaknesses of single approaches in this domain. Similarly, for a better com-
parison among several domains, a collection of all the works in the different real 
world domains could be collected and exchanged on a central platform. Such a 
platform might also help machine learning researchers in providing an additional 
source of challenges in the real world and would pave the way to broadly high-
light weaknesses in the current state-of-the-art approaches. Google’s repository on 
baselines in uncertainties in neural networks (Nado et al. 2021)5 could be such a 
platform and a step towards achieving this goal.
• Uncertainty ground truths
  It remains difficult to validate existing methods due to the lack of uncertain ground 
truths. An actual uncertainty ground truth on which methods can be compared in an 
ImageNet like manner would make the evaluation of predictions on single samples pos-
sible. To reach this, the evaluation of the data generation process and occurring sources 
of uncertainty, such as the labeling process, might be investigated in more detail.
• Explainability and physical models
  Knowing the actual reasons for a false high certainty or a low certainty makes it 
much easier to engineer the methods for real life applications, which again increases the 
trust of people into such methods. Recently, (Antorán et al. 2020) claimed to have pub-
lished the first work on explainable uncertainty estimation. Uncertainty estimations, in 
5 https:// github. com/ google/ uncer  tainty- basel ines.