S1547 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
training data is considered as out-of-distribution. For the training process, a loss, seeking a 
minimum margin greater than zero between the average entropy of the in-domain and the 
out-of-distribution subsets is introduced and leads to a significant improvement in the out-
of-distribution detection.
3.3.5  Making ensemble methods more efficient
Compared to single model methods, ensemble methods come along with a significantly 
increased computational effort and memory consumption (Sagi and Rokach 2018; Malinin 
et al. 2020). When deploying an ensemble for a real life application the available memory 
and computational power are often limited. Such limitations could easily become a bot-
tleneck (Kocić et al. 2019) and could become critical for applications with limited reac-
tion time. Reducing the number of models leads to less memory and computational power 
consumption. Pruning approaches reduce the complexity of ensembles by pruning over 
the members and reducing the redundancy among them. For that, several approaches based 
on different diversity measures are developed to remove single members without strongly 
affecting the performance (Guo et al. 2018; Cavalcanti et al. 2016; Martínez-Muñoz et al. 
2008).
Distillation is another approach where the number of networks is reduced to one single 
model. It is the procedure of teaching a single network to represent the knowledge of a 
group of neural networks (Buciluǎ et al. 2006). First works on the distillation of neural net-
works were motivated by restrictions when deploying large-scale classification problems 
(Buciluǎ et al. 2006). The original classification problem is separated into several sub-prob-
lems focusing on single blocks of classes that are difficult to differentiate. Several smaller 
trainer networks are trained on the sub-problems and then teach one student network to 
separate all classes at the same time. In contrast to this, Ensemble distillation approaches 
capture the behaviour of an ensemble by one single network. The first works on ensemble 
distillation used the average of the softmax outputs of the ensemble members in order to 
teach a student network the derived predictive uncertainty (Hinton et al. 2015). Englesson 
and Azizpour (2019) justify the resulting predictive distributions of this approach and addi-
tionally cover the handling of out-of-distribution samples. When averaging over the mem-
bers’ outputs, the model uncertainty, which is represented in the variety of ensemble out-
puts, gets lost. To overcome this drawback, researchers applied the idea of learning higher 
order distributions, i.e. distributions over a distribution, instead of directly predicting the 
output (Lindqvist et al. 2020; Malinin et al. 2020). The members are then distillated based 
on the divergence from the average distribution. The idea is closely related to the prior net-
works (Malinin and Gales 2018) and the evidential neural networks (Sensoy et al. 2018), 
which are described in Sect.  3.1. Malinin et al. (2020) modelled ensemble members and 
the distilled network as prior networks predicting the parameters of a Dirichlet distribution. 
The distillation then seeks to minimize the KL divergence between the averaged Dirichlet 
distributions of the ensemble members and the output of the distilled network. Lindqvist 
et al. (2020) generalized this idea to any other parameterizable distribution. With that, the 
method is also applicable to regression problems, for example by predicting a mean and 
standard deviation to describe a normal distribution. Within several tests, the distillation 
models generated by these approaches are able to distinguish between data uncertainty and 
model uncertainty. Although distillation methods cannot completely capture the behaviour 
of an underlying ensemble, it has been shown that they are capable of delivering good and