S1518 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
Factor I: Variability in real world situations
Most real world environments are highly variable and almost constantly affected by changes. These 
changes affect parameters such as temperature, illumination, clutter, and physical objects’ size and 
shape. Changes in the environment can also affect the expression of objects, such as plants after rain 
look very different from plants after a drought. When real world situations change compared to the 
training set, this is called a distribution shift. Neural networks are sensitive to distribution shifts, which 
can lead to significant changes in the performance of a neural network.
The second case is based on the measurement system, which has a direct effect on the 
correlation between the samples and the corresponding targets. The measurement system 
generates information xi and yi that describe /u1D714i but might not contain enough information 
to learn a direct mapping from xi to yi . This means that there might be highly different real 
world information /u1D714i and /u1D714j (e.g. city and forest) resulting in very similar corresponding 
measurements xi and xj (e.g. temperature) or similar corresponding targets yi and yj (e.g. 
label noise that labels both samples as forest). This directly leads to our second factor of 
uncertainty: 
Factor II: Error and noise in measurement systems
The measurements themselves can be a source of uncertainty on the neural network’s prediction. This can 
be caused by limited information in the measurements, such as the image resolution. Moreover, it can be 
caused by noise, for example, sensor noise, by motion, or mechanical stress leading to imprecise meas-
ures. Furthermore, false labeling is also a source of uncertainty that can be seen as an error or noise in 
the measurement system. It is referenced as label noise and affects the model by reducing the confidence 
on the true class prediction during training. Depending on the intensity, this type of noise and errors can 
be used to regularize the training process and to improve robustness and generalization (Goodfellow 
et al. 2016; Peterson et al. 2019; Lukasik et al. 2020).
2.2  Deep neural network design and training
The design of a DNN covers the explicit modeling of the neural network and its stochas-
tic training process. The assumptions on the problem structure induced by the design and 
training of the neural network are called inductive bias (Battaglia et al. 2018). We summa-
rize all decisions of the modeler on the network’s structure (e.g. the number of parameters, 
the layers, the activation functions, etc.) and training process (e.g. optimization algorithm, 
regularization, augmentation, etc.) in a structure configuration s. The defined network 
structure gives the third factor of uncertainty in a neural network’s predictions: 
Factor III: Errors in the model structure
The structure of a neural network has a direct effect on its performance and therefore also on the uncer -
tainty of its prediction. For instance, the number of parameters affects the memorization capacity, which 
can lead to under- or over-fitting on the training data. Regarding uncertainty in neural networks, it is 
known that deeper networks tend to be overconfident in their softmax output, meaning that they predict 
too much probability on the class with the highest probability score (Guo et al. 2017).
For a given network structure s and a training data set D , the training of a neural net-
work is a stochastic process and therefore the resulting neural network f/u1D703 is based on a 
random variable,