S1560 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
where H(̂yi) is the entropy of the output and /u1D6FCi is a parameter that controls the strength of 
the entropy-based confidence penalty. The parameter /u1D6FCi is computed equivalently for the 
VWCI loss.
Instead of regularizing the training process by modifying the objective function, (Thu-
lasidasan et al. 2019) regularized it by using a data-agnostic data augmentation technique 
named mixup (Zhang et al. 2018b). In mixup training, the network is not only trained on 
the training data but also on virtual training samples (̃x,̃y) generated by a convex combina-
tion of two random training pairs (xi,yi) and (xj,yj) , i.e.
According to Thulasidasan et al. (2019), the label smoothing resulting from mixup training 
can be viewed as a form of entropy-based regularization resulting in the inherent calibra-
tion of networks trained with mixup. Maroñas et al. (2020) see mixup training among the 
most popular data augmentation regularization techniques due to its ability to improve the 
calibration as well as the accuracy. However, they argued that in mixup training the data 
uncertainty in mixed inputs affects the calibration and therefore mixup does not necessarily 
improve the calibration. They also underlined this claim empirically. Similarly, Rahaman 
et al. (2021) experimentally showed that the distributional-shift induced by data augmen-
tation techniques such as mixup training can negatively affect the confidence calibration. 
Based on this observation, (Maroñas et al. 2020) proposed a new objective function that 
explicitly takes the calibration performance on the unmixed input samples into account. 
Inspired by the expected calibration error (ECE, see Sect.  5.2) (Naeini et al. 2015) meas-
ured the calibration performance on the unmixed samples for each batch b by the differ -
entiable squared differences between the batch accuracy and the mean confidence on the 
batch samples. The total loss is given as a weighted combination of the original loss on 
mixed and unmixed samples and the calibration measure is evaluated only on the unmixed 
samples:
where Lb(/u1D703) is the original unregularized loss using training and mixed samples included 
in batch b and /u1D6FD is a hyperparameter controlling the relative importance given to the batch-
wise expected calibration error ECEb . By adding the batchwise calibration error for each 
batch b∈B to the standard loss function, the miscalibration induced by mixup training is 
regularized.
In the context of data augmentation, (Patel et  al. 2021) improved the calibration of 
uncertainty estimates by using on-manifold data augmentation. While mixup training com-
bines training samples, on-manifold adversarial training generates out-of-domain samples 
using adversarial attack. They experimentally showed that on-manifold adversarial train-
ing outperforms mixup training in improving the calibration. Similar to Patel et al. (2021), 
Hendrycks et al. (2019) showed that exposing classifiers to OOD examples at training can 
help to improve the calibration.(42) LH(𝜃)=−1
NN/uni2211.s1
i=1yiloĝyi−𝛼iH(̂yi),
(43) ̃x=𝜆xi+(1−𝜆)xj
(44) ̃y=𝜆yi+(1−𝜆)yj.
(45)LECE(/u1D703)=1
B/uni2211.s1
b∈BLb(/u1D703)+/u1D6FDECEb,