S1533 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
(2018) made use of the inhibited softmax function. It contains an artificial and constant 
logit that makes the absolute magnitude of the single logits more determined in the soft-
max output. Van Amersfoort et al. (2020) showed that Radial Basis Function (RBF) net-
works can be used to achieve competitive results in accuracy and very good results regard-
ing uncertainty estimation. RBF networks learn a linear transformation on the logits and 
classify inputs based on the distance between the transformed logits and the learned class 
centroids. In Van Amersfoort et al. (2020), a scaled exponentiated L2 distance was used. 
The data uncertainty can be directly derived from the distances between the centroids. By 
including penalties on the Jacobian matrix in the loss function, the network was trained to 
be more sensitive to changes in the input space. As a result, the method reached good per -
formance on out-of-distribution detection. In several tests, the approach was compared to 
a five members deep ensemble (Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017) and it was shown that this 
single network approach performs at least equivalently well on detecting out-of-distribu-
tion samples and improves the true-positive rate.
For regression tasks, (Oala et al. 2020) introduced an uncertainty score based on the 
lower and upper bound output of an interval neural network. The interval neural network 
has the same structure as the underlying deterministic neural network and is initialized with 
the deterministic network’s weights. In contrast to Gaussian representations of uncertainty 
given by a standard deviation, this approach can give non-symmetric values of uncertainty. 
Furthermore, the approach is found to be more robust in the presence of noise. Tagasovska 
and Lopez-Paz (2019) presented an approach to estimate data and model uncertainty. A 
simultaneous quantile regression loss function was introduced in order to generate well-
calibrated prediction intervals for the data uncertainty. The model uncertainty is quanti-
fied based on a mapping from the training data to zero, based on so-called Orthonormal 
Certificates. The aim was that out-of-distribution samples, where the model is uncertain, 
are mapped to a non-zero value and thus can be recognized. Kawashima et al. (2021) intro-
duced a method that computes virtual residuals in the training samples of a regression task 
based on a cross-validation like pre-training step. With original training data expanded by 
the information of these residuals, the actual predictor is trained to give a prediction and a 
value of certainty. The experiments indicated that the virtual residuals represent a promis-
ing tool in order to avoid overconfident network predictions.
3.1.2  External uncertainty quantification approaches
External uncertainty quantification approaches do not affect the models’ predictions, since 
the evaluation of the uncertainty is separated from the underlying prediction task. Further -
more, several external approaches can be applied to already trained networks at the same 
time without affecting each other. Raghu et al. (2019) argued that when both tasks, the pre-
diction, and the uncertainty quantification, are done by one single method, the uncertainty 
estimation is biased by the actual prediction task. Therefore, they recommended a “direct 
uncertainty prediction” and suggested training two neural networks, one for the actual pre-
diction task and a second one for the prediction of the uncertainty on the first network’s 
predictions. Similarly, Ramalho and Miranda (2020) introduced an additional neural net-
work for uncertainty estimation. But in contrast to Raghu et  al. (2019), the representa-
tion space of the training data is considered and the density around a given test sample is 
evaluated. The additional neural network uses this training data density in order to predict 
whether the main network’s estimate is expected to be correct or false. Hsu et al. (2020) 
detected out-of-distribution examples in classification tasks at test-time by predicting total