S1571 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
of different sensors with different spatial, temporal, and semantic properties. Fusing the 
information from these different sources and channels propagates the uncertainties from 
different sources into the prediction. The challenge lies in developing methods that do not 
only quantify uncertainties but also the amount of contribution from different channels 
individually and which learn to focus on the trustworthy data source for a given sample 
(Schmitt and Zhu 2016).
Unlike normal computer vision scenarios where the image acquisition equipment is 
quite near to the subject, the EO satellites are hundreds of kilometers away from the sub-
ject. The sensitivity of sensors, atmospheric absorption properties, and surface reflectance 
properties all contribute to uncertainties in the acquired data. Integrating the knowledge of 
physical EO systems, which also contain information about uncertainty models in those 
systems, is another major open issue. However, for several applications in EO, measuring 
uncertainties is not only something good to have but rather an important requirement of the 
field. E.g., the geo-variables derived from EO data may be assimilated into process models 
(ocean, hydrological, weather, climate, etc) and the assimilation requires the probability 
distribution of the estimated variables.
8  Conclusion and outlook
8.1  Conclusion—how well do the current uncertainty quantification methods work 
for real world applications?
Even though many advances on uncertainty quantification in neural networks have been 
made over the last years, their adoption in practical mission- and safety-critical applica-
tions is still limited. There are several reasons for this, which are discussed one by one as 
follows:
• Missing validation of existing methods over real-world problems 
  Although DNNs have become the de facto standard in solving numerous computer 
vision and medical image processing tasks, the majority of existing models are not able 
to appropriately quantify the uncertainty that is inherent to their inferences, particularly 
in real world applications. This is primarily because the baseline models are mostly 
developed using standard data sets such as Cifar10/100, ImageNet, or well-known 
regression data sets that are specific to a particular use case and are therefore not read-
ily applicable to complex real-world environments, such as low-resolution satellite data 
or other data sources affected by noise. Although many researchers from other fields 
apply uncertainty quantification in their field (Rußwurm et al. 2020; Loquercio et al. 
2020; Choi et al. 2019), a broad and structured evaluation of existing methods based on 
different real world applications is not available yet. Works like (Gustafsson et al. 2020) 
already built the first step towards a real life evaluation.
• Lack of standardized evaluation protocol 
  Existing methods for evaluating the estimated uncertainty are better suited to com-
pare uncertainty quantification methods based on measurable quantities such as the 
calibration (Nado et al. 2021) or the performance on OOD detection (Malinin and 
Gales 2018). As described in Sect.  6, these tests are performed on standardized sets 
within the machine learning community. Furthermore, the details of these experi-
ments might differ in the experimental setting from paper to paper (Mukhoti et al.