S1552 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
4.1.1  Measuring data uncertainty in classification tasks
Consider a classification task with K  different classes and a probability vector network 
output p(x) for some input sample x . In the following p  is used for simplification and 
pk stands for the k -th entry in the vector. In general, the given prediction p  represents a 
categorical distribution, i.e. it assigns a probability to each class to be the correct pre-
diction. Since the prediction is not given as an explicit class but as a probability distri-
bution, (un)certainty estimates can be directly derived from the prediction. In general, 
this pointwise prediction can be seen as estimated data uncertainty (Kendall and Gal 
2017). However, as discussed in Sect.  2, the model’s estimation of the data uncertainty 
is affected by model uncertainty, which has to be taken into account separately. In order 
to evaluate the amount of predicted data uncertainty, one can for example apply the 
maximal class probability or the entropy measures:
The maximal probability represents a direct representation of certainty, while entropy 
describes the average level of information in a random variable. Even though a softmax 
output should represent the data uncertainty, one cannot tell from a single prediction how 
large the amount of model uncertainty is that affects this specific prediction as well.
4.1.2  Measuring model uncertainty in classification tasks
As already discussed in Sect.  3, a single softmax prediction is not a very reliable way 
for uncertainty quantification since it is often badly calibrated (Smith and Gal 2018) and 
does not have any information about the certainty of the model itself has on this specific 
output (Smith and Gal 2018). An (approximated) posterior distribution p(/u1D703 /uni007C.varD) on the 
learned model parameters can help to receive better uncertainty estimates. With such a 
posterior distribution, the softmax output itself becomes a random variable and one can 
evaluate its variation, i.e. uncertainty. For simplicity, we denote p(y/uni007C.var/u1D703 ,x) also as p  and it 
will be clear from context whether p  depends on /u1D703 or not. The most common measures 
for this are mutual information (MI), the expected Kullback–Leibler Divergence (EKL), 
and the predictive variance. Basically, all these measures compute the expected diver -
gence between the (stochastic) softmax output and the expected softmax output
The MI uses entropy to measure the mutual dependence between two variables. In the 
described case, the difference between the information given in the expected softmax out-
put and the expected information in the softmax output is compared, i.e.(28) Maximal probability: pmax=max/braceleft.s1pk/braceright.s1K
k=1
(29) Entropy: H (p)=−K/uni2211.s1
k=1pklog2(pk)
(30) ̂p=/u1D53C𝜃∼p(𝜃/uni007C.varD)/bracketleft.s1p(y/uni007C.varx,𝜃/bracketright.s1.
(31) MI(𝜃,y/uni007C.varx,D)=H/bracketleft.s1̂p/bracketright.s1−/u1D53C𝜃∼p(𝜃/uni007C.varD)H/bracketleft.s1p(y/uni007C.varx,𝜃)/bracketright.s1.