S1542 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
neural networks in the 1990s, and several modern methods provide an extension to deep 
neural networks (Botev et al. 2017; Martens and Grosse 2015; Ritter et al. 2018; Lee et al. 
2020).
The core of the Laplace Approximation is the estimation of the Hessian. Unfortunately, 
due to the enormous number of parameters in modern neural networks, the Hessian matri-
ces cannot be computed in a feasible way as opposed to relatively smaller networks in 
MacKay (1992c) and Denker and LeCun (1991). Consequently, several different ways for 
approximating H have been proposed in the literature. A brief review is as follows. Instead 
of diagonal approximations [e.g. Becker and LeCun (1989), Salimans and Kingma (2016)], 
several researchers have been focusing on including the off-diagonal elements [e.g. Liu 
and Nocedal (1989), Hennig (2013) and Le Roux and Fitzgibbon (2010)]. Amongst them, 
layer-wise Kronecker Factor approximation of Grosse and Martens (2016), Martens and 
Grosse (2015), Botev et al. (2017) and Chen et al. (2018) have demonstrated a notable scal-
ability (Ba et al. 2016). A recent extension can be found in George et al. (2018) where the 
authors propose to re-scale the eigenvalues of the Kronecker factored matrices so that the 
diagonal variance in its eigenbasis is accurate. The work presents an interesting idea as one 
can prove that in terms of a Frobenius norm, the proposed approximation is more accurate 
than that of Martens and Grosse (2015). However, as this approximation is harmed by inac-
curate estimates of eigenvectors, (Lee et al. 2020) proposed to further correct the diagonal 
elements in the parameter space.
Existing works obtain Laplace Approximation using various approximations of the Hes-
sian in the line of fidelity-complexity trade-offs. For several works, an approximation using 
the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix or Gauss-Newton matrix, leading to indepen-
dently distributed model weights, has been utilized in order to prune weights (LeCun et al. 
1989) or perform continual learning in order to avoid catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick 
et al. 2017). In Ritter et al. (2018), the Kronecker factorization of the approximate block-
diagonal Hessian (Martens and Grosse 2015; Botev et al. 2017) have been applied to obtain 
scalable Laplace Approximation for neural networks. With this, the weights among differ -
ent layers are still assumed to be independently distributed, but not the correlations within 
the same layer. Recently, building upon the current understanding of neural network’s loss 
landscape that many eigenvalues of the Hessian tend to be zero, (Lee et al. 2020) developed 
a low-rank approximation that leads to sparse representations of the layers’ co-variance 
matrices. Furthermore, (Lee et al. 2020) demonstrated that the Laplace Approximation can 
be scaled to ImageNet size data sets and architectures, and further showed that with the 
proposed sparsification technique, the memory complexity of modelling correlations can 
be made similar to the diagonal approximation. Lastly, (Kristiadi et al. 2020) proposed a 
simple procedure to compute the last-layer Gaussian approximation (neglecting the model 
uncertainty in all other layers of neural networks), and showed that even such a minimalist 
solution can mitigate overconfidence predictions of ReLU networks.
Recent efforts have extended the Laplace Approximation beyond the Hessian approxi-
mation. To tackle the widely known assumption that the Laplace Approximation is for the 
bell-shaped true posterior and thus resulting in under-fitting behavior (Ritter et al. 2018; 
Humt et al. 2020) proposed to use Bayesian Optimization and showed that hyperparameters 
of the Laplace Approximation can be efficiently optimized with increased calibration per -
formance. Another work in this domain is by Kristiadi et al. (2021), who proposed uncer -
tainty units—a new type of hidden units that changes the geometry of the loss landscape so 
that more accurate inference is possible. While (Shinde et al. 2020) demonstrated the prac-
tical effectiveness of the Laplace Approximation to the autonomous driving applications, 
(Feng et al. 2019) showed the possibility to (i) incorporate contextual information and (ii)