S1572 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
2018). However, a clear standardized protocol of tests that should be performed on 
uncertainty quantification methods is still not available. For researchers from other 
domains, it is difficult to directly find state-of-the-art methods for the field they are 
interested in, not to speak of the hard decision on which sub-field of uncertainty 
quantification to focus. This makes the direct comparison of the latest approaches 
difficult and also limits the acceptance and adoption of currently existing methods 
for uncertainty quantification.
• Inability to evaluate uncertainty associated to a single decision 
  Existing measures for evaluating the estimated uncertainty (e.g., the expected cali-
bration error) are based on the whole testing data set. This means, that equivalent to 
classification tasks on unbalanced data sets, the uncertainty associated with single sam-
ples or small groups of samples may potentially get biased towards the performance 
on the rest of the data set. But for practical applications, assessing the reliability of 
predicted confidence would give much more possibilities than an aggregated reliability 
based on some testing data, which are independent of the current situation (Kull and 
Flach 2014). Especially for mission- and safety-critical applications, pointwise evalua-
tion measures could be of paramount importance and hence such evaluation approaches 
are very desirable.
• Lack of ground truth uncertainties 
  Current methods are empirically evaluated and the performance is underlined by rea-
sonable and explainable values of uncertainty. A ground truth uncertainty that could be 
used for validation is in general not available. Additionally, even though existing meth-
ods are calibrated on given data sets, one cannot simply transfer these results to any 
other data set since one has to be aware of shifts in the data distribution and that many 
fields can only cover a tiny portion of the actual data environment. In application fields 
such as EO, the preparation of a huge amount of training data is hard and expensive, 
and hence synthetic data can be used to train a model. For this artificial data, artificial 
uncertainties in labels and data should be taken into account to receive a better under -
standing of the uncertainty quantification performance. The gap between the real and 
synthetic data, or estimated and real uncertainty further limits the adoption of currently 
existing methods for uncertainty quantification.
• Explainability issue  
  Existing methods of neural network uncertainty quantification deliver predictions of 
certainty without any clue about what causes possible uncertainties. Even though those 
certainty values often look reasonable to a human observer, one does not know whether 
the uncertainties are actually predicted based on the same observations the human 
observer made. But without being sure about the reasons and motivations of single 
uncertainty estimations, a proper transfer from one data set to another, and even only 
a domain shift, are much harder to realize with guaranteed performance. Regarding 
safety-critical real-life applications, the lack of explainability makes the application of 
the available methods significantly harder. Besides the explainability of neural network 
decisions, existing methods for uncertainty quantification are not well understood on a 
higher level. For instance, explaining the behavior of single deterministic approaches, 
ensembles or Bayesian methods is a current direction of research and remains difficult 
to grasp in every detail (Fort et  al. 2019). It is, however, crucial to understand how 
those methods operate and capture uncertainty to identify pathways for refinement, and 
detect and characterize uncertainty, failures, and important shortcomings (Fort et  al. 
2019).