S1532 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
et al. 2018). Both of these network types output the parameters of a Dirichlet distribution 
from which the categorical distribution describing the class probabilities can be derived. 
The general idea of prior networks (Malinin and Gales 2018) is already described above 
and is visualized in Fig.  6. Prior networks are trained in a multi-task way with the goal 
of minimizing the expected Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the predictions of 
in-distribution data and a sharp Dirichlet distribution and between a flat Dirichlet distribu-
tion and the predictions of out-of-distribution data (Malinin and Gales 2018). Besides the 
main motivation of a better separation between in-distribution and OOD samples, these 
approaches also improve the separation between the confidence of correct and incorrect 
predictions, as was shown by Tsiligkaridis (2021a). As a follow-up, (Malinin and Gales 
2019) discussed that for the case that the data uncertainty is high, the forward definition 
of the KL-divergence can lead to an undesirable multi-model target distribution. In order 
to avoid this, they reformulated the loss using the reverse KL divergence. The experiments 
showed improved results in the uncertainty estimation as well as for the adversarial robust-
ness. Tsiligkaridis (2021b) extended the Dirichlet network approach by a new loss func-
tion that aims at minimizing an upper bound on the expected error based on the L∞-norm, 
i.e. optimizing an expected worst-case upper bound. Wu et al. (2019) argued that using a 
mixture of Dirichlet distributions gives much more flexibility in approximating the pos-
terior distribution. Therefore, an approach where the network predicts the parameters for 
a mixture of K Dirichlet distributions was suggested. For this, the network logits repre-
sent the parameters for M Dirichlet distributions and additionally M weights /u1D714i,i=1, ..,M 
with the constraint ∑M
i=1/u1D714i=1 are optimized. Nandy et al. (2020) analytically showed that 
for in-domain samples with high data uncertainty, the Dirichlet distribution predicted for a 
false prediction is often flatter than for a correct prediction. They argued that this makes it 
harder to differentiate between in- and out-of-distribution predictions and suggested a regu-
larization term for maximizing the gap between in- and out-of-distribution samples.
Evidential neural networks (Sensoy et al. 2018) also optimize the parameterization of 
a single Dirichlet network. The loss formulation is derived by using subjective logic and 
interpreting the logits as multinomial opinions or beliefs, as introduced in Evidence or 
Dempster-Shafer theory (Dempster 1968). Evidential neural networks set the total amount 
of evidence in relation to the number of classes and conclude a value of uncertainty from 
this, i.e. receiving an additional “I don’t know class”. The loss is formulated as the expected 
value of a basic loss, such as categorical cross entropy, with respect to a Dirichlet distribu-
tion parameterized by the logits. Additionally, a regularization term is added, encouraging 
the network predict the “I don’t know state” if no evidence for an improvement in the data 
fit is found. Zhao et al. (2019) extended this idea by differentiating between vacuity and 
dissonance in the collected evidence in order to better separate in- and out-of-distribution 
samples. For that, two explicit data sets containing overlapping classes and out-of-distribu-
tion samples are needed to learn a regularization term. Amini et al. (2020) transferred the 
idea of evidential neural networks from classification tasks to regression tasks by learn-
ing the parameters of an evidential normal inverse gamma distribution over an underlying 
Normal distribution. Charpentier et al. (2020) avoided the need of OOD data for the train-
ing process by using normalizing flows to learn a distribution over a latent space for each 
class. A new input sample is projected onto this latent space and a Dirichlet distribution is 
parameterized based on the class-wise densities of the received latent point.
Besides the Dirichlet distribution based approaches described above, several other inter -
nal approaches exist. In Liang et al. (2018b), a relatively simple approach based on small 
perturbations on the training input data and the temperature scaling calibration is presented 
leading to efficient differentiation of in- and out-of-distribution samples. Możejko et  al.