S1544 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
Doudkin 2020), or reinforcement learning (Kurutach et al. 2018; Rajeswaran et al. 2017) 
can be found in the literature. Besides the improvement in accuracy, ensembles give an 
intuitive way of representing the model uncertainty on a prediction by evaluating the vari-
ety among the member’s predictions.
Compared to Bayesian and single deterministic network approaches, ensemble meth-
ods have two major differences. First, the general idea behind ensembles is relatively clear 
and there are not many groundbreaking differences in the application of different types of 
ensemble methods and their application in different fields. Hence, this section focuses on 
different strategies to train an ensemble and some variations that target making ensem-
ble methods more efficient. Second, ensemble methods were originally not introduced to 
explicitly handle and quantify uncertainties in neural networks. Although the derivation of 
uncertainty from ensemble predictions is obvious, since they actually aim at reducing the 
model uncertainty, ensembles were first introduced and discussed in order to improve the 
accuracy on a prediction (Hansen and Salamon 1990). Therefore, many works on ensemble 
methods do not explicitly take the uncertainty into account. Notwithstanding this, ensem-
bles have been found to be well suited for uncertainty estimations in neural networks (Lak -
shminarayanan et al. 2017).
3.3.2  Single‑ and multi‑mode evaluation
One main point where ensemble methods differ from the other methods presented in this 
paper is the number of local optima that are considered, i.e. the differentiation into single-
mode and multi-mode evaluation.
In order to create synergies and marginalise false predictions of single members, the 
members of an ensemble have to behave differently in case of an uncertain outcome. The 
mapping defined by a neural network is highly non-linear and hence the optimized loss 
function contains many local optima to which a training algorithm could converge. Deter -
ministic neural networks converge to one single local optimum in the solution space (Fort 
et al. 2019). Other approaches, e.g. BNNs, still converge to one single optimum, but addi-
tionally, take the uncertainty on this local optimum into account (Fort et al. 2019). This 
means, that neighbouring points within a certain region around the solution also affect the 
loss and also influence the prediction of a test sample. Since these methods focus on single 
regions, the evaluation is called single-mode evaluation. In contrast to this, ensemble meth-
ods consist of several networks, which should converge to different local optima. This leads 
to a so-called multi-mode evaluation (Fort et al. 2019).
In Fig.  7, the considered parameters of a single-mode deterministic, single-mode proba-
bilistic (Bayesian), and multi-mode ensemble approach are visualized. The goal of multi-
mode evaluation is that different local optima could lead to models with different strengths 
and weaknesses in the predictions such that a combination of several such models brings 
synergy effects improving the overall performance.
3.3.3  Bringing variety into ensembles
One of the most crucial points when applying ensemble methods is to maximize the variety 
in the behaviour among the single networks (Renda et al. 2019; Lakshminarayanan et al. 
2017). In order to increase the variety, several different approaches can be applied:
• Random initialization and data shuffle