S1545 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
  Due to the very non-linear loss landscape, different initializations of a neural net-
work lead in general to different training results. Since the training is realized on mini-
batches, the order of the training data points also affects the final result.
• Bagging and boosting
  Bagging (Bootstrap aggregating) and Boosting are two strategies that vary the dis-
tribution of the used training data sets by sampling new sets of training samples from 
the original set. Bagging is sampling from the training data uniformly and with replace-
ment (Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006). Thanks to the replacement process, ensemble 
members can see single samples several times in the training set while missing some 
other training samples. For boosting, the members are trained one after another, and the 
probability of sampling a sample for the next training set is based on the performance 
of the already trained ensemble (Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006).
• Data augmentation
  Augmenting the input data randomly for each ensemble member leads to models 
trained on different data points and therefore in general to a larger variety among the 
different members.
• Ensemble of different network architecture
  The combination of different network architectures leads to different loss landscapes 
and can therefore also increase the diversity in the resulting predictions (Herron et al. 
2020).
In several works, it has been shown that the variety induced by random initialization works 
sufficiently and that bagging could even lead to a weaker performance (Lee et al. 2015; 
Lakshminarayanan et  al. 2017). Livieris et  al. (2021) evaluated different bagging and 
boosting strategies for ensembles of weight-constrained neural networks. Interestingly, it is 
found that bagging performs better for a small number of ensemble members while boost-
ing performs better for a large number. Nanni et al. (2019) evaluated ensembles based on 
different types of image augmentation for bioimage classification tasks and compared those Fig. 7  A visualization of the different evaluation behaviours of deterministic neural networks, Bayes-
ian neural networks, and the ensemble of deterministic neural networks. The x-axis indicates the network 
parameters /u1D703 and the y-axis represents the loss value. While the deterministic network learns the param-
eters based on a pointwise estimation, the Bayesian neural network also takes the surrounding of the single 
point into account. The ensemble of deterministic methods optimizes pointwise but learns several different 
parameter settings