S1550 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
test-time augmentation policy by choosing augmentations to be included in a fixed-length 
policy. Similarly, (Kim et al. 2020) proposed a method for learning a loss predictor from 
the training data for instance-aware test-time augmentation selection. The predictor selects 
test-time augmentations with the lowest predicted loss for a given sample.
Although learnable test-time augmentation techniques (Shanmugam et al. 2020; Lyzhov 
et  al. 2020; Kim et  al. 2020) help to select valid augmentations, one of the major open 
questions is to find out the effect on uncertainty due to different kinds of augmentations. 
It can for example happen that a simple augmentation-like reflection is not able to capture 
much of the uncertainty while some domain-specialized stretching and shearing captures 
more uncertainty. It is also important to find out how many augmentations are needed to 
correctly quantify uncertainties in a given task. This is particularly important in applica-
tions like earth observation, where inference might be needed on a global scale with lim-
ited resources.
3.5  Neural network uncertainty quantification approaches for real life applications
In order to use the presented methods on real life tasks, several different considerations 
have to be taken into account. The memory and computational power are often restricted 
while many real world tasks may be time-critical (Kocić et al. 2019). An overview of the 
main properties is given in Table 1.
The presented applications all come along with advantages and disadvantages, depend-
ing on the properties a user is interested in. While ensemble methods and test-time augmen-
tation methods are relatively easy to apply, Bayesian approaches deliver a clear description 
of the uncertainty on the models parameters and also deliver a deeper theoretical basis. The 
computational effort and memory consumption is a common restriction on real life appli-
cations, where single deterministic network approaches perform best, but the distillation 
of ensembles or efficient Bayesian methods can also be taken into consideration. Within 
the different types of Bayesian approaches, the performance, the computational effort, and 
the implementation effort still vary strongly. Laplace approximations are relatively easy 
to apply and compared to sampling approaches much less computational effort is needed. 
Furthermore, there often already exist pretrained networks for an application. In this case, 
Laplace Approximation and external deterministic single network approaches can in gen-
eral be applied to already trained networks.
Another important aspect that has to be taken into account for uncertainty quantifica-
tion in real life applications is the source and type of uncertainty. For real life applica-
tions, out-of-distribution detection forms the maybe most important challenge in order to 
avoid unexpected decisions of the network and to be aware of adversarial attacks. Espe-
cially since many motivations of uncertainty quantification are given by risk minimization, 
methods that deliver risk-averse predictions are an important field to evaluate. Many works 
already demonstrated the capability of detecting out-of-distribution samples on several 
tasks and built a strong fundamental tool set for the deployment in real life applications 
(Yu and Aizawa 2019; Vyas et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2019; Gustafsson et al. 2020). How -
ever, in real life, the tasks are much more difficult than finding out-of-distribution sam-
ples among data sets (e.g., MNIST or CIFAR data sets) and the main challenge lies in 
comparing such approaches on several real-world data sets against each other. The work 
of Gustafsson et al. (2020) forms a first important step towards an evaluation of methods 
that better suits the demands in real life applications. Interestingly, they show for their 
tests ensembles to outperform the considered Bayesian approaches. This indicates, that the