S1546 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
to each other. Guo and Gould (2015) used augmentation methods within in an ensemble 
approach for object detection. Both works stated that the ensemble approach using aug-
mentations improves the resulting accuracy. In contrast to this, (Rahaman et al. 2021; Wen 
et al. 2021b) stated with respect to uncertainty quantification that image augmentation can 
harm the calibration of an ensemble, and post-processing calibration methods have to be 
slightly adapted when using ensemble methods. Other ways of inducing variety for specific 
tasks have been also introduced. For instance, in Kim et al. (2018), the members are trained 
with different attention masks in order to focus on different parts of the input data. Other 
approaches focused on the training process and introduced learning rate schedulers that are 
designed to discover several local optima within one training process (Huang et al. 2017; 
Yang and Wang 2020). Following, an ensemble can be built based on local optima found 
within one single training run. It is important to note that if not explicitly stated, the works 
and approaches presented so far targeted improvements in predictive accuracy and did not 
explicitly consider uncertainty quantification.
3.3.4  Ensemble methods and uncertainty quantification
Besides the improvement in the accuracy, ensembles are widely used for modelling uncer -
tainty on predictions of complex models, such as in climate prediction (Leutbecher and 
Palmer 2008; Parker 2013). Accordingly, ensembles are also used for quantifying the 
uncertainty on a deep neural network’s prediction, and over the last years they became 
more and more popular for such tasks (Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017; Renda et al. 2019). 
Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017) are often referenced as a base work on uncertainty estima-
tions derived from ensembles of neural networks and as a reference for the competitive-
ness of deep ensembles. They introduced an ensemble training pipeline to quantify predic-
tive uncertainty within DNNs. In order to handle data and model uncertainty, the member 
networks are designed with two heads, representing the prediction and a predicted value 
of data uncertainty on the prediction. The approach is evaluated with respect to accuracy, 
calibration, and out-of-distribution detection for classification and regression tasks. In all 
tests, the method performs at least equally well as the BNN approaches used for compari-
son, namely Monte Carlo Dropout and Probabilistic Backpropagation. Lakshminarayanan 
et al. (2017) also showed that shuffling the training data and a random initialization of the 
training process induces a sufficient variety in the models in order to predict the uncer -
tainty for the given architectures and data sets. Furthermore, bagging is even found to 
worsen the predictive uncertainty estimation, extending the findings of Lee et al. (2015), 
who found bagging to worsen the predictive accuracy of ensemble methods on the investi-
gated tasks. Gustafsson et al. (2020) introduced a framework for the comparison of uncer -
tainty quantification methods with a specific focus on real life applications. Based on this 
framework, they compared ensembles and Monte Carlo dropouts and found ensembles to 
be more reliable and applicable to real life applications. These findings endorse the results 
reported by Beluch et al. (2018) who found ensemble methods to deliver more accurate 
and better calibrated predictions on active learning tasks than Monte Carlo Dropout. Ova-
dia et al. (2019) evaluated different uncertainty quantification methods based on test sets 
affected by distribution shifts. The excessive evaluation contains a variety of model types 
and data modalities. As a takeaway, the authors stated that already for a relatively small 
ensemble size of five, deep ensembles seem to perform best and are more robust to data 
set shifts than the compared methods. Vyas et al. (2018) presented an ensemble method for 
the improved detection of out-of-distribution samples. For each member, a subset of the