S1566 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
7  Applications of uncertainty estimates
From a practical point of view, the main motivation for quantifying uncertainties in 
DNNs is to be able to classify the received predictions and to make more confident deci-
sions. This section gives a brief overview and examples of the aforementioned motiva-
tions. In the first part, we discuss how uncertainty is used within active learning and 
reinforcement learning. Subsequently, we discuss the interest of the communities work -
ing on domain fields like medical image analysis, robotics, and earth observation. These 
application fields are used representatively for the large number of domains where 
uncertainty quantification plays an important role. The challenges and concepts could 
(and should) be transferred to any application domain of interest.
7.1  Active learning
The process of collecting labeled data for supervised training of a DNN can be labori-
ous, time-consuming, and costly. To reduce the annotation effort, the active learning 
framework shown in Fig.  10 trains the DNN sequentially on differently labelled data sets 
increasing in size over time (Iuzzolino et al. 2020). In particular, given a small labelled 
data set and a large unlabeled data set, a deep neural network trained in the setting of 
active learning learns from the small labeled data set and decides based on the acquisi-
tion function, which samples to select from the pool of unlabeled data. The selected 
data are added to the training data set and a new DNN is trained on the updated training 
data set. This process is then repeated with the training set increasing in size over time. 
Uncertainty sampling is one most popular criteria used in acquisition functions (Settles 
2009) where predictive uncertainty determines which training samples have the high-
est uncertainty and should be labelled next. Uncertainty-based active learning strategies 
for deep learning applications have been successfully used in several works (Gal et al. 
2017b; Chitta et al. 2018; Pop and Fulop 2018; Zeng et al. 2018; Nguyen et al. 2019; 
Feng et al. 2021).
7.2  Reinforcement learning
The general framework of deep reinforcement learning is shown in Fig.  11. In the con-
text of reinforcement learning, uncertainty estimates can be used to solve the exploration-
exploitation dilemma. It says that uncertainty estimates can be used to effectively balance Fig. 10  The active learning 
framework: The acquisition func-
tion evaluates the uncertainties 
on the network’s test predictions 
in order to select unlabelled data. 
The selected data are labelled 
and added to the pool of labelled 
data, which is used to train and 
improve the performance of the 
predictor