Vol.:(0123456789)Artificial Intelligence Review (2023) 56:S1513–S1589
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10562-9
1 3
A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks
Jakob Gawlikowski1,2 · Cedrique Rovile Njieutcheu Tassi3,4 · Mohsin Ali2,5 · 
Jongseok Lee6 · Matthias Humt3,6 · Jianxiang Feng3,6 · Anna Kruspe2 · 
Rudolph Triebel3,6 · Peter Jung2,4,7 · Ribana Roscher2,8 · Muhammad Shahzad2 · 
Wen Yang9 · Richard Bamler10 · Xiao Xiang Zhu2 
Published online: 29 July 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Over the last decade, neural networks have reached almost every field of science and 
become a crucial part of various real world applications. Due to the increasing spread, 
confidence in neural network predictions has become more and more important. However, 
basic neural networks do not deliver certainty estimates or suffer from over- or under-con-
fidence, i.e. are badly calibrated. To overcome this, many researchers have been working 
on understanding and quantifying uncertainty in a neural network’s prediction. As a result, 
different types and sources of uncertainty have been identified and various approaches to 
measure and quantify uncertainty in neural networks have been proposed. This work gives 
a comprehensive overview of uncertainty estimation in neural networks, reviews recent 
advances in the field, highlights current challenges, and identifies potential research oppor -
tunities. It is intended to give anyone interested in uncertainty estimation in neural net-
works a broad overview and introduction, without presupposing prior knowledge in this 
field. For that, a comprehensive introduction to the most crucial sources of uncertainty is 
given and their separation into reducible model uncertainty and irreducible data uncer -
tainty is presented. The modeling of these uncertainties based on deterministic neural net-
works, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), ensemble of neural networks, and test-time data 
augmentation approaches is introduced and different branches of these fields as well as the 
latest developments are discussed. For a practical application, we discuss different meas-
ures of uncertainty, approaches for calibrating neural networks, and give an overview of 
existing baselines and available implementations. Different examples from the wide spec-
trum of challenges in the fields of medical image analysis, robotics, and earth observation 
give an idea of the needs and challenges regarding uncertainties in the practical applica-
tions of neural networks. Additionally, the practical limitations of uncertainty quantifica-
tion methods in neural networks for mission- and safety-critical real world applications are 
discussed and an outlook on the next steps towards a broader usage of such methods is 
given.
Keywords Bayesian deep neural networks · Ensembles · Test-time augmentation · 
Calibration · Uncertainty
Extended author information available on the last page of the article