S1549 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
methods in many practical applications where the computation power or memory is lim-
ited, the application is time-critical, or very large networks with high inference time are 
included (Malinin et al. 2020).
Many aspects of ensemble approaches are only investigated with respect to the perfor -
mance on the predictive accuracy but do not take predictive uncertainty into account. This 
also holds for the comparison of different training strategies for a broad range of problems 
and data sets. Especially since the overconfidence from single members can be transferred 
to the whole ensemble, strategies that encourage the members to deliver different false pre-
dictions instead of all delivering the same false prediction should be further investigated. 
For a better understanding of ensemble behavior, further evaluations of the loss landscape, 
as done by Fort et al. (2019), could offer interesting insights.
3.4  Test‑time augmentation
Inspired by ensemble methods and adversarial examples (Ayhan and Berens 2018), the 
test-time augmentation is one of the simpler predictive uncertainty estimation techniques. 
The basic method is to create multiple test samples from each test sample by applying 
data augmentation techniques on it and then test all those samples to compute a predic-
tive distribution in order to measure uncertainty. The idea behind this method is that the 
augmented test samples allow the exploration of different views and is therefore capable of 
capturing the uncertainty. In general, test-time augmentation can use the same augmenta-
tion techniques that can be used for regularization during training and has been shown to 
improve calibration to in-distribution data and out-of-distribution data detection (Ashukha 
et  al. 2019; Lyzhov et  al. 2020). Mostly, this technique of test-time augmentations has 
been used in medical image processing (Wang et al. 2018a, 2019; Ayhan and Berens 2018; 
Moshkov et al. 2020). One of the reasons for this is that the field of medical image pro-
cessing already makes heavy use of data augmentations while using deep learning (Ron-
neberger et  al. 2015), so it is quite easy to just apply those same augmentations during 
test time to calculate the uncertainties. Another reason is that collecting medical images is 
costly, thus forcing practitioners to rely on data augmentation techniques. Moshkov et al. 
(2020) used the test-time augmentation technique for cell segmentation tasks. For that, 
they created multiple variations of the test data before feeding it to a trained UNet or Mask 
R-CNN architecture. Following this, they used majority voting to create the final output 
segmentation mask and discuss the policies of applying different augmentation techniques 
and how they affect the final predictive results of the deep networks.
Overall, test-time augmentation is an easy method for estimating uncertainties because 
it keeps the underlying model unchanged, requires no additional data, and is simple to put 
into practice with off-the-shelf libraries. Nonetheless, it needs to be kept in mind that dur -
ing applying this technique, one should only apply valid augmentations to the data, mean-
ing that the augmentations should not generate data from outside the target distribution. 
According to Shanmugam et al. (2020), test-time augmentation can change many correct 
predictions into incorrect predictions (and vice versa) due to many factors such as the 
nature of the problem at hand, the size of training data, the deep neural network architec-
ture, and the type of augmentation. To limit the impact of these factors, (Shanmugam et al. 
2020) proposed a learning-based method for test-time augmentation that takes these factors 
into consideration. In particular, the proposed method learns a function that aggregates the 
predictions from each augmentation of a test sample. Similar to Shanmugam et al. (2020), 
Lyzhov et al. (2020) proposed a method, named “greedy Policy Search”, for constructing a