S1517 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
• the errors in the training procedure of the DNN,
• the errors caused by unknown data.
In the following, the four steps leading from raw information to uncertainty quantification 
on a DNN’s prediction are described in more detail. Within this, we highlight the sources 
of uncertainty that are related to the single steps and explain how the uncertainties are 
propagated through the process. Finally, we introduce a model for the uncertainty on a neu-
ral network’s prediction and introduce the main types of uncertainty considered in neural 
networks.
The goal of this section is to give an accountable idea of the uncertainties in neural 
networks. Hence, for the sake of simplicity, we only describe and discuss the mathematical 
properties, which are relevant for understanding the approaches and applying the method-
ology in different fields.
2.1  Data acquisition
In the context of supervised learning, the data acquisition describes the process where 
measurements x and target variables y are generated in order to represent a (real world) 
situation /u1D714 from some space Ω . In the real world, a realization of /u1D714 could for example be a 
bird, x a picture of this bird, and y a label stating ‘bird’. During the measurement, random 
noise can occur and information may get lost. We model this randomness in x by
Equivalently, the corresponding target variable y is derived, where the description is either 
based on another measurement or is the result of a labeling process.2 For both cases, the 
description can be affected by noise and errors and we state it as
A neural network is trained on a finite data set of realizations of x/uni007C.var/u1D714i and y/uni007C.var/u1D714i based on N 
real world situations /u1D7141,…,/u1D714N,
When collecting the training data, two factors can cause uncertainty in a neural network 
trained on this data. First, the sample space Ω should be sufficiently covered by the training 
data x1,…,xN for /u1D7141,…,/u1D714N . For that, one has to take into account that for a new sample 
x∗ it in general holds that x∗≠xi for all training situations xi . Following, the target has to 
be estimated based on the trained neural network model, which directly leads to the first 
factor of uncertainty: (3) x/uni007C.var/u1D714∼px/uni007C.var/u1D714.
(4) y/uni007C.var/u1D714∼py/uni007C.var/u1D714.
(5) D={xi,yi}N
i=1.
2 In many cases one can model the labeling process as a mapping from /u1D54F to /u1D550 , e.g. for speech recognition 
or various computer vision tasks. For other tasks, such as earth observation, this is not always the case. 
Data is often labeled based on high-resolution data while low-resolution data is utilized for the prediction 
task.