S1541 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
computing system for SG-MCMC to exploit the modern computing routines, while (Wang 
et al. 2018b) showed that Generative Adversarial Models (GANs) can be used to distill the 
samples for improved memory efficiency, instead of distillation for enhancing the run-time 
capabilities of computing predictive uncertainty (Balan et  al. 2015). Lastly, other recent 
trends are techniques that reduce the variance (Dubey et al. 2016; Zou et al. 2018) and bias 
(Durmus et al. 2016; Durmus and Moulines 2019) arising from stochastic gradients.
Concurrently, there have been solid advances in the theory of SG-MCMC methods and 
their applications in practice. Sato and Nakagawa (Sato and Nakagawa 2014), for the first 
time, showed that the SGLD algorithm with constant step size weakly converges; (Chen 
et al. 2015) showed that faster convergence rates and more accurate invariant measures can 
be observed for SG-MCMCs with higher order integrators rather than a 1st order Euler 
integrator while (Teh et al. 2016) studied the consistency and fluctuation properties of the 
SGLD. As a result, verifiable conditions obeying a central limit theorem for which the 
algorithm is consistent, and how its asymptotic bias-variance decomposition depends on 
step-size sequences have been discovered. A more detailed review of the SG-MCMC with 
a focus on supporting theoretical results can be found in Nemeth and Fearnhead Nemeth 
and Fearnhead 2021. Practically, SG-MCMC techniques have been applied to shape clas-
sification and uncertainty quantification (Li et al. 2016b), empirically study and validate 
the effects of tempered posteriors (or called cold-posteriors) (Wenzel et al. 2020) and train 
a deep neural network in order to generalize and avoid over-fitting (Ye et al. 2017; Chandra 
et al. 2019).
3.2.3  Laplace approximation
The goal of the Laplace Approximation is to estimate the posterior distribution over the 
parameters of neural networks p(/u1D703 ∣x,y) around a local mode of the loss surface with a 
Multivariate Normal distribution. The Laplace Approximation to the posterior can be 
obtained by taking the second-order Taylor series expansion of the log posterior over the 
weights around the MAP estimate ̂𝜃 given some data (x,  y). If we assume a Gaussian prior 
with a scalar precision value 𝜏>0 , then this corresponds to the commonly used L2-regu-
larization, and the Taylor series expansion results in
where the first-order term vanishes because the gradient of the log posterior 
/u1D6FF/u1D703=∇ logp(/u1D703∣x,y) is zero at the maximum ̂𝜃 . Taking the exponential on both sides and 
approximating integrals by reverse engineering densities, the weight posterior is approxi-
mately a Gaussian with the mean ̂𝜃 and the covariance matrix (H+/u1D70FI)−1 where H is the 
Hessian of logp(/u1D703 ∣x,y) . This means that the model uncertainty is represented by the Hes-
sian H resulting in a Multivariate Normal distribution:
In contrast to the two other methods described, the Laplace approximation can be applied 
on already trained networks and is generally applicable when using standard loss func-
tions such as MSE or cross entropy and piece-wise linear activations (e.g. RELU). Mac-
Kay ( 1992c) and Denker and LeCun (1991) have pioneered the Laplace approximation for logp(𝜃∣x,y)≈log p(̂𝜃∣x,y)
+1
2(𝜃−̂𝜃)T(H+𝜏I)(𝜃−̂𝜃),
(27) p(𝜃∣x,y)∼N/parenleft.s1̂𝜃,(H+𝜏I)−1/parenright.s1
.