S1531 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
to the logit values. As visualized in Fig.  6, a higher concentration value leads to a sharper 
Dirichlet distribution.
The set of all class probabilities of a categorical distribution over k classes is equivalent 
to a k−1-dimensional standard or probability simplex. Each node of this simplex repre-
sents a probability vector with the full probability mass on one class and each convex com-
bination of the nodes represents a categorical distribution with the probability mass distrib-
uted over multiple classes. Malinin and Gales (2018) argued that a high model uncertainty 
should lead to a lower precision value and therefore to a flat distribution over the whole 
simplex since the network is not familiar with the data. In contrast to this, data uncertainty 
should be represented by a sharper but also centered distribution, since the network can 
handle the data, but cannot give a clear class preference. In Fig.  6 the different desired 
behaviors are shown.
The Dirichlet distribution is utilized in several approaches as Dirichlet Prior Networks 
(Malinin and Gales 2018; Tsiligkaridis 2021b) and Evidential Neural Networks (Sensoy 
Fig. 5  Predictions received from a LeNet network trained on MNIST’s handwritten digits from 0 to 9 and 
evaluated on different rotations of test samples. One can clearly see, that for some rotations the network 
gives high confidence on the false class due to confusion (e.g.: 3 is confused with 8) or representations not 
seen at training. These examples represent a simple case of how a basic classification network can lead to 
overconfident wrong predictions under data distribution shifts
Fig. 6  The desired behaviors of a Dirichlet distribution over categorical distributions. The visualizations 
show three Dirichlet distributions over three classes. Each node of the simplex represents one class. In a the 
sharp Dirichlet distribution with its expectation close to the upper node represents a certain prediction of 
a categorical distribution. In b the sharp Dirichlet distribution in the center of the simplex represents high 
data uncertainty but low distributional uncertainty. In c the flat Dirichlet distribution indicates high distribu-
tional uncertainty