S1554 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
One can also derive a total class probability for each class individually by applying the 
sigmoid function to each logit (Hsu et al. 2020). Based on the class-wise total probabilities, 
OOD samples might easier be detected, since all classes can have low probability at the 
same time. Other methods deliver an explicit measure of how well new data samples suit 
the training data distribution. Based on this, they also give a measure that a sample will be 
predicted correctly (Ramalho and Miranda 2020).
4.1.4  Performance measure on complete data set
While the measures described above measure the performance of individual predictions, 
others evaluate the usage of these measures on a set of samples. Measures of uncertainty 
can be used to separate between correctly and falsely classified samples or between in-
domain and OOD samples (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017). For that, the samples are split 
into two sets, for example, in-domain and OOD or correctly classified and falsely classi-
fied. The two most common approaches are the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) 
curve and the Precision-Recall (PR) curve. Both methods generate curves based on differ -
ent thresholds of the underlying measure. For each considered threshold, the ROC curve 
plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate,3 and the PR curve plots the pre-
cision against the recall.4 While the ROC and PR curves give a visual idea of how well 
the underlying measures are suited to separate the two considered test cases, they do not 
give a qualitative measure. To reach this, the area under the curve (AUC) can be evalu-
ated. Roughly speaking, the AUC gives a probability value that a randomly chosen positive 
sample leads to a higher measure than a randomly chosen negative example. For example, 
the maximum softmax values measure ranks of correctly classified examples higher than 
falsely classified examples. Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017) showed for several application 
fields that correct predictions have in general a higher predicted certainty in the softmax 
value than false predictions. Especially for the evaluation of in-domain and OOD exam-
ples, the Area Under Receiver Operating Curve (AUROC) and the Area Under Precision-
Recall Curce (AUPRC) are commonly used (Nandy et al. 2020; Malinin and Gales 2018, 
2019). The clear weakness of these evaluations is the fact that the performance is evaluated 
and the optimal threshold is computed based on a given test data set. A distribution shift 
from the test set distribution can ruin the whole performance and make the derived thresh-
olds impractical.
4.2  Evaluating uncertainty in regression tasks
4.2.1  Measuring data uncertainty in regression predictions
In contrast to classification tasks, where the network typically outputs a probability distri-
bution over the possible classes, regression tasks only predict a pointwise estimation with-
out any hint of data uncertainty. As already described in Sect.  3, a common approach to 
overcome this is to let the network predict the parameters of a probability distribution, for 
3 The true positive rate is the number of samples, which are correctly predicted as positive divided by the 
total number of true samples. The false positive rate is the number of samples falsely predicted as positive 
divided by the total number of negative samples [see also (Davis and Goadrich 2006)].
4 The precision is equal to the number of samples that are correctly classified as positive, divided by the 
total number of positive samples. The recall is equal to the number of samples correctly predicted as posi-
tive divided by the total number of positive samples [see also (Davis and Goadrich 2006)].