S1524 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
motion noise (Kendall and Gal 2017). From a modeler’s point of view, domain-shift 
uncertainty is caused by external or environmental factors but can be reduced by cover -
ing the shifted domain in the training data set.
• Out-of-domain uncertainty (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Liang et al. 2018b; Shafaei 
et al. 2019; Mundt et al. 2019)
  Out-of-domain uncertainty represents the uncertainty related to an input drawn from 
the subspace of unknown data. The distribution of unknown data is different and far 
from the training distribution. While a DNN can extract in-domain knowledge from 
domain-shift samples, it cannot extract in-domain knowledge from out-of-domain sam-
ples. For example, when domain-shift uncertainty describes phenomena like a blurred 
picture of a dog, out-of-domain uncertainty describes the case when a network that 
learned to classify cats and dogs is asked to predict a bird. The out-of-domain uncer -
tainty stems from the inability of the DNN to explain an out-of-domain sample due to 
its lack of out-of-domain knowledge. From a modeler’s point of view, out-of-domain 
uncertainty is caused by input samples, where the network is not meant to give a pre-
diction for or by insufficient training data.
Since the model uncertainty captures what the DNN does not know due to a lack of in-
domain or out-of-domain knowledge, it captures all, in-domain, domain-shift, and out-of-
domain uncertainties. In contrast, the data uncertainty captures in-domain uncertainty that 
is caused by the nature of the data the network is trained on, for example, overlapping sam-
ples and systematic label noise.
3  Uncertainty estimation
As described in Sect.  2, several factors may cause model and data uncertainty and affect 
a DNN’s prediction. This variety of sources of uncertainty makes the complete exclusion 
of uncertainties in a neural network impossible for almost all applications. Especially in 
practical applications employing real world data, the training data is only a subset of all 
possible input data, which means that a miss-match between the DNN domain and the 
unknown actual data domain is often unavoidable. However, an exact representation of the 
uncertainty of a DNN prediction is also not possible to compute, since the different uncer -
tainties can in general not be modeled accurately and are most often even unknown. There-
fore, methods for estimating uncertainty in a DNN prediction is a popular and vital field 
of research. The data uncertainty part is normally represented in the prediction, e.g. in the 
softmax output of a classification network or in the explicit prediction of a standard devia-
tion in a regression network (Kendall and Gal 2017). In contrast to this, several different 
approaches which model the model uncertainty and seek to separate it from the data uncer -
tainty in order to receive an accurate representation of the data uncertainty were introduced 
(Kendall and Gal 2017; Malinin and Gales 2018; Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017).
In general, the methods for estimating the uncertainty can be split into four different 
types based on the number (single or multiple) and the nature (deterministic or stochastic) 
of the used DNNs.
• Single deterministic methods give the prediction based on one single forward pass 
within a deterministic network. The uncertainty quantification is either derived by 
using additional (external) methods or is directly predicted by the network.