S1557 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
be more overconfident than shallower ones (Guo et al. 2017; Seo et al. 2019; Li and Hoiem 
2020).
Several methods for uncertainty estimation presented in Sect.  3 also improve the net-
work’s calibration (Lakshminarayanan et  al. 2017; Gal and Ghahramani 2016). This is 
clear since these methods quantify model and data uncertainty separately and aim at reduc-
ing the model uncertainty on the predictions. Besides the methods that improve calibration 
by reducing the model uncertainty, a large and growing body of literature has investigated 
methods for explicitly reducing calibration errors. These methods are presented in the fol-
lowing, followed by measures to quantify the calibration error. It is important to note that 
these methods do not reduce the model uncertainty, but propagate the model uncertainty 
onto the representation of the data uncertainty. For example, if a binary classifier is over -
fitted and predicts all samples of a test set as class A with probability 1, while half of the 
test samples are actually class B, the recalibration methods might map the network output 
to 0.5 in order to have reliable confidence. This probability of 0.5 is not equivalent to the 
data uncertainty but represents the model uncertainty propagated onto the predicted data 
uncertainty.
5.1  Calibration methods
Calibration methods can be classified into three main groups according to the step when 
they are applied:
• Regularization methods applied during the training phase (Szegedy et al. 2016; Pereyra 
et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018a; Müller et al. 2019; Venkatesh and Thiagarajan 2019)
  These methods modify the objective, optimization, and/or regularization procedure 
in order to build DNNs that are inherently calibrated.
• Post-processing methods applied after the training process of the DNN (Guo et  al. 
2017; Wenger et al. 2020)
  These methods require a held-out calibration data set to adjust the prediction scores 
for recalibration. They only work under the assumption that the distribution of the left-
Fig. 8  a Reliability diagram showing an overconfident classifier: The bin-wise accuracy is smaller than the 
corresponding confidence. b Reliability diagram of an underconfident classifier: The bin-wise accuracy is 
larger than the corresponding confidence. c Reliability diagram of a well-calibrated classifier: The confi-
dence fits the actual accuracy for the single bins