S1520 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
and a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation is given by
Since the modeling is based on the unavailable latent variable /u1D714 , one takes an approxima-
tive representation based on a sampled training data set D={xi,yi}N
i=1 containing N sam-
ples and corresponding targets. The distribution and MAP estimator in (7) and (8) for a 
new sample x∗ are then predicted based on the known examples by
and
In general, the distribution given in (9) is unknown and can only be estimated based on the 
given data in D. For this estimation, neural networks form a very powerful tool for many 
tasks and applications.
The prediction of a neural network is subject to both model-dependent and input data-
dependent errors, and therefore the predictive uncertainty associated with y∗ is in general 
separated into data uncertainty [also statistical or aleatoric uncertainty (Hüllermeier and 
Waegeman 2021)] and model uncertainty [also systemic or epistemic uncertainty (Hüller -
meier and Waegeman 2021)]. Depending on the underlying approach, additional explicit 
modeling of distributional uncertainty (Malinin and Gales 2018) is used to model the 
uncertainty, which is caused by examples from a region not covered by the training data. 
Figure  1 illustrates the described types of uncertainty for regression and classification 
tasks.
2.4.1  Model‑ and data uncertainty
The model uncertainty covers the uncertainty that is caused by shortcomings in the model, 
either by errors in the training procedure, an insufficient model structure, or lack of knowl-
edge due to unknown samples or a bad coverage of the training data set. In contrast to this, 
data uncertainty is related to uncertainty that directly stems from the data. Data uncertainty 
is caused by information loss when representing the real world within a data sample and 
represents the distribution stated in (7). For example, in regression tasks, noise in the input 
and target measurements causes data uncertainty that the network cannot learn to correct. 
In classification tasks, samples that do not contain enough information in order to identify 
one class with 100% certainty cause data uncertainty on the prediction. The information 
loss is a result of the measurement system, e.g. by representing real world information by 
image pixels with a specific resolution, or by errors in the labelling process.
For the five presented factors for uncertainties on a neural network’s prediction, this 
means the following: Only factor 2 represents a source of aleatoric uncertainty since it 
causes insufficient data that make a certain prediction not possible. For all other fac-
tors, the source of uncertainty lies in the experimental setup and is related to epistemic 
uncertainty. The uncertainty induced by Factor I is a result of the insufficient coverage 
of the data distribution in the training data. Factor III and Factor IV clearly represent 
shortcomings in the training and the modelling of the network. Factor V is also related 
to epistemic uncertainty since the data itself might be fine but the unknown domain is (8)y∗=arg max
yp(y/uni007C.varx∗).
(9) p(y∗/uni007C.varx∗)=/uni222B.dspDp(y∗/uni007C.varD,x∗)
(10)y∗=arg max
yp(y/uni007C.varD, x∗).