S1561 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
5.1.2  Post‑processing methods
Post-processing (or post-hoc) methods are applied after the training process and aim at 
learning a re-calibration function. For this, a subset of the training data is held-out during 
the training process and used as a calibration set. The re-calibration function is applied to 
the network’s outputs (e.g. the logit vector) and yields an improved calibration learned on 
the left-out calibration set. Zhang et al. (2020) discussed three requirements that should be 
satisfied by post-hoc calibration methods. They should 
1. preserve the accuracy, i.e. should not affect the predictor’s performance.
2. be data efficient, i.e. only a small fraction of the training data set should be left out for 
the calibration.
3. be able to approximate the correct re-calibration map as long as there is enough data 
available for calibration.
Furthermore, they pointed out that none of the existing approaches fulfills all three 
requirements.
For classification tasks, the most basic but still very efficient way of post-hoc calibration 
is temperature scaling (Guo et al. 2017). For temperature scaling, the temperature T>0 of 
the softmax function
is optimized. For T=1 the function remains the regular softmax function. For T>1 the 
output changes such that its entropy increases, i.e. the predicted confidence decreases. 
For T∈(0, 1) the entropy decreases and following, the predicted confidence increases. As 
already mentioned above, a perfectly calibrated neural network outputs MAP estimates. 
Since the learned transformation can only affect the uncertainty, the log-likelihood based 
losses as cross-entropy do not have to be replaced by a special calibration loss. While the 
data efficiency and the preservation of the accuracy are given, the expressiveness of basic 
temperature scaling is limited (Zhang et al. 2020). To overcome this, (Zhang et al. 2020) 
investigated an ensemble of several temperature scaling models. Doing so, they achieved 
better calibrated predictions, while preserving the classification accuracy and improving 
the data efficiency and the expressive power. Kull et al. (2019) were motivated by non-neu-
ral network calibration methods, where the calibration is performed class-wise as a one-
vs-all binary calibration. They showed that this approach can be interpreted as learning a 
linear transformation of the predicted log-likelihoods followed by a softmax function. This 
again is equivalent to training a dense layer on the log-probabilities and hence the method 
is also very easy to implement and apply. Obviously, the original predictions are not guar -
anteed to be preserved.
Analogous to temperature scaling for classification networks, Levi et al. (2022) intro-
duced standard deviation scaling (std-scaling) for regression networks. As the name indi-
cates, the method is trained to rescale the predicted standard deviations of a given network. 
Equivalently to the motivation of optimizing temperature scaling with the cross-entropy 
loss, std-scaling can be trained using the Gaussian log-likelihood function as loss, which is 
in general also used for the training of regression networks, which also gives a prediction 
for the data uncertainty.(46)softmax (zi)=expzi∕T
∑K
j=1expzj∕T,