S1567 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
the exploration of unknown environments with the exploitation of existing knowledge 
extracted from known environments. For example, if a robot interacts with an unknown 
environment, the robot can safely avoid catastrophic failures by reasoning about its uncer -
tainty. To estimate the uncertainty in this framework, (Huang et al. 2019a) used an ensem-
ble of bootstrapped models (models trained on different data sets sampled with replace-
ment from the original data set), while Gal and Ghahramani (2016) approximated Bayesian 
inference via dropout sampling. Inspired by Gal and Ghahramani (2016) and Huang et al. 
(2019a), Kahn et al. (2017) and Lütjens et al. (2019) used a mixture of deep Bayesian net-
works performing dropout sampling on an ensemble of bootstrapped models. For further 
reading, (Ghavamzadeh et al. 2015) presented a survey of Bayesian reinforcement learning.
7.3  Uncertainty in real‑world applications
With the increasing usage of deep learning approaches within many different fields, quan-
tifying and handling uncertainties has become more and more important. On one hand, 
uncertainty quantification plays an important role in risk minimization, which is needed 
in many application fields. On the other hand, many fields offer only challenging data 
sources, which are hard to control and verify. This makes the generation of trust-worthy 
ground truth a very challenging task. In the following, three different fields where uncer -
tainty plays an important role are presented, namely robotics including autonomous driv -
ing, medical image analysis, and earth observation.
7.3.1  Medical analysis
As there is a significant amount of uncertainty in medical data, it is essential for 
machine learning approaches in this field to provide reliable predictions and confi-
dence values in order to gain trust from physicians and patients (Abdullah et al. 2022; 
Begoli et  al. 2019; Loftus et  al. 2022). For medical applications involving clinical 
background data, distribution shifts are quite common. This is because medical infor -
mation is highly confidential, and machine learning models are often trained on data 
from different sources (e.g., varying patient backgrounds or measurement systems) Fig. 11  The reinforcement learning framework: The agent interacts with the environment by executing a 
specific action influencing the next state of the agent. The agent observes a reward representing the cost 
associated with the executed action. The agent chooses actions based on a policy learned by a deep neural 
network. However, the predicted uncertainty associated with the action predicted by the deep neural net-
work can help the agent to decide whether to execute the predicted action or not