S1539 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
demonstrated that variational inference can be scaled up to ImageNet size data sets and 
architectures using multiple GPUs and proposed practical tricks such as data augmenta-
tion, momentum initialization, and learning rate scheduling.
One of the successes in variational methods has been accomplished by casting exist-
ing stochastic elements of deep learning as variational inference. A widely known example 
is Monte Carlo Dropout (MC Dropout) where the dropout layers are formulated as Ber -
noulli distributed random variables, and training a neural network with dropout layers can 
be approximated as performing variational inference (Gal and Ghahramani 2015, 2016; 
Gal et al. 2017a). A main advantage of MC dropout is that the predictive uncertainty can 
be computed by activating dropout not only during training but also at test time. In this 
way, once the neural network is trained with dropout layers, the implementation efforts 
can be kept minimum and the practitioners do not need expert knowledge to reason about 
uncertainty—certain criteria that the authors are attributing to its success (Gal and Ghah-
ramani 2016). The practical values of this method have been demonstrated also in several 
works (Eaton-Rosen et al. 2018; Loquercio et al. 2020; Rußwurm et al. 2020) and resulted 
in different extensions [evaluating the usage of different dropout masks for example for 
convolutional layers (Tassi and Rovile 2019) or by changing the representations of the pre-
dictive uncertainty into model and data uncertainties (Kendall and Gal 2017)]. Approaches 
that build upon a similar idea but randomly drop incoming activations of a node, instead 
of dropping an activation for all following nodes, were also proposed within the literature 
(Mobiny et al. 2021) and called drop connect. This was found to be more robust on the 
uncertainty representation, even though it was shown that a combination of both can lead 
to higher accuracy and robustness in the test predictions (McClure and Kriegeskorte 2016). 
Lastly, connections of variation inference to Adam (Khan et al. 2018), RMS Prop (Khan 
et al. 2017), and batch normalization (Atanov et al. 2019) have been further suggested in 
the literature.
3.2.2  Sampling methods
Sampling methods, also often called Monte Carlo methods, are another family of Bayesian 
inference algorithms that represent uncertainty without a parametric model. Specifically, 
sampling methods use a set of hypotheses (or samples) drawn from the distribution and 
offer the advantage that the representation itself is not restricted by the type of distribution 
(e.g. can be multi-modal or non-Gaussian)—hence probability distributions are obtained 
non-parametrically. Popular algorithms within this domain are particle filtering, rejec-
tion sampling, importance sampling, and Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling (MCMC) 
(Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006). In the case of neural networks, MCMC is often used since 
alternatives such as rejection and importance sampling are known to be inefficient for such 
high-dimensional problems. The main idea of MCMC is to sample from arbitrary distribu-
tions by a transition in state space where this transition is governed by a record of the cur -
rent state and the proposal distribution that aims to estimate the target distribution (e.g. the 
true posterior). To explain this, let us start defining the Markov Chain: a Markov Chain is a 
distribution over random variables x1,⋯,xT which follows the state transition rule:
i.e. the next state only depends on the current state and not on any other former state. In 
order to draw samples from the true posterior, MCMC sampling methods first generate (23) p(x1,⋯,xT)=p(x1)T/uni220F.s1
t=2p(xt/uni007C.varxt−1),