S1519 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
The process is stochastic due to random decisions as the order of the data, random initiali-
zation, or random regularization as augmentation or dropout. The loss landscape of a neu-
ral network is highly non-linear and the randomness in the training process in general leads 
to different local optima /u1D703∗ resulting in different models (Lakshminarayanan et al. 2017). 
Also, parameters such as batch size, learning rate, and the number of training epochs affect 
the training and result in different models. Depending on the underlying task these models 
can significantly differ in their predictions for single samples, even leading to a difference 
in the overall model performance. This sensitivity to the training process directly leads to 
the fourth factor for uncertainties in neural network predictions: 
Factor IV: Errors in the training procedure
The training process of a neural network includes many parameters that have to be defined (batch size, 
optimizer, learning rate, stopping criteria, regularization, etc.), and also stochastic decisions within the 
training process (batch generation and weight initialization) take place. All these decisions affect the 
local optima and it is therefore very unlikely that two training processes deliver the same model param-
eterization. A training data set that suffers from imbalance or low coverage of single regions in the data 
distribution also introduces uncertainties on the network’s learned parameters, as already described 
in the data acquisition. This might be softened by applying augmentation to increase the variety or by 
balancing the impact of single classes or regions on the loss function.
Since the training process is based on the given training data set D , errors in the data 
acquisition process (e.g. label noise) can result in errors in the training process.
2.3  Inference
The inference describes the prediction of an output y∗ for a new data sample x∗ by the neu-
ral network. At this time, the network is trained for a specific task. Thus, samples that are 
not inputs for this task cause errors and are therefore also a source of uncertainty: 
Factor V: Errors caused by unknown data
Especially in classification tasks, a neural network that is trained on samples derived from a world W1 can 
also be capable of processing samples derived from a completely different world W2 . This is for exam-
ple the case when a network trained on images of cats and dogs receives a sample showing a bird. Here, 
the source of uncertainty does not lie in the data acquisition process, since we assume a world to contain 
only feasible inputs for a prediction task. Even though the practical result might be equal to too much 
noise on a sensor or complete failure of a sensor, the data considered here represents a valid sample, but 
for a different task or domain.
2.4  Predictive uncertainty model
As a modeller, one is mainly interested in the uncertainty that is propagated onto a predic-
tion y∗ , the so-called predictive uncertainty. Within the data acquisition model, the prob-
ability distribution for a prediction y∗ based on some sample x∗ is given by(6) /u1D703/uni007C.varD ,s∼p/u1D703/uni007C.varD,s .
(7) p(y∗/uni007C.varx∗)=/uni222B.dspΩp(y∗/uni007C.var/u1D714)p(/u1D714 /uni007C.varx∗)d/u1D714