S1548 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
for some experiments even comparable results (Lindqvist et al. 2020; Malinin et al. 2020; 
Reich et al. 2020).
Other approaches, as sub-ensembles (Valdenegro-Toro 2019) and batch-ensembles (Wen 
et al. 2019) seek to reduce the computation effort and memory consumption by sharing 
parts among the single members. It is important to note that the possibility of using differ -
ent model architectures for the ensemble members could get lost when parts of the ensem-
ble are shared. Also, the training of the models cannot be run in a completely independent 
manner. Therefore, the actual time needed for training does not necessarily decrease in the 
same way as the computational effort does.
Sub-ensembles (Valdenegro-Toro 2019) divide a neural network architecture into two 
sub-networks. The trunk network is for the extraction of general information from the input 
data, and the task network uses this information to fulfill the actual task. In order to train a 
sub-ensemble, first, the weights of each member’s trunk network are fixed based on the 
resulting parameters of one single model’s training process. Following, the parameters of 
each ensemble member’s task network are trained independently from the other members. 
As a result, the members are built with a common trunk and an individual task sub-net-
work. Since the training and the evaluation of the trunk network have to be done only once, 
the number of computations needed for training and testing decreases by the factor 
M⋅Ntask+Ntrunk
M⋅N , where Ntask , Ntrunk , and N stand for the number of variables in the task net-
works, the trunk network, and the complete network. Valdenegro-Toro (2019) further 
underlined the usage of a shared trunk network by arguing that the trunk network is in gen-
eral computational more costly than the task network. In contrast to this, batch-ensembles 
(Wen et al. 2019) connect the member networks with each other at every layer. The ensem-
ble members’ weights are described as a Hadamard product of one shared weight matrix 
W∈ℝn×m and M individual rank one matrix Fi∈ℝn×m , each linked with one of the M 
ensemble members. The rank one matrices can be written as a multiplication Fi=risT
i of 
two vectors s∈ℝn and r∈ℝm and hence the matrix Fi can be described by n+m parame-
ters. With this approach, each additional ensemble member increases the number of param-
eters only by the factor n+m
M⋅(n+m)+n⋅m+1 instead of M+1
M=1+1
M . On the one hand, with this 
approach, the members are not independent anymore such that all the members have to be 
trained in parallel. On the other hand, the authors also showed that parallelization can be 
realized similarly to the optimization on mini-batches and on a single unit.
3.3.6  Sum up ensemble methods
Ensemble methods are very easy to apply since no complex implementation or major mod-
ification of the standard deterministic model have to be realized. Furthermore, ensemble 
members are trained independently from each other, which makes the training easily par -
allelizable. Also, trained ensembles can be extended easily, but the needed memory and 
computational effort increase linearly with the number of members for training and eval-
uation. The main challenge when working with ensemble methods is the need of intro-
ducing diversity among the ensemble members. For accuracy, uncertainty quantification, 
and out-of-distribution detection, random initialization, data shuffling, and augmentations 
have been found to be sufficient for many applications and tasks (Lakshminarayanan et al. 
2017; Nanni et al. 2019). Since these methods may be applied anyway, they do not need 
much additional effort. The independence of the single ensemble members leads to a lin-
ear increase in the required memory and computation power with each additional member. 
This holds for the training as well as for testing. This limits the deployment of ensemble