S1528 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
3.1  Single deterministic methods
For deterministic neural networks, the parameters are deterministic and each repetition 
of a forward pass delivers the same result. With single deterministic network methods for 
uncertainty quantification, we summarize all approaches where the uncertainty on a predic-
tion y∗ is computed based on one single forward pass within a deterministic network. In 
the literature, several such approaches can be found. They can be roughly categorized into 
approaches where one single network is explicitly modeled and trained in order to quantify 
uncertainties (Sensoy et al. 2018; Malinin and Gales 2018; Możejko et al. 2018; Nandy 
et al. 2020; Oala et al. 2020) and approaches that use additional components in order to 
give an uncertainty estimate on the prediction of a network (Raghu et al. 2019; Ramalho 
and Miranda 2020; Oberdiek et al. 2018; Lee and AlRegib 2020). While for the first type, 
the uncertainty quantification affects the training procedure and the predictions of the net-
work, the latter type is in general applied to already trained networks. Since trained net-
works are not modified by such methods, they have no effect on the network’s predictions. 
In the following, we call these two types internal and external uncertainty quantification 
approaches.
3.1.1  Internal uncertainty quantification approaches
Many of the internal uncertainty quantification approaches followed the idea of predict-
ing the parameters of a distribution over the predictions instead of a direct pointwise 
maximum-a-posteriori estimation. Often, the loss function of such networks takes the 
expected divergence between the true distribution and the predicted distribution into 
account e.g., in Malinin and Gales (2018), Malinin and Gales (2019). The distribution 
over the outputs can be interpreted as a quantification of the model uncertainty (see 
Fig. 4  A visualization of the basic principles of uncertainty modeling of the four presented general types of 
uncertainty prediction in neural networks. For a given input sample x∗ each approach delivers a prediction 
y∗ , a representation of model uncertainty /u1D70Emodel and a value of data uncertainty /u1D70Edata . A Single deterministic 
model, B Bayesian neural network, C ensemble approach, and D test-time data augmentation. The mean 
and the standard deviation are only used to keep the visualization simple. In practice, other methods could 
be utilized. For the deterministic approaches the idea of predicting the parameters of a probability distri-
bution Ξ is visualized, other approaches which base on tools additional to the prediction network are not 
visualized here