S1522 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
models (Lakshminarayanan et  al. 2017), Bayesian inference reformulates it using Bayes 
Theorem (Bishop and Nasrabadi 2006)
The term p(/u1D703 ) is called the prior distribution on the model parameters since it does not 
take any information but the general knowledge on /u1D703 into account. The term p(D /uni007C.var/u1D703) rep-
resents the likelihood that the data in D is a realization of the distribution predicted by a 
model parameterized with /u1D703 . Many loss functions are motivated by or can be related to 
the likelihood function. Loss functions that seek to maximize the log-likelihood (for an 
assumed distribution) are for example the cross-entropy or the mean squared error (Ritter 
et al. 2018).
Even with the reformulation given in (12), the predictive distribution given in (11) is 
still intractable. To overcome this, several different ways to approximate the predictive 
distribution were proposed. A broad overview of the different concepts and some spe-
cific approaches is presented in Sect. 3 .(12) p(/u1D703 /uni007C.varD)=p(D /uni007C.var/u1D703)p(/u1D703 )
p(D).
Fig. 2  The illustration shows the different steps of a neural network pipeline, based on the earth observa-
tion example of land cover classification (here settlement and forest) based on optical images. The different 
factors that affect the predictive uncertainty are highlighted in the boxes. Factor I is shown as changing 
environments by cloud-covered trees, and different types and colors of trees. Factor II is shown by insuf-
ficient measurements, that can not directly be used to separate between settlement and forest and by label 
noise. In practice, the resolution of such images can be low and which would also be part of Factor II. Fac-
tor III and Factor IV represent the uncertainties caused by the network structure and the stochastic training 
process, respectively. Factor V in contrast is represented by feeding the trained network with unknown types 
of images, namely cows and pigs