S1523 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
2.4.2  Distributional uncertainty
Depending on the approaches that are used to quantify the uncertainty in y∗ , the formula-
tion of the predictive distribution might be further separated into data, distributional, and 
model parts (Malinin and Gales 2018):
The distributional part in (13) represents the uncertainty on the actual network output, e.g. 
for classification tasks this might be a Dirichlet distribution, which is a distribution over 
the categorical distribution given by the softmax output. Modeled this way, distributional 
uncertainty refers to uncertainty that is caused by a change in the input-data distribution, 
while model uncertainty refers to uncertainty that is caused by the process of building and 
training the DNN. As modeled in (13), the model uncertainty affects the estimation of the 
distributional uncertainty, which affects the estimation of the data uncertainty.
While most methods presented in this paper only distinguish between model and data 
uncertainty, approaches specialized on out-of-distribution (OOD) detection often explicitly 
aim at representing the distributional uncertainty (Malinin and Gales 2018; Nandy et al. 
2020). A more detailed presentation of different approaches for quantifying uncertainties in 
neural networks is given in Sect.  3. In Sect.  4, different measures for measuring the differ -
ent types of uncertainty are presented.
2.5  Uncertainty classification
On the basis of the input data domain, the predictive uncertainty can also be classified into 
three main classes:
• In-domain uncertainty (Ashukha et al. 2019)
  In-domain uncertainty represents the uncertainty related to an input drawn from a 
data distribution assumed to be equal to the training data distribution. The in-domain 
uncertainty stems from the inability of the deep neural network to explain an in-domain 
sample due to a lack of in-domain knowledge. From a modeler’s point of view, in-
domain uncertainty is caused by design errors (model uncertainty) and the complexity 
of the problem at hand (data uncertainty). Depending on the source of the in-domain 
uncertainty, it might be reduced by increasing the quality of the training data (set) or 
the training process (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021).
• Domain-shift uncertainty (Ovadia et al. 2019)
  Domain-shift uncertainty denotes the uncertainty related to an input drawn from a 
shifted version of the training distribution. The distribution shift results from insuf-
ficient coverage by the training data and the variability inherent to real world situa-
tions. A domain-shift might increase the uncertainty due to the inability of the DNN to 
explain the domain-shift sample on the basis of the seen samples at training time. Some 
errors causing domain shift uncertainty can be modeled and can therefore be reduced. 
For example, occluded samples can be learned by the deep neural network to reduce 
domain shift uncertainty caused by occlusions (DeVries and Taylor 2017). However, it 
is difficult if not impossible to model all errors causing domain shift uncertainty, e.g., (13)p(y∗/uni007C.varx∗,D)=/uni222B.dsp/uni222B.dspp(y /uni007C.var/u1D707)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DF.m/uni23DF.r
Datap(/u1D707 /uni007C.varx∗,/u1D703)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.m/uni23DE.x/uni23DE.x/uni23DF.r
Distributionalp(/u1D703 /uni007C.varD)
/uni23DF.l/uni23DF.m/uni23DF.r
Modeld/u1D707d/u1D703.