S1564 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
6  Data sets and baselines
In this section, we collect commonly used tasks and data sets for evaluating uncertainty 
estimation among existing works. Besides, a variety of baseline approaches commonly 
used as a comparison against the methods proposed by the researchers are also pre-
sented. By providing a review on the relevant information of these experiments, we hope 
that both researchers and practitioners can benefit from it. While the former can gain a 
basic understanding of recent benchmarks tasks, data sets, and baselines so that they 
can design appropriate experiments to validate their ideas more efficiently, the latter 
might use the provided information to select more relevant approaches to start based on 
a concise overview on the tasks and data sets on which the approach has been validated.
In the following, we will introduce the data sets and baselines summarized in Table  4 
according to the taxonomy used throughout this review.
The structure of the table is designed to organize the main contents of this section 
concisely, hoping to provide a clear overview of the relevant works. We group the 
approaches of each category into one of four blocks and extract the most commonly 
used tasks, data sets, and provided baselines for each column respectively. The corre-
sponding literature is listed at the bottom of each block to facilitate lookup. Note that 
we focus on methodological comparison here, but not the choice of architecture for dif-
ferent methods which has an impact on performance as well. Due to the space limitation 
and visual density, we only show the most important elements (task, data set, baselines) 
ranked according to the frequency of use in the literature we have researched.
The main results are as follows. One of the most frequent tasks for evaluating uncer -
tainty estimation methods is the regression task, where samples close and far away from 
the training distribution are studied. Furthermore, the calibration of uncertainty esti-
mates in the case of classification problems is very often investigated. Further notewor -
thy tasks are OOD detection and robustness against adversarial attacks. In the medical 
domain, calibration of semantic segmentation results is the predominant use case.
The choice of data sets is mostly consistent among all reviewed works. For regres-
sion, toy data sets are employed for visualization of uncertainty intervals while the 
UCI (Dua and Graff 2017) data sets are studied in light of (negative) log-likelihood 
comparison. The most common data sets for calibration and OOD detection are 
MNIST (LeCun et  al. 1998; Deng 2012), CIFAR10 and CAFIAR100 (Krizhevsky 
2009) as well as SVHN (Netzer et al. 2011) while ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and its 
tiny variant are also studied frequently. These form distinct pairs when OOD detection 
is studied where models trained on CIFAR variants are evaluated on SVHN and visa 
versa while MNIST is paired with variants of itself like notMNIST and FashionMN-
IST (Xiao et al. 2017). Classification data sets are also commonly distorted and cor -
rupted to study the effects on calibration, blurring the line between OOD detection 
and adversarial attacks.
Finally, the most commonly used baselines by far are Monte Carlo (MC) Drop-
out and deep ensembles while the softmax output of deterministic models is almost 
always employed as a kind of surrogate baseline. It is interesting to note that inside 
each approach–BNNs, Ensembles, Single Deterministic Models, and Input Augmen-
tation–some baselines are preferred over others. BNNs are most frequently compared 
against variational inference methods like Bayes’ by Backprop (BBB) or Probabilistic 
Backpropagation (PBP) while for Single Deterministic Models it is more common to