S1562 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
Wenger et al. (2020) proposed a Gaussian process (GP) based method, which can be 
used to calibrate any multi-class classifier that outputs confidence values and presented 
their methodology by calibrating neural networks. The main idea behind their work is to 
learn the calibration map by a Gaussian process that is trained on the networks’ confidence 
predictions and the corresponding ground-truths in the left-out calibration set. For this 
approach, the preservation of the predictions is also not assured.
5.1.3  Calibration with uncertainty estimation approaches
As already discussed above, removing the model uncertainty and receiving an accurate 
estimation of the data uncertainty leads to a well-calibrated predictor. Following several 
works based on deep ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et  al. 2017; Mehrtash et  al. 2020) 
and BNNs, (Izmailov et al. 2020; Foong et al. 2019; Kristiadi et al. 2020) also compared 
their performance to other methods based on the resulting calibration. Lakshminarayanan 
et al. (2017) and Mehrtash et al. (2020) reported an improved calibration by applying deep 
ensembles compared to single networks. However, Rahaman et al. (2021) showed that for 
specific configurations as the usage of mixup-regularization, deep ensembles can even 
increase the calibration error. On the other side, they showed that applying temperature 
scaling on the averaged predictions can give a significant improvement on the calibration.
For the Bayesian approaches, (Kristiadi et al. 2020) showed that restricting the Bayesian 
approximation to the weights of the last fully connected layer of a DNN is already enough 
to improve the calibration significantly. Zhang et al. (2019) and Laves et al. (2019) showed 
that confidence estimates computed with MC dropout can be poorly calibrated. To over -
come this, (Zhang et  al. 2019) proposed structured dropout, which consists of dropping 
channels, blocks, or layers, to promote model diversity and reduce calibration errors.
5.2  Evaluating calibration quality
Evaluating calibration consists of measuring the statistical consistency between the predic-
tive distributions and the observations (Vaicenavicius et al. 2019). For classification tasks, 
several calibration measures are based on binning. For that, the predictions are ordered by 
the predicted confidence ̂pi and grouped into M bins b1,…,bM . Following, the calibration 
of the single bins is evaluated by setting the average bin confidence
in relation to the average bin accuracy
where ̂ys , ys , and ̂ps refer to the predicted and true class label of a sample s. As noted in 
Guo et al. (2017), confidences are well-calibrated when for each bin acc(bm)=conf (bm) . 
For a visual evaluation of a model’s calibration, the reliability diagram introduced by 
DeGroot and Fienberg (1983) is widely used. For a reliability diagram, the conf (bm) is plot-
ted against acc (bm) . For a well-calibrated model, the plot should be close to the diago-
nal, as visualized in Fig.  8. The basic reliability diagram visualization does not distinguish 
between different classes. In order to do so and hence to improve the interpretability of the (47)conf(bm)=1
/uni007C.varbm/uni007C.var/uni2211.s1
s∈bm̂ps
(48)acc(bm)=1
/uni007C.varbm/uni007C.var/uni2211.s1
s∈bm1(̂ys=ys),