S1555 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
example, a mean vector and a standard deviation for a normally distributed uncertainty 
(Lakshminarayanan et  al. 2017; Kendall and Gal 2017). In doing so, a measure of data 
uncertainty is directly given. The prediction of the standard deviation allows an analytical 
description that the (unknown) true value is within a specific region. The interval that cov -
ers the true value with a probability of /u1D6FC (under the assumption that the predicted distribu-
tion is correct) is given by
where Φ−1 is the quantile function, the inverse of the cumulative probability function. For 
a given probability value /u1D6FC the quantile function gives a boundary, such that 100 ⋅/u1D6FC% of a 
standard normal distribution’s probability mass is on values smaller than Φ−1(/u1D6FC) . Quantiles 
assume some probability distribution and interpret the given prediction as the expected 
value of the distribution.
In contrast to this, other approaches (Pearce et al. 2018; Su et al. 2018) directly predict a 
so-called prediction interval (PI)
in which the prediction is assumed to lay. Such intervals induce uncertainty as a uniform 
distribution without giving a concrete prediction. The certainty of such approaches can, as 
the name indicates, be directly measured by the size of the predicted interval. The Mean 
Prediction Interval Width (MPIW) can be used to evaluate the average certainty of the 
model (Pearce et al. 2018; Su et al. 2018). In order to evaluate the correctness of the pre-
dicted intervals the Prediction Interval Coverage Probability (PICP) can be applied (Pearce 
et al. 2018; Su et al. 2018). The PCIP represents the percentage of test predictions that fall 
into a prediction interval and is defined as
where n is the total number of predictions and c is the number of ground truth values that 
are actually captured by the predicted intervals.
4.2.2  Measuring model uncertainty in regression predictions
In Sect.  2, it is described, that model uncertainty is mainly caused by the model’s architec-
ture, the training process, and underrepresented areas in the training data. Hence, there is 
no real difference in the causes and effects of model uncertainty between regression and 
classification tasks such that model uncertainty in regression tasks can be measured equiv -
alently as already described for classification tasks, i.e. in most cases by approximating an 
average prediction and measuring the divergence among the single predictions (Kendall 
and Gal 2017).
4.3  Evaluating uncertainty in segmentation tasks
The evaluation of uncertainties in segmentation tasks is very similar to the evaluation of 
classification problems. The uncertainty is estimated in segmentation tasks using approxi-
mates of Bayesian inference (Nair et  al. 2020; Roy et  al. 2019; LaBonte et  al. 2019; (34)/bracketleft.s2
̂y−1
2Φ−1(𝛼)⋅𝜎;̂y+1
2Φ−1(𝛼)⋅𝜎/bracketright.s2
(35) PI(x)=/bracketleft.s1Bl,Bu/bracketright.s1
(36) PICP=c
n,