S1515 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
Sensoy et al. 2018; Malinin and Gales 2019; Raghu et al. 2019). However, estimating 
the predictive uncertainty is not sufficient for safe decision-making. It is also crucial to 
assure that the uncertainty estimates are reliable. To this end, the calibration property 
(the degree of reliability) of DNNs has been investigated and re-calibration methods 
have been proposed (Guo et al. 2017; Wenger et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020) to obtain 
reliable (well-calibrated) uncertainty estimates.
There are several works that give an introduction and overview of uncertainty in sta-
tistical modelling. Ghanem et al. (2017) published a handbook about uncertainty quanti-
fication, which includes a detailed and broad description of different concepts of uncer -
tainty quantification, but without explicitly focusing on the application of neural networks. 
The theses of Gal (1998) and Kendall (2019) contain a good overview of Bayesian neural 
networks (BNNs), especially with the focus on the Monte Carlo (MC) Dropout approach 
and its application in computer vision tasks. The thesis of Malinin (2019) also contains 
a very good introduction and additional insights into Prior networks. Wang and Yeung 
(2016, 2020) contributed two surveys on Bayesian deep learning. They introduced a gen-
eral framework and the conceptual description of the BNNs, followed by an updated pres-
entation of Bayesian approaches for uncertainty quantification in neural networks with a 
special focus on recommender systems, topic models, and control. In Ståhl et al. (2020), an 
evaluation of uncertainty quantification in deep learning is given by presenting and com-
paring the uncertainty quantification based on the softmax output, the ensemble of net-
works, BNNs, and autoencoders on the MNIST data set. Regarding the practicability of 
uncertainty quantification approaches for real-life mission- and safety-critical applications, 
(Gustafsson et  al. 2020) introduced a framework to test the robustness required in real-
world computer vision applications and delivered a comparison of two popular approaches, 
namely MC Dropout and Ensemble methods. Hüllermeier and Waegeman (2021) presented 
the concepts of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in neural networks and discussed dif-
ferent concepts to model and quantify them. In contrast to this, (Abdar et al. 2021) pre-
sented an overview on uncertainty quantification methodologies in neural networks and 
provide an extensive list of references for different application fields and a discussion of 
open challenges.
In this work, we present an extensive overview over all concepts that have to be taken 
into account when working with uncertainty in neural networks while keeping the appli-
cability of real world applications in mind. Our goal is to provide the reader with a clear 
thread from the sources of uncertainty to applications, where uncertainty estimations 
are needed. Furthermore, we point out the limitations of current approaches and discuss 
further challenges to be tackled in the future. For that, we provide a broad introduction 
and comparison of different approaches and fundamental concepts. The survey is mainly 
designed for people already familiar with deep learning concepts and who are planning 
to incorporate uncertainty estimation into their predictions. But also for people already 
familiar with the topic, this review provides a useful overview of the whole concept of 
uncertainty in neural networks and their applications in different fields. In summary, we 
comprehensively discuss
• Sources and types of uncertainty (Sect. 2),
• Recent studies and approaches for estimating uncertainty in DNNs (Sect. 3),
• Uncertainty measures and methods for assessing the quality and impact of uncertainty 
estimates (Sect. 4),
• Recent studies and approaches for calibrating DNNs (Sect. 5),