S1559 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
uncertainty. Following, at inference, the model uncertainty cannot be obtained anymore. 
This is the main motivation for us to separate the approaches presented below from the 
approaches presented in Sect. 3.1.
One popular regularization based calibration method is label smoothing (Szegedy 
et al. 2016). For label smoothing, the labels of the training examples are modified by 
taking a small portion /u1D6FC of the true class’ probability mass and assigning it uniformly 
to the false classes. For hard, non-smoothed labels, the optimum cannot be reached in 
practice, as the gradient of the output with respect to the logit vector z ,
can only converge to zero with increasing distance between the true and false classes’ log-
its. As a result, the logits of the correct class are much larger than the logits for the incor -
rect classes and the logits of the incorrect classes can be very different from each other. 
Label-smoothing avoids this and while it generally leads to a higher training loss, the cali-
bration error decreases and the accuracy often increases as well (Müller et al. 2019).
Seo et al. (2019) extended the idea of label smoothing and directly aimed at reducing 
the model uncertainty. For this, they sampled T  forward passes of a stochastic neural 
network already at training time. Based on the T  forward passes of a training sample 
(xi,yi) , a normalized model variance /u1D6FCi is derived as the mean of the Bhattacharyya coef-
ficients (Comaniciu et al. 2000) between the T  individual predictions ̂y1,…,̂yT and the 
average prediction ̄y=1
T∑T
t=1̂yt,
Based on this /u1D6FCi , (Seo et al. 2019) introduced the variance-weighted confidence-integrated 
loss function that is a convex combination of two contradictive loss functions,
where L(i)
GT is the mean cross-entropy computed for the training sample xi with given 
ground-truth yi . LU represents the mean KL-divergence between a uniform target probabil-
ity vector and the computed prediction. The adaptive smoothing parameter /u1D6FCi pushes pre-
dictions of training samples with high model uncertainty (given by high variances) towards 
a uniform distribution while increasing the prediction scores of samples with low model 
uncertainty. As a result, variances in the predictions of a single sample are reduced and the 
network can then be applied with a single forward pass at inference.
Pereyra et  al. (2017) combated the overconfidence issue by adding the negative 
entropy to the standard loss function and therefore a penalty that increases with the 
network’s predicted confidence. This results in the entropy-based objective function LH , 
which is defined as(39)∇zCE(y, ̂y(z)) = softmax (z)−y
=exp(z)
∑K
i=1exp(zi)−y,
(40)𝛼i=1
TT/uni2211.s1
t=1BC(̄yi,̂yi,t)
=1
TT/uni2211.s1
t=1K/uni2211.s1
k=1/uni221A.s1
̄yi,k⋅̂yi,t,k.
(41) LVWCI(/u1D703)=−N/uni2211.s1
i=1(1−/u1D6FCi)L(i)
GT(/u1D703)+/u1D6FCiL(i)
U(/u1D703),