S1570 J. Gawlikowski et al.
1 3
Other approaches also learn from the robots’ past experiences of failures or detect incon-
sistencies of the predictors (Gurău et al. 2016; Daftry et al. 2016). In summary, the robot-
ics community has been both, the users and the developers of the uncertainty estimation 
frameworks targeted to the specific problems.
Yet, robotics poses several unique challenges to uncertainty estimation methods for 
DNNs. These are for example, (i) how to limit the computational burden and build real-
time capable methods that can be executed on the robots with limited computational capac-
ities (e.g. aerial, space robots, etc); (ii) how to leverage spatial and temporal information, 
as robots sense sequentially instead of having a batch of training data for uncertainty esti-
mates; (iii) whether robots can select the most uncertainty samples and update its learner 
online; (iv) Whether robots can purposefully manipulate the scene when uncertain. Most 
of these challenges arise due to the properties of robots that they are physically situated 
systems.
7.3.3  Earth observation (EO)
Earth Observation (EO) systems are increasingly used to make critical decisions related to 
urban planning (Netzband et al. 2007), resource management (Giardino et al. 2010), dis-
aster response (Van Westen 2000), and many more. Right now, there are hundreds of EO 
satellites in space, owned by different space agencies and private companies. Like in many 
other domains, deep learning has shown great initial success in the field of EO over the 
past few years (Zhu et al. 2017). These early successes consisted of taking the latest devel-
opments of deep learning in computer vision and applying them to small curated earth 
observation data sets (Zhu et al. 2017). At the same time, the underlying data is very chal-
lenging. Even though the amount of data is huge, so is the variability in the data. This 
variability is caused by different sensor types, spatial changes (e.g. different regions and 
resolutions), and temporal changes (e.g. changing light conditions, weather conditions, sea-
sons). Besides the challenge of efficient uncertainty quantification methods for such large 
amounts of data, several other challenges that can be tackled with uncertainty quantifica-
tion exist in the field of EO. All in all, the sensitivity of many EO applications together 
with the nature of EO systems and the challenging EO data make the quantification of 
uncertainties very important in this field. Despite hundreds of publications in the last years 
on DL for EO, the range of literature on measuring the uncertainties of these systems is 
relatively small.
Furthermore, due to the large variation in the data, a data sample received at test time 
is often not covered by the training data distribution. For example, while preparing train-
ing data for a local climate zone classification, the human experts might be presented only 
with images where there is no obstruction and structures are clearly visible. When a model 
which is trained on this data set is deployed in the real world, it might see images with 
clouds obstructing the structures or snow giving them a completely different look. Also, 
the classes in EO data can have a very wide distribution. For example, there are millions 
of types of houses in the world and no training data can contain the examples for all of 
them. The question is where the OOD detector will draw the line and declare the following 
houses as OOD. Hence, OOD detection is important in earth observation and uncertainty 
measurements play an important part in this (Gawlikowski et al. 2022).
Another common task in EO, where uncertainties can play an important role, is data 
fusion. Optical images normally contain only a few channels like RGB. In contrast to 
this, EO data can contain optical images with up to hundreds of channels, and a variety