S1537 A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks  
1 3
Table 3  Overview over the properties of different types of Bayesian neural network approaches as also discussed in the introduction to Sect.  3.2. The properties are stated 
relatively among the approaches
The properties should not be used to compare these approaches to other uncertainty methods such as ensembles, single deterministic models, and test-time augmentation 
methods. For a comparison of Bayesian methods to these methods see Table 1Variational inference Sampling approaches Laplace approximation
Description Variational inference approaches approxi-
mate the (in general intractable) posterior 
distribution by optimizing over a family 
of tractable distributions achieved by 
minimizing the KL divergenceRepresentation of the target random 
variable from which realizations can be 
sampled. Such methods are based on 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo and further 
extensionsSimplifies the target distribution by approxi-
mating the log-posterior distribution and 
then, based on this approximation, deriv -
ing a normal distribution on the network 
weights
Analytic expression Yes No Yes
Can be applied to pretrained networks No No Yes
Deterministic? Yes No Yes
Unbiased? No Yes No
Optimum Local optimum Hard to mix between modes Local optimum
Convergence Easy to assess convergence Hard to assess convergence Easy to assess convergence
Computational effort at training time Medium—convergence may be slowed 
down by regularization and additional 
parameters for uncertainty representationHigh—M forward passes based on sam-
pled parameters, otherwise intractableLow—training of one deterministic model 
and Laplace approximation
Computational effort at inference High—M forward passes based on sam-
pled parameters, otherwise intractableHigh—M forward passes based on sam-
pled parameters, otherwise intractableHigh—M forward passes based on sampled 
parameters, otherwise intractable
Application Scenarios Medical: (Heo et al. 2018; Chen et al. 
2021; Dusenberry et al. 2020; Nair et al. 
2020; Roy et al. 2019; Scalia et al. 2020) 
Robotics: (Tchuiev and Indelman 2018; 
Feldman and Indelman 2018) Earth 
Observation: (Rußwurm et al. 2020)Medical: (Liang et al. 2018a) Earth Obser -
vation: (Herrmann 2020) Plant Diseases: 
(Hernández and López 2020)Robotics: (Humt et al. 2020; Yun and Liu 
2023) Medical: (Niraula et al. 2022) 
Remote Sensing: (Rewicki 2021)