Ad Hoc Networks 125 (2022) 102740
2tier strategy to exploit the core features of smart application systems. 
The system has a reliable edge-tier architecture to transfer and control 
the communication between the end computing devices through a 
dedicated edge-gateway. An edge-gateway utilizes a proximity network 
to connect sensing components, actuator, and control system to provide 
inter-level communication. Moreover, the middleware applications such 
as data transformation and integration interface with a platform tier to 
offer high-level services. 
Of late, the fifth generation (5 G) has standardized the technological 
standards of broadband cellular networks for the evolution of IoT- 
enabled wireless devices (IoT-EWD). Global commercialization en-
grosses the network initiatives towards sixth-generation (6 G) to deter -
mine performance requirements, technological innovation, and key 
drivers. International Telecommunication Union (ITU) discovers a new 
horizon to enable digital society and network innovation by 2030 [1]. 
An academic institute so-called the University of Oulu, Finland allies 
with a telecom research institution to launch a 6 G flagship project [2]. 
The university research partnership focuses on the evolution of 
networking architecture to enable new technological services such as 
critical and holographic communication. The united states collaborate 
with the federal communications commission to operate the 6 G network 
in the spectrum of TeraHertz ⊑THz⊒[3]. It applies blockchain technology 
to offer a feature of dynamic spectrum sharing. 
Also, the next-generation communication systems such as aerial, 
terrestrial, maritime, and satellite integrate the feature of the 6 G 
network to discover a space-air-ground integrated network (SAGIN) to 
propose various cutting edge technologies including quantum machine 
learning and Millimeter and Terahertz Waves Communication [4]. The 
generation of mobile communication systems generally drives the 
fundamental features of the 6 G network to empower digital technolo -
gies. The advancement of the Internet of Things (IoT) deals with system 
intelligence to connect the environmental object which utilizes the 
services such as enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and massive ma-
chine type communication (mMTC) to perform intensive computing, 
data collection, processing, and analysis [5]. Moreover, the communi -
cation technologies such as high-order modulation and low-density 
parity coding consider an eMBB scenario to achieve a peak data rate 
⊃10Gbps. However, the massive growth of IoT devices consumes a 
longer time to process the environmental data to the cloud storage 
system. 
As a result, future networking system including 5 G/6 G makes a 
discovery of edge intelligence to minimize processing delay and to 
perform a power computation at mobile edge computing (MEC) [6]. It 
may converge computing, communication, and caching to standardize 
the vision of beyond 5 G (B5G) networks. Most networking scenarios 
present a predictive technical framework, three-dimension radio con-
nectivity, cell-less architecture, and resource allocation to fulfill the 
system-level perceptive of 6 G applications. The emerging communica -
tion system utilizes sensitive sensors, immersive media, autonomous 
vehicles, and IoT to fulfill the key dimensions of digital society. The 
massive volume of physical objects centralizes the operational demands 
of 6 G to coordinate with intelligent networks which offer efficient 
interaction over a dedicated network infrastructure. An effective bind-
ing can vary the limits of the network latency and amplitude to support 
convenient access and edge computing. Moreover, this technical feature 
may effectively control the usage of network resources to meet the re-
quirements of new communication services. Of late, cloud computing 
has rapidly been developed for various application services that deal 
with a massive amount of data over cloud-server [7]. 
To provide better storage efficiencies, private and public clouds are 
blended. It may involve a joint operation to develop a hybrid cloud. It is 
emerging as a new paradigm to perform storage and service computa -
tion. As a result, more individual users and enterprises are motivating to 
outsource the private data over a cloud server. It has several benefits 
such as high-quality services, greater flexibility, quick deployment, 
faster computation, and effective resource usage. The recent development makes a double-edged sword to address various chal-
lenging issues. Therefore, data security and privacy issues have attracted 
researches attention for the protection of cloud data [8]. To offer 
effective data retrieval and utilization, encrypted data over the cloud is 
stimulating more interest. In a cloud environment, data upload plays a 
significant role to ensure the security of sensitive data i.e. for 
data-owner. On the other hand, cloud servers should provide adequate 
protection from outsider attack. However, there may be a serious threat 
to the user data when the cloud server is compromised. Thus, the cloud 
server is usually a semi-trusted component to perform honest user re-
quests when any data content is attempting to gain quality services [9]. 
Of late, encryption over cloud data has enhanced the development 
aspects of data security and user protection. Since the cloud server has 
high-quality data storage, on-demand service, data accessibility, share -
ability, and consistent data backup of massive data, the storage tech-
nologies and network environment include hardware resources and 
software management to minimize the maintenance cost and service 
response time. The emerging technologies advance the development of 
cloud computing to improve the quality of user experience and appli -
cation services [10]. As a result, it allows computing devices to access 
cloud data remotely which adopts system resources such as computa -
tion, communication, and storage to enable large-scale data processing 
[11]. The intelligent system integrates a cloud storage service to manage 
extensive datasets of industrial applications. However, the applications 
are still challenging to offer better security and privacy in the manage -
ment of remote data services [12]. A large quantity of datasets generated 
by IoT devices demands efficient shareability among different 
computing devices. The real-time entities utilize trusted third parties to 
store their data files on a cloud server. 
Unfortunately, in a real-time application, cloud storage or third 
parties gain device access to collect the sensitive information of the users 
[13]. Thus, it is evident that sensitive data can easily be intruded under 
any mission-critical infrastructure by illegal users. By accessing the file, 
the entities such as cloud servers and an illegal user may acquire the 
information restricted to a particular data. In order to preserve data 
integrity, a straightforward approach is highly preferred. This approach 
can encrypt the user data before outsourcing it to the cloud server. 
However, a user wants relative searching techniques such as semantic, 
privacy-preserving, identity-based, etc. to solve the problem of intrac -
tability [14]. Zeng and Choo [15] designed a proxy re-encryption 
scheme for secure cloud storage systems. Their scheme constructs a 
conditional process to minimize computation cost and key size of the 
ciphertext. Hussain et al. [16] applied a sequence of binary bit and an 
XOR operation to develop an efficient encryption scheme. In their 
scheme, the IoT includes several stages to encrypt the data which con-
sumes less time than traditional RSA. 
Fan et al. [17] considered multi-linear mapping to design a proxy 
re-encryption with the dynamic condition. Their scheme allows the data 
owners to share the encrypted data using proxy on to the cloud. As a 
result, the data security issue is a key factor of the data owner to verify 
whether the outsourcing data is private to the cloud-server or not. Of 
late, the researchers have proposed various data encryption techniques 
[18–21] that guarantee secure data outsourcing. Lian et al. [18] utilized 
access control factors to design a proxy re-encryption scheme. Their 
scheme tries to build a system model to generate a key with multi-factor 
and weight value. Maiti et al. [19] employed a strategy of proxy 
re-encryption to present a privacy-preserving scheme. In their scheme, 
Lagrange interpolation is preferred to solve the computation cost of 
re-generation keys. Wu et al. [20] proposed identity-based proxy 
re-encryption using lattice-based cryptography. This mechanism applies 
pre-image sampling and double private-key to separate the execution of 
ciphertext transformation and decryption in order to generate a valid 
re-encryption key. Kim et al. [21] designed a proxy re-encryption 
scheme to optimize the resource usages including storage and network 
capacity. 
This scheme enables data sharing and management to design a B.D. Deebak et al.