Ad Hoc Networks 125 (2022) 102740
3lightweight device. However, the existing re-encryption techniques are 
still unavailable to construct a conventional keyword-based technique. 
Therefore, a searchable encryption technique is chosen which allows 
data users to execute the encrypted queries over stored data remotely. It 
provides security efficiency and flexibility to strengthen the verification 
process in the ciphertext environment. Of late, cloud computing has 
been more prevalent to examine the searching techniques such as multi- 
keyword ranking, fuzzy keywords, and similarity over encrypted data 
outsourcing. The authorized data users have sufficient network access to 
search outsourcing files that allow the users to search arbitrary key-
words. It can obtain the eligible data files without applying for any 
control data access. In a real-time scenario, the data owner wishes to 
access the keyword queries to grant the privileges to the different data 
users. As an instance, a technical manager allows searching techniques 
to obtain the development process of the documents. Moreover, the 
developers rely on the current projects to prevent the company from 
accessing the financial statements. 
The fine-grained data access control is not trivial to process by the 
data owner as the data can be outsourced to the remote cloud server in 
the form of encryption. Moreover, the provision of ciphertext retrieval 
considers the role of keyword trapdoor to complete a ciphertext search 
without accessing the entire documents of ciphertext. As a result, the 
bandwidth consumption can be preserved to accelerate the execution of 
ciphertext queries. However, most of the existing techniques cannot 
resist indistinguishable attack as they use a strategy of the deterministic 
trapdoor to complete ciphertext retrieval. Most importantly, searchable 
encryption techniques such as single keyword, multi-keyword, and fuzzy 
keyword linearly increase the complexity over the size of the encrypted/ 
decrypted document. The storage systems such as public, private, and 
hybrid integrate searchable encryption to gain data security and pri-
vacy. It is worthy to note that hardware storage and system maintenance 
may cause severe physical threats to cloud storage. As to strengthen the 
security features of the storage systems, people prefer encrypted cloud 
before uploading sensitive data. At present, privacy preservation is 
treating as a serious issue to outsource cloud data. 
1.1. Edge-Cloud in I-IoT 
To provide a substantial solution, an edge-cloud design is preferred 
that has a comparable platform among energy computation and industrial applications i.e. based on the Internet of Things (IoT) [22]. To 
optimize the system computation, edge computing is suited that may 
closely associate with IoT objects to acquire the cloud services. This 
systematic process may offer instant caching to analyze the online data 
efficiently to meet the industrial demand i.e. Industry 4.0. [23]. Fig. 1 
shows the architecture of edge-cloud in I-IoT that traditionally collects 
the raw data to synchronize with a cloud computing platform. Most IoT 
devices utilize edge applications to transmit industrial data to a central 
storage unit. The edge applications locate their own cloud center to 
process any real-time data which demands minimum latency to fulfill 
the requirements of cloud computing. The computing system prefers the 
edge of the network to build a robust infrastructure. It is widely 
comprised of industrial IoT devices, software applications, and network 
protocols to deliver any intellectual services. The industrial IoT includes 
sensing units, actuators, and smart devices to establish seamless inter-
action with data users. The edge of the network manages IoT devices to 
locate centralized access in the cloud. The centralized cloud solves the 
issue of data placement to minimize service latency. It uses a strategy of 
service allocation to manage the cloud services using software-defined 
networking. 
Moreover, to analyze a huge amount of industrial data, the archi -
tecture of Edge-Cloud integrates on-demand computing services over a 
dedicated Internet such as a database, server, and web-based tools. This 
architecture handles a massive amount of data generated by IoT devices 
to manage the consumption of bandwidth, storage, and processing costs. 
It uses a technology of edge computing to offer service continuity and to 
manage the cloud networks. The computing tools such as edge device, 
control access, communication, and storage are legally distributed to 
process the system functions namely query task, delegate, collect data, 
and upload. However, a data manager may authorize the user to retrieve 
the cloud data due to storage limitations. In general, communication 
latency may involve a significant role between data managers and IoT 
devices to analyze the data services. Each IoT device may typically store 
the online data over an edge platform to authorize the data owner. Most 
of the applications include online data services over the flow of data 
such as transmission latency and data redundancies. A typical win-win 
strategy may be applied to mitigate the communication cost that re-
stricts unnecessary data upload over a cloud platform. Therefore, cloud 
and edge computing may usually be honest but more curious. Tradi -
tionally, edge computing devices have fewer capabilities of intelligence 
Fig. 1.An Architecture of Edge-Cloud in I-IoT.  B.D. Deebak et al.