291 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
1 3
6.1  Context
In this case, the context for use—the COVID-19 pan-
demic—can be understood as the motivating factor 
behind a technological solution. The immediate (health) 
crisis demands swift action to stifle the further spread of 
the virus. Actions are also undertaken with the desire to 
return to less strict measures at some point post-pandemic. 
A prima facie analysis of the values at play here point 
to tensions between immediate concerns for public health  
and more enduring ones for economic stability/prosperity.  
Development of an app can be targeted to (attempt to) bal-
ance this tension, as a tracking and tracing app may assist 
in the resumption of certain societal activities such as trav -
elling or work. By tracing potential infections, resumption 
can unfold in a way that still reduces health risks as much 
as possible.
6.2  Value identification
6.2.1  Values promoted by the design: the UN sustainable 
development goals
The design of Corona Datenspende can be said to support 
the third SDG of “good health and well-being” (see Fig.  5). 
Although the impromptu technology was introduced in 
response to an immediate context, in situ deployment and use may encourage applications outside the original context 
(perhaps in other countries, or for other illnesses).4
6.2.2  Values respected by the design, with focus on those 
specific to AI: respect for human autonomy, 
prevention of harm (nonmaleficence), fairness, 
and explicability
Respect for human autonomy: here, autonomy refers to the 
balance between human decision-making power and its 
abdication to AI systems. Machines should be designed not 
only to promote human autonomy but also to constrain the 
abdication of too much decision-making power. This is espe-
cially true in areas where the value of human decision-mak -
ing outweighs the efficacy of the machine’s decision-making 
capabilities [58]. Such respect aligns with the sixteenth SDG 
(Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions), particularly 16.7: 
Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and representa-
tive decision-making at all levels [ 55].
4 Goal 3 target 3.B more aptly aims to “support the research and 
development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and 
noncommunicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, 
provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in 
accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and 
Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use 
to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects 
of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public 
health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for all” [55].
Fig. 6  VSD design process for AI technologies