286 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
Still, a self-learning algorithm can be biased due to the 
way it learns [41]. For instance, it could be biased because 
the training set for the algorithm is not representative or oth-
erwise skewed. If a form of supervised learning is chosen, 
the algorithm might conceivably learn biases that exist in 
human judgments rendered for supervisory learning. Yet if 
these potential sources of bias are also excluded, there is still 
no guarantee that the resulting algorithm will be unbiased—
and certainly not if a form of non-supervised (reinforcement) 
learning is chosen. One issue is that the resulting artificial 
neural network may be described as following a certain rule 
even if this rule was never encoded or (easily) derived from 
the nodes (variables) in the artificial neural network [c.f. 42]. 
In other words, the resulting algorithm might conceivably be 
described as following a rule that is somehow biased without 
this result being foreseeable or even clearly discernible.
Bias in the algorithm of this imaginary case could thus 
be emergent and opaque. Bias is emergent in the sense that 
it is an unintended and unforeseen consequence of the way 
the algorithm has learned. It is opaque in the sense that the 
bias may not be immediately clear or detectible from human 
inspection of the algorithm or artificial neural network.
The point generally applies beyond both this specific 
example and the value ‘freedom from bias’ (or fairness). 
Due to their self-learning capabilities, AI systems (espe -
cially those powered by ML) may develop features that were 
never intended or foreseen—or even foreseeable—by their 
designers.2 This means they may have unintended value 
consequences. It could even imply they might unintention-
ally ‘disembody’ values embedded in their original design 
[43, 44]. Unintended features may not always be discern-
ible as they could be due to specific ways the algorithm has 
developed itself—ways that are hard or even impossible for 
humans to fully understand.
These issues are not necessarily insurmountable. In the 
case of the imaginary algorithm used by the tax office, tech-
nical solutions could at least make it much less likely for the 
system to develop in a biased direction: we might tell the 
algorithm to optimise itself not only in terms of effectiveness 
(as expressed in some number or rate of fraud detection), but 
also in terms of fairness (such as presenting a non-biased 
selection of cases for investigation) [41].
The salient point is that addressing emergence and opac-
ity requires a set of design principles, or rather norms, that 
are not needed for traditional technologies. Some of these 
norms relate to technical or design requirements. Others concern organisation of the design process and the future life 
cycle of a product (continued monitoring, for instance). Still, 
others may address which AI techniques to use or not use. 
The next section looks at the AI4SG principles proposed as 
a way to address the specific challenges posed to VSD by AI.
4  AI4SG meaning and factors
Thorough work on the harmonisation of AI4SG values was 
undertaken recently by Cowls et al. (2019) who focus on 
factors that are “particularly relevant” to AI (not exhausting 
the potential list of relevant factors). The seven principles 
that are particularly relevant for orienting AI design towards 
social good are: (1) falsifiability and incremental deploy -
ment; (2) safeguards against the manipulation of predictors; 
(3) receiver-contextualised intervention; (4) receiver-contex-
tualised explanation and transparent purposes; (5) privacy 
protection and data subject consent; (6) situational fairness; 
and (7) human-friendly semanticisation [25].
Although discussed separately, the seven factors naturally 
co-depend and co-vary with one another. Thus, they should 
not be understood as a rank-ordered hierarchy. Similarly, 
they each relate in some way to at least one of the four ethi-
cal principles laid out by the EU High-Level Expert Group 
on AI: respect for human autonomy, prevention of harm, 
fairness, and explicability. This mapping onto the more 
general values of ethical AI is not insignificant as any diver -
gence from these more general values has potentially delete-
rious consequences. The function of the seven factors, then, 
is to specify these higher-order values into more specific 
norms and design requirements (Fig.  3).
We briefly describe the AI4SG principles below.
(1) Falsifiability and incremental deployment
  Falsifiability is defined as “the specification…and the 
possibility of empirical testing” [25, p. 5]. This means 
other values implicated in AI design are predicated on 
their ability to be falsifiable or essential to the architec-
ture of a technical system. Continued empirical testing 
must be undertaken in different contexts (which obvi-
ously cannot be exhausted without full deployment) to 
best ascertain the possible failures of a system. Hence 
there is a need for an incremental deployment cycle in 
which systems are introduced into real-world contexts 
only when a minimum level of safety warrants it.
(2) Safeguards against the manipulations of predictors
  The manipulation of predictors can lead to a range of 
potentially deleterious outcomes for AI, moving away 
from the boons promised by the AI4SG values. This 
is described as the outcome of the “manipulation of 
input data as well as overreliance on non-causal indi-
cators” [25, p. 57]. Along with the over-espoused but 2 Although ML is chosen as the type of self-learning AI system in 
this paper, the VSD challenges posed by AI systems of this type are 
not exclusive to ML per se. In fact, most approaches to AI learning 
are combinatory/hybrid approaches involving different types of ML 
and ANN systems. Thus at the very least, they pose VSD challenges 
similar to the types explained here.