292 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
Prevention of harm (nonmaleficence): nonmaleficence 
means understanding systemic capabilities and limits to pre-
vent potential risks and harms from manifesting in systems. 
When it comes to how individuals control their personal 
data, for example, questions of data privacy and security 
are often invoked [58]. RKI explicitly states that it does not 
collect personal user information beyond the level of postal 
codes (used to understand transmission densities). But pri-
vacy concerns exist at the community level nonetheless, par -
ticularly in regards to practices for storing, using, sharing, 
archiving, and destroying collected data. Risks of regional 
gerrymandering, targeted solicitation and/or discrimination 
are not excluded solely by delimiting data collection to the 
level of postal codes. Harm may also occur due to specific 
ways the app is used. This is especially true if the app is used 
to not only map the spread of the virus but also trace individ-
uals as potential bearers of the disease and ‘risk factors’. We 
discuss these in more detail below, under contextual values.
Fairness: fairness is typically described and defined in 
different ways, creating ambiguity in meaning. It can also 
be specified across different points in the life cycle of AI 
technologies, including their relations with human beings. 
Here, fairness can be framed as justice. Floridi et al. (2018b) 
sum up various definitions of justice in three ways. The first 
definition of justice is using AI to correct past wrongs, such 
as by eliminating unfair discrimination. The second is ensur -
ing the use of AI actually creates benefits that are shared 
(or at least shareable). The third is preventing the creation 
of new harms, such as undermining existing social struc-
tures. This general understanding of fairness as justice aligns 
directly with the sixteenth SDG (Peace, Justice and Strong 
Institutions).
Explicability: to support the other values, employed AI 
systems must be explicable. This means the inner workings 
of these systems must be intelligible (not opaque). There 
must also be at least one agent who is accountable for the 
way it works (an agent who understands the way the system 
works and is thus responsible for its actions [58]).
6.2.3  Context‑specific values not covered by 1) and 2). 
These underpin analyses of specific contexts 
and focus especially on stakeholder values
Although the German government stated that Corona Dat-
enspende would be voluntary, scholars pointed out that the 
app might nevertheless be applied in ways that endanger 
the voluntariness of use. For example, it could be used to 
allow access to certain services (such as public transport) 
or become required by employers for their employees. 
Such potential uses might, in turn, also invite individuals to 
misuse the app to retain maximum freedom of movement. 
Users might even conceal certain contacts by turning off  
their phones, which could again contribute to health risks.Similar concerns were voiced in other countries. In the 
Netherlands, sixty scientists and experts wrote an open letter 
to the Dutch government warning about a number of risks 
and unintended consequences associated with a tracing and 
tracking app [63]. Among other things, they observed that 
such an app might lead to stigmatisation and discrimination. 
Depending on how it was used, it could endanger fundamen-
tal human rights such as the right of association. They also 
drew attention to the fact that an app might give a false sense 
of security, leading people to follow requirements for social 
distancing less strictly. This would ultimately increase, 
rather than decrease, health risks.
Many of the risks and potential side effects mentioned by 
scholars regarding SARS-CoV-2 apps map onto the values 
discussed above, particularly health values (under 1) and 
non-maleficence, and justice, autonomy, and explicability 
(under 2). For example, a false sense of security relates to 
the value of health. Privacy and voluntariness relate to the 
value of autonomy. Stigmatisation and discrimination relate 
to the value of fairness [e.g. 64– 66]. Some values, such as 
the right of association or security against hacking and mis-
use, are less clearly related to one of the SDGs but could 
perhaps be subsumed under nonmaleficence.
More clearly, the issues show that we should consider val-
ues in context to gain full awareness of what is at stake and 
how we might translate our concerns into tangible design 
requirements. In this specific case, it is particularly impor -
tant to consider the behavioural effects of contact-tracing 
apps. It is also crucial to view values within a broader sys-
temic context. Even if a contextual value analysis fails to 
reveal completely new values, it will nonetheless be crucial 
for understanding which values are at stake for a specific 
application, how they should be understood in that specific 
case, and how they might translate into design requirements.
6.3  Formulating design requirements
To illustrate how tools such as the value hierarchy (Fig.  4) 
can be used to visualise and aid designers in translating 
abstract values into technical design requirements, we pro-
vide a specific instance of the tool below (Fig.  7). There are, 
of course, any number of iterations occupying any given 
vector in the hierarchy. This is just one example. Similarly, 
and to reiterate here, the desirability of using such a tool 
is the aid it provides designers. Designers are tasked with 
visualising and opening up potential design pathways. The 
tool helps in understanding the avenues for value translation, 
which are often abstract. These avenues translate values into 
concrete design requirements, and vice versa.
We chose the value of nonmaleficence because it is 
more abstract, thus illustrating the utility of the tool. Non-
maleficence was first translated through two of the AI4SG