285 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
1 3
conventional information and communication technologies, 
or at least not to the same degree [3 ]. The nature of AI thus 
carries two important implications for the issue of value 
identification. First, the original VSD list of values does not 
suffice for AI. Instead, one should consider values identified 
by an AI-specific entity as a starting point. For example, 
the EU high-level expert group on the ethics of AI lists the 
following values [33, 34]: respect for human autonomy, pre-
vention of harm, fairness, and explicability. Second, some 
value list could be desirable to ensure that typical ethical 
concerns arising from AI are not overlooked. This is not to 
say that no other values should be included in the design of 
AI applications. They should, and some form of bottom-up 
elicitation may be relevant here.1 But any elicited list should 
be supplemented by principles to ensure that typical AI ethi-
cal issues are properly addressed. We propose recourse to 
the AI4SG meanings and principles, which the third section 
discusses in more detail.
3  Challenges posed by AI
AI applications pose specific challenges for VSD that are 
largely due to their self-learning capabilities. This compli-
cates the reliable integration of values into the design of 
technologies that employ AI. We start with a brief, imagi-
nary illustration, then discuss the complications that AI 
raises for VSD in more general terms.
Suppose the tax department of a certain country wants 
to develop an algorithm that helps detect potential cases of 
fraud. More specifically, the application should help civil 
servants identify tax declarations that need extra or special 
scrutiny. Now, suppose the tax department chooses to build 
a self-learning artificial neural network for this task. An arti-
ficial neural network consists of a number of input units, hid-
den units, and one or more output units, as pictured in Fig.  2.
Let us suppose that the output unit or variable is simply 
a yes/no indicating whether a specific tax declaration needs 
additional scrutiny. The input variables (units) can be many. 
For example, they might include the amount of tax owed by 
a certain citizen, the use of specific tax exemptions, prior 
history (such as suspected fraud in the past), and any num-
ber of other personal details (age, sex, home address, etc.) 
(Fig.  2).The units (variables) in the artificial neural network are 
connected as shown in Fig.  2. Connections between units can 
be weighted factors that are learned by the algorithm. This 
learning can be supervised or not [35]. If supervised learning 
is applied, the algorithm may learn to make calls on which 
tax declarations merit further scrutiny—calls that are similar 
to those of experienced civil servants within the tax depart-
ment. In the case of unsupervised learning, information on 
which scrutinised cases led to the detection of actual fraud 
may be fed back into the algorithm. The algorithm may then 
be programmed to learn to select cases that have the highest 
probability of leading to actual fraud detection [36].
Now, one of the values that are obviously important in 
the design of such an algorithm is ‘freedom from bias’. This 
value was included on the original list proposed by Friedman 
and Kahn [37]. Friedman and Nissenbaum [38] define ‘bias’ 
in reference to “computer systems that systematically and 
unfairly discriminate against certain individuals or groups of 
individuals in favour of others” (p. 332). In traditional VSD, 
there are a number of ways this value may be implemented 
into algorithm design. First and foremost, it can be translated 
into design requirements that no variables within the artifi-
cial neural network (the nodes in Fig.  2) use as they may lead 
to an unwanted bias. Ethnicity, for example, maybe ruled out 
as a potential variable. But this is not enough to ensure the 
realisation of the value ‘freedom from bias’, as biases may 
also be introduced through proxy variables. Postal codes 
can be a proxy variable for ethnicity, so one may also need 
to rule out the use of such proxies to ensure ‘freedom from 
bias’ [39, 40].
Fig. 2  An artificial neural network
1 Bottom-up approaches can be informed by the actual processes of 
participatory design and of responsible research and innovation, such 
as those by Abebe et al. 2020; Liao and Muller 2019; Whitman et al. 
2018; Smith and Iversen 2018. They can also be informed by emerg-
ing regulation on constraining data collection practices as well as the 
design of AI systems (as relates to ‘protected characteristics’, human 
oversight, and informational roles, for example) [73, 74].