Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-021-00038-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Mapping value sensitive design onto AI for social good principles
Steven Umbrello1  · Ibo van de Poel2 
Received: 23 October 2020 / Accepted: 30 November 2020 / Published online: 1 February 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Value sensitive design (VSD) is an established method for integrating values into technical design. It has been applied to 
different technologies and, more recently, to artificial intelligence (AI). We argue that AI poses a number of challenges spe-
cific to VSD that require a somewhat modified VSD approach. Machine learning (ML), in particular, poses two challenges. 
First, humans may not understand how an AI system learns certain things. This requires paying attention to values such as 
transparency, explicability, and accountability. Second, ML may lead to AI systems adapting in ways that ‘disembody’ the 
values embedded in them. To address this, we propose a threefold modified VSD approach: (1) integrating a known set of 
VSD principles (AI4SG) as design norms from which more specific design requirements can be derived; (2) distinguish-
ing between values that are promoted and respected by the design to ensure outcomes that not only do no harm but also 
contribute to good, and (3) extending the VSD process to encompass the whole life cycle of an AI technology to monitor 
unintended value consequences and redesign as needed. We illustrate our VSD for AI approach with an example use case 
of a SARS-CoV-2 contact tracing app.
Keywords Value sensitive design · VSD · Artificial intelligence · AI4SG · Sustainable development goals · COVID-19
1 Introduction
There is ample discussion of the risks, benefits, and impacts 
of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Although the exact effects of 
AI on society are neither clear nor certain, AI is doubtlessly 
having a profound impact on overall human development 
and progress and it will continue to do so in the future [1 –3]. 
AI is understood here as a class of technologies that are 
autonomous, interactive, adaptive, and capable of carrying 
out human-like tasks [ 4]. We are particularly interested in 
AI technologies based on Machine Learning (ML), which 
allows such technologies to learn on the basis of interac-
tion with (and feedback from) the environment. We argue 
that the nature of these learning capabilities poses specific challenges for AI design. AI technologies are more likely 
than not to acquire features that were neither foreseen nor 
intended by their designers. These features, as well as the 
ways AI technologies are learning and evolving, maybe 
opaque to humans [5 ].
In this article, we build on and extend an approach to 
ethical design called value sensitive design (VSD). Although 
other tools for achieving responsible research and innovation 
have been proposed [6 , 7], we specifically chose VSD as the 
design methodology due to its inherent self-reflexivity. VSD 
also emphasizes an engagement with both direct and indirect 
stakeholders as a fundamental part of the design process and 
the philosophical investigation of values [8 , 9].
Past research has explored how VSD can be applied 
to specific technologies such as energy systems [ 10, 11], 
mobile phone usage [12], architecture projects [13], manu-
facturing [14, 15], and augmented reality systems [16], to 
name a few. Similarly, it has been proposed as a suitable 
design framework for technologies emerging in both the 
near- and long-term future. Examples include the explora-
tory application of VSD to nanopharmaceuticals [17], 
molecular manufacturing [18], intelligent agent systems 
[19], and less futuristic autonomous vehicles [ 20, 21]. 
Although these studies provide a useful theoretical basis for  * Steven Umbrello 
 steven.umbrello@unito.it
 Ibo van de Poel 
 I.R.vandepoel@tudelft.nl
1 Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies, University 
of Turin, Via Sant’Ottavio, 20, 10124 Turin, Italy
2 Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Technology, 
Policy and Management, Jaffalaan 5, 2628 BX Delft, 
The Netherlands