289 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
1 3
“outside world” [25, p. 7]. The need for ongoing monitoring 
arises from uncertainties accompanying the introduction of 
new technologies in society [57].
The resulting VSD process is illustrated in Fig.  6. Given 
that each AI system design has different uses and thus dif-
ferent value implications, the illustration serves as a general 
model for engineers to use as a guide throughout their design 
program.
We suggest that VSD for AI proceeds in four iterative 
phases briefly described below:
1. Context analysis: motivations for design differ across 
projects. For this reason, there is no normative starting 
point from which all designers begin. VSD acknowl-
edges that technology design can begin with the dis-
crete technology itself, the context for use, or a certain 
value as a starting point. In all cases, the analysis of 
context is crucial. Different contextual variables come 
into play to impact the way values are understood (in 
the second phase), both in conceptual terms as well as 
in practice, on account of different socio-cultural and 
political norms. The VSD approach sees eliciting stake-
holders in sociocultural contexts as imperative. This will 
determine whether the explicated values of the project 
are faithful to those of the stakeholders, both directly 
and indirectly. Empirical investigations thus play a key role in determining potential boons and downfalls for 
any given context.
2. Value identification: the second phase concerns iden-
tification of a set of values to form a starting point for 
the design process. We suggest three main sources for 
such values. One source is the values promoted by the 
design, such as by deriving from the SDGs. Another 
source is those respected by the design, particularly the 
values identified in relation to AI (respect for human 
autonomy, prevention of harm or nonmaleficence, 
fairness and explicability [ 33, 58]). A final source is 
context-specific values that are not covered by the first 
two sources. Instead, they derive from analysis of a spe-
cific context in the first phase and of stakeholder values 
in particular. Moreover, it should be noted that phase 
two does not just involve empirical investigations. This 
phase has a distinct normative flavour in the sense that 
it results in the identification of values to be upheld in 
further design from a normative point of view. Phase 
two also involves conceptual investigations geared at 
interpreting (in context) and conceptualising relevant 
values.
3. Formulating design requirements: the third phase 
involves the formulation of design requirements on 
the basis of identified values (phase 2) and contex-
tual analysis (phase 1). Here, tools such as the value 
Fig. 5  United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Source: [55]