284 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
how VSD might be applied to specific technologies, they 
do not account for the unique ethical and technical issues 
presented by various AI systems.
To address these challenges, we suggest expanding VSD 
to include a set of AI-specific design principles. Here, we 
propose building on significant headway made recently in 
a number of AI for Social Good (AI4SG) projects that are 
becoming popular in various research circles [22]. Various 
AI-enabled technologies have already implemented prac-
tical, on-the-ground applications of the AI4SG principles 
[23]. This provides researchers with a solid foundation 
for the manifestation of ethics in practice. But AI4SG is 
nonetheless difficult and, given the multiplicity of research 
domains, practices, and design programs, its underlying 
principles remain fuzzy [24]. Still, some work has already 
been done to narrow down the essential AI4SG principles 
[3, 25].
This paper is organised as follows. Section 1 lays out the 
VSD framework. Section 2 explains why it is challenging 
to apply VSD to AI. Section 3 relates the motivations and 
description of the AI4SG principles as a way to address the 
specific challenges posed by AI to VSD. Section 4 outlines 
a design approach inspired by VSD and the AI4SG princi-
ples. To provide a preliminary illustration of this approach, 
Sect. 5 uses the example of a specific SARS-CoV-2 contact 
tracing smartphone application. Finally, Sect. 6 concludes 
the paper.
2  Value sensitive design
Value sensitive design (VSD) is a principled approach to the 
design of new technologies that take values of ethical impor -
tance into account. The original approach was developed 
by Batya Friedman and colleagues from the University of 
Washington. As the approach grew more widespread, others developed it further (sometimes under somewhat different 
headings, such as ‘Values at Play’ or ‘Design for Values’ 
[26, 27]).
At the core of the VSD approach is what Friedman et al. 
[28] call a tripartite methodology of empirical, conceptual, 
and technical investigations (see Fig.  1). Whether carried out 
consecutively, in parallel, or iteratively, these investigations 
involve: (1) empirical enquiries into relevant stakeholders, 
their values, and their value understandings and priorities; 
(2) conceptual enquiries into these values and their possi-
ble trade-offs; and (3) technical enquiries into value issues 
raised by current technology and the possibilities for value 
implementation into new designs.
One important issue in VSD is deciding how to iden-
tify which values should be taken into account through a 
concrete process [30]. Friedman et al. [28] propose a list 
of thirteen values that are important for the design of infor -
mation systems (human welfare, ownership and property, 
privacy, freedom from bias, universal usability, trust, auton-
omy, informed consent, accountability, courtesy, identity, 
calmness, and environmental sustainability). Others have 
opposed a setlist of values, arguing that it is better to elicit 
values from stakeholders in a bottom-up approach [31, 32]. 
Both approaches probably have their advantages and dis-
advantages. A value list may well overlook values that are 
important in a specific situation, but absent from the list; 
a bottom-up elicitation may help uncover such values, but 
it is hardly watertight as stakeholders themselves may fail 
to articulate important values or crucial stakeholders may 
not have been identified. Stakeholder values, too, may not 
always have ethical importance that should be included in 
VSD.
When it comes to the identification of values in VSD pro-
cesses for AI technologies, there are some important consid-
erations. To begin, consensus about ethical issues specific to 
AI is now widespread. These issues are not raised by more Fig. 1  The recursive VSD 
tripartite framework was 
employed in this study. Source: 
[29]Conceptual Investigations
Determination and investigation of  
values from both relevant philosophical 
literatures and those explicitly elicited 
from stakeholders
Technical Investigations
Evaluation of technical limitations on the 
technology itself in terms of how they  
support or constrain identified values and 
design requirementsEmpirical Investigations
Empirical evaluation of stakeholder 
values through soci o-cultural norms 
followed by translation into potential 
design requirements