294 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
Prototyping must take into account behaviour, societal 
effects, and their subsequent impacts on values. Once 
again, the tracing and tracking app is a case in point. Some 
value issues, such as privacy, can be addressed through 
technical choices (e.g. pseudonymisation, local data stor -
age, and the automatic destruction of data after a certain 
period of time). But other value concerns require insight 
into the behavioural impacts of this sort of app. Behav -
ioural impacts are very hard, if not impossible, to predict 
reliably without some form of prototyping. At the very 
least, prediction requires small-scale testing in situ. It is 
therefore advisable to go through a number of trials for 
such apps, scaling up from very small-scale testing with 
mock-ups to test settings of increasing size (not unlike 
what is done in medical experiments with new drugs). 
Testing trajectories might also reveal new values brought 
to bear that need to be taken into account. Doing so would 
then trigger a new iteration of the development cycle.
7  Conclusion
This paper discusses how AI systems can pose certain chal-
lenges to a value-sensitive design approach in technology. 
These result from the use of machine learning in AI, which 
creates two challenges for VSD. First, it may be not at all 
clear (to humans) how an AI system has learned certain 
things. The inherent opacity of AI systems requires paying 
attention to values such as transparency, explainability, and 
accountability. Second, AI systems may adapt themselves 
in ways that ‘disembody’ the values embedded in them by 
VSD designers. To deal with these challenges, we proposed 
an extension of VSD to the whole life cycle of AI systems 
design. More specifically, we have shown how the AI4SG 
principles iterated by Floridi et al. can be integrated as VSD 
norms when considering AI design. To integrate the AI4SG 
principles into a more systematic VSD approach, we pro-
posed a design process consisting of four iterative basic 
steps: contextual analysis, value identification, translation 
of values into design requirements, and prototyping.
At the core of our model lies a two-tiered approach to 
ensuring values in the design of AI technologies. The first 
tier consists of a real commitment to contributing to social 
good (beneficence) through AI. The second tier involves 
the formulation of (and adherence to) a number of concrete 
AI4SG principles. AI4SG factors could help avoid most 
ethical harms, even without the first tier. But there is no 
guarantee at all that new AI applications will actively con-
tribute to social good. So without the second tier, there is a 
danger of contributing to societal challenges. This occurs 
when SDGs are used to legitimise AI technologies that 
do not respect some fundamental ethical principles. Here lies the danger of ethical white-washing, which is already 
visible on the webpages of some large companies.
In addition to these two tiers of values, we have argued 
that contextual values are highly important (or at least 
the contextual interpretation of values from the two tiers). 
Contextual interpretation is necessary for understanding 
which values are at stake for a specific application, and 
how to translate relevant values into design requirements.
Acknowledgments We thank the two anonymous reviewers who 
provided not only positive but constructive comments. All remaining 
errors are the author’s alone. The views expressed in this paper are not 
necessarily those of the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies. 
The content of this publication has not been approved by the United 
Nations and does not reflect the views of the United Nations or its 
officials or Member States.
Funding Open Access funding provided by Università degli Studi 
di Torino. Ibo van de Poel’s contribution is part of the project Val-
ueChange that has received funding from the European Research 
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 788321.
Compliance with ethical standards  
Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author 
states that there is no conflict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Baum, S.D.: On the Promotion of safe and socially beneficial arti-
ficial intelligence. AI Soc (2016). https ://doi.org/10.1007/s0014  
6-016-0677-0
 2. Winfield, A.F., Michael, K., Pitt, J., Evers, V.: Machine ethics: 
the design and governance of ethical AI and autonomous systems. 
Proc. IEEE 107(3), 509–517 (2019). https ://doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC .2019.29006 22
 3. Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, 
P., Dignum, V., Luetge, C., Madelin, R., Pagallo, U., Rossi, F., 
Schafer, B., Valcke, P., Vayena, E.: AI4People—an ethical frame -
work for a good ai society: opportunities, risks, principles, and 
recommendations. Minds Mach. 28 (4), 689–707 (2018). https  ://
doi.org/10.1007/s1102 3-018-9482-5
 4. Floridi, L., Sanders, J.W.: On the morality of artificial agents. 
Minds Mach. 14(3), 349–379 (2004)
 5. Boscoe, B.: Creating transparency in algorithmic processes. Del-
phi Interdiscip. Rev. Emerg. Technol. 2(1), 12 (2019)