293 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
1 3
principles (5 and 6), and then into technical design require-
ments. In this paradigm, AI4SG principles are adopted as 
norms – rightly so, given their framing by Floridi et al. [67] 
as imperatives. Naturally, any given context for use, val-
ues, and technology specifics will implicate any number of 
combinations. There is no exclusive or exhaustive route that 
might satisfy value translation, which can move in a bottom-
up direction (design requirements norms values) as well as 
the top-down diction (values norms design requirements) 
shown above (see also Longo et al. [67]). We could just 
as easily (and probably should) use situational fairness as 
the normative tool for operationalising other values, such 
as explicability (transparent dataset collection, use, storage, 
and destruction [for example, see 68]) and justice (promot-
ing non-discriminatory laws and practices through unbiased 
compliance [for example, see the use of Fairness Warnings 
and/or Fair-MAML described by 69]).
At a functional level, the normative structure of AI4SG 
values supports avoiding (most) ethical harms associated 
with AI systems. However, it does not guarantee new AI 
applications will actively contribute to social good per se . 
Combined with real operationalisation of the SDGs, the 
higher level values listed above allow for the development 
of more salient AI systems that contribute to social good 
(or global beneficence). This multi-tiered approach, which 
couples AI-specific values with stakeholder values and their 
application to SDG attainment via AI4SG norms, can miti-
gate dangers posed by ethical white-washing. Such white-
washing occurs when AI technologies that fail to respect 
some fundamental ethical principles are legitimised [70– 72].
Regardless, this type of visualisation can be used across 
different sources for values. As listed above, sources include 
the SDGs and stakeholders. Visualisation helps determine 
how related values can produce technical design require-
ments that are both similar and different. Research pro-
jects could do this empirically, by taking any particular AI technology and providing thorough value-design require-
ment translations to determine the effectiveness of this 
approach. All in all, our aim is to help designers begin to 
design for various values more effectively. Often, these val-
ues are conflated erroneously or side-lined altogether.
6.4  Prototyping
Prototyping involves building mock-ups of the technol-
ogy in question according to design requirements laid 
out in the previous step. Technology is moved from the 
more controlled space of the lab or design environment 
and in situ. This, of course, implicates stakeholder values 
both directly and indirectly. Various design decisions may 
prove recalcitrant at this point. Alternatively, unforeseen 
recalcitrant behaviour could emerge to implicate other 
values. Assuming limited deployment of the technology, 
it could be recalled into the design space so corrective 
modifications might be implemented. Given the stakes at 
play and the urgency for amelioration, the crisis situation 
behind the inception of Corona Datenspende invited direct 
deployment rather than prototyping. But while tempting, 
this may ultimately prove an unwise course of action. AI 
systems possess significant risks, especially those that are 
predicated on such large quantities of data subjects. Small 
scale deployment or in-house testing of the efficacy and 
fidelity of the app’s underlying systems are a necessary 
(albeit insufficient) condition. Absent this condition, it is 
difficult to ensure the responsible development of an AI 
system of this type. Absent responsible development, the 
app is far less likely to achieve positive ethical/societal 
values (such as beneficence, justice, explicability, auton-
omy, and associated distal SDGs) or to reduce ethical AI 
risks (such as nonmaleficence).
It must be stressed that prototyping should not be lim-
ited to testing the proper technical function of the app. Design RequirementsNormsValuesNonm aleficence
(1)Privacy  
protec/g415on and 
data subject 
consent [AI4Sg #5]
Clear terms  of use 
and UI/UX 
integrationPseudon ymization 
of data subject 
inform ation (e.g.,  
GDPR 2016/679  
[Recital 28])(1)Situa/g415onal  
fairness [AI4SG #6]
(1)Avoid data sets  
that may result in 
biases towards 
lower-inco me 
neighbourhoods  (1)Modalit y for 
data subjiect  
inform ation 
Rectification and 
erasure (e.g., 
GDPR Article 17)
Fig. 7  Translating the reduction of harm (nonmaleficence) into design requirements through AI4SG norms