287 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296 
1 3
underthought value of transparency, overreliance on 
non-causal indicators often leads to the gamification 
of systems. Those who understand which inputs lead 
to which outputs can then gamify systems to yield their 
desired ends [5 , 45].
(3) Receiver-contextualised intervention
  The co-construction and co-variance of technol-
ogy with the user implicates a delicate balancing act 
between how artefacts affect user autonomy. Within the 
context of technological design and development, user 
autonomy is a value of particular importance [46]. To 
balance the false positives and false negatives that can 
result in sub-optimal levels of user-based technology 
interventions, users can be given optionality. As one 
possible route for balancing interventions on autonomy, 
user optionality is contextualised from “information 
about users’ capacities, preferences and goals, and 
the circumstances in which the intervention will take 
effect” [25, p. 9].
(4) Receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent 
purposes
  The aims of any given system must be transparent. 
That is, the operations carried out by a system should 
be explainable so as to be understood. The evermore 
ubiquitous deployment of AI systems is already under -
way. The need for explainability and transparency in 
their operations and goals has likewise garnered much 
attention due to the potential harms that can result from 
opaque goals and operations [5 , 47, 48]. In relation to (3), information on system operations and objectives 
should be similarly receiver-contextualised [25].
(5) Privacy protection and data subject consent
  Scholarship on privacy protection and subject con -
sent is both rich and nuanced, encompassing decades 
of socio-ethical, legal, and other perspectives on the 
topics. As privacy forms the basis for good policy and 
just democratic regimes [ 49], AI4SG programs naturally 
make it an essential factor [50]. Tensions and bounda-
ries between different levels or understandings of user 
data processing and use have already been explored, 
and there are nuanced proposals for how to adequately 
address them [51, 52]. Stakeholder data is foundational 
to the usability and efficacy of AI systems, so AI4SG 
systems seek a sufficient balance that respects the values 
of stakeholders in regards to data processing and storage.
(6) Situational fairness
  As mentioned in (5), datasets are critical to the func-
tion of AI systems. Datasets can be biased on account 
of multiple factors (dataset collection, selection, 
categorisations, etc.). The resulting function of any 
given system will provide similarly biased results [5 ]. 
Biased decision-making can be of ethical importance 
because sets may involve ethically-relevant categories 
of data (such as race, gender, or age, among others) 
[38]. Recursive improvements to systems only exacer -
bate bias if designed/trained with biased datasets. The 
propagation of bias in datasets must thus be avoided if 
we are at attain AI4SG.Human 
Autonomy
(1)Receiver -
contextualised  
intervention (AI4SG  
#3)
(1)Privacy 
protection and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5)
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation 
(AI4SG #7)Prevention 
of Harm
(1)Falsifiability and 
incremental  
deployment
(2)(AI4SG #1)
(1)Privacy 
protection and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5)Fairness
(1)Safeguards 
against the 
manipulations of 
predictors (AI4SG 
#2)
(1)Situational 
fairness (AI4SG #6)Explicability
(1)Receiver -
contextualised 
explanation and 
transparent 
purposes (AI4SG 
#4)
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation  
(AI4SG #7)
Fig. 3  Relationship between higher-order values of the EU HLEG on AI and AI4SG norms