290 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
hierarchy [59] can be useful for mutually relating val-
ues and design requirements, or for translating values 
into design requirements (Fig.  5). We suggest that the 
translation of values into design requirements is some -
what different from the sets of values formulated in 
the second phase. For example, the first set of values 
might be derived from the SDGs. These values will 
be promoted by the design. They are typically trans-
lated into design requirements formulated as criteria 
that should be met as much as possible. The second 
set of values are those that should be respected, par -
ticularly in regards to AI. Here, the AI4SG principles 
are especially helpful for formulating more specific 
design requirements. Requirements will most likely 
be formulated as constraints or boundary conditions 
rather than as criteria that should be achieved as much 
as possible. Boundary conditions thus set the deon-
tological constraints that any design must meet to be 
ethically (minimally) acceptable. The third set of con-
textual values, the analysis of context and particularly 
stakeholders, will most likely play an important role 
in determining how values should be translated into 
design requirements.
4. Prototyping: the fourth phase is building prototype tests 
that meet design requirements. This idea is in line with 
what is more generally described in VSD as a value-ori -
ented mock-up, prototype, or field deployment [ 8, p. 62]. 
We propose extending this phase to the entire life-cycle 
of AI technology. Even if technologies initially meet 
value-based design requirements, they may develop in 
unexpected ways and yield undesirable effects. They 
could fail to achieve the values for which they were 
intended, or they may have unforeseen side effects that 
require consideration of additional values [60]. In such 
cases, there is reason to redesign the technology and 
complete another iteration of the cycle.
To ensure adoptability and illustrate the efficacy of this 
approach, we provide timely examples below. These exam-
ples offer a clear illustration of how the process works by 
situating it within a figurative context for a specific AI 
system.6  The AI4SG‑VSD design process in action: 
SARS‑CoV‑2 contact tracing apps
On Tuesday, April 7, 2020, the Robert Koch Institute 
(RKI)—the German federal research facility responsible 
for disease control and prevention – prompted German 
citizens with smartphones and smartwatches to voluntarily 
share their health data to track the spread of the COVID-19 
virus [61]. The RKI is rolling out a new app called Corona 
Datenspende (Corona Data Donation), which allows users 
to voluntarily and anonymously share their health data. 
The data aids scientists in determining the symptoms cor -
related with COVID-19 infection as well as the distribution 
of infections across the nation. It further helps with gaug-
ing the efficacy of public health measures to ameliorate 
the situation. The app allows the user to record their age, 
height, weight, gender, health metrics (such as physical 
activity, body temperature, sleep behaviour, or heart rate), 
and postal code. Lothar Wieler, head of the RKI, said that 
the information collected by the app would “help to bet-
ter estimate where and how fast Covid-19 is spreading in 
Germany” [62].
The RKI explicitly states that data collected from indi-
vidual users is labelled with pseudonyms. Personal user 
information, such as names and addresses, remain private 
through the use of artificial identifiers to de-identify user 
data. However, this leaves open the possibility of re-identi-
fying data subjects.3 Likewise, the machine learning systems 
underlying the app are designed to:
recognise symptoms that are associated with, among 
other things, a coronavirus infection. These include, 
for example, an increased resting heart rate and 
changes in sleep and activity behaviour. The donated 
data will only be used for scientific purposes. After 
careful preparation, the data flows into a map that visu-
ally shows the spread of potentially infected people 
down to the zip code level. [61]
Although the app is still in its infancy regarding stages 
of deployment, we can illustrate the design of the Corona 
Datenspende (albeit ex post facto  in this case) using the 
framework described above (see Fig.  6).
3 It bears mentioning that pseudonymisation is not equal to anonymi-
sation. In fact, according to GDPR, only completely anonymised 
data are outside the scope of the regulation. Pseudonymised data 
does not have the same legal consequences as anonymised data due 
to a salient difference: anonymising data means to irreversibly delete 
any potential link to the person the data originally belonged to. Con-
versely, pseudonymising data means to de-identify data through arti-
ficial identifiers—leaving open the possibility of re-identifying data 
subjects. Although pseudonymisation is considered a secure means of 
storing personal information, it does not compare to anonymisation 
as the legal consequences are substantially different: the GDPR still 
applies to pseudonymised data [75, 76].