288 AI and Ethics (2021) 1:283–296
1 3
(7) Human-friendly semanticisation
The task of managing or maximising the “semantic capital” 
of agents must be essential to the design of AI4SG systems. 
Floridi (2018) defines semantic capital as “any content that 
can enhance someone’s power to give meaning to and make 
sense of (semanticise) something” [53, p. 483]. AI allows for 
the automation of semanticisation, or making sense of things. 
If done haphazardly, the results may be ethically problematic. 
Arbitrary semanticisation can lead to results attributing mean-
ing in ways that do not map onto our own understandings 
(random meaning-making). Dataset exposure may also be too 
limited, allowing for the propagation of narrow meanings; AI 
semanticisation will likewise be too narrow, thus limiting the 
redefinition or interpretation of things [54].
This section has condensed the seven essential factors 
critical to the design of AI4SG systems proposed by Floridi 
et al. (2020). Let us now see how these factors might help 
to overcome the challenges posed to VSD by AI, which we 
discussed in the previous section. We focus on the specific 
example given in Sect.  2. First, principle 6 would require 
“remov[ing] from relevant datasets variables and proxies 
that are irrelevant to an outcome” [25, p.18]. This is in line 
with the traditional VSD approach, but it is not enough as 
AI bias may be emergent and/or hidden (opaque). Princi-
ple 1 is particularly important for addressing the emergent 
character of bias, particularly the emphasis on incremental 
development. This is primarily a procedural requirement 
that requires monitoring and extending VSD to the full-life 
cycle of design, which we discuss in greater detail in the 
next section. To avoid opacity, AI4SG principles 4 and 7 are 
important. It should be noted that sometimes, the principles 
imply certain ML techniques should not be used.
5  Adapting the VSD approach
To address the challenges posed to VSD by AI, we propose 
a modified VSD approach. The modifications we propose 
are threefold: (1) integrating AI4SG principles into VSD as design norms from which more specific design requirements 
can be derived; (2) distinguishing between values promoted 
by design and values respected by design to ensure the 
resulting outcome does not simply avoid harm but also con-
tributes to doing good, and (3) extending the VSD process 
to encompass the whole life cycle of an AI technology to be 
able to monitor unintended value consequences and redesign 
the technology as needed. We begin by briefly explaining 
these new features and then sketch the overall process.
5.1  Integrating AI4SG principles as design norms
We propose mapping the AI4SG principles onto the ‘norms’ 
category used to translate values into technical design 
requirements, and vice versa, as outlined by Van de Poel 
(2013) (see Fig.  4).
5.2  Distinguishing between promoted values 
and respected values
For a VSD approach to AI to be more than just avoiding 
harm and actually contributing to social good, there must 
be an explicit orientation toward socially desirable ends. 
Such an orientation is still missing in current proposals for 
AI4SG. We propose addressing this through an explicit ori-
entation toward the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
proposed by the United Nations, as the best approximation 
of what we collectively believe to be valuable societal ends 
(Fig.  5).
5.3  Extending VSD to the entire life cycle
To address the emergent and possibly undesirable properties 
that AI systems acquire as they learn, we propose extend-
ing VSD to the full life cycle of AI technologies. VSD 
will allow continued monitoring for potential unintended 
value consequences and technological redesign as needed 
[44, 56]. Indeed, the first AI4SG principle voices a similar 
idea: “AI4SG designers should identify falsifiable require-
ments and test them in incremental steps from the lab to the 
Design Requirement sNormsValues Valu e
Norm
Design 
Require mentDesign  
Requireme ntDesign 
Requireme ntDesign 
Require mentNorm Norm Norm
Fig. 4  Values hierarchy. Source: Van de Poel, 2013