connections from neuron u, the same weights can be used to both retrieve u's
contents and prevent u's output 
ow to other neurons in the network.
To address the problem of con
icting weight updates, LSTM extends the
CEC with input andoutput gates connected to the network input layer and
to other memory cells. This results in a more complex LSTM unit, called a
memory block; its standard architecture is shown in Figure 11.
The input gates, which are simple sigmoid threshold units with an activation
function range of [0 ;1], control the signals from the network to the memory cell
by scaling them appropriately; when the gate is closed, activation is close to
zero. Additionally, these can learn to protect the contents stored in ufrom
disturbance by irrelevant signals. The activation of a CEC by the input gate is
dened as the cellstate. The output gates can learn how to control access to
the memory cell contents, which protects other memory cells from disturbances
originating from u. So we can see that the basic function of multiplicative gate
units is to either allow or deny access to constant error 
ow through the CEC.
9 Training LSTM-RNNs - the Hybrid Learning
Approach
In order to preserve the CEC in LSTM memory block cells, the original formu-
lation of LSTM used a combination of two learning algorithms: BPTT to train
network components located after cells, and RTRL to train network components
located before andincluding cells. The latter units work with RTRL because
there are some partial derivatives (related to the state of the cell) that need to
be computed during every step, no matter if a target value is given or not at that
step. For now, we only allow the gradient of the cell to be propagated through
time, truncating the rest of the gradients for the other recurrent connections.
We dene discrete time steps in the form = 1;2;3;:::. Each step has a
forward pass and a backward pass; in the forward pass the output/activation
of all units are calculated, whereas in the backward pass, the calculation of the
error signals for all weights is performed.
9.1 The Forward Pass
LetMbe the set of memory blocks. Let mcbe thec-th memory cell in the
memory block m, andW[u;v]be a weight connecting unit uto unitv.
In the original formulation of LSTM, each memory block mis associated with
one input gate inmand one output gate outm. The internal state of a memory
cellmcat time+ 1 is updated according to its state smc() and according
to the weighted input zmc(+ 1) multiplied by the activation of the input gate
yinm(+ 1). Then, we use the activation of the output gate zoutm(+ 1) to
calculate the activation of the cell ymc(+ 1).
The activation yinmof the input gate inmis computed as
yinm(+ 1) = finm(zinm(+ 1)) (24)
20