which are connected to other neurons, are called hidden neurons.
Feed-forward neural networks are loop-free and fully connected. This means
that each neuron provides an input to each neuron in the following layer, and
that none of the weights give an input to a neuron in a previous layer.
The simplest type of neural feed-forward networks are single-layer perceptron
networks. Single-layer neural networks consist of a set of input neurons, dened
as the input layer, and a set of output neurons, dened as the output layer. The
outputs of the input-layer neurons are directly connected to the neurons of the
output layer. The weights are applied to the connections between the input and
output layer.
In the single-layer perceptron network, every single perceptron calculates
the sum of the products of the weights and the inputs. The perceptron res `1'
if the value is above the threshold value; otherwise, the perceptron takes the
deactivated value, which is usually `-1'. The threshold value is typically zero.
Sets of neurons organised in several layers can form multilayer, forward-
connected networks. The input and output layers are connected via at least one
hidden layer, built from set(s) of hidden neurons. The multilayer feed-forward
neural network sketched in Figure 4, with one input layer and three output
layers (two hidden and one output), is classied as a 3-layer feed-forward neural
network. For most problems, feed-forward neural networks with more than two
layers oer no advantage.
Multilayer feed-forward networks using sigmoid threshold functions are able
to express non-linear decision surfaces. Any function can be closely approxi-
mated by these networks, given enough hidden units.
Figure 4: A multilayer feed-forward neural network with one input layer, two
hidden layers, and an output layer. Using neurons with sigmoid threshold func-
tions, these neural networks are able to express non-linear decision surfaces.
The most common neural network learning technique is the error backprop-
agation algorithm. It uses gradient descent to learn the weights in multilayer
networks. It works in small iterative steps, starting backwards from the output
layer towards the input layer. A requirement is that the activation function of
the neuron is dierentiable.
8