{ Understanding LSTM {
a tutorial into Long Short-Term Memory
Recurrent Neural Networks
Ralf C. Staudemeyer
Faculty of Computer Science
Schmalkalden University of Applied Sciences, Germany
E-Mail: r.staudemeyer@hs-sm.de
Eric Rothstein Morris
(Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
E-Mail: eric rothstein@sutd.edu.sg)
September 23, 2019
Abstract
Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN)
are one of the most powerful dynamic classiers publicly known. The net-
work itself and the related learning algorithms are reasonably well docu-
mented to get an idea how it works. This paper will shed more light into
understanding how LSTM-RNNs evolved and why they work impressively
well, focusing on the early, ground-breaking publications. We signicantly
improved documentation and xed a number of errors and inconsistencies
that accumulated in previous publications. To support understanding we
as well revised and unied the notation used.
1 Introduction
This article is an tutorial-like introduction initially developed as supplementary
material for lectures focused on Articial Intelligence. The interested reader
can deepen his/her knowledge by understanding Long Short-Term Memory Re-
current Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN) considering its evolution since the early
nineties. Todays publications on LSTM-RNN use a slightly dierent notation
and a much more summarized representation of the derivations. Nevertheless
the authors found the presented approach very helpful and we are condent this
publication will nd its audience.
Machine learning is concerned with the development of algorithms that au-
tomatically improve by practice. Ideally, the more the learning algorithm is run,
the better the algorithm becomes. It is the task of the learning algorithm to
create a classier function from the training data presented. The performance
of this built classier is then measured by applying it to previously unseen data.
Articial Neural Networks (ANN) are inspired by biological learning sys-
tems and loosely model their basic functions. Biological learning systems are
1arXiv:1909.09586v1  [cs.NE]  12 Sep 2019