11.3 Other learning tasks
Early papers applied LSTM-RNN to a number of real world problems pushing its
evolution further. Covered problems include protein secondary structure predic-
tion [40, 9] and music generation [15]. Network security was covered in [65, 66]
were the authors apply LSTM-RNN to the DARPA intrusion detection dataset.
In [80, 70] the authors apply computational tasks to LSTM-RNN. In 2014
the authors of [80] evaluate short computer programs using the Sequence-to-
Sequence framework. One year later the authors of [70] use a modied version
of the framework to learn solutions of combinatorial optimisation problems.
12 Conclusions
In this article, we covered the derivation of LSTM in detail, summarising the
most relevant literature. Specically, we highlighted the vanishing error prob-
lem, which is a serious shortcoming of RNNs. LSTM provides a possible solution
to this problem by introducing a constant error 
ow through the internal states
of special memory cells. In this way, LSTM is able to tackle long time-lag prob-
lems, bridging time intervals in excess of 1,000 time steps. Finally, we introduced
two LSTM extensions that enable LSTM to learn self-resets and precise timing.
With self-resets, LSTM is able to free memory of irrelevant information.
Acknowledgements
This work was mainly pushed as a private project from Ralf C. Staudemeyer
spanning a period of ten years from 2007{17. During the time 2013{15 it was
partially supported by post-doctoral fellowship research funds provided by the
South African National Research Foundation, Rhodes University, the University
of South Africa, and the University of Passau. The co-author Eric Rothstein
Morris picked-up the loose ends, developed the unied notation for this article
in 2015{16.
We acknowledge support for this work from Ralf's Ph.D. supervisor Chris-
tian W. Omlin for raising the authors interest to investigate the capabilities of
Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks. Very special thanks go
to Arne Janza for doing the internal review. Without his dedicated support to
eliminate a number of hard to nd logical inconsistencies this publication would
not have found its way to the reader.
References
[1] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate. In Proc. oftheInt.
Conf. onLearning Representations (ICLR 2015), volume 26, page 15, sep
2015.
[2] Bram Bakker. Reinforcement learning with long short-term memory. In
Advances inNeural Information Processing Systems (NIPS'02), 2002.
35