complex webs of interconnected neurons. Neurons are simple units accepting
a vector of real-valued inputs and producing a single real-valued output. The
most common standard neural network type are feed-forward neural networks.
Here sets of neurons are organised in layers: one input layer, one output layer,
and at least one intermediate hidden layer. Feed-forward neural networks are
limited to static classication tasks. Therefore, they are limited to provide a
static mapping between input and output. To model time prediction tasks we
need a so-called dynamic classier.
We can extend feed-forward neural networks towards dynamic classication.
To gain this property we need to feed signals from previous timesteps back into
the network. These networks with recurrent connections are called Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) [74], [75]. RNNs are limited to look back in time for
approximately ten timesteps [38], [56]. This is due to the fed back signal is
either vanishing or exploding. This issue was addressed with Long Short-Term
Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN) [22], [41], [23], [60]. LSTM
networks are to a certain extend biologically plausible [58] and capable to learn
more than 1,000 timesteps, depending on the complexity of the built network
[41].
In the early, ground-breaking papers by Hochreiter [41] and Graves [34], the
authors used dierent notations which made further development prone to errors
and inconvenient to follow. To address this we developed a unied notation and
did draw descriptive gures to support the interested reader in understanding
the related equations of the early publications.
In the following, we slowly dive into the world of neural networks and speci-
cally LSTM-RNNs with a selection of its most promising extensions documented
so far. We successively explain how neural networks evolved from a single per-
ceptron to something as powerful as LSTM. This includes vanilla LSTM, al-
though not used in practice anymore, as the fundamental evolutionary step.
With this article, we support beginners in the machine learning community to
understand how LSTM works with the intention motivate its further develop-
ment.
This is the rst document that covers LSTM and its extensions in such great
detail.
2 Notation
In this article we use the following notation:
The learning rate of the network is .
A time unit is . Initial times of an epoch are denoted by t0and nal
times byt.
The set of units of the network is N, with generic (unless stated otherwise)
unitsu;v;l;k2N.
The set of input units is I, with input unit i2I.
The set of output units is O, with output unit o2O.
The set of non-input units is U.
2