Figure 8: This gure shows a fully recurrent neural network (RNN) with self-
feedback connections.
system and the model is learned during collection. Therefore, RTRL is an online
learning algorithm.
6 Training Recurrent Neural Networks
The most common methods to train recurrent neural networks are Backpropa-
gation Through Time (BPTT) [62, 74, 75] and Real-Time Recurrent Learning
(RTRL) [75, 76], whereas BPTT is the most common method. The main dier-
ence between BPTT and RTRL is the way the weight changes are calculated.
The original formulation of LSTM-RNNs used a combination of BPTT and
RTRL. Therefore we cover both learning algorithms in short.
6.1 Backpropagation Through Time
The BPTT algorithm makes use of the fact that, for a nite period of time, there
is an FFNN with identical behaviour for every RNN. To obtain this FFNN, we
need to unfold the RNN in time. Figure 9a shows a simple, fully recurrent
neural network with a single two-neuron layer. The corresponding feed-forward
neural network, shown in Figure 9b, requires a separate layer for each time step
with the same weights for all layers. If weights are identical to the RNN, both
networks show the same behaviour.
The unfolded network can be trained using the backpropagation algorithm
described in Section 4. At the end of a training sequence, the network is unfolded
in time. The error is calculated for the output units with existing target values
using some chosen error measure. Then, the error is injected backwards into
the network and the weight updates for all time steps calculated. The weights
in the recurrent version of the network are updated with the sum of its deltas
over all time steps.
We calculate the error signal for a unit for all time steps in a single pass,
using the following iterative backpropagation algorithm. We consider discrete
time steps 1 ;2;3:::, indexed by the variable . The network starts at a point in
timet0and runs until a nal time t. This time frame between t0andtis called
anepoch. Let Ube the set of non input units, and let fube the dierentiable,
non-linear squashing function of the unit u2U; the output yu() ofuat time
13