          ISSN : 2302 -9285  
Bulletin  of Electr Eng & Inf , Vol. 10, No. 2, April  2021  :  870 – 878 872 
Hence, this research is contemplating to regression task under supervised division . This is because 
regression task refers to the model changing in forecasting numerical value [17] that fits the focal point of the 
research such prediction . In other words, this research will predict the remaining life of machine from an oil 
and gas company by using the numerical data produced by them . Iqbal and Yan  [18] listed down five kinds 
of machi ne learning algorithms in respect to supervised set . There are logic -based algorithms, statistical 
learning algorithms, instance based learning (IBL), support vector machines (SVM) and DL. The algorithms 
have been measured in terms of their  accuracy in prediction as [19] highlighted . If the prediction produces 
inaccurate result, it may lead to a faulty expectation . The research is focusing on accuracy because an 
accurate prediction model can influence the decision making of an individual in their daily activity [20]. For 
example, manufacturing sector seeks help from an accurate forecast model in deciding the manufacturing 
rate. 
Logic -based algorithms consist of decision tree (DT) and rule system . DT is claimed to produce low 
accuracy because of its greediness while executing the algorithm [21]. In DT, entropy and information gain 
play the most important role in splitting the attributes . Entropy is computing the vulnerability within the set 
of training because of the possibility of more than on e possible splitting solution [22]. The ideal solution is 
having the lowest entropy that will put the probability, p either in 0 or 1 as  shown in Figure 2 . 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Graph of entropy ft probability  
 
Entropy is related to information gain as an accurat e dt occupies lower entropy and the highest 
information gain . infor mation Gain as shown in (2) is the differences in the entropy due to the partition [22]. 
 
Gain spit=Entropy (p) − (∑ni
n Entropy (i)k
i=1 ) (2) 
 
Entropy (p) is the root node while k refers to splitt ing node and 𝑛𝑖 stands for occurrence in partition 
i. It only considers the highest value that is contemplating as bias on the splitting process [23]. Although DT 
can handle noise and missing values very well but it provides unstable result as the whole tree need to be re -
constructed when new attributes are inserted . This will take a longer execution time . 
As for rule system (RS), the accuracy is poor especially for long and complex list [24]. The 
algorithm exists in form of A → B where A is the pre decessor while B represents the successor [25]. The 
values returned by RS will be true or false with true is kept as valid in the system [25]. The structure of RS is 
easy but it can be complex when the rules are lengthy . The transparency might be affected [15]. Thus, either 
DT or rule system is not suitable for prediction purpose . 
Statistical learning algorithms comprise of Naïve Bayes classifiers (NBC) and Bayesian networks . 
Those two algorithms are interconnected among each other . NBC is one of the member s in the Bayesian 
group [26] thus they applied the same concepts in the way they work . Bayesian looks over past studies result 
in longer execution time [24]. The solution will be less inferential impact as the method views  along on 
insignificant data [27]. Bayesian is also known to deal with a limited amount of continuous values [28]. The 
common practices are transforming the continuous attributes into  discrete variables . The convers ion process 
however able to apprehend with rough features only on the initi al distribution unleashing the statistical 
leverages mainly if the relationship among the traits are linear [28]. Therefore, NBC and Bayesian are not 
competent to complete the foresee errand . 
Instance -based learning (IBL) tradeoff between discovering and r emoving noise in data with 
accuracy making them to be poor [29]. It stores lots of variables include those necessary and unnecessary