Bulletin  of Electr Eng & Inf   ISSN: 2302 -9285   
 
Predicting machine failure using recurrent neural network -gated recurrent unit … (Zainuddin Z .) 871 
them and result in the unknown information [7]. It is implemented in variety of fields for example financial, 
sales and many more . The term helps an organization from bearing a responsible for the loss incurre d in case 
of machine fault . 
A fault can be an unusuality showed by the machine or gears such as any component undergoes 
sudden breakdown or shutdown [8]. A fault occur to the machine is the root cause of machine failure . 
Immerman  [9] stated that 82% of fir ms suffer losses up to $260 .000 per hour when machine faced with sudden 
fail for the past three years . Stratus technologies calculated almost $20 Billion or 5% from the total 
production lost during unexpected failure [10]. Thus, predicting machine failure can help monitoring the 
machine condition and sparing the expenses as they will be examines over time [8]. Thus, this paper is 
focusing on predicting machine failure by using time series data induced from the machine itself to achieve 
high availability in production process and aim for zero unexpected failure . The prediction is constructed by 
using ML algorithm in regard to my domain in information technology (IT) . 
ML can run time series data to locate the pattern for forecasting purpose [11]. The author pr oved by 
applying random forest (RF) to prognosticate sales . The sales distribution is analysed to conceptualize the 
pattern of sales upon years . Once RF is  attached to the data, the error estimation is tabulated . Mean absolute 
error (MAE) is referred as th e error calculation in (1) . 
 
Error =MAE
Mean (sales )∗100%   (1) 
 
The quotient of training is recorded to 3 .9% while the validation hits 11 .6%. Then, RF is generalized to 
prevent bias occasion . The generalization helps in getting more exact result from the patter n showed by the 
data even though the presence of noise is detected [11]. 
Another research from [12] that utilized deep learning (DL) to perform on time series data in solar 
photovoltaic (PV) . The data is modified according to previous structure and forecas ting scope as the scope 
will react to each problem . Then, the data is divided into three categories called training, testing and 
validation . DL has its own parameters that affect the sequel thus grid search is imposed by using the training 
and validation s ets. The search will find the ideal values for the parameters as the solution and being 
compared with the validation set . The most optimal one will be used for foreseeing task . DL displayed the 
lowest root mean squared error (RMSE), 148 .98 and 114 .76 for M AE compared to the other algorithms . 
Therefore, ML works well with time series data for prediction . 
Rebala et al . [13] categorized three types of ML algorithms named supervised, unsupervised and 
reinforcement . Supervised is the relation between input and output through a function produced by the 
algorithm . In other hand, unsupervised is dealing with unmarked data which required the model to self -learn 
by its own to attain information . Reinforcement is the respon se of algorithm with reference to benefit and 
penalization . Praveena and Jaiganesh  [14] supports the statement by illustrating machine learning algorithms 
into three classes as per Figure 1 . 
Figure 1 shows that supervised is a task driven or a series of ac tivity that being fulfilled to satisfy 
the objectives . The task driven can be classified into regression or classification . Regression is working on 
continuous data while classification implies at a fixed esteem point [15]. The second category is known as 
unsupervised or data driven group . Data driven is an expression for an activity influenced by data and did not 
impacted by instinct or individual observation . The most common example is clustering . Clustering allows 
one to search for the group with similar  characteristics in a partition considering them belongs to 
unsupervised learning style [16]. The last class is reinforcement which permits the algorithm to react towards 
the world’s perception depending on policy learned . The surrounding will be affected by the reaction thus 
encompassing responses aided on the algorithm . 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Types of machine learning algorithm