Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Informatics  
Vol. 10, No. 2, April 2021 , pp. 870~878 
ISSN: 2302 -9285 , DOI: 10.11591/eei .v10i2 .2036       870 
  
Journal homepage : http://beei .org Predicting machine failure using recurrent neural network -
gated recurrent unit (RNN -GRU) through time series data  
 
 
Zainuddin Z ., P. Akhir E . A., Hasan M . H. 
Department of Computer & Information Science, Universiti Teknologi Petronas, Tronoh Perak, Malaysia  
 
 
Article Info   ABSTRACT  
Article history:  
Received Oct 25, 2020 
Revised Jan 17, 2021 
Accepted Feb 15, 2021 
  Time series data often involves big size environment that lead to high 
dimensionality problem . Many industries are generating time series data that 
continuously update each second . The arising of machine learning may help 
in managing the data . It can forecast f uture instance while handling large data 
issues . Forecasting is related to predicting task of an upcoming event to avoid 
any circumstances happen in current environment . It helps those sectors such 
as production to foresee the state of machine in line with  saving the cost from 
sudden breakdown as unplanned machine failure can disrupt the operation 
and loss up to millions . Thus, this paper offers a deep learning algorithm 
named recurrent neural network -gated recurrent unit (RNN -GRU) to forecast 
the state of machines producing the time series data in an oil and gas sector . 
RNN -GRU is an affiliation of recurrent neural network (RNN) that can 
control consecutive data due to the existence of update and reset gates . The 
gates decided on the necessary information t o be kept in the memory . RNN -
GRU is a simpler structure of long short -term memory (RNN -LSTM) with 
87% of accuracy on prediction . Keyword s: 
Gated recurrent unit  
Machine failure  
Machine learning  
Prediction  
Time series data  
This is an open access article under the CC BY -SA license . 
 
Corresponding Author:  
Zainuddin Z  
Computer & Information Science Department  
Universiti Teknologi Petronas  
Bandar Seri Iskandar, 32610 Tronoh, Perak  
Email: zahirah_18003491@utp .edu.my 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION   
Oil and gas industry deals with lots of activities such as manufacturing the oil and gas for sale while 
providing some sorts of services in refining the oil and gas and transport them to a required petrol station [1]. 
All the activities generate time series da ta from sensors, corporate document archive and internet . Time series 
data is a successive of data points observed over a chronological of time [2]. The data is updated each second 
and revolves around big data size issue and complexity of attributes [3]. This research adopts a set of time 
series data apprehended by an oil and gas corporation generated from several kinds of sensors . The data is 
given in massive amount of 55 GB kept in CSV format . There are three types of columns consisting tag 
(name of machi nes), time and value with an interval of one year . The information is increasing over time lead 
to big data size problem . They in need of new algorithms and procedures to handle them for getting a new 
result [4]. Hence, machine learning (ML) algorithm is p roposed to manage the problem . 
ML is an aid to computer by modeling past experiences for forecasting the future considering as a 
major topic in artificial intelligence (AI) [5]. It has been an incredible discover in identifying the connection 
among the inf ormation, processing big data size and able to achieve the same performance as machine 
operation [6]. The algorithm is valuable when it receives more data as it can grasp the pattern from them to 
predict on new outcome . Prediction is defined as an activity  of grapping the acquired knowledge to process