          ISSN : 2302 -9285  
Bulletin  of Electr Eng & Inf , Vol. 10, No. 2, April  2021  :  870 – 878 874 
RNN -GRU is proved to execute faster around 18 .16% than RNN -LSTM when median values are 
combined  together [46]. This means that GRU can work faster than LSTM without com promising the 
accuracy . One of the existing literature on time series forecasting using GRU model i s written by Rahman  
et al., [47] it is used to predict the price of stock market . The authors started fetch real time dataset gathered 
from Yahoo Finance [47]. Pandas collections are used to separate the data into training and testing [47]. The 
current input is marked as t while the ou tput will be class ified into t+1 [47]. Then, the data  is scaled and 
reshape into appropriate composition . Since that GRU is associated with neural network (NN), all elements 
belong to NN is activated [47]. The proposed method is fit into training data and output will be se eing 
through testing . Real values ar e set as the benchmark for comparison between training and testing . The result 
is visualized for further evaluation . To conclude, the first data came from lowe r’s company (LOW) with 
RMSE of 0 .0127464 followed by Coca -Cola Company at 0 .0144508 . The third co mpany named Apple 
Incorporation displays 0 .013996 as the RMSE . This demonstrates the excellency of GRU with time series 
data for prediction activity .  
The stat ement is supported by Le et al., they claimed that GRU can deliver equivalent great outcome 
with simpler structure [48]. The writers utilized 18 years of water level data at the Can Tho river from  
January 2000 to January 2018 . The data is split up into three  division categorized as training, tes ting and 
validation . Seventeen years from 2000 to 2016 are allocated for training [48]. Year of 2017 are u sed for 
validation and five days in January 2018 granted for prediction a nd evaluation . The model is tra ined to 
identify the value for its parameters [48]. This research only required one variable of data named water level 
which m ake the time step to be one as the dimension for input and output [48]. The hidden layers are  decided 
to be in range 5  to 20. The design is finalized with number of epochs, dro pout, learning rate and Adam 
algorithm towards the data . As the result, MAE is tabulated among 0 .087 to 0 .106. Hence, the authors able to 
prove that GRU can yield not much significant of error values with fewer gates . 
 
 
2. RESEARCH METHOD  
Research activity fo r this paper is presented here to satisfy the research objectives . There are seven  
essential steps in the research activities as demonstrated in Figure 4 . 
‒ Collection of data  
Oil and gas organizations support this research by giving out its histo rical of one year data . The size 
is estimated at 55 GB . 
‒ Data cleaning  
There are three  columns of name of machines or tags, time and the value of tags . A meeting is 
conducted with a data expert from the involved company to consult on the data . Any noise or error is 
resolved amid the session . 
‒ Division of data  
The ratio set for training and testing is 7:3 . 
‒ RNN -GRU construction  
The time series data is feed towards the algorithm . The v alues are normalized into 0 and 1. GRU is 
adjusted to fit with data structure . A random value is set at number of epochs and look back . The error is 
computed through RMSE  during loop back with ADAM optimizer to update the network weight . 
‒ Training of RNN -GRU  
Update gate in charge of taking in input to figure out the amount of required information to along 
with the content of information . 
 
zt=σ(W(z)xt+U(z)ht−1) (5) 
 
𝑥𝑡 represents the present input is multiplied with its weight 𝑊(𝑧) in the meantime of multiplication of ℎ𝑡−1 , 
past data with its input 𝑈(𝑧). Both answers are aggregated and times with sigmoid functi on. The result is 
displayed as  𝑧𝑡 in the range of 0  to 1. 
 
ht=zt⨀ht−1+(1−zt)⨀ht (6) 
 
𝑧𝑡 and ℎ𝑡−1 is element -wise and added up with element -wise of 1−𝑧𝑡 and ℎ𝑡. ℎ𝑡 is referred to the essential 
information to be stored in memory will be passing down to reset gate .  
 
rt=σ(W(r)xt+U(r)ht−1) (7)