asﬁsh and mammals, these abilities are elaborated and combined with
new strategies to enable more pow erful behavioral strategies.
This evolutionary perspective suggests a strategy for passing the
embodied Turing test by breaking it down into a series of incremen-
tally challenging ones that build on each other, and iteratively opti-
mizing on this series53.S p e c i ﬁcally, the embodied Turing test
comprises challenges that include a wide range of organisms used inneuroscience research, including worms, ﬂies,ﬁsh, rodents and pri-
mates. This would enable us to deploy the vast amount of knowledgewe have accumulated about the behavior, biomechanics, and neuralmechanisms of these model organisms to both precisely de ﬁne each
species-speci ﬁc embodied Turing test and serve as strong inductive
biases to guide the development of robust AI controllers that canpass it.
The performance of these arti ﬁcial agents could be compared
with that of animals. Rich behavioral datasets representing a large
swath of a species ’ethogram have now been collected and can be
deployed to benchmark performance on species-speci ﬁc embodied
Turing tests. Furthermore, these datasets are being rapidly expandedg i v e nn e wt o o l si n3 Dv i d e o g r a p h y
54–57. Additionally, detailed bio-
mechanical measurements support highly realistic animal body mod-els, complete with skeletal constraints, muscles, tendons, and pawfeatures
58. Combined with the open-sourcing of powerful, fast physics
simulators and virtual environments59,60, these models will afford the
opportunity for embodied Turing test research to be performed insilico at scale
33. Finally, existing extensive neural datasets with simul-
taneous neural recordings across multiple brain regions during beha-
vior, combined with increasingly detailed neural anatomy andconnectomics, provide a powerful roadmap for the design of AI sys-tems that can control virtual animals to recapitulate the behaviors oftheir in vivo counterparts and thus pass the embodied Turing test.
Importantly, the speci ﬁcs of the embodied Turing test for each
species can be tuned to the needs of different groups of researchers.We can test the capacity of AI systems in terms of sensorimotor con-trol, self-supervised and continual learning, generalization, memory-guided behavior on both short and life-long timescales, and socialinteractions. Despite these potentially different areas of interest, the
challenges that compose the embodied Turing test can be standar-
dized to permit the quanti ﬁcation of progress and comparison
between research efforts. Standardization can be fostered by stake-holders including government and private funders, large researchorganizations such as the Allen Institute, and major collaborations likethe International Brain Lab, with an eye toward the development ofcommon APIs and support for competitions as has been an importantimpetus for much progress in machine learning and robotics
61,62.
Ultimately, virtual organisms that demonstrate successful recapitula-tion of behaviors of interest can be adapted to the physical world withadditional efforts in robotics and deployed to solve real-world
problems.
What we need
Achieving these goals will require signi ﬁcant resources deployed in
three main areas. First, we must train a new generation of AI researchers
who are equally at home in engineering/computational science andneuroscience . These researchers will chart fundamentally new direc-
tions in AI research by drawing on decades of progress in neu-roscience. The greatest challenge will be in determining how to exploitthe synergies and overlaps in neuroscience, computational science,and other relevant ﬁelds to advance our quest: identifying what details
of the brain ’s circuitry, biophysics, and chemistry are important and
what can be disregarded in the application to AI. There is thus a critical
need for researchers with dual training in AI and neuroscience to applyinsights from neuroscience to advance AI and to help design experi-ments that generate new insights relevant to AI. Although there isalready some research of this type, it exists largely at the margins ofmainstream neuroscience; training in neuroscience has thus far been
motivated and funded mainly by the goal of improving human healthand of understanding the brain as such. This lack of alignment betweenﬁelds might explain, e.g., the multi-decade gap between Hubel and
Wiesel ’s discovery of the structure of the visual system
6and the
development and application of convolutional neural networks inmodern machine learning
8. Thus, the success of a NeuroAI research
program depends on the formation of a community of researchers for
whom the raison d'être of their training is to exploit synergies between
neuroscience and AI. Explicit design of new training programs canensure that the NeuroAI research community re ﬂects the demo-
graphics of society as a whole and is equipped with the ethical toolsneeded to ensure that the development of AI bene ﬁts society
63.
Second, we must create a shared platform capable of developing
and testing these virtual agents. One of the greatest technical chal-
lenges that we will face in creating an iterative, embodied Turing test
and evolving arti ﬁcial organisms to pass it is the amount of compu-
tational power required. Currently, training just one large neural net-work model on a single embodied task (e.g. control of a body in3-dimensional space) can take days on specialized distributedhardware
64. For multiple research groups to iteratively work together
to optimize and evaluate a large number of agents over multiplegenerations on increasingly complex embodied Turing tests, a largeinvestment in a shared computational platform will be required. Muchlike a particle accelerator in physics or large telescope in astronomy,this sort of large-scale shared resource will be essential for moving the
brain-inspired AI research agenda forward. It will require a major
organizational effort, with government and ideally also industry sup-port, that has as its central goal scienti ﬁc progress on animal and
human-like intelligence.
Third, we must support fundamental the oretical and experimental
research on neural computation .W eh a v el e a r n e dat r e m e n d o u s
amount about the brain over the last decades, through the efforts ofthe NIH, in no small measure due to the BRAIN Initiative, and othermajor funders, and we are now reaching an understanding of the vastdiversity of the brain ’s individual cellular elements, neurons, and how
they function as parts of simple circuits. With these building blocks in
place, we are poised to shift our focus toward understanding how the
brain functions as an integrated intelligent system. This will requireinsight into how a hundred billion neurons of a thousand differenttypes, each one communicating with thousands of other neurons, withvariable, adaptable connections, are wired together, and the compu-tational capabilities —the intelligence —that emerges. We must reverse
engineer the brain to abstract the underlying principles. Taking
advantage of the powerful synergies between neuroscience and AI willrequire program and infrastructure support to organize and enableresearch across the disciplines at a large scale.
Fortunately, there is now broad political agreement that invest-
ments in AI research are essential to humanity ’s technological future.
Indeed, IARPA (Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity) was apioneer in this ﬁeld, launching the Machine Intelligence from Cortical
Networks (MICrONS) project. This project spearheaded the collectionof an unprecedented data set consisting of a portion of a mouseconnectome and associated functional responses with the speci ﬁc goal
of catalyzing the development of next-generation AI algorithms
65.
Nonetheless, community-wide efforts to bridge the ﬁelds of neu-
roscience and AI will require robust investments from governmentresources, as well as oversight of project milestones, commercializa-tion support, ethics, and big bets on innovative ideas. In the U.S., thereare currently some lines of federal resourcing, such as the NSF ’s
National Arti ﬁcial Intelligence Research Institutes, explicitly dedicated
to driving innovation and discovery in AI from neuroscience research,but these are largely designed to support a traditional academic modelwith different groups investigating different questions, rather than thecreation of a centralized effort that could create something like thePerspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37180-x
Nature Communications |         (2023) 14:1597 4