Turing test: An arti ﬁcial beaver might be tested on its ability to build a
dam, and an arti ﬁcial squirrel on its ability to jump through trees.
Nonetheless, many core sensorimotor capabilities are shared byalmost all animals, and the ability of animals to rapidly evolve the
sensorimotor skills needed to adapt to new environments suggests
that these core skills provide a solid foundation. This implies that afterdeveloping an AI system to faithfully reproduce the behavior of onespecies, the adaptation of this system to other species —and even to
humans —may be straightforward. Below we highlight a few of the
characteristics that are shared across species.
Animals engage their environments
The de ﬁning feature of animals is their ability to move around and
interact with their environment in purposeful ways. Despite recentadvances in optimal control, reinforcement learning, and imitation
learning, robotics is still far from achieving animal-level abilities in
controlling their bodies and manipulating objects, even in simulation.Of course, neuroscience can provide guidance about the kinds ofmodular and hierarchical architectures that could be adapted to arti-ﬁcial systems to give them these capabilities
33.I tc a na l s op r o v i d eu s
with design principles like partial autonomy (how low-level modules ina hierarchy act semi-autonomously in the absence of input from high-level modules) and amortized control (how movements generated atﬁrst by a slow planning process are eventually transferred to a fast
reﬂexive system). These principles could guide the design of systems
for perception, action selection, locomotion, and ﬁne-grained control
o fl i m b s ,h a n d s ,a n d ﬁngers. Understanding how speci ﬁc neural cir-
cuits participate in different tasks could also inspire solutions for otherforms of ‘intelligence, ’including in more cognitive realms. For exam-
ple, we speculate that incorporating principles of circuitry for low-levelmotor control could help provide a better basis for higher-level motorplanning in AI systems.
Animals behave ﬂexibly
Another goal is to develop AI systems that can engage a large reper-
toire of ﬂexible and diverse tasks in a manner that echoes the incred-
ible range of behaviors that individual animals can generate. Modern
AI can easily learn to outperform humans at video games like Breakout
using nothing more than pixels on a screen and game scores34.H o w -
ever, these systems, unlike human players, are brittle and highly sen-sitive to small perturbations: changing the rules of the game slightly, oreven a few pixels on the input, can lead to catastrophically poorperformance
35.T h i si sb e c a u s et h e s es y s t e m sl e a r nam a p p i n gf r o m
pixels to actions that need not involve an understanding of the agentsand objects in the game and the physics that governs them. Similarly, aself-driving car does not inherently know about the danger of a cratefalling off a truck in front of it unless it has literally seen examples ofcrates falling off trucks leading to bad outcomes. And even if it has
been trained on the dangers of falling crates, the system might con-
sider an empty plastic bag being blown out of the car in front of it as anobstacle to avoid at all costs rather than an irritant, again, because itdoesn ’t actually understand what a plastic bag is or how unthreatening
it is physically. This inability to handle scenarios that have notappeared in the training data is a signi ﬁcant challenge to widespread
reliance on AI systems.
To be successful in an unpredictable and changing world, an agent
must be ﬂexible and master novel situations by using its general
knowledge about how such situations are likely to unfold. This isarguably what animals do. Animals are born with most of the skillsneeded to thrive or can rapidly acquire them from limited experience,
thanks to their strong foundation in r eal-world interaction, courtesy of
evolution and development
36. Thus, it is clear that training from
scratch for a speci ﬁc task is not how animals obtain their impressive
skills; animals do not arrive into the world tabula rasa and then rely on
large labeled training sets to learn. Although machine learning hasbeen pursuing approaches for sidestepping this tabula rasa limitation,
including self-supervised learning, transfer learning, continual learn-ing, meta learning, one-shot learning and imitation learning
37, none of
these approaches comes close to achieving the ﬂexibility found in
most animals. Thus, we argue that understanding the neural circuit-
level principles that provide the foundation for behavioral ﬂexibility in
the real-world, even in simple animals, has the potential to greatlyincrease the ﬂexibility and utility of AI systems. Put another way, we
can greatly accelerate our search for general-purpose circuits for real-world interaction by taking advantage of the optimization process thatevolution has already engaged in
38–45.
Animals compute ef ﬁciently
One important challenge for modern AI —that our brains have over-
come —is energy ef ﬁciency. Training a neural network requires enor-
mous amounts of energy. For example, training a large language model
such as GPT-3 requires over 1000 megawatts-hours, enough to power asmall town for a day
46. Biological systems are, by contrast, much more
energy ef ﬁcient: The human brain uses about 20 watts47. The differ-
ence in energy requirement between brains and computers derivesfrom differences in information processing. First, at an algorithmiclevel, modern large-scale ANNs, such as large language models
26,r e l y
on very large feedforward architectures with self-attention to processsequences over time
23, ignoring the potential power of recurrence for
processing sequential information. One reason for this is that currentlywe do not have ef ﬁcient mechanisms for credit assignment calcula-
tions in recurrent networks. In contrast, brains utilize ﬂexible recurrent
architectures that can solve the temporal credit assignment problemwith great ef ﬁciency. Uncovering the mechanisms by which this hap-
pens could potentially enable us to increase the energy ef ﬁciency of
artiﬁcial systems. Alternatively, it has been proposed that the synaptic
dynamics within adjacent dendritic spines could serve as a mechanismfor learning sequential structure, a scheme that could potentially beefﬁciently implemented in hardware
48. Second, at an implementation
level, neural circuits differ from digital computers. Neural circuitsc o m p u t ee f f e c t i v e l yd e s p i t et h ep r e s e n c eo fu n r e l i a b l eo r “noisy ”
components. For example, synaptic release, the primary means of
communication between neurons, can be so unreliable that only one in
every ten messages is transmitted
49. Furthermore, neurons interact
mainly by transmitting action potentials (spikes), an asynchronouscommunication protocol. Like the interactions between conventionaldigital elements, the output of a neuron can be viewed as a string of 0 sand 1 s; but unlike a digital computer, the energy cost of a “1”(i.e., of a
spike) is several orders of magnitude higher than that of a “0”
50.A s
biological circuits operate in a regime where spikes are sparse —even
very active neurons rarely ﬁre at more than 100 spikes per second and
typical cortical ﬁring rates may be less than 1 spike/second —they are
much more energy ef ﬁcient51. Spike-based computation has also been
shown to be orders of magnitude faster and more energy ef ﬁcient in
recent hardware implementation52.
A roadmap for solving the embodied Turing test
How might arti ﬁcial systems that pass the embodied Turing test be
developed? One natural approach would be to do so incrementally,guided by our evolutionary history. For example, almost all animalsengage in goal-directed locomotion; they move toward some stimuli(e.g., food sources) and away from others (e.g., threats). Layered ontop of these foundational abilities are more sophisticated skills, suchthe ability to combine different streams of sensory information (e.g.,visual and olfactory), to use this sensory information to distinguish
food sources and threats, to navigate to previous locations, to weigh
possible rewards and threats to achieve goals, and to interact with theworld in precise ways in service of these goals. Most of these —and
many other —sophisticated abilities are found to some extent in even
very simple organisms, such as worms. In more complex animals, suchPerspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37180-x
Nature Communications |         (2023) 14:1597 3