The seeds of the current AI revolution were planted decades ago,
mainly by researchers attempting to understand how brains compute3.
Indeed, the earliest efforts to build an “artiﬁcial brain ”led to the
invention of the modern “von Neumann computer architecture, ”for
which John von Neumann explicitly drew upon the very limited
knowledge of the brain available to him in the 1940s4,5.L a t e r ,t h e
Nobel-prize winning work of David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel on visualprocessing circuits in the cat neocortex inspired the deep convolu-tional networks that have catalyzed the recent revolution in modernAI
6–8. Similarly, the development of reinforcement learning was
directly inspired by insights into animal behavior and neural activityduring learning
9–15. Now, decades later, applications of ANNs and RL
are coming so quickly that many observers assume that the long-elusive goal of human-level intelligence —sometimes referred to as
“artiﬁcial general intelligence ”—is within our grasp. However, in con-
trast to the optimism of those outside the ﬁeld, many front-line AI
researchers believe that major breakthroughs are needed before wecan build arti ﬁcial systems capable of doing all that a human, or even a
much simpler animal like a mouse, can do.
Although AI systems can easily defeat any human opponent in
games such as chess
16and Go17, they are not robust and often struggle
when faced with novel situations. Moreover, we have yet to buildeffective systems that can walk to the shelf, take down the chess set, setup the pieces, and move them around during a game, although recentprogress is encouraging
18. Similarly, no machine can build a nest, for-
age for berries, or care for young. Today ’s AI systems cannot compete
with the sensorimotor capabilities of a four-year old child or even
simple animals. Many basic capacities required to navigate new situa-tions —capacities that animals have or acquire effortlessly —turn out to
be deceptively challenging for AI, partly because AI systems lack eventhe basic abilities to interact with an unpredictable world. A growingnumber of AI researchers doubt that merely scaling up currentapproaches will overcome these limitations. Given the need to achievemore natural intelligence in AI, it is quite likely that new inspirationfrom naturally intelligent systems is needed
19.
Historically, many key AI advances, such as convolutional ANNs
and reinforcement learning, were inspired by neuroscience. Neu-
roscience continues to provide guidance —e.g., attention-based neural
networks were loosely inspired by attention mechanisms in thebrain
20–23—b u tt h i si so f t e nb a s e do n ﬁndings that are decades old. The
fact that such cross-pollination between AI and neuroscience is far lesscommon than in the past represents a missed opportunity. Over thelast decades, through efforts such as the NIH BRAIN initiative andothers, we have amassed an enormous amount of knowledge aboutthe brain. The emerging ﬁeld of NeuroAI, at the intersection of neu-
roscience and AI, is based on the premise that a better understanding ofneural computation will reveal fundam ental ingredients of intelligenceand catalyze the next revolution in AI. This will eventually lead to arti-
ﬁcial agents with capabilities that match those of humans. The NeuroAI
program we advocate is driven by the recognition that AI historicallyowes much to neuroscience and the promise that AI will continue to
learn from it –but only if there is a large enough community of
researchers ﬂuent in both domains. We believe the time is right for a
large-scale effort to identify and understand the principles of biolo-gical intelligence and abstract those for application in computer androbotic systems.
It is tempting to focus on the most characteristically human
aspects of intelligent behavior, such as abstract thought and reason-ing. However, the basic ingredients of intelligence —adaptability, ﬂex-
ibility, and the ability to make general inferences from sparseobservations —are already present in some form in basic sensorimotor
circuits, which have been evolving for hundreds of millions of years. As
AI pioneer Hans Moravec
24put it, abstract thought “is a new trick,
perhaps less than 100 thousand years old ….effective only because it is
supported by this much older and much more powerful, thoughusually unconscious, sensorimotor knowledge. ”This implies that the
bulk of the work in developing general AI can be achieved by buildingsystems that match the perceptual and motor abilities of animals andthat the subsequent step to human-level intelligence would be con-siderably smaller. This is good news because progress on the ﬁrst goal
can rely on the favored subjects of neuroscience research —rats, mice,
and non-human primates —for which extensive and rapidly expanding
behavioral and neural datasets can guide the way. Thus, we believe that
the NeuroAI path will lead to necessary advances if we ﬁgure out the
core capabilities that all animals possess in embodied sensorimotorinteraction with the world.
NeuroAI grand challenge: the embodied turing test
In 1950, Alan Turing proposed the “imitation game ”25as a test of a
machine ’s ability to exhibit intelligent behavior indistinguishable from
that of a human (Fig. 1, left). In that game, now known as the Turing
test, a human judge evaluates natural language conversations betweena real human and a machine trained to mimic human responses. Byfocusing on conversational abilities, Turing evaded asking whether a
machine could “think, ”a question he considered impossible to answer.
The Turing test is based on the implicit belief that language representsthe pinnacle of human intelligence and that a machine capable ofconversation must surely be intelligent.
Until recently, no arti ﬁcial system could come close to passing the
Turing test. However, a class of modern AI systems called “large lan-
guage models ”can now engage in surprisingly cogent conversations
26.
In part, their success reveals how easily we can be tricked into imputingintelligence, agency, and even consciousness to our interlocutor
27.
Impressive though these systems are, because they are not groundedin real-world experiences, they nonetheless continue to struggle with
many basic aspects of causal reasoning and physical common-sense.
Thus, the Turing test does not probe our prodigious perceptual andmotor abilities to interact with and reason about the physical world,abilities shared with animals and honed through countless generationsof natural selection.
We therefore propose an expanded “embodied Turing test, ”one
that includes advanced sensorimotor abilities (Fig. 1, right). The spirit
of the original Turing test was to establish a simple qualitative standardagainst which our progress toward building arti ﬁcially intelligent
machines can be judged. This embodied Turing test would benchmarkand compare the interactions with the world of arti ﬁcial systems ver-
sus humans and other animals. Similar ideas have been proposed
previously
28–32. However, in light of recent advances enabling large-
scale behavioral and neural measurements, as well as large-scalesimulations of embodied agents in silico, we believe the time is ripe toinstantiate a major research effort in this direction. As each animal hasits own unique set of abilities, each animal de ﬁnes its own embodiedTuring test Embodied Turing test
vs.vs.
Fig. 1 | Turing tests: comparisons between the performance of AI systems and
their living counterparts. Left: The original Turing test as proposed by Alan
Turing25. If a human tester cannot determine whether their interlocutor is an AI
system or another human, the AI passes the test. Modern large language modelshave made substantial progress towards passing this test
26.Right : The embodied
Turing test. An AI animal model —whether robotic or in simulation —passes the test if
its behavior is indistinguishable from that of its living counterpart. No AI systemsare close to passing this test. Here, an arti ﬁcial beaver is tested on the species-
speci ﬁc behavior of dam construction.Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37180-x
Nature Communications |         (2023) 14:1597 2