Resnet50Inceptionv30.210.220.230.240.250.260.27CCA SimilarityRepresentational Similarity Higher Layers 
 ImageNet Models
CBR-LargeWCBR-Small CBR-Tiny0.3500.3550.3600.3650.3700.3750.380Representational Similarity Higher Layers 
 CBRs
CCA(Rand, ImNet)
CCA(Rand, Rand)Figure 2: Pretrained weights give rise to different hidden representations than training from random
initialization for large models. We compute CCA similarity scores between representations learned using
pretrained weights and those from random initialization. We do this for the top two layers (or stages for Resnet,
Inception) and average the scores, plotting the results in orange. In blue is a baseline similarity score, for
representations trained from different random initializations. We see that representations learned from random
initialization are more similar to each other than those learned from pretrained weights for larger models, with
less of a distinction for smaller models.
4 Representational Analysis of the Effects of Transfer
In Section 3 we saw that transfer learning and training from random initialization result in very
similar performance across different neural architectures and tasks. This gives rise to some natural
questions about the effect of transfer learning on the kinds of representations learned by the neural
networks. Most fundamentally, does transfer learning in fact result in any representational differences
compared to training from random initialization? Or are the effects of the initialization lost? Does
feature reuse take place, and if so, where exactly? In this section, we provide some answers to these
basic questions. Our approach directly analyzes and compares the hidden representations learned by
different populations of neural networks, using (SV)CCA [ 22,19], revealing an important dependence
onmodel size , and differences in behavior between lower and higher layers. These insights, combined
with results Section 5 suggest new, hybrid approaches to transfer learning.
Quantitatively Studying Hidden Representations with (SV)CCA To understand how pretraining
affects the features and representations learned by the models, we would like to (quantitatively) study
the learned intermediate functions (latent layers). Analyzing latent representations is challenging due
to their complexity and the lack of any simple mapping to inputs, outputs or other layers. A recent
tool that effectively overcomes these challenges is (Singular Vector) Canonical Correlation Analysis,
(SV)CCA [ 22,19], which has been used to study latent representations through training, across
different models, alternate training objectives, and other properties [ 22,19,25,18,8,17,30]. Rather
than working directly with the model parameters or neurons, CCA works with neuron activation
vectors — the ordered collection of outputs of the neuron on a sequence of inputs. Given the activation
vectors for two sets of neurons (say, corresponding to distinct layers), CCA seeks linear combinations
of each that are as correlated as possible. We adapt existing CCA methods to prevent the size of the
activation sets from overwhelming the computation in large models (details in Appendix C), and
apply them to compare the latent representations of corresponding hidden layers of different pairs of
neural networks, giving a CCA similarity score of the learned intermediate functions.
Transfer Learning and Random Initialization Learn Different Representations Our ﬁrst exper-
iment uses CCA to compare the similarity of the hidden representations learned when training from
pretrained weights to those learned when training from random initialization. We use the represen-
tations learned at the top two layers (for CBRs) or stages (for Resnet, Inception) before the output
layer, averaging their similarity scores. As a baseline to compare to, we also look at CCA similarity
scores for the same representations when training from random initialization with two different seeds
(different initializations and gradient updates). The results are shown in Figure 2. For larger models
(Resnet, Inception), there is a clear difference between representations, with the similarity of represen-
tations between training from random initialization and pretrained weights (orange) noticeably lower
5