Transfusion: Understanding Transfer Learning for
Medical Imaging
Maithra Raghu
Cornell University and Google Brain
maithrar@gmail.comChiyuan Zhang
Google Brain
chiyuan@google.com
Jon Kleinbergy
Cornell University
kleinber@cs.cornell.eduSamy Bengioy
Google Brain
bengio@google.com
Abstract
Transfer learning from natural image datasets, particularly IMAGE NET, using stan-
dard large models and corresponding pretrained weights has become a de-facto
method for deep learning applications to medical imaging. However, there are fun-
damental differences in data sizes, features and task speciﬁcations between natural
image classiﬁcation and the target medical tasks, and there is little understanding of
the effects of transfer. In this paper, we explore properties of transfer learning for
medical imaging. A performance evaluation on two large scale medical imaging
tasks shows that surprisingly, transfer offers little beneﬁt to performance, and
simple, lightweight models can perform comparably to IMAGE NETarchitectures.
Investigating the learned representations and features, we ﬁnd that some of the
differences from transfer learning are due to the over-parametrization of standard
models rather than sophisticated feature reuse. We isolate where useful feature
reuse occurs, and outline the implications for more efﬁcient model exploration. We
also explore feature independent beneﬁts of transfer arising from weight scalings.
1 Introduction
With the growth of deep learning, transfer learning has become integral to many applications —
especially in medical imaging, where the present standard is to take an existing architecture designed
for natural image datasets such as I MAGE NET, together with corresponding pretrained weights (e.g.
ResNet [10], Inception [27]), and then ﬁne-tune the model on the medical imaging data.
This basic formula has seen almost universal adoption across many different medical specialties.
Two prominent lines of research have used this methodology for applications in radiology, training
architectures like ResNet, DenseNet on chest x-rays [ 31,24] and ophthalmology, training Inception-
v3, ResNet on retinal fundus images [ 2,9,23,4]. The research on ophthalmology has also culminated
in FDA approval [ 28], and full clinical deployment [ 29]. Other applications include performing early
detection of Alzheimer’s Disease [ 5], identifying skin cancer from dermatologist level photographs
[6], and even determining human embryo quality for IVF procedures [15].
Despite the immense popularity of transfer learning in medical imaging, there has been little work
studying its precise effects, even as recent work on transfer learning in the natural image setting
[11,16,20,12,7] has challenged many commonly held beliefs. For example in [ 11], it is shown that
Equal Contribution.
yEqual Contribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.