(a) Resnet Init
 (b) Resnet Final
 (c) Res-trans Init
 (d) Res-trans ﬁnal
(e) CBR-Small Init
 (f) CBR-Small Final
 (g) CBR Trans
 (h) CBR Trans Final
Figure 5: Visualization of conv1 ﬁlters shows the remains of initialization after training in Resnet, and
the lack of and erasing of Gabor ﬁlters in CBR-Small. We visualize the ﬁlters before and after training from
random initialization and pretrained weights for Resnet (top row) and CBR-Small (bottom row). Comparing the
similarity of (e) to (f) and (g) to (h) shows the limited movement of Resnet through training, while CBR-Small
changes much more. We see that CBR does not learn Gabor ﬁlters when trained from scratch (f), and also erases
some of the pretrained Gabors (compare (g) to (h).)
Filter Visualizations and the Absence of Gabors As a ﬁnal study of how pretraining affects the
model representations, we visualize some of the ﬁlters of conv1 for Resnet and CBR-Small (both
7x7 kernels), before and after training on the RETINA task. The ﬁlters are shown in Figure 5, with
visualizations for chest x-rays in the Appendix. These add evidence to the aformentioned observation:
the Resnet ﬁlters change much less than those of CBR-Small. In contrast, CBR-Small moves more
from its initialization, and has more similar learned ﬁlters in random and pretrained initialization.
Interestingly, CBR-Small does not appear to learn Gabor ﬁlters when trained from scratch (bottom row
second column). Comparing the third and fourth columns of the bottom row, we see that CBR-Small
even erases some of the Gabor ﬁlters that it is initialized with in the pretrained weights.
5 Convergence: Feature Independent Beneﬁts and Weight Transfusion
In this section, we investigate the effects of transfer learning on convergence speed, ﬁnding that:
(i) surprisingly, transfer offers feature independent beneﬁts to convergence simply through better
weight scaling (ii) using pretrained weights from the lowest two layers/stages has the biggest effect
on convergence — further supporting the ﬁndings in the previous section that any meaningful feature
reuse is concentrated in these lowest two layers (Figure 3.) These results suggest some hybrid
approaches to transfer learning, where only a subset of the pretrained weights (lowest layers) are
used, with a lightweight redesign to the top of the network, and even using entirely synthetic features,
such as synthetic Gabor ﬁlters (Appendix F.3). We show these hybrid approaches capture most of the
beneﬁts of transfer and enable greater ﬂexibility in its application.
Feature Independent Beneﬁts of Transfer: Weight Scalings We consistently observe that using
pretrained weights results in faster convergence. One explanation for this speedup is that there is
signiﬁcant feature reuse. However, the results of Section 4 illustrate that there are many confounding
factors, such as model size, and feature reuse is likely limited to the lowest layers. We thus tested
to see whether there were feature independent beneﬁts of the pretrained weights, such as better
scaling . In particular, we initialized a iid weights fromN(~;~2), where ~and~2are the mean and
variance of ~W, the pretrained weights. Doing this for each layer separately inherits the scaling of the
pretrained weights, but destroys all of the features. We called this the Mean Var init, and found that it
signiﬁcantly helps speed up convergence (Figure 6.) Several additional experiments studying batch
normalization, weight sampling, etc are in the Appendix.
7