3 and up are referable DR (requiring immediate specialist attention), while grades 1 and 2 correspond
tonon-referable DR . As in prior work [ 9,2] we evaluate via AUC-ROC on identifying referable DR.
We also study a second medical imaging dataset, CHEXPERT [14], which consists of chest x-ray
images (resized to 224224), which can be used to diagnose 5 different thoracic pathologies:
atelectasis, cardiomegaly, consolidation, edema and pleural effusion. We evaluate our models on
the AUC of diagnosing each of these pathologies. Figure 1 shows some example images from both
datasets and I MAGE NET, demonstrating drastic differences in visual features among those datasets.
3 Models and Performance Evaluation of Transfer Learning
To lay the groundwork for our study, we select multiple neural network architectures and evaluate
their performance when (1) training from random initialization and (2) doing transfer learning from
IMAGE NET. We train both standard, high performing IMAGE NETarchitectures that have been popular
for transfer learning, as well as a family of signiﬁcantly smaller convolutional neural networks, which
achieve comparable performance on the medical tasks.
As far as we are aware, there has been little work studying the effects of transfer learning from
IMAGE NETon smaller, non-standard IMAGE NETarchitectures. (For example, [ 21] studies a different
model, but does not evaluate the effect of transfer learning.) This line of investigation is especially
important in the medical setting, where large, computationally expensive models might signiﬁcantly
impede mobile and on-device applications. Furthermore, in standard IMAGE NETmodels, most of the
parameters are concentrated at the top, to perform the 1000 -class classiﬁcation. However, medical
diagnosis often has considerably fewer classes – both the retinal fundus images and chest x-rays have
just5classes – likely meaning that I MAGE NETmodels are highly overparametrized.
We ﬁnd that across both datasets and all models, transfer learning does not signiﬁcantly affect perfor-
mance. Additionally, the family of smaller lightweight convolutional networks performs comparably
to standard IMAGE NETmodels, despite having signiﬁcantly worse accuracy on IMAGE NET– the
IMAGE NETtask is not necessarily a good indication of success on medical datasets. Finally, we
observe that these conclusions also hold in the setting of very limited data.
3.1 Description of Models
For the standard IMAGE NETarchitectures, we evaluate ResNet50 [ 11] and Inception-v3 [ 27], which
have both been used extensively in medical transfer learning applications [ 2,9,31]. We also design a
family of simple, smaller convolutional architectures. The basic building block for this family is the
popular sequence of a (2d) convolution, followed by batch normalization [ 13] and a relu activation.
Each architecture has four to ﬁve repetitions of this basic layer. We call this model family CBR.
Depending on the choice of the convolutional ﬁlter size (ﬁxed for the entire architecture), the number
of channels and layers, we get a family of architectures with size ranging from a third of the standard
IMAGE NETmodel size (CBR-LargeT, CBR-LargeW) to one twentieth the size (CBR-Tiny). Full
architecture details are in the Appendix.
3.2 Results
We evaluate three repetitions of the different models and initializations (random initialization vs
pretrained weights) on the two medical tasks, with the result shown in Tables 1, 2. There are two
possibilities for repetitions of transfer learning: we can have a ﬁxed set of pretrained weights and
multiple training runs from that initialization, or for each repetition, ﬁrst train from scratch on
IMAGE NETand then ﬁne-tune on the medical task. We opt for evaluating the former, as that is the
standard method used in practice. For all models except for Inceptionv3, we ﬁrst train on IMAGE NET
to get the pretrained weights. For Inceptionv3, we used the pretrained weights provided by [26].
Table 1 shows the model performances on the R ETINA data (AUC of identifying moderate Diabetic
Retinopathy (DR), described in Section 2), along with IMAGE NETtop 5 accuracy. Firstly, we see
that transfer learning has minimal effect on performance, not helping the smaller CBR architectures
at all, and only providing a fraction of a percent gain for Resnet and Inception. Next, we see that
despite the signiﬁcantly lower performance of the CBR architectures on IMAGE NET, they perform
very comparably to Resnet and Inception on the RETINA task. These same conclusions are seen on
3