Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
achievable by the generative model, random sample quality indicates how well the model gener-
alizes. Finally, interpolation quality sheds light on the structure of the learned latent space. The
evaluation of generative models is a nontrivial research question (Theis et al., 2016; Sajjadi et al.,
2017; Lucic et al., 2018). We report here the ubiquitous Fr ´echet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel
et al., 2017) and we provide precision and recall scores (PRD) (Sajjadi et al., 2018) in Appendix E.
Table 1 summarizes our main results. All of the proposed RAE variants are competitive with the
V AE, WAE and 2sV AE w.r.t. generated image quality in all settings. Sampling RAEs achieve the
best FIDs across all datasets when a modest 10-component GMM is employed for ex-post density
estimation. Furthermore, even when Nis considered as q(z), RAEs rank ﬁrst with the exception of
MNIST, where it competes for the second position with a V AE. Our best RAE FIDs are lower than
the best results reported for V AEs in the large scale comparison of (Lucic et al., 2018), challenging
even the best scores reported for GANs. While we are employing a slightly different architecture
than theirs, our models underwent only modest ﬁnetuning instead of an extensive hyperparameter
search. A comparison of the different regularization schemes for RAEs (Q2) yields no clear winner
across all settings as all perform equally well. Striving for a simpler implementation, one may prefer
RAE-L2 over the GP and SN variants.
For completeness, we investigate applying multiple regularization schemes to our RAE models. We
report the results of all possible combinations in Table 3, Appendix I. There, no signiﬁcant boost of
performance can be spotted when comparing to singly regularized RAEs.
Surprisingly, the implicitly regularized RAE and AE models are shown to be able to score impressive
FIDs whenq(z)is ﬁt through GMMs. FIDs for AEs decrease from 58.73 to 10.66 on MNIST and
from 127.85 to 45.10 on CelebA – a value close to the state of the art. This is a remarkable result
that follows a long series of recent conﬁrmations that neural networks are surprisingly smooth by
design (Neyshabur et al., 2017). It is also surprising that the lack of an explicitly ﬁxed structure
on the latent space of the RAE does not impede interpolation quality. This is further conﬁrmed by
the qualitative evaluation on CelebA as reported in Fig. 1 and for the other datasets in Appendix F,
where RAE interpolated samples seem sharper than competitors and transitions smoother.
Our results further conﬁrm and quantify the effect of the aggregated posterior mismatch. In Table 1,
ex-post density estimation consistently improves sample quality across all settings and models. A
10-component GMM halves FID scores from 20to10for WAE and RAE models on MNIST and
from 116 to 46 on CelebA. This is especially striking since this additional step is much cheaper and
simpler than training a second-stage V AE as in 2sV AE (Q3). In summary, the results strongly sup-
port the conjecture that the simple deterministic RAE framework can challenge V AEs and stronger
alternatives (Q1).
6.2 G RAMMAR RAE: MODELING STRUCTURED INPUTS
We now evaluate RAEs for generating complex structured objects such as molecules and arithmetic
expressions. We do this with a twofold aim: i) to investigate the latent space learned by RAE for
more challenging input spaces that abide to some structural constraints, and ii) to quantify the gain
of replacing the V AE in a state-of-the-art generative model with a RAE.
To this end, we adopt the exact architectures and experimental settings of the GrammarV AE
(GV AE) (Kusner et al., 2017), which has been shown to outperform other generative alternatives
such as the CharacterV AE (CV AE) (G ´omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). As in Kusner et al. (2017), we
are interested in traversing the latent space learned by our models to generate samples (molecules
or expressions) that best ﬁt some downstream metric. This is done by Bayesian optimization (BO)
by considering the log(1 + MSE)(lower is better) for the generated expressions w.r.t. some ground
truth points, and the water-octanol partition coefﬁcient ( logP) (Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2015) (higher is
better) in the case of molecules. A well-behaved latent space will not only generate molecules or
expressions with better scores during the BO step, but it will also contain syntactically valid ones,
i.e., , samples abide to a grammar of rules describing the problem.
Figure 2 summarizes our results over 5 trials of BO. Our GRAEs (Grammar RAE) achieve better
average scores than CV AEs and GV AEs in generating expressions and molecules. This is visible
also for the three best samples and their scores for all models, with the exception of the ﬁrst best
expression of GV AE. We include in the comparison also the GCVV AE, the equivalent of a CV-V AE
8