Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
3.1 R EGULARIZATION SCHEMES FOR RAE S
Among possible choices for LREG, a ﬁrst obvious candidate is Tikhonov regularization (Tikhonov
& Arsenin, 1977) since is known to be related to the addition of low-magnitude input noise (Bishop,
2006). Training a RAE within this framework thus amounts to adopting LREG=LL2=jjjj2
2which
effectively applies weight decay on the decoder parameters .
Another option comes from the recent GAN literature where regularization is a hot topic (Kurach
et al., 2018) and where injecting noise to the input of the adversarial discriminator has led to im-
proved performance in a technique called instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2017). To enforce Lips-
chitz continuity on adversarial discriminators, weight clipping has been proposed (Arjovsky et al.,
2017), which is however known to signiﬁcantly slow down training. More successfully, a gradient
penalty on the discriminator can be used similar to Gulrajani et al. (2017); Mescheder et al. (2018),
yielding the objective LREG=LGP=jjrD(E(x))jj2
2which bounds the gradient norm of the
decoder w.r.t. its input.
Additionally, spectral normalization (SN) has been successfully proposed as an alternative way to
bound the Lipschitz norm of an adversarial discriminator (Miyato et al., 2018). SN normalizes each
weight matrix `in the decoder by an estimate of its largest singular value: SN
`=`=s(`)where
s(`)is the current estimate obtained through the power method.
In light of the recent successes of deep networks without explicit regularization (Zagoruyko & Ko-
modakis, 2016; Zhang et al., 2017), it is intriguing to question the need for explicit regularization
of the decoder in order to obtain a meaningful latent space. The assumption here is that techniques
such as dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), adding noise
during training (An, 1996) implicitly regularize the networks enough. Therefore, as a natural base-
line to theLRAEobjectives introduced above, we also consider the RAE framework without LREG
andLRAE
Z, i.e., a standard deterministic autoencoder optimizing LREConly.
To complete our “autopsy” of the V AE loss, we additionally investigate deterministic autoencoders
with decoder regularization, but without the LRAE
Zterm, as well as possible combinations of different
regularizers in our RAE framework (cf. Table 3 in Appendix I).
Lastly, it is worth questioning if it is possible to formally derive our RAE framework from ﬁrst
principles. We answer this afﬁrmatively, and show how to augment the ELBO optimization problem
of a V AE with an explicit constraint, while not ﬁxing a parametric form for q(zjx). This indeed
leads to a special case of the RAE loss in Eq. 11. Speciﬁcally, we derive a regularizer like LGPfor
a deterministic version of the CV-V AE. Note that this derivation legitimates bounding the decoder’s
gradients and as such it justiﬁes the spectral norm regularizer as well since the latter enforces the
decoder’s Lipschitzness. We accommodate the full derivation in Appendix B.
4 E X-POST DENSITY ESTIMATION
By removing stochasticity and ultimately, the KL divergence term LKLfrom RAEs, we have sim-
pliﬁed the original V AE objective at the cost of detaching the encoder from the prior p(z)over the
latent space. This implies that i) we cannot ensure that the latent space Zis distributed according
to a simple distribution (e.g., isotropic Gaussian) anymore and consequently, ii) we lose the simple
mechanism provided by p(z)to sample from Zas in Eq. 1.
As discussed in Section 2.1, issue i) is compromising the V AE framework in any case, as reported in
several works (Hoffman & Johnson, 2016; Rosca et al., 2018; Dai & Wipf, 2019). To ﬁx this, some
works extend the V AE objective by encouraging the aggregated posterior to match p(z)(Tolstikhin
et al., 2017) or by utilizing more complex priors (Kingma et al., 2016; Tomczak & Welling, 2018;
Bauer & Mnih, 2019).
To overcome both i) and ii), we instead propose to employ ex-post density estimation overZ. We ﬁt
a density estimator denoted as q(z)tofz=E(x)jx2Xg . This simple approach not only ﬁts our
RAE framework well, but it can also be readily adopted for any V AE or variants thereof such as the
WAE as a practical remedy to the aggregated posterior mismatch without adding any computational
overhead to the costly training phase.
5