Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
FROM VARIATIONAL
TODETERMINISTIC AUTOENCODERS
Partha GhoshyMehdi S. M. Sajjadi yAntonio Vergariz Michael Blacky
Bernhard Sch ¨olkopfy
yMax Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, T ¨ubingen, Germany
fpghosh,msajjadi,black,bs g@tue.mpg.de
zUniversity of California, Los Angeles, USA
aver@cs.ucla.edu
ABSTRACT
Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) provide a theoretically-backed and popular
framework for deep generative models. However, learning a V AE from data poses
still unanswered theoretical questions and considerable practical challenges. In
this work, we propose an alternative framework for generative modeling that is
simpler, easier to train, and deterministic, yet has many of the advantages of V AEs.
We observe that sampling a stochastic encoder in a Gaussian V AE can be inter-
preted as simply injecting noise into the input of a deterministic decoder. We
investigate how substituting this kind of stochasticity, with other explicit and im-
plicit regularization schemes, can lead to an equally smooth and meaningful latent
space without forcing it to conform to an arbitrarily chosen prior. To retrieve a
generative mechanism to sample new data, we introduce an ex-post density es-
timation step that can be readily applied also to existing V AEs, improving their
sample quality. We show, in a rigorous empirical study, that the proposed regular-
ized deterministic autoencoders are able to generate samples that are comparable
to, or better than, those of V AEs and more powerful alternatives when applied to
images as well as to structured data such as molecules.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Generative models lie at the core of machine learning. By capturing the mechanisms behind the
data generation process, one can reason about data probabilistically, access and traverse the low-
dimensional manifold the data is assumed to live on, and ultimately generate new data . It is there-
fore not surprising that generative models have gained momentum in applications such as computer
vision (Sohn et al., 2015; Brock et al., 2019), NLP (Bowman et al., 2016; Severyn et al., 2017), and
chemistry (Kusner et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; G ´omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018).
Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) cast learning rep-
resentations for high-dimensional distributions as a variational inference problem. Learning a V AE
amounts to the optimization of an objective balancing the quality of samples that are autoencoded
through a stochastic encoder–decoder pair while encouraging the latent space to follow a ﬁxed prior
distribution. Since their introduction, V AEs have become one of the frameworks of choice among
the different generative models. V AEs promise theoretically well-founded and more stable training
than Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and more efﬁcient sam-
pling mechanisms than autoregressive models (Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Germain et al., 2015).
However, the V AE framework is still far from delivering the promised generative mechanism, as
there are several practical and theoretical challenges yet to be solved. A major weakness of V AEs is
Equal contribution.
1An implementation is available at: https://github.com/ParthaEth/Regularized_
autoencoders-RAE-
1