Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
The choice of q(z)needs to trade-off expressiveness – to provide a good ﬁt of an arbitrary space
forZ– with simplicity , to improve generalization. For example, placing a Dirac distribution on each
latent point zwould allow the decoder to output only training sample reconstructions which have a
high quality, but do not generalize. Striving for simplicity, we employ and compare a full covariance
multivariate Gaussian with a 10-component Gaussian mixture model (GMM) in our experiments.
5 R ELATED WORKS
Many works have focused on diagnosing the V AE framework, the terms in its objective (Hoffman
& Johnson, 2016; Zhao et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2018), and ultimately augmenting it to solve
optimization issues (Rezende & Viola, 2018; Dai & Wipf, 2019). With RAE, we argue that a simpler
deterministic framework can be competitive for generative modeling.
Deterministic denoising (Vincent et al., 2008) and contractive autoencoders (CAEs) (Rifai et al.,
2011) have received attention in the past for their ability to capture a smooth data manifold. Heuristic
attempts to equip them with a generative mechanism include MCMC schemes (Rifai et al., 2012;
Bengio et al., 2013). However, they are hard to diagnose for convergence, require a considerable
effort in tuning (Cowles & Carlin, 1996), and have not scaled beyond MNIST, leading to them being
superseded by V AEs. While computing the Jacobian for CAEs (Rifai et al., 2011) is close in spirit
toLGPfor RAEs, the latter is much more computationally efﬁcient.
Approaches to cope with the aggregated posterior mismatch involve ﬁxing a more expressive form
forp(z)(Kingma et al., 2016; Bauer & Mnih, 2019) therefore altering the V AE objective and re-
quiring considerable additional computational efforts. Estimating the latent space of a V AE with a
second V AE (Dai & Wipf, 2019) reintroduces many of the optimization shortcomings discussed for
V AEs and is much more expensive in practice compared to ﬁtting a simple q(z)after training.
Adversarial Autoencoders (AAE) (Makhzani et al., 2016) add a discriminator to a deterministic
encoder–decoder pair, leading to sharper samples at the expense of higher computational overhead
and the introduction of instabilities caused by the adversarial nature of the training process.
RECONSTRUCTIONS RANDOM SAMPLES INTERPOLATIONS
GT
VAE
CV-VAE
WAE
2SVAE
RAE-GP
RAE-L2
RAE-SN
RAE
AE
Figure 1: Qualitative evaluation of sample quality for V AEs, WAEs, 2sV AEs, and RAEs on CelebA.
RAE provides slightly sharper samples and reconstructions while interpolating smoothly in the latent
space. Corresponding qualitative overviews for MNIST and CIFAR-10 are provided in Appendix F.
Wasserstein Autoencoders (WAE) (Tolstikhin et al., 2017) have been introduced as a generaliza-
tion of AAEs by casting autoencoding as an optimal transport (OT) problem. Both stochastic and
deterministic models can be trained by minimizing a relaxed OT cost function employing either an
adversarial loss term or the maximum mean discrepancy score between p(z)andq(z)as a reg-
6