Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2.2 C ONSTANT -VARIANCE ENCODERS
Before introducing our fully-deterministic take on V AEs, it is worth investigating intermediate ﬂa-
vors of V AEs with reduced stochasticity. Analogous to what is commonly done for decoders as
discussed in the previous section, one can ﬁx the variance of q(zjx)to be constant for all x. This
simpliﬁes the computation of Efrom Eq. 9 to
ECV
(x) =(x) +; N(0;I) (10)
whereis a ﬁxed scalar. Then, the KL loss term in a Gaussian V AE simpliﬁes (up to a constant)
toLCV
KL=jj(x)jj2
2. We name this variant Constant-Variance V AEs (CV-V AEs). While CV-V AEs
have been adopted in some applications such as variational image compression (Ball ´e et al., 2017)
and adversarial robustness (Ghosh et al., 2019), to the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic
study of them in the literature. We will ﬁll this gap in our experiments in Section 6. Lastly, note that
nowin Eq.10 is not learned along the encoder as in Eq. 9. Nevertheless, it can still be ﬁtted as
an hyperparameter, e.g., by cross-validation, to maximise the model likelihood. This highlights the
possibility to estimate a better parametric form for the latent space distribution after training, or in a
outer-loop including training. We address this provide a more complex and ﬂexible solution to deal
with the prior structure over Zvia ex-post density estimation in Section 4.
3 D ETERMINISTIC REGULARIZED AUTOENCODERS
Autoencoding in V AEs is deﬁned in a probabilistic fashion: EandDmap data points not to a
single point, but rather to parameterized distributions (cf. Eq. 7). However, common implementa-
tions of V AEs as discussed in Section 2 admit a simpler, deterministic view for this probabilistic
mechanism. A glance at the autoencoding mechanism of the V AE is revealing.
The encoder deterministically maps a data point xto mean(x)and variance (x)in the latent
space. The input to Dis then simply the mean (x)augmented with Gaussian noise scaled by
(x)via the reparametrization trick (cf. Eq. 9). In the CV-V AE, this relationship is even more
obvious, as the magnitude of the noise is ﬁxed for all data points (cf. Eq. 10). In this light, a V AE
can be seen as a deterministic autoencoder where (Gaussian) noise is added to the decoder’s input.
We argue that this noise injection mechanism is a key factor in having a regularized decoder. Using
random noise injection to regularize neural networks is a well-known technique that dates back sev-
eral decades (Sietsma & Dow, 1991; An, 1996). It implicitly helps to smooth the function learned
by the network at the price of increased variance in the gradients during training. In turn, decoder
regularization is a key component in generalization for V AEs, as it improves random sample quality
and achieves a smoother latent space. Indeed, from a generative perspective, regularization is moti-
vated by the goal to learn a smooth latent space where similar data points xare mapped to similar
latent codes z, and small variations in Zlead to reconstructions by Dthat vary only slightly.
We propose to substitute noise injection with an explicit regularization scheme for the decoder .
This entails the substitution of the variational framework in V AEs, which enforces regularization
on the encoder posterior through LKL, with a deterministic framework that applies other ﬂavors of
decoder regularization. By removing noise injection from a CV-V AE, we are effectively left with a
deterministic autoencoder (AE). Coupled with explicit regularization for the decoder, we obtain a
Regularized Autoencoder (RAE). Training a RAE thus involves minimizing the simpliﬁed loss
LRAE=LREC+LRAE
Z+LREG (11)
whereLREG represents the explicit regularizer for D(discussed in Section 3.1) and LRAE
Z =
1=2jjzjj2
2(resulting from simplifying LCV
KL) is equivalent to constraining the size of the learned la-
tent space, which is still needed to prevent unbounded optimization. Finally, andare two hyper
parameters that balance the different loss terms.
Note that for RAEs, no Monte Carlo approximation is required to compute LREC. This relieves the
need for more samples from q(zjx)to achieve better image quality (cf. Appendix A). Moreover,
by abandoning the variational framework and the LKLterm, there is no need in RAEs for a ﬁxed
prior distribution over Z. Doing so however loses a clear generative mechanism for RAEs to sample
fromZ. We propose a method to regain random sampling ability in Section 4 by performing density
estimation on Zex-post, a step that is otherwise still needed for V AEs to alleviate the posterior
mismatch issue.
4