Figure 7: Overview of PATE’s approach [46].
private and/or sensitive information leakage. Finally, we
discussed recent results attempting to defend against such
attacks. Next, we list three areas where further work is
desperately needed.
6.1 Severity of Attacks
Overall, our review showed that there exists a large body
of literature presenting a wide range of different attacks.
Speciﬁcally, we covered membership inference attacks
(MIAs), model inversion, property inference, as well as
model and functionality stealing attacks.
We concluded that membership inference attacks are
very much possible, but it is hard to grasp the real-world
effect on actually deployed models due to the lack of case
studies vis-a-vis impact on actual users, relation to adver-
sary’s prior knowledge, etc. We also offered a critic of
model inversion attacks, while covering less studied at-
tacks in the ﬁeld of property inference and model steal-
ing. Much work is left to be done – especially considering
ways to provide guidelines and evaluation framework for
practitioners.
6.2 Policy Implications and Further Study
Needed
The implication of the attacks covered in this manuscript
vis-a-vis policy and data protection is also largely unex-
plored. The only exception in this context is the work
by Cohen and Nissim [9], which rephrases privacy attacks
in the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) frame-
work and more speciﬁcally within the “singling out” con-
cept. While the GDPR heavily focuses on the concept of
identiﬁcation, what it means for a person to be “identi-
ﬁed, directly or indirectly” is not clear. As pointed in [9],
Recital 26 sheds a little more light: “To determine whether
a natural person is identiﬁable account should be taken of
all the means reasonably likely to be used, such as singling
out, either by the controller or by another person to identify
the natural person directly or indirectly.”
Therefore, singling out is one way to identify a person in
data, and only data that does not allow singling out may be
excepted from the regulation. Clearly, more work linking
up privacy attacks (and defenses) with regulation and data
protection efforts needs to ramp up.
6.3 Need for Better Evaluations
Overall, several defense techniques against privacy attacks
have been proposed over the past few years. However,it is very hard to assess how generalizable they are and
what is the trade-off they incur with respect to privacy and
utility. This prompts the need for a more thorough eval-
uation of how defenses fare in practice, vis-a-vis realistic
use cases and datasets, rather than the standard public ones
that, more often than not, say little or nothing about real-
world performance.
In this context, some recent work has taken some good
steps in the right direction; for instance, Jayaraman and
Evans [30] study the impact of variable choices of the pa-
rameter, different variants of differential privacy, and sev-
eral learning tasks on both utility and privacy (including
in the context of MIAs) for privacy-preserving machine
learning. Alas, however, their main ﬁnding is that there is
no way to obtain privacy for free?relaxed deﬁnitions of dif-
ferential privacy that reduce the amount of noise needed to
improve utility also increase the privacy leakage. In other
words, current mechanisms for differentially private ma-
chine learning rarely offer acceptable utility-privacy trade-
offs for complex learning tasks: settings that provide lim-
ited accuracy loss provide little effective privacy, and set-
tings that provide strong privacy result in useless models.
Once again, this points to the need to better understand
where trade-offs are possible, in what context, and at what
expenses, rather than hoping to deploy generic, one-size-
ﬁts-all defenses across the board.
Ackwnoledgments. The author wishes to thanks Vitaly
Shmatikov, Luca Melis, Jamie Hayes, and Yang Zhang for
valuable discussions and feedback.
References
[1] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan,
I. Mironov, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. Deep learning with
differential privacy. In ACM CCS , 2016.
[2] M. Abadi, U. Erlingsson, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan,
I. Mironov, N. Papernot, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. On the
protection of private information in machine learning sys-
tems: Two recent approches. In IEEE CSF , 2017.
[3] Y . Aono, T. Hayashi, L. Wang, S. Moriai, et al. Privacy-
preserving deep learning: Revisited and Enhanced. In ATIS ,
2017.
[4] G. Ateniese, L. V . Mancini, A. Spognardi, A. Villani, D. Vi-
tali, and G. Felici. Hacking smart machines with smarter
ones: How to extract meaningful data from machine learn-
ing classiﬁers. IJSN , 2015.
[5] K. Bonawitz, V . Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B.
McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth.
Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving ma-
chine learning. In ACM CCS , 2017.
10