Figure 1: A simple illustration of how one can use discriminative
vs generative models. The former learns to distinguish between
two classes, i.e., pictures of cats or dogs. The latter estimates
the underlying distribution of a dataset (pictures of cats) and ran-
domly generate realistic, yet synthetic, samples according to their
estimated distribution.
actually commonly divided into two main types, depend-
ing on the structure of the data at hand:
Supervised learning: an association between inputs
and outputs based on training examples in the form
of inputs labeled with corresponding outputs. If the
output data is categorical, the task is called classi-
ﬁcation, and real-valued output domains deﬁne re-
gression problems [45]. Classic examples of super-
vised learning tasks include object recognition in im-
ages, machine translation, and spam ﬁltering. In this
setting, the model parameters are adjusted to reduce
the gap between model predictions h(x)and the ex-
pected output indicated by the dataset.
Unsupervised learning: When the method is given
unlabeled inputs, its task is unsupervised. Unsuper-
vised learning considers problems such as clustering
points according to a similarity metric, dimensional-
ity reduction to project data in lower dimensional sub-
spaces, etc [45].
Other types of techniques include reinforcement learning ,
which we omit to ease presentation.
ML approaches. ML models can be also categorized de-
pending on the probability distributions they learn. Assum-
ing one has some input data xand wants to classify it into
labelsy, then, roughly speaking, one can use either:
Discriminative models to learn the conditional proba-
bility distribution p(yjx), or
Generative models to learn the joint probability distri-
butionp(x;y). Among these, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [21] were originally proposed for
unsupervised learning, but now also used for super-
vised and reinforcement learning, and have become
very popular as they learn to generate new data with
the same statistical properties as the training set. The
two kinds of model are exempliﬁed in Figure 1.
Another distinction is based on whether the learning task
is centralized or (somewhat) distributed:
Centralized learning: in conventional ML method-
ologies, all training data is pooled and stored at a sin-
gle entity, and models are trained on this joint pool.
Figure 2: An overview of the federated learning approach.
Collaborative/federated learning: multiple partici-
pants, each with their own training dataset, construct
a joint model by training a local model on their own
data, but periodically exchange model parameters,
updates to these parameters, or partially constructed
models with the other participants. This intuition is il-
lustrated in Figure 2. There are several techniques in
this category, including federated learning deployed
by Google [33] on million of devices, e.g., for training
of predictive keyboards on character sequences that
users type on their phones.
ML Algorithms. As discussed above, ML involves creat-
ing models. These can be built using different approaches,
sometimes referred to as algorithms. Supervised learn-
ing techniques include Linear Regression, Logistic Regres-
sion, K-Nearest Neighbors, Decision Trees, Support Vec-
tor Machines, Random Forest, Naive Bayes, etc. For in-
stance, Logistic Regression is a linear model where the
probabilities describing the possible outcomes of a single
trial are modeled via a logistic (logit) function; the pa-
rameters of the model are estimated with maximum like-
lihood estimation, using an iterative algorithm. Unsuper-
vised learning algorithms include clustering ones–e.g., hi-
erarchical clustering, k-means, DBSCAN, etc.
Neural networks, which have attracted a lot of attention
in recent years, are also types of ML instantiations, where
learning can be either supervised or unsupervised. A neu-
ral net consists of a large number of simple processing
nodes that are densely interconnected, usually organized
into layers, to which weights are assigned. During train-
ing, weights are initially set to random values; as training
data passes through the layers, weights are continually ad-
justed until training data with the same labels consistently
yield similar outputs [24]. In particular, in deep neural net-
works (“deep learning”), each level learns to transform its
input data into a slightly more abstract and composite rep-
resentation; in fact, the word “deep” typically refers to the
number of layers through which the data is transformed.
Overall, choosing the right machine learning algorithm
depends on several factors, including, but not limited to:
data size, quality and diversity, as well as what answers
businesses want to derive from that data. Additional con-
siderations include accuracy, training time, parameters,
data points and much more. Therefore, the right choice
is typically both a combination of business need, speciﬁca-
tion, experimentation, and time available.
2