data used to train the model. The adversary’s goal is
to extract an equivalent or near-equivalent ML model.
Functionality Stealing: Rather than stealing the
model, here the ultimate goal is to create “knock-offs”
of the (black-box) model solely based on input-output
pairs observed from MLaaS queries [42].
4 Attacks
4.1 Membership Inference Attack (MIA)
As mentioned above, membership inference relates to the
problem of deciding, given a data point, whether or not it
was included in the training dataset.
4.1.1 Deﬁnition and Relevance
Formally, in a membership inference attack (MIA), the ad-
versary, given a target datapoint dandsome access to a
modelh(x), tries to infer whether d2x. This can con-
stitute a serious privacy breach in a number of settings,
which we discuss next.
Sensitivity of task/model. First of all, MIA can directly
violate privacy if inclusion in a training set is itself sensi-
tive based on the nature of the task at hand. For example,
if health-related records (or images like MRIs) are used to
train a classiﬁer, discovering that a speciﬁc record was used
for training inherently leaks information about the individ-
ual’s health. Similarly, if images from a database of crim-
inals are used to train a model predicting the probability
that one will re-offend, successful membership inference
exposes an individual’s criminal history.
Signal of leakage. When a record is fully known to the ad-
versary, learning that it was used to train a particular model
is an indication of information leakage through the model.
Overall, MIA is often considered to be a signal—a measur-
ing stick of sort—that access to a model leads to potentially
serious privacy breaches. In fact, MIAs are often a gateway
to further attacks: e.g., if the adversary infers that data of a
victim is part of the information she has access to she can
mount other attacks, like proﬁling, property inference, etc.
Establishing wrongdoing. On the other hand, MIA can
also be used by regulators to support the suspicion that a
model was trained on personal data without an adequate
legal basis, or for a purpose not compatible with the data
collection. For instance, DeepMind was recently found to
have used personal medical records provided by the UK’s
National Health Service for purposes beyond direct patient
care; the basis on which the data was collected [56].
MIA beyond machine learning. As a side note, we re-
mark that MIAs have been studied not only in the con-
text of machine learning, but also in other ﬁelds. Over-
all, given a data point dand a function f(x), one can
deﬁne membership inference as the problem of determin-
ing whether dis part of the input to the function f, i.e.,
d2x. Often,fis some aggregation function, and in fact
researchers have demonstrated the existence of successful
MIAs against aggregate statistics in the context of genomic
studies [27], location data [48], and noisy statistics in gen-
eral [16].4.1.2 State of the Art
Attacking Machine Learning as a Service. MIA against
black-box machine learning models was ﬁrst studied by
Shokri et al. [51], in the context of supervised learning.
They focus on classiﬁcation models trained by commercial
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) providers, such as
Google and Amazon, whereby a user has API access to a
trained model.
More speciﬁcally, customers in possession of a dataset
and a data classiﬁcation task can upload the dataset to the
MLaaS service and pay it to construct a model. The service
then makes the model available to the customer—typically
as a black-box API. This setting is illustrated in Figure 4.
For example, a mobile-app maker can use such a service
to analyze users’ activities and query the resulting model
inside the app to promote in-app purchases to users when
they are most likely to respond. Moreover, some machine-
learning services also let data owners expose their models
to external users for querying or even sell them.
Inference via overﬁtting. Shokri et al. [51]’s approach
exploits differences in the model’s response to inputs that
were or were not seen during training. For each class of
the targeted black-box model, they train a shadow model ,
with the same machine learning technique; the intuition
is that the model ends up “overﬁtting” on data used for
training [51]. Overﬁtting is a modeling error that occurs
when a function is too closely ﬁt to a limited set of data
points, and thus performs better on the training inputs than
on the inputs drawn from the same population but not used
during the training. Therefore, the attacker can exploit the
conﬁdence values on inputs belonging to the same classes
and learn to infer membership.
Then, Salem et al. [49], although also building on over-
ﬁtting signals, relax several adversarial assumptions—e.g.,
using multiple shadow models, knowledge of the target
model structure, and having a dataset from the same dis-
tribution as the target model’s training data—showing that
MIAs are very broadly applicable at low cost and thereby
pose a more severe risk than previously thought. Overall,
the attacks are relatively successful across the board, more
or less so depending on the adversary’s prior knowledge,
the datasets, the task at hand, etc.
ML and overﬁtting. Another line of work studies the
relationship between overﬁtting and information leakage.
In particular, Yeom et al. [58] assume that the adversary
knows the distribution from which the training set was
drawn and its size, and that the adversary colludes with
the training algorithm. Their attacks are close in perfor-
mance to Shokri et al.’s [51], and show that, besides over-
ﬁtting, the inﬂuence of target attributes on model’s outputs
also correlates with successful attacks. Truex et al. [55]
extend [51] to a more general setting and show how mem-
bership inference attacks are largely transferable.
Generative models. While the research discussed above
focus on discriminative models, other work target genera-
tive models. As discussed in Section 2.1, they are used to
generate new samples from the same underlying distribu-
tion of a given training dataset, e.g., to artiﬁcially generate
plausible images and videos. Here the attacker targets a
5