Figure 4: Membership inference attack against MLaaS in the
black-box setting [51].
MLaaS engine that provides synthetic samples on demand
– e.g., the user’s query is “provide an image sample of a
cat” – based on a trained generative model. Once again,
inferring whether speciﬁc data points are part of the train-
ing set for that generative model may constitute a serious
privacy breach. Note that membership inference on gen-
erative models is much more challenging than on discrim-
inative models: in the former, the attacker cannot exploit
conﬁdence values on inputs belonging to the same classes,
and therefore it is more difﬁcult to detect overﬁtting and
mount the attack.
Hayes et al. [25] consider both black-box and white-
box attacks: in the former, the adversary can only make
queries to the model under attack, i.e., the target model,
and has no access to the internal parameters. In the latter,
she also has access to the parameters. To mount the attacks,
they train a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [21]
on samples generated from the target model; i.e,, using
generative models as a method to learn information about
the target generative model, and thus create a local copy
of the target model from which they can launch the at-
tack. The intuition is that, if a generative model overﬁts,
then a GAN—which combines a discriminative model and
a generative model—should be able to detect this overﬁt-
ting, since the discriminator is trained to learn statistical
differences in distributions. Moreover, for white-box at-
tacks, the attacker-trained discriminator itself can be used
to measure information leakage of the target model.
Federated Learning. In this setting, the attack can be
mounted by an adversary, a participant in the federated
learning, attempting to infer whether a speciﬁc record is
part of the training set of either a speciﬁc or any partici-
pant. The ﬁrst MIA against federated learning is presented
by Melis et al. [35], whose main intuition is to exploit un-
intended leakage from either the embedding layer (all deep
learning models operating on non-numeric data where the
input space is discrete and sparse ﬁrst use an embedding
layer to transform inputs into a lower-dimensional vector
representation) or the gradients (in deep learning mod-
els, gradients are computed by back-propagating the loss
through the entire network from the last to the ﬁrst layer).
An illustration of Melis et al. [35]’s attack is in Figure 5.
Then, Nasr et al. [37] design MIAs during the training
phase in a white-box setting, including passive and active
attackers based on the different adversary prior knowledge.4.2 Model Inversion
As mentioned earlier, model inversion techniques aim to
infer class features and/or construct class representatives,
given that the adversary has some access (either black-box
or white-box) to a model.
4.2.1 Deﬁnition and Early Work
The concept of model inversion is introduced by Fredrik-
son et al. [17, 18]. First, they show how an attacker can rely
on outputs from a classiﬁer to infer sensitive features used
as inputs to the model itself: given the model and some
demographic information about a patient whose records
are used for training, an attacker might predict sensitive
attributes of the patient. Then, they use so-called “hill-
climbing” on the output probabilities of a computer-vision
classiﬁer to reveal individual faces from the training data.
These techniques are sometimes described as violating
privacy of the training data, even though the inferred fea-
tures characterize an entire class and not speciﬁcally the
training data, except in the cases of pathological overﬁt-
ting where the training sample constitutes the entire mem-
bership of the class.
4.2.2 Further Attacks
Collaborative learning. Hitaj et al. [26] show that a par-
ticipant in collaborative learning can use GANs to con-
struct class representatives. However, this technique has
been evaluated only on models where all members of the
same class are visually similar (handwritten digits and
faces). Thus, there is no evidence that it produces actual
training images or can distinguish a training image and an-
other image from the same class.
Aono et al. [3] show that, in the collaborative deep learn-
ing protocol of [50], an adversarial server can partially re-
cover participants’ data points from the shared gradient up-
dates, although in a greatly simpliﬁed setting where the
batch consists of a single data point.
Unintended Memorization. Song et al. [52] engineer a
machine learning model that memorizes the training data,
which can then be extracted with black-box access to the
model, without affecting the accuracy of the model on its
primary task.
Then, Carlini et al. [8] show that deep learning-based
generative sequence models trained on text data can unin-
tentionally memorize speciﬁc training inputs, which can
then be extracted with black-box access. Even though
the models are trained on text, extraction is demonstrated
only for sequences of digits (artiﬁcially introduced into the
text), which are not affected by the relative word frequen-
cies in the language model.
4.3 Property Inference
As mentioned above, work presented in [4, 17, 26] aimed
to infer properties that characterize an entire class: for ex-
ample, given a face recognition model where one of the
classes is Bob, infer what Bob looks like (e.g., Bob wears
glasses). However, while Ateniese et al. [4] are actually
6