An Overview of Privacy in Machine Learning
Emiliano De Cristofaro, UCL & Alan Turing Institute
e.decristofaro@ucl.ac.uk
March 2020
1 Prologue
Over the past few years, providers such as Google, Mi-
crosoft, and Amazon have started to provide customers
with access to software interfaces allowing them to eas-
ily embed machine learning tasks into their applications.
Overall, organizations can now use Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) engines to outsource complex tasks, e.g.,
training classiﬁers, performing predictions, clustering, etc.
They can also let others query models trained on their data.
Naturally, this approach can also be used (and is often ad-
vocated) in other contexts, including government collabo-
rations, citizen science projects, and business-to-business
partnerships.
However, if malicious users were able to recover data
used to train these models, the resulting information leak-
age would create serious issues. Likewise, if the inner pa-
rameters of the model are considered proprietary informa-
tion, then access to the model should not allow an adver-
sary to learn such parameters. In this document, we set to
review privacy challenges in this space, providing a sys-
tematic review of the relevant research literature, also ex-
ploring possible countermeasures.
More speciﬁcally, we provide ample background infor-
mation on relevant concepts around machine learning and
privacy. Then, we discuss possible adversarial models and
settings, cover a wide range of attacks that relate to private
and/or sensitive information leakage, and review recent re-
sults attempting to defend against such attacks.
Finally, we conclude with a list of open problems that
require more work, including the need for better evalua-
tions, more targeted defenses, and the study of the relation
to policy and data protection efforts.
2 Background
In this section, we provide some background information
and deﬁnitions related to machine learning (ML) as well
privacy technologies for ML.
2.1 Machine Learning (ML)
Learning process. ML provides automated methods of
analysis for large sets of data, or to perform tasks that are
too hard to program by hand. The general approach to cre-
ate a machine learning model is as follows [45]:
Training: Most ML models can be seen as paramet-
ric functions h(x)taking an input xand a parametervector. The input xis often represented as a vec-
tor of values called features . The space of functions
f8;x!h(x)gis the set of candidate hypotheses
to model the distribution from which the dataset was
sampled. A learning algorithm analyzes the training
data to ﬁnd the value(s) of parameter(s) . In other
words, during training, an ML algorithm aims to learn
the “characteristics” of some data with respect to a
given “task” – e.g., given enough pictures of pets, the
algorithm should learn to distinguish what differenti-
ates pictures of, say, cats from dogs.
Validation: The model performance is then validated
on a test dataset, which must be disjoint from the
training dataset in order to measure the model’s gener-
alization. In other words, validation performs a sanity
check to make sure the algorithm has indeed learned
what it is supposed to.
Inference (or testing): Once training completes, the
model is deployed to make predictions on inputs un-
seen during training: the value of parameters are
ﬁxed, and the model computes h(x)for new inputs
x. The model prediction may take different forms but,
e.g. for classiﬁcation, the most common is a vector
assigning a probability for each class of the problem,
which characterizes how likely the input belongs to
that class. In other words, we can now use the algo-
rithm in the wild, and use it for the task at hand – e.g.,
given a picture, the algorithm tells us whether that is
a picture of a cat or a dog.
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD). With each function
hand, one typically associates a loss L(h;), a value
that quantiﬁes the cost of any discrepancies between the
model’s prediction h(x)and the true value f(x), over all
examplesx(approximated by the training examples) [2].
Training the model his the process of searching for a value
ofwith the smallest loss, or with a tolerably small loss.
Often, both the model hand the loss Lare differentiable
functions of . Therefore, training often relies on a pro-
cess called stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where one
repeatedly picks an example x(or batches thereof), calcu-
latesh(x), and the corresponding loss, and adjusts to
reduce the loss by going in the opposite direction of the
gradient [2]. In a nutshell, SGD is a very common process
used during training to ﬁnd the settings in the ML algo-
rithm that maximize its accuracy.
Tasks. The process discussed above is typical in what is
referred to as supervised learning. However, ML tasks are
1arXiv:2005.08679v1  [cs.LG]  18 May 2020