ization [38], linear classiﬁers [6, 22], decision trees [7, 31],
linear regressors [12], and neural networks [5, 11, 32, 36].
SMC has also been used to build privacy-preserving
neural networks in a distributed fashion. For instance, Se-
cureML [36] starts with the data owners (clients) distribut-
ing their private training inputs among two non-colluding
servers during the setup phase; the two servers then use
MPC to train a global model on the clients’ encrypted joint
data. Then, Bonawitz et al. [5] use secure multi-party ag-
gregation techniques, tailored for federated learning, to let
participants encrypt their updates so that the central param-
eter server only recovers the sum of the updates.
Conﬁdentiality vs Privacy. Overall, cryptography in ML
is really aimed at protecting conﬁdentiality , rather than
privacy , which constitutes the main focus of our report.
The two terms are often confused, both in the context
of ML and in general, but they actually refer to differ-
ent properties. Conﬁdentiality is an explicit design prop-
erty whereby one party wants to keep information (e.g.,
training data, testing data, model parameters, etc.) hid-
den from both the public and other parties (e.g., clients
with respect to servers or vice-versa). Whereas, privacy is
about protecting against unintended information leakage,
whereby an adversary aims to infer sensitive information
through some (intended) interaction with the victim. In
other words, cryptographically-enforced conﬁdential com-
puting does not provide any guarantees about what the out-
put of the computation reveals. Therefore, we will focus on
privacy rather than conﬁdentiality defenses.
5.2 Differential Privacy (DP)
The state-of-the-art method for providing access to infor-
mation free from inferences is to satisfy differential pri-
vacy (DP) [13]. This applies to ML as well, and more pre-
cisely to providing access to models that have been trained
on (sensitive) datasets [1, 43, 46, 47, 50]. More precisely,
there are two main privacy-preserving model-training ap-
proaches in literature: 1) using noisy stochastic gradient
descent (noisy SGD) [2], and 2) Private Aggregation of
Teacher Ensembles (PATE) [43, 46].
Noisy SGD. As mentioned in Section 2.1, ML models are
often used trained using stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
The intuition is to add noise to the SGD process; however,
the main challenge is to do so while ensuring that the noise
is carefully calibrated. The sensitivity of the ﬁnal value
of(the parameter vector) to the elements of the training
data is generally hard to analyze. On the other hand, since
the training data affects only via the gradient computa-
tions, one may achieve privacy by bounding gradients (by
clipping) and by adding noise to those computations. In a
nutshell, this is the idea behind the seminal work by Abadi
et al. [1], in particular in the accounting of the privacy loss,
and hence it is general referred to as the Moments Accoun-
tantalgorithm.
PATE. To protect the privacy of training data during
learning, PATE transfers knowledge from an ensemble of
“teacher” models trained on partitions of the data to a “stu-
dent” model; see Figure 7. Intuitively, privacy is provided
by training teachers on disjoint data, and strong guaranteesstem from noisy aggregation of teachers’ answers.
Collaborative Learning. In the collaborative learning set-
ting, Shokri and Shmatikov [50] support distributed train-
ing of deep learning networks in a privacy-preserving way.
Speciﬁcally, their system relies on the input of indepen-
dent entities which aim to collaboratively build a machine
learning model without sharing their training data. To this
end, they selectively share subsets of noisy model param-
eters during training. Moreover, federated learning pro-
posals, which have already mentioned, tackle the problem
of training deep learning models with differential privacy
guarantees for the tasks of training language models [34]
and digits classiﬁcation [20].
5.3 Trusted Execution Environments
A different line of work focuses on privacy (as well as in-
tegrity) guarantees for ML computations in untrusted en-
vironments (i.e., tasks outsourced by a client to a remote
server, including MLaaS) by leveraging so-called Trusted
Execution Environments (TEEs), such as Intel SGX or
ARM TrustZone. TEEs use hardware and software pro-
tections to isolate sensitive code from other applications,
while attesting to its correct execution. The main idea is
that TEEs outperform purely cryptographic approaches by
multiple orders of magnitude.
In this area, there are three main approaches. The
ﬁrst includes work supporting oblivious data access pat-
terns [41] and in general training for a range of ML algo-
rithms run inside SGX [28, 29]. The second, by Tramer
and Boneh [53], focuses on high performance execution
of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in TEEs, by efﬁciently
partitioning DNN computations between trusted and un-
trusted devices. The third, by Hanzlik et al. [23], is es-
sentially a guarded ofﬂine deployment of MLaaS: models
are executed locally on the client’s side (therefore, the data
never leaves the device).
5.4 ML-Speciﬁc Approaches
Finally, a number of ML techniques are used to reduce in-
formation available to the adversary to mount their attacks.
For instance, dropout is a popular technique often used to
mitigate overﬁtting in neural networks; as such, this might
reduce the effectiveness of MIAs based on overﬁtting.
Additional techniques in this space include weight nor-
malization (re-parameterization of the weights vectors that
decouples the length of those weights from their direction),
dimensionality reduction (e.g., only using inputs that occur
many times in the training data), selective gradient sharing
(in collaborative learning, participants could share only a
fraction of their gradients during each update), etc.
6 Conclusion
This document provided a literature review on privacy and
machine learning. We provided ample background infor-
mation on relevant concepts, including machine learning,
differential privacy, etc., as well as adversarial models.
Then, we presented a wide range of attacks that relate to
9