When the model itself represents intellectual property—
e.g., in ﬁnancial market systems—the model and its param-
eters should be kept private. In other contexts, it is impera-
tive that the privacy of the training data be preserved, e.g.,
medical applications. Regardless of the goal, the attacks
and defenses for them relate to exposing or preventing the
exposure of the model and training data.
Access. We ﬁrst discuss what kind of access the attacker
might have:
White-Box: she has some information about the
model or its original training data, e.g., ML algorithm
h, model parameters , network structure, or sum-
mary, partial, or full training data.
Black-Box: she has no knowledge about the model.
Rather, she might explore a model by providing a se-
ries of carefully crafted inputs and observing outputs.
Inference vs training. Another variable is where the at-
tack might take place:
Training Phase: the adversary attempts to learn the
model, e.g., accessing a summary, partial or all of
the training data. She might create a substitute model
(aka auxiliary model) to use to mount attacks on the
victim system.
Inference Phase: the adversary collects evidence
about the model characteristics by observing infer-
ences made by it.
Passive vs Active. Finally, one can also distinguish be-
tween passive and active attacks, roughly mirroring the tra-
ditional distinction in security literature between honest-
but-curious and fully malicious adversaries. Consider for
instance federated learning, where the attacker is one of the
participants in the collaborative setting:
Passive attack: the adversary passively observes the
updates and performs inference, e.g., without chang-
ing anything in the training procedure;
Active attack: the adversary actively changes the why
she operates, e.g., in the case of federated learning,
by extending their local copy of the collaboratively
trained model with an augmented property classiﬁer
connected to the last layer.
3.2 Types of attacks
Before delving into the state of the art in actual attacks, we
deﬁne what privacy means in the context of machine learn-
ing or, alternatively, what it means for a machine learning
model to breach privacy. Speciﬁc attacks proposed in liter-
ature are then reviewed in Section 4.
3.2.1 Inference about members of the population
Statistical disclosure: the adversary learns something
about the input to the model from the model; in
theory, one would like to control statistical disclo-
sure (this is also known as the “Dalenius desidera-
tum” [10]), in that a model should reveal no moreabout the input to which it is applied than would
have been known about this input without applying
the model. However, as also pointed out in [51], this
cannot be achieved by any useful model [14].
Model inversion: an adversary can use the model’s
output to infer the values of sensitive attributes used
as input to the model. Note that it may not be possi-
ble to prevent this if the model is based on statistical
facts about the population : for example, suppose that
training the model has uncovered a high correlation
between a person’s externally observable phenotype
features and their genetic predisposition to a certain
disease; this correlation is now a publicly known fact
that allows anyone to infer information about the per-
son’s genome after observing that person [51].
Inferring class representatives: overall, model inver-
sion can be generalized to potential breaches where
the adversary, given some access to the model, infers
features that characterize each class, making it possi-
ble to construct representatives of these classes.
3.2.2 Inference about members of the training dataset
Here the focus is on privacy of the individuals whose data
was used to train the model. This motivation is closely
related to the original goals of differential privacy [13]. Of
course, members of the training dataset are members of the
population, too. Therefore, one should focus on what the
model reveals about them beyond what it reveals about an
arbitrary member of the population:
Membership inference: given a model and an exact
data point, the adversary infers whether this point was
used to train the model or not.
Property inference: training data may not be identi-
cally distributed across different users whose records
are in the training set; unlike model inversion, the ad-
versary tries to infer properties that are true of a subset
of the training inputs but not of the class as a whole.
For instance, when Bob’s photos are used to train a
gender classiﬁer, she infers that Alice appears in some
of the photos.
3.2.3 Inferring Model Parameters
As discussed earlier, MLaaS allows model owners to
charge others for queries to their commercially valuable
models. This pay-per-query deployment option exempli-
ﬁes an increasingly common tension: on the one hand, the
query interface of an ML model may be widely accessible,
yet the model itself and the data on which it was trained
may be proprietary and conﬁdential. Moreover, for secu-
rity applications such as spam or fraud detection, an ML
model’s secrecy is critical to its utility; an adversary that
can learn the model can also often evade detection [4].
In this space, we can distinguish between:
Model Extraction: a black-box adversary that can
query an ML model to obtain predictions on input fea-
ture vectors, and may or may not know the model type
(e.g., logistic regression) or the distribution over the
4