4.4.2 Functionality Extraction
As mentioned in Section 3.2, the goal of functionality ex-
traction is, rather than to steal the model, to create “knock-
offs.” In [42], Orekondy et al. do so solely based on input-
output pairs observed from MLaaS queries. More specif-
ically, the adversary interacts with a black-box “victim”
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) by providing it in-
put images and obtaining respective predictions. The re-
sulting image-prediction pairs are used to train a knock-off
model, e.g., to compete with the victim model at the vic-
tim’s task.
Additional work in this category includes [44], whereby
the adversary trains a local model to substitute for a vic-
tim deep neural network (DNN), using inputs synthetically
generated by an adversary and labeled by the target DNN.
4.5 Take Aways
Throughout this section, we have presented and discussed
the state of the art in attacks against privacy in ML.
Membership inference attacks are real. As evident from
the above discussion, there has been a very signiﬁcant
amount of research work on membership inference attacks
against ML. Arguably, this is motivated by 1) the serious-
ness of the privacy risks stemming from such attacks, 2)
the fact that MIA is often just a signal of leakage and can
serve as a canary for broad privacy issues, and 3) the in-
teresting challenges in making attacks more effective, less
reliant on strong assumptions, etc.
Overall, several attacks have been proposed in the con-
text of a wide variety of datasets (images, text, etc.), mod-
els (discriminative, generative, federated), as well as threat
models (API access, white-box, black-box, active, pas-
sive, etc.). Such attacks are realistic but obviously their
effectiveness depends on the actual settings, e.g., adver-
sary’s knowledge of records, model parameters, etc., and
are likely to affect certain users more than others.
While we discuss possible defenses and the overall out-
look, respectively, in Section 5 and ??, we are conﬁdent
in arguing that MIAs are a real problem that at the very
least should make practitioners and researchers question
whether deploying ML models in the wild is a good idea,
privacy-wise, whenever training data is sensitive. How-
ever, further work is needed to provide clear guidelines
and usable tools for practitioners willing to provide ac-
cess to trained model to fully understand the privacy risks,
on their speciﬁc data/speciﬁc learning task, for the users
whose data is used for training.
Limitations of model inversion. Although research
roughly falling in the “model inversion” category is im-
portant, we believe there are some limitations in what they
mean for privacy. Class members produced by model in-
version and GANs are similar to the training inputs only
if all members of the class are similar, as is the case for
MNIST (the dataset of handwritten digit used in [26]) and
facial recognition. This does not violate privacy of the
training data; it simply shows that machine learning works
as it should. A trained classiﬁer reveals the input features
characteristic of each class, thus enabling the adversary to
sample from the class population. For instance, Figure 6shows GAN-constructed images for the gender classiﬁca-
tion task on the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset,
taken from [35]. These images show a generic female face,
but there is no way to tell from them whether an image of
a speciﬁc female was used in training or not.
Therefore, the informal property violated by such at-
tacks is, roughly speaking: “a classiﬁer should prevent
users from generating an input that belongs to a particu-
lar class or even learning what such an input looks like.”
However, it is not clear why this property is desirable or
whether it is even achievable. In fact, this motivated us to
study what we deﬁned as property inference attacks.
Property inference needs further work. Overall, prop-
erty inference attacks are not to be ignored, even though,
their effectiveness depends on the context. As mentioned
earlier, inferring sensitive attributes is really a privacy
breach when the attacker can conﬁdently assess that those
attributes related to records in the training set, and even
more so if they do not leak simply because the class the
model is learning to classify is strictly correlated.
So really the only “attack” in this sense we are aware
of is that of Melis et al. [35], which has only been stud-
ied in the context of collaborative learning. Even in that
case, the authors essentially show that the accuracy of the
attack quickly degrades with increasing number of partici-
pants. In fact, if this is large enough, then differentially pri-
vate defenses based on the moments accountant method [1]
(discussed in Section 5) can be used to thwart such attacks.
It remains however an open research questions to inves-
tigate whether property inference attacks: 1) are possible,
as per our deﬁnition, in non collaborative learning settings
and at scale, and 2) can be thwarted in collaborative set-
tings involving a small number of participants. (We discuss
the latter in more detail Section 5.)
5 Defenses
Overall, we can categorize defenses against attacks dis-
cussed in this document and in general aiming to protect
conﬁdentiality and privacy in ML based on the main tools
they rely on. These include advanced privacy-enhancing
technologies like cryptography and differential privacy (re-
viewed in Section 2.3) as well approaches used as part of
the learning process (mainly, training) to reduce informa-
tion available to the adversary.
5.1 Cryptography
Cryptography in ML can support conﬁdential computing
scenarios where, for instance, a server has a model trained
on its private data and wishes to provide inferences (e.g.,
classiﬁcation) on clients’ private data. In this context, there
are a number of research proposals and prototypes in lit-
erature, which allow the client to obtain the inference re-
sult without revealing their input to the server, while at the
same preserving the conﬁdentiality of the server’s model.
For instance, privacy-enhancing tools based on secure
multi-party computation (SMC) and fully homomorphic
encryption (FHE) have been proposed to securely train su-
pervised machine learning models, such as matrix factor-
8