177
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon systems in order to understand…
to explode makes this type of autonomous weapon a rather 
indiscriminate and unintelligent one, which is why anti-
personal landmines have been banned following the 1997 
Ottawa Treaty. The German Falcon torpedo used during 
WWII is also another good example of a not-so-wise auton-
omous weapon. Equipped with an acoustic homing seeker, 
this type of torpedo did not travel in a straight line like tra-
ditional torpedoes. Using its acoustic sensors, it was able to 
detect ships and modify its trajectory accordingly. While it 
was a revolutionary weapon at the time that allowed for the 
more precise and deadly targeting of Allied merchant ships, 
it nonetheless faced a serious problem: two of the three 
U-boats equipped with this technology were sunk after their 
torpedoes detected the sound of the submarines’ propellers 
and circled back on them. On the other hand, defense sys-
tems like the Israeli Iron Dome, the German Nächstbereich -
schutzsystem MANTIS, or the South Korean SGR-A1 can 
be considered as more clever autonomous systems because 
of their capacity to only fire on specific targets. Indeed, these 
systems are programmed to either identify incoming rockets 
and other projectiles or enemy combatants, and to intercept 
or fire at them without any human intervention. In the case 
of the Iron Dome, the Israeli military has displayed numer -
ous batteries on strategical positions throughout the country 
that are constantly moved to fool the enemy and to adjust 
to new threats. When the radar system detects an incom-
ing missile, the sophisticated algorithm determines in a few 
seconds the type of projectile that has been fired and if it is 
aimed at populated civilian areas or military infrastructure. 
If this is the case, interception missiles are launched. Since 
the deployment of this system in 2011, more than a thousand 
of Hezbollah and Hamas’ rockets have been intercepted with 
an incredible success rate,10 which has of course changed the 
lives of Israeli citizens living close to Lebanon or the Gaza 
Strip (Human Rights Council 2015, 151). In return, this sys -
tem has not led to the destruction of commercial airliners or 
the death of innocent civilians.
At the end of the day, one of the main benefits of this 
conceptual clarifications is not only to defuse the fear that 
senseless computers can now decide to harm us based on 
their own free will. As it stands now, human beings are still 
either directly (in the case of drones) or indirectly involved 
(in the case of automated weapons in the way algorithms are 
developed) in the decision to kill in warfare. It also gives us a 
better idea of the specific ethical challenges associated with 
these respective weapon systems. One of most important being our capacity to determine the criminal responsibility 
of those responsible of a system malfunction or the unfor -
tunate death of innocent civilians. If attributing this respon-
sibility can be difficult in the case of an autonomous sys-
tem, it is easier to determine in the two other systems since 
their respective reaction depends either on the decision of a 
human being (in the case of drones) or of individuals who 
have determined how the automated reaction ought to work.
References
Caron, Jean-François. 2018. A Theory of the Super Soldier: The Moral-
ity of Capacity-Increasing Technologies in the Military. Manches-
ter: Manchester University Press.
Caron, Jean-François. 2019. The War of the Machines: Contempo-
rary Technologies and the Morality of Warfare, 2019. London: 
Routledge.
Creighton, Jolene. 2016. The Evolution of AI: Can Morality be Pro-
grammed?. Futurism, 1 July. https ://futur  ism.com/the-evolu tion-
of-ai-can-moral ity-be-progr  ammed /.
Einar Himma, Kenneth. 2009. Artificial Agency, Consciousness, and 
the Criteria for Moral Agency: What Properties Must an Artificial 
Agent have to be a Moral Agent? Ethics and Information Technol-
ogy 11 (1): 19–29.
Human Rights Council. 2015. Report of the detailed findings of the 
independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to 
Human Rights Council resolution S-21/1. 29th session.
Krishnan, Armin. 2009. Killer Robots: Legality and Ethicality of 
Autonomous Weapons. London: Ashgate.
Leveringhaus, Alex. 2016. Ethics and Autonomous Weapons. Oxford: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Minsky, Marvin. 1968. Semantic Information Processing. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
Scharre, Paul. 2018. Army of None: Autonomous Weapons and the 
Future of War. New York, London: W.W. Norton & Company.
Sharkey, Noel. 2010. Saying No! To Lethal Autonomous Targeting. 
Journal of Military Ethics 9 (4): 369–383.
Sparrow, Robert. 2007. Killer Robots. Journal of Applied Philosophy  
24 (1): 62–77.
Turner, Jacob. 2019. Robot Rules. Regulating Artificial Intelligence. 
London: Palgrave MacMillan.
Turner, Julian. 2018. Sea Hunter: Inside the US Navy’s Autonomous 
Submarine Tracking Vessel. Naval Technology, 3 May. https ://
www.naval -techn ology  .com/featu res/sea-hunte r-insid e-us-navys  
-auton omous -subma rine-track ing-vesse l/.
Jean‑François Caron is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Political Science and at the Institute of Political Science and Adminis-
tration at the University of Opole.
10 During Operation Pillar of Defense, the system successfully inter -
cepted 84% of rockets and mortars fired against Israel, while the suc-
cess rate reached 91% during the first part.