175
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon systems in order to understand…
achieve three important features, namely: (1) to be able to 
analyze all possible outcomes and to suggest the best pos-
sible strategy and, if necessary, (2) to have intelligent robots 
coordinate a common action together, as well as (3) to dis-
play an analytical ability to show the same moral discern-
ment as human beings. Currently, AI is only able to fulfill 
the first two tasks.
While it has taken more time than originally expected for 
scientists to develop computers intelligent enough to beat 
chess and Go players,6 this was finally achieved in Febru-
ary 1996 when Deep Blue, an IBM supercomputer, was 
able to beat the world chess champion Gary Kasparov. As 
mentioned by Armin Krishnan, since then, “The days are 
now definitely gone when humans could seriously compete 
with computers in the chess domain” (Krishnan 2009, 47). 
We had to wait about twenty more years before a computer 
named AlphaGo was able to beat world champion Lee Sedol 
at the ancient Chinese game of Go, a game that requires 
far more intuition than chess. While Deep Blue relied on 
its capacity to evaluate millions of possible moves at the 
same time, AlphaGo relied for its part on its capacity for 
reinforcement learning and is therefore more akin to the 
decision-making process of humans. Indeed, AlphaGo’s 
abilities were progressive and based on numerous attempts 
and errors. The machine was programmed to play countless 
games against itself, which helped it to learn from its mis-
takes and to devise alternative strategies. This is how it was 
eventually able to develop unprecedented moves that had 
never before been used by Go players.
Like in many other domains, AI has not been limited to 
games and has been integrated in different parts of military 
computer systems and robots. One of the best examples is 
certainly DARPA’s Deep Green system that helps military 
commanders to have a better view of their strategies by gen-
erating their likely possible outcomes, thereby suggesting 
what might be the best course of action. In light of the accel-
erating stream of data and information that military com-
manders are now faced with, it is fairly easy to understand 
why this system has been developed, since human beings’ 
capacity to process this information is not increasing. Of 
course, this system keeps a human in the loop and its aim 
“is not to replace the human military commander with a 
machine, but to enable [him] to master the enormous com-
plexity of modern war”’ (Krishnan 2009, 54). Alongside the 
use of computers as decision support tools (which is inher -
ently non-problematic from the perspective of the morality 
of warfare), current technologies can also allow the armed 
forces to better coordinate their actions. Indeed, swarm systems are allowing machines to enjoy far more autonomy 
and have been developed with the aim of copying the swarm 
intelligence of ants and to use this in military technologies, 
especially for drones. There is indeed something fascinating 
about these insects. While they are vulnerable and unable 
to solve simple navigational puzzles when they are isolated 
from their peers, they show a strong collective intelligence 
by coordinating themselves in an effective manner without 
communicating with each other. This is why militaries have 
developed multi-agent systems that enable multiple robots to 
independently act in concert rather than hinder one another. 
This was done by the US military in 2003, when 120 small 
robots equipped with swarm intelligence flew in a coor -
dinated manner. Since then, the Chinese military has also 
shown its ability to use this technology effectively. One can 
easily understand the effectiveness of this system through 
a hockey analogy. While it is easy for two defensemen to 
coordinate themselves when a forward from the other team is 
trying to enter their territory with the puck, this task would 
be impossible in a situation where there were five forwards 
with five different pucks against five defensemen. It would, 
however, be possible for a swarm of robot defensemen to 
very quickly devise a way of successfully defending their 
territory by collectively deciding on a course of action. The 
US Navy has shown the usefulness of this system during a 
test in 2014. A number of small swarm boats were deployed 
near a high-value ship. The human controller’s task was 
simply to order the swarm boats to intercept a suspicious 
vessel by coordinating themselves autonomously. As stated 
by Paul Scharre:
Bob Brizzolara, who directed the Navy’s demonstra-
tion, called the swarming boas a ‘game changer’. It’s 
an often-overused term, but in this case, it’s not hyper -
bole—robotic boat swarms are highly valuable to the 
Navy as a potential way to guard against threats to its 
ships. In October 2000, the USS Cole was attacked by 
al-Qaida terrorists using a small explosive-laden boat 
while in port in Aden, Yemen. The blast killed seven-
teen sailors and cut a massive gash in the ship’s hull. 
Similar attacks continue to be a threat to US ships, not 
just from terrorists but also from Iran, which regularly 
uses small high-speed craft to harass US ships near the 
Straits of Hormuz. Robot boats could intercept suspi-
cious vessels further away, putting eyes (and poten-
tially weapons) on potentially hostile boats without 
putting sailors at risks (2018, 22).
These examples show that AI military technology has 
reached a point where machines can analyze situations, pro-
vide advice, and coordinate each other: features that have 
been labelled by Jacob Turner as a weak form of AI (2019, 
6). In order to have a stronger form of AI, the technology 
would have to encompass many of the attributes of human 6 It took almost 40 years before a computer was able to beat a chess 
Grand Master, while it was originally predicted that it would take 
10 years (Krishnan 2009, 47).