176 J.-F. Caron 
intelligence and resemble the kind of robots portrayed in 
popular culture—namely, systems that would allow robots to 
identify targets and to decide whether to fire at them. This is 
likely the aspect of AI that scares most people and raises the 
question as to whether it is possible to have robots develop 
their own moral code and to make them behave in a way that 
is ethically responsible. Consider the following scenario: a 
fully autonomous drone is flying about a city and positively 
identifies a well-known terrorist who has been involved—
and who is still involved—in terrorist acts against civilians. 
However, he is surrounded by young children and a group of 
elderly women. Should the robot fire a Hellfire missile at this 
high-value target? Such a decision comes with many fun-
damental moral questions and can either be solved through 
consequentialist (killing this man and innocent civilians in 
his vicinity will ultimately contribute to saving more lives) 
or deontological ethics (according to which it is immoral 
under any circumstances to justify the murder of civilians). 
The now famous example of the naked soldier evoked by 
Michael Walzer is another good example in this regard. He 
is asking us to imagine that “a soldier while on patrol or on 
sniper duty catches an enemy soldier unaware, holds him in 
his gunsight, easy to kill, and then must decide whether to 
shoot him or let the opportunity pass” (2006, 138–139). If 
killing this soldier is not problematic in the eyes of Walzer, 
he nonetheless agrees that for many of us, harming a sol-
dier who is taking a bath, calmly smoking a cigarette, or 
doing his business behind a bush would be morally repulsive 
(and he gives many examples in this regard in his book). 
This hesitation is the quintessential representation of moral 
agency and the true meaning of an autonomous subject.7 At 
the moment, the capacity to make such moral decision is not 
a feature of any weapon system.
As previously mentioned, AI is not sophisticated enough 
to allow machines to make the same moral judgments as 
human beings on a regular basis.8 In fact, as argued by Ken-
neth Einar Himma, “it is clear that an artificial agent would 
have to be a remarkably sophisticated piece of technology 
to be a moral agent” (2009, 28) and that this might very 
well never be achieved. It is, however, what researchers are 
currently trying to accomplish through a pre-programmed 
mode. More precisely, they are trying to determine ethi-
cal patterns in how human beings make moral decisions in numerous circumstances. For instance, how would drivers 
react if a child on a bike were to swerve in front of them 
while the only option to avoid him was to swerve onto a side-
walk where a group of elderly women were taking a walk? 
Who would they choose to hit? When we would finally be 
able to determine how morality functions, computer engi-
neers and technicians would then try to program these pat-
terns into an AI. If this task is ever achieved by scientists, 
these intelligent robots will simply be a more advanced form 
of a pre-programmed decision-making process, which still 
does not qualify as autonomy. Since there are currently no 
robots that are able to engage targets independently of a 
human’s will, there is thus no need at this point to entertain 
a conversation on these science fiction-esque weapons.
It is, of course, easy to have our attention diverted from 
the essence of the current debate by fears that are mainly 
supported by films such as Slaughterbots,9 a movie that was 
shown as a side event hosted by the Campaign to Stop Killer 
Robots in November 2017 as a propaganda tool to con-
vince people that autonomous weapons should be banned. 
Although controversial and conducive to debates, such films 
are an unfaithful representation of what these weapons are 
currently capable of. In this sense, it is not helpful to envis-
age that terminators and other technologies may end up turn-
ing against their creators and wipe out the entire human race.
The intelligence of weapons with a pre-programmed 
lethal capacity are not automatically more morally prob-
lematic because the life and death decision is no longer the 
sole prerogative of a human being. In fact, sticking solely to 
the notion of having or not having a human in the loop as a 
way of distinguishing the morality of these weapons is irrel-
evant in allowing us to determine the ethical permissibil-
ity of these weapons. Those who are honest will admit that 
while some of these weapon systems can be problematic, 
others have not led to the indiscriminate killing of count-
less civilians. This nuanced judgment is explained by the 
fact that other factors need to be considered—namely, their 
overall intelligence, the way they are used and programmed, 
as well as the identity of those who are targeted. It is from 
these various factors that these aforementioned technologies 
may be deemed to be or not to be ethically permissible. Let 
us take the example of the landmine that can be considered 
as a lethal weapon with pre-programmed autonomy, in the 
sense that it is designed to detonate on its own when pres-
sure is exerted on it. This weapon, however, suffers from a 
major flaw: it has no freedom when it comes to determining 
if it should explode depending on the nature of those who 
are stepping on it. This incapacity to decide whether or not 7 As Leveringhaus puts it correctly, “the act of programming negates 
any autonomy in a philosophical sense” (Leveringhaus 2016, 48).
8 As noted by Vincent Conitzer, a Professor of Computer Science at 
Duke University who is working on allowing AI to make moral judg-
ments, “Recently, there have been a number of steps towards such a 
system, and I think there have been a lot of surprising advances (…) 
but I think having something like a "true AI", one that’s really as flex-
ible, able to abstract, and do all these things that humans do so easily, 
I think we’re still quite far away from that” (Creighton 2016).9 This short film depicts a future in which autonomous drones are 
going berserk and turn themselves against US Senators and university 
students.