174 J.-F. Caron 
these systems are able to fire at specific targets without the 
direct intervention of a human operator. Indeed, both sys-
tems are programmed to either identify incoming rockets 
and other projectiles or enemy combatants and to intercept 
or fire at them.2 We can also add to the list of examples 
the Sea Hunter, a prototype unmanned submarine track -
ing vessel developed by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) that will very soon join the US 
Naval fleet and has been described as “a highly autonomous 
unmanned ship that could revolutionize US maritime opera-
tions” and “a new vision of naval surface warfare” (Turner 
2018). Even if the initial goal was to use this type of vessel 
for surveillance purposes, the US Navy tested the Sea Hunter 
in August 2017 with an offensive anti-submarine payload 
system which means that the likelihood is high that it might 
be able to locate, track, and engage enemy submarines in 
the near future. If the Navy ever decides to move forward 
with this vessel, it would become very similar to the Iron 
Dome. Similar to the Israeli defense system, the vessel could 
potentially replace whole fleets of destroyers that were previ-
ously dedicated to anti-submarine warfare thanks to a pre-
programmed system that would only engage specific targets 
which would be detected because of their unique charac-
teristics, such as Yasen or Akula class Russian submarines 
whose dimensions and features are different from US Los 
Angeles class submarines.
Even though these systems are often referred to as being 
“autonomous” (see for instance Sparrow 2007,3 63), this 
designation is misleading. Indeed, the notion of autonomy 
refers clearly to features that are not associated with the pre-
viously discussed weapons systems, since an autonomous 
agent is someone who is first and foremost able to pose a 
deliberate and independent action that results from his own 
will. This means that breathing is not sufficient in itself to 
define a living creature as an autonomous agent, since this 
action is involuntary and a natural result of the parasympa-
thetic nervous system. The same logic would apply to the 
photosynthesis process of plants and other organisms. On the 
contrary, an autonomous action refers to an act that results 
from deliberate intent, which implies free will. Similarly, an 
individual who is under hypnosis or whose mental faculties 
are impaired cannot be considered an autonomous agent. This also implies that the intended action must result from 
a deliberative process that takes into account the difference 
between what is right and wrong. This faculty is at the core 
of how criminal responsibility is understood.4
In the case of military technologies, this understand-
ing of autonomy would refer to their capacity to determine 
on their own and without any form of human interference 
when and against whom to use lethal force. This is clearly 
not the case with these aforementioned weapons systems 
since their lethal potential lies either with humans (as in the 
case of drones) or through a pre-programmed algorithm. 
In order to talk about autonomous weapons systems, these 
technologies would need to possess the capacity to exercise 
moral judgment in their killing process. However, it must 
be noted that these weapons do not exist at the current time 
and considering the inherent difficulties associated with their 
potential development, it is impossible to say if scientists 
will ever be able to create them. On the contrary, it is clear 
that there is an intention to transform this fantasy into a 
reality. This conclusion is supported by the rhetoric of many 
senior military officers and by the tremendous investments 
that states have allocated in recent years for the research and 
development of these weapons. Indeed, we cannot ignore the 
fact that Russian military commanders have openly said that 
“a fully robotized unit will be created [in the near future], 
capable of independently conducting military operations”, 
while it has been stated by the US Department of Defense 
that the option of developing autonomous weapons able to 
determine on their own who should be targeted ought to be 
on the table (Scharre 2018, 6). Moreover, the Pentagon has 
recently announced that it will invest USD 18 billion in the 
research and development of such technologies.5
One of the main goals behind these investments is the 
capacity to develop autonomous platforms that are able to 
utilize artificial intelligence (AI) in order to operate on their 
own and to behave without a human in the loop. If it is ever 
realized, this innovation will open the door to the third revo-
lution in warfare, after the invention of gunpowder and the 
nuclear bomb. Coined for the first time in 1956 by John 
McCarthy at the British Dartmouth Summer Conference, 
AI refers to “the science of making machines do things that 
would require intelligence if done by men” (Minsky 1968, 
V). In order for AI to be used to its full potential in the mili-
tary domain, this advanced technology ought to be able to 
2 The autonomous nature of the SGR-A1 defence system has been 
a hotly debated topic in the last few years. Despite the fact that the 
spokesperson for Samsung Techwin—the company that developed 
the weapon—said in 2010 that the weapon “cannot automatically 
fire at detected foreign objects or figures”, it was however revealed 
3  years earlier that the technology could engage targets on its own 
without human intervention.
3 Noel Sharkey is one of the few who adequately sees and engages 
with the problem of labelling weapons such as drones as autonomous 
(Sharkey 2010, 376).4 This is why “someone who does not know the difference between 
right and wrong is not a moral agent and not appropriately censured 
for her behaviours. This is, of course, why we do not punish people 
with severe cognitive disabilities like a psychotic condition that inter -
feres with the ability to understand the moral character of her behav -
iour” (Einar Himma 2009, 23).
5 It is estimated that global spending on military robotics will reach 
around USD 7.5 billion a year in 2018.