Vol.:(0123456789)Digital War (2020) 1:173–177 
https://doi.org/10.1057/s42984-020-00028-5
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Defining semi‑autonomous, automated and autonomous weapon 
systems in order to understand their ethical challenges
Jean‑François Caron1,2
Accepted: 10 November 2020 / Published online: 24 November 2020 
© Springer Nature Limited 2020
Abstract
There is a lot of misunderstandings when it comes to what has been labelled as “autonomous killing robots”. Indeed, the 
robotization of weapons is a very complex issue and requires a clear conceptualization of these various types of weapons that 
are currently being used in the military. This article offers a typology of these weapon systems by distinguishing between 
semi-autonomous, automated and autonomous weapons. This necessary distinction allows for a better understanding of the 
ethical challenges associated with these systems.
Keywords Autonomous weapon systems · Automated weapon systems · Semi-autonomous weapon system · War · Military 
technologies · Just war theory
If we are to believe some reports, the world of warfare is 
about to be profoundly changed. Not only are we to witness 
the deployment of super soldiers on the battlefields (Caron 
2018), but autonomous killing robots will also replace 
human combatants. In light of the various Hollywood sce-
narios that have been made in the last decades, this prospect 
is for many of us very problematic. Indeed, how can we 
think objectively about this possibility when our minds are 
influenced by movies in which mankind is losing control 
over the machines, such as War Games or the Terminator  
franchise? Yet, ignoring that cultural legacy is essential if 
we are to assess the appropriateness of using these weapons 
systems and face the ethical questions connected with this 
new reality. The other challenge is to have a clear under -
standing of what we are talking about when we are talking 
about autonomous machines. There are a lot of confusion in 
this regard as a lot of people tend to assimilate technologies 
such as drones or the Israeli Iron Dome defense system in the 
same category as HAL in 2001: A Space Odyssey, namely a 
computer able to make decisions on its own. This is a serious 
mistake that needs to be overcome. If the latter system that came out of Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clark’s minds 
can be labelled as an autonomous system, the formers fall 
within two different categories, namely of semi-autonomous 
and or automated weapon systems.
This therefore begs the question of how we can we dif-
ferentiate between these types of weapons? It can be argued 
that one way of distinguishing between them is through the 
relationship humans have with the machines when they are 
performing tasks; in other words, whether there is a human 
in the loop as well as how their lethal capacities operate. 
In this perspective, some weapons’ autonomy is solely pre-
programmed, and their lethal capacities remain entirely the 
prerogative of a human operator. This is the case with many 
military technologies, such as drones that are able to fly 
autonomously to a certain location. However, they cannot 
fire their weapons without the direct intervention of a human 
being. We can think in this regard to the US Predator1 and 
Reaper drones whose non-lethal autonomy remain largely 
akin to that of a standard plane with its auto-pilot function. 
However, when it comes to firing their Hellfire missiles, 
these weapons cannot act on their own. They are fired by a 
human agent according to certain rules of engagement.
Secondly, we find automated weapon systems that pos-
sess a destructive and/or lethal capacity. The best exam-
ples in this regard are the Israeli Iron Dome and the South 
Korean SGR-A1. Contrary to semi-autonomous weapons, This text is an extract from Caron (2019).
 * Jean-François Caron 
 jean-francois.caron@nu.edu.kz
1 Nazarbayev University, Nur -Sultan, Kazakhstan
2 University of Opole, Opole, Poland1 The Predator has been retired from active service by the US mili-
tary in early 2018.