2.2 G ENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014) form a subclass of implicit gen-
erative models that relies on adversarial training of two networks: the generator , which attempts
to produce samples that mimic the reference distribution, and the discriminator , which tries to dif-
ferentiate between real and generated samples and, in doing so, provides a useful gradient signal
to the generator. Following rapid development, GANs have achieved state-of-the-art results in im-
age (Zhang et al., 2019; Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019) and video generation (Clark et al.,
2019), and have been successfully applied for unsupervised feature learning (Donahue et al., 2017;
Dumoulin et al., 2017a; Donahue & Simonyan, 2019), among many other applications.
Despite achieving impressive results in these domains, limited work has so far shown good perfor-
mance of GANs in audio generation. Two notable exceptions include WaveGAN (Donahue et al.,
2019) and GANSynth (Engel et al., 2019), which both successfully applied GANs to simple datasets
of audio data. The former is the most similar to this work in the sense that it uses GANs to generate
raw audio; results were obtained for a dataset of spoken commands of digits from zero to nine. The
latter provides state-of-the-art results for a dataset of single note recordings from various musical
instruments (NSynth, Engel et al., 2017) by training GANs to generate invertible spectrograms of
the notes. Neekhara et al. (2019) propose an adversarial vocoder model that is able to synthesise
magnitude spectrograms from mel-spectrograms generated by Tacotron 2, and combine this with
phase estimation using the Local Weighted Sums technique (Le Roux et al., 2010).
To the best of our knowledge, GANs have not yet been applied at large scale to non-visual domains.
Two seconds of audio at 24kHz1has a dimensionality of 48000 , which is comparable to RGB im-
ages at 128128resolution. Until recently, high-quality GAN-generated images at such or higher
resolution were uncommon (Zhang et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019), and it was not clear that training
GANs at scale would lead to extensive improvements (Brock et al., 2019).
Multiple discriminators have been used in GANs for different purposes. For images, Denton et al.
(2015); Zhang et al. (2017); Karras et al. (2018) proposed to use separate discriminators for differ-
ent resolutions. Similar approaches have also been used in image-to-image transfer (Huang et al.,
2018) and video synthesis (Saito & Saito, 2018). Clark et al. (2019), on the other hand, combine
a 3D-discriminator that scores the video at lower resolution and a 2D-frame discriminator which
looks at individual frames. In adversarial feature learning, Donahue & Simonyan (2019) combine
outputs from three discriminators to differentiate between joint distributions of images and latents.
Discriminators operating on windows of the input have been used in adversarial texture synthesis (Li
& Wand, 2016) and image translation (Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017).
3 GAN-TTS
3.1 D ATASET
Our text-to-speech models are trained on a dataset which contains high-ﬁdelity audio of human
speech with the corresponding linguistic features and pitch information. The linguistic features
encode phonetic and duration information, while the pitch is represented by the logarithmic funda-
mental frequency logF0. In total, there are 567features. We do not use ground-truth duration and
pitch for subjective evaluation; we instead use duration and pitch predicted by separate models. The
dataset is formed of variable-length audio clips containing single sequences, spoken by a profes-
sional voice actor in North American English. For training, we sample 2second windows (ﬁltering
out shorter examples) together with corresponding linguistic features. The total length of the ﬁltered
dataset is 44hours. The sampling frequency of the audio is 24kHz, while the linguistic features and
pitch are computed for 5ms windows (at 200Hz). This means that the generator network needs to
learn how to convert the linguistic features and pitch into raw audio, while upsampling the signal
by a factor of 120. We apply a -law transform to account for the logarithmic perception of volume
(see Appendix C).
124kHz is a commonly used frequency for speech, because the absence of frequencies above 12kHz does
not meaningfully affect ﬁdelity.
3