In Section 5 we describe other combinations of RWD s as well as a full, deterministic discriminator
which we used in our ablation study.
3.4 D ISCRIMINATOR ARCHITECTURE
➞➞
(a) GBlock
Conv
channels: N ➞ 2×N, size: 3 
ReLU 
Downsample ReLU Conv
dilation: 2, size: 3 
Conv
channels: N ➞ 2×N, size: 1 
Downsample 
h l 
Conv
channels: 567 ➞ 2×N, size: 1 
(b) Conditional DBlock
Conv
channels: N ➞ m×N, size: 3 
ReLU 
Downsample ReLU Conv
dilation: 2, size: 3 
Conv
channels: N ➞ m×N, size: 1 
Downsample 
(c) DBlock
Figure 1: Residual blocks used in the model. Convolutional layers have the same number of input
and output channels and no dilation unless stated otherwise. h- hidden layer representation, l
- linguistic features, z- noise vector, m2 f1;2g- channel multiplier, M-G’s input channels,
M= 2Nin blocks 3, 6, 7, and M=Notherwise; sizerefers to kernel size.
The full discriminator architecture is shown in Figure 2. The discriminators consists of blocks
(DBlocks) that are similar to the GBlocks used in the generator, but without batch normalisation.
The architectures of standard and conditional DBlocks are shown in Figures 1b and 1c respectively.
The only difference between the two DBlocks is that in the conditional DBlock, the embedding of
the linguistic features is added after the ﬁrst convolution. The ﬁrst and the last two DBlocks do
not downsample (i.e. keep the temporal dimension ﬁxed). Apart from that, we add at least two
downsampling blocks in the middle, with downsample factors depending on k, so as to match the
frequency of the linguistic features (see Appendix A.2 for details). Unconditional RWD s are com-
posed entirely of DBlocks. In conditional RWD s, the input waveform is gradually downsampled by
DBlocks, until the temporal dimension of the activation is equal to that of the conditioning, at which
point a conditional DBlock is used. This joint information is then passed to the remaining DBlocks,
whose ﬁnal output is average-pooled to obtain a scalar. The dilation factors in the DBlocks’ convo-
lutions follow the pattern 1;2;1;2– unlike the generator, the discriminator operates on a relatively
small window, and we did not observe any beneﬁt from using larger dilation factors.
4 E VALUATION
We provide subjective human evaluation of our model using Mean Opinion Scores ( MOS ), as well
as quantitative metrics.
5