We note that Kilgour et al. (2019) proposed a similar metric, Fr´echet Audio Distance . This metric,
however, has been designed for music datasets and uses a music classiﬁer as a feature extractor;
therefore it is not well-suited to evaluate text-to-speech models.
As conditioning plays a crucial role in our task, we compute two variants of these metrics, con-
ditional ( cFDSD, cKDSD ) and unconditional ( FDSD, KDSD ). Both Fr ´echet and Kernel distance
provide scores with respect to a reference real sample and require both the real sample and the
generated one to be independent and identically distributed. Assume that variables xrealand xG
are drawn from the real and and generated distributions, while c is drawn from the distribution of
linguistic features. In the conditional case, cFDSD andcKDSD compute distances between condi-
tional distributions p(xGjc)andp(xrealjc). In the unconditional case, FDSD andKDSD compare
p(xG)andp(xreal).
Both metrics are estimated using 10,000 generated and reference samples, drawn independently with
the same (in the conditional case), or independent (in the unconditional case) linguistic features. This
procedure is detailed in Appendix B.3.
The main reason for using both Fr ´echet and Kernel distances is the popularity of FID in the image
domain, despite the issue of its biased estimator, as shown by Bi ´nkowski et al. (2018). Thanks to the
availability of an unbiased estimator of MMD, this issue does not apply to kernel-based distances.
For instance, they yield zero values for real data, which allows comparison in the conditional case.
We give more details on these distances in Appendix B.2.
5 E XPERIMENTS
In this section we discuss the experiments, comparing GAN-TTS with WaveNet and carrying out
ablations that validate our architectural choices.
As mentioned in Section 3, the main architectural choices made in our model include the use of
multiple RWD s, conditional and unconditional, with a number of different downsampling factors.
We thus consider the following ablations of our best-performing model:
1. full-input discriminator FullD =DC
1,
2. single conditional RWD :cRWD 1,
3. multiple conditional RWD s:cRWDf1;2;4;8;15g=P
k2f1;2;4;8;15gcRWDk,
4. single conditional and single unconditional RWD :cRWD 1+uRWD 1,
5. ﬁve independent cRWD s and uRWD s:
(cRWD 1+uRWD 1)5(x;c) :=P5
i=1cRWD 1(x;c;i) +uRWD 1(x;0
i),
6. 10 RWD s without downsampling but with different window sizes:
RWD 1;240f1;2;4;8;15g=P
k2f1;2;4;8;15g(cRWD 1;240k+uRWD 1;240k)
7. 10 RWD s with longer window: RWD
480.
All other parameters of these models were the same as in the proposed one. In Appendix D we
present details of the hyperparameters used during training.
5.1 R ESULTS
Table 1 presents quantitative evaluations of the proposed model, together with benchmarks and other
variants of GAN-TTS that we considered in this work.
Our best model achieves worse yet comparable scores to the strong baselines, WaveNet and Parallel
WaveNet. This performance, however, has not yet been achieved using adversarial techniques and
is still very good, especially when compared to parametric text-to-speech models. These results
are however not directly comparable due to dataset differences; for instance WaveNet and Parallel
WaveNet were trained on 65 hours of data, a bit more than GAN-TTS.
Our ablation study conﬁrms the importance of combining multiple RWD s. The deterministic full
discriminator achieved the worst scores. All multiple- RWD models achieved better results than a
7