feed-forward convolutional network. This allows for very efﬁcient audio generation, which is im-
portant in practical applications. Our architectural exploration lead to the development of a model
with an ensemble of unconditional and conditional Random Window Discriminators operating at
different window sizes, which respectively assess the realism of the generated speech and its cor-
respondence with the input text. We showed in an ablation study that each of these components is
instrumental to achieving good performance. We have also proposed a family of quantitative metrics
for generative models of speech: (conditional) Fr ´echet DeepSpeech Distance and(conditional) Ker-
nel DeepSpeech Distance , and demonstrated experimentally that these metrics rank models in line
with Mean Opinion Scores obtained through human evaluation. As they are based on the publicly
available DeepSpeech recognition model, they will be made available for the machine learning com-
munity. Our quantitative results as well as subjective evaluation of the generated samples showcase
the feasibility of text-to-speech generation with GANs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank A ¨aron van den Oord, Andrew Brock and the rest of the DeepMind team.
REFERENCES
Dario Amodei, Rishita Anubhai, Eric Battenberg, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Jing-
dong Chen, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, Linxi Fan,
Christopher Fougner, Tony Han, Awni Hannun, Billy Jun, Patrick LeGresley, Libby Lin, Sharan
Narang, Andrew Ng, Sherjil Ozair, Ryan Prenger, Jonathan Raiman, Sanjeev Satheesh, David
Seetapun, Shubho Sengupta, Yi Wang, Zhiqian Wang, Chong Wang, Bo Xiao, Dani Yogatama,
Jun Zhan, and Zhenyao Zhu. Deep Speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in English and
Mandarin. In ICML , 2016.
Sercan ¨O Arik, Mike Chrzanowski, Adam Coates, Gregory Diamos, Andrew Gibiansky, Yongguo
Kang, Xian Li, John Miller, Andrew Ng, Jonathan Raiman, et al. Deep Voice: Real-time neural
text-to-speech. In ICML , 2017.
Mikołaj Bi ´nkowski, Dougal J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying MMD
GANs. In ICLR , 2018.
Andrew Brock, Theodore Lim, James M. Ritchie, and Nick Weston. Neural photo editing with
introspective adversarial networks. In ICLR , 2016.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high ﬁdelity
natural image synthesis. In ICLR , 2019.
Aidan Clark, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Efﬁcient video generation on complex datasets.
arXiv:1907.06571 , 2019.
Emily L Denton, Soumith Chintala, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Deep generative image models
using a Laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks. In NeurIPS , 2015.
Chris Donahue, Julian McAuley, and Miller Puckette. Adversarial audio synthesis. In ICLR , 2019.
Jeff Donahue and Karen Simonyan. Large scale adversarial representation learning.
arXiv:1907.02544 , 2019.
Jeff Donahue, Philipp Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial feature learning. In ICLR , 2017.
Vincent Dumoulin, Ishmael Belghazi, Ben Poole, Olivier Mastropietro, Alex Lamb, Martin Ar-
jovsky, and Aaron Courville. Adversarially learned inference. In ICLR , 2017a.
Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur. A learned representation for artistic
style. In ICLR , 2017b.
Jesse Engel, Cinjon Resnick, Adam Roberts, Sander Dieleman, Mohammad Norouzi, Douglas Eck,
and Karen Simonyan. Neural audio synthesis of musical notes with WaveNet autoencoders. In
ICML , 2017.
9