that are almost indistinguishable from real data. However, their application to audio generation
tasks has seen relatively limited success so far. In this paper, we explore raw waveform generation
with GANs, and demonstrate that adversarially trained feed-forward generators are indeed able to
synthesise high-ﬁdelity speech audio. Our contributions are as follows:
We introduce GAN-TTS, a Generative Adversarial Network for text-conditional high-
ﬁdelity speech synthesis. Its feed-forward generator is a convolutional neural network,
coupled with an ensemble of multiple discriminators which evaluate the generated (and
real) audio based on multi-frequency random windows. Notably, some discriminators take
the linguistic conditioning into account (so they can measure how well the generated au-
dio corresponds to the input utterance), while others ignore the conditioning, and can only
assess the general realism of the audio.
We propose a family of quantitative metrics for speech generation based on Fr´echet Incep-
tion Distance (FID, Heusel et al., 2017) and Kernel Inception Distance (KID, Bi ´nkowski
et al., 2018), where we replace the Inception image recognition network with the Deep-
Speech audio recognition network.
We present quantitative and subjective evaluation of TTS-GAN and its ablations, demon-
strating the importance of our architectural choices. Our best-performing model achieves a
MOS of 4:2, which is comparable to the state-of-the-art WaveNet MOS of 4:4, and estab-
lishes GANs as a viable option for efﬁcient TTS.
2 R ELATED WORK
2.1 A UDIO GENERATION
Most neural models for audio generation are likelihood-based: they represent an explicit probability
distribution and the likelihood of the observed data is maximised under this distribution. Autore-
gressive models achieve this by factorising the joint distribution into a product of conditional distri-
butions (van den Oord et al., 2016; Mehri et al., 2017; Kalchbrenner et al., 2018; Arik et al., 2017).
Another strategy is to use an invertible feed-forward neural network to model the joint density di-
rectly (Prenger et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019). Alternatively, an invertible feed-forward model can
be trained by distilling an autoregressive model using probability density distillation (van den Oord
et al., 2018; Ping et al., 2019), which enables it to focus on particular modes. Such mode-seeking
behaviour is often desirable in conditional generation settings: we want the generated speech sig-
nals to sound realistic and correspond to the given text, but we are not interested in modelling every
possible variation that occurs in the data. This reduces model capacity requirements, because parts
of the data distribution may be ignored. Note that adversarial models exhibit similar behaviour, but
without the distillation and invertibility requirements.
Many audio generation models, including all of those discussed so far, operate in the waveform
domain: they directly model the amplitude of the waveform as it evolves over time. This is in stark
contrast to most audio models designed for discriminative tasks (e.g. audio classiﬁcation): such
models tend to operate on time-frequency representations of audio ( spectrograms ), which encode
certain inductive biases with respect to the human perception of sound, and usually discard all phase
information in the signal. While phase information is often inconsequential for discriminative tasks,
generated audio signals must have a realistic phase component, because ﬁdelity as judged by humans
is severely affected otherwise. Because no special treatment for the phase component of the signal
is required when generating directly in the waveform domain, this is usually more practical.
Tacotron (Wang et al., 2017) and MelNet (Vasquez & Lewis, 2019) constitute notable exceptions,
and they use the Grifﬁn-Lim algorithm (Grifﬁn & Lim, 1984) to reconstruct missing phase informa-
tion, which the models themselves do not generate. Models like Deep V oice 2 & 3 (Gibiansky et al.,
2017; Ping et al., 2018) and Tacotron 2 (Shen et al., 2018) achieve a compromise by ﬁrst generating
a spectral representation, and then using a separate autoregressive model to turn it into a waveform
and ﬁll in any missing spectral information. Because the generated spectrograms are imperfect, the
waveform model has the additional task of correcting any mistakes. Char2wav (Sotelo et al., 2017)
uses intermediate vocoder features in a similar fashion.
2