HIGHFIDELITY SPEECH SYNTHESIS
WITH ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
Mikołaj Bi ´nkowski
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
mikbinkowski@gmail.com
Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Aidan Clark, Erich Elsen, Norman Casagrande,
Luis C. Cobo, Karen Simonyan
DeepMind
fjeffdonahue,sedielem,aidanclark,eriche,ncasagrande,
luisca,simonyan g@google.com
ABSTRACT
Generative adversarial networks have seen rapid development in recent years and
have led to remarkable improvements in generative modelling of images. How-
ever, their application in the audio domain has received limited attention, and
autoregressive models, such as WaveNet, remain the state of the art in genera-
tive modelling of audio signals such as human speech. To address this paucity,
we introduce GAN-TTS, a Generative Adversarial Network for Text-to-Speech.
Our architecture is composed of a conditional feed-forward generator produc-
ing raw speech audio, and an ensemble of discriminators which operate on ran-
dom windows of different sizes. The discriminators analyse the audio both in
terms of general realism, as well as how well the audio corresponds to the ut-
terance that should be pronounced. To measure the performance of GAN-TTS,
we employ both subjective human evaluation (MOS – Mean Opinion Score),
as well as novel quantitative metrics (Fr ´echet DeepSpeech Distance and Ker-
nel DeepSpeech Distance), which we ﬁnd to be well correlated with MOS. We
show that GAN-TTS is capable of generating high-ﬁdelity speech with natural-
ness comparable to the state-of-the-art models, and unlike autoregressive models,
it is highly parallelisable thanks to an efﬁcient feed-forward generator. Listen to
GAN-TTS reading this abstract at https://storage.googleapis.com/
deepmind-media/research/abstract.wav .
1 I NTRODUCTION
The Text-to-Speech (TTS) task consists in the conversion of text into speech audio. In recent years,
the TTS ﬁeld has seen remarkable progress, sparked by the development of neural autoregressive
models for raw audio waveforms such as WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016), SampleRNN (Mehri
et al., 2017) and WaveRNN (Kalchbrenner et al., 2018). A notable limitation of these models is
that they are difﬁcult to parallelise over time: they predict each time step of an audio signal in
sequence, which is computationally expensive and often impractical. A lot of recent research on
neural models for TTS has focused on improving parallelism by predicting multiple time steps in
parallel, e.g. using ﬂow-based models (van den Oord et al., 2018; Ping et al., 2019; Prenger et al.,
2019; Kim et al., 2019). Such highly parallelisable models are more suitable to run efﬁciently on
modern hardware.
An alternative approach for parallel waveform generation would be to use Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014). GANs currently constitute one of the dominant
paradigms for generative modelling of images, and they are able to produce high-ﬁdelity samples
Work done at DeepMind.
1arXiv:1909.11646v2  [cs.SD]  26 Sep 2019