distribution benchmarks, like CIFAR [18] and STL10 [8].
Some methods achieve this goal by using the model’s self-
correcting capability. In [25] [3] [2] [25], a high confidence
threshold is used to filter incorrectly pseudo-labeled data.
[34] [20] [29] use a self-ema teacher to generate pseudo la-
bels with the assumption that the weighted averaged model
produces more stable and less noisy predictions. Some
methods [28] [31] try to narrow the distribution gap be-
tween raw data and labeled data by predictions’ uncertainty.
However, justifying a model’s prediction by its output with-
out introducing other information still suffers from confir-
mation bias [21]. Especially on the real-world data with
unbalanced distribution or unknown classes, the effect of a
model’s self-correcting is facing a huge challenge. By ex-
plicitly introducing contrastive information, our CCSSL al-
leviates the confirmation bias in the feature space and shows
great de-noise ability on the real-world data.
Another trend is using prior or posterior information to
co-rectify a model’s predictions. Both [11] [5] use a pre-
trained model as a universal prior information. In [21], by
knowledge embedding graph, semantic information is used
to regularize feature learning. Although the above meth-
ods are proved helpful, fixed prior is hard to be blended into
downstream tasks, resulting in inferior performance in prac-
tice. [19] utilizes posterior information by constructing a
prediction graph and introducing contrastive learning from
self-supervised learning (Self-SL). However, directly com-
bining image-level feature repulsion interferes with SSL’s
class-clustering ability. To solve this conflict, in our pro-
posed CCSSL, a class-aware contrastive module is specifi-
cally explored for reliable in-distribution data clustering and
noisy out-of-distribution data contrasting to better integrate
with downstream classification tasks.
To this end, we propose a class-aware contrastive semi-
supervised learning (CCSSL) method. CCSSL consists of
a semi-supervised module and a class-aware contrastive
module. Any end-to-end pseudo-label-based SSL can re-
place the semi-supervised module to benefit from the class-
aware contrastive module’s confirmation bias alleviation
ability. Unlike self-correcting methods that try to allevi-
ate noise by model’s own output, CCSSL regularizes the
training process by introducing information in the feature
space. As shown in the Fig. 1, CCSSL constructs the fea-
ture space with high dimensional vectors from two strong
augmented views. Rather than directly combining con-
trastive learning, CCSSL uses class-aware clustering on in-
distribution data to maintain SSL’s clustering ability and
image-level contrasting on out-of-distribution data for noise
alleviation. Furthermore, to reduce the implicit noise in-
troduced from the class-aware clustering, we incorporate
a target re-weighting module that emphasizes learning on
high probable in-distribution samples and reduces the ef-
fect of uncertain noisy samples. We found that with thehelp of the re-weighting module, the prediction confidence
of learned models is robust enough for roughly discriminat-
ing in-distribution and out-of-distribution data.
Our contributions can be described in three folds:
•We propose a novel SSL learning method CCSSL,
which takes advantage of both SSL’s effective learn-
ing and Self-SL’s noise alleviation ability by class-wise
clustering on in-distribution data and image-wise con-
trasting on out-of-distribution data.
•CCSSL is a drop-in helper that can improve upon any
end-to-end pseudo-label-based SSL method for confir-
mation bias alleviation and faster convergence. CC-
SSL’s noise alleviation capability makes SSL methods
more practical in the real-world setting.
•We thoroughly analyzed the effect of CCSSL with vari-
ous state-of-the-art SSL methods on both in-distribution
data and real-world data. By simply combining CCSSL,
current state-of-the-art SSL methods can be further im-
proved.
2. Related Work
In this section, we describe the recent trends of deep
learning based SSL and contrastive based Self-SL. Then we
analyze specific methods aiming at using on the real-world
setting.
2.1. Semi-Supervised Learning
Deep learning based SSL mainly consists of pseudo-
labeling and consistency regularization. Pseudo-label-
based methods utilize unlabeled data by training on self-
generated predictions. The self-training process vali-
dates the model itself and can also be named as self-
confirming [9]. However, using pseudo labels suffers con-
firmation bias [1] because it is easy to overfit incorrect pre-
dictions during training. Both [25] [3] use high confidence
predictions to filter noisy data. [15] makes a detour by
label propagation to spread labeled data distribution on un-
labeled data. Consistency based methods [16] [29] [25] aim
to produce consistent predictions on different image views
based on the manifold assumption that different views of
the same image should lie on the same point in the high
dimensional space. [25] [30] create different views of an
image by strong augmentations to simulate image perturba-
tions of an object. Lately, pseudo-label-based consistency
training [25] [3] [2], which use a weak augmentation for
creating pseudo labels and a strong augmentation for con-
sistency training, has dominated and achieved excellent per-
formance gain. However, the research on the real-world
setting with extensive out-of-distribution data has been less
studied. With evaluating in-distribution data and real-world
data, we show CCSSL’s ability of alleviating confirmation
bias in practical.
14422