Class-Aware Contrastive Semi-Supervised Learning
Fan Yang2*Kai Wu1*Shuyi Zhang1Guannan Jiang4Yong Liu1
Feng Zheng3†Wei Zhang4Chengjie Wang1†Long Zeng2
1Tencent Youtu Lab2Tsinghua University3Southern University of Science and Technolog4CATL
Abstract
Pseudo-label-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) has
achieved great success on raw data utilization. However,
its training procedure suffers from confirmation bias
due to the noise contained in self-generated artificial
labels. Moreover, the model’s judgment becomes noisier in
real-world applications with extensive out-of-distribution
data. To address this issue, we propose a general method
named Class-aware Contrastive Semi-Supervised Learn-
ing (CCSSL), which is a drop-in helper to improve the
pseudo-label quality and enhance the model’s robustness
in the real-world setting. Rather than treating real-world
data as a union set, our method separately handles reliable
in-distribution data with class-wise clustering for blending
into downstream tasks and noisy out-of-distribution data
with image-wise contrastive for better generalization. Fur-
thermore, by applying target re-weighting, we successfully
emphasize clean label learning and simultaneously reduce
noisy label learning. Despite its simplicity, our proposed
CCSSL has significant performance improvements over
the state-of-the-art SSL methods on the standard datasets
CIFAR100 [18] and STL10 [8]. On the real-world dataset
Semi-iNat 2021 [27], we improve FixMatch [25] by
9.80% and CoMatch [19] by 3.18%. Code is available
https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/Classification-
SemiCLS.
1. Introduction
Raw data utilization is becoming a research focal point
for its high accessibility and high affordability. The def-
inition of raw data is the union set of in-distribution
data (known classes and balanced distribution) and out-of-
distribution data [32] (unknown classes or unbalanced dis-
tribution), as shown in Fig. 1. For in-distribution datasets,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved excellent per-
formance with the help of pseudo labeling [25] [3] [2] [13].
The primary process for the pseudo-label based SSL is it-
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
(a) Real-World Data With In-Distribution and Out-of-Distribution Data
(b) Pseudo-Label-Based SSL
 (c) Class-Aware Contrastive SSL
(ours)
Figure 1. Intuition graph for class-aware contrastive semi-
supervised learning. (a) represents real-world unlabeled data con-
taining in-distribution and out-of-distribution data (unbalanced
distribution or unknown classes). Unlike pseudo-label-based
semi-supervised learning in (b), which wrongly clusters noisy out-
of-distribution data, CCSSL in (c) reduces noise by image-level
contrastive learning on out-of-distribution data while maintaining
the class-aware clustering ability for in-distribution data.
erative training: 1) creating self-generated pseudo labels
on raw data, 2) training on pseudo labels, 3) repeating 1
and 2. The underlying assumption for training on pseudo
labels is that the distribution of the labeled data is close
to the unlabeled, and the unlabeled dataset does not con-
tain any novel categories. This assumption often does not
hold in the real-world applications with extensive out-of-
distribution data, which contains unbalanced distribution or
unknown classes. SSL’s training and labeling loop collapses
in the real-world because of the enormous noise introduced
by pseudo labeling on out-of-distribution data. The confir-
mation bias [1] induced by noisy pseudo labels deteriorates
SSL performance by a large margin [26].
SSL has used many techniques to alleviate the confirma-
tion bias and achieved state-of-the-art results on standard in-
14421