class-aware contrastive module to take advantages of both
Self-SL’s generalizability and SSL’s efficient training.
Class-Aware Contrastive learning considers class-
aware information for in-distribution data while alleviating
noise for out-of-distribution data. Inspired by [17], we con-
sider the embeddings zfrom the same category as positive
pairs instead of the same image with the help of the pseudo-
labels ˆqfrom the semi-supervised module to form super-
vised contrastive matrix Wscon in Fig. 2. However, class-
wise clustering by pseudo-labels is unsafe to use because a
model’s prediction may contain a large amount of noises es-
pecially for out-of-distribution data, as explained in Sec. 1.
Therefore, we introduce contrastive learning for noise reg-
ularization. We use Tpush as the threshold for clustering
and contrasting in the feature space, and then Wscon is tran-
formed to class-aware contrastive matrix Wclacon as shown
in Fig. 2. For model’s prediction p > T push, we assume
the images have a high probability to be in-distribution data
Uinand should be pulled closer with the same class. For
p < T push, our formula degenerates to contrastive learning
where only Aug sof the same image are positive pairs. Each
element wclacon
ij inWclacon has the following format:
wclacon
ij =

1 if j=i,
1 if ziandzjare from same category ,
and both qiandqj> Tpush,
0 otherwise ,
(5)
where iandjare indices of z for augmented sample. qi
denotes the pseudo label confidence score of the ith aug-
mented views. Although class-aware contrastive is theoreti-
cally functional, directly using Tpush to judge the cleanness
of data is problematic since images just above the Tpush
might be out-of-distribution data too. To solve this issue,
we propose a foreground re-weighting module to reduce the
noise effect on out-of-distribution data.
Foreground Re-weighting is used to further emphasize
training on in-distribution data with high confidence and
weaken the potential bias brought from out-of-distribution
data. We formulate the final target matrix Wtarget by
re-weight Wclacon with the foreground probability from
model’s prediction on Aug w. Simply by multiplying con-
fidence qof two samples, we get a re-weighting factor
wre=qi·qj, where iandjrepresent the indices of row
and column in Wtarget , respectively. Each element wtarget
ij
ofWtarget is defined as follows:
wtarget
ij =qi·qj·wclacon
ij ifi̸=j,
wclacon
ij otherwise .(6)
The loss of the class-aware contrastive module Lcis
formulated by minimizing the cross-entropy between Sin
Eq. (2) and Wtarget . The loss of Lccan be defined as:Lc=H(S, W target ) =2NX
i=11
1 +|P(i)|Lc,i, (7)
where Hdenotes cross entropy and P(i)represents in-
dices of the views from other images of the same class with
confidence p > T push.|P(i)|denotes its cardinality and
|P(i)|+ 1represents all positive pairs. Lc,ias below:
Lc,i=−logexp(zi·z∗
i/τ)P2N
j=11j̸=iexp(zi·zj/τ)
−X
p∈P(i)logwij·exp(zi·zp/τ)P2N
j=11j̸=iexp(zi·zj/τ),(8)
where z∗
iis the embedding of Aug srather than zifrom
the same image. We calcualte the final total loss Eq. (9) us-
ing a weighted sum of supervised loss Lx, semi-supervised
lossLuand class-aware contrastive loss Lc.LxandLu
are from Sec. 3.3. λuandλcare the weights for semi-
supervised loss and class-aware contrastive loss, respec-
tively.
L=Lx+λuLu+λcLc (9)
3.5. Applications
CCSSL method can be used with any pseudo-label-based
SSL to alleviate confirmation bias in the training process.
Applying CCSSL to SSL methods is simple. We applied
the CCSSL to the mainstream SSL methods, like MixMatch
[3], FixMatch [25] and CoMatch [19]. MixMatch and Fix-
Match are based on pseudo-labels and have a strong aug-
mentation Aug sfor unlabeled data learning. We create an-
other Aug sfor class-aware contrastive module, which trains
parallelly with the original network. CoMatch also incorpo-
rates contrastive learning, but no class-wise clustering is in-
volved. Since CoMatch already has two Aug s, we directly
use them for class-aware contrastive module. Our experi-
ments in Sec. 4 show CCSSL not only improves the per-
formance for SSL methods but also speeds up the training
process.
4. Experiments
In this section, we first evaluate the effectiveness of CC-
SSL on in-distribution datasets, which may also contain blur
out-of-distribution cases. Then, we show CCSSL’s ability
of confirmations bias alleviation on real-world data. Last, a
qualitative comparison is presented.
4.1. Datasets
We assume that the harder the dataset, the higher noise it
has, so we conduct experiments on the following different
noise level datasets.
14425