Figure 2. Framework of our proposed CCSSL. Given a batch of unlabeled images, the weakly augmented views will go through a semi-
supervised module that can be borrowed from any pseudo-label-based SSL to generate model predictions. With pseudo labels, we make
a supervised contrastive matrix with only class-level information. Then, the class-aware contrastive matrix is formed by image-level
contrasting on out-of-distribution data to reduce confirmation bias. By applying a re-weighting module, we focus learning on clean data
and get the final target matrix. Besides, feature affinity matrix is made by two strong augmented views. Class-aware contrastive module
for unlabeled data is formulated by minimizing cross-entropy between the affinity matrix and the target matrix.
2.2. Self-Supervised Learning
Self-SL has a long story for learning a universal rep-
resentation without supervision. [12] [14] build the base
for contrastive learning by proposing and refining the noise
contrastive estimation (NCE). Based on NCE, [22] pro-
poses infoNCE which inspires learning representations to
discriminate different views of a sample among other sam-
ples. Moco [11] and simCLR [5] train a siamses network [6]
to learn image-wise feature by pulling similar (positive)
samples and pushing apart different (negative) samples [7].
Inspired by contrastive learning, we formulate positive pairs
and negative pairs in CCSSL to regularize feature training.
However, directly combining contrastive learning ignores
the internal conflict between image-level feature repulsion
and SSL’s class-level feature clustering. By incorporating
class-level information, CCSSL can seamlessly blend into
downstream tasks.
2.3. Real-World Unlabeled Data Learning
Real-world unlabeled data usually contains out-of-
distribution data with unbalanced class distribution or un-
known classes. Current pseudo-label-based SSL suffers
from confirmation bias by incorrect pseudo-labeling on
similar unknown classes or blurry images from out-of-
distribution data, resulting in worse performance than su-
pervised baseline [26]. Open set classification is a subfieldof real-world unlabeled data learning focusing on novel cat-
egories. [10] keeps tracking the effect of the supervised
learning model to prevent performance hazards. By in-
corporating deep-construction-based representation learn-
ing, [33] learns to distinguish unknowns from knowns.
Open set classification methods are proven to be effective
on handwriting datasets or self-constructed datasets but sel-
dom generalize on real-world data. [26] conducts a sys-
tematic evaluation of several recently proposed SSL tech-
niques on a real-world setting by two challenging datasets
and shows that recent SSL’s performance pales on real-
world datasets in comparison to in-distribution standard
datasets. Therefore, this paper further explores the real-
world setting and narrows the gap between research and
real-world applications by confirmation bias alleviation for
out-of-distribution data.
3. Method
3.1. Problem Definition
In the setting of a semi-supervised classification task, let
X={(xi, yi) :i∈(1, ..., B )}be a batch of labeled data
, where xiis the ith image and yirepresents its one-hot la-
bel, and U={ui:i∈(1, ..., µB )}be a batch of unlabeled
data , where µis a hyperparameter that determines the rel-
ative ratio of XandU. In the real world, unlabeled data
14423