Ucontains in-distribution data Uinand out-of-distribution
dataUout, which makes pseudo labels more susceptible to
confirmation bias [21].
3.2. Framework
Our proposed CCSSL consists of a replaceable semi-
supervised module and a class-aware contrastive module,
as in Fig. 2. Our method focuses on introducing class-
aware contrastive information to alleviate confirmation bias
for semi-supervised module especially in real-world set-
ting. Any pseudo-label-based SSL can be used as the semi-
supervised module to enjoy the benefit. The notations are
as follows:
Data augmentation provides different views of a single
image. For a labeled image xi, a weak augmentation is used
for supervised learning. For an unlabeled image ui, we ap-
ply a weak augmentation Aug w(·)and two strong augmen-
tations Aug s(·). The Aug wand one Aug sare sent to semi-
supervise module, while all Aug sare used for class-aware
contrastive learning.
Encoder F(·)is used to extract representation r=
F(Aug(x))for a given input x.
Semi-Supervised module can be replaced by any
pseudo-label based semi-supervised learning method. The
module generates pseudo labels during training and outputs
the final prediction at inference time by a classification head
Pcls(·). We use FixMatch [25] in the method for simplicity.
Class-Aware contrastive module constructs an embed-
ding space by mapping the high-dimensional representation
rto a low-dimensional embedding zthrough the projec-
tion head Pproj(·). We propose the class-aware contrastive
learning in the embedding space to improve the robustness
for out-of-distribution data and compatibleness with down-
stream tasks.
3.3. Semi-Supervised Module
Following the general form of pseudo-label-based SSL,
the module contains a supervised loss Lxand an unsu-
pervised loss Lu.Lxis the same as [25]. Lurelies on
pseudo labels ˆqi= arg max( pi)from the model’s predic-
tionpi=Pcls(Aug w(ui))on the weak view of image ui.
Only pseudo labels with high confidence q≥t, where
q= max( p), will be retained for consistency training. H
means cross entropy:
Lu=1
µBµBX
i=11(max( pi)≥t)H( ˆqi, Pcls(Aug s(ui)).
(1)
However, the manual set threshold tis difficult to
guarantee the accuracy of pseudo labels ˆq, especially on
real-world setting with out-of-distribution data. The phe-
nomenon of overfitting on self-generated labels is calledconfirmation bias [1], and it can hardly be alleviated by the
model itself during training. Therefore, we propose a novel
class-aware contrastive learning method, which introduces
unbiased information in the feature space.
3.4. Class-Aware Contrastive Module
In Fig. 2, we seamlessly integrate clustering and con-
trasting in the feature space and apply re-weighting for at-
tentive training. Given unlabeled images in a batch, we
separate images into two parts based on the likelihood of
in-distribution and out-of-distribution, in which Tpush is
used as the threshold for separation from the model’s pre-
diction confidence. For highly possible in-distribution data
max( p)> T push, we apply class-aware clustering in the
feature space to seamlessly blend into downstream tasks.
For out-of-distribution data max( p)< T push, we follow
contrastive learning mechanism [5] by taking a image’s
views as positive samples and others as negative. Then we
apply foreground probability re-weighting for each sample
to focus learning on high confidence clean data. Next, we
will show how to formulate the method step by step.
Contrastive learning aims to learn a universal prior in-
formation for downstream tasks. As in [11] [5], we ran-
domly sample a minibatch of Nimages and each image ui
has two strong augmentations Aug swhich are used to ex-
tract features rthrough encoder F(·). Then, ris mapped
to obtain a square normalized low-dimensional embedding
zby the projection head. Finally, we get an embedding’s
affinity matrix S∈R2N×2Nby the dot product of embed-
dingsZ={zi:i= 1, ...,2N}with a temperature factor
τ, as follow:
sij= exp( zi·zj/τ), (2)
Then, a constrastive matrix Wcon∈R2N×2Nfor loss cal-
culation with Sis formulated as:
wcon
ij=

1 if j=i,
1 if ziandzjare from the same image′s
views ,
0 otherwise .
(3)
The self-supervised contrastive loss InfoNCE [22] takes
the following format:
LInfoNCE=−2NX
i=1logexp(zi·z∗
i/τ)P2N
j=11(j̸=i)exp(zi·zj/τ),(4)
where z∗
iis from the other Aug sof the same image as zi.
The ideal solution for contrastive learning is to push each
image far from others and pull same image views closer in
the feature space. The property is effective to alleviate noise
on the out-of-distribution data. However, it is not compati-
ble with the classification task which requires to cluster im-
ages at the class level. To solve the conflict between con-
trastive learning and downstream tasks, we formulate the
14424