11
[21] E. Hoffer, I. Hubara, and D. Soudry, “Train longer, generalize better:
Closing the generalization gap in large batch training of neural
networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2017.
[22] H. Sedghi, V . Gupta, and P . M. Long, “The Singular Values of
Convolutional Layers,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019.
[23] J. C. Gower, G. B. Dijksterhuis, and others, Procrustes problems ,
vol. 30. Oxford University Press on Demand, 2004.
[24] N. J. Higham, “Stable iterations for the matrix square root,”
Numerical Algorithms , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 227–242, 1997.
[25] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images.(2009),” tech. rep., 2009.
[26] X. Dong, G. Kang, K. Zhan, and Y. Yang, “EraseReLU: A Simple
Way to Ease the Training of Deep Convolution Neural Networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.07634 , 2017.
[27] N. A. Derzko and A. M. Pfeffer, “Bounds for the Spectral Radius of
a Matrix,” Mathematics of Computation , vol. 19, p. 62, 4 1965.
Alireza Zaeemzadeh (S‘11) received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2014. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering at the University of Central
Florida. His current research interests lie in the
areas of machine learning, linear algebra, and
optimization. Alireza‘s awards and honors include
University of Central Florida Multidisciplinary Doc-
toral Fellowship and Graduate Dean’s Fellowship.
Nazanin Rahnavard (S‘97-M‘10-SM’19) re-
ceived her Ph.D. in the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, in 2007. She is currently an
Associate Professor in the Department of Electri-
cal and Computer Engineering at the University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida. Dr. Rahnavard
is the recipient of NSF CAREER award in 2011
and 2020 UCF’s College of Engineering and Com-
puter Science Excellence in Research Award.
She has interest and expertise in a variety of
research topics in the communications, networking, signal processing,
and machine learning areas. She serves on the editorial board of the
Elsevier Journal on Computer Networks (COMNET) and on the Technical
Program Committee of several prestigious international conferences.
Mubarak Shah , the UCF Trustee chair professor,
is the founding director of the Center for Research
in Computer Vision at the University of Central
Florida (UCF). He is a fellow of the NAI, IEEE,
AAAS, IAPR, and SPIE. He is an editor of an
international book series on video computing,
was editor-in-chief of Machine Vision and Appli-
cations journal, and an associate editor of ACM
Computing Surveys journal. He was the program
cochair of CVPR 2008, an associate editor of the
IEEE T-PAMI, and a guest editor of the special
issue of the International Journal of Computer Vision on Video Computing.
His research interests include video surveillance, visual tracking, human
activity recognition, visual analysis of crowded scenes, video registration,
UAV video analysis, and so on. He has served as an ACM distinguished
speaker and IEEE distinguished visitor speaker. He is a recipient of ACM
SIGMM Technical Achievement award; IEEE Outstanding Engineering
Educator Award; Harris Corporation Engineering Achievement Award; an
honorable mention for the ICCV 2005 Where Am I? Challenge Problem;
2013 NGA Best Research Poster Presentation; 2nd place in Grand
Challenge at the ACM Multimedia 2013 conference; and runner up for the
best paper award in ACM Multimedia Conference in 2005 and 2010. At
UCF he has received Pegasus Professor Award; University Distinguished
Research Award; Faculty Excellence in Mentoring Doctoral Students;
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning award; Teaching Incentive Program
award; Research Incentive Award.