1
Norm-Preservation: Why Residual Networks
Can Become Extremely Deep?
Alireza Zaeemzadeh, Student Member, IEEE, Nazanin Rahnavard, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Mubarak Shah, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Augmenting neural networks with skip connections, as introduced in the so-called ResNet architecture, surprised the
community by enabling the training of networks of more than 1,000 layers with signiﬁcant performance gains. This paper deciphers
ResNet by analyzing the effect of skip connections, and puts forward new theoretical results on the advantages of identity skip
connections in neural networks. We prove that the skip connections in the residual blocks facilitate preserving the norm of the gradient,
and lead to stable back-propagation, which is desirable from optimization perspective. We also show that, perhaps surprisingly, as more
residual blocks are stacked, the norm-preservation of the network is enhanced. Our theoretical arguments are supported by extensive
empirical evidence.
Can we push for extra norm-preservation? We answer this question by proposing an efﬁcient method to regularize the singular values of
the convolution operator and making the ResNet’s transition layers extra norm-preserving. Our numerical investigations demonstrate that
the learning dynamics and the classiﬁcation performance of ResNet can be improved by making it even more norm preserving. Our
results and the introduced modiﬁcation for ResNet, referred to as Procrustes ResNets, can be used as a guide for training deeper
networks and can also inspire new deeper architectures.
Index Terms —Residual Networks, Convolutional Neural Networks, Optimization Stability, Norm Preservation, Spectral Regularization.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have progressed rapidly during the
last few years, achieving outstanding, sometimes super
human, performance [1]. It is known that the depth of
the network, i.e., number of stacked layers, is of decisive
signiﬁcance. It is shown that as the networks become deeper,
they are capable of representing more complex mappings [2].
However, deeper networks are notoriously harder to train. As
the number of layers is increased, optimization issues arise
and, in particular, avoiding vanishing/exploding gradients
is essential to optimization stability of such networks. Batch
normalization, regularization, and initialization techniques
have shown to be useful remedies for this problem [3], [4].
Furthermore, it has been observed that as the networks
become increasingly deep, the performance gets saturated
or even deteriorates [5]. This problem has been addressed
by many recent network designs [5], [6], [7], [8]. All of these
approaches use the same design principle: skip connections.
This simple trick makes the information ﬂow across the layers
easier, by bypassing the activations from one layer to the next
using skip connections. Highway Networks [7], ResNets [5],
[6], and DenseNets [8] have consistently achieved state-of-
the-art performances by using skip connections in different
network topologies. The main goal of skip connection is
to enable the information to ﬂow through many layers
without attenuation. In all of these efforts, it is observed
empirically that it is crucial to keep the information path
clean by using identity mapping in the skip connection. It is
also observed that more complicated transformations in the
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA (e-mail:
zaeemzadeh@eecs.ucf.edu; nazanin@eecs.ucf.edu; shah@crcv.ucf.edu).skip connection lead to more difﬁculty in optimization, even
though such transformations have more representational
capabilities [6]. This observation implies that identity skip
connection, while provides adequate representational ability,
has a great feature of optimization stability, enabling deeper
well-behaved networks.
Since the introduction of Residual Networks (ResNets) [5],
[6], there have been some efforts on understanding how the
residual blocks may help the optimization process and how
they improve the representational ability of the networks.
Authors in [9] showed that skip connection eliminates the
singularities caused by the model non-identiﬁability. This
makes the optimization of deeper networks feasible and
faster. Similarly, to understand the optimization landscape of
ResNets, authors in [10] prove that linear residual networks
have no critical points other than the global minimum. This
is in contrast to plain linear networks, in which other critical
points may exist [11]. Furthermore, authors in [12] show that
as depth increases, gradients of plain networks resemble
white noise and become less correlated. This phenomenon,
which is referred to as shattered gradient problem, makes
training more difﬁcult. Then, it is demonstrated that residual
networks reduce shattering, compared to plain networks,
leading to numerical stability and easier optimization.
In this paper, we present and analytically study another
desirable effect of identity skip connection: the norm preserva-
tion of error gradient , as it propagates in the backward path. We
show theoretically and empirically that each residual block
in ResNets is increasingly norm-preserving , as the network
becomes deeper . This interesting result is in contrast to
hypothesis provided in [13], which states that residual
networks avoid vanishing gradient solely by shortening the
effective path of the gradient.arXiv:1805.07477v5  [cs.CV]  22 Apr 2020