16
philosophy (e.g., causal explanation theories) and psychology
(e.g., folk psychology) are harnessed. Further, explanation
techniques developed should be tested either through user
studies, ﬁeld trials, or laboratory studies to ensure that they
fulﬁl requirements for the respective stakeholders they are
designed for.
C. Ethics: AV Operations
1) Faithfulness and Blackboxness: A major limitation in
the existing work is the low assurance of faithfulness of
the explanations generated. Intermediate data or states data
of A V operations are currently missing in nearly all of the
existing autonomous driving datasets. Also, the existing work
on explainability in A Vs are merely explanations provided by
humans trying to rationalise the behaviour of an A V or an
ego vehicle. These explanations obtained from rationalisation
are used to annotate driving datasets which are subsequently
used to train a deep explanation model. The complexity or
blackbox nature of this process makes auditing difﬁcult and
thereby presents a challenge in the evaluation of faithfulness.
Considering faithfulness on a non-binary scale as suggested
in [183], explanations for autonomous driving behaviours
could attain improved faithfulness when considering data
from the different intermediate operations such as planning.
Constructing an A V’s navigation plans and exploring them is
possible when the start and end goals of the A V are known
beforehand. This information can be difﬁcult to assess from
A Vs at present but, as a starting point, driving simulators
and the Lyft Level5 dataset are helpful to create a prototype
at the least. To ensure the intelligibility of explanations, the
representation of these navigation plans need to be clear to
lay users. Interpretable techniques such as navigation graphs
and decision trees could be helpful in this regard. Navigation
graphs and decision trees are inherently transparent, hence,
meaningful interpretations and explanations (e.g., in natural
language) can be easily obtained.
Also, for intelligibility, high-level commands (e.g., turning
right, lane change left, and lead vehicle accelerating, among
others) as used in the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Ad-
ministration (NHTSA) report [184] can be used to represent
transitions between road and lane segments, and interaction
with other road participants.
The Sense Access eXplain (SAX) project4in the Oxford
Robotics Institute (ORI) is currently collecting driving data
which includes some proprioception information from the
CAN bus of a Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) ego vehicle [185].
Some of the relevant CAN bus data include wheel angle,
yaw, acceleration, and braking, among others. The JLR is
also equipped with in-vehicle microphones which record the
spoken thoughts of the driving instructor who drives the
vehicles and the passengers during ﬁeld trials. Using this
data to supplement exteroception data and navigation plans
with interpretable representations and algorithms will help
to enhance the faithfulness of explanations. Moreover, the
recorded spoken thoughts of the JLR driver and passengers
obtained during the trials can be further explored (e.g., through
4https://ori.ox.ac.uk/projects/sense-assess-explain-sax/conversation analysis) to gain insights into how natural lan-
guage explanations should be provided.
2) Explanation Bias: Another serious limitation in current
research is the inherent bias existing in the resulting expla-
nation models built on the perception datasets (presented in
Table IV). The datasets are ﬁnite and are non-representative
as they do not cover all possible driving scenarios in fair ratios.
For instance, some trafﬁc rules and signs differ with regions
or continents. In addition to ﬁnite training data, it can be
argued that the speciﬁcation of the (ﬁnite-complexity) model
(e.g., which variables to include and which to ignore) is still
an open research question. How do we know that the A V’s
model of it environment at a particular time captures all of the
variables that can inﬂuence its actions at that instance? Hence,
the mis-speciﬁcation of the model and the non-representative
nature of driving datasets can introduce biases that propagate
down into explanations. This challenge opens up new research
questions around driving data quality, and the adaptability and
correctness of the A V’s models.
There are hopes that A Vs will bring many beneﬁts to society.
If these hopes must come through, the research community
should take actions toward better research inclusivity (e.g.,
of researchers, regulators, and end-users). A V regulators can
leverage on the suggestions outlined in this paper to develop
more A V explainability related guidelines and regulations to
address the highlighted issues.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We have presented a literature survey on explanations for
autonomous driving. We discussed the need for explanations
in autonomous vehicles, and identiﬁed and categorised differ-
ent autonomous driving stakeholders who would potentially
utilise explanations. We identiﬁed and categorised relevant
regulations and standards that could facilitate explanations.
Having conducted a thorough review of the existing academic
literature on explanations, we provided a categorisation for
explanations and positioned the reviewed academic articles
in the appropriate category. Consequently, we identiﬁed key
challenges around explainability in autonomous driving. Some
of the challenges include the absence of concrete regulations
on A V explainability, the insufﬁcient levels of interdisciplinary
research around A V explainability, and bias and faithfulness
issues potentially arising from the technologies built upon the
current A V datasets. We provided recommendations for the
development of A V-speciﬁc explainability regulations and pro-
posed a conceptual framework for an explainable A V . Finally,
we advocated for more interdisciplinary research around A V
explainability. While uninhabited aerial vehicles (UA V) and
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) were not discussed in
this survey, we note that they can beneﬁt from the provision
of explanations and the recommendations we have provided in
this paper. Hopes are high that A Vs will bring many beneﬁts to
society. For these beneﬁts to be realised, a further look at the
recommendations provided in this paper for implementation
purposes would be helpful.