9
system developers) for debugging A Vs because it can facilitate
positional error correction and provide other stakeholders a
perception of reliability and safety for A Vs. Potentially, it will
inform the development process of more robust localisation
procedures.
C. Planning
Through AI planning and scheduling, the sequence of
actions required for an agent to complete a task are generated.
These action sequences are further utilised in inﬂuencing the
agent’s online decisions or behaviours with respect to the
dynamics of the environment it operates in [128]. The planning
system is an important aspect of autonomous vehicles because
of the complex maneuvers they make in dynamic, complex,
and sometimes less structured or cluttered environments (e.g.,
urban roads, street roads with lots of pedestrians and other
road participants). In fact, trafﬁc elements (e.g., road side
infrastructures, road network, road signs, and road quality) are
dynamic and can change with time; this makes A Vs regularly
update their plans (and even learn sometimes) as they operate.
Often, the amount of data (e.g., descriptions of objects, states,
and locations) that the A V processes per time is larger than
such that a human may be able to process, and continuously
and accurately keep track of. Hence, a stakeholder riding in
an A V may be left in a confused state when the A V updates
its trajectory without providing an explanation.
Explainable planning can play a vital role in supporting
users and improving their experiences when they interact with
autonomous systems in complex decision-making procedures
[129]. According to [130], depending on the stakeholder,
the process may involve the translation of the agent’s plans
into easily understandable forms, and the design of the user
interfaces that facilitate this understanding. Relevant work in-
clude XAI-PLAN [131], WHY-PLAN [132], reﬁnement-based
planning (RBP) [133], plan explicability and predictability
[134], and plan explanation for model reconciliation [90],
[135].
a) XAI-PLAN: is a domain-independent, planning system
agnostic, and an explainable plan model that provides initial
explanations for the decisions made by an agent planner
[131]. The user explores alternative actions in a plan and a
comparison is done with the user’s resulting plan and the plan
that was suggested by the planner. The XAI-PLAN framework
then provides an explanation to justify discrepancies. This
kind of interaction encourages and enhances mixed-initiative
planning which has the potential of improving the ﬁnal plan.
Interestingly, users can pose contrastive forms of queries in the
form ”why does the plan contain action X rather than action
Y?”.
b) Reﬁnement-based Planning (RBP): A related trans-
parent and domain-independent framework called reﬁnement-
based planning (RBP) [133] produces explanations of verbal
plans upon a verbal query from a user. It possesses an
enhanced representation of the search space, providing a 2-
way search (i.e., forward and backwards) capability when
generating plans. This allows for ﬂaw detection and plan
update or optimization. Using states and action primitives,the RBP paradigm integrates partial-order causal-link planning
and hierarchical planning [136] (hybrid planning framework).
c) Why-Plan: Korpan and Epstein [132] also proposed
Why-Plan, an explanation technique in human-machine col-
laborative planning. The method juxtaposes a person’s and
autonomous agent’s objectives in a path planning process and
provides explanations to justify the differences in panning
objectives in a meaningful and human-friendly fashion. It
basically addresses questions like ”why does your plan involve
that action?”
The explainable planning frameworks described above and
the related work by [90], [135], [137], [138] can serve as
basics to build upon for plan explanations in A Vs.
D. Vehicle Control
Control in an A V generally has to do with the manipulations
of vehicle motions such as lane changing, lane-keeping, and
car following. These manipulations are broadly categorised
under longitudinal control (speed regulation with throttle and
brake) and lateral control (i.e., automatic steering to follow
track reference) [139].
ADAS currently works based on the A V’s sensor infor-
mation obtained from observing the environment. Interfaces
that come with ADAS now display rich digital maps [140],
vehicle’s position, and track related attributes ahead or around
the vehicle. Stakeholders may issue investigatory queries when
the A V makes a decision against their expectations. For
instance, the stakeholder may want to ask different questions
based on current contexts (e.g., near-miss, special vehicle case,
or collision). Investigatory queries could be in form of a
‘why’ question (e.g., ‘Why did you turn left?’), ‘why not’
or contrastive question (e.g., ‘why did you switch to the left
lane instead of the right lane’), ‘what if’ or counterfactual
questions (e.g., ‘what if you turned left instead of right?’), or
‘what’ question (e.g., ‘What are you doing?’).
Other than existing in-vehicle visual interfaces, such as
mixed reality (MR) visualization [141], and other ﬂexible
(i.e., highly reconﬁgurable) dashboard panels [142], in-vehicle
interfaces that support the exchange of messages between the
stakeholder and the A V is crucial. The user should be able
to query the interface and receive explanations for navigation
and control decisions in an appropriate form; either through
voice, text, visual, gesture or a combination of any of these
options.
In the next section, we address questions regarding expla-
nation in relation to A V management and interaction with the
respective stakeholders.
VI. S YSTEM MANAGEMENT
In this section, we review works relating to event data
recording (EDR) in A Vs and human-machine interactions
involving in-vehicle interfaces and external human-machine
interfaces (eHMI) that could be potentially used for explana-
tions.