4
provided in Section VI. Countries are also deﬁning new
regulations for autonomous vehicles, for example, the Scottish
Law Commission’s regulation for autonomous vehicles [62].
Unfortunately, these regulations( [62], [63]) do not directly
address the explainability challenge. We further elaborate on
this in Section VII.
Refer to [64] for further details on regulations and ethical
guidelines.
B. AV Standards
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) apply advanced elec-
tronics, information and communications technologies to roads
and automobiles. This is done to collect, store, and pro-
vide trafﬁc information in real-time for convenient and safe
transport; improved reliability, efﬁciency, and quality; and
the reduction in energy consumption [65]. The international
standard organisation technical committee 204 (ISO TC204),
the IEEE, and related standard organisations have set stan-
dards for A Vs and ITS in general. The IEEE Initiatives, in
particular, has a vision for prioritising human well-being with
autonomous and intelligent systems, and the assessment of
gaps in standardisation for safe autonomous driving. These
standards directly or indirectly demonstrate the necessity of
explainability in A Vs. In Table I, we identiﬁed standards that
are related to safety and information/explanation provision in
A Vs. We categorised these standards into two sets: Human
safety-related standards and information or data exchange
related standards. For more details on A V related standards,
refer to the ISO report on intelligent transport systems in [66]
and the Apex.AI document on automated mobility [64]. To
the best of our knowledge, there is currently no explainability
standards for autonomous driving. To address this gap, we
have elaborated in Section VII on how some of the existing A V
regulations and the related standards highlighted in Table I can
be extended to directly support explainability in autonomous
driving.
We now describe different stakeholders involved in A V
explanations in the next section.
C. Stakeholders
Explanation provision in autonomous driving has many
personas due to the different purposes of explanations. The
level of detail (in terms of information) anticipated by the
explanation recipients, the explanation type and the mode of
communication vary with respect to the type of recipient and
purpose for the explanation. This highlights the importance
of explanation personalisation with respect to stakeholders.
Personalisation is seen to be crucial for the generation of intel-
ligible or understandable explanations [67], [68], [69]. While
lay users who lack technical domain expertise may be satisﬁed
with a user-friendly explanation that requires less background
knowledge to interpret, developers and engineers would prefer
a ﬁnely detailed explanation with technical terms that would
support a deeper conception of the internal functioning of a
model [70]. In this light, the consideration of the persona of the
explainee is necessary [71]. Going forward, we refer to anyone
who has to engage with an explanation as a stakeholder.Having identiﬁed the typical personas in the literature, we
divided stakeholders into three broad categories: Class A (all
types of end-users and society), Class B (all technical groups,
e.g. developers), and Class C (all forms of regulatory bodies
including insurers). See the further description:
1)Class A: End-Users
Passenger: this is the in-vehicle agent who may
interact with the explanation agency in the A V but
is not responsible for any driving operation.
Auxiliary Driver: This is a special in-vehicle pas-
senger who may also interact with the explanation
agency in the A V and can also participate in the
driving operations. This kind of participant may
mainly exist in SAE level 3 and 4 vehicles.
Pedestrian: this is the agent outside the A V (external
agent) who may interact with the A V to convey
intentions either through gestures or an external
human-machine interface (eHMI).
Pedestrian with Reduced Mobility (PRM): this is
the agent outside the A V (external agent) who may
interact with the A V to convey intentions either
through gestures or an external human-machine
interface (eHMI) but have reduced mobility capacity
(e.g., pedestrian in a wheelchair).
Other Road Participants: these are other agents
outside the A V (external agent) who may interact
with the A V to convey intentions either through
gestures or an external human-machine interface
(eHMI) (e.g., cyclists, other vehicles).
2)Class B: Developers and Technicians
A V Developer: the agent who develops the automa-
tion software and tools for A Vs.
Automobile Technicians: the agent who repairs and
maintains A Vs.
3)Class C: Regulators and Insurers
System Auditor: the agent who inspects A V design
processes and operations in order to ascertain com-
pliance with regulations and guidelines.
Regulator: the agent who sets guidelines and regu-
lations for the design, use, and maintenance of A Vs.
Accident Investigator: the agent who investigates the
cause of an accident in which an A V was involved.
Insurer: the agent who insures the A V against van-
dalism, damage, theft, and accidents.
In the next section, we provide a categorisation of ex-
planations based on methodologies, and situate the different
stakeholders in the categorisation.
IV. E XPLANATION CATEGORISATIONS
Explanations serve different functions in different con-
texts [70]. Therefore, the methods of generation and evaluation
are context and purpose-dependent [72]. Wang et al. [73] iden-
tiﬁed three approaches that have been adopted in the academic
literature in either developing or evaluating explanations.
First, the authors in [73] highlighted the existence of
unvalidated guidelines for the design and evaluations of