11
al. [153] proposed a broader database in relation to the US
EDR regulation (NHTSA 49 CFR Part 563.7) after carrying
out a study involving the reconstruction of real accidents with
ADAS enabled vehicles to investigate requirements. These
advancements in EDRs are relevant for the development of
explanation techniques for accidents (and other critical events).
It may also draw researchers’ attention to explainable EDR
which is currently very much under-explored. Human-machine
interaction (HMI) is a key aspect of explanation in A Vs. In
the next section, we will discuss the relationship between HMI
and explanations in the autonomous driving context.
B. Human-Machine Interaction
A Vs possess components for sensing, decision making,
and the operation of the vehicles, requiring minimal human
driving [154]. They can operate in complex environments
where the decision set is large [11]. This poses a challenge to
the understandability of their operational modes. A Vs are seen
to have evolved over the years in terms of automation level,
and in-vehicle technologies and interfaces (i.e., technologies
and interfaces within the vehicle). Essentially, vehicles in the
SAE levels 0 to 2 have a low explanation requirement due to
their low complexity. For vehicles in levels 3 and above, the
explanation requirement is high due to their high complexity.
Table V provides a summary based on [155], [156], with SAE
levels and explanation requirements. As shown in Table V,
vehicle instrument (i.e., an instrument that measures some
quantities about the vehicle) interfaces evolved to adaptive
displays where content is presented in a form that enhances
user experience, and with enhanced positioning features, e.g.,
global navigation satellite system (GNSS).
Recent highly automated vehicles are incorporating more
enhanced interaction technologies. Moreover, novel interac-
tion technologies provide the opportunity for the design of
useful and attractive in-vehicle user interfaces that abstract
and explain vehicle automation operations (e.g., perception,
planning, localisation, and control) exist. In the next section,
we will discuss some research on in-vehicle interfaces.
1) Novel Interaction Technologies: The in-vehicle user
interface is essential for efﬁcient explanation provision, and
hence, enhancing the driving experience [157]. There are
studies that suggest that interface design trends impact driving
experience. For example, Jung et al. [158] explored the impact
of the displayed precision of instrumentation estimates of
range and battery state-of-charge on drivers’ driving expe-
rience, and attitude towards varying conditions of resource
availability in an all-electric vehicle. Results from the study
showed that it can be advantageous to display the uncertainty
values associated with a measure rather than concealing it as
participants presented with an ambiguous display of range
measure reported a preserved trust level towards the vehi-
cle. Although presenting users with a single number value
increased reading and apprehension time, the implication of
disguised uncertainty on user experience and behaviour has to
be carefully considered in critical situations.
A related work by Mashko et al. [159] involved the assess-
ment of in-vehicle navigation systems with a visual displaywhere virtual trafﬁc signs were represented on an in-vehicle
display to assist better orient at road sections loaded with
excess information clutter. The use of virtual trafﬁc signs in-
vehicle improved the drivers’ concentration and reaction to
trafﬁc signs on the road. Langois [160] proposed an interface
(Lighting Peripheral Display––LPD) that creates signals that
are able to be handled by peripheral vision (the ability to see
objects and movement outside of the direct line of vision)
while driving in order to enhance the utility of ADAS. The
LPD possessed a box illuminated by light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and reﬂected onto the windscreen. User tests con-
ducted showed that driving performance and comfort were
enhanced by LPDs. Sirkin et al. [161] developed Daze, a
technique for measuring situation awareness through real-time,
in-situ event alerts. The technique is ecologically valid in that
it is very similar in look and feel to the applications used
by people in the actual driving environments, and can be
applied in simulators and also in on-road research settings. The
authors conducted a study that included simulated based and
on-road test deployments in order to provide assurance that
Daze could characterise drivers’ awareness of their immediate
environment and also understand the practicality of its use.
Having examined the existing interaction technologies, it
would be worthwhile to look at what users actually prefer.
2) In-vehicle Interfaces—User Preferences: Learning about
the experiences of in-vehicle participants will help to inform
what users’ preferences are. Mok et al. [162] described a
Wizard of Oz study to get insights into how automated vehicles
ought to interact with human drivers. Design improvisation
sessions were conducted inside a driving simulator with in-
teraction and interface design experts. While the two human
operators (wizards) controlled the audio and driving behaviour
of the car, the participants were driven through a simulated
track with different terrain and road conditions. The study
noted that:
1) instead of taking over full control, participants wanted
to share control with the vehicle;
2) participants like to know exactly when a handover (mode
switch) happens and require a clear alert from the
vehicle to that effect;
3) to the participants, delayed responses and unperformed
requests were acceptable as long as the responses pro-
vided are correct/proper;
4) A Vs have a variety of means to help sustain or improve
participants’ trust in them.
Fu et al. [163] studied the effect of varying sensitivity and
automation levels of in-vehicle collision avoidance systems.
The authors explored this with the automatic emergency
braking (AEB) systems in level 3 autonomous vehicles, for
which the attention of the driver is needed to monitor the
system for failures. Drivers reacted more (in terms of vigilance
and awareness) to the system when it was biased to under-
report hazards. The result also suggested that higher levels
of autonomy in vehicles result in a lower level of driver
vigilance and awareness. This was discovered when the roles
of the driver and the computer were reversed, where the driver
was meant to supervise an imperfect higher-level automated