6
TABLE II
CAUSAL FILTERS AND EXAMPLE INVESTIGATORY QUERIES .
Causal Filter Class Example Query
Why Not (Contrastive) Causal why did you not do Y?
Why (Factual) Causal why did you do X?
What If (Counterfactual) Causal what would you do if Z?
What Non-Causal what are you doing?
achieving a goal [83]. Theory of mind involves explaining
people’s behaviour on the basis of their minds: their knowl-
edge, their beliefs, and their desires [84]. We note that there are
criticisms of the theory of mind and mental models. However,
this is out of the scope of this paper.
We use the three discussed methodologies as one of our cat-
egorisation dimensions. Explanations methods that are mainly
based on the researcher’s experience without further user
studies to justify claims are categorised under unvalidated
guidelines (UG). Those that adopted a user study to elicit
users experience are categorised as empirically derived (ED),
and those that built on psychology theories as are categorised
under psychological constructs from formal theories (PC).
Other dimensions for our categorisation include causal ﬁlter,
explanation style, interactivity, dependence, system, scope,
stakeholders, and operation.
The description of the various dimensions of explanation is
detailed below.
a) Causal Filters: explanations resulting from causal ﬁl-
ters use selected causes relevant to interpreting an observation,
with respect to existing knowledge [73]. The explanations pro-
vided in this category are assumed to be usually generated by
causal ﬁlters or investigatory queries like why, why not, how to,
andwhat if [60]. These causal ﬁlters are assumed to produce
explanations that could be factual (e.g. ‘why’ explanation),
contrastive (‘why not’ explanation), or counterfactual (‘how
to’ and ‘what if’ explanation). See Table II.
b) Explanation Style: explanations are categorised based
on the type of information or elements referenced in the
explanation and the forms they are presented in [72].
Input Inﬂuence: a list of input variables is presented
along with quantitative measures of their inﬂuence (either
positive or negative) on a decision.
Sensitivity: shows what magnitude of change is required
in an input variable in order to change the output class.
Note that this is different from sensitivity used in machine
learning evaluation.
Case-based: picks out a relevant case from the model’s
training data that is most similar to the decision made,
which is then used to explain.
Demographic: explanation provides aggregate statistics of
previous outcomes for people with the same demograph-
ics.
c) Model Dependence: in this context refers to the possi-
bility of having an explanation method that can be used to ex-
plain any type of autonomous driving model (e.g., perception
models and motion planning models). If the possibility exists,
the explanation method is considered to be model agnostic .
Otherwise, it is regarded as model speciﬁc . Two popular
model-agnostic explanation techniques are SHAP [85] andLIME [86]. Although LIME and SHAP explanation techniques
can be useful in autonomous driving, to the best of our
knowledge, only SHAP has been used in the context of
autonomous driving [27].
d) Interactivity: this refers to the possibility of a stake-
holder raising follow-up questions as a way of demanding fur-
ther explanations. The conversational style of explaining [87]
allows for this.
e) System Type: this refers to the nature of the system
that the explanation technique is primarily designed for. It
could be an explanation technique for data-driven systems
(e.g., explaining the output of a machine learning model) or
agoal-driven system (e.g., explaining the behaviour of an
autonomous agent based on plans and goals) [20]. In more
detail, an explanation method that explains a deep learning
model trained on driving scene images or video is data-driven
while one that explains plans (or change in plans) in the
absence of a trained machine learning model is referred to
as goal-driven in this context.
f) Scope: in this context refers to the coverage of the
explanation in terms of the system’s parts. We adapt termi-
nologies from the explainable AI (XAI) domain. While global
explanation explains a model’s decision-making process in
general, a local explanation explains a single prediction in XAI
[88], [89]. The term global explanation in this paper is used to
refer to an explanation that explains the entire behaviour of the
A V . In contrast, a local explanation refers to an explanation that
only explains a subset of the A V’s behaviour. Nahata et al. [27]
proposed a tree explanation technique that can provide both
factual ( why) and counterfactual ( what if ) explanations for an
A V collision risk model. Users can specify simple constraints
for generating counterfactual explanations (e.g., setting the
desired counterfactual output to be explained).
A representative subset of previous works where an expla-
nation technique was primarily discussed or implemented in
the context of autonomous driving are shown in Table III.
Note that [90], [91] are mainly on robot plan explanations
but are applicable to autonomous vehicles. While attention
maps are commonly regarded as explanations in the machine
learning literature, Jain and Wallace [92] argued against this
notion by claiming, based on the outputs of experiments, that
attentions maps are not explanations. Consequently, Wiegreff
and Pinter [93] disproved this claim and argued that such
a claim depends on one’s deﬁnition of explanation and that
prior work against the effectiveness of attention maps for
explanations does not disprove the usefulness of attention
mechanisms for explainability. We agree that attention maps
and heatmaps are not effective in some cases but are however
useful. Therefore, we include relevant works on attention maps
and heatmaps in this survey. See Table III for an overview.
The overview provided in Table III indicates that some types
of explanations (e.g., sensitivity, demographics, contrastive,
counterfactual, model-agnostic, and global explanations) are
rare in the autonomous driving literature. This may be due
to the nascent nature of the explainable autonomous driving
domain.