14
Fig. 4. A conceptual framework for explainable A V following the perception, planning, and control paradigm. The explainer receives data from the perception
and localisation system, planning system, and vehicle control system. This data can either be stored with time stamps and provided all at once as an
explanation log to accident investigators, or each explanation is provided as it is generated. The framework provides a multi-modal interface for interacting
with the explainer.
(maybe coordinates), and the time the representation
occurred.
2) An explanation that provides information on what this
digital representation contains (e.g., pedestrian, vehicles,
road fabric) and the state of these objects (e.g., cross-
ing, heading north, static). For example, if Molly was
detected, it should be possible to receive information
to explain and justify the process (e.g., detection and
tracking algorithm or software) by which Molly was
detected and tracked and the detection and tracking
conﬁdence levels.
In explaining outputs from a perception system, it is sug-
gested that A Vs should be able to provide real-time data access
(both onboard or remotely) to their digital representation of the
3D world (including semantic information) when requested by
authorised entities.
b) Decision: This involves the provision of insights into
the planning operations (behaviour planning and path plan-
ning) of the A V . The decision-making steps involve planning
paths and motion/behaviour based on observations (through
perception) from the environment and its structured knowledge
about the environment. These planning require reasoning and
decision-making under several constraints, e.g, uncertainty
about both the current and future state of the environment.
It also involves the identiﬁcation of potential risks, evaluating
them and ﬁnding measures to mitigate the risks.These uncertainties are associated with the conﬁdence level
in the A V’s predictions. A Vs use prediction algorithms to
predict their trajectory and that of other road participants, and
the risk of collision associated with different plans. In relation
to the Molly Problem, to ascertain whether the A V had a good
awareness of its environment upon which it made a decision,
we must consider whether it was aware of the conﬁdence levels
of the models that detected and tracked Molly. It should be
able to provide information on how conﬁdent it was about the
subsequent steps or actions of Molly e.g., the probability that
Molly will increase her speed in the next seconds. It should
also be able to provide information about the considered plans
(including the chosen ones), and the risk values associated with
the considered plans.
It is suggested that when requested by authorised entities,
A Vs should be able to provide real-time data access (both in-
vehicle or remotely) to the levels of uncertainty associated
with its current and possible future digital representations of
its environment and the uncertainty threshold upon which a
plan or a risk mitigation action was selected.
c) Action: This deals with the provision of information to
provide insight into the execution of the A V’s plans for given
contexts. It is the resulting vehicle dynamics to continuous
control inputs in response to circumstances and situations
observed. They are measurable outputs of the perception
and decision-making steps that provide valuable insights into