21
uk/government/publications/ethics-transparency-and-accountability-fr
amework-for-automated-decision-making
[180] Law Commission, “Automated Vehicles: Analysis of Responses to
the Preliminary Consultation Paper,” Accessed: July, 5. [Online].
Available: https://www.scotlawcom.gov.uk/ﬁles/2815/6093/3787/Auto
mated Vehicles -Analysis ofResponses tothePreliminary Consu
ltation Paper.pdf
[181] ——, “What goes into an explanation?” Accessed: July, 5. [Online].
Available: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protectio
n/key-data-protection-themes/explaining-decisions-made-with-artiﬁc
ial-intelligence/part-1-the-basics-of-explaining-ai/what-goes-into-an-
explanation/
[182] B. Brehmer and D. D ¨orner, “Experiments with computer-simulated
microworlds: Escaping both the narrow straits of the laboratory and
the deep blue sea of the ﬁeld study,” Computers in human behavior ,
vol. 9, no. 2-3, pp. 171–184, 1993.
[183] A. Jacovi and Y . Goldberg, “Towards Faithfully Interpretable NLP
Systems: How should we deﬁne and evaluate faithfulness?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.03685 , 2020.
[184] W. G. Najm, J. D. Smith, M. Yanagisawa et al. , “Pre-crash scenario ty-
pology for crash avoidance research,” United States. National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[185] M. Gadd, D. De Martini, L. Marchegiani, L. Kunze, and P. Newman,
“Sense–Assess–eXplain (SAX): Building Trust in Autonomous Vehi-
cles in Challenging Real-World Driving Scenarios,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Workshop on Ensuring
and Validating Safety for Automated Vehicles (EVSAV) , 2020, pp. 150–
155.
Daniel Omeiza received a bachelors degree in Com-
puter Science from the University of Ilorin in 2015.
He obtained a masters degree in Information Tech-
nology from Carnegie Mellon University in 2019.
He is currently working towards a DPhil degree
at the University of Oxford. His research interests
primarily lie in explainability in autonomous driving.
He is a student member of the IEEE.
Helena Webb is a Transitional Assistant Professor
in the School of Computer Science at the University
of Nottingham. She is interested in the ways that
users interact with technologies in different kinds
of setting and how social action both shapes and
is shaped by innovation. She works on projects
that seek to identify mechanisms for the improved
design, responsible development and effective reg-
ulation of technology. She has worked on projects
relating to, amongst others, harmful content on
social media, algorithm bias, resource scarcity in
STEM education, human-robot dialogue, and responsible robotics. She is an
interdisciplinary researcher and specialises in the application of qualitative
research methods. She is also very interested in methodological innovation to
combine detailed, granular analysis with larger scale computational work.
Marina Jirotka is Professor of Human-Centred
Computing at the University of Oxford and Gov-
erning Body Fellow at St Cross College. She leads
an interdisciplinary research group developing meth-
ods for building computing systems responsibly to
support human, societal and environmental values.
The team focuses on responsible innovation, in a
range of ICT ﬁelds including robotics, AI, machine
learning, quantum computing, social media and the
digital economy. She is an EPSRC Established Ca-
reer Fellow conducting a ﬁve-year investigation into
Developing Responsible Robotics for the Digital Economy. She is Director
of the newly established Responsible Technology Institute at Oxford, and she
is co-director of the Observatory for Responsible Research and Innovation in
ICT (ORBIT) which provides RI services and training to ICT researchers and
practitioners. She obtained her BSc in Psychology and Social Anthropology
(Hons) from The University of London Goldsmiths College in 1985 and
her Masters in Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence from the University of
South Bank in 1987. Her doctorate in Computer Science, “An Investigation
into Contextual Approaches to Requirements Capture”, was undertaken at the
University of Oxford in 2000.
Lars Kunze is a Departmental Lecturer in Robotics
in the Oxford Robotics Institute (ORI) and the De-
partment of Engineering Science at the University of
Oxford. In the ORI, he leads the Cognitive Robotics
Group (CRG). Dr Kunze is also the Technical Lead
at the Responsible Technology Institute (RTI), an
international centre of excellence focused on re-
sponsible technology at Oxford University; and a
Programme Fellow of the Assuring Autonomy In-
ternational Programme (AAIP). He is a Stipendiary
Lecturer in Computer Science at Christ Church and
an Editor of both the Journal of Responsible Technology and the German
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Before joining Oxford, he was a Research
Fellow in the Intelligent Robotics Lab at Birmingham University. He studied
Cognitive Science (BSc, 2006) and Computer Science (MSc, 2008) at the
University of Osnabr ¨uck, Germany, and partly at the University of Edinburgh,
UK. He received a PhD (Dr. rer. nat.) from the Technical University of Munich
in 2014.