2
focused on approaches aimed at ‘opening’ black-box machine
learning mechanisms (data-driven XAI) applied in deep learn-
ing. In contrast, Anjomshoae et al. [20] provided a systematic
literature review generally on explainable agencies (i.e., ex-
plaining the behaviour of goal-driven agents and robots) which
entailed the use of descriptive statistics to show the amount of
research done around explainable agencies with no particular
focus on autonomous driving. Also, Zablocki et al.’s [21]
provided a survey that focused on vision-based autonomous
driving systems.
Our paper aims to ﬁll the gap in the academic literature
by providing a comprehensive survey on explanations for
the behaviour of A Vs at different aspects of operations (i.e.,
perception, localisation, planning, vehicle control, and system
management) with the requirements of different stakeholders
in mind. We also propose recommendations such as a con-
ceptual framework for A V explainability including possible
user interfaces, and some regulatory considerations for A V
explainability. In this paper, a stakeholder is an individual or
an agent whose roles involve interaction with an A V . While
there may be some technology overlap between autonomous
vehicles, uninhabited aerial vehicles (UA V) and autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUV), we will focus on autonomous
vehicles in this survey to enable us to cover enough depth.
We note that there are different deﬁnitions of explanations
in psychology [22], philosophy [23] and AI [24], [25]; we
assume a more general meaning by referring to an explanation
as a piece of information presented in an intelligible way as a
reason or part of a reason for an outcome, event or an effect
in text, speech, or visual forms. We refer to explainability
as the ability of a system to support the provision of this
form of explanations. We refer to interpretable techniques as
techniques that are transparent enough to support meaningful
interpretations to their intended audience (mostly developers).
We do not expect laypeople to be able to easily and quickly
make sense of interpretable models [26]. However, intelligible
explanations (e.g., in natural language) for the outputs of the
interpretable models will be beneﬁcial to laypeople. This type
of explanations are easier to obtain from interpretable models
as shown in [27], [28].
The rest of this paper is organised into 9 sections: Section II
presents the general need for explanations in autonomous
vehicles. Section III presents and discusses the regulations
and standards related to explanations in A Vs. The different
stakeholders who interact with A Vs are identiﬁed and cate-
gorised in Section III-C. The categorisation system deﬁned
in Section III-C is used in the rest of the paper. Section IV
broadly categorises explanations into many dimensions and
provides several literature references for the different cate-
gories. Section V describes the core operations of an A V
and reviews existing work on explanations in relation to
the different core A V operations. These operations include
perception, localisation, planning, and control. Section VI ex-
amines A V system management. System management involves
event data recorders and human-machine interaction which are
crucial in explanations. Section VII discusses challenges in the
explainable A V landscape and provides recommendations for
future work in the ﬁeld. Section VIII concludes the paper witha summary.
II. N EED FOR EXPLANATIONS
The need for explanations in autonomous vehicles stems
from the increasing concerns for transparency and account-
ability of autonomous vehicles. It is believed that explanations
are one way of achieving these goals. In this section, we
discuss the need for explanation in the light of transparency,
accountability, and trust.
A. Transparency and Accountability
One generally agreed upon notion of accountability is
associated with the process of being called ‘to account’ to
some authority for one’s actions [29]. Accountability, in broad
terms, often encompasses closely related concepts, such as
responsibility and liability [30]. Mulgan [31] elucidated that
accountability entails responsibility but, unlike responsibility,
it requires explanations about actions and it cannot be shared.
Meanwhile, liability is a legal or ﬁnancial responsibility [32].
In the human and machine context, Doshi-Velez et al. [33] con-
ceptualise accountability as the ability to determine whether
the decision of a system was made in compliance with
procedural and substantive standards, and importantly, to hold
one responsible when there is a failure to meet the standards.
In autonomous driving, accountability becomes a challenging
issue mainly because of the various operations involved (e.g.,
perception, planning, controls, system management among
others) that demand inputs from multiple stakeholders; this
can result in responsibility gaps.
As identiﬁed by Mulgan [31], achieving accountability
requires social interaction and exchange. At one end, the
requester of an account seeks answers and rectiﬁcation while
at the other end, the respondent or explainer responds and
accepts responsibility if necessary. In the context of this paper,
the A V is being called by a stakeholder to provide an account;
we expect the A V to provide an account in the form of an
explanation that is intelligible to the requester to facilitate
the assignment of responsibilities. There have been debates
on how responsibility should be allocated for certain A V
accidents. Companies have stated the need for clear rules to be
set in advance. For example, Honda has mentioned that it is
necessary to put legal frameworks in place in order to clarify
where the responsibility lies in case of the occurrence of an
accident after the realisation of fully automated driving [34].
Technical solutions are also being put forward. One such
example is the proposal for the use of a ‘blackbox’, similar to
a ﬂight recorder in an aircraft, to facilitate investigations [35].
Shashua and Shalev-Shwartz [36] also advocated for the use
of mathematical models to clarify faults in order to facilitate
a conclusive determination of responsibility.
The social aspect of accountability described by Mul-
gan [31], will demand that the aforementioned recommended
approaches are able to plug into explanation mechanisms
where causes and effects of actions can be communicated
to the relevant stakeholders in intelligible ways. In addition
to accountability for accident cases, which has gained much
attention in the industry reports, actions resulting in undesired,