12
TABLE V
VEHICLE INSTRUMENT INTERFACE EVOLUTION AND EXPLANATION NEED
# Explanation Interface SAE Automation Level XAI Demand Vehicle Examples
1 Fully analog interface Level 0 Low Old Ford vehicles and similar vehicles back before the
year 1990
2 Partly analog and digital interface (e.g., dig-
ital odometer, analog speed dial)Level 0 Low Older Honda Civics, Citroen C4 Picasso and others mostly
between 1990 and 2000.
3 Mostly digital interface Level 0 and 1 Low BMW 5 Series, Fiat 500, and Jaguar XF and others mostly
between 2010 and 2016
4 Fully digital interface with adaptive display,
GNSS)Level 2 and 3 Moderate Tesla Autopilot, Audi A8 2016 to present
5 Fully digital interface with adaptive display,
Sat Nav)Level 4 High Waymo cars 2016 to present
system; the driver’s reaction performance worsened during a
critical event. Related studies are described in [163], [164].
Park et al. [165] conducted a study in an attempt to under-
stand the extent to which semi-A V decision-making should
account for individual user preference. Having considered
18 different scenarios with tactical driving goals, signiﬁcant
differences were discovered in scenario interpretations, A V
perceptions, and vehicle decision references. The alignment of
individual preference with A V decision yielded more positive
changes in the impression of the vehicle than unaligned
decisions.
Closely related to explanations, Ha et al. [12],
Koo et al. [13], Omeiza et al. [54] investigated the
effect of explanations on trust through empirical user studies.
Ha et al. [12] examined two explanation types, simple and
attributional, as well as perceived risk on trust in A Vs in
four autonomous driving scenarios with varying levels of risk
using a simulation of an in-vehicle experience. Their results
indicated that an explanation type can greatly affect trust in
autonomous vehicles and that under high levels of perceived
risk, attributional explanations lead to the highest trust in
A Vs.
Further, Schneider et al [98] investigated whether the pro-
vision of explanations in simulated driving can enhance the
user experience and increase the subjective feeling of safety
and control. The provision of explanations did not inﬂuence
user experience during and after the ride. See an example of
a basic mobile explanation interface in Figure 2.
These works highlight the importance of the user-centred
approach (which could have a great inﬂuence on the future
of human-machine interaction) in the design and development
of explanation methods for A Vs. In-vehicle user interfaces are
a medium for the provision of visual, text, or voice expla-
nations. However, previous works only focus on providing
information about the vehicle to users without communicating
reasons and/or causal links for decisions. This remains an
open challenge for A V designers and researchers. We now
explore the interaction between an A V and other external
trafﬁc participants.
3) AV and External Agents Interaction: There are different
categories of trafﬁc participants that an A V has to interact
with, and there are many studies focusing on the interactions
between A Vs and other trafﬁc participants [166], [167]. Trafﬁc
participants that A Vs will frequently interact with are: pedes-trians, cyclists and other vehicles.
a) Pedestrians: Pedestrians and human drivers com-
municate intents to each other to inform the next choice
of action [168], [169], [170]. Autonomous vehicles should
also have modalities for communicating intents to pedestri-
ans [171]. Mahadevan et al. [172] conducted a study to get
insights into interface designs that explicitly communicate
autonomous vehicle awareness and intent to pedestrians. Dif-
ferent interface prototypes were developed and deployed in
a study that involved a Segway and a car in a simulation
setting. Results suggest that interfaces communicating vehicle
awareness and intent can assist pedestrians attempting to cross
at crosswalks and can exist in the environment outside of the
vehicle. They suggested a combination of modalities (e.g.,
visual, auditory, and physical) in the interfaces.
Faas et al. [37] investigated pedestrians’ trust and crossing
behaviour in repeated encounters with A Vs in a video-based
laboratory study. The occurrence of A V malfunction and
system transparency with status and intent eHMI were studied.
Their results showed that trust increases with the presence
of status and intent eHMI and decreases when there is a
malfunction in the A V but recovers quickly. Crossing onset
time also decreased with the provision of the eHMI. Crossing
onset time indicates the time in seconds between the vehicle
yielding and the pedestrian stepping off the sidewalk [173]. It
was noted that status eHMI can cause pedestrians to overtrust
A Vs, therefore, intent messages are needed to complement
status eHMIs.
Pedestrians reactions to a ghost driver have also been
investigated in the academic literature. A ghost driver in this
context refers to a driver who pretends to be absent in the car
even when they are in control of the driving operations. Moore
et al. [174] conducted a Wizard-of-Oz driverless vehicle study
aimed to test pedestrians’ reactions to everyday trafﬁc in
the absence of an explicit eHMI. Although some pedestrians
were surprised by the vehicle’s supposed autonomy, others
neither noticed nor paid attention to its autonomous nature.
All the pedestrians crossed in front of the vehicle without
explicit signalling. This suggests that the vehicle’s implicit
eHMI (which is basically its observed motion) may sufﬁce.
Therefore, pedestrians may not need the explicit eHMI in
their interaction routine. A similar study by Moore et al. [175]
indicated that pedestrians crossed in front of a ghost vehicle
with little hesitation even when the vehicle did not give any