13
signal beyond its motion. However, Li et al. [176] ﬁndings
contradicts this claim by conﬁrming pedestrians behaviours
are different on encountering a vehicle with a hidden driver
based on a study carried out in Europe.
b) Interaction with Pedestrians with Reduced Mobility
(PRM): Pedestrians with reduced mobility might need their
support devices re-engineered to allow for effective interaction
with A Vs [177]. Pasha et al. [177] carried out a design study
to explore interface designs for interaction between A Vs and
PRMs. The results from the analysis disclosed that visual cues
are the most important interface elements, and street infras-
tructures are the most important location for housing cues for
this category of pedestrians. They also found that wheelchairs
might require an interface, and the current wheelchairs would
have to be altered to allow for this interface.
c) Other Road-Participants: Vehicle-cyclist interaction
is an important topic to examine, especially in an environ-
ment where cycling is common. Cyclists and drivers cur-
rently communicate through implicit cues (vehicle motion)
and explicit but imprecise signals such as horns, lights, and
hand gestures [178]. Hou et al. [178] designed a virtual
reality (VR) A V-cyclist immersive simulator and a number
of A V-cyclist interfaces to explore interactions between A Vs
and cyclists. Findings suggest that A V-cyclist interfaces can
improve rider conﬁdence in lane merging scenarios. Future
A Vs could consistently communicate feedback (explanations)
which includes awareness and intent based on their sensor
data [178].
In general, more research is needed to explore how the ﬁnd-
ings from these studies can be utilised to create effective and
efﬁcient interaction interfaces between A Vs and stakeholders
in order to facilitate the provision of explanations. In the next
section, we will present some challenges around explainability
in autonomous driving and suggest future research directions.
VII. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss the challenges related to stan-
dards and regulations, user-centric explanation design and
evaluation, and ethics. We also suggest means to address some
of the key challenges.
A. Standards and Regulations
Some of the standards provided in Table I are very relevant
to explainability in autonomous driving. For example, ISO/TR
21707:2008 which speciﬁes a set of standard terminology
for deﬁning the quality of data being exchanged between
data suppliers and data consumers in the ITS domain is very
relevant to A V explainability although not originally intended
for explainability. While the quality of data is important,
the presentation style and language and the interfaces by
which the data is provided are also critical for explanations
in autonomous driving. We suggest that this standard and
others in Table I be explored for the development of more
A V explainability related ones, and should be made easily
accessible.Regulations regarding the explainability of automated sys-
tems are being set by countries and regions. However, these
regulations seem to be too general and do not directly spec-
ify requirements for speciﬁc technologies and stakeholders,
especially in autonomous driving. For example, the UK’s
ethics, transparency and accountability framework for auto-
mated decision-making [179] states that:
When automated or algorithmic systems assist a
decision made by an accountable ofﬁcer, you should
be able to explain how the system reached that
decision or suggested decision in plain English. The
explanation needs to be appropriate for your audi-
ence, expert or non-expert, and should be scrutinised
and iterated by a multidisciplinary and diverse team
(including end-users) to avoid bias and group speak.
In a preliminary consultation paper on autonomous vehi-
cles [180], the UK law commission states the recommenda-
tion of the National Physical Laboratory on explainability in
autonomous driving:
It is recommended that the autonomous decision-
making systems should be available, and able, to
be interrogated post-incident. Similar to GDPR, de-
cisions by automated systems must be explainable
and key data streams stored in the run-up, during
and after an accident.
Explanations can help in assessing and rationalising the ac-
tions of an A V ( outcome-based ), and in providing information
on the governance of the A V across its design, deployment,
and management ( processed-based ). This is in line with the
information commission ofﬁce (ICO) guidelines [181] for
general AI systems. We suggest that regulatory guidelines
for A V explainability should be set in line with these two
goals. We have carefully adapted the ICO guidelines and the
ITU’s comments on the ‘Consultation Paper 3 A regulatory
framework for automated vehicles’ to provide suggestions that
include a conceptual framework for better explainability in
A Vs.
1) Outcome-based explainability: To be able to ratio-
nalise/explain the outcomes of an A V , explainability at the
perception level (i.e., what the A V ’sees’), decision level (i.e.,
how the A V plans paths and motion) and action or control
level (i.e., how the A V acts on its plan or how it executes
its decisions) must be considered. We use these high-level
terminologies: perception, decision, and actions to describe
how explainability regulations could be made speciﬁcally for
A Vs.
a) Perception: Explanations for a perception system can
come in two forms:
1) An explanation capable of explaining the algorithms or
software processes used to transform sensor data into a
digital representation of the real-world and justiﬁcation
for such algorithms. In line with the Molly problem
earlier mentioned in II, it should be possible to obtain
information on how Molly was represented digitally
(sensor types and data transformations), and informa-
tion about the circumstance, e.g., her location, position