10
TABLE IV
DRIVING DATASETS THAT CAN BE USED TO DEVELOP EXPLANATION METHODS FOR AVS AND THE STAKEHOLDERS THAT WOULD POTENTIALLY BENEFIT
FROM SUCH EXPLANATIONS .
Dataset Size Exteroception Proprioception Annotation & Explanation Stakeholders
Sensors (e.g., Cameras) Sensors (e.g., CAN) (see Sec. III-C)
BDD-X [94] 7K40s 3 7Textual Why explanation associated with
videos segments with heatmapsClass A, B, and C
BDD-OIA [95] 23K5s 3 7 Actions and Why explanation Class A, B and C
DoTA [127]4,677 videos
(73,193 s)3 7What explanation (Temporal and spa-
tial anomaly identiﬁcation with bounding
boxes)Class B and C
CTA [110] 1,93517.7s3 7Why explanation for accidents with cause
and effectsClass B and C
HDD [112] 374,400 s 3 3What explanations for
driver actionsClass B
BDD-A Extended [100] 1;10310s3 7Human gaze inciting why and/or what ex-
planation , explanation necessity scoreClass B
Lyft Level5 [111] 360,000 s 3 7 Trajectory annotation Class B
A. Logging and Fault Management: Event Data Recorder
The event data recorder (EDR) serves as a recording device
in automobiles to log information related to vehicle accidents.
Upon a posthoc analysis, a better understanding of how certain
faults or accidents come about is achieved [143].
The installation of EDR in passenger vehicles has been a
mandatory process in the United States since 2014. Recently,
the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) suggested
the need for risk mitigation pertaining to monitoring driver
engagement and the need for better event data recording
requirements for autonomous driving systems after the Tesla
crash case in 2018 [7].
As autonomous vehicles increase in society and gain more
public attention, it is necessary to discriminate human driver
errors and negligence from the A V’s errors (arising from non-
adapted or poor product design or a product defect [144],
[145]) and express these errors in explanations. Martinesco et
al. [146] attributed the existing challenge in ascribing faults to
the appropriate trafﬁc participant to the difﬁculty in identifying
and evaluating the correct cause of an accident.
In line with this, the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety
Administration (NHTSA) calls for the industry and standard
bodies such as SAE and IEEE to develop a uniform approach
to address data recording and sharing2which may, in turn,
be useful for explanations. Pinter et al. [147] deplored the
inability of the existing EDRs to provide sufﬁcient data needed
to reconstruct the behaviour of a vehicle before and after an
accident, and to a degree that the accident could be analysed
from the perspective of liability. As A V functions continue
to increase (eventually leading to full autonomy), the storage
of a satisfactory number of parameters is needed for the
reconstruction of the vehicle’s behaviour and the provision of
2See relevant documents here: https://www.nhtsa.gov/fmvss/event-data-
recorders-edrsexplanations for a reasonable amount of time before and after
the accident becomes crucial.
As an effort towards building more effective EDRs that
can support explanation provision, different approaches, which
include the use of blockchain technologies, and more effective
and robust data models have been proposed. Guo et al. [148]
proposed a blockchain-inspired EDR system for autonomous
vehicles to achieve indisputable accident forensics by pro-
viding trustability and veriﬁability assurance of an event’s
information. With this blockchain approach, the veriﬁcation
and conﬁrmation of a new block of event data are possible with
no central authority involved. In terms of storage mechanisms
and reliability, Yao et al. [149] proposed a Smart Black
Box (SBB) to supplement traditional data recording with
value-driven higher-bandwidth data capture. The SBB uses a
deterministic mealy machine [150] based on data value and
similarity to cache short-term histories of data as buffers. By
optimising value and storage cost trade-offs, the appropriate
compression quality for each data chunk in the driving history
data is determined. Prioritised data recording prevents the
retention of low-value buffers. By discarding them, space is
made available to store new data.
With the EU upcoming legislative rules on EDR beginning
2022 [151] (and a similar one in China [152]), there is
the question as to whether existing data storage facilities
are sufﬁcient for the data needs for accident investigations
involving automated vehicles. For efﬁcient storage space
management, a well deﬁned data package which puts the
data points (with necessary parameters) and the frequency of
measuring and recording that can enable full reconstruction
of A Vs’ regular and irregular movements is necessary for
event explanation purposes. The data model from Pinter et
al. [147] can be used to determine the data content required
in an EDR, sufﬁcient for accident investigations, and suitable
for vehicles at different autonomy levels. Further, Bohm et