15
driving behaviour and risk. As such, the continual monitoring
of actions can be used for assessing the behaviour of the A V
in given circumstances. We suggest that A Vs should be able
to provide real-time data access (both in-vehicle or remotely
from the vehicle) to the actions of the A V , with respect to
observations and knowledge; and the resultant decisions made,
when requested by authorised entities.
2) Process-based Explainability: Process-based explain-
ability in an A V is concerned with the provision of information
that facilitates the independent assessment of the entire oper-
ations and governance of the A V . Process-based explainability
takes perception, decision, and action data, including the
governance processes of the entire A V operation. This makes
it possible to reconstruct an event or accident immediately
after it happens, signiﬁcantly reducing the time to provide
recommendations for future improvements.
Process explainability can be useful for fairness, safety
and performance assessment, accountability and responsibility,
and impact assessment. For fairness, the explanation outlines
the steps taken across the design and the implementation of
the A V to ensure that its decisions are generally unbiased
and fair and whether someone has been treated equitably.
For example, whether adequate measures were implemented
to provide PRMs more time to cross the road; whether the
pedestrian detection/classiﬁcation system works with the same
accuracy for people of colour; or whether predicted crash
outcomes are representative of all members of the population,
e.g, all body types, not just typical adult males.
For safety and performance evaluation, the explanation
provides information on the steps taken across the design and
implementation of the A V to maximise the accuracy, reliability,
security, and robustness of its decisions and behaviours. For
accountability and responsibility, the explanation provides in-
sight on who is involved in the development and management
of an A V , and who to contact for a human review of a decision.
For impact assessment, the explanation provides information
on the steps taken across the design and implementation of
A V technologies. It considers and monitors the impacts that
the use of the A V and its decisions has or may have on an
individual, and on wider society.
It is suggested that real-time access to perception, decision,
and action data and information about the process manage-
ment (both in-vehicle or remotely from the vehicle) be made
available for independent real-time processing to authorised
authorities. Powers should also be granted to relevant author-
ities to impose sanctions in real-time based upon failure to
meet explainability requirements.
In the next section, we suggest how the different A V
operations ﬁt into the A V explainability recommendations
provided and we also provide a conceptual design to represent
this.
3) Conceptual Framework for Explainable AV: We suggest
a conceptual design of how we envision the core A V operations
and components ﬁtting together for explanation provisions
purposes (see Figure 4). The perception and localisation op-
erations are fused together as both receive input directly from
sensors (LiDAR, radar, GPS, IMU). The perception system
provides a digital 3D representation of the world/environmentincluding information about object detections, detection and
tracking uncertainties, and object location, and passes them
to the behaviour and motion planning system which makes
decisions by estimating risks, ﬁnding mitigation actions, and
producing a trajectory. The output from the behaviour and mo-
tion planning system informs the vehicle control and actuation
system on the kind of inputs to send to the actuators to alter
the vehicle dynamics to achieve some effect (e.g., reacting
to an observation). Each of these operations feed directly
to the explainer and the EDR in the system management
compartment. The EDR organises its data and can provide
its organised/structured data to the explainer. The explainer
can generate explanations from a combination of data it has
from the different operations and the EDR. Explanations can
be requested in bulk in the form of an explanation log by spec-
ifying a time range or they can be requested in a conversational
manner (i.e., one query at a time). The explanation log can
provide process-based information that is useful for accident
investigation and effective A V governance. The conversational
style explanations are useful for outcome-based explanations
as events occur.
B. User-Centric Explanation Design and Evaluation
1) Trust: Many of the existing works examining explana-
tions in the context of autonomous driving do so using the
trust objective. These works involved user studies with either
synthetic laboratory tasks with little or no direct connection
to the real system or used microworlds [41]. A microworld
is a simpliﬁed version of a real system in which the critical
elements are present but with the complexities eliminated to
assist easy control of the experiment [182]. Attributes such as
trust which have been used for explanation assessment in A Vs
[13], [12] should be measured using a progressive experiment
occurring in a real-world setting in order to obtain accurate
results. This recommendation align with the trust node of the
UKRI Trustworthy Autonomous Systems programme3which
stresses the need for extensive human and autonomous systems
interaction studies in relation to trust.
2) Stakeholders’ Consideration: As seen in Table III, re-
search on explanations in A Vs has mainly focused on the the-
ory and implementation of explanations based on perception
data with less user-centric empirical studies. Only a few user
studies were conducted to elicit the requirements (e.g., when
an explanation is needed and the appropriate explanations
for each scenario) of the different stakeholders (e.g., some
vulnerable members in Class A). Thus, the consideration
of stakeholders in terms of explanation utility needs more
attention. Further, most of the explanation methods proposed
do not fulﬁl the properties of the standard causal explanations
(e.g., that explanations should be contrasted with relevant
foils) [87]. We suggest a more interdisciplinary approach to
explanations in autonomous driving, where expert ideas from
behavioural sciences (e.g., conversation theories), human-
computer interaction (e.g., user interface designs), artiﬁcial
intelligence, ethics (e.g., unveiling bias through explanations),
3https://www.ukri.org/news/new-trustworthy-autonomous-systems-projects-
launched/