1
Explanations in Autonomous Driving: A Survey
Daniel Omeiza, Helena Webb, Marina Jirotka, Lars Kunze
Abstract —The automotive industry has witnessed an increasing
level of development in the past decades; from manufacturing
manually operated vehicles to manufacturing vehicles with a high
level of automation. With the recent developments in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI), automotive companies now employ blackbox
AI models to enable vehicles to perceive their environments and
make driving decisions with little or no input from a human. With
the hope to deploy autonomous vehicles (A V) on a commercial
scale, the acceptance of A V by society becomes paramount and
may largely depend on their degree of transparency, trustwor-
thiness, and compliance with regulations. The assessment of the
compliance of A Vs to these acceptance requirements can be facil-
itated through the provision of explanations for A Vs’ behaviour.
Explainability is therefore seen as an important requirement
for A Vs. A Vs should be able to explain what they have ‘seen’,
done, and might do in environments in which they operate. In
this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of the existing
body of work around explainable autonomous driving. First,
we open with a motivation for explanations by highlighting and
emphasising the importance of transparency, accountability, and
trust in A Vs; and examining existing regulations and standards
related to A Vs. Second, we identify and categorise the different
stakeholders involved in the development, use, and regulation
of A Vs and elicit their explanation requirements for A V . Third,
we provide a rigorous review of previous work on explanations
for the different A V operations (i.e., perception, localisation,
planning, control, and system management). Finally, we identify
pertinent challenges and provide recommendations, such as a
conceptual framework for A V explainability. This survey aims to
provide the fundamental knowledge required of researchers who
are interested in explainability in A Vs.
©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.Index Terms —Explanations, explainable AI, accountability,
trust, autonomous vehicles, robotics, intelligent vehicles, human-
machine interaction, regulations, standards
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE advent of autonomous vehicles (A Vs) is a signiﬁcant
milestone in the automotive industry. The increasing
growth rate in the industry is considered to be a result of the
increasing research knowledge in vehicle dynamics. Moreover,
the enhancements of sensing devices (e.g., LiDAR [1], [2]
and Radar [3], [4]) and the emergence of deep learning algo-
rithms have also contributed to the industry growth. Despite
This work was supported by the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) through the project RoboTIPS: Developing Re-
sponsible Robots for the Digital Economy, grant reference EP/S005099/1.
It was also supported by the Assuring Autonomy International Programme
(Demonstrator project: Sense-Assess-eXplain (SAX)), a partnership between
Lloyd’s Register Foundation and the University of York; the Trustworthy
Autonomous Systems Hub’s project RoAD (Responsible A V Data), grant
reference EP/V00784X/1; and the Responsible Technology Institute, Oxford.
Daniel Omeiza and Marina Jirotka are with the Department of Computer
Science, University of Oxford, UK (e-mail: daniel.omeiza@cs.ox.ac.uk).
Helena Webb is with the School of Computer Science, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK (e-mail: helena.webb@nottingham.ac.uk)
Lars Kunze is with the Oxford Robotics Institute, Department of Engineer-
ing Science, University of Oxford, UK (e-mail: lars@robots.ox.ac.uk)the technological advancements, the successful deployment
of A Vs in the real world may greatly depend on users’
perception of safety, and in turn, trust. Accidents caused by
A V technologies [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10] hamper trust [11].
Thus, effective ways to build conﬁdence and trust in A Vs need
to be investigated. Explanation provision is considered as a
way of building conﬁdence and trust in A V technologies [12],
[13].
People (e.g., developers and regulators) can beneﬁt from
explanations that explain the actions and behaviour of au-
tonomous systems. Consider the Molly problem1described by
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in relation
to A Vs. A young girl called Molly was crossing the road
alone and was hit by an unoccupied self-driving vehicle. There
were no eye-witnesses. Post-hoc explanations containing the
vehicle’s observations, the road rules, and trafﬁc signs it
acted on will serve as clues to the causes of the accident.
These clues will inform the accident investigation process.
Moreover, system auditors can also beneﬁt from an easier
auditing process in the presence of explanations to provide
an assurance of safety.
Further, the general stress on explainable AI (XAI) and
the “right to explanation” as stipulated in the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [14] underscores the essence
of explanations in complex systems, especially when they
are powered by black-box models. Such complex systems,
such as, autonomous vehicles are likely to make decisions
that are strange and confusing to end-users. This is because
AI decisionality is inherently different from human decision-
making processes [15]. This is especially the case for vehicles
with a high level of automation, e.g., vehicles in SAE Level
3 or above—the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
automation categorisation tends to be the predominant cat-
egorisation model used by automotive engineers. This cate-
gorisation model classiﬁes vehicles into ﬁve levels based on
automation [16]. As highly automated vehicles make high-
stake decisions that can signiﬁcantly affect end-users, the
vehicles should explain or justify their decisions to meet set
transparency guidelines.
A large body of literature on explainable AI focuses on
explaining single neurons or a single artiﬁcial neural network
model while only a handful focuses on explaining an entire
goal-based system like autonomous vehicles which possess
unique architecture and various interacting sub-systems. Pro-
viding explanations for the behaviour of such goal-based
systems is therefore essential.
In this paper, we provide a structured and comprehensive
overview of the recent work on explanations in autonomous
driving. Previous literature surveys such as [17], [18], [19]
1https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/ai4ad/Pages/MollyProblem.aspxarXiv:2103.05154v4  [cs.HC]  9 Nov 2021