5
TABLE I
SELECTED STANDARDS FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES . THESE STANDARDS UNDERLINE THE IMPORTANCE OF SAFE ,TRANSPARENT ,AND EXPLAINABLE
AVS.
Aim Standard & Description Stakeholder
ISO 19237:2017 Pedestrian detection and collision mitigation systems
ISO 22078:2020 Bicyclist detection and collision mitigation systems
ISO 26262:2011: Road vehicles – Functional safety. An international standard for
functional safety of electrical and/or electronic (E/E) systems in production automobiles
(2011). It addresses possible hazards caused by the malfunctioning behaviour of E/E
safety-related systems, including the interaction of these systems.
ISO 21448:2019: Safety Of The Intended Functionality (SOTIF). Provides guidance
on design, veriﬁcation and validation measures. Guidelines on data collection (e.g. time
of day, vehicle speed, weather conditions) (2019). (complementary to ISO 26262).Class B and C
A V Developers,
Regulators,
System Auditors,
Accident Investi-
gators,
InsurerUL 4600: Standard for Safety for Evaluation of Autonomous Products. a safety
case approach to ensuring autonomous product safety in general, and self-driving cars
in particular.
Human SafetySaFAD: Safety First for Automated Driving. White paper by eleven companies
from the automotive industry and automated driving sector about frameworks for
development, testing and validation of safe automated passenger vehicles (SAE Level
3/4).
RSS (Intel) / SFF (NVIDIA): Formal Models & Methods to evaluate safety of A V
on top of ISO 26262 and ISO 21448 (proposed by companies).
IEEE Initiatives: “Reliable, Safe, Secure, and Time-Deterministic Intelligent Systems
(2019)”; “A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well-being with Autonomous and Intelligent
Systems” (2019); “Assessment of standardization gaps for safe autonomous driving
(2019)”.
The Autonomous: Global safety reference, created by the community leading automo-
tive industry players, which facilitates the adoption of autonomous mobility on a grand
scale (2019).
ISO/TR 21707:2008: Integrated transport information, management, and control—
Data quality in intelligent transport systems (ITS) . “speciﬁes a set of standard
terminology for deﬁning the quality of data being exchanged between data suppliers
and data consumers in the ITS domain” (2018).Class A and C
Passengers,
Auxiliary
Drivers,
Pedestrians,
Regulators,
System Auditors,
Accident
Investigators
InsurersISO 13111-1:2017: The use of personal ITS station to support ITS service provision
for travellers. “Deﬁnes the general information and use cases of the applications based
on the personal ITS station to provide and maintain ITS services to travellers including
drivers, passengers, and pedestrians” (2017).
Information/Data
ExchangeISO 15075:2003: In-vehicle navigation systems—Communications message set
requirements. “Speciﬁes message content and format utilized by in-vehicle navigation
systems” (2003).
ISO/TR 20545:2017: Vehicle/roadway warning and control systems. “Provides the
results of consideration on potential areas and items of standardization for automated
driving systems” (2017).
ISO 17361:2017: Lane departure warning.
ISO/DIS 23150: Data communication between sensors and data fusion unit for
automated driving functions.
explanations. They claim that these kinds of guidelines are
based on authors’ experiences with no further substantial
justiﬁcation. Hence, explanation generation algorithms that
generate explanations as short rules [74], or those that apply
inﬂuence scores [75] (such as partial dependence plots [76])
without sufﬁcient justiﬁcation for the explanation choices
made are assumed to be based on unvalidated guidelines.
Thus, the explanations generated by these algorithms may
not be appropriate for class A stakeholders due to the low
intelligibility quality of the explanations [70].
Second, researchers suggested (in [77]) that understanding
users’ requirements might be helpful in explainable AI re-
search. It is on this premise that some research on explanation
design approaches have been thought to be empirically de-
rived . This type of research elicits explanation requirements
from user surveys in order to determine the right explanation
for a use-case with explanation interfaces [73]. For instance,
explanation frameworks have been proposed for recommender
systems [78], case-based reasoning [79], intelligent decision
aids [80], and intelligible context-aware systems [81] uponthe elicitation of users’ requirements through surveys and user
studies. Through user studies, Lim and Anind [81] examined
explanations based on intelligibility types. The intelligibility
types used were: ‘why’ (factual), ‘why not’ (contrastive),
‘what if’ and ‘how to’ (counterfactual) explanations which
are considered relevant for ﬁltering causes for an effect. We
interchangeably refer to these intelligibility types as causal
ﬁlters or investigatory queries in this paper.
Third, some explanation design methods are derived from
psychological constructs from formal theories in the aca-
demic literature [73]. Some of these methods (e.g., in [53])
draw on philosophy, cognitive psychology, social science,
and AI theories to inform explanation design for explanation
frameworks. For example, Akula et al. [82] employed the
Theory of Mind (ToM) in the development of an explanation
framework (X-ToM). The authors in [82] claimed that in their
explanation framework, the mental representations in ToM
were incorporated to learn an optimal explanation policy that
took into account human’s perception and beliefs. Simply put,
a policy, as used in this context is an agent’s strategy for