Moore AI for Not Bad
needatalltofocus on“notgood” domains.Evenwithcriteria to
label AI systems as “good,” the inherent interdependence rai ses
questionsaboutwhetherAIisinherently“bad”andwhethera ny
domaincanredeemthesystemofproduction.
“AI for the good” is strategically vague. Left out by the use of
“AI for the good” is the intensely political nature of any one
of the areas associated with the term (as in domain deﬁnition ).
Recall the USC AI for Social Good project on policing which
Green named as oppressive. Indeed, according to the deﬁnition
ofgoodfrom1,theUSCprojectwouldbebad—itdoesprivilege
community voices and reinforces forms of oppressive policing
(whichrestrictpeoples”capabilities).
Furthermore,non-proﬁtorganizations,whichatleastsomeA I
practitionersassociatewiththeiruseof“socialgood,”18mightnot
even desire such technology. For example, for these non-proﬁt s,
technical contributions might be better spent on upgrading ol d
systems(likefromWindowsXP)ratherthanspendingresource s
togetdatainthe“right”formatforbuildingAIsystems.
Fourth,thisallsuggeststhattobeconsidered“good,”proje cts
must commit to a deﬁnition of social good and then show that,
evenafterconsideringnegativeexternalities,onthebala ncethey
still achieve good. On the whole, then, projects might better
considerthedegreetowhichtheyare“notbad.”
CRITIQUES
Inthissection,Iconsiderfourcritiquesofmyargument.
First, detractors might chafe at a focus on the words of AI.
Theymightarguethatfocusingonwordsignoresthesubstanc eof
technologieswhichwouldactuallybringabout“good.”Ofco urse
thesubstanceofthetechnologiesisimportant,butinthispape rI
focusontheuseoflanguage,which,asImakethecaseforinth e
introduction,isalsoimportant.
Second,onemightpositthatevenif“AIforthegood”isvague,
theuseofsuchtermsdoesnoharm.Whiletheclaimofvaguenes s
hasbeenusedtodecrythediﬃcultyofregulatingAItechnolo gies
(Scherer,2015 ),weusevaguetermslikeenergyormanufacturing
and are able to operationalize them ( Danaher, 2018 ). In this
sense, the absence of a deﬁnition would be permissible so long
as we “know it when we see it.” This is not the case with
claims of “social good.” Such a response is strategically vag ue; it
elides the externalities inherent to AI technologies and us es the
weak criteria of the domain deﬁnition. Harm comes in allowin g
ourselvestofeelgoodwhileperpetuatingoppressivesystemsan d
whenmisallocatingresources.
Third, a reader might say that “social good” is just marketin g
speak—not what practitioners say. That may be so, but the
term appears from research to implementation: in governments,
in funding agencies, in research papers, at conferences, in
companies, and in public discourse. Even if the majority of the
use of “AI for good” occurs externally to AI practitioners, it is
through these routes that the notions of AI manifest. That is ,
practitionersmustcareabouthowtheirworkisusedandnotju st
whatitis.
18https://www.research.ibm.com/science-for-social-good/Still, one might argue that, fourth, despite its ﬂaws, “social
good” is a relevant distinction. Even in the absence of a more
robust criteria, there is a diﬀerence between machine learni ng
researchers choosing to work on credit card companies being
defrauded vs. those working on disease modeling. I suggest
that there is a better approach than to ignore the ambiguity,
the insuﬃcient criteria, and the externalities of AI. Instea d of
banishing“AIforgood,”wemightratherrenametheﬁeld.
SUGGESTIONS
In this critique of the use of language, I also oﬀer a suggestion .
Namely,weshouldstoplabelingprojectsas“forsocialgood” and
instead use the term “for not bad.” The latter more accuratel y
evokestheneedtoavoidtheinherentbadtraitsofAItechnol ogies
without falling into the traps involved with vague claims to
“socialgood.”
Practitioners who would still like to use terms like “AI
for the good” should read literature that studies the criter ia
for evaluation of social change projects and then apply those
criteria.Thisincludesworkinthehealthsciences,social sciences,
development studies, economics, and more. In the scope of
technologicalchangesforimplementingtheoriesofajustsoc iety,
the literature in Information and Communication Technolog ies
for Development provides some examples. Conferences in
this space include the ACM Conference on Computing and
Sustainable Societies (COMPASS) and the Workshop on
ComputingWithinLimits19.Thejournal InformationTechnology
andInternationalDevelopment focusesonthebackgroundtheory
ofsuchwork20.
Withsuchabackground,practitionersmaybebetterprepared
to deﬁne and measure criteria of “good” to expand on my
attempt above. More work to quantify the externalities of AI
projects[buildingonexampleslike Maxmen(2019) andStrubell
et al. (2019) ] will then ﬁll out such criteria. This might include
comparable metrics on cost, energy usage, and potential for
futuremisuseofdata.
Sustained interaction with those in communities that are to
be “innovated” will further concretize what constitutes “goo d.”
Tambe and Rice (2018) andPatton (2019) demonstrate how this
can be done with social work. Action research, like as relate d to
human computer interaction by Hayes (2011) , provides another
lens for community interaction in terms of accountability a nd
shared credit for results. Many “social good” initiatives a lready
discussafocusonpartnerships21—theseshouldbeexpandedand
madesuretorecognize,ifnotattempttoaddress,theunderly ing
structuralissues.
“AIfornotbad”avoidssomeoftheproblemsof“AIforgood.”
It more honestly describes the current vagueness and centers
the externalities. Practitioners unwilling or unable to co mmit to
explicitnotionsofgoodshouldconsideradoptingit.
19https://acmcompass.org/;http://computingwithinlimits.org
20https://itidjournal.org/index.php/itid
21For example, WadhwaniAI partners with India’s Central Tuberculosi s Division
https://wadhwaniai.org
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32