Moore AI for Not Bad
AI2, WadhwaniAI, and MILA, respectively discuss AI for
“common good,” “social good,” and “humanity.”13Government
initiativesfromIndia,theU.S.,andChinadosimilarly14.
“Social good” shifts between social responsibility, societa l
impacts, society, common good, the good, development, and
ethics. Its proposals come in similar forms: calls for more dat a,
better data, broader application, more diverse voices, reﬂex ivity,
transparency, changes to funding priorities, more education ,
moreregulation—more.
The meaning of artiﬁcial intelligence shifts as well. It may
mean “algorithmic systems,” or “automated decision making ”
(Harris and Davenport, 2005 )—other times, it is synonymous
with “data science” or “big data.” It also could be the case
that AI does not truly exist and only refers to some yet-to-
comefuture( Walch,2018 )when,presumably,this“socialgood”
will actually be achieved. To others, that AI does not exist i s
misleading ( Schank, 1987; Bringsjord and Schimanski, 2003 ).
To such technical minds, AI would chieﬂy refer to a set of
techniques like machine learning, deep learning, active le arning,
orreinforcementlearning15.
“AIforthegood”de-politicizestheproblemsaddressed.Many
of these problems, like poverty, recidivism, and the distribu tion
of resources, are ones of institutional failure. Technolog y-based
approaches, when not aimed at the root of problems, divert
attentionfromtheproperrecourse:structuralchange.
In this paper, I oﬀer a critical perspective on the use of
language of AI practitioners like myself who, from practice to
theory, apply their work to some deﬁnition of “good.” I use
discursive analysis to explore the space between the notion of
such projects and their actuality. In so doing, I follow Green
(2018)in identifying AI systems as inherently political. Vague
terms are the wagons of a modern gold rush into the promised
riches of a mythic AI frontier. Like the California gold rush , this
expansionmaybringenvironmentaldegradation,concentrat ions
rather than distributions of wealth, and the oppression of
marginalizedpopulations.
It is not the primary aim of this paper to synthesize a
deﬁnition of AI, social good, or their combination. Chieﬂy,
I theorize about what the apparent use omits. Nonetheless, I
do oﬀer and argue for a preliminary deﬁnition of good in
section three. I use the term “data science” to loosely denote
AI systems. For clarity hereafter and unless otherwise note d,
“AI for the good” or “AI for social good” will encompass the
above uses as they exist today and will refer to the projection
of the computational discipline onto some deﬁnition of public
or societal good. AI itself means, and will be used to mean
in this paper, more than just the application of a statistical
model like logistic regression to a dataset: it will mean the
notionsassociatedwithsuchsystems,thespeciﬁcsofwhichI will
explorebelow.
This paper proceeds in four parts. First, I review relevant
literature. Second, I argue why “AI for the good,” as it is use d, is
13https://allenai.org/;http://wadhwaniai.org/;https://mila.q uebec/en/ai-society/
14https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/ﬁles/document_public ation/
NationalStrategy-for-AI-Discussion-Paper.pdf; https://www. whitehouse.gov/
ai/;http://www.baai.ac.cn/blog/beijing-ai-principles
15Schank (1987) andBringsjord and Schimanski (2003) allow that AI exists given
anarrowfunctionaldeﬁnitionandexplorethecomplicationsofintelli gence.inappropriate.Third,Iaddresspossiblecritiquesofmyapproach .
Fourth,Isuggestdirectionsforthosewhoaimtoworkin“AIf or
thegood.”
LITERATURE REVIEW
Many have already studied the components of “AI
for the good.” I review these attempts in four parts.
First, I establish the precedent for practitioners to
reﬂect on data science. Second, I summarize critiques
of AI systems and language. Third, I review promising
directions for the ﬁeld. Fourth, I present attempts AI
practitioners have made to improve elements of “AI for
thegood.”
First, following Agre (1997) andIliadis and Russo (2016) ,
I critically reﬂect on data science. I draw on science and
technologystudiesanddiscursiveanalysistobolstertheint egrity
of scientiﬁc knowledge through “socially robust knowledge”
(Nowotny,2003 ).IspeaktopractitionersofAIaswellastothose
whostudytheuseofsuchtools.
Second, existing works provide or analyze the meanings
beyond the underlying functioning of AI systems. There are
claims that these data-focused technologies might overcome
theory (Anderson, 2008 ) or transform modern life ( Mayer-
Schönberger and Cukier, 2013 ). In examining “the algorithm
as a thing and the algorithm as a word,” I choose words
rather than the content of techniques as the site of critique
(Beer, 2017 , p. 9). Words are crucial because “by deﬁnition,
a technological project is a ﬁction, since at the outset it does
not exist, and there is no way it can exist yet because it is
in the project phase” ( Latour and Porter, 1996 ). “AI for social
good” is one such project—if it already existed, why say so?
Even AI alone, “evokes a mythical, objective omnipotence, bu t
it is backed by real-world forces of money, power, and data”
(Powles, 2018 ). Here Beer”s dichotomy between the algorithm
as a word and as a physical manifestation becomes evident.
Associating other words with AI—like intelligent, good, or
society—creates notions of eﬃciency, neutrality, and progr ess,
like how many technological metaphors ( Stark and Hoﬀmann,
2019) “are myths that suﬀuse modern society” ( Dalton and
Thatcher,2014 )wieldingpower.
Inrebuttingcommonnotionsofneutralityfrompractitioner s,
Green focuses on the political nature of AI technologies. He
thoroughlyarguesthatdatascienceshouldbeseenofaspolit ical
and, responding to the frequent practitioner argument that “W e
should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good,” states,
“data science lacks any theories or discourse regarding wha t
“perfect” and “good” actually entail” ( Green, 2018 , p. 19). The
pro-technology argument takes “for granted that technology -
centric incremental reform is an appropriate strategy for soci al
progress”( Green,2018 ,p.19)withouthavingtoworryabouthow
(orwhether)thisactuallyoccurs.Thisbeliefthattheintro duction
ofatechnologyissuﬃcienttoyieldapositiveendisoften,lik eby
DaltonandThatcher(2014) ,calledtechnologicaldeterminism.
Third, there are promising approaches to deﬁne “good” with
regard to AI. Social work provides one application. Tambe
and Rice propose a union between social workers and AI
practitioners, because “AI can be used to improve society and
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32