Moore AI for Not Bad
ﬁghtsocialinjustice”( TambeandRice,2018 ,p.3).Patton,asocial
worker academic, ﬁnds footing for such a union and identiﬁes
ways AI practitioners can engage well—largely by privileging
thosewithwhomtheywork( Patton,2019 ).D’Ignazioaddstothis
byapplyingasocialworkcodeofethicstodatascientists,mak ing
explicit the principles to which data scientists seldom commit ,
like commitments to social justice and to the communities wi th
whomtheywork( D’Ignazio,2018 ).
Fourth, AI practitioners use terms like “AI for good”
seemingly without regard to their notional or metaphorical
value, but some engage with what might constitute “good.”
Practitioners, like Niño et al. (2017) , use “social good” as a
domainfromwhichtosolveproblems(“theﬁeldofsocialgood”)
(Niño et al., 2017 , p. 896). These projects are designed for
“serving the people who are in need globally, improving the
societyweliveinandpeople’sconditionswithinit”andmakeu p
application areas like health care, ecology, human rights, ch ild
welfare, etc. ( Niño et al., 2017 , p. 897). Niño et al. characterize
key areas in projects for “social good” in a framework includi ng
data ownership, ethics, sustainability, assessment, stake holder
engagement, etc. Nevertheless, they do not mention what mak es
a project constitute “social good” except as existing in one of
the application areas16, as described by Green”s and D’Ignazio”s
critiques. Using “social good” as a domain risks allowing th e
constituent projects to be seen of as good even if they fail
to meet principles espoused by others (like by having poor
data management practices), use no principles at all, or, more
importantly, meet a set of principles that actively violate the
principles of social justice (but retain the term “good”). I wi ll
henceforth refer to this understanding of “social good” as t he
domaindeﬁnition.
For example, Green questions the focus on crime prediction
systems at USC’s AI for Social Good initiative. He argues that
the initiative bolsters racist and oppressive policing instea d of
working to address the structural problems which lead to polic e
action (Green, 2018 ). Similarly, Palantir, a big data company
that produces crime prediction systems for clients like the
U.S. government, recently partnered with the United Nation’s
WorldFoodProgram(WFP)( WorldFoodProgram,2019 ).One
might argue that such an endeavor is “social good” given that
WFP is a not-for-proﬁt aimed at reducing poverty. Nonetheless ,
this partnership met a signiﬁcant outcry from groups like the
Responsible Data List ( Easterday, 2019 ). Clearly, these groups
interpret “social good” quite diﬀerently. Their disagreemen t
indicatestheinsuﬃciencyofthedomaindeﬁnition.
Other practitioners working in “AI for good” recognize
limitations of their eﬀorts. Researchers at IMB call for a shift to
produceopenAIplatformstomitigateone-oﬀprojects( Varshney
and Mojsilovic, 2019 ). Maxmen questions the worth of the Big
Data for Good project from a global telecommunications group
in its use of call detail records to respond to disasters becau se
governments might (mis)use the same data for surveillance
(Maxmen, 2019 ). Along the same lines, but largely not using
the term “AI for good,” recent work in fairness, accountabil ity,
16Theirframeworkdoesaddressa“lackofstandardizedgoodpracticest oleverage
thepowerofdata”( Niñoetal.,2017 ,p.897).andtransparency(FAT∗)hasaimedtodeﬁnebestprinciplesand
practices for AI systems. Like Greene et al. (2019) andLipton
(2016)note that such technical eﬀorts occur in too limited a
manner; they present reforms to structures that might better be
replaced.Selbstetal.expandonthesecritiquestonotehowFAT∗
as a ﬁeld misses the broader social context and might be better
servedfocusingonprocessandcollaboratingdeeplywithdoma in
experts(Selbstetal.,2019 ).
In an examination of the entire ﬁeld of AI, as opposed
to individual projects, Floridi et al. identify principles for the
creation of a “good AI society” regarding under-use, mis-use,
andover-use( Floridietal.,2018 ).Improvingonothers,theyuse
the term “AI for social good” just once and not in the context
of a discipline, but rather to identify the application of their
framework17. Notably, they focus on potential harms (like those
possible from a general artiﬁcial intelligence) on an equal, i f not
greater, degree than current harms (like threats to individu al
privacy). This corresponds to their inclusion of under-use of AI
as a risk. Given the current harms of AI, their “good AI societ y”
mayjustbea“goodbadsociety,”or,thebestoftheworst.
Prominent AI practitioners have acknowledged some of the
inherentrisksandambiguitiesofAItechnologies( Dietterichand
Horvitz, 2015; Horvitz and Mulligan, 2015 ), but they do so in
a way that appears to just pay lip service to, and thus avoid,
fundamental critiques. To paraphrase, they argue that the ris ks
of AI technologies are important, but that the risks can only b e
solved by further development of AI technologies. The utopic
notionofeconomicliberalismemploysthesamesortofrhetor ic:
because the free-market ideal has never been achieved, one c an
alwaysarguethatitsfailuresareduetoinsuﬃcientlyfreem arkets
(Polanyi, 2001 ). Likewise, data scientists, instead of addressing
critiques, focus on how to realize the ideal of dataﬁcation i n
society (Rouvroy et al., 2013 ); they reinforce a technological
determinism. In this way, the use of “AI for the good,” given th e
domain deﬁnition, appears to strategically avoid considerati on
that the risks of AI may be too great to consider any further
developmentofthetechnologies.
Many arguments for and notions of AI technologies sit
on lose ground. Critiques of these technologies highlight t heir
limitations, often in the sense of technological determinis m and
the avoidance of structural problems. A greater focus on thes e
political problems and an engagement with communities might
reorienttheﬁeld.Withtheseinmind,Iexaminewhether“AIfo r
good”isappropriatetoclassifytheﬁeld.
THE GOOD AND BAD OF “AI FOR GOOD”
When working for “the good” we must ask whichgood and
for whom . By committing to deﬁnitions of what constitutes
“good” and “bad” with regard to AI technologies, I examine
the appropriateness of labeling the ﬁeld as “AI for the good.”
I described in the literature review how the clearest criteri a
for “AI for good” is based on the domain with which an AI
17“This should involve a clear mission to advance AI for social good , to serve as a
uniquecounterbalancetoAItrendswithlessfocusonsocialopport unities”(Floridi
etal.,2018 ,p.704).
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32