Moore AI for Not Bad
technology interacts (the domain deﬁnition). We are meant t o
accept that because a project works on health, with not-for-
proﬁt organizations, in the space of climate change, on poverty -
reduction, etc., that it is “for social good.” In this sectio n, my
argumentisasfollows:
1. I provide an alternative deﬁnition of good according to the
capabilityapproach andsocialjustice.
2. Following 1, there are projects that are good, but that are n ot
labeledassuch.
3. Following 1, AI technologies carry inherently
badexternalities.
4. Following 3, in order to consider net goods, “AI for social
good”mustengagewithandbalanceoutthesebads.
First, I oﬀer a functional deﬁnition of “good” for an AI system
using the capability approach and social justice. Green(2018,
p. 4) cites ( Collins, 2002 ) in deﬁning a social justice project
as “an organized, long-term eﬀort to eliminate oppression and
empower individuals and groups within a just society” and
advocates for such projects in data science. Such a project can
work in complement with the capability approach, a theoretical
frameworkpredicatedoncontext-dependentindividualfreed om
and well-being as deﬁned by people’s capabilities or real
opportunities to act. This approach, particularly as evoked
in the areas of information and communication technologies
(Johnstone, 2007; Kleine, 2010 ), provides an operational lens for
AI technologies. I use the capability approach with a particular
focus on accountability and individual control over private
information to highlight voices from historically margina lized
communities Of course, one might disagree with my deﬁnition
on many grounds—mine is neither radical (e.g., anti-capital ism)
nor conservative (e.g., a defense of the status quo) enough
and remains vague. My point is not so much to advance this
deﬁnitionastoadvocatefordiscussionof whichdeﬁnitionismost
appropriatejustasGreen,Patton,andD’Ignaziodo.Suchafram e
will then allow us to analyze claims of “social good.” Suﬃce t o
say, a “good” intervention should be empowering (particularl y
of basic human functioning), address structural condition s of
oppression, and perform at least as well as interventions using
similaramountsofresources.
Forexample,imagineaprojectdesignedinpartnershipwitha
community in a speciﬁc West-African country with little acce ss
to health care. The project uses a computer vision application
on a smartphone to screen babies for birth defects. This projec t
might be viewed of as “good” given that it speciﬁcally works
with a marginalized community and increases their capabilit y
to access health care. Further, the community might not have
achieved the same access to care with a similarly-resource-
intensiveeﬀorttotrainmoremedicalprofessionals.
Second, using the deﬁnition of good from 1, there are
projects which do not use the label “AI for the good” that
might be classiﬁed as such. For example, consider recent
eﬀorts in federated learning to decentralize and distribute the
computations constituent in the training of a model ( McMahan
and Ramage, 2017 ). These eﬀorts address some concerns about
theprivacyofuserdata:suchdatamightnotneedtobecollect ed
inthesamecentralizedmanner.Furthermore,onecanimagin eafully-speciﬁedfederatedlearningprojectthatmeetsthecrit eriaof
1. Despite this, the concept of federated learning does not car ry
themonikersocialgood.
Third,inherentlybadexternalitiesarisewithAItechnologi es.
Recent work has shown that model training creates a signiﬁcan t
carbon footprint ( Strubell et al., 2019 ). In order to create an AI
system,onemustemploymanyengineersandscientistsandset-
up infrastructure, all of which are costly—perhaps more so than
otherinterventions. Evenmore signiﬁcantly,enormous inv isible
and unacknowledged labor goes into labeling data for traini ng
purposes, much of which occurs under potentially or explicitly
exploitativeconditions( GrayandSuri,2019 ).Dataﬁcationnames
the creep to record more of life in a manner that can be
processedbyacomputer( Mayer-SchönbergerandCukier,2013 ).
It undergirds the bloom in AI—models need data to combine
with human labels—but brings unknown harms. Data collected
for what 1 day appears good may be used later for what may not
accordthesamedeﬁnitionofgood.Forexample,datatoimprove
resource distribution to parolees were later used to create a
model to gauge how likely oﬀenders were to recommit crimes
(AngwinandLarson,2016 ).Dataﬁcationworksatoddswithuser
privacyasseenwithconsumerhacks,behavioraladvertising, and
governmentsurveillance( Zuboﬀ,2019 ).
“AI for good” distracts from the larger world in which AI
exists.Public visibility does not acknowledge the interdependent
and exploitative nature of the technologies. Labeling them a s
“for the good” positions them as somehow intrinsically bette r
than the social systems on which they depend. For example,
tech companies implement systems they acquire from start-ups
createdfromacademicresearch.Mostresearchpaperscomefrom
graduate students whose long working hours are enabled by th e
labor of custodial staﬀ and food service employees. In order t o
respondtoquestionsontheappropriatenessofalongshort-term
memoryorahiddenMarkovmodelonemustnotjustunderstand
their error rates, but also how to calculate derivatives, en gage in
basic math, and use language—skills learned through years of ,
for most, public schooling and from hundreds of teachers. AI
modelsrunonmachinesmadethousandsofmilesawaybypeople
practitioners will never meet. These machines draw electrici ty
producedbyfossilfuelworkersandwhichisdistributedthrou gh
a grid maintained by scores more. The startups themselves, or
the tech companies that buy up startups to “scale” their system s,
then farm out the process of data labeling to vast networks of
invisibleworkers( GrayandSuri,2019 ).Toevenhavethecapacity
to build an AI system requires what Anderson describes of as
“joint-production” ( Anderson, 1999 , p. 321). Those involved in
AI systems are not just the visible actors of engineers, scie ntists,
researchers, program managers, marketers, negotiators, la wyers,
orendusers.Thesetermstoopreciselyassignagency,ability ,and
intentionality to what is best described as panning the sedim ent
ofstreamsofdata.
The point is not to decry actors who lay claim to terms like
“AIforthegood”somuchastoquestionhowtheiractionsreﬂe ct
ontheirstatedgoals.Thosewhousesuchtermsmayevenbeliev e
thattheyaresavingtheﬁeldofAIfrom“notgood”domains,that
theirresearchareasarethemoreappropriatedirection.Given the
overheads and externalities of AI, it is not clear there is suc h a
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32