7601 
Mathematical Bioscien ces and Engineering   V olume 19, Issue 8, 7586–7605. 5.4. Comparison  
A brief comparison between different techniques in terms of sen sors and features used for 
different health monitoring research is given in above Figure 1 8. Below there is T able 1 has a brief 
comparison between eight different research. 
Table 1.  Comparison of proposed and t he existing techniques.  
Ref. NET System Heart 
rate + SpO2 App ECG GSM LCD Email 
alert Room 
control Injector GPS
Proposed WIFI AI              
[33] IP Based             
[34] WIFI Fuzzy            
[35] LoraWAN            
[36] BT + Wifi            
[37] BT + Wifi            
[38] Wifi            
[39] LoRa AI           
[40] Wifi AI           
6. Summary 
6.1. Conclusions 
By applying the deep neural networ k, the training data is proce ssed in MATLAB, and the output 
class is generated that shows the probabilities of the output c lass with respect to the target class. The 
confusion matrix is made up of m arginal and joint probabilities . This matrix shows the loss and 
validation of the training data. The overall result from DNN is  generated, and our system becomes 
intelligent by training the system. Our designed IOT-based syst em can automatically send data to the 
doctor via the web page. Also, an AI-based medicine prescriptio n system can give a dose to the patient 
in the absence of a doctor during a severe emergency. This syst em can also be used as a product for 
patients living in rural areas as helping them to avoid hospita l expenses; they can use the device and 
check their vital signs and get the correct medicine for them v ia doctor or the AI-based system [41]. 
6.2. Limitations 
Our AI-Based Patient Monitoring System has been designed to hel p doctors observe the vital 
signs of patients remotely via a webpage and to help people who  are in need of a hospital and living 
in rural areas but cannot reach the hospital and also in case o f the absence of a doctor, to prescribe 
medicines to the patients accordingly. The fully developed prop osed system has many applications. 
There is no need for the doctor to visit the patient, again and  again, the doctor can monitor the patient's 
vital signs via a webpage from anywhere in the world. This syst em can be used in hospitals so that 
doctors can simply observe the patient while sitting in their o ffice. This system can also be used as a 
product for patients living in rural areas as helping them to a void hospital expenses, they can simply