7588 
Mathematical Bioscien ces and Engineering   V olume 19, Issue 8, 7586–7605. In this article, a system for remote health surveillance is dev eloped by utilizing locally available 
sensors. This system will provide the live location, GSM messag es, and an email to the doctors during 
emergency conditions. The remainder of the paper is laid out as  follows: Section 2 contains the 
literature survey of previously e xisting techniques and problem  statements. Section 3 contains the 
materials and methodology of the proposed system. Section 4 giv es the general description of 
intelligent neural networks and defines the training of the pro posed intelligent system. Section 5 
contains the real-time implementation results of the proposed s ystem and provides a discussion of 
obtained results. Section 5 also gives a comparison among propo sed and different existing IoT-based 
health monitoring systems. The c onclusions and future works are  described in the last. 
2. Literature review 
A health monitoring gadget might make use of interconnected pie ces of equipment. It is then sent 
to M2M, which are machines for people, machines for computers, portable devices, or cellphones [12]. 
Health care tracking and optimization may be done in a far more  efficient, intelligently scalable, and 
interoperable manner with this method. Modern systems now inclu de a flexible user interface [13], 
helper devices [14], and mental h ealth management [15] to help people live smarter lives. The IoT is 
essential for monitoring health because it allows us to link eq uipment for medication to gather health 
data from patients and work on it to avoid catastrophic occurre nces [16]. It is also possible to connect 
medical sensors and process them. In every expansion sign of pr ogress of humanity in technology, the 
critical issue in life is achieving good health. A sensing devi ce may be considered “smart” if it is 
combined with a network-capable application processor (NCAP) th at provides local control, and 
feedback and connects each sensing device to the high-level net work. [17]. The situation in the 
hospitals is getting worst by th e viral infections of COVID-19,  which create space shortage for new 
patients. Numerous hospitals have already initiated to invest i n technology acceptance. For example, 
to reduce administrative burdens  while improving healthcare out comes. Saratoga Hospital purchased 
IoT-enabled patient m onitoring devices [18]. 
In healthcare hardware and software, the medical IoT is keenly integrated to back clinicians and 
patients. Continuous patient surve illance provisions are in pla ce. When they come home, no 
arrangement is made to verify the parameters. And thus, there’s  a risk that the illness might come back. 
Therefore, the Internet of Things health surveillance system is  the answer. Data from a patient is often 
measured and uploaded to the serve r (temperature, heart rate, S pO2, ECG). The physician might even 
have not to live with the patient to check the patient’s status . The doctor can look at  the health state of 
his patient using his android mobile application or the smartph one of the patient. If any parameter 
exceeds the threshold value, the doctor receives a message of a n emergency alert. The optimal control 
of humidity and temperature of the  room also keeps a safe envir onment in the patient room [19]. 
According to the WHO,  COVID-19 has harmed  more than 10 million individuals in the world. And 
there is also a high overall death rate. During COVID-19, many doctors who met patients to secure 
COVID-19 patients were also affected [20]. In various monitorin g applications, wireless sensor networks 
(WSNs) have been widely employed because of the advantages of l ow cost and easy deployment, 
including battlefield surveillance, environmental monitoring, a nd bio identification [21,22], etc. 
The key function of IoT in an emergency is to monitor and notif y the patient. Wearable gadgets, 
medical tracking systems, supply chains, remote patient monitor ing, and more are ex amples of IoT in 
the medical and healthcare sector s. IoT can help improve diagno stic accuracy by continuously