7587 
Mathematical Bioscien ces and Engineering   V olume 19, Issue 8, 7586–7605. the IoT system will send the location to the emergency team and  relatives. In severe conditions, an AI-
based system will analyze the parameters and injects the dose. 
Keywords:  artificial intelligence; Blynk IoT platform; electrocardiogram  (ECG); emergency 
condition; internet of things (IoT); SpO2  
 
1. Introduction 
Chronic disease (for example, car diovascular disease, diabetes,  Alzheimer’s) has increased, with 
mortality associated with a rise in coronial health disease to 66% by 2030. Telehealth, which includes 
virtual healthcare, makes use o f technology to improve communic ation between doctors, clinics, and 
patients. Clinics, doctors, and patients can share information,  monitor, and follow up on care plans 
using electronic communication technology, which allows for max imum virtual participation 
throughout medical treatment. We now live in a globe where tech nology can execute procedures, 
perform pre-operative planning, and monitor results from afar [ 1], in accordance with the World Health 
Organization (WHO). It is necessary to monitor patients continu ously with chronic illnesses to avert 
life-threatening scenarios.  
This decade, the Internet of Things has been hailed as the begi n n i n g  o f  a  n e w  e r a  o f  
interconnectedness for everyday de vices everywhere. Remote heal th monitoring mechanisms [2,3], 
parking management [4], smart houses [5], smart cities [6], sma rt environment [7], industrial sites [8], 
and agricultural lands [9]. Hea lth and environmental conditions  can be tracked using IoT in healthcare 
management. The importance of IoT systems has been increased in  real-time applications because of 
their simple structure. IoT conn ects computers to the internet through sensors and networks in order to 
process data in real-time [10,11] . Figure 1 shows the IoT appli cations in real-time systems. 
 
Figure 1. IoT applications in daily life.