7589 
Mathematical Bioscien ces and Engineering   V olume 19, Issue 8, 7586–7605. monitoring health changes. Users can stay in touch with doctors  or nurses via IoT healthcare apps. 
They assist healthcare workforces to work more efficiently with  the patients in working place [23]. An 
IoT platform will help the doctor and the patient. The doctor e xamines the health ind icators of patients 
through the IoT platform (Blynk). It is necessary to constantly  monitor patients with chronic illnesses 
in order to avert life-threatening scenarios. The IoT is essent ial for monitoring health because it allows 
linking health parameter measuring instruments to gather patien t health data and proceed with it to 
avoid catastrophic occurrences. It is also possible to connect medical sensors and process them. The 
design of the wireless sensor n etwork consists of nodes that ar e used to monitor e nvironments such as 
temperature. This may be assesse d through the physicalizing of the Internet. This technology is 
exciting for an extensive range of applications such as medical , environmental, transit, military, 
entertainment, home defense, crisis management, and smart space s [24,25].  
Normally, many researchers have considered the machine learning  techniques as eﬃcient 
diagnostic tool health monitoring of patients [26–28]. For the best solution of real-time problems, the 
most suitable AI techniques i s the neural ne twork [29]. 
3. Materials and methodology 
In this section, we provided th e materials and methodology of t he proposed system. The complete 
description of the sys tem using a flowchart  is also presented. 
3.1. General context 
There are three primary problems with existing IoT-based health  surveillance systems. First, the 
communication lines such as 3G/4G are used commonly under relat ively high-cost conditions. 
Secondly, in general, data priv acy problems are not addressed. And at last, most of them are not 
analyzed or monitored. Our main work is to make a low-cost and more robust system via ESP32 board. 
One of the key elements of this project is Blynk, a development  platform for e-health monitoring that 
works along with Arduino Uno. Up to 15 sensors can be connected  and measured using Blynk. The 
Blynk platform is utilized for biomedical sensors such as ECG s ensor, body temperature sensor and 
oxygen saturation and pulse rate sensor. LoRa communication tec hnology, a novel,  private and 
broadcast modulation approach, enables the transmission of data  at extremely low data rates to very 
long ranges are utilized for the w ireless transfer  of measured health data to the cloud. 
When patients have to take a medicine at a certain point during  the day, the patient will be notified 
of the medication and the condition. Blynk IoT platform is the best solution for monitoring parameters 
from remote location. A complete flow chart of the proposed rea l-time health monitoring system is 
shown in Figure 2.