1614 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1612–1622
1 3
an optimal number of hidden layers to solve the COVID-19 
detection problem. We used the Python programming lan-
guage to create our deep neural networks and the computa-
tion power of a Google Colaboratory Linux server with an 
Ubuntu 16.04 operating system a Tesla K80 GPU graphics 
card to train them. The networks were trained with a data-
set that contained only CXR images (210 COVID-19, 350 
viral pneumonia, and 350 normal). The majority of previ-
ously conducted studies given in the literature have made 
use of limited datasets containing less than 100 COVID-19 
images. Due to this, we decided to employ a larger dataset 
to develop deep neural networks which demonstrate reliable 
performance. Our inference engine, COV19-ResNet, reached 
an accuracy of 100%, a precision rate of 100%, a recall rate 
of 100%, a specification of 100%, and an F1 score of 100% 
for the detection of COVID-19. However, the accuracy val-
ues obtained for normal and viral pneumonia classes were 
95.71% and 97.14%, respectively.
Methods
Patient and Dataset
The present study was a retrospective one. The database 
used consists of 210 COVID-19, 350 viral pneumonia, and 
350 normal CXR images that were created using two differ -
ent data sources. Figure  1 presents the sample CXR images 
for each class. The first data source was created by a team of 
researchers from Qatar University (Doha, Qatar) and Dhaka 
University (Dhaka, Bangladesh) along with collaborators 
from Pakistan and Malaysia. The dataset consists of 219 
COVID-19 positive, 1341 normal, and 1345 viral pneumonia 
CXR images, and it is constantly updated with new CXR 
images [21].
The second data source consists of 5863 CXR images 
(pneumonia and normal) selected from retrospective cohorts 
of patients from the Guangzhou Women and Children’s 
Medical Center [22].
Our dataset initially consisted of 910 X-ray images (PNG 
format), and we produced 90 additional COVID-19 samples 
using data augmentation methods such as horizontal/verti-
cal, rotation, and shifting. The well-known 60/20/20 rule, 
which is used as a common strategy to split data in machine 
learning, was enforced in our study; 60% of the dataset was 
assigned for training, 20% for validation, and the final 20% 
for testing.
COV19‑CNNet
A CNN is a special type of neural network that has shown 
excellent performance in computer vision competitions. This 
network gains the ability to recognize different objects after training on a big image dataset. This architecture works in 
a similar manner to human vision—both use correlations 
between different images. Some diseases that are difficult to 
detect by experts can be detected in seconds by the systems 
created with this algorithm. However, considerable skill and 
experience in DL is required to select suitable hyperparam-
eters, such as the learning rate, kernel sizes of convolutional 
filters, and number of layers, when creating a CNN from 
scratch for a new task. In this study, we developed a CNN-
based interference engine called COV19-CNNet, which was 
built from scratch to detect COVID-19, using our expertise 
in and experiences with DL. It consists of seven convolu-
tional layers for feature extraction and four dense layers for 
classification (Fig.  2).
The initial convolutional layers of the network tends to 
respond to basic features such as oriented lines and tex-
tures, whereas intermediate layers of the network respond 
to more complex features. By the time information reaches 
the higher layers of the network, the feature maps of these 
layers are able to extract specific findings.
Having multi-convolutional layers in the network makes it 
possible to extract useful information from images. The large 
number of parameters required is one of the biggest prob-
lems in training a deep convolutional network. This problem 
was solved for this model by using a pooling operation. Out-
puts of the convolutional layers were summarized using the 
2D max-pooling operation. Batch normalization was used 
to rescale outputs of some particle layers.
A flatten layer was used in the transition from the con-
volution layers to the four dense layers. The dense layers 
which are also known as fully connected layers help learn 
non-linear combinations of the high-level features outputted 
by the convolutional layers. The last dense layer has three 
neurons to categorize images as COVID-19, viral pneumo-
nia, and normal. It uses Softmax as an activation function.
We used specific strategies in the training phase to pre-
vent overfitting: In each step of the training process, ran-
dom unit sets in the dense layers were selected and ignored 
using the dropout technique. This is an efficient strategy that 
makes it possible to train various networks using different 
data units. Thus, if any part of the network becomes too 
sensitive to noise in the data, the other parts will compensate 
for it. The early stopping method was also used to prevent 
overfitting. Through this, the training of the model ceases 
when performance improvement is stopped on the valida-
tion dataset.
COV19‑ResNet
Deep neural networks are useful for dealing with complex 
tasks. However, adding too many layers generally causes 
vanishing gradient problems, and the weights of the early 
layers cannot be updated by backpropagation. This can