1621 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1612–1622 
1 3
The SqueezeNet model [6 ] has an accuracy of 100%, a 
precision rate of 99.35%, a recall rate of 100%, a specifi-
cation of 96.67%, and an F1 score of 99.67% for COVID-
19, while the values of all these metrics are 100% in our 
COV19-ResNet engine. In addition, the accuracy values 
of the SqueezeNet model for normal and viral pneumonia 
are 98.04% and 96.73%, respectively. The COV19-ResNet 
accuracy values for normal and viral pneumonia are 95.71% 
and 97.14%, respectively. The COV19-CNNet accuracy lev -
els for COVID-19, normal, and viral pneumonia are 100%, 
100%, and 82.86%, respectively. In light of these findings, 
it is evident that our COV19-ResNet model performs bet-
ter than the SqueezeNet model in classifying COVID-19 
and viral pneumonia. Additionally, the best classifier for the 
normal class among the three models is our COV19-CNNet 
engine, which has an accuracy rate of 100%.
ImageNet pre-trained models are not sufficient for 
classifying medical images as they are trained using 
natural images. Medical and natural images are differ -
ent in many aspects. Therefore, we developed inference 
engines with new and special deep neural networks that 
were trained from scratch. We focused on the problem of 
multi-class classification in this study, a rather difficult 
task for the diagnosis of COVID-19. Table  2 presents the 
performances of the pre-trained models [6 , 13, 16, 17] 
and the diagnostic inference engines we developed for 
this difficult task. Different combinations were obtained 
from different datasets, and the data was augmented 
using special functions. We chose the samples that were 
close together in the classes to avoid hypersensitivity 
against a certain class. To this end, we increased the 
augmentation methods as well as the number of COVID-
19 images (90 samples). In fact, it is more appropriate to 
use a large dataset for deep neural network training from 
scratch in the medical field. However, it is difficult to 
create large datasets, especially with respect to emerg-
ing diseases such as COVID-19. This makes training 
deep neural networks from scratch relatively more dif-
ficult than transfer learning. It should also be noted that, 
besides the abovementioned ones, there are several other 
studies on detecting COVID-19 using CXRs; however, 
they are not peer-reviewed articles. As a result, these 
studies have not been included in Table  2.
Conclusion
X-ray images can be used to develop an effective diag-
nostic tool with DL technologies for detecting COVID-19 
and viral pneumonia. COV19-CNNet and COV19-ResNet 
were developed with special architectures from scratch 
without using a pre-trained DL model. These inference 
engines were trained using CXR images and created with an optimum number of hidden layers and parameters. 
Both engines can accurately detect COVID-19 cases, but 
COV19-ResNet has a higher accuracy rate.
The disadvantage of the CXR imaging modality is that 
it shows negative radiological signs in the early stages 
of COVID-19. However, the inference engines we devel-
oped with DL technology can detect COVID-19 patients 
at an early stage. For instance, the CT and CXR images 
shown in Fig.  6 belong to a patient in the early stage of 
COVID-19 [35]. The ground-glass opacities in the right 
lower lobe of the CT image (red arrows) (Fig.  6b) are 
not visible in the CXR image (Fig.  6a). Nevertheless, 
using the CXR image, our diagnostic inference engines 
diagnosed this patient as having COVID-19 with 100% 
accuracy at an early stage. Early diagnosis makes a sig-
nificant contribution to the treatment and quarantine 
process, ensuring that the primary treatment of chronic 
patients at high risk can be initiated. Thus, intensive care 
units and other health resources can be used in a more 
efficient manner.
Several studies have shown us that DL has the poten-
tial to be applied in the diagnosis and treatment of dis-
eases. Considering this, DL models trained with large 
medical datasets need to be developed in the future. 
These models can then be used to solve various prob-
lems by being integrated successfully into many devices, 
including medical imaging tools.
This study, alongside other studies in this area, indi-
cates that AI-aided research can make sizeable contribu-
tions to fight the coronavirus outbreak. All data about 
COVID-19 should be shared without any restrictions 
around the world so that this information can be actively 
used in similar studies. Additionally, the developed AI-
aided systems need to be tested in health institutions. 
However, it should not be overlooked that doctors show 
resistance regarding the use of AI-aided systems in 
the diagnosis and treatment process. It is necessary to 
emphasize that these systems are powerful tools that can 
support doctors in the diagnosis and treatment of dis-
eases. We developed and tested two diagnostic inference 
engines based on CNN and the architecture of ResNet 
in this study. We plan to develop a radiological system 
equipped with comprehensive features and use these 
intelligent inference engines as a part of it.
Compliance with Ethical Standards  
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
Ethical Approval  This article does not contain any studies with human 
participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
Funding There is no source of funding for this article.