1613 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1612–1622 
1 3
but the clinical suspicion is still high, then a chest CT scan 
must be conducted.
CT helps detect possible complications that are not seen 
in CXR [6 ]. Radiologists play a vital role in this process by 
accurately reporting their radiological findings from both 
the CXR and CT scans. These reports provide important 
information on the absence or presence of a coronavirus 
infection. Findings that cause serious suspicion relevant to 
“COVID-19 are ground glass patterned areas, which, even 
in the initial stages, affect both lungs, in particular the lower 
lobes, and especially the posterior segments, with a funda-
mentally peripheral and subpleural distribution” [7 ].
COVID-19 and other pneumonia types have similar imag-
ing features, which makes it difficult to differentiate them. 
Although CT is an effective imaging method for the early 
detection and diagnosis of COVID-19, its implementation 
poses several difficulties and disadvantages. If the process is 
not conducted in a safe manner by considering the rate and 
form of the spread of COVID-19, the risk of transmitting the 
disease to health workers and other patients increases. For 
this reason, the American College of Radiology (ACR) has 
released recommendations to be followed when performing 
imaging for suspected COVID-19 infection. The ACR state-
ment states the following: “CT should be used sparingly and 
reserved for hospitalized, symptomatic patients with specific 
clinical indications for CT. Appropriate infection control 
procedures should be followed before scanning subsequent 
patients. Facilities may consider deploying portable radiog-
raphy units in ambulatory care facilities for use when chest 
X-rays are considered medically necessary. The surfaces of 
these machines can be easily cleaned, avoiding the need to 
bring patients into radiography rooms.” [8 ].
Additionally, the average effective dose of radiation is 
0.1 mSv for CXR, but this quantity is 70 times more for a 
chest CT. Such a high level of radiation has a significant 
negative effect on DNA, causing mutations that may lead 
to cancer [9 ].
On the other hand, the cost of chest CT scans is higher 
than that of CXRs. Considering the budgets that countries 
have allocated for fighting COVID-19, the imaging cost 
for CT scans for every suspected patient results in notable 
expenses.
Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies produce success-
ful results, especially in the differentiation and diagnosis 
of diseases with similar symptoms and uncertainty. Deep 
learning (DL) involves neural network models learning to 
make classifications based on images or different types of 
data sources. DL models have promising potential for prog -
nostic and diagnostic accuracy due to their competency in 
comparison to human experts. Deep neural networks use 
labels to discover hidden patterns in inputted complex data 
[10]. This technology can be used to develop real-time sys-
tems that detect different types of diseases [11, 12]. Using a pre-trained model for a new problem is called transfer 
learning. There are many pre-trained models in DL that are 
used to solve various problems by making simple modifi-
cations. Xception, VGG16, VGG19, ResNet, ResNetV2, 
InceptionV3, InceptionResNetV2, MobileNet, Mobile-
NetV2, DenseNet, and NASNet are well-known ImageNet 
pre-trained models. There are a limited number of DL stud-
ies on the detection of COVID-19 from CXR images, and 
models pre-trained using natural images have been used in 
these studies [6 , 13–18].
Ayrton [15] used ResNet50-based deep transfer learning 
technique on a small dataset of 339 images (39 COVID-19 
positive and 300 normal) and reached a validation accuracy 
of 96.2%. Further, Wang and Wong [18] proposed a DL 
model named COVID-Net for the detection of COVID-19. 
This model has 92.4% accuracy in classifying normal, pneu -
monia, and COVID-19 classes. Hemdan et al. [14] used 50 
CXR images (25 COVID-19 and 25 normal) to build the 
COVIDX-Net framework, which includes seven different 
pre-trained models: VGG19, DenseNet121, InceptionV3, 
ResNetV2, Inception-ResNetV2, Xception, and Mobile -
NetV2. The VGG19 and DenseNet models were each found 
to have an accuracy of 90%, while the Inceptionv3 model has 
the worst classification performance at an accuracy of 50%.
Asif et al. [19] proposed a CNN model based on Incep-
tionv3 with transfer learning for the detection of COVID-19. 
The researchers used a dataset that consists of 864 COVID-
19, 1345 viral pneumonia, and 1341 normal chest X-ray 
images. Before using this dataset, they increased the number 
of images by 10 times for each class through data augmenta-
tion methods. They obtained a training accuracy of 97% and 
a validation accuracy of 93% after the completion of 4000 
epochs in the proposed model.
ImageNet pre-trained models show insufficient perfor -
mance for some tasks. Natural images and medical images 
differ significantly, and transfer learning models are mainly 
trained using datasets that contain natural images. Therefore, 
these models do not perform well when medical images are 
used as the dataset. Hence, transfer learning cannot be con-
sidered more efficient than training a network from scratch, 
as the networks learn different high-level features [20]. 
Besides, using a pre-trained model in DL applications is 
quite simple; it merely requires writing a few lines of code. 
In contrast, creating a model from scratch requires expert 
knowledge and experience in the DL field.
Unlike the abovementioned researchers, we developed 
two deep neural networks from scratch: COV19-CNNet 
based on CNN and COV19-ResNet based on ResNet. The 
number of required hidden layers is a significant aspect to 
be considered for obtaining good results. It changes based 
on the complexity of the dataset and the problem. There-
fore, the number of hidden layers must be well-defined in 
order to successfully train a model. We attempted to find