as after accidents involving hazardous material transportation vehicles. The MC within the DSS contains
the risk assessment module (RAM), the simulation module (SM) and the decision module (DM). Out of
these modules, the SM used colored PNs to model the behaviour of highway network, which includes the
model of the accident and the restoration procedure after the accident. Colored PNs have also been used by
Stephenson (2004) as a modelling and simulation method for risk assessment of information systems. Kadri
et al. (2012) proposed a new method using colored PNs for quantitative risk assessment of domino eect on
industrial plants caused by heat radiation to process equipment and/or storage vessels.
A comprehensive risk assessment framework based on fuzzy PNs in combination with the analytic hierar-
chy process (AHP), the entropy method (EM) and the cloud model, has been proposed by Guo et al. (2016)
for long-distance oil and gas transportation pipelines. The AHP method together with the EM method and
the cloud model help to address the issue related to the uncertain, vague and random characteristics of risk
factors of oil and gas pipelines. On the other hand, Zhou et al. (2017) used weighted fuzzy PNs to propose
a method for security risk (e.g., threat of terrorist attacks) assessment in the chemical industry. The use of
the PNs helps this method to model interrelationships between risk factors and the importance of the risk
factors, thus allowing to perform meaningful risk assessment.
5. Discussion and future outlook
Meaningful and accurate safety, reliability, and risk assessment play a vital role in the development and
safe operation of safety-critical systems. Several classical approaches such as FTA, ETA and FMEA have
been utilised for system analysis. Despite their extensive use for system safety, reliability and risk assessment,
they do have a number of shortcomings. The major shortcoming is that these approaches often perform anal-
ysis under unrealistic assumptions, such as by considering statistical and stochastic independence between
events, binary states of system components, and overlooking temporal behaviour. However, these limitations
have not gone unnoticed. Alternative approaches have been developed to alleviate the limitations of classical
approaches, thus enabling the analysis of practical systems under realistic assumptions.
Bayesian networks and Petri nets are two dierent approaches that are used either as standalone ap-
proaches or in association with other approaches to address many of the limitations of the existing ap-
proaches. The two approaches share capabilities, such as enabling predictive analysis of failure behaviour
of systems by taking into account statistical, stochastic and temporal dependencies of events. Moreover,
both the approaches can consider repairability and multiple states of failure of components during modelling
of the system behaviour. However, they do have distinct capabilities, and relatively better performance in
dierent scenarios. For instance, in diagnostic analysis, BN-based approaches can propagate new evidence
through the network to obtain new beliefs about the failure probability of the events and update prior
beliefs. Unlike PNs, BNs are therefore able to adapt and rene their diagnostic ability over time.
Although extensive research has been performed on BNs and PNs, there exist many challenges in this
area. When BNs and PNs are used as standalone approaches, their manual construction requires experts
with extensive knowledge about the system so that behaviour can be accurately captured. In BNs, this
task is further complicated by the fact that deep knowledge about the system is required to understand
dependencies among dierent variables in a BN model so that conditional probability tables can be created.
If the system design evolves over the life-cycle, the BN or PN model of the system has to be adapted to
maintain consistency.
The major limitations of BNs application as standalone approaches are that there are limited formal
semantic guidelines available for developing BNs for a system and they do not guarantee a coherent model.
For this reason, it is possible to create dierent BN models for the same system which will produce the same
result, except that they dier in complexity. This is primarily a problem when the parent-child relationships
among nodes are not properly dened, thus producing a complex model instead of a simple one. On the
other hand, strong semantics guidelines and mathematical formulation of PNs could help to create coherent
models of systems behaviour, but PN models are inherently complex. For this reason, PNs-based approaches
often suer from the state space explosion problem, which undermines their ecacy and applicability for
the analysis of large and complex industrial scale systems. Mechanisms have been proposed to minimise the
state space explosion problem. But there still remains scope for further research to improve the scalability
21