However, the inclusion of neutral dependency algorithm for complexity minimisation of CPTs makes this
approach unsuitable for posterior/diagnostic analysis. Similar contribution has also been made by Barua
et al. (2016). They proposed to use DFTs to model dynamic failure behaviour of chemical process plants
and then convert the DFTs into DBNs for dynamic risk assessment. Khakzad et al. (2013d) proposed a new
BN-based approach for probability estimation and failure propagation path determination of domino eects.
Recently, Khakzad (2015) developed another Bayesian network methodology to model both the spatial and
temporal evolutions of the cascading eects of a chain of accidents and to determine the most probable
sequence of accidents in a process plant. (Hu et al., 2015b) proposed a dynamic Bayesian network based
method for fault propagation studies in petrochemical process facilities. In this approach, rstly, a HAZOP
study is performed to identify the faults, their causes and potential consequences. The causal relationships
among dierent events are then modelled using DBN for risk assessment.
The modelling power of BNs has been utilised to model various aspects of maritime risk assessment
such as the ship-ship collision or grounding occurrence (Akhtar and Utne, 2014; H anninen et al., 2014b),
accidents and their consequences (Ant~ ao et al., 2009; Kelangath et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013; Goerlandt
and Montewka, 2014; Montewka et al., 2014). H anninen and Kujala (2012) used Bayesian networks to
identify the risk-in
uencing variables which signicantly aect the occurrence of ship collision in the Gulf
of Finland. Wu et al. (2015) proposed to integrate the interpretive structural modelling (ISM) method
(Wareld, 1973) with BNs for risk assessment for operations in marine environments. To form the structure
of the BN model and nd the relationships among the BN nodes, this approach used the ISM method to
systematically acquire information from experts. The prior probabilities of the BN nodes were determined
based on expert opinions. The approach was applied to two oshore pipeline case studies to facilitate better
risk assessment in associated maritime projects. When precise failure data are scarce, expert judgements
are commonly used to obtain the prior probability of the BN nodes. However, there exists criticism about
the subjectivity of the expert judgement. To address this issue, Li et al. (2014) developed a binary logistic
regression method to obtain prior probabilities of the BN nodes by utilising the existing maritime accident
data resources. Other recent contributions related to the risk assessment of oil and gas pipelines using
Bayesian networks are available in (Aljaroudi et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016b; Wu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017).
Bayesian networks have been applied for conducting dynamic risk assessment of deepwater managed pressure
drilling and under-balanced drilling operations by Bhandari et al. (2015).
Cai et al. (2013) proposed an algorithm to convert fault trees into a dynamic Bayesian network for
quantitative risk assessment of human errors on oshore blowouts considering the repairability of events.
In order to address the issue of scarce statistical failure data, Wang and Mosleh (2010) proposed a method
based on BNs called QQBBN to incorporate both qualitative and quantitative information in the BN models.
This approach is particularly useful when the risk assessment requires to take into account the in
uence
of human and organizational factors. At the same time, Wang et al. (2011b) integrated fuzzy fault trees
with BN for probabilistic risk assessment under conditions of uncertainty. Ren et al. (2009) combined fuzzy
logic with BN for oshore risk analysis. In order to incorporate both qualitative and quantitative data in
the risk assessment process under uncertainty, recently, John et al. (2016) developed a modelling approach
combining BNs with fuzzy set theory. They applied this approach for resilience improvement of the seaport
system by performing risk assessments.
Chin et al. (2009) proposed a BN-based method for risk assessment in new product development. In this
approach, the risk factors in new product development project such as research and development risk, supply
risk, production risk and product reliability were identied and their interrelationships were investigated
rst. After that, BN is used to model the relationships among those factors. A systematic probability
generation algorithm was developed for prior and conditional probability generation of the nodes of the
BN. However, for complex Bayesian network structures where a node has many parent nodes, and a large
number of states is considered for a node, this approach creates diculties in completing the large conditional
probability tables. Duval et al. (2012) proposed a BN-based integrated risk assessment method for industrial
risk assessment where all the potential risks such as risks associated with system models (e.g., functional and
organizational), environmental conditions, human actions and maintenance strategy are globally covered in
a single view. Li et al. (2010) proposed to construct BN models for 
ood risk assessment using domain
knowledge and spatial data. Liu et al. (2012) used Bayesian network for health risk assessment using the
12