as standalone approaches, either predened BNs are used for the analysis of a specic system or new BNs
are created from scratch based on the knowledge about system under consideration. For example, in (Gran
and Helminen, 2001), the authors used a BN model for reliability assessment of nuclear plants. BN models
were used for the reliability analysis of power systems and military vehicles in (Yu et al., 1999; Daemi et al.,
2012; Yongli et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2008) and (Neil et al., 2001), respectively. Network reliability has been
studied in (Lynn et al., 1998) using a pre-dened BN.
When BNs are created from scratch, they can be created manually, (semi-)automatically from the existing
data, or by combining manual and data-driven processes (Zhao et al., 2012). To create a BN for system
reliability analysis, the information about the nodes, the association among the nodes and the strength of
these associations must be known a priori. To help with the creation of a BN model, an expert with signicant
knowledge about the system is typically employed. Fig. 3 shows the steps required to create and utilise a BN
model for safety and reliability analysis. Bouissou et al. (1999) proposed a method for hierarchical top-down
construction of BNs combining evidence from dierent sources for reliability assessment of safety-critical
systems.
To overcome the limitation of employing experts for creating BNs, and nd associations between BN
nodes, Doguc and Ramirez-Marquez (2009) proposed a method for automatic construction of a BN model of
a system based on the historical data about the system without the intervention of experts. In this approach,
associations between system components were identied using a data mining algorithm named K2. The same
authors have performed similar research in (Doguc and Ramirez-Marquez, 2012) for reliability analysis of
grid systems. Jiang et al. (2013) proposed a novel probabilistic model, called the hybrid relation model
(HRM) for reliability evaluation of programmable logic controller (PLC) systems. HRM is a type of BN,
which captures complex dependencies among PLC system components caused by the embedded software.
Aslett et al. (2015) used the concept of survival signature (Coolen and Coolen-Maturi, 2013) for reliability
evaluation of systems using BNs. A hybrid BN framework has been presented by Neil and Marquez (2012)
to model the availability of renewable systems. Cai et al. (2012) have shown how a BN can be used for
reliability evaluation of subsea blow-out preventer control system. Recently, Liu et al. (2015) proposed a
method for developing a dynamic Bayesian network model for reliability analysis of subsea blowout preventer
stack in the presence of common cause failures. In (H anninen et al., 2014a; Eleye-Datubo et al., 2008) BNs
have been used for safety and reliability analysis in the maritime and oshore industries. H anninen (2014)
reviewed the benet and challenges of applications of Bayesian networks in maritime safety and accident
analysis. Honari et al. (2009) showed how the Bayesian network can be used for the probabilistic reliability
quantication of an (r,s)-out-of- (m,n) : F system. In (Su et al., 2012), the application of DBN for reliability
assessment of distribution system has been illustrated.
Although most applications target hardware reliability, methodologies have also been proposed for soft-
ware systems. Fenton et al. (2008) reviewed the application of BNs for software defect prediction and
reliability estimation. In (Bai, 2005), a new BN method called Markov Bayesian network has been proposed
and applied for reliability assessment of software systems using data from their operational prole. In this
approach, failure data of components were obtained from historical data and expert knowledge. At the same
time, a dynamic Bayesian network based method has been proposed in (Roshandel et al., 2007) to assess
the reliability of software systems at the architectural level by creating a stochastic reliability model of the
system. This approach was developed for design time analysis of system where no information about the
runtime behaviour of the system is available. The technique used a component-based strategy to evaluate
the overall system reliability, i.e., the reliability of the system components is evaluated rst and then the
results are combined to estimate system-level reliability.
Reliability of systems with small probabilities are usually evaluated using Monte Carlo simulation. But
Monte Carlo simulation based approaches are expensive in terms of execution time and memory requirement.
To overcome these limitations, Cadini and Gioletta (2016) have proposed a method by exploiting Bayesian
Monte Carlo (BMC) approach (Ghahramani and Rasmussen, 2003). Straub and Kiureghian (2010) proposed
a computational framework called enhanced Bayesian network (eBN) by combining Bayesian networks and
structural reliability methods (Ditlevsen and Madsen, 1996) for reliability estimation of engineering struc-
tures and infrastructures. Recently, Straub and Papaioannou (2014) proposed a method by combining
structural reliability methods with rejection sampling strategy (Gilks and Wild, 1992) for calculating the
6