Applications of Bayesian Networks and Petri Nets in Safety, Reliability, and
Risk Assessments: A review
Abstract
System safety, reliability and risk analysis are important tasks that are performed throughout the system life-
cycle to ensure the dependability of safety-critical systems. Probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) approaches
are comprehensive, structured and logical methods widely used for this purpose. PRA approaches include,
but not limited to, Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Failure Mode and Eects Analysis (FMEA), and Event
Tree Analysis (ETA). Growing complexity of modern systems and their capability of behaving dynamically
make it challenging for classical PRA techniques to analyse such systems accurately. For a comprehensive
and accurate analysis of complex systems, dierent characteristics such as functional dependencies among
components, temporal behaviour of systems, multiple failure modes/states for components/systems, and
uncertainty in system behaviour and failure data are needed to be considered. Unfortunately, classical
approaches are not capable of accounting for these aspects. Bayesian networks (BNs) have gained popularity
in risk assessment applications due to their 
exible structure and capability of incorporating most of the
above mentioned aspects during analysis. Furthermore, BNs have the ability to perform diagnostic analysis.
Petri Nets are another formal graphical and mathematical tool capable of modelling and analysing dynamic
behaviour of systems. They are also increasingly used for system safety, reliability and risk evaluation. This
paper presents a review of the applications of Bayesian networks and Petri nets in system safety, reliability
and risk assessments. The review highlights the potential usefulness of the BN and PN based approaches over
other classical approaches, and relative strengths and weaknesses in dierent practical application scenarios.
Keywords: Bayesian networks, Petri nets, Safety analysis, Reliability analysis, Risk assessment
1. Introduction
Safety critical systems underpin many of the advances in modern society and have become an integral
part of our life. Use of such systems can be noticed in a wide range of industries such as the automotive,
aerospace, nuclear, energy, medical, and process industries. However, our high reliance upon them also
means that the failure of such systems has the potential to cause great harm to people and the environment.
For this reason, the development of such systems requires a rigorous assessment of system behaviour to
ensure that they possess a high level of dependability: the capability of avoiding failures that are more
frequent and more severe than it is acceptable.
One of the key goals in developing safety-critical systems is to identify potential risks posed by such
systems and then minimising the likelihood of these risks. To increase the dependability of systems, analysts
have to understand the behaviour of systems, i.e., how they work and how they may fail. The dependability
analysis process allows system analysts to complete the above tasks. Based on the results of the analysis,
decision makers can determine necessary preventive and/or maintenance actions to minimise the likelihood
of system failure. As systems become more complex, dependability analysis plays a vital role in the successful
design and development of the system; they also become increasingly dicult.
Over the years, several approaches have gained popularity including Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) (Vesely
et al., 2002), Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP) (Dunj o et al., 2010), Failure Modes Eect and
Criticality Analysis (FMECA) (US Department of Defense, 1980), and Bow-tie diagrams (de Dianous and
Fi evez, 2006) etc. These approaches often simplify the system safety and reliability analysis processes by
making assumptions about system behaviour. Such assumptions include: focusing only on the technical part