Figure 8: Pseudocode to convert DFT to GSPN (Kabir et al., 2018b)
theory. Fault trees are translated into Petri nets and minimal cut and path sets are generated from PN
models. On the other hand, fuzzy set theory has been used for representing failure and repair rates instead of
crisp values. Inclusion of fuzzy set in the analysis allowed to incorporate expert opinions, linguistic variables,
and uncertainty and imprecision in reliability data. Wu et al. (2011) proposed a method combining FTA
and fuzzy reasoning PN (FRPN) for reliability analysis of a solar array system. The root causes of the
failure of solar array were determined using FTA. The FT was then translated into FRPN, which was used
for fault propagation studies and reliability analysis. This method was extended in (Wu et al., 2012) and
applied for reliability optimisation of the solar array of a spacecraft. A PN-based FTA has been used to
probabilistic safety assessment of a power plant in (Lee and Lu, 2012).
Reliability block diagrams (RBDs) have also been translated to Petri nets for system reliability evaluation.
Distefano and Puliato (2009) have used dynamic RBDs (DRBDs) to capture time-dependant behaviour
of systems. DRBDs were translated into PN models for reliability evaluation. Similarly, Robidoux et al.
(2010) proposed a method to translate DRBD into colored Petri net for reliability evaluation. A reliability
markup language (RML) is dened to formally describe DRBDs. RML is an XML-based language to formally
describe the components, structure, and dynamic behaviour of a DRBD model. An algorithm was developed
for automatically converting DRBD models to colored Petri net models.
Other models were also translated into PNs for system safety and reliability analysis. For instance,
event trees were translated into PNs in (N yvlt and Rausand, 2012). Hei et al. (2011) and Wang and Lu
(2012) proposed methodologies to translate UML Statecharts into PNs for safety analysis. Dependability
artefacts such as fault trees, FMEAs are not only translated to PNs for safety and reliability analysis, they
are also used in association with PNs. For example, Dutuit et al. (2008) studied the safety integrity level
allocation problem for safety instrumented systems using both FTA and PNs, and compared the results.
Fault Tree Driven Markov Processes (FTDMP) (Cacheux et al., 2013) and GSPN have been used together
in (Talebberrouane et al., 2016) for availability analysis of safety critical systems and the results were
compared to show the advantages of GSPN over FTDMP. In (Yan et al., 2017), PNs have been used with
FTA and FMEA for mission modelling of automated guided vehicles. Habchi and Barthod (2016) proposed
a methodology combining RBD and PNs for reliability assessment of mechatronic systems.
19