and probabilistic features of system behaviour using CPN. Monte Carlo simulation was used for reliability
evaluation.
Ionescu et al. (2006) have used GSPN for the reliability modelling of medium voltage distribution systems
of nuclear power plants. GSPNs have also been used by Ghosh et al. (2017) for reliability modelling and
analysis of phasor measurement units (PMUs) in power systems. Codetta-Raiteri and Bobbio (2005) used
GSPN and FSPN for solving dynamic reliability problem. On the other hand, colored PN has been used by
N emeth et al. (2009) for primary-to-secondary leaking safety procedure verication of nuclear power plants.
In order to deal with imprecise, uncertain information in the reliability analysis of repairable systems, Garg
(2013) proposed a method combining PNs with intuitionistic fuzzy sets. PN is used for qualitative modelling
of behaviour of systems. For quantitative analysis, failure rates and repair times of system components are
represented by intuitionistic fuzzy numbers of triangular membership functions instead of crisp or classical
fuzzy numbers.
PN has been used by Singh and Rajput (2016) for modelling and safety analysis of computer based
safety critical systems. The same authors proposed another PN-based method in (Singh and Rajput, 2017)
for dependability analysis of real-time systems. In this approach, they considered dierent properties such
as non-liveness, deadlock, stability, etc., during dependability evaluation. A hierarchical approach was
proposed by Chung and Chang (2011) to create a PN model for the purication operation in the Metal
Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) process. The model was then simulated to identify the
eects of dierent component failure and external interferences. Hybrid Petri nets were used by Ghasemieh
et al. (2016) to model the behaviour of waste water treatment facility. The survivability of the system
was evaluated by using model checking on the PN model. Vasilyev et al. (2017) used hybrid Petri nets for
reliability modelling of polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell systems. Li et al. (2016c) proposed
a PN-based reliability modelling method when system reliability was evaluated considering the dependence
of failure mechanism. Wieland et al. (2009) proposed a PN based model to calculate reliability data of
polymer-electrolyte-membrane fuel cell stacks. The reliability data include the average lifetime of a single
stack or the reliability of stacks of a whole fuel cell vehicle 
eet within a given time. Zareiee et al. (2014)
developed PN-based controller for safety analysis of discrete event systems. This controller prevents the
system from entering any forbidden state by solving Integer Linear Programming problems. Singh et al.
(2017) used PNs for safety modelling of gantry crane operations. Gon calves et al. (2017) used PNs for
safety assessment of unmanned aerial vehicle. A Petri net-based fault modelling approach was proposed in
(Sunanda and Seetharamaiah, 2015) and the approach was validated by applying it to a prototype rail-road
crossing junction system.
One particular application of Petri nets in system safety and reliability analysis is in the fault detection
and diagnosis. Sun et al. (2004) used fuzzy Petri nets to create fault diagnosis models of electric power
systems (EPS). By combining Petri nets with fuzzy set theory, this approach allows the fault diagnosis of
EPS when incomplete and uncertain alarm information of protective relays and circuit breakers is detected.
Feasibility and eectiveness of this approach were illustrated through simulation. Fuzzy PNs have been
utilised to propose another approach in (Zhang et al., 2016) for fault diagnosis of power systems. This
approach can take into account the temporal behaviour of the systems. Liu et al. (2013) combined fuzzy
evidential reasoning (FER) and dynamic adaptive fuzzy Petri nets (DAFPNs) for fault diagnosis and cause
analysis. In the approach, FER was used to identify abnormal events and the DAFPNs was used to determine
the root causes and consequences of abnormal events. PNs have been used by Mansour et al. (2013) for
fault diagnosis of large power generation station. To improve the condence degree on the diagnostic result,
Cheng et al. (2015) proposed a method based on fuzzy PNs.
Case-based reasoning (CBR) (Aamodt and Plaza, 1994) has been integrated with PN by Yang et al.
(2004) to propose a method for fault diagnosis of induction motors. In this approach, CBS is used to
collect information from previous cases by taking into account knowledge and experience of experts, and
thus using this information to solve new problems that show similarity with previous cases. A modular and
hierarchical approach has been proposed in (Miyagi and Riascos, 2006) for fault detection and treatment in
manufacturing systems. A state-based approach has been proposed by Lefebvre (2012) using the properties
of the reachability graph of PNs for fault detection and diagnosis of systems under partial observation of
system states and events. Other applications of PNs for fault diagnosis include the fault diagnosis of normal
15