Figure 2: Example of a PN
2005). At the same time, it is problematic to model time-dependent behaviour using classical PNs. To
overcome the above mentioned limitations, conventional PNs have gone through dierent modications.
Stochastic Petri Net (SPN) (Molloy, 1982) is one such extension of PNs that allows transition delays to be
exponentially distributed. To allow both immediate and timed transitions in the same PN model, SPNs
have been extended to Generalized Stochastic Petri Nets (GSPN) (Marsan and Chiola, 1987; Marsan et al.,
1996). In GSPNs, timed transitions are usually represented graphically by white bars and re after a random
period of time. On the other hand, immediate transitions are graphically represented by black bars and
they re immediately after being enabled. Immediate transitions have priority over timed transitions, i.e.,
if an immediate and a timed transition are enabled at the same time, the immediate transition res rst.
Extended Stochastic Petri Nets (ESPNs) (Trivedi et al., 1984; Dugan et al., 1984) are another extension
to SPNs, which allow transition delays to be dened as any arbitrary distribution. That means that non-
exponentially distributed transitions are possible in ESPNs. On the other hand, Fluid Stochastic Petri Nets
(FSPN) (Gribaudo et al., 2001a,b) allow modelling system behaviour with two classes of places: discrete
places and 
uid places. Discrete places may hold a discrete number of tokens and 
uid places may hold a
continuous quantity represented by a non-negative real number. The capability of PNs for system modelling
has been enhanced in dierent other ways. One such enhancement is the inclusion of inhibitor arcs (Peterson,
1981) in the PN model. An inhibitor arc is represented as an arc that ends with a small circle instead of
arrowhead. Inhibitor arcs can have a weight like normal arcs (Kleijn and Koutny, 2004) and they change
the ring rule of transitions. If a place pis connected to a transition tthrough an inhibitor arc with weight
w, then the transition twill be enabled only if pcontains at most w-1tokens. Moreover, when a transition
res, no token is consumed through an inhibitor arc, i.e., tokens in the inhibiting place remain zero. Using
the property of the inhibitor arc, it is possible to verify non-occurrence of an event. There are dierent other
variants of Petri nets available such as coloured Petri nets (CPNs) (Peterson, 1980; Jensen, 1981, 2013),
Stochastic Well-formed nets (SWN) (Chiola et al., 1991, 1993), and predicate/transition nets (Genrich and
Lautenbach, 1981). A detailed description of dierent types of PNs is out of scope of this paper. However,
interested readers can nd more information about Petri nets in (Reisig, 2012; Zurawski and Zhou, 1994;
Peterson, 1977; Murata, 1989).
3. Bayesian Networks in Safety, Reliability and Risk Assessments
3.1. Applications in Safety and Reliability Analysis
Bayesian networks have been used in system safety and reliability analysis in two dierent ways. Firstly,
they are used as standalone approaches. In such cases, system behaviour is directly modelled into a BN and
all the relevant analyses are performed on the BN model. In the second scenario, BNs are used in association
with other dependability analysis artefacts. In this case, generally dependability analysis artefacts such as
fault trees are obtained rst. After that, these artefacts are converted to BN models and all analyses are
performed on these models.
3.1.1. Applications as standalone approaches
Early applications of BNs could be found in (Neil et al., 1996). A short review of applications of
dynamic BNs for dynamic reliability assessment was presented in (Zahra et al., 2013). When BNs are used
5