2006a; Mi et al., 2012). In (Kim, 2011), the author extended an RBD with general gates (RBDGG) using
the concept of reliability graph with general gates (RGGG) (Kim and Seong, 2002). In order to quantify
system reliability, RBDGG was transformed into BNs. While the previous approaches considered binary
states of system components, the approach proposed in (Zhou et al., 2006a) considered multi-state systems.
In addition to multi-state systems, common cause failure (CCF) is also considered in (Mi et al., 2012).
The most extensive application of BNs in system safety and reliability evaluation as model-to-model
transformation approaches is by translating fault trees (FTs) into BNs. The pioneering work on system
reliability analysis by translating FTs into BNs was performed by Bobbio et al. (2001). The process of
mapping a FT into a BN is shown in Fig. 4. As seen in the gure, the mapping of a FT into a BN model
is a one-to-one mapping process. The basic events of the FT are mapped to the root nodes of BN, the
intermediate events (e.g., logic gates) are mapped into the internal nodes and the top event of the FT is
mapped to a leaf node. The prior probabilities of the root nodes of the BN are calculated using the failure
probabilities of the basic events they represent. On the other hand, the conditional probabilities of the
internal nodes are populated based on the functional denitions of the logic gates they represent. As the
outcome of the logic gates are deterministic, i.e. true or false, the entries in the conditional probability
tables (CPTs) are either 0 or 1.
Figure 4: FT to BN conversion process
Once a BN is formed from of a FT model, predictive analysis is performed by following the arcs of the
network. The result of predictive analysis usually consists of system reliability related information. On the
other hand, diagnostic analysis can be performed by providing evidence about the system failure on the BN
model. Based on this evidence the posterior probability of the root nodes of the BN can be calculated and
updated. Evidence-based analysis is also used to determine the importance of the basic events in terms of
their contributions to the occurrence of the system failure. In many areas, FTs have been translated to
BNs for safety and reliability analysis of systems. For example, in (Martins and Maturana, 2013) FTA has
been integrated with BNs for human reliability analysis in oil tanker operations. Some other applications
include the reliability evaluation of steel construction projects (Leu and Chang, 2013), train control systems
(Flammini et al., 2006; Su and Che, 2013), and power systems (Limin et al., 2002).
In most of the approaches mentioned earlier in this section, the prior probabilities of the component
failures are considered as precise values. However, for large and complex systems, in many cases it is
dicult to obtain a precise failure probability. The issue of epistemic uncertainty in failure data has been
explicitly addressed using BNs. For instance, in (Simon et al., 2007, 2008), the authors combined evidence
theory with BNs to address the issues of both random and epistemic uncertainties. The authors showed how
the basic concepts of the Dempster Shafer theory (Shafer, 1976) can be implemented in BN tools for the
treatment of epistemic uncertainty. Moreover, they also showed how diagnostic analysis can be performed
to identify components that contribute more to the uncertainty.
In addition to classical fault trees, dynamic fault trees (DFTs) have also been probabilistically evaluated
by translating them into Bayesian networks. Boudali and Dugan (2005a) proposed a method for reliability
evaluation of dynamic systems by translating DFTs into discrete-time Bayesian networks (DTBNs). This
approach can model complex behaviours of components and their interactions. It also alleviates the state
space explosion problem met in the evaluation of DFTs using Markov chains. The qualitative translation
9