and wind turbine generators (Kachur and Shakhova, 2016; Han, 2015).
Basile et al. (2009) proposed a diagnoser for discrete event system (DES), where the online computation
of the set of possible fault events explaining the last observed event is done by dening and solving integer
linear programming problems. When the system model evolves the diagnoser has to be redesigned and
redened. However, to avoid this, Dotoli et al. (2008, 2009) proposed an on-line diagnoser based on Petri
nets. Cabasino et al. (2009, 2010) also proposed a method for online diagnosis of DES using Petri nets. In
this method, faults in the system are modelled as unobservable transitions, and nominal behaviours may
also be modelled as unobservable transitions. Renganathan and Bhaskar (2010) also proposed a PN-based
method for online fault diagnosis. They have also proposed a method in (Renganathan and Bhaskar, 2013)
using hybrid PNs for fault diagnosis and fault tolerant control in bottling plants.
State space explosion is a common problem faced by the PN-based approaches due to the generation of
all possible system states. Giua and Seatzu (2005) proposed a method to avoid the exhaustive enumeration
of the DES states by introducing the concept of basis markings and justications . Jiroveanu et al. (2008)
proposed a similar approach. This approach made improvement over (Giua and Seatzu, 2005) in the sense
that it can be applied to large systems. For fault detection and diagnosis of large scale systems, Jiroveanu
and Boel (2006) proposed a model-based approach using timed PNs. Small PN models are created for local
components and these models are composed together to obtain the PN model of the whole system. Due to
the modularity of the approach, the re-usability of the existing models has increased signicantly. This has
also improved the scalability and computational complexity of the approach, which allows possible online
applications.
4.1.2. Applications as model-to-model transformation approaches
An overview of the approaches where dierent models are translated into PNs for safety and reliability
analysis are shown in Table 3. Early application of PNs as model-to-model transformation approaches for
system safety and reliability analysis can be found in (Hura and Atwood, 1988) where Hura and Atwood
showed the concept of utilisation of PNs for fault tree analysis. They provided an algorithm for mapping
classical fault trees into PNs and showed how the PN model can be used for fault detection, fault propagation
and reliability analysis. Later on, dierent complementary contributions had been made showing how PNs
can be used to quantify fault trees. For example, Malhotra and Trivedi (1995) developed a methodology for
dependability modelling using GSPN and stochastic reward nets (SRN). In their method, algorithms were
proposed to convert FTs into equivalent GSPN and SRN by considering repairability of systems. At the
same time, Liu and Chiou (1997) have presented a novel method for failure analysis using Petri nets. In
addition to showing how fault trees can be converted to PN models, this method also showed how to obtain
minimal cut sets and path sets from a PN model. To take into account the repair activities in fault tree
analysis, Bobbio et al. (2003a) proposed to convert FTs into stochastic Petri nets. A list of many other
similar approaches is shown in Table 3.
In addition to the classical fault trees, dynamic fault trees have also been translated to PNs for safety and
reliability analysis. For instance, Codetta-Raiteri (2005) and Zhang et al. (2009) proposed methodologies
to translate DFTs into GSPNs for reliability analysis of dynamic systems. On the other hand, Kabir et al.
(2018a, 2015b) showed how temporal fault trees can be translated into GSPNs. Fig. 6 shows the graphical
symbols of the commonly used DFT gates and a detailed information about the denitions and functional
behaviour of these gates can be found in (Dugan et al., 1992; Kabir et al., 2016). The AND and OR gates
are two Boolean gates. The output of an AND gate will become true when all its inputs become true,
whereas the OR gate will become true when at least one of its input becomes true. The PAND gate can
model sequencing of events and the outcome of this gate will become true if and only if all its input becomes
true in left-to-right sequential order. The FDEP gate helps to model a scenario when the operations of some
system components are dependent on the operation of another component of the system. In the FDEP gate
there is only one trigger event, but there could be multiple functionally dependent events. The occurrence
of the trigger event would force the dependent events to occur; by contrast, the occurrence of a dependent
event would aect neither the trigger event nor the other dependent events. In a SPARE gate, the left most
input is the primary input and other inputs act as secondary inputs. This gate designs a scenario where the
spare components are activated in a sequence, i.e., if there are two spare components, then the rst spare
16