BNs can provide a robust probabilistic method of reasoning under uncertainty and they are capable of
combining dierent sources of information to provide a global assessment. In a BN model, both forward
(predictive) and backward (diagnostic) analyses can be performed. The forward analysis of the model is
done by following the directions of the network's arcs from the root nodes towards the leaf nodes. In this
analysis, the information about the causes are used to obtain the new belief about the eects. On the other
hand, the backward analysis of the BN model is performed by following the direction of the arcs in the
opposite direction, i.e., reasoning from eects back to their causes. In this case, evidence is provided on the
nodes representing unknown variables and based on this evidence new beliefs about the known variables
are obtained and updated. The diagnostic analysis of BN model is performed using the Bayes' theorem.
According to Bayes' theorem, if Aand Bare two random events and it is known that Bhas occurred, then
the posterior probability of the event Aoccurring given that Bhas occurred can be determined as:
Pr(AjB) =Pr(BjA)Pr(A)
Pr(B)(2)
where Pr(A) and Pr(B) are the prior probability of event AandBrespectively.
Classical BNs are particularly suitable for modelling systems in the static domain where the temporal
behaviour of systems is not taken into account. However, classical BNs have been extended to model
systems in dynamic domain as well. Application of BNs in dynamic domain has led to the formalisms
like Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBNs) (Nicholson, 1992; Murphy, 2002), Temporal Bayesian Networks
(TBN)(Kanazawa, 1992), Dynamic Object Oriented Bayesian Networks (DOOBNs) (Weber and Joue,
2006), etc. Usually, a node in a BN represents either a discrete or a continuous variable. However, a hybrid
BN (HBN) (Marquez et al., 2010) is a type of BN which can incorporate both discrete and continuous
variables in a single BN model.
2.2. Petri Nets
Petri Nets (PNs) are a formal graphical and mathematical modelling tool which is appropriate for
specifying and analysing the behaviour of complex, distributed and concurrent systems. A classical PN is a
bipartite directed graph generally represented as six-tuple N= (P; T; A; K; W; M 0), where:
P=fp1; p2; p3; ;; pngis a nite set of places: a place is graphically represented by a circle.
T=ft1; t2; t3; ;; tmgis a nite set of transitions: a transition is represented by a rectangular bar.
A(PT)[(TP) is a nite set of arcs from places to transitions ortransitions to places .
K=f1;2;3;g is the capacity function of a place p, which denes number of resources a place can
hold. Resources are represented as tokens (shown as dots).
W:A!f1;2;3;g is the weight of an arc, which represents the number of tokens consumed from
a place through an arc or number of tokens deposited to a place through an arc.
M0:P!f1;2;3;g is the initial marking of a PN model representing the number of tokens in each
place of the model.
In a PN model, input places are known as the pre-conditions of a transition, which represent the condi-
tions that need to be satised for the transition to be enabled and are connected to the transition through
input arcs. Transition enabling conditions are dened as a pre-specied number of tokens in all the input
places of the transition. On the other hand, output places are known as post-conditions of a transition,
which represent the outcome of the transition and are connected to the transition through output arcs. On
ring of a transition, a pre-specied number of tokens are consumed from the input places of that transition
and a pre-specied number of tokens are deposited to the output places of the transition.
Although, classical PNs are easy to analyse, it requires many places and transitions to model the be-
haviour of moderately complex systems, which may give rise to a state explosion problem (Desrochers et al.,
4