process of DFTs to DTBNs is the same as the translation process of FTs to BNs, as seen in Fig. 4. The
only dierence is that, in addition to Boolean gates, dynamic gates are also translated into BNs. However,
the quantitative part of the translation process, i.e., the generation of prior probabilities and conditional
probabilities, are dierent from the static approach. Now, these probability values are generated by taking
into account that a component can fail in dierent points in time and also by considering the dynamic
behaviour of the logic gates. It is important to note that as this approach considers the discrete model
of time, the granularity of temporal discretisation has to be decided prior to modelling. The accuracy
and computational performance of this approach is dependant on the number of time intervals used for
time discretisation. To overcome the issues with time discretisation, Boudali and Dugan (2006) proposed
a method based on continuous time BNs. This approach is dierent from the DTBN-based approach in
the sense that the variables in the BN are now continuous. More importantly, the probabilities (both prior
and conditional) are expressed as probability density functions and the joint probability distribution is
expressed as a joint probability density function instead of multi-dimensional tabular form. For this reason,
this approach saves on memory, by not storing any probability tables, and can provide an exact closed form
solution to the system reliability evaluation. Marquez et al. (2008, 2010) developed a BN-based approach
where both discrete and continuous nodes are used in the same model and which allows the use of any
parametric and empirical distributions for the time-to-failure of system components.
At the same time, Montani et al. (2005) proposed a concept of translating DFTs to dynamic Bayesian
networks (DBNs) for dependability analysis of systems. They performed further research to propose the
concept of a tool for automatic translation of DFTs to DBNs in (Montani et al., 2006b,a). Finally, they
presented a complete tool named RADYBAN in (Montani et al., 2008) for automatic conversion of DFTs
to a 2-time-slice BNs (2TBNs)(Weber and Joue, 2003). 2TBN is an instant-based approach, whereas the
methodology proposed by Boudali and Dugan (2005a) was interval-based. The instant-based approach has
been criticised for being too general or creating unnecessarily complex networks by repeating the same struc-
ture for each time instance. However, the 2TBN approach seems to overcome this limitation by modelling
any time horizon using only two time slices. Portinale et al. (2010) further developed this work by intro-
ducing a repair box gate to enable the modelling of repairable systems. In (Codetta-Raiteri and Portinale,
2015), dynamic Bayesian networks were used for fault detection, identication, and recovery in autonomous
spacecraft. Most recent contributions of BNs applications in safety and reliability by converting DFTs into
BNs can be found in (Codetta-Raiteri, 2015; Codetta-Raiteri and Portinale, 2017). In (Codetta-Raiteri and
Portinale, 2017), DFTs were evaluated by translating them into a Generalised Continuous Time Bayesian
Network (GCTBN) (Codetta-Raiteri and Portinale, 2010), an extension of the CTBN dened by Nodel-
man et al. (2002). Unlike other variants of BNs, GCTBN can consider repairability of components during
analysis. The GCTBNs were solved by converting them to GSPN models. For this reason, if the GCTBN
contains many multi-state nodes, the GSPN-based analysis will suer from state space explosion due to the
consideration of large number of states.
RBDs and FTs are not the only artefacts that are transformed into BNs for system safety and reliability
analysis. Dierent other artefacts such as bow-tie diagrams were translated to BNs in (Khakzad et al.,
2013a; Abimbola et al., 2015) and FMEA was translated to BNs in (Chengshan and Yinghua, 2004). In
addition to model-to-model transformation approaches, BNs have also been used in association with other
dependability artefacts, where other models are not directly transformed into BNs. Instead, BN models are
used in parallel with other models to improve the results. For instance, in Yang et al. (2008) have used
BNs with FMEA and fuzzy set theory for risk prioritisation in FMEA. Weber et al. (2004) used a dynamic
BN as an equivalent model to the Markov chain for reliability assessment of complex systems. On the
other hand, Foulliaron et al. (2015) modelled semi-Markovian processes using a special type of DBN called
Graphical duration model (GDM) (Donat et al., 2010) for reliability analysis of dynamic systems. In (Singh
et al., 2001), BN has been used with UML diagrams for reliability evaluation of component based software
systems. In this approach, system reliability is estimated using three models as: state-based models, path-
based models and additive models. In state-based models, predened system architectures or architectures
generated at run time are represented using control graphs (Gokhale et al., 1998). All possible execution
paths that the system can follow during runtime are considered in the path-based models. Component
failure data are used in the additive models (Xie and Wohlin, 1995) by considering the growth model.
10