of the PN approaches. For example, modularisation (Gulati and Dugan, 1997; Anand and Somani, 1998;
Manian et al., 1998; Huang and Chang, 2007; Chiacchio et al., 2013; Yevkin, 2011) has been used successfully
to improve performance of the techniques, an area where further work is possible. In addition to that, when
the state space of PN is too wide for the analysis, simulation can be exploited instead of analysis.
When BNs and PNs are used as part of model-to-model transformation approaches, coherent models can
be created as these models are transformed from other artefacts such as fault trees. However, the correctness
of the BN or PN models and subsequent analyses depends on the correctness of the input models. Moreover,
for PN-based approaches, it can be dicult to translate large models into PNs and the translated models can
be very dicult to understand due to very complex graphical view. Again, while running analysis on such
a big model the users can face the state space explosion problem. On the other hand, BN-based approaches
provide more 
exibility and create more understandable models. Moreover, BN-based approaches can avoid
the state space explosion problem by avoiding the state space generation by exploiting the local dependencies
between variables while modelling complex behaviour. Another advantage of BN, with respect to PN, is the
possibility to learn the model, in terms of graphs and probabilities, by applying machine learning techniques
on available training data (Neapolitan, 2004). However, BN models are more complex than PN in terms of
parameter setting: in the PN, we only have to set ring rates of timed transitions, and they are equivalent
to the failure rates of the basic events; in the BN instead, we have to set the CPT entries of each variable,
considering all the possible value combinations of the variable with its parent variables. If the entries in a
CPT are deterministic (e.g. CPT of a logic gate), then these values can be generated automatically.
In order to have a general comparison between PN and BN based approaches when used as model-to-
model transformation approaches, consider the simple dynamic fault tree (DFT) shown in Fig. 9. The BN
model and the GSPN model of this DFT is shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively. As can be seen, from
a graphical point of view, the PN model of the DFT is relatively more complex than the BN model of the
DFT. More specically, while the BN model has 23 nodes, the PN model has 40 nodes. The BN model
has 23 arcs; and the PN model has 78 arcs and 34 transitions. In terms of parameter setting, in the PN
model, we need to set the ring rates of 13 timed transitions. The BN model of Fig. 10 was created based
on the method shown in (Kabir et al., 2018a) and it is a discrete time model. To facilitate the denition
of the temporal behaviour of the logic gates in the CPTs, the time was discretised by dividing it into 5
dierent intervals. As the node G1 represents the top event of the TFT, time is not discretised for this
node. For this particular setting, we need to set 17574 values in the probability tables. Out of these values,
17496 values are deterministic, i.e., either 0 or 1, hence set automatically. 78 probabilistic values for 13
root nodes corresponding to 13 basic events of the DFT were set manually. A transient analysis performed
on this GSPN model for 5000 hours mission time generates 174345 states. DFTs of larger systems can be
much larger and more complex, which will lead to graphically complex and computationally demanding PN
models. In terms of results, the BN-based and the PN-based methods estimated the top event probability
of the DFT as 0.0293 and 0.0290, respectively. This shows that the results given by the two models are
coherent.
In terms of modelling of time, PN-based methods use continuous model of time, whereas BNs-based
approaches use both discrete and continuous models of time. When the discrete model of time is used, the
granularity of time discretisation must be decided as part of the transformation process. The size of the step
(), in other words, the number of discrete intervals used, represents a trade-o between the computing
time and the precision of the results. When an approximate result suces, using a relatively large step
size it is possible to obtain results in short time. On the hand, the selection of a smaller discretisation
step can make the model of time nearly continuous. As a result, computing time increases, but in return
accuracy of the results improve. To eliminate the need for time discretisation, continuous-time BNs use
the continuous model of time. Most recently, a generalised continuous-time BN-based approach (Codetta-
Raiteri and Portinale, 2017) combined strong features of both BNs and PNs to provide added advantages.
For instance, both system repairability and multi-state system are considered in this approach. However,
due to the consideration of multiple states for system components and PN-based analysis, this approach may
suer from state space explosion. Further research in this area is thus also required. One potential option is
to use approximate algorithms instead of exact algorithms to analyse BNs. For instance, for dynamic BN,
the approximate Boyen-Koller algorithm (Boyen and Koller, 1998) can be used instead of the exact Junction
22