4.2. Applications in Risk Assessments
Like Bayesian networks, Petri nets have also been used for risk assessment in dierent industries. In 2003,
Vernez et al. (2003) discussed the uses and application perspectives of PNs in the risk analysis and accident
modelling areas. A timed Petri net based approach has been proposed by Tuncel and Alpan (2010) for risk
assessment and real-time control of supply chain (SC) networks. Failure mode eects and criticality analysis
(FMECA) is used to identify the disruption factors in the SC. The dynamic and stochastic behaviour of the
SC is modelled using timed PNs and the risk is evaluated through simulating the model. A special version
of PN called attack net has been used by McDermott (2001) for penetration testing to assess the security
risk of information systems. This approach allows to view graphically how a collection of 
aws can combine
together to cause system penetration.
A hierarchical approach was developed by Balasubramanian et al. (2002) to construct PN models for risk
analysis of liquid ammonia loading operations in process industries. A set of sub-PN models were created for
all the components of the system and the failure behaviour of components was incorporated into these models.
The sub-PN models of components were combined together and simulated to obtain the failure propagation
behaviour of the system. Getting motivated by the approaches proposed in (McDermott, 2001; Zhou et al.,
2003; Dahl, 2005), Henry et al. (2009) proposed a method for assessing the risk of computer network
operations against Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. This work extended the
earlier work of Balasubramanian et al. (2002) and the process model presented in (Balasubramanian et al.,
2002) was extended to construct a corresponding SCADA model by including remote manual and automated
control in the model of the process components. Later, this approach was more formalised by the same
authors in (Henry et al., 2010).
Helmer et al. (2007) proposed a distributed, agent-based method by combining software fault trees (SFT)
with colored Petri nets for systematic specication, design, and implementation of an intrusion detection
system (IDS) for security risk assessment of computer systems. SFTs are used for dening intrusions
and developing a requirement model of the IDS. The SFT models are then used to create CPN models for
intruder detection. Aloini et al. (2012) have showed how colored Petri nets can be used for risk assessment of
enterprise resource planning by taking into account dependencies (e.g. causal relationships) among dierent
risk factors. SPNs have been used in (Ghazel, 2009) for dynamic behaviour modelling of level crossings
considering both road and railway trac. An SPN model showing global system behaviour was simulated
to evaluate collision risk at level crossings.
UML design and Timed Petri net have been used by Bernardi et al. (2011) for timing-failure risk as-
sessment of real-time software systems. UML-based software specication was augmented with MARTE
(OMG, 2009) prole annotations to model the non-functional system properties. The UML-based design
is then transformed into a timed PN model for timing-failure risk assessment. Zafra-Cabeza et al. (2004)
proposed an algorithm for the optimal scheduling of projects with respect to time and cost, where a timed
PN was used to represent the project tasks and the project risk assessment plan. Lee et al. (2013) proposed
a PN based method by integrating risk identication, analysis and mitigation actions for qualitative risk
assessment of distributed manufacturing system. In this approach, Monte Carlo simulation was used for
quantitative risk assessment.
A colored PN-based risk assessment method was proposed by Ammar et al. (1997) for risk assessment
of functional specication of real-time software systems. This approach was later extended by the same
authors in (Ammar et al., 2001). A colored PN-based method called MORM (man-machine occupational
risk modelling) has been developed by Vernez et al. (2004) for occupational health and safety risk assessment
in industrial processes. This approach overcomes many of the limitations of the classical risk assessment
approaches such as FMEA and HAZOP, by taking into account multiple factors such as man-machine
functional interactions, 
ow deviations, and physical failures of machines into a single analysis. Fanti et al.
(2015) used modular colored PNs in their model-based decision support system (DSS) for evaluating risk
associated with transport of hazardous materials. The DSS contains three components: the data component
(DC), the model component (MC) and the user Interface Component (UIC) can address two problems.
Firstly, it can evaluate the risk induced on the population by vehicles transporting hazardous materials
through highways. Secondly, it can help to select optimal restoration procedures in critical situations such
20