example of road constructions. Recently, Brito and Griths (2016) proposed a Bayesian approach to predict
the risk of losing Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) during a mission in hazardous environments due
to the deviations of operating conditions from its agreed nominal conditions. BNs have been used by Kabir
Kabir et al. (2015a) to develop a model for evaluating risk of water main failure by considering dierent
contributing factors such as hydraulic capacity, structural integrity, and water quality etc.
Similar to addressing human factors in system safety and reliability analysis applications, BNs have been
used for human factor analysis in risk assessment. Trucco et al. (2008) proposed a method for integrating
Human and Organisational Factors (HOF) into a risk analysis by combining fault tree analysis and Bayesian
networks. In this approach, rstly, fault trees are used to represent the hazardous situations that may occur
due to the failure of the systems. Afterwards, BN is used to modify the probability of the basic events of
the fault tree by taking into account the eect of the human and organisational factors.
4. Petri Nets in Safety, Reliability and Risk Assessments
4.1. Applications in Safety and Reliability Analysis
Similar to BNs, PNs have also been used both as standalone approaches and as a part of model-to-model
transformation approaches for system safety and reliability analysis. When used as standalone approaches,
system behaviour is directly modelled using Petri nets and the model is then analysed to evaluate system
safety and reliability. On the other hand, when used as part of model-to-model transformation approaches,
system failure behaviour is captured rst using a dependability analysis model as a fault tree. This model
is then transformed into a PN model and the model is analysed to determine system safety and reliability.
4.1.1. Applications as standalone approaches
Petri nets have been used for the safety analysis of real-time safety critical software systems by Leveson
and Stolzy (1987). In their approach, the nominal behaviour of systems is modelled using Timed Petri
nets and the model is then extended by introducing failures and faults. This extended model is analysed for
safety and criticality analysis of systems. It is important to note that only the severity of the hazards is used
for safety analysis so the analysis remains qualitative. Dutuit et al. (1997) presented a PN-based approach
which included qualitative analysis, i.e. determination of potential sequences of events that lead to system
failure as well as reliability analysis with application to distributed processing systems and communication
networks in (Kumar and Aggarwal, 1993; Muppala and Lin, 1996) and (Balakrishnan and Trivedi, 1996),
respectively.
A tutorial has been provided in (Schneeweiss, 2001) showing how PNs can be used to model dierent
reliability scenarios. Fig. 5 shows the typical steps that are required to create and analyse a PN model
for safety and reliability analysis. Volovoi (2004) proposed a 
exible and graphical modelling framework
for reliability analysis of non-exponentially distributed data. The approach was demonstrated with several
examples, including load sharing, shared pool of identical imperfectly repaired components, phased mission
systems, and damage tolerant components.
Mura and Bondavalli (2001) used Markov Regenerative Stochastic Petri Nets to propose an analyti-
cal technique with low computational complexity for dynamic behaviour modelling and analysis of phased
mission systems. Recently, Wu and Wu (2015) proposed an extended object-oriented Petri net (EOOPN)
model for mission reliability analysis of the repairable phased mission system with common cause failures.
Adamyan and He (2002a) used PNs to model sequence-dependant failure behaviour of manufacturing sys-
tems. Using the PN model, the potential sequences of events that can cause the system failure were identied
and based on these information, safety and reliability are evaluated. Failure rates of system components are
assumed to be exponentially distributed. To overcome this limitation the same authors proposed a method
in (Adamyan and He, 2003) and (Adamyan and He, 2004), which allows the use of inhibitor arcs and loops
in PN model. They also use fewer variables than in earlier work to reduce computational complexity. Sadou
and Demmou (2009) proposed a PN based approach for temporal behaviour analysis of dynamic systems.
Using PN, they derive the causes of reaching a feared (unexpected) scenario. Reliability is evaluated by
identifying a set of minimal sequence of scenarios that can cause the system to go to the feared state. A
13