(a) PyTorch3D rendering pipeline
 (b) Problems with differentiability in rendering
Figure 2: (a) The modular rendering pipeline in PyTorch3D and (b) The z- &xy-discontinuities in
traditional rasterization and the soft formulations [31] which enable differentiability.
K Nearest Neighbors forD-dimensional points are used in Chamfer loss, normal estimation, and
other point cloud operations. We implement exact KNN with custom CUDA kernels that natively
handle heterogeneous batches. Our implementation is tuned for D4andK32, and uses
template metaprogramming to individually optimize each (D;K )pair. We compare against Faiss [ 23],
a fast GPU library for KNN that targets a different portion of the design space: it does not handle
batching, is optimized for high-dimensional descriptors ( D128), and scales to billions of points.
Figures 1c and 1d show that we outperform Faiss by up to 5for batched 3D problems.
3.2 Differentiable mesh renderer
Arenderer inputs scene information (camera, geometry, materials, lights, textures) and outputs an
image. A differentiable renderer can also propagate gradients backward from rendered images to
scene information [34], allowing rendering to be embedded into deep learning pipelines [25, 31].
PyTorch3D includes a differentiable renderer that operates on heterogeneous batches of triangle
meshes. Our renderer follows three core design principles: differentiability , meaning that it computes
gradients with respect to all inputs; efﬁciency , meaning that it runs quickly and scales to large meshes
and images; and modularity , meaning that users can easily replace components of the renderer to
customize its functionality to their use case and experiment with alternate formulations.
As shown in Figure 2a, our renderer has two main components: the rasterizer selects the faces affect-
ing each pixel, and the shader computes pixel colors. Through careful design of these components,
we improve efﬁciency and modularity compared to prior differentiable renderers [25, 31, 7].
Rasterizer. The rasterizer ﬁrst uses a camera to transform meshes from world to view coordinates.
Cameras are Python objects and compute gradients via autograd; this aids modularity, as users can
easily implement new camera models other than our provided orthographic and perspective cameras.
Next, the core rasterization algorithm ﬁnds triangles that intersect each pixel. In traditional rasteriza-
tion, each pixel is inﬂuenced only by its nearest face along the z-axis. As shown in Figure 2b, this
can cause step changes in pixel color as faces move along the z-axis (due to occlusion) and in the
xy-plane (due to face boundaries). Following [ 31] we soften these nondifferentiabilities by blending
the inﬂuence of multiple faces for each pixel, and decaying a face’s inﬂuence toward its boundary.
Our rasterizer departs from [ 31] in three ways to improve efﬁciency and modularity. First, in [ 31],
pixels are inﬂuenced by every face they intersect in the xy-plane; in contrast we constrain pixels to
be inﬂuenced by only the nearest Kfaces along the z-axis, computed using per-pixel priority queues.
Similar to traditional z-buffering, this lets us quickly discard many faces for each pixel, improving
efﬁciency. We show in Section 4 that this modiﬁcation does not harm downstream task performance.
Second, [ 31] naïvely compares each pixel with each face. We improve efﬁciency using a two-pass
approach similar to [ 28], ﬁrst working on image tiles to eliminate faces before moving to pixels.
Third, [31] fuses rasterization and shading into a monolithic CUDA kernel. We decouple these, and
as shown in Figure 2a our rasterizer returns Fragment data about theKnearest faces to each pixel:
face ID, barycentric coordinates of the pixel in the face, and (signed) pixel-to-face distances along
4