Accelerating 3D Deep Learning with PyTorch3D
Nikhila Ravi Jeremy Reizenstein David Novotny Taylor Gordon
Wan-Yen Lo Justin JohnsonGeorgia Gkioxari
Facebook AI Research
Abstract
Deep learning has signiﬁcantly improved 2D image recognition. Extending into
3D may advance many new applications including autonomous vehicles, virtual
and augmented reality, authoring 3D content, and even improving 2D recognition.
However despite growing interest, 3D deep learning remains relatively underex-
plored. We believe that some of this disparity is due to the engineering challenges
involved in 3D deep learning, such as efﬁciently processing heterogeneous data and
reframing graphics operations to be differentiable. We address these challenges by
introducing PyTorch3D, a library of modular, efﬁcient, and differentiable operators
for 3D deep learning. It includes a fast, modular differentiable renderer for meshes
and point clouds, enabling analysis-by-synthesis approaches. Compared with other
differentiable renderers, PyTorch3D is more modular and efﬁcient, allowing users
to more easily extend it while also gracefully scaling to large meshes and images.
We compare the PyTorch3D operators and renderer with other implementations and
demonstrate signiﬁcant speed and memory improvements. We also use PyTorch3D
to improve the state-of-the-art for unsupervised 3D mesh and point cloud prediction
from 2D images on ShapeNet. PyTorch3D is open-source and we hope it will help
accelerate research in 3D deep learning.
1 Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning has signiﬁcantly advanced the ability of AI systems to process
2D image data. We can now build high-performing systems for tasks such as object [ 49,27,52,19]
and scene [ 64,65] classiﬁcation, object detection [ 48], semantic [ 32] and instance [ 20] segmentation,
and human pose estimation [ 2]. These systems can operate on complex image data and have been
deployed in countless real-world settings. Though sucessful, these methods suffer from a common
shortcoming: they process 2D snapshots and ignore the true 3D nature of the world.
Extending deep learning into 3D can unlock many new applications. Recognizing objects in 3D point
clouds [ 46,47] can enhance the sensing abilities of autonomous vehicles, or enable new augmented
reality experiences. Predicting depth [ 10,9], or 3D shape [ 8,11,59,41] can lift 2D images into 3D.
Generative models [ 61,62,39] might one day aid artists in authoring 3D content. Image-based tasks
like view synthesis can be improved with 3D representations given only 2D supervision [ 53,60,38].
Despite growing interest, 3D deep learning remains relatively underexplored.
We believe that some of this disparity is due to the signiﬁcant engineering challenges involved in
3D deep learning. One such challenge is heterogeneous data . 2D images are almost universally
represented by regular pixel grids. In contrast, 3D data are stored in a variety of structured formats
including voxel grids [ 8,55], point clouds [ 46,11], and meshes [ 59,14] which can exhibit per-
element heterogeneity. For example, meshes may differ in their number of vertices and faces, and
their topology. Such heterogeneity makes it difﬁcult to efﬁciently implement batched operations on 3D
data using the tensor-centric primitives provided by standard deep learning toolkits like PyTorch [ 43]
equal contribution
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2007.08501v1  [cs.CV]  16 Jul 2020