Input Sphere FC Sphere GCNHigh Res
Sphere GCNV oxel GCN
(a) Silhouette Mesh RenderingInput Sphere GCN V oxel GCN
Flat
Phong
Gouraud
(b) Textured Mesh Rendering
Figure 5: Mesh predictions via (a) silhouette and (b) textured rendering on ShapeNet test. For (a),
we show the input image, the prediction and an additional view for each model. For (b), we show the
input image, the predicted shapes and the predicted textures for each shader and model - the predicted
shapes across shaders are very similar, so we show one per model.
4 Experiments
Extending supervised learning into 3D is challenging due to the difﬁculty of obtaining 3D annotations.
Extracting 3D via weakly or unsupervised approaches can unlock exciting applications, such as
novel view synthesis, 3D content creation for AR/VR and more. Differentiable rendering makes
3D inference via 2D supervision possible. In this section, we experiment with unsupervised 3D
shape prediction using PyTorch3D. At test time, models predict an object’s 3D shape (point cloud or
mesh) from a single RGB image. During training they receive no 3D supervision, instead relying
on re-projection losses via differentiable rendering. We compare to SoftRas [ 31] and demonstrate
superior shape prediction and speed. The efﬁciency of our renderer allows us to scale to larger images
and more complex meshes, setting a new state-of-the-art for unsupervised 3D shape prediction.
Dataset. We experiment on ShapeNetCoreV1 [ 6], using the rendered images and train/test splits from
[8]. Images are 137137, and portray instances from 13 object categories from various viewpoints.
There are roughly 840K train and 210K test images; we reserve 5%of train images for validation.
Metrics. We follow [ 59,14] for evaluating 3D meshes. We sample 10k points uniformly at random
from the surface of predicted and ground-truth meshes. These are compared using Chamfer distance,
normal consistency, and F
1score for various distance thresholds . Refer to [ 14] for more details.
To fairly extend evaluation to point cloud models, we predict 10k points per cloud.
4.1 Mesh prediction with differentiable rendering
In this task, we predict 3D object meshes from 2D image inputs with 2D silhouette supervision.
Following [ 31], we use a 2-view training setup: for each object image on the minibatch we include
its corresponding view under a random known transformation. At test time, all models take as input
a single image and directly predict the 3D object mesh in camera coordinates . Inspired by recent
advances in supervised shape prediction [59, 14], we explore the following model designs:
Sphere FC. Closely following [31], this model learns to deform an initial sphere template with 642
vertices and 1280 faces. The input image is encoded via a CNN backbone followed by two fully
connected layers, each of 1024 dimensions, which cast offset predictions for each vertex.
Sphere GCN. Inspired by recent advances in [ 59,14], this model uses graph convolutions. Each
vertex pools its features from the output of the backbone indexed by its 2D projection. A set of graph
convs on the mesh graph predict vertex offsets. Similar to Sphere FC, this model deforms a sphere
mesh. Unlike Sphere FC, image to feature alignment is preserved. PyTorch3D’s scale efﬁciency
allows us to train a High Res variant which deforms an even larger sphere (2562 verts, 5120 faces).
Voxel GCN. The above models predict shapes homeomorphic to spheres, and are not able to capture
varying shape topologies. Recently, Mesh R-CNN [ 14] shows that coarse voxel predictions capture
instance-speciﬁc object topologies. These low ﬁdelity voxel predictions perform poorly as they
can’t reconstruct ﬁne structures or smooth surfaces, but when reﬁned with 3D mesh supervision,
they become state-of-the-art. To demonstrate PyTorch3D’s ﬂexibility with varying shape topologies
7