experiments in SoftRas [ 31] which use a Sphere FC model to deform a sphere of 642 vertices and
1280 faces and render at 64 64. While PyTorch3D performs better under that setting, we see that
the absolute performance for both SoftRas (chamfer 1.475) and PyTorch3D (chamfer 0.989) is not
good enough. Going to higher rendering resolutions improves models (chamfer 0.346 with SoftRas
vs 0.313 with PyTorch3D). Sphere GCN, a more geometry-aware network architecture, performs
much better for all rendering resolutions and all rendering engines (chamfer 0.301 with SoftRas
vs chamfer 0.293 with PyTorch3D at 128 128). This is also evident in Figure 5a where we show
predictions for all models at a 128 128 rendering resolution. Sphere FC is able to capture a global
pose and appearance but fails to capture instance-speciﬁc shape details. Sphere GCN, which deforms
the same sized sphere template, is able to reconstruct instance-speciﬁc shapes, such as chair legs and
tables, much more accurately. We take advantage of PyTorch3D’s scale efﬁciency and use a larger
sphere where we immediately see improved reconstruction quality (chamfer 0.281 with PyTorch3D).
However, Sphere FC and Sphere GCN can only make predictions homeomorphic to spheres. This
forces them to multiple face intersections and irregularly shaped faces in order to capture the complex
shape topologies. Our V oxel GCN variant tests the ability of our renderer to make predictions of
any genus by reﬁning shape topologies predicted by a neural network. The reconstruction quality
improves for V oxel GCN which captures holes and complex shapes while maintaining regular shaped
faces. More importantly, V oxel GCN improves the V oxel Only baseline, which also predicts voxels
but performs no further reﬁnement. Even though both models are trained with the same supervision,
V oxel GCN achieves a chamfer of 0.267 compared to 0.916 for V oxel Only.
More visualizations We show additional mesh predictions via silhouette rendering in Figure 9 and
via textured rendering in Figure 10. Our texture model is simple; we predict (r;g;b )texture values
per vertex. The shaders interpolate the vertex textures into face textures based on their algorithm and
the blending accumulates the face textures for each pixel. More sophisticated texture models could
involve directly sampling vertex textures from the input image or using GANs for natural looking
texture predictions. Despite its simplicity, our texture model does well at reconstructing textures.
Textures are more accurate for V oxel GCN mainly because of the regular shaped and sized faces in
the predicted mesh. This is in contrast to Sphere GCN, where faces can intersect and largely vary
in size in an effort to capture the complex object shape, which in turn affects the interpolated face
textures. In addition, simple shading functions, such as ﬂat shading , visibly lead to worse textures, as
expected. More sophisticated shaders, like Phong and Gouraud, lead to better texture reconstructions.
B.2 Unsupervised point cloud prediction
Expanding on the brief description of the unsupervised point cloud prediction model in the main
paper, here we provide more details and analyze our results further. Our training and inference
procedures are similar to meshes; we follow the same 2-view train setup while at test time our model
only takes as input a single RGB image (Figure 7). Our Point Align model is similar to Sphere GCN.
We start from an initial point cloud of 10k points sampled randomly and uniformly from the surface
of a sphere. Each point samples features from the backbone using Vert Align . A sequence of fully
connected layers replace Graph Conv - point clouds do not have connectivity patterns - resulting
in per point offset predictions (and (r;g;b )values, in the case of textured models). The network
architecture is shown in Figure 11.
Losses Point Align is trained solely with L=Lsfor silhouette rendering and an additional L1loss
between the rendered and ground truth image for textured rendering. There are no shape regularizers.
Blending In the case of textured rendering, we experiment with two blending (or compositing)
functions, Alpha andNorm .
More discussion on Table 4 Our point cloud evaluation in Table 4 is directly comparable to that of
meshes in Table 1; we use the same number of points, 10k, to compute chamfer and F1for meshes (by
sampling points from the mesh surface) and point clouds (directly using the points in the cloud). From
the comparison with meshes, we observe that our unsupervised point cloud model leads to slightly
better reconstruction quality than meshes (chamfer 0.272 for Point Align vs 0.281 for High Res
Sphere GCN). This is proof that our point cloud renderer is effective at predicting shapes. The quality
of our reconstructions is shown in Figure 12 which provides more shape and texture predictions by
our Point Align model with an alpha and norm compositor.
12