5 Broader Impact
In this paper we introduce PyTorch3D, a library for 3D research which is fully differentiable to enable
easy inclusion into existing deep learning pipelines, modular for fast experimentation and extension,
optimized andefﬁcient to allow scaling to large 3D data sizes, and with heterogeneous batching
capabilities to support the variable shape topologies encountered in real world use cases.
Similar to PyTorch or TensorFlow, which provide fundamental tools for deep learning, PyTorch3D is a
library of building blocks optimized for 3D deep learning. Frameworks like PyTorch and PyTorch3D
provide a platform for solving a plethora of AI problems including semantic or synthesis tasks.
Data-driven solutions to such problems necessitate the community’s caution regarding their potential
impact, especially when these models are being deployed in the real world. In this work, our goal
is to provide students, researchers and engineers with the best possible tools to accelerate research
at the intersection of 3D and deep learning. To this end, we are committed to support and develop
PyTorch3D in adherence with the needs of the academic, research and engineering community.
Appendix
A Sampling Batches for Benchmarks
The batches of 3D data used in the benchmarks in Section 3 were sampled from ShapeNetCoreV1
using a uniform sampling strategy. For meshes, homogeneous batches ( = 0;here denotes the
variance in size for elements within the batch) consist of one mesh with the speciﬁed number of faces,
repeatedBtimes withBbeing the batch size. For heterogeneous batches (  >0), we sample B
values from a uniform distribution with the speciﬁed andin the number of faces per mesh. For
each value, we ﬁnd the mesh in the dataset with number of faces closest to the desired value.
For point cloud operators, we ﬁrst sample a random mesh from the dataset and then uniformly sample
points from the surface of the mesh. For homogeneous batches, the same number of points is sampled
Btimes. For heterogeneous batches, Bvalues for the number of points in each point cloud is sampled
from a uniform distribution with the speciﬁed and.
B Experiments: Unsupervised shape prediction
In Section 4, we experiment with unsupervised 3D shape prediction from a single image using the
PyTorch3D renderers. Predicting a 3D shape from an input image is ambiguous as inﬁnite 3D shapes
can explain a 2D image. In the absence of ground truth supervision, to resolve shape ambiguity we
assume 2 views of the object at train time. This setup is also assumed in SoftRas [31].
The 2-view training setup is shown in Figure 7(a). When constructing minibatches, for every image
input sampled, we assume an additional view under known rotation Rand translation t. The predicted
shape from the input is then transformed by (R;t)and its rendered output is compared against the
ground truth silhouette. At test time, the model takes as input a single image and predicts the object’s
3D shape in camera coordinates , as shown in Figure 7(b). In the case of textured rendering, the
textured views are additionally compared at train time. We do the same for point clouds.
B.1 Unsupervised mesh prediction
In the case of meshes, we experiment with three architectures for the 3D shape network, namely
Sphere FC ,Sphere GCN andVoxel GCN . The ﬁrst two deform an initial sphere template and use
no 3D shape supervision. The third deforms shape topologies cast by the voxel head and tests the
effectiveness of differentiable rendering for varying shapes and connectivities as predicted by a neural
network. These topologies are different and more diverse than human-deﬁned or simple genus 0
shapes allowing us to stretch test our renderer. V oxel GCN uses coarse voxel supervision to train
the voxel head which learns to predict instance-speciﬁc, yet coarse, shapes. Note that V oxel GCN is
identical to Mesh R-CNN [ 14], but unlike Mesh R-CNN it uses no mesh supervision. The details of
the architectures for all three models are shown in Figure 8. For each model, we show the network
modules as well as the shapes of the intermediate batched tensor outputs. Note that for V oxel GCN,
the shapes of the meshes vary within the batch due to the heterogeneity from the voxel predictions.
10