Machines 2023 ,11, 677 3 of 25
focused on performance enhancement by increasing the internal depth of the architecture,
introducing several variants with increased layers, VGG-16/19. GoogleNet introduced the
cascading concept by cascading multiple ‘inception’ modules, whilst ResNet introduced
the concept of skip-connections for preserving information and making it available from
the earlier to the later layers of the architecture.
The motive for an object detector is to infer whether the object(s) of interest are
residing in the image or present the frame of a video. If the object(s) of interest are
present, the detector returns the respective class and locality, i.e., location dimensions
of the object(s). Object detection can be further divided into two sub-categories: Two-
stage methods and one-stage methods as shown in Figure 1. The former initiates the
ﬁrst stage with the selection of numerous proposals, then in the second stage, performs
prediction on the proposed regions. Examples of two-stage detectors include the famous
R-CNN [ 35] variants, such as Fast R-CNN [ 36] and Faster R-CNN [ 37], boasting high
accuracies but low computational efﬁciency. The latter transforms the task into a regression
problem, eliminating the need for an initial stage dedicated to selecting candidate regions;
therefore, the candidate selection and prediction is achieved in a single pass. As a result,
architectures falling into this category are computationally less demanding, generating
higher FPS and detection speed, but in general the accuracy tends to be inferior with respect
to two-stage detectors.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 26 
 
 and ResNet [34]. AlexNet is prop osed in 2012 and consists of ﬁve convolutional, three 
pooling, and three fully connected layers primarily utilized for image classi ﬁcation tasks. 
VGGNet focused on performance enhancement by increasing the internal depth of the 
architecture, introducing several variants with increased layers, VGG-16/19. GoogleNet 
introduced the cascading concept by cascading multiple ‘inception’ modules, whilst Res-
Net introduced the concept of skip-connections  for preserving information and making it 
available from the earlier to the later layers of the architecture. 
The motive for an object detector is to infe r whether the object(s) of interest are resid-
ing in the image or present the frame of a video. If the object(s) of interest are present, the 
detector returns the respective class and locality , i.e., location dimensions of the object(s). 
Object detection can be further divided into two sub-categories: Two-stage methods and one-stage methods as shown in Figure 1. The former initiates the ﬁrst stage with the se-
lection of numerous proposals, then in the second stage, performs prediction on the pro-
posed regions. Examples of two-stage detect ors include the famous R-CNN [35] variants, 
such as Fast R-CNN [36] and Faster R-CNN [37], boasting high accuracies but low com-
putational e ﬃciency. The la tter transforms the task into a regression problem, eliminating 
the need for an initial stage dedicated to selecting candidate regions; therefore, the candi-
date selection and prediction is achieved in a single pass. As a result, architectures falling 
into this category are computationally less demanding, generating higher FPS and detec-
tion speed, but in general the accuracy tends to be inferior with respect to two-stage de-
tectors. 
 
Figure 1. Object detector anatomy. 
2. Original YOLO Algorithm 
YOLO was introduced to the computer vision community via a paper release in 2015 
by Joseph Redmon et al. [29] titled ‘You Only Look Once: Uni ﬁed, Real-Time Object De-
tection’. The paper reframed object detection, presenting it essentially as a single pass re-
gression problem, initiating with image pixels and moving to bounding box and class 
probabilities. The proposed approach based on the ‘uni ﬁed’ concept enabled the simulta-
neous prediction of multiple bounding boxe s and class probabilities, improving both 
speed and accuracy. 
Since its inception in 2016 until the present year (2023), the YOLO family has contin-
ued to evolve at a rapid pace. Although the initial author (Joseph Redmon) halted further 
work within the computer vision domain at YOLO-v3 [38], the e ﬀectiveness and potential 
of the core ‘uni ﬁed’ concept have been further developed by several authors, with the 
latest addition to the YOLO family coming in  the form of YOLO-v8. Figure 2 presents the 
YOLO evolution timeline. 
Figure 1. Object detector anatomy.
2. Original YOLO Algorithm
YOLO was introduced to the computer vision community via a paper release in 2015 by
Joseph Redmon et al. [ 29] titled ‘You Only Look Once: Uniﬁed, Real-Time Object Detection’.
The paper reframed object detection, presenting it essentially as a single pass regression
problem, initiating with image pixels and moving to bounding box and class probabilities.
The proposed approach based on the ‘uniﬁed’ concept enabled the simultaneous prediction
of multiple bounding boxes and class probabilities, improving both speed and accuracy.
Since its inception in 2016 until the present year (2023), the YOLO family has continued
to evolve at a rapid pace. Although the initial author (Joseph Redmon) halted further work
within the computer vision domain at YOLO-v3 [ 38], the effectiveness and potential of
the core ‘uniﬁed’ concept have been further developed by several authors, with the latest
addition to the YOLO family coming in the form of YOLO-v8. Figure 2 presents the YOLO
evolution timeline.
2.1. Original YOLO
The core principle proposed by YOLO-v1 was the imposing of a grid cell with dimen-
sions of ss onto the image. In the case of the center of the object of interest falling into one
of the grid cells, that particular grid cell would be responsible for the detection of that object.
This permitted other cells to disregard that object in the case of multiple appearances.