Machines 2023 ,11, 677 4 of 25
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 26 
 
  
Figure 2. YOLO evolution timeline. 
2.1. Original YOLO 
The core principle proposed by YOLO-v1 wa s the imposing of a grid cell with di-
mensions of s×s onto the image. In the case of  the center of the object of interest falling 
into one of the grid cells, that particular grid cell would be responsible for the detection 
of that object. This permi tted other cells to disregard that object in the case of multiple 
appearances. 
For implementation of object detection, each grid cell would predict B bounding 
boxes along with the dimensions and con ﬁdence scores. The con ﬁdence score was indic-
ative of the absence or presence of an object within the bounding box. Therefore, the con-
ﬁdence score can be expressed as Equation (1): 
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 𝑝 (𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 )∗𝐼 𝑜 𝑈௣௥௘ௗ௧௥௨௧௛  (1)
where 𝑝(𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 ) signi ﬁed the probability of the object being present, with a range of 0–1 
with 0 indicating that the object is not present and 𝐼𝑜𝑈௣௥௘ௗ௧௥௨௧௛ represented the intersection-
over-union with the predicted bounding box with respect to the ground truth bounding 
box. 
Each bounding box consisted of ﬁve components ( x, y, w, h, and the  conﬁdence score) 
with the ﬁrst four components  corresponding to center coordinates ( x, y, width, and height ) 
of the respective bounding box as shown in Figure 3.  
Figure 2. YOLO evolution timeline.
For implementation of object detection, each grid cell would predict Bbounding boxes
along with the dimensions and conﬁdence scores. The conﬁdence score was indicative of
the absence or presence of an object within the bounding box. Therefore, the conﬁdence
score can be expressed as Equation (1):
con f idence score =p(object )IoUtruth
pred(1)
where p(object )signiﬁed the probability of the object being present, with a range of 0–1 with
0 indicating that the object is not present and IoUtruth
predrepresented the intersection-over-
union with the predicted bounding box with respect to the ground truth bounding box.
Each bounding box consisted of ﬁve components ( x,y,w,h,and the conﬁdence score)
with the ﬁrst four components corresponding to center coordinates ( x,y,width, and height )
of the respective bounding box as shown in Figure 3.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 26 
 
  
Figure 3. YOLO-v1 preliminary architecture. 
As alluded to earlier, the input image is split into s × s grid cells (default = 7 × 7), with 
each cell predicting B bounding boxes, each containing ﬁve parameters and sharing pre-
diction probabilities of classes ( C). Therefore, the parameter output would take the fol-
lowing form, expressed in (2): 
𝑠×𝑠× (5∗𝐵+𝐶 )  (2)
Considering the example of YOLO network wi th each cell boundi ng box prediction 
set to 2 and evaluating the benchmark COCO dataset consisting of 80 classes, the param-eter output would be give n as expressed in (3): 
7×7×( 5∗2+8 0 )   (3)
The fundamental motive of YOLO and object detection in general is the object detec-
tion and localization via bounding boxes. Ther efore, two sets of bounding box vectors are 
required, i.e., vector y is the representative of ground truth and vector 𝑦ሶ is the predicted 
vector. To address multiple bounding boxes containing no object or the same object, 
YOLO opts for non-maximum suppression (NMS). By de ﬁning a threshold value for 
NMS, all overlapping predic ted bounding boxes with an IoU lower than the de ﬁned NMS 
value are eliminated. 
The original YOLO based on the Darknet framework consisted of two sub-variants. 
The ﬁrst architecture comprised of 24 convolutional layers with the ﬁnal layer providing 
a connection into the ﬁrst of the two fully connected layers. Whereas the ‘Fast YOLO’ var-
iant consisted of only nine co nvolutional layers hosting fewer ﬁlters each. Inspired by the 
inception module in GoogleNet, a sequence of 1×1   convolutional layers was imple-
mented for reducing the resultant feature sp ace from the preceding layers. The prelimi-
nary architecture for YOLO-v1 is presented in Figure 3. 
To address the issue of multiple bounding boxes for the same object or with a con ﬁ-
dence score of zero, i.e., no object, the authors decided to greatly penalize predictions from bounding boxes containing objects ( 𝛾
௖௢௢௥ௗ =5) and the lowest penalization for prediction 
containing no object ( 𝛾௡௢௢௕௝ =0 . 5 ). The authors calculated the loss function by taking the 
sum of all bounding  box parameters ( x, y, width , height , conﬁdence score, and class prob-
ability). As a result, the ﬁrst part of the equation computes the loss of the bounding box 
prediction with respect to the ground tr uth bounding box based on the coordinates 
𝑥௖௘௡௧௘௥ , 𝑦௖௘௡௧௘௥ . 𝕝௜௝௢௕௝ is set as 1 in the case of the object residing within  𝑗௧௛ bounding box 
prediction in 𝑖௧௛ cell; otherwise, it is set as 0. The selected, i.e., predicted bounding box 
would be tasked with predicting an object wi th the greatest IoU, as expressed in (4): 
𝛾௖௢௢௥ௗ ∑∑ 𝕝௜௝௢௕௝[(𝑥௜−𝑥 పෝ)ଶ+(𝑦௜−𝑦 పෝ)ଶ]஻
௝ୀ଴ௌమ
௜ୀ଴   (4)
The next component of the loss function computes the prediction error in width and 
height of the bounding box, similar to the preceding compon ent. However, the scale of 
error in the large boxes has lesser impact co mpared to the small boxes. The normalization 
of width and height between the range 0 and 1 indicates that their square roots increase 
Figure 3. YOLO-v1 preliminary architecture.