Machines 2023 ,11, 677 17 of 25
88.9%. The reported FPS was impressive reaching 98.6 FPS, with the authors claiming
that the proposed solution would provide intelligent monitoring at PV power stations.
Inferencing output presented in Figure 16 shows the proposed AP-YOLO-v5 architecture,
providing inferences at a higher conﬁdence level compared to the original YOLO-v5.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 26 
 
  
Figure 16. inference/con ﬁdence comparison [89]. 
3.3. Steel Surface Defect Detection 
Dinming Yang et al. [90] set the premise of  their research by stating the importance 
of steel pipe quality inspection, citing the growing demand in countries, such as China. 
Although X-ray testing is utilized as one of the key methods for industrial nondestructive 
testing (NDT), the authors state that it still requires human assistance for the determina-
tion, classi ﬁcation, and localization of the defect s. The authors propose the implementa-
tion of YOLO-v5 for production-based weld st eel defect detection based on X-ray images 
of the weld pipe. The authors claim that the trained YOLO-v5 reached a mAP of 98.7% 
(IoU-0.5), whilst meeting the real-time detect ion requirements of steel pipe production 
with a single image detection rate of 0.12 s. 
Zhuxi MA et al. [91] address the issu e of large-scale computation and speci ﬁc hard-
ware requirements for automated defect detection in aluminum strips. The authors select 
YOLO-v4 as the architecture, whilst the back bone is constructed to make use of depth-
wise separable convolutions along with a parallel dual a ttention mechanism for feature 
enhancement, as shown in Figure 17. The propos ed network is tested on real data from a 
cold-rolling workshop, providing impressive results on real data achieving an mAP of 
96.28%. Compared to the original YOLO-v4, the authors claim that the proposed architec-
ture volume is reduced by 83.38%, whilst the inference speed is increased by a factor of 
three. The increase in performance was pa rtly due to the custom anchor approach, 
whereby due to the maximum aspect ratio of the custom dataset, the defect was set to 1:20 
which is in-line with the defect characteristics, such as scratch marks. 
Figure 16. Inference/conﬁdence comparison [89].
3.3. Steel Surface Defect Detection
Dinming Yang et al. [ 90] set the premise of their research by stating the importance
of steel pipe quality inspection, citing the growing demand in countries, such as China.
Although X-ray testing is utilized as one of the key methods for industrial nondestructive
testing (NDT), the authors state that it still requires human assistance for the determination,
classiﬁcation, and localization of the defects. The authors propose the implementation of
YOLO-v5 for production-based weld steel defect detection based on X-ray images of the
weld pipe. The authors claim that the trained YOLO-v5 reached a mAP of 98.7% (IoU-0.5),
whilst meeting the real-time detection requirements of steel pipe production with a single
image detection rate of 0.12 s.
Zhuxi MA et al. [ 91] address the issue of large-scale computation and speciﬁc hard-
ware requirements for automated defect detection in aluminum strips. The authors select
YOLO-v4 as the architecture, whilst the backbone is constructed to make use of depth-
wise separable convolutions along with a parallel dual attention mechanism for feature
enhancement, as shown in Figure 17. The proposed network is tested on real data from
a cold-rolling workshop, providing impressive results on real data achieving an mAP of
96.28%. Compared to the original YOLO-v4, the authors claim that the proposed architec-
ture volume is reduced by 83.38%, whilst the inference speed is increased by a factor of
three. The increase in performance was partly due to the custom anchor approach, whereby
due to the maximum aspect ratio of the custom dataset, the defect was set to 1:20 which is
in-line with the defect characteristics, such as scratch marks.