Machines 2023 ,11, 677 9 of 25
The authors also introduced a bag-of-freebies, presented in Figure 7, primarily consist-
ing of augmentations, such as Mosaic aimed at improving performance without introducing
additional baggage onto the inference time. CIoU loss [ 58] was also introduced as a freebie,
focused on the overlap of the predicted and ground truth bounding box. In the case of no
overlap, the idea was to observe the closeness of the two boxes and encourage overlap if in
close proximity.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 26 
 
  
Figure 6. Path aggregation. ( a) Original PAN, ( b) modi ﬁed PAN. 
The authors also introduced a bag-of-freebie s, presented in Figure 7, primarily con-
sisting of augmentations, such as Mosaic aimed at improving performance without intro-
ducing additional baggage onto the inference time. CIoU loss [58] was also introduced as 
a freebie, focused on the overlap of the predic ted and ground truth bounding box. In the 
case of no overlap, the idea was to observe the closeness of the two boxes and encourage 
overlap if in close proximity. 
In addition to the bag-of-freebies, the auth ors introduced ‘bag-of-specials’, with the 
authors claiming that although this set of op timization techniques presented in Figure 7 
would marginally impact the inference time, they would signi ﬁcantly improve the overall 
performance. One of the components within th e ‘bag-of-specials’ was the Mish [59] acti-
vation function aimed at moving feature creations toward their respective optimal points. Cross mini-batch normalization [60] was also  presented facilitating the running on any 
GPU as many batch normalization techniques involve multiple GPUs operating in tan-
dem. 
 
Figure 7. State-of-the-art optimization methodologies experimented in YOLO-v4 via bag-of-spe-
cials. 
2.5. YOLO-v5 
The YOLO network in essence consists of th ree key pillars, namely, backbone for fea-
ture extraction, neck focused on feature aggregation, and the head for consuming output 
Figure 7. State-of-the-art optimization methodologies experimented in YOLO-v4 via bag-of-specials.
In addition to the bag-of-freebies, the authors introduced ‘bag-of-specials’, with the
authors claiming that although this set of optimization techniques presented in Figure 7
would marginally impact the inference time, they would signiﬁcantly improve the overall
performance. One of the components within the ‘bag-of-specials’ was the Mish [ 59] acti-
vation function aimed at moving feature creations toward their respective optimal points.
Cross mini-batch normalization [ 60] was also presented facilitating the running on any
GPU as many batch normalization techniques involve multiple GPUs operating in tandem.
2.5. YOLO-v5
The YOLO network in essence consists of three key pillars, namely, backbone for
feature extraction, neck focused on feature aggregation, and the head for consuming
output features from the neck as input and generating detections. YOLO-v5 [ 61] similar to
YOLO-v4, with respect to contributions, focus on the conglomeration and reﬁnement of
various computer vision techniques for enhancing performance. In addition, in less than
2 months after the release of YOLO-v4, Glenn Jocher open-sourced an implementation of
YOLO-v5 [61].
A notable mention is that YOLO-v5 was the ﬁrst native release of architectures be-
longing to the YOLO clan, to be written in PyTorch [ 62] rather than Darknet. Although
Darknet is considered as a ﬂexible low-level research framework, it was not purpose built
for production environments with a signiﬁcantly smaller number of subscribers due to
conﬁgurability challenges. PyTorch, on the other hand, provided an established eco-system,
with a wider subscription base among the computer vision community and provided the
supporting infrastructure for facilitating mobile device deployment.