Machines 2023 ,11, 677 15 of 25
3.1. Industrial Fabric Defect Detection
Rui Jin et al. [ 81] in their premise state the inefﬁciencies of manual inspection in the
textile manufacturing domain as high cost of labor, human-related fatigue, and reduced
detection speed (less than 20 m/min). The authors aim to address these inefﬁciencies by
proposing a YOLO-v5-based architecture, coupled with a spatial attention mechanism
for accentuation of smaller defective regions. The proposed approach involved a teacher
network trained on the fabric dataset. Post training of the teacher network, the learned
weights were distilled to the student network, which was compatible for deployment onto
a Jetson TX2 [ 82] via TensorRT [ 83]. The results presented by the authors show, as expected,
that the teacher network reported higher performance with an AUC of 98.1% compared to
95.2% (student network). However, as the student network was computationally smaller,
the inference time was signiﬁcantly less at 16 ms for the student network in contrast to the
teacher network at 35 ms on the Jetson TX2. Based on the performance, the authors claim
that the proposed solution provides high accuracy and real-time inference speed, making it
compatible for deployment via the edge device.
Sifundvoleshile Dlamini et al. [ 84] propose a production environment fabric defect
detection framework focused on real-time detection and accurate classiﬁcation on-site,
as shown in Figure 14. The authors embed conventional image processing at the onset
of their data enhancement strategy, i.e., ﬁltering to denoise feature enhancement. Post
augmentations and data scaling, the authors train the YOLO-v4 architecture based on
pretrained weights. The reported performance was respectable with an F1-score of 93.6%,
at an impressive detection speed of 34 fps and prediction speed of 21.4 ms. The authors
claim that the performance is evident to the effectiveness of the selected architecture for the
given domain.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 26 
 
 authors claim that the proposed solution prov ides high accuracy and real-time inference 
speed, making it compatible for deployment via the edge device. 
Sifundvoleshile Dlamini et al. [84] propos e a production environment fabric defect 
detection framework focused on real-time detection and accurate classi ﬁcation on-site, as 
shown in Figure 14. The authors embed conventional image processing at the onset of 
their data enhancement strategy, i.e., ﬁltering to denoise feature enhancement. Post aug-
mentations and data scaling, the authors tr ain the YOLO-v4 architecture based on pre-
trained weights. The reported performance was respectable with an F1-score of 93.6%, at 
an impressive detection speed of 34 fps and pr ediction speed of 21.4 ms. The authors claim 
that the performance is evident to the e ﬀectiveness of the selected architecture for the 
given domain. 
 
Figure 14. Inspection machine integration [84]. 
Restricted by the available computing reso urces for edge deploy ment, Guijuan Lin et 
al. [85] state problems with quality inspection  in the fabric production domain, including 
minute scale of defects, extreme unbalance wi th the aspect ratio of certain defects, and 
slow defect detection speeds. To address thes e issues, the authors proposed a sliding-win-
dow, self-a ttention (multihead) mechanism calibrated  for small defect targets. Addition-
ally, the Swin Transformer [86] module as depicted in Figure 15 was integrated into the 
original YOLO-v5 architecture for the extraction  of hierarchical features. Furthermore, the 
generalized focal loss is implemented with the architecture aimed at improving the learn-ing process for positive target instances, whilst lowering the rate of missed detections. The 
authors report the accuracy of the proposed so lution on a real-world fabric dataset, reach-
ing 76.5% mAP at 58.8 FPS, making it compatible with the real-time detection require-ments for detection via embedded devices. 
Figure 14. Inspection machine integration [84].
Restricted by the available computing resources for edge deployment, Guijuan Lin et al. [ 85]
state problems with quality inspection in the fabric production domain, including minute
scale of defects, extreme unbalance with the aspect ratio of certain defects, and slow defect
detection speeds. To address these issues, the authors proposed a sliding-window, self-
attention (multihead) mechanism calibrated for small defect targets. Additionally, the Swin
Transformer [ 86] module as depicted in Figure 15 was integrated into the original YOLO-v5
architecture for the extraction of hierarchical features. Furthermore, the generalized focal
loss is implemented with the architecture aimed at improving the learning process for
positive target instances, whilst lowering the rate of missed detections. The authors report
the accuracy of the proposed solution on a real-world fabric dataset, reaching 76.5% mAP