Machines 2023 ,11, 677 8 of 25
YOLO-v3 proposed a hybrid architecture factoring in aspects of YOLO-v2, Darknet-
53 [51], and the ResNet concept of residual networks. This enabled the preservation of
ﬁne-grained features by allowing for the gradient ﬂow from shallow layers to deeper layers.
On top of the existing 53 layers of Darknet-53 for feature extraction, a stack of 53 addi-
tional layers was added for the detection head, totaling 106 convolutional layers for the
YOLO-v3. Additionally, YOLO-v3 facilitated multi-scale detection, namely, the architecture
made predictions at three different scales of granularity for outputting better performance,
increasing the probability of small object detection.
2.4. YOLO-v4
YOLO-v4 was the ﬁrst variant of the YOLO family after the original author discon-
tinued further work that was introduced to the computer vision community in April 2020
by Alexey Bochkovsky et al. [52]. YOLO-v4 was essentially the distillation of a large suite
of object detection techniques, tested and enhanced for providing a real-time, lightweight
object detector.
The backbone of an object detector has a critical role in the quality of features extracted.
In-line with the experimental spirit, the authors experimented with three different back-
bones: CSPResNext-50, CSPDarknet-53, and EfﬁcientNet-B3 [ 53]. The ﬁrst was based on
DenseNet [ 54] aimed at alleviating the vanishing gradient problem and bolstering feature
propagation and reuse, resulting in reduced number of network parameters. EfﬁcientNet
was proposed by Google Brain. The paper posits that an optima selection for parameters
when scaling CNNs can be ascertained through a search mechanism. After experimenting
with the above feature extractors, the authors based on their intuition and backed by their
experimental results selected CSPDarknet-53 as the ofﬁcial backbone for YOLO-v4.
For feature aggregation, the authors experimented with several techniques for integra-
tion at the neck level including feature pyramid network (FPN) [ 55] and path aggregation
network (PANet) [ 56]. Ultimately, the authors opted for PANet as the feature aggregator.
The modiﬁed PANet, as shown in Figure 6, utilized the concatenation mechanism. PANet
can be seen as an advanced version of FPN, namely, PANet proposed a bottom-up augmen-
tation path along with the top-down path (FPN), adding a ‘shortcut’ connection for linking
ﬁne-grained features from high- and low-level layers. Additionally, the authors introduced
a SPP [ 57] block post CSPDarknet-53 aimed at increasing the receptive ﬁeld and separation
of the important features arriving from the backbone.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 26 
 
  
Figure 6. Path aggregation. ( a) Original PAN, ( b) modi ﬁed PAN. 
The authors also introduced a bag-of-freebie s, presented in Figure 7, primarily con-
sisting of augmentations, such as Mosaic aimed at improving performance without intro-
ducing additional baggage onto the inference time. CIoU loss [58] was also introduced as 
a freebie, focused on the overlap of the predic ted and ground truth bounding box. In the 
case of no overlap, the idea was to observe the closeness of the two boxes and encourage 
overlap if in close proximity. 
In addition to the bag-of-freebies, the auth ors introduced ‘bag-of-specials’, with the 
authors claiming that although this set of op timization techniques presented in Figure 7 
would marginally impact the inference time, they would signi ﬁcantly improve the overall 
performance. One of the components within th e ‘bag-of-specials’ was the Mish [59] acti-
vation function aimed at moving feature creations toward their respective optimal points. Cross mini-batch normalization [60] was also  presented facilitating the running on any 
GPU as many batch normalization techniques involve multiple GPUs operating in tan-
dem. 
 
Figure 7. State-of-the-art optimization methodologies experimented in YOLO-v4 via bag-of-spe-
cials. 
2.5. YOLO-v5 
The YOLO network in essence consists of th ree key pillars, namely, backbone for fea-
ture extraction, neck focused on feature aggregation, and the head for consuming output 
Figure 6. Path aggregation. ( a) Original PAN, ( b) modiﬁed PAN.