Machines 2023 ,11, 677 7 of 25
YOLO-v2 architecture, aimed at real-time detection of more than 9000 different objects;
however, at a signiﬁcantly reduced mAP of 19.7%.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 26 
 
 connected layers to serve this purpose. YO LO-v2 replaced the fully connected layer re-
sponsible for predicting bounding boxes by adding anchor boxes for bounding box pre-
dictions. Anchor boxes [47] are essentially a list of prede ﬁned dimensions (boxes) aimed 
at best matching the objects of interest. Rather than manual determination of best- ﬁt an-
chor boxes, the authors utilized k-means clus tering [48] on the training set bounding 
boxes, inclusive of the ground truth boundi ng boxes, grouping similar shapes and plo tting 
average IoU with respect to the closest cent roid as shown in Figure 4. YOLO-v2 was 
trained on di ﬀerent architectures, namely, VGG-16 and GoogleNet, in addition to the au-
thors proposing the Darknet-19 [49] architectu re due to characteristics, such as reduced 
processing requirements, i.e., 5.58 FLOPs compared to 30.69 FLOPs and 8.52 FLOPs on 
VGG-16 and GoogleNet, respectively. In term s of performance, YOLO-v2 provided 76.8 
mAP at 67 FPS and 78.6 mAP at 40 FPS. The results demonstrated the architectures’ supe-
riority over SOTA architectures of that time, such as SSD and Faster R-CNN. YOLO-9000 
utilized YOLO-v2 architecture, aimed at real-time detection of more than 9000 di ﬀerent 
objects; however, at a signi ﬁcantly reduced mAP of 19.7%. 
 
Figure 4. Dimension cluste rs vs. mAP. 
2.3. YOLO-v3 
Architectures, such as VGG, focused their development work around the concept 
that deeper networks, i.e., more internal laye rs, equated to higher accuracy. YOLO-v2 also 
had higher number of convolutional layers compared to its predecessor. 
However, as the image progressed throug h the network, the progressive down sam-
pling resulted in the loss of ﬁne-grained features; therefore, YOLO-v2 often struggled with 
detecting smaller objects. At the time research was active in addressing this issue, as evi-
dent by the deployment of skip connection s [50] embedded within the proposed ResNet 
architecture, the focus was on addressing the vanishing gradient issue by facilitating in-
formation propagation via skip connection, as presented in Figure 5. 
Figure 4. Dimension clusters vs. mAP .
2.3. YOLO-v3
Architectures, such as VGG, focused their development work around the concept that
deeper networks, i.e., more internal layers, equated to higher accuracy. YOLO-v2 also had
higher number of convolutional layers compared to its predecessor.
However, as the image progressed through the network, the progressive down sam-
pling resulted in the loss of ﬁne-grained features; therefore, YOLO-v2 often struggled
with detecting smaller objects. At the time research was active in addressing this issue,
as evident by the deployment of skip connections [ 50] embedded within the proposed
ResNet architecture, the focus was on addressing the vanishing gradient issue by facilitating
information propagation via skip connection, as presented in Figure 5.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 26 
 
  
Figure 5. Skip-connection con ﬁguration. 
YOLO-v3 proposed a hybrid architecture fa ctoring in aspects of YOLO-v2, Darknet-
53 [51], and the ResNet concept of residual networks. This enabled the preservation of 
ﬁne-grained features by a llowing for the gradient ﬂow from shallow layers to deeper lay-
ers. 
On top of the existing 53 layers of Darknet-53 for feature extraction, a stack of 53 
additional layers was added for the detection head, totaling 106 convolutional layers for 
the YOLO-v3. Additionally, YOLO-v3 facilitated multi-scale detection, namely, the archi-
tecture made predictions at three di ﬀerent scales of granularity for outpu tting better per-
formance, increasing the probability of small object detection. 
2.4. YOLO-v4 
YOLO-v4 was the ﬁrst variant of the YOLO family after the original author discon-
tinued further work that was introduced to the computer vi sion community in April 2020 
by Alexey Bochkovsky et al. [52]. YOLO-v4 was essentially the distillation of a large suite 
of object detection techniques, tested and en hanced for providing a real-time, lightweight 
object detector. 
The backbone of an object detector has a critical role in the quality of features ex-
tracted. In-line with the experimental spirit, the authors experimented with three di ﬀerent 
backbones: CSPResNext-50, CSPDarknet-53, and E ﬃcientNet-B3 [53]. The ﬁrst was based 
on DenseNet [54] aimed at alleviating the vanishing gradient problem and bolstering fea-ture propagation and reuse, resulting in reduced number of network parameters. E ﬃ-
cientNet was proposed by Google Brain. The paper posits that an optima selection for 
parameters when scaling CNNs can be asce rtained through a search mechanism. After 
experimenting with the above feature extractors, the authors based on their intuition and 
backed by their experimental result s selected CSPDarknet-53 as the o ﬃcial backbone for 
YOLO-v4. 
For feature aggregation, the authors experi mented with several techniques for inte-
gration at the neck level including feature pyramid network (FPN) [55] and path aggrega-tion network (PANet) [56]. Ultimately, the authors opted for PANet as the feature aggre-
gator. The modi ﬁed PANet, as shown in Figure 6, utilized the concatenation mechanism. 
PANet can be seen as an advanced version of FPN, namely, PANet proposed a bo ttom-up 
augmentation path along with the top-down path (FPN), adding a ‘shortcut’ connection 
for linking ﬁne-grained features from high- and low-level layers. Additionally, the authors 
introduced a SPP [57] block post CSPDarknet-53 aimed at increasing the receptive ﬁeld 
and separation of the important features arriving from the backbone. 
Figure 5. Skip-connection conﬁguration.