Machines 2023 ,11, 677 14 of 25
2.8. YOLO-v8
The latest addition to the family of YOLO was conﬁrmed in January 2023 with the
release of YOLO-v8 [ 80] by Ultralytics (also released YOLO-v5). Although a paper release
is impending and many features are yet to be added to the YOLO-v8 repository, initial
comparisons of the newcomer against its predecessors demonstrate its superiority as the
new YOLO state-of-the-art.
Figure 13 demonstrates that when comparing YOLO-v8 against YOLO-v5 and YOLO-
v6 trained on 640 image resolution, all YOLO-v8 variants output better throughput with a
similar number of parameters, indicating toward hardware-efﬁcient, architectural reforms.
The fact that YOLO-v8 and YOLO-v5 are presented by Ultralytics with YOLO-v5 providing
impressive real-time performance and based on the initial benchmarking results released
by Ultralytics, it is strongly assumed that the YOLO-v8 will be focusing on constrained
edge device deployment at high-inference speed.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 26 
 
  
Figure 13. YOLO-v8 comparison with predecessors [80]. 
3. Industrial Defect Detection Via YOLO 
The previous section demonstrates the rapid evolution of the YOLO ‘clan’ of object 
detectors amongst the computer vision community. This section of the review focuses on 
the implementation of YOLO variants for the detection of surface defects within the in-dustrial se tting. The selection of ‘industrial se tting’ is due to its varying and stringent re-
quirements alternating between accuracy and speed, a theme which is found through 
DNA of the YOLO variants. 
3.1. Industrial Fabric Defect Detection 
Rui Jin et al. [81] in their premise state the ine ﬃciencies of manual inspection in the 
textile manufacturing domain as high cost of  labor, human-related fatigue, and reduced 
detection speed (less than 20 m/min). The authors aim to address these ine ﬃciencies by 
proposing a YOLO-v5-based architecture, coupled with a spatial a ttention mechanism for 
accentuation of smaller defective regions. Th e proposed approach involved a teacher net-
work trained on the fabric dataset. Post tr aining of the teacher network, the learned 
weights were distilled to the student network, which was compatible for deployment onto 
a Jetson TX2 [82] via TensorRT [83]. The results presented by the authors show, as ex-
pected, that the teacher network reported hi gher performance with an AUC of 98.1% com-
pared to 95.2% (student network). However, as the student network was computationally 
smaller, the inference time was signi ﬁcantly less at 16 ms for the student network in con-
trast to the teacher network at 35 ms on th e Jetson TX2. Based on the performance, the 
Figure 13. YOLO-v8 comparison with predecessors [80].
3. Industrial Defect Detection via YOLO
The previous section demonstrates the rapid evolution of the YOLO ‘clan’ of object
detectors amongst the computer vision community. This section of the review focuses
on the implementation of YOLO variants for the detection of surface defects within the
industrial setting. The selection of ‘industrial setting’ is due to its varying and stringent
requirements alternating between accuracy and speed, a theme which is found through
DNA of the YOLO variants.