Machines 2023 ,11, 677 12 of 25
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 26 
 
 Figure 9. YOLO-v6 model base architecture. 
Additional improvements focused on indu strial applications include the use of 
knowledge distillation [70], involving a teacher model used for training a student model, 
where the predictions of the teacher are used as soft labels along with the ground truth 
for training the student. This comes without fueling the computational cost as essentially the aim is to train a smaller (student) model to replicate the high performance of the larger 
(teacher) model. Comparing the performance of YOLO-v6 with its predecessors, includ-
ing YOLO-v5 on the benchmark COCO dataset in Figure 10, it is clear that YOLO-v6 
achieves a higher mAP at various FPS. 
 
Figure 10. Relative evaluation of YOLO-v6 vs. YOLO-v5 [71]. 
2.7. YOLO-v7 
The following month after the release of YOLO-v6, the YOLO-v7 was released [72]. 
Although other variants have been releas ed in between, including YOLO-X [73] and 
YOLO-R [74], these focused more on GPU speed  enhancements with respect to inferenc-
ing. YOLO-v7 proposes several architectural reforms for improving the accuracy and 
maintaining high detection speeds. The proposed reforms can be split into two categories: 
Architectural reforms and Trainable BoF (bag-o f-freebies). Architectural reforms included 
the implementation of the E-ELAN (extended e ﬃcient layer aggregation network) [75] in 
the YOLO-v7 backbone, taking inspiration from research advancements in network e ﬃ-
ciency. The design of the E-ELAN was guided by the analysis of factors that impact accu-
racy and speed, such as memory access cost , input/output channel ratio, and gradient 
path. 
The second architectural reform was presented as compound model scaling, as 
shown in Figure 11. The aim was to cater for a wider scope of application requirements, 
i.e., certain applications require accuracy to be prioritized, whilst others may prioritize speed. Although NAS (network architecture se arch) [76] can be used for parameter-spe-
ciﬁc scaling to ﬁnd the best factors, the scaling factors are independent [77]. Whereas the 
compound-scaling mechanism a llows for the width and depth to be scaled in coherence 
for concatenation-based networks, maintaining optimal network architecture while scal-
ing for di ﬀerent sizes. 
Figure 10. Relative evaluation of YOLO-v6 vs. YOLO-v5 [71].
2.7. YOLO-v7
The following month after the release of YOLO-v6, the YOLO-v7 was released [ 72].
Although other variants have been released in between, including YOLO-X [ 73] and YOLO-
R [74], these focused more on GPU speed enhancements with respect to inferencing. YOLO-
v7 proposes several architectural reforms for improving the accuracy and maintaining high
detection speeds. The proposed reforms can be split into two categories: Architectural
reforms and Trainable BoF (bag-of-freebies). Architectural reforms included the implemen-
tation of the E-ELAN (extended efﬁcient layer aggregation network) [ 75] in the YOLO-v7
backbone, taking inspiration from research advancements in network efﬁciency. The design
of the E-ELAN was guided by the analysis of factors that impact accuracy and speed, such
as memory access cost, input/output channel ratio, and gradient path.
The second architectural reform was presented as compound model scaling, as shown
in Figure 11. The aim was to cater for a wider scope of application requirements, i.e., certain
applications require accuracy to be prioritized, whilst others may prioritize speed. Although
NAS (network architecture search) [ 76] can be used for parameter-speciﬁc scaling to ﬁnd
the best factors, the scaling factors are independent [ 77]. Whereas the compound-scaling
mechanism allows for the width and depth to be scaled in coherence for concatenation-
based networks, maintaining optimal network architecture while scaling for different sizes.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 26 
 
  
Figure 11. YOLO-v7 compound scaling. 
Re-parameterization planning is based on averaging a set of model weights to obtain 
a more robust network [78,79]. Expanding further, module level re-parameterization ena-
bles segments of the network to regulate th eir own parameterization strategies. YOLO-v7 
utilizes gradient ﬂow propagation paths with the aim to observe which internal network 
modules should deploy re-parameterization strategies. 
The auxiliary head coarse-to- ﬁne concept is proposed on  the premise that the net-
work head is quite far downstream; therefore, the auxiliary head is deployed at the middle 
layers to assist in the training proces s. However, this would not train as e ﬃciently as the 
lead head, due to the former not having access to the complete network. 
Figure 12 presents a performance comparis on of YOLO-v7 with the preceding YOLO 
variants on the MS COCO dataset. It is clear from Figure 12 that all YOLO-v7 variants 
surpassed the compared object detectors in a ccuracy and speed in the range of 5–160 FPS. 
It is, however, important to note, as mentione d by the authors of YOLO-v7, that none of 
the YOLO-v7 variants are designed for CPU-based mobile device deployment. YOLO-v7-tiny/v7/W6 variants are designed for edge GPU, consumer GPU, an d cloud GPU, respec-
tively. Whilst YOLO-v7-E6/D6/E6E are designed for high-end cloud GPUs only. 
 
Figure 12. YOLO-v7 comparison vs. other object detectors [72]. 
Figure 11. YOLO-v7 compound scaling.