Machines 2023 ,11, 677 19 of 25
approaches the racking. Evaluating the performance of the proposed solution on a real
dataset, the authors claimed an impressive performance of 91.1% mAP running at 19 FPS.
Table 4 presents a comparison of the present research in this emerging ﬁeld. Although
mask R-CNN presents the highest accuracy, which is a derivative of the segmentation
family of architectures with signiﬁcant computational load, this makes it an infeasible
option for deployment. Whereas the proposed approach utilizing YOLO-v7 achieved
similar accuracy compared to MobileNet-V2, whilst requiring signiﬁcantly less training
data along with inferencing at 19 FPS.
Table 4. Racking domain research comparison.
Research Architecture Dataset Size Accuracy FPS
[95] MobileNet-V2 19,717 92.7% -----
[96] YOLO-v7 2095 91.1% 19
[97] Mask-RCNN 75 93.45% -----
4. Discussion
The YOLO family of object detectors has had a signiﬁcant impact on improving the
potential of computer vision applications. Right from the onset, i.e., the release of the
YOLO-v1 in 2015, signiﬁcant breakthroughs were introduced. YOLO-v1 became the ﬁrst
architecture combining the two conventionally separate tasks of bounding box prediction
and classiﬁcation into one. YOLO-v2 was released in the following year, introducing archi-
tectural improvements and iterative improvements, such as batch normalization, higher
resolution, and anchor boxes. In 2018, YOLO-v3 was released, an extension of previous
variants with enhancements including the introduction of objectness scores for bounding
box predictions added connections for the backbone layers and the ability to generate
predictions at three different levels of granularity, leading to improved performance on
smaller object targets.
After a short delay, YOLO-v4 was released in April 2020, becoming the ﬁrst variant of
the YOLO family not to be authored by the original author Joseph Redmon. Enhancements
included improved feature aggregation, gifting of the ‘bag of freebies’, and the mish
activation. In a matter of months, YOLO-v5 entered the computer vision territory, becoming
the ﬁrst variant to be released without being accompanied by a paper release. YOLO-v5
based on PyTorch, with an active GitHub repo further delineated the implementation
process, make it accessible to a wider audience. Focused on internal architectural reforms,
YOLO-v6 authors redesigned the backbone (EfﬁcientRep) and neck (Rep-PAN) modules,
with an inclination toward hardware efﬁciency. Additionally, anchor-free and the concept
of decoupled head was introduced, implying additional layers for feature separation from
the ﬁnal head, which is empirically shown to improve the overall performance. The authors
of YOLO-v7 also focused on architectural reforms, considering the amount of memory
required to keep layers within memory and the distance required for gradients to back-
propagate, i.e., shorter gradients, resulting in enhanced learning capacity. For the ultimate
layer aggregation, the authors implemented E-ELAN, which is an extension of the ELAN
computational block. The advent of 2023 introduced the latest version of the YOLO family,
YOLO-v8, which was released by Ultralytics. With an impending paper release, initial
comparisons of the latest version against predecessors have shown promising performance
with respect to throughput when compared to similar computational parameters.
4.1. Reason for Rising Popularity
Table 5 presents a summary of the reviewed YOLO variants based on the underlying
framework, backbone, average-precision (AP), and key contributions. It can be observed
from Table 3 that as the variants evolved there was a shift from the conservative Darknet
framework to a more accessible one, i.e., PyTorch. The AP presented here is based on
COCO-2017 [ 63] with the exception of YOLO-v1/v2, which are based on VOC-2017 [ 39].