Machines 2023 ,11, 677 2 of 25
quality inspection a cumbersome task with manifold inefﬁciencies linked to human bias,
fatigue, cost, and downtime [ 19]. These inefﬁciencies provide an opportunity for CV-based
solutions to present automated quality inspection that can be integrated within existing
surface defect inspection processes, increasing efﬁciency whilst overcoming bottlenecks
presented via conventional inspection methodologies [20].
However, for success, CV-based architectures must conform to a stringent set of
deployment requirements that can vary from one manufacturing sector to another [ 21]. In
the majority of applications, the focus is not only on the determination of the defect, but also
on multiple defects along with the locality details of each [ 22]. Therefore, object detection
is preferred over image classiﬁcation since the latter only focuses on determination of
object within the image without providing any locality information. Architectures within
the object detection domain can be classiﬁed into single-stage or two-stage detectors [ 23].
Two-stage detectors split the detection process into two stages: Feature extraction/proposal
followed by regression and classiﬁcation for acquiring the output [ 24]. Although this can
provide high accuracy, it comes with a high computational demand making it inefﬁcient for
real-time deployment onto constrained edge devices. Single-stage detectors, on the other
hand, merge the two processes into one, enabling the classiﬁcation and regression via a
single pass, signiﬁcantly reduce the computational demand, and provide a more compelling
case for production-based deployment [ 25]. Although many single-stage detectors have
been introduced, such as single shot detector (SSD) [ 26], deconvolutional single shot
detector (D-SSD) [ 27], and RetinaNet [ 28], the YOLO (You Only Look Once) [ 29] family of
architectures seems to be gaining high traction due to its high compatibility with industrial
requirements, such as accuracy, lightweight, and edge-friendly deployment conditions.
The last half-a-decade has been dominated by the introduction of YOLO variants, with the
most recent variant introduced in 2022 as YOLO-v8.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no cohesive review of the advancing YOLO
variants, benchmarking technical advancements, and their implications on industrial
deployment. This paper reviews the YOLO variants released to the present date, focusing
on presenting the key technical contributions of each YOLO iteration and its impact on key
industrial metrics required for deployment, such as accuracy, speed, and computational
efﬁcacy. As a result, the aim is to provide researchers and practitioners with a better
understanding of the inner workings of each variant, enabling them to select the most
relevant architecture based on their industrial requirements. Additionally, literature on
the deployment of YOLO architectures for various industrial surface defect detection
applications is presented.
The subsequent structure of the review is as follows. The ﬁrst section provides an
introduction to single- and two-stage detectors and the anatomy for single-stage object
detectors. Next, the evolution of YOLO variants is presented, detailing the key contributions
from YOLO-v1 to YOLO-v8, followed by a review of the literature focused on YOLO-based
implementation of industrial surface defect detection. Finally, the discussion section
focuses on summarizing the reviewed literature, followed by extracted conclusions, future
directions, and challenges are presented.
Object Detection
CNNs can be categorized as convolution-based feed forward neural networks for
classiﬁcation purposes [ 30]. The input layer is followed by multiple convolutional layers
to acquire an increased set of smaller-scale feature maps. These feature maps post further
manipulation are transformed into one-dimensional feature vectors before being used as
input to the fully connected layer(s). The process of feature extraction and feature map
manipulation is vital to the overall accuracy of the network; therefore, this can involve the
stacking of multiple convolutional and pooling layers for richer feature maps. Popular
architectures for feature extraction include AlexNet [ 31], VGGNet [ 32], GoogleNet [ 33], and
ResNet [ 34]. AlexNet is proposed in 2012 and consists of ﬁve convolutional, three pooling,
and three fully connected layers primarily utilized for image classiﬁcation tasks. VGGNet