Machines 2023 ,11, 677 18 of 25
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 26 
 
  
Figure 17. Proposed parallel network structure [91]. 
Jianting Shi et al. [92] cite the manufacturin g process of steel production as the reason 
for various defects originating on the steel surface, such as rolling scale and patches. The 
authors state that the small dimensions of the defects as well as the stringent detection 
requirements make the quality inspection process a challenging task. Therefore, the au-
thors present an improved version of YOLO-v5 by incorporating an a ttention mechanism 
for facilitating the transmission of shallow features from the backbone to the neck, pre-
serving the defective regions, in addition to k-means clustering of anchor boxes for ad-
dressing the extreme aspect ratios of defectiv e targets within the dataset. The authors state 
that the improved architecture achieved 86.35% mAP reaching 45 FPS detection speed, whilst the original architecture achieved 81.78% mAP at 52 FPS. 
3.4. Pallet Racking Defect Inspection 
A promising application with signi ﬁcant deployment scope in the warehousing and 
general industrial storage centers is automated pallet racking inspection. Warehouses and 
distribution centers host a crit ical infrastructure known as racking for stock storage. Un-
noticed damage to pallet racking can pave the way for signi ﬁcant losses initiated by rack-
ing collapse leading to wasted/damaged stock, ﬁnancial implications, operational losses, 
injured employees, and worst-case, loss of lives [93]. Due to the ine ﬃciencies of the con-
ventional racking inspection mechanisms, such  as human-led annual inspection resulting 
in labor costs, bias, fatigue, and mechanical pr oducts, such as rackguar ds [94] lacking clas-
siﬁcation intelligence, CNN-based automated de tection seems to be a promising alterna-
tive. 
Realizing the potential, Hussain et al. [95] inaugurated research into automated pallet 
racking detection via computer vision. After presenting their initial research based on the 
MobileNet-V2 architecture, the authors recent ly proposed the implementation of YOLO-
v7 for automated pallet racking inspection [96]. The selection of the architecture was in-
line with the stringent requirements of production ﬂoor deployment, i.e., edge device de-
ployment, placed onto an oper ating forklift, requiring real-time detection as the forklift 
approaches the racking. Evaluating the perfor mance of the proposed solution on a real 
dataset, the authors claimed an impressive pe rformance of 91.1% mAP running at 19 FPS. 
Figure 17. Proposed parallel network structure [91].
Jianting Shi et al. [ 92] cite the manufacturing process of steel production as the reason
for various defects originating on the steel surface, such as rolling scale and patches. The
authors state that the small dimensions of the defects as well as the stringent detection
requirements make the quality inspection process a challenging task. Therefore, the authors
present an improved version of YOLO-v5 by incorporating an attention mechanism for
facilitating the transmission of shallow features from the backbone to the neck, preserving
the defective regions, in addition to k-means clustering of anchor boxes for addressing
the extreme aspect ratios of defective targets within the dataset. The authors state that the
improved architecture achieved 86.35% mAP reaching 45 FPS detection speed, whilst the
original architecture achieved 81.78% mAP at 52 FPS.
3.4. Pallet Racking Defect Inspection
A promising application with significant deployment scope in the warehousing
and general industrial storage centers is automated pallet racking inspection. Ware-
houses and distribution centers host a critical infrastructure known as racking for stock
storage. Unnoticed damage to pallet racking can pave the way for significant losses
initiated by racking collapse leading to wasted/damaged stock, financial implications,
operational losses, injured employees, and worst-case, loss of lives [ 93]. Due to the
inefficiencies of the conventional racking inspection mechanisms, such as human-led
annual inspection resulting in labor costs, bias, fatigue, and mechanical products, such
as rackguards [ 94] lacking classification intelligence, CNN-based automated detection
seems to be a promising alternative.
Realizing the potential, Hussain et al. [ 95] inaugurated research into automated pallet
racking detection via computer vision. After presenting their initial research based on the
MobileNet-V2 architecture, the authors recently proposed the implementation of YOLO-
v7 for automated pallet racking inspection [ 96]. The selection of the architecture was
in-line with the stringent requirements of production ﬂoor deployment, i.e., edge device
deployment, placed onto an operating forklift, requiring real-time detection as the forklift