Machines 2023 ,11, 677 21 of 25
Table 6. GitHub popularity comparison.
YOLO Variant Stars (K)
V3 9.3
V4 20.2
V5 34.7
V6 4.6
V7 8.4
V8 2.9
4.2. YOLO and Industrial Defect Detection
Manifestations of the fourth industrial revolution can be observed at present in an
ad-hoc manner, spanning across various industries. With respect to the manufacturing
industry, this revolution can be targeted at the quality inspection processes, which are
vital for assuring efﬁciency and retaining client satisfaction. When focusing on surface
defect detection, as alluded to earlier, the inspection requirements can be more stringent
as compared to other applications. This is due to many factors, such as the fact that the
defects may be extremely small, requiring external spectral imaging to expose defects prior
to classiﬁcation and due to the fact that the operational setting of the production line may
only provide a small-time window within which inference must be carried out.
Considering the stringent requirements outlined above and benchmarking against the
principles of YOLO family of variants, forms the conclusion that the YOLO variants have the
potential to address both real-time, constrained deployment and small-scale defect detec-
tion requirements of industrial-based surface defect detection. YOLO variants have proven
real-time compliance in several industrial environments as shown in [81,84,85,90,95] . An
interesting observation arising from the industrial literature reviewed is the ability for users
to modify the internal modules of YOLO variants in order to take care of their speciﬁc ap-
plication needs without compromising on real-time compliance, for example [81,87,91,92] ,
introducing attention-mechanisms for accentuation of defective regions.
An additional factor, found within the later YOLO variants is sub-variants for each
base architecture, i.e., for YOLO-v5 variants including YOLO-v5-S/M/L, this corresponds
to different computational loads with respect to the number of parameters. This ﬂexibility
enables researchers to consider a more ﬂexible approach with the architecture selection
criteria based on the industrial requirements, i.e., if real-time inference is required with less
emphasis on optimal mAP , a lightweight variant can be selected, such as YOLO-v5-small
rather than YOLO-v5-large.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, this work is the ﬁrst of its type focused on documenting and reviewing
the evolution of the most prevalent single-stage object detector within the computer vision
domain. The review presents the key advancements of each variant, followed by imple-
mentation of YOLO architectures within various industrial settings focused on surface
automated real-time surface defect detection.
From the review, it is clear as the YOLO variants have progressed, latter versions in
particular, YOLO-v5 has focused on constrained edge deployment, a key requirement for
many manufacturing applications. Due to the fact that there is no copyright and patent
restrictions, research anchored around the YOLO architecture, i.e., real-time, lightweight,
accurate detection, can be conducted by any individual or research organization, which has
also contributed to the prevalence of this variant.
With YOLO-v8 released in January 2023, showing promising performance with respect
to throughput and computational load requirements, it is envisioned that 2023 will see
more variants released by previous or new authors focused on improving the deployment
capacity of the architectures with respect to constrained deployment environments.
With research organizations, such as Ultralytics and Meituan Technical Team taking
a keen interest in the development of YOLO architectures with a focus on edge-friendly