Machines 2023 ,11, 677 16 of 25
at 58.8 FPS, making it compatible with the real-time detection requirements for detection
via embedded devices.
Machines 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 26 
 
  
Figure 15. Backbone for Swin Transformer network [85]. 
3.2. Solar Cell Surface Defect Detection 
Setting their premise, the authors [87] state that human-led Photovoltaic (PV) inspec-
tion has many drawbacks including the re quirement of operation and maintenance 
(O&M) engineers, cell-by-cell inspec tion, high workload, and reduced e ﬃciency. The au-
thors propose an improved architecture based on YOLO-v5 for the characterization of complex solar cell surface textures and defect ive regions. The proposal is based on the 
integration of deformable convolution within  the CSP module with the aim of achieving 
an adaptive learning scale. Additionally, an a ttention mechanism is incorporated for en-
hanced feature extraction. Moreover, the authors optimize the original YOLO-v5 architec-
ture further via K-means++ clustering for an chor box determination algorithm. Based on 
the presented results, the improved architectu re achieved a respectable mAP of 89.64% on 
an EL-based solar cell image dataset, 7.85% higher compared to mAP for the original ar-
chitecture, with detection speed reaching 36.24 FPS, which can be translated as a more accurate detection while remaining compatible with the real-time requirements. 
Amran Binomairah et al. [88]  highlight two frequent defects encountered during the 
manufacturing process of crystalline solar cell s as dark spot/region and microcracks. The 
latter can have a detrimental impact on the performance of the module, which is a major 
cause for PV module failures. The authors su bscribe to the YOLO architecture, comparing 
the performance of their methodology on YOLO-v4 and an improved YOLO-v4-tiny inte-
grated with a spatial pyramid pooling mechanism. Based on the presented results, YOLO-
v4 achieved 98.8% mAP at 62.9 ms, whilst the improved YOLO-v4-tiny lagged with 91% 
mAP at 28.2 ms. The authors claim that although the la tter is less accurate, it is notably 
faster than the former. 
Tianyi Sun et al. [89] focus on automated hot-spot detection within PV cells based a 
modi ﬁed version of the YOLO-v5 architecture. The ﬁrst improvement comes in the form 
of enhanced anchors and detection heads for the respective architecture. To improve the 
detection precision at varying scales, k-means clustering [48] is deployed for clustering 
the length–width ratio with respect to the data  annotation frame. Additionally, a set of the 
anchors consisting of smaller values were adde d to cater for the detection of small defects 
by optimizing the cluster numb er. The reported performance of the improved architecture 
was reported as 87.8% mAP, with the average recall rate of 89.0% and F1-score reaching 
88.9%. The reported FPS was impressive reaching  98.6 FPS, with the authors claiming that 
the proposed solution would provide intellige nt monitoring at PV power stations. Infer-
encing output presented in Figure 16 sh ows the proposed AP-YOLO-v5 architecture, 
providing inferences at a higher con ﬁdence level compared to the original YOLO-v5. 
Figure 15. Backbone for Swin Transformer network [85].
3.2. Solar Cell Surface Defect Detection
Setting their premise, the authors [ 87] state that human-led Photovoltaic (PV) inspec-
tion has many drawbacks including the requirement of operation and maintenance (O&M)
engineers, cell-by-cell inspection, high workload, and reduced efﬁciency. The authors
propose an improved architecture based on YOLO-v5 for the characterization of complex
solar cell surface textures and defective regions. The proposal is based on the integration
of deformable convolution within the CSP module with the aim of achieving an adaptive
learning scale. Additionally, an attention mechanism is incorporated for enhanced feature
extraction. Moreover, the authors optimize the original YOLO-v5 architecture further via
K-means++ clustering for anchor box determination algorithm. Based on the presented
results, the improved architecture achieved a respectable mAP of 89.64% on an EL-based
solar cell image dataset, 7.85% higher compared to mAP for the original architecture, with
detection speed reaching 36.24 FPS, which can be translated as a more accurate detection
while remaining compatible with the real-time requirements.
Amran Binomairah et al. [ 88] highlight two frequent defects encountered during
the manufacturing process of crystalline solar cells as dark spot/region and microcracks.
The latter can have a detrimental impact on the performance of the module, which is
a major cause for PV module failures. The authors subscribe to the YOLO architecture,
comparing the performance of their methodology on YOLO-v4 and an improved YOLO-v4-
tiny integrated with a spatial pyramid pooling mechanism. Based on the presented results,
YOLO-v4 achieved 98.8% mAP at 62.9 ms, whilst the improved YOLO-v4-tiny lagged with
91% mAP at 28.2 ms. The authors claim that although the latter is less accurate, it is notably
faster than the former.
Tianyi Sun et al. [ 89] focus on automated hot-spot detection within PV cells based a
modiﬁed version of the YOLO-v5 architecture. The ﬁrst improvement comes in the form
of enhanced anchors and detection heads for the respective architecture. To improve the
detection precision at varying scales, k-means clustering [ 48] is deployed for clustering the
length–width ratio with respect to the data annotation frame. Additionally, a set of the
anchors consisting of smaller values were added to cater for the detection of small defects
by optimizing the cluster number. The reported performance of the improved architecture
was reported as 87.8% mAP , with the average recall rate of 89.0% and F1-score reaching