mostly on local relationships within the input se-
quence (Dhingra et al., 2018; Ravfogel et al., 2019).
Some recent work seeks to design neural archi-
tectures that build in desirable inductive biases
(Dyer et al., 2016; Battaglia et al., 2018), or com-
pares the immutable biases of different architec-
tures (McCoy et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020). How-
ever, inductive biases can also be learned by bio-
logical (Harlow, 1949) and artiﬁcial systems alike
(Lake et al., 2017). In the language model ﬁne-
tuning paradigm proposed by Howard and Ruder
(2018) and popularized by models such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019), a pretrained neural network
plays the role of the learner. Pretraining adjusts a
model’s weights so that it will navigate the hypoth-
esis space during training on a downstream task
more effectively than a randomly initialized model.
There is a difference between learning to extract
a linguistic feature and acquiring a bias towards us-
ing it when generalizing. There is ample evidence
that BERT encodes features such as syntactic cate-
gory and constituency (Tenney et al., 2019; Clark
et al., 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019). The ac-
quisition of linguistic features is a prerequisite for a
linguistic bias. However, these ﬁndings do not tell
us if the model will make use of these features to
form generalizations during target task training, or
if it will fall back on surface features that account
for most of the data.
Methods: Measuring Inductive Bias We con-
duct three kinds of experiments to probe a model’s
preference for linguistic or surface generalizations:
unambiguous control experiments, fully ambiguous
experiments, and partially ambiguous inoculation
experiments. Figure 1 gives an overview of the
ambiguous experiment design.
First, it only makes sense to compare a model’s
preference between two features if it actually repre-
sents both features. This is the goal behind control
experiments , in which we ﬁne-tune RoBERTa to
classify sentences based on a single linguistic or
surface feature in a totally unambiguous setting.
Second, we conduct ambiguous experiments on
models that pass the controls. We ﬁne-tune a pre-
trained model on a binary sentence classiﬁcation
task using ambiguous data, which equally supports
both a simple linguistic generalization and a simple
surface one. For example, Figure 1 shows a linguis-
tic task where sentences in the positive class are de-
ﬁned by having a main verb in the “ing” form. We
make the training data ambiguous by introducing asurface feature that distinguishes the two classes:
In all (and only) training examples with label 1,
the word “the” precedes the word “a”. Based on
this training data, a model could reasonably adopt
either a linguistic generalization or a surface one.
We then test the classiﬁer on disambiguating
data to observe which generalization it made. In
this kind of data, the labels align with the linguistic
generalization, and contradict the surface one: For
example, in Figure 1, “a” now always precedes
“the” in the positive test examples with label 1. We
quantify a model’s inductive bias using a metric we
call the linguistic bias score (LBS). We deﬁne LBS
as the Matthews correlation between the model
predictions and the labels on the disambiguating
test set (Matthews, 1975). If LBS is 1, the learner
shows a systematic linguistic bias. If LBS is -1,
it shows a systematic surface bias. If LBS is 0, it
shows neither bias.
Finally, while the fully ambiguous experiments
probe models’ biases in an idealized setting, train-
ing data in more naturalistic contexts often does
contain some evidence supporting a linguistic gen-
eralization over a simple surface one. To simulate
this, we also conduct a series of inoculation exper-
iments (following Liu et al., 2019a), in which we
introduce small amounts of disambiguating data
into an otherwise ambiguous training set. For each
experiment, we replace 0.1%, 0.3%, or 1% of the
training data with examples that support the lin-
guistic generalization and contradict the surface
one. These experiments allow us to compare the
strength of linguistic bias in models that show an
overall surface bias: If two models adopt the sur-
face generalization in the fully ambiguous case, we
can still say that one has a stronger linguistic bias
than the other if it requires less inoculation data to
be swayed towards the linguistic generalization.
3 Evaluation Data
We introduce MSGS (Mixed Signals Generaliza-
tion Set), pronounced “messages”, a dataset we
design to be used in poverty of the stimulus and
inoculation experiments. With the goal of contrast-
ing inductive biases that are helpful and harmful in
most NLP applications, the tasks in MSGS test a
model’s preferences for generalizations based on
linguistic or surface features.
Features under Study Table 3 illustrates the 4
linguistic features and 5 surface features we con-