eralization. Ravfogel et al. (2019) train RNNs
on a morphological prediction task using artiﬁ-
cial languages derived from naturally occurring
English text, ﬁnding that RNNs show a recency
bias in acquiring agreement rules. McCoy et al.
(2018, 2020) train a seq2seq models on generated
data ambiguous between a surface and a structural
generalization to learn the subject-auxiliary inver-
sion rule in English question formation. They ﬁnd
that, while tree-structured models show a struc-
tural bias, sequence models do not. Warstadt and
Bowman (2020) conduct related experiments on
subject-auxiliary inversion and other English struc-
tural rules, and ﬁnd that BERT likely acquires a
structural bias from pretraining.
More abstract inductive biases have also been
studied. Using zero-shot learning in an artiﬁcial
language, Lake and Baroni (2018) show that RNNs
lack a bias in favor of learning compositional mean-
ings for new symbols. Gandhi and Lake (2019) and
Gulordava et al. (2020) explore conditions under
which neural networks exhibit a bias towards learn-
ing mutually exclusive meanings for new symbols.
Data augmentation and inoculation have also
been explored previously as a way to inﬂuence how
models generalize. McCoy et al. (2019) and Min
et al. (2020) show that small amounts of inocu-
lating data during training on textual entailment
help BERT overlook certain surface generaliza-
tions. Jha et al. (2020) study inoculation using
a constructed language of numerical sequences.
Like us, they generate ambiguous datasets, though
they only compare features that resemble our sur-
face features. They ﬁnd that it is relatively easy to
nudge models away from shallow generalizations,
but harder to nudge them towards deeper ones.
Finally, several earlier studies explored how in-
creasing training data impacts linguistic knowledge
in LMs. Unlike the present study, these studies
evaluate LMs using an unsupervised acceptability
judgment task on minimal pairs (i.e. not during
ﬁne-tuning), and do not attempt to separate feature
learning from feature preferences. van Schijndel
et al. (2019) ﬁnd the greatest increase in sensitivity
to acceptability contrasts occurs between training
on 2M and 10M words. Warstadt et al. (2020)
ﬁnd that while LMs learn agreement phenomena
at a similarly early stage, other phenomena require
more data to learn. Finally, Hu et al. (2020) ﬁnd
that adopting architectures that build in linguistic
bias, such as RNNGs (Dyer et al., 2016), has a big-ger effect on the acceptability task than increasing
training data from 1M to 40M words.
7 Future Work & Conclusion
Our experiments shed light on the relationship be-
tween pretraining data and an inductive bias to-
wards linguistic generalization. Our results indi-
cate that, although some abstract linguistic features
are learnable from relatively small amounts of pre-
training data, models require signiﬁcant pretraining
after discovering these features to develop a bias
towards using them when generalizing. This gives
some insight into why extensive pretraining helps
general-purpose neural networks adapt to down-
stream tasks with relative ease.
We also introduce MSGS, a new diagnostic
dataset for probing the inductive biases of learn-
ing algorithms using the poverty of the stimulus
design and inoculation, and also introduce a set
of 12 RoBERTa models we pretrain on smaller
data quantities. These models could prove to be a
helpful resource for future studies looking to study
learning curves of various kinds with respect to the
quantity of pretraining data.
Finally, while our results naturally lead to the
conclusion that we should continue to pursue mod-
els with ever more pretraining, such as GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020), we do not wish to suggest
that this will be the only or best way to build mod-
els with stronger inductive biases. Future work
might use MSGS as a diagnostic tool to measure
how effectively new model architectures and self-
supervised pretraining tasks can more efﬁciently
equip neural networks with better inductive biases.
Acknowledgments
This project has beneﬁted from ﬁnancial support
to SB by Eric and Wendy Schmidt (made by rec-
ommendation of the Schmidt Futures program),
by Samsung Research (under the project Improv-
ing Deep Learning using Latent Structure ), by In-
tuit, Inc., and in-kind support by the NYU High-
Performance Computing Center and by NVIDIA
Corporation (with the donation of a Titan V GPU).
This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1850208 and 1922658. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reﬂect the views of the National Science
Foundation.