Absolute positionSurface
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
1M10M100M 1B30BOrthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M10M100M 1B30BMorphologyLinguistic
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic category
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic position
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic construction
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Pretraining Dataset Size
Matthews Correlation
Pretraining Dataset Size
Matthews CorrelationFigure 2: Results on the main experiments measured in Matthews correlation for the surface control tasks (top)
and linguistic control tasks (bottom). Note: For surface tasks a positive score represents a surface generalization.
tures that allow for lexical variation in the data
while maintaining grammatical well-formedness.
Although generated sentences often describe un-
likely or implausible scenarios (e.g., The lawyer
was sinking all canoes ), semantic plausibility is
independent of all the features we examine, so this
should not affect a model that genuinely encodes
these features. To prevent out-of-vocabulary tokens
affecting our results, we ensure that every word
stem in the vocabulary appears in the pretraining
datasets for our RoBERTa models (see §4.1).
Our experimental logic only makes sense if
we are reasonably conﬁdent that models can only
achieve high test performance by genuinely adopt-
ing a linguistic generalization. However, training
models on generated data can easily lead to overﬁt-
ting, and classiﬁers trained and tested on data from
the same domain can achieve perfect performance
even on arbitrary tasks with random labels (Hewitt
and Liang, 2019). For this reason, our primary
evaluations test models’ ability to generalize out-
of-domain. We manipulate domain in two ways:
First, we generate training data and test data for
each dataset from separate in-domain and out-of-
domain templates. Thus a model cannot succeed at
test time simply by recognizing a template or a key
part of a template. For example, in the SYNTACTIC
POSITIONLEXICAL CONTENT paradigm shown
in Table 2, the in-domain data contrasts the main
verb with a verb in a relative clause embedded in
the complement clause of a verb; while the out-of-
domain data contrasts the main verb with a verb in
the complement clause of a noun. In most tasks,each domain itself is generated from multiple tem-
plates as well to widen the domain and encourage
better generalization during training.
Second, on tasks that test lexical knowledge (for
instance, the knowledge that slept is an irregular
past verb and meow is not), we divide the crucial
lexical items into in-domain and out-of-domain
sets. Thus, a model cannot succeed by memorizing
the keywords associated with each class. See the
Appendix for a more detailed description of the
implementation details for each feature.
4 Models, Pretraining, & Fine-Tuning
We test 13 RoBERTa models in our main experi-
ments: We pretrain 12 from scratch, and also test
RoBERTa BASE pretrained by Liu et al. (2019b).
4.1 Pretraining
Pretraining Data We pretrain RoBERTa using
scaled-down recreations of the dataset used by
Devlin et al. (2019) to train BERT, i.e English
Wikipedia (2.5 billion tokens) and BookCorpus
(800 million tokens). Both are included in the
RoBERTa pretraining data.4We download the lat-
est Wikipedia dump as of Feb 1, 2020. The original
BookCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015) is no longer avail-
able, so we collect similar data from Smashwords,
the original source of BookCorpus.5
4RoBERTa uses English Wikipedia, BookCorpus, CC-
News, OpenWebText, and STORIES in pretraining.
5We collect our data using the Wikipedia XML
dump https://dumps.wikimedia.org/mirrors.html and data-
processing code https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor, and
a Smashwords crawler https://github.com/soskek/bookcorpus.