Learning Which Features Matter: RoBERTa Acquires a Preference for
Linguistic Generalizations (Eventually)
Alex Warstadt,1Yian Zhang,2Haau-Sing Li,3Haokun Liu,3Samuel R. Bowman1;2;3
1Dept. of Linguistics,2Dept. of Computer Science,3Center for Data Science
New York University
Correspondence: warstadt@nyu.edu
Abstract
One reason pretraining on self-supervised lin-
guistic tasks is effective is that it teaches mod-
els features that are helpful for language under-
standing. However, we want pretrained mod-
els to learn not only to represent linguistic fea-
tures, but also to usethose features preferen-
tially during ﬁne-turning. With this goal in
mind, we introduce a new English-language di-
agnostic set called MSGS (the Mixed Signals
Generalization Set), which consists of 20 am-
biguous binary classiﬁcation tasks that we use
to test whether a pretrained model prefers lin-
guistic or surface generalizations during ﬁne-
tuning. We pretrain RoBERTa models from
scratch on quantities of data ranging from 1M
to 1B words and compare their performance on
MSGS to the publicly available RoBERTa BASE.
We ﬁnd that models can learn to represent lin-
guistic features with little pretraining data, but
require far more data to learn to prefer linguis-
tic generalizations over surface ones. Eventu-
ally, with about 30B words of pretraining data,
RoBERTa BASE does demonstrate a linguistic
bias with some regularity. We conclude that
while self-supervised pretraining is an effec-
tive way to learn helpful inductive biases, there
is likely room to improve the rate at which
models learn which features matter.
1 Introduction
Self-supervised pretraining through language mod-
eling on massive datasets has revolutionized NLP.
One reason this method works is that pretraining
shapes a model’s hypothesis space, giving it in-
ductive biases that help it learn linguistic tasks
(Howard and Ruder, 2018). Numerous probing
studies have provided support for this idea by show-
ing that language models learn representations that
encode linguistic features (Gulordava et al., 2019;
Tenney et al., 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019).
However, feature learning is just the ﬁrst step to
acquiring helpful inductive biases. Models must
The rumor that a CEO is losing spread. A boy who is hugging the cat sneezed. 
A guest said that the boat is sinking. 
Test behavior:  Surface bias observed 
Label=0,Prediction=1 A rumor that the CEO lost is spreading. 
Label=0,Prediction=0 The boy who hugged a cat is sneezing. 
1   2   3   4       5 6   7  8 
A rumor that the CEO lost is spreading. Disambiguating Test Data 
Test behavior:  Linguistic bias observed Linguistic Generalization: 
Is the main verb in the “-ing” form? Ambiguous Training Data 
Surface Generalization: 
Does the word “the” precede “a”? Hypothesis Space ?
A boy who hugged the cat is sneezing. 
1 2   3   4     5   6   7  8 Label=1
The boy who hugged a cat is sneezing. 
Label=1
The guest is saying that a boat sinks. Label=0
Label=0
Label=1,Prediction=1 
The rumor that a CEO is losing spread. Label=1,Prediction=0 Figure 1: Example of an ambiguous experiment (with-
out inoculation). A model is trained on ambiguous data
whose labels are consistent with either a linguistic or
a surface generalization, and tested on disambiguating
data whose labels support only the linguistic general-
ization. Light green and dark red shading represents
data or features associated with the positive and nega-
tive labels/predictions, respectively.
also be able to learn which features matter. The
NLU datasets these models are often ﬁne-tuned
on are ambiguous and contain artifacts, and often
support multiple possible generalizations. Neural
networks are not mind readers: Models that have
been shown to represent linguistic features some-
times fail to use them during ﬁne-tuning on NLU
tasks, instead adopting shallow surface generaliza-
tions (Jia and Liang, 2017; McCoy et al., 2019). To
this end, recent work in probing pretrained models
advocates for shifting the focus of study away from
whether they represent linguistic features and in
favor of whether they learn useful representations
of those features (V oita and Titov, 2020; Pimentel
et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2020).
We investigate how RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b)
acquires language-speciﬁc inductive biases during
self-supervised pretraining. We track separatelyarXiv:2010.05358v1  [cs.CL]  11 Oct 2020