Dom. Split L LLSSentence
InTrain (Ambiguous)1 1 These men weren’t hating that this person who sang tunes destroyed the vase.
0 0 These men hated that this person who sang tunes was destroying some vase.
Inoc. (Disamb.)1 0 These men weren’t hating that this person who sang tunes destroyed some vase.
0 1 These men hated that this person who sang tunes was destroying the vase.
OutTest (Disamb.)1 0 These reports that all students built that school were impressing some children.
0 1 These reports that all students were building the school had impressed some children.
Aux. (Ambiguous)1 1 These reports that all students built the school were impressing some children.
0 0 These reports that all students were building that school had impressed some children.
Table 2: A full paradigm from the SYNTACTIC POSITION LEXICAL CONTENT task. LLandLSmark the
presence of the linguistic feature ( Is the main verb in the “ing” form? ) and surface feature ( Does S contain
“the”? ), respectively. Dom. is short for domain .
sider.1Each feature is meant to be representative
of a broad category of features (e.g. morpholog-
ical features), though the precise implementation
of each feature is necessarily much narrower (e.g.
Does the sentence have an irregular past verb? ).
Forming generalizations based on surface features
entails knowledge of the identity of certain words
(in our case, only “the” and “a”), the positional
indices of words in the string, the total number of
words in a string, or whether certain characters are
lowercase or uppercase.2Forming generalizations
based on linguistic features requires more abstract
knowledge of tense and inﬂectional morphemes,
parts of speech, the control construction,3and hi-
erarchical syntactic structures, none of which are
encoded in the surface string.
Dataset Structure MSGS contains 20 ambigu-
ous binary classiﬁcation tasks each gotten by pair-
ing one of 4 linguistic features with one of 5 surface
features. We write FEAT 1FEAT 2to denote a task
that combines features FEAT 1and FEAT 2. Each am-
biguous dataset contains 50k sentences split into
1We explored a slightly larger set of linguistic features and
excluded several based on initial experiments showing our
models did not encode them. For example, we constructed a
task with the objective of identifying sentences that contain
antonyms (e.g. The little girl likes the big dog. ), but found that
only RoBERTa BASE could solve the unambiguous control task.
2Although these are surface properties of the string, they
are not all trivial for RoBERTa due to its subword tokenization.
3The control construction is a syntactic construction in
which a semantic argument of a predicate ﬁlls or controls an
argument slot of an embedded verb. The raising construction
is superﬁcially similar, but the ﬁller of the embedded argument
slot is not a semantic argument of the main predicate (Sag
et al., 2003). For instance, Sue is eager to sleep is an example
of control because the NP Sueis the semantic subject of both
eager andsleep . By contrast, Sue is likely to sleep is an
example of raising because Sueis the semantic subject of
sleep , but not of likely . These two phenomena have different
syntactic derivations in some theories (Chomsky, 1981).training, evaluation, and inoculation sets. MSGS
also includes 9 unambiguous control tasks —one
for each feature. Each control dataset contains 30k
sentences split into training and evaluation sets.
For ambiguous tasks, we generate data in
paradigms of 8 sentences following a 222
design, as shown in Table 2. We vary the following
three features: a binary linguistic feature, a binary
surface feature, and the domain from which the
sentence is sampled. We generate in-domain and
out-of-domain sentences from different templates
(see §3:Data Generation for more detail).
As shown in Table 2, we split the data into four
contrasting pairs with different purposes: (1) Train-
ing data is ambiguous in-domain data makes up
99% to 100% of the training set. (2) Inoculat-
ing data is disambiguating in-domain data which
makes up 0.1% to 1% of the training set in exper-
iments with inoculation. We show the classiﬁer
only the linguistic label ( LL) to nudge it towards
adopting a linguistic generalization. (3) Test data
is disambiguating out-of-domain data used to test
whether the model adopted the linguistic or surface
generalization. (4) Auxiliary data is ambiguous
out-of-domain data used to test how well the model
adapts to the out-of-domain templates, regardless
of which generalization it makes.
For control tasks, we generate data in paradigms
of 4 sentences following a 22design by vary-
ing the feature and domain. We use control tasks
to test whether each pretrained model represents
each feature well enough to ﬁne-tune an effective
classiﬁer in an unambiguous setting.
Data Generation The data is generated from
templates using a generation toolkit from Warstadt
et al. (2020). This toolkit includes a vocabulary
of over 3000 entries labeled with grammatical fea-