A Data Description
MSGS contains 5 surface features and 4 linguis-
tic features, summarized in Table 3 (repeated from
the main body of the paper, for convenience). Im-
plementation details for the features are described
below. The implementation of one feature some-
times depends on other feature it is paired with in
an ambiguous dataset.
Absolute position This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence begins with the word “the”. We generally
ensure that sentences bearing a value for this fea-
ture contains two clauses and four determiners total.
Some sentences in SYNTACTIC CATEGORY AB-
SOLUTE POSITION contain fewer than four NPs.
The in-domain and out-of-domain sentences differ
in the order or position of the clauses.
Length This feature is 1 iffthe sentence exceeds
some number of tokens. The exact threshold varies
depending on the linguistic feature in an ambigu-
ous task, since different linguistic features lead to
sentences of different length, on average. In mixed
tasks, we vary the length of sentences by adjoining
subordinate clauses (e.g. If Sue wakes ) of varying
length to the clause in which the linguistic feature
is varied.
Lexical content This feature is 1 iffthe sentence
contains the. The sentences generally contain at
least two clauses and four determiners. The posi-
tion of thevaries between in-domain and out-of-
domain sentences.
Relative position This feature is 1 when thepre-
cedes a, and 0 when aprecedes the. The sentences
generally contain at least two clauses and four deter-
miners. Thus, there are six different conﬁgurations
in which theprecedes a, and these are separated
into in-domain and out-of-domain templates.
Orthography This feature is 1 iffthe sentence
appears in title case. In the control paradigm, the
sentences generally contain two clauses, whose
positions are varied between in-domain and out-of-
domain sentences.
Lexical semantics This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence contains a pair of antonyms. In sentences
with label 0, there is a pair of words in a hyper-
nym/hyponym or synonym relation. There are
21 pairs of adjective antonyms and 21 pairs of
verb antonyms (not accounting for different inﬂec-
tional forms). To prevent the task being solvableusing lexical content, these pairs are divided into in-
domain and out-of-domain sets. There are different
templates corresponding to whether the antonyms
are adjectives, intransitive verbs, or transitive verbs.
Each template appears in both in-domain and out-
of-domain sentences.
Morphology This feature is 1 when the sentence
contains an irregular past tense verb, and 0 when
it contains a 3rd person present plural verb (iden-
tical to the bare form). Sentences either contain
an irregular past tense verb or a regular 3rd person
present plural verb (identical to the bare form). We
do this because other verb forms can be identiﬁed
by inﬂectional morphemes such as -sor auxiliaries
such as have , and so discrimination between them
could in some cases reduce to a lexical content
task. The verbs are divided into in-domain and
out-of-domain sets.
Syntactic category This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence contains an adjective. To diversify the tem-
plates, we consider all grammatical combinations
of a noun, an adjective, a locative PP, and a proper
name (e.g., Sue is the tall actress in the park , or
The actress is Sue ). In out-of-domain sentences we
also include single-word nominal predicates like
president (see the example in Table 3 to control
for the fact that predicative adjectives are always a
single, lowercase word. This gives a total of 19 tem-
plates divided into in-domain and out-of-domain
sets, some with adjectives and some without. The
set of adjectives is also split between domains.
Syntactic construction This feature has value 1
iffthe sentence contains the control construction.
In the control construction a semantic argument of
a predicate ﬁlls or controls an argument slot of an
embedded verb (Sag et al., 2003). For instance, in
Sue is eager to sleep , the NP Suesurfaces as the syn-
tactic subject of eager , but Sueis also understood as
the semantic subject of sleep . This contrasts with
theraising construction in Sue is likely to sleep ,
where Sueis again surfaces as the syntactic subject
oflikely in the main clause, and is the semantic sub-
ject of sleep in the embedded position, but is not a
semantic argument of likely . Different predicates
are compatible with control and raising: eager is
a control predicate and likely is a raising predi-
cate. We include control and raising predicates of
three kinds: subject control/raising verbs, object
control/raising verbs, and control/raising adjectives.
Speciﬁc predicates are divided into in-domain and