more pretraining, indicating they have a stronger
linguistic bias. We also notice distinctive behavior
for the models at the extreme ends of pretraining
data quantity: The 1M model never completes the
transition, suggesting it has a strong surface bias,
and RoBERTa BASE appears to be in the middle of
this transition with 0% inoculating data, suggesting
that even more pretraining data could produce a
model with a more consistent linguistic bias.
These ﬁndings are echoed in individual task
results in Figure 4.7In each plot, models with
the same amount of inoculation data (i.e. points
with a given color) have higher LBS as the
amount of pretraining data increases. Notably, on
ambiguous tasks involving LEXICAL CONTENT ,
RoBERTa BASE usually favors generalizations based
on linguistic features without any inoculating data,
which no other pretrained model does. We ﬁnd this
result quite striking: Even if the labels are perfectly
correlated with the presence or absence of the word
“the”, RoBERTa BASE overlooks that fact in favor of
a deeper generalization based on an abstract feature
like the inﬂectional form of a verb in a particular
syntactic position. Furthermore, this preference
is clearly acquired through additional pretraining.
The results for MORPHOLOGYORTHOGRAPHY
is a typical illustration of the differences between
models. The 1M model never adopts the linguistic
generalization based on the morphological feature,
though it eventually rejects the surface general-
ization. The 100M and 1B models make robust
linguistic generalizations only with 1.0% inoculat-
ing data. By contrast, RoBERTa BASE requires only
0.1% inoculating data (i.e. 10 out of 10k examples)
to adopt the linguistic generalization.
Surface Biases of RoBERTa Our results also
suggest some speciﬁc conclusions about which
kinds of surface features RoBERTa pays attention
to.8For instance, these models have little prefer-
ence for sentence length. As shown in the second
column of Figure 4, most of the models form lin-
guistic generalizations rather than generalizations
based on sentence length, even with no inoculat-
ing data. By contrast, the models strongly prefer
generalizations based on orthography—and to a
lesser extent lexical content and word order—over
7Analogous results for the held out training-condition data,
inoculation data, and auxiliary data are in the Appendix.
8MSGS does not come close to representing the full range
of possible relevant lexical or syntactic features, preventing us
from making strong conclusions about which speciﬁc linguis-
tic features RoBERTa has biases in favor of.linguistic generalizations.
The Success of Pretrained Models Our ﬁnd-
ings provide insight into why pretraining on mas-
sive datasets is so successful. While linguistic fea-
ture learning is a major effect of pretraining, it
is far from the end of the story: Pretraining also
helps models learn which features are central to
language. However, this second kind of learning
seems to require far more exposure to data with
current models and pretraining techniques. There-
fore, massive datasets are needed to teach models
which features are useful for generalizing.
The data scale at which we observe RoBERTa
beginning to show a linguistic bias (between 1B
and 30B words) is similar to the amount of pretrain-
ing data used by the ﬁrst pretrained LMs to achieve
major successes at NLU tasks, such as ELMo (Pe-
ters et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
This suggests a crucial data threshold below which
language model pretraining is unlikely to be signif-
icantly helpful for most applications with current
model architectures, and may explain the many-
year gap between the development of neural LMs
and the ﬁrst major applications of LM pretraining:
The early LMs must have not have been trained
sufﬁciently to cross that threshold, yielding consis-
tently poor results.
6 Related work
There is increasing interest in studying the induc-
tive biases of neural networks. Much of this work
has grown out of numerous ﬁndings that these mod-
els often fail to generalize in ways that task design-
ers intend. For example, Jia and Liang (2017) and
McCoy et al. (2019) demonstrate that ambiguity in
widely used NLU datasets like SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016) and MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018)
leads models like BERT to adopt some surface
generalizations, despite the fact that they represent
linguistic features. This continues to be a problem
for models like RoBERTaBASEwhich show an over-
all linguistic bias in our experiments. However,
for tasks like NLI, the underlying linguistic feature
depends on a combination of signiﬁcant syntactic
knowledge, semantic knowledge, and world knowl-
edge. It stands to reason that representations and
preferences for such high level features require
more data to learn than the features we probe.
Other work has used the poverty of stimulus
design to study inductive biases associated with
particular neural architectures during syntactic gen-