Feature type Feature description Positive example Negative exampleSurfaceAbsolute position Is the ﬁrst token of S “the”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased a mouse.
Length Is S longer than n(e.g., 3) words? The cat chased a mouse. The cat meowed.
Lexical content Does S contain “the”? That cat chased the mouse. That cat chased a mouse.
Relative position Does “the” precede “a”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased the mouse.
Orthography Does S appear in title case? The Cat Chased a Mouse. The cat chased a mouse.LinguisticMorphology Does S have an irregular past verb? The cats slept. The cats meow.
Syn. category Does S have an adjective? Lincoln was tall. Lincoln was president.
Syn. construction Is S the control construction? Sue is eager to sleep. Sue is likely to sleep.
Syn. position Is the main verb in “ing” form? Cats who eat mice are purring. Cats who are eating mice purr.
Table 1: Schematic examples of the linguistic and surface features in our experiments.
how RoBERTa’s representation of linguistic fea-
tures and its preferences for linguistic generaliza-
tions over surface generalizations change as the
amount of pretraining data increases. We pretrain
RoBERTa from scratch on datasets ranging from
1M to 1B words and evaluate these models along-
side RoBERTa BASE in a series of experiments to
probe the inductive biases of a pretrained model at
the time of ﬁne-tuning on a downstream task.
We probe these models in three kinds of ex-
periments: First, we conduct control experiments
where we ﬁne-tune models on unambiguous binary
classiﬁcation tasks to test whether they learn to rep-
resent simple linguistic and surface features. Sec-
ond, we conduct ambiguous experiments following
thepoverty of the stimulus design (Wilson, 2006),
as illustrated in Figure 1. In these experiments,
we ﬁne-tune a pretrained model on an ambiguous
binary classiﬁcation task in which the training set
is consistent with both a linguistic generalization
and a surface one. We then test the classiﬁer on
disambiguating data to reveal which generalization
the model adopted, and by extension its preference
among the two features. Third, we conduct inocu-
lation experiments (following Liu et al., 2019a) to
test how hard it is to sway a model with a surface
bias to adopt a linguistic generalization. We do this
by introducing small amounts of disambiguating
data into an otherwise ambiguous training set. We
automatically generate data for all these tasks, and
call the resulting dataset MSGS (Mixed Signals
Generalization Set), pronounced “messages”.
The results show that RoBERTa acquires a
stronger linguistic bias as pretraining increases.
RoBERTa BASE has the strongest linguistic bias,
and requires little to no inoculating data to reli-
ably make the linguistic generalization. In general,
models with more pretraining data can generally be
induced to adopt linguistic generalizations with lessinoculating data. We also ﬁnd a large gap between
the amount of pretraining data that RoBERTa needs
to learn the linguistic features necessary to general-
ize out-of-domain and the amount it needs to learns
that it should prefer those features when generaliz-
ing. The control experiments on unambiguous data
reveal that models with little pretraining do actually
represent the linguistic features, but nonetheless
show a strong surface bias. In other words, the
main contribution of pretraining to linguistic bias
learning is devoted not to extracting features, but
to learning which features matter.
We conclude that helpful inductive biases can
be learned through pretraining, but current mod-
els require abundant data to do so. The implica-
tions of this conclusion point in two directions:
First, we can probably continue to pretrain on
increasingly massive training sets to improve on
the generalization and few-shot learning abilities
of models like T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) and GPT-
3 (Brown et al., 2020). Second, since models
learn useful features early, there is hope that fu-
ture advances could accelerate by reducing the
amount of data needed to learn which features mat-
ter. To aid in this effort, we release the MSGS
dataset, our pretrained RoBERTas, and all our code:
https://github.com/nyu-mll/msgs .
2 Inductive Bias
Background: Learning Inductive Bias Any ﬁ-
nite set of training examples shown to a learning
algorithm like a neural network is consistent with
inﬁnitely many generalizable decision functions.
Inductive biases are a learner’s preferences among
these functions. An inductive bias can eliminate
certain possible functions altogether, or result in a
preference for some over others (Haussler, 1988).
For instance, an RNN classiﬁer is capable of rep-
resenting anyfunction, but prefers ones that focus