175 Digital twins: artificial intelligence and the IoT cyber -physical systems in Industry 4.0  
1 3
4  Categorisation of future and present 
techniques: found in the qualitative 
literature review and the quantitative 
bibliometric analysis
This review presents different groups of future challenges 
and techniques for embedding AI systems within IoT sys -
tems, and a form of dependency or a causal edge relation 
between them. Table  1 shows the edges between different 
nodes representing groups of the influence of future and pre-
sent challenges and techniques on artificial cognition in CPS.
The techniques identified (in Table  1) represent a form of 
conceptual grouping for building upon the CPS architecture 
(Lee et al. 2015), but separates the future from the present 
techniques and challenges. This separation constitutes the 
grounding for the empirical review of AI systems within 
IoT systems summarised in Tables  2, 3 and 4 , presenting an 
overview of I4.0 strategies in tabular form. Table  1 is also 
important for the understanding of the conceptual diagram, 
in Fig.  6, because all abbreviations are explained in Table  1.5  Empirical review: embedding IoT systems 
in I4.0 frameworks
The aim of this section is to relate the academic literature 
and industry reports, with what is happening in practice. 
The first objective of the empirical review is to determine 
whether the practical frameworks and initiative globally 
are implementing the recommendations from the leading 
research in this area, as identified in the literature review—
Sect.  2. The second objective is to relate the findings from 
the bibliometric analysis, with the leading frameworks and 
initiatives, and to build summary tables of the emerging 
categories. The summary tables are used for the conceptual 
diagram design, illustrating the evolution of Industry 4.0 and 
IoT enhanced cyber-physical systems. Finally, by empirically 
comparing academic literature with national frameworks, 
we propose a practical approach, which is considered cru-
cial in current literature (Radanliev, De Roure, Nurse, et al., 
2020), and also discussed in earlier supply chain literature 
(Radanliev 2016).
Fig. 5  Bibliometric analysis of 436 data records—factorial analysis