182 P . Radanliev et al.
1 3
reverse engineering design processes that are present in this 
paper.
Validity of the research findings was pursued through 
applying the grounded theory approach (Goulding 2002), 
to create the categorisations in the summary tables, which 
is a time tested method for building theory from existing 
knowledge. For ensuring validity of the findings, we also 
applied qualitative research techniques, including open and 
categorical coding (Easterby-Smith et al. 2002; Eriksson 
and Kovalainen 2008; Gummesson 2000), in the summary 
tables. Open coding to validate a reliable representation of 
the data records, categorical coding to recognise the con-
cepts in the data (Goulding 2002). Discourse analysis is 
applied to evaluate and interpret the connotation behind 
the explicitly stated approaches (Eriksson and Kovalainen 
2008), along with tables of evidence (Eisenhardt 1989) as 
seen in the summary tables, and conceptual diagram (Miles 
et al. 1983) for graphical analysis.
7  Conclusion
The research integrates concepts related to digital auto-
mation (e.g., digital twins), that have not been previously 
integrated in a research. Through statistical analysis of bib-
liometric data records from 1900 to 2020, this study iden-
tified how artificial intelligence, is evolving in internet of 
things systems. With factorial analysis, we identified the 
main national clusters of research, on how artificial intel-
ligence, is evolving in internet of things systems and cyber-
physical systems. From our analysis, it becomes clear that 
despite political turbulences, the US is closely coupled in 
the research collaboration network with China. Furthermore, 
despite political and economic collaborations, that even 
include a joint research budget (Horizon 2020), the two lead-
ing European nations in terms of this research, the UK and 
Germany are not closely engaged in research collaborations 
on the topics of internet of things, cyber-physical systems 
and Industry 4.0. Other findings from this study include 
an up-to-date overview of existing and emerging advance-
ments in the field of I4.0, from academic literature and gov -
ernmental initiatives. This combines existing literature to 
derive common basic terminology and approaches and to 
incorporate existing standards into a new conceptual mecha-
nism for embedding AI within IoT of I4.0. In this study, 
cyber-psychical systems are defined as connecting systems 
for human–computer interactions, and our research focus 
was on artificial intelligence that meets public acceptability, 
security standards, and legal scrutiny. Therefore, instead of 
simply presenting concepts, we presented summary tables 
with clear narratives showing the national frameworks that 
are compliant and meet public acceptability, security stand-
ards, and legal scrutiny. The summary tables categorise concepts from established frameworks, while the literature 
review and the bibliometric analysis categorise established 
scientific research data records.
The summary tables developed throughout the paper, can 
serve as a best practice and inform initial steps taken for 
design and prototype of digital twins CPSs in Industry 4.0. 
Such prototype would improve our capacity for a compre-
hensive and systematic understanding of the opportunities 
and threats that arise when CPS are migrated to the periph-
ery of the internet and into local IoT networks.
Acknowledgements Eternal gratitude to the Fulbright Visiting Scholar 
Project.
Authors contributions Dr Petar Radanliev: main author; Prof. Dave 
De Roure: supervision; Omar Santos, Prof. Michael Huth: supervision, 
review and corrections, Razvan Nicolescu: review and corrections.
Funding This work was funded by the UK EPSRC [Grant number: 
EP/S035362/1] and by the Cisco Research Centre [Grant number 
CG1525381].
Availability of data and materials All data and materials included in 
the article.
Code availability N/A—no code was developed; code was however 
used for running the R Studio analysis.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author 
states that there is no conflict nor competing interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Aria, M., Cuccurullo, C.: bibliometrix: an R-tool for comprehensive 
science mapping analysis. J. Informet. 11(4), 959–975 (2017). 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. joi. 2017. 08. 007
ASI, A. for strategic initiatives: National Technology initiative, Agency 
for Strategic Initiatives. Government of Russia (2016). https://  
asi. ru/ eng/ nti/
Balaji, B., Al Faruque, M. A., Dutt, N., Gupta, R., & Agarwal, Y.: 
Models, abstractions, and architectures. In: Proceedings of the 
52nd Annual Design Automation Conference on—DAC ’15, 1–6. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 27447 69. 27479 36 (2015)