173 Digital twins: artificial intelligence and the IoT cyber -physical systems in Industry 4.0  
1 3
Contract-based design enables actor-oriented design of 
multiple models of computation to be integrated in a single 
hierarchical system (Bhave et al. 2011), like loosely time-
triggered CPS architectures (Benveniste 2010).
3  Methodology for the bibliometric analysis 
of existing literature with computable 
statistical methods
In this section, we analyse existing literature records with 
computable statistical methods. While the literature review 
was focused on qualitative review of selected articles, this 
chapter analyses data records with statistical categorisations 
that eliminate bias of qualitative interpretations, and data 
records selection. To analyse the present and future chal-
lenges identified in the literature review, we conducted a 
bibliometric search for data records. We searched the Web 
of Science Core Collection for records on the TOPIC: (cyber 
physical systems) AND TOPIC: (internet of things) AND 
TOPIC: (industry 4.0). This search resulted with 436 in a 
timespan from 1900 to 2020. We obtained the data from 
the Web of Science with a Boolean search that include only 
‘AND’. In the spirit of reproducible research, we note that 
if similar search is conducted, but instead of AND, we use 
OR, then the results would be 60,148. These records would 
however not be related to a research related to all the topics 
of IoT, CPS and I4.0, but instead, the data records would be relevant to individual topics. Since in this study, we wanted 
to investigate the relationship between these systems, we 
used the smaller sample of 436 data record. This was based 
on our rationale to investigate the relationship between these 
topics, and not the research on these topics in isolation. 
Since we wanted to investigate the tacit evolution of AI in 
these connected systems, we did not include AI in the data 
records search, instead, our investigation was on identifying 
if concepts related to AI are present in the data records. We 
wanted to investigate if AI is evolving naturally as a result 
of the relationships between these connected systems. To 
analyse the data records, we used statistical methods with R 
studio and the ‘bibliometrix’ package (Aria and Cuccurullo 
2017), see Fig.  2.
In Fig.  2, we designed a three-fields plot of the 436 data 
records, and we can see the connections between different 
research topics by keywords, by fields, and by countries. 
In the spirit of reproducible research and eliminating bias 
in research, we include one figure analysis where the data 
search and analysis is conducted with the Web of Science 
research analysis tool, but instead of AND, we use OR, and 
we analyse the results of 60,148 records on these subjects, 
but with individual topic investigated, which can be repli-
cated by searching for the TOPIC: (cyber physical systems) 
OR TOPIC: (internet of things) OT TOPIC: (industry 4.0), 
in Fig.  3.
In Fig.  3, we can see that China has produced the most 
scientific research on the individual topics in isolation. 
Fig. 2  Bibliometric analysis of 436 data records—three-fields plot