179 Digital twins: artificial intelligence and the IoT cyber -physical systems in Industry 4.0  
1 3
investigation, we identified that artificial intelligence 
improves organisational resilience in industrial systems, 
supporting both a technical and human level. With empiri-
cal analysis, we correlated the world leading Industry 4.0 
frameworks, and modelled the interdependencies between 
edge components to both external and internal services and 
systems in summary tables. The methodology we applied 
resembled a grounded theory analysis of complex intercon-
nected and coupled systems. This enables us to connect 
the human–computer interactions in different information 
knowledge management systems with artificial intelligence, 
and to design a mechanism for future evolution of artificial 
intelligence in internet of things networks. We argue that 
such evolution is inevitable, and already happening in Indus-
try 4.0 automations.
In this review study, we combined qualitative review of 
recent and relevant literature from Google Scholar, with 
quantitative computable statistical analysis of bibliometric 
data records from the Web of Science, and empirical review 
of government frameworks. The findings from this review 
study is an outline of present and future research challenges 
in Sects. 2.1 and 2.2, analysed with the bibliomic analysis 
in Sect.  3 and summarised in Table  1. In Table  1, we can see 
the present and future research challenges categorised and 
abbreviated as terminology for building the conceptual dia-
gram in Fig.  6, presenting the state-of-the-art in our under -
standing on how AI evolves within the IoT.
The implications for research are a conceptual 
approach that enables us to connect the human–computer, 
with the evolution of artificial intelligence in connected networks. We argue that such evolution is inevitable, and 
already happening in Industry 4.0 automations.
The future research dimensions emerging from this 
study are related to enhancing our capacity for under -
standing of the opportunities when AI technologies are 
integrated in smart connected networks. To assist in these 
future dimensions, the summary tables developed through-
out the paper, can serve as a best practice and inform ini-
tial steps taken for design and prototype of AI-enabled IoT. 
AI-enabled IoT would enable a comprehensive and sys -
tematic understanding of the opportunities and threats that 
arise when AI technologies are migrated to the periphery 
of the internet and into local IoT networks. The summary 
tables detail a new CPS process, that enables practition-
ers to understand and design deep learning solutions for 
embedding AI systems. Recent research has discussed the 
integration and the cyber risks from Fog computing (FC) 
and Internet of Everything (IoE) (Radanliev et al. 2020a). 
This research was focused on CPS process in Edge com-
puting and Internet of Things. The new CPS process can 
be applied in real systems like smart cites and 5G technol-
ogy, with the integration of IoT connected systems. These 
systems (IoT and CPS) are interconnected and the results 
in Fig.  1 present hierarchical categories integrating the 
two systems.
The main implications for practitioners from this study, 
is the new CPS process. When enhanced with recent deep 
learning solutions, the new CPS process can be applied in 
real systems like smart cites and 5G technology. The new 
CPS process can also help governments trying to improve 
and/or build their national strategies. The value from the 
developed mechanisms for national governments of the 
developed nations, is that they can check and compare the 
existing digital strategies with the national digital strategies 
applied across the globe.
The findings from this study benefit digital industries in 
developed and developing nations, with a design process 
describing how to use the new CPS process in industrial 
applications. The benefits for digital industries in developing 
countries that have no digital strategies (e.g., most African, 
Latin American, Eastern European nations), is that they can 
review the current developments from around the world, 
and follow the step by step process to embed AI systems 
within IoT systems of their I4.0 frameworks. The benefits for 
digital industries in developed countries is included in the 
summary tables, which are presented in this paper and are 
designed to support the building of future artificial cogni-
tion in CPS and the improving and reformulating of existing 
I4.0 frameworks and practical initiatives. The summary table 
mechanism emerging from the empirical review is based on 
grouping of future and present techniques and presenting 
the design process for embedding AI systems within IoT 
systems. These are established models for decomposing and 
Fig. 6  Future and present challenges separated in a conceptual dia-
gram—explaining the mechanism that enables understanding of how 
AI evolves within the IoT