176 P . Radanliev et al.
1 3
The empirical review starts with the German I4.0 (Indus-
trie 4.0) (Germany Trade Invest 2014; Industrie 4 .0, 2017) 
and follows with an empirical review of (additional 13) I4.0 
initiatives. The main elements of each initiative in Table  3 
are separated in: areas of focus, decision and action. The 
empirical review identifies several shortcomings in individ-
ual initiatives, which are complimented by other initiatives. 
This required building a model that integrates the strengths 
and reduces the weaknesses of all initiatives. There are 
problems, when, for example, some of the areas of focus, 
decision and action (Tables  2, 3, 4) differ in terms of strat-
egy and propose very different approaches. To resolve this 
issue, we use two strategies. Firstly, the individual areas as 
categorised in the empirical summary tables that are used as 
reference categories. Secondly, the summary tables are used 
for embedding AI systems within IoT systems in I4.0 mecha-
nism that relates various areas to each other and eliminates 
conflicts in different and sometimes contrasting approaches.
The summary table analysis of the initiatives presents 
some of the complexities in developing a unifying archi-
tecture, with a step-by-step method for integration of CPS 
cognitive capabilities. The diversity of the approaches in 
world initiatives grows in magnitude as the empirical anal-
ysis advances to the summary tables of the less evolved 
(Table  3) and the elusive initiatives (Table  4). This diversity 
is categorised with the grounded theory, into areas of ‘focus’, ‘decision’, and ‘action’. Some initiatives contain concepts 
that are based on prioritising, and we created a category 
called ‘priority’ for such concepts. Or prioritised ‘relation-
ships’, so we created a separate group for such concepts. In 
the summer tables, we present a multiverse of such catego-
ries that emerge from applying the grounded theory in the 
empirical analysis. Some of these areas appear unrelated, 
and yet, they are present. Therefore, the relationship is not 
clearly presented in the national initiative, but it becomes 
clearer in the summary table, when placed in a category 
against other similar concepts.
The differences in the categorised approaches in the three 
summary tables correspond to the different national and 
international strengths and aspirations of the promoters of 
these strategies. The three summary tables (Tables  2, 3, 4) 
emerging from the empirical review, capture different and 
often conflicting approaches that harden adoption of coher -
ent standards for artificial cognition in CPS.
The conceptual diagram in Fig.  6 separates the future 
challenges from the present challenges in the three summary 
tables (Tables  2, 3, 4). The categorisations in the summary 
tables (Tables  2, 3, 4), detail our grounded theory process, 
where emerging concepts are extracted from the large num-
ber of digitalisation initiatives from around the globe. The 
emerging concepts are structured in a conceptual diagram, 
using categorical coding in Fig.  6. To understand better the 
conceptual diagram, in Fig.  6, we refer to the abbreviations 
in Table  1.
In Fig.  6 to simplify the differences between areas of: 
‘focus’, ‘decision’ and ‘action’, we used the world leading 
initiatives, and grouped concepts based on similarities, e.g. 
in the key technologies: NIF lists 47 key technologies, Made 
in China 2025 prioritises 10 tech sectors and NTI includes 
13 key tech examples. However, some initiatives focus on 
areas of decision and action that differ greatly from the main 
objectives of other initiatives. For example, the focus on 
market networks and market creation of the National Tech-
nology Initiative (ASI 2016) is opposed to the mainstream 
technology development in NIF that includes policies for 
subsidies and repayable advances, tax incentives and loans. 
These differences emphasised the need to develop the sum-
mary tables that serve as a mechanism for inter-relating the 
three areas of focus, decision and action in a meaningful 
method. The analysis outlined in Tables  2, 3 and 4  provides 
detailed explanation of these areas.
6  Discussion
Through empirical and statistical analysis, we presented 
a new understanding on how artificial intelligence tech-
nologies are migrated to the periphery of the internet and 
into local internet of things networks. With qualitative Table 1  Future and present techniques for embedding AI systems 
within IoT systems
Present techniques and challenges
Education and training EaT
Financial planning FP
Information flow for energy savings IFfES
Robustness, safety, and security RSS
Control and hybrid systems CHS
Computational abstractions architecture CAA 
Real-time embedded systems abstractions RTESA
Model-based development MBD
Future techniques and challenges
Eco-industrial by-product synergy EIS
Distributed integrated-decentralised DID
Multi-agent swarm intelligence SI
Contract-based design CBD
Self-sustaining networked sensors SSS
Symbiotic relations with the physical environment SRPE
User-centric Cloud based vision CCV
Future vision for artificial cognition in CPS
Energy-aware buildings and cities EABaC
Critical infrastructure with preventive maintenance CIPM
Self-correcting of cyber-physical systems SCCPS
Flexible AC transmission systems FACTS
Distributed energy resource technologies DER