Vol.:(0123456789)1 3International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications (2022) 6:171–185 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41315-021-00180-5
REGULAR PAPER
Digital twins: artificial intelligence and the IoT cyber‑physical systems 
in Industry 4.0
Petar Radanliev1  · David De Roure1 · Razvan Nicolescu2 · Michael Huth3 · Omar Santos4
Received: 26 November 2020 / Accepted: 22 April 2021 / Published online: 24 May 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
This paper presents a summary of mechanisms for the evolution of artificial intelligence in ‘internet of things’ networks. 
Firstly, the paper investigates how the use of new technologies in industrial systems improves organisational resilience sup-
porting both a technical and human level. Secondly, the paper reports empirical results that correlate academic literature with 
Industry 4.0 interdependencies between edge components to both external and internal services and systems. The novelty 
of the paper is a new approach for creating a virtual representation operating as a real-time digital counterpart of a physical 
object or process (i.e., digital twin) outlined in a conceptual diagram. The methodology applied in this paper resembled a 
grounded theory analysis of complex interconnected and coupled systems. By connecting the human–computer interactions 
in different information knowledge management systems, this paper presents a summary of mechanisms for the evolution 
of artificial intelligence in internet of things networks.
Keywords Digital twin · Industrial internet of things · Cyber physical systems · Human and robot interactions · Industry 
4.0 · Bibliometric analysis
1 Introduction
The volume of data generated at the edge, creates diverse 
challenges for developing data strategies in a variety of areas 
(e.g., artificial intelligence, ethics, edge vs fog computing). 
Data strategies for complex coupled systems at the edge, 
demands data strategy optimisation for collecting of prob -
abilistic data, when edge computing nodes are deployed. 
The personal perceptions of risk as a result of collecting 
probabilistic data at the edge interact with data regulations, 
standards and policies. The focus of the empirical research 
(in Sect.  3) of this study is the integration of these data perceptions, regulations and policies for conceptualising the 
creation of ‘digital twins’. Our research objective is to apply 
statistical methods on existing research records and to iden-
tify how artificial intelligence (AI), is evolving at the edge. 
With consideration of the above, our research focus was on 
AI integration in ‘cyber-psychical systems’ (CPS) that con-
nect human–computer interactions. Our research emphasis 
was on conceptualisation of AI assimilation in ‘digital twins’ 
of CPS—that meets public acceptability, security standards, 
and legal scrutiny. This paper builds upon earlier literature 
on cyber risk in Industry 4.0 (I4.0) (Radanliev et al. 2020a, 
b, c, d), but with less focus on supply chains and much 
greater emphasis on statistical biometrical analysis of large 
number of data records and qualitative empirical analysis of 
the leading Industry 4.0 national frameworks.
To address these research objectives, the paper integrates 
the topics of artificial intelligence and cyber physical sys-
tems with areas including ‘Industry 4.0’ (I4.0)—which rep-
resent the digitalisation of industrial processes; ‘internet-
of-things’ (IoT)—which is defined as connected system 
(Fig.  1).
The paper builds upon established methodologies (1) 
literature review and bibliometric analysis to identify con-
cepts from existing research. (2) empirical review of most  * Petar Radanliev 
 petar.radanliev@eng.ox.ac.uk
1 Oxford E-Research Centre, Engineering Science 
Department, University of Oxford, 7 Keble Rd, 
Oxford OX1 3QG, England, UK
2 Department for Anthropology, UCL, London, England, UK
3 Department of Computing, Imperial College London, 
Huxley Building, 180 Queen’s Gate, London SW7 2AZ, 
England, UK
4 Cisco Research Centre, Research Triangle Park, 
Durham-Raleigh, North Carolina, USA