172 P . Radanliev et al.
1 3
documented frameworks and initiatives on Industry 4.0; 
(3) grounded theory, to identify and group concepts from 
the literature review, bibliometric analysis, and the empiri-
cal analysis, followed by (4) conceptual diagram design to 
present the new process.
The reminder of the paper is structured as follow: In 
Sect.  2 we present a literature review on challenges for pri-
vacy, security and resilience of connected environments, 
and future challenges for AI systems embedded within IoT. 
We conclude Sect.  2 with a bibliometric analysis, using 
statistical software and R studio to present three-fields 
plot, collaboration network map, and conceptual research 
structure map with using factorial analysis. In Sect.  3 
we present our empirical analysis, where the results of 
applying grounded theory, for conceptual groupings, are 
presented in summary tables and followed by conceptual 
diagram illustration. Followed by a discussion in Sect.  4, 
and conclusions in Sect.  5.
2  Literature review
The objective of the qualitative investigation is to review 
a selected article that are considered as leading academic 
research in this area. The objective of the quantitative 
analysis is to review all current and historical data records. 
In our literature review and bibliometric analysis, we fol-
lowed recommendations on ensuring ‘relevance’ of the 
analysed literature (Lezzi et al. 2018), accuracy through 
‘text mining’ (Rivas et al. 2018), with a focus on ‘integra-
tion’ of different technologies (Sittón-Candanedo 2020).2.1  Present challenges for privacy, security 
and resilience of connected environments
Present challenges for artificial intelligence in industrial 
techniques are in the areas of: robustness, safety, and secu-
rity (Hahn et al. 2013 ; Zhu et al. 2011 ); control and hybrid 
systems (Leitão et al. 2016; Shi et al. 2011); computational 
abstractions architectures (Madakam et al. 2015); real-
time embedded systems abstractions (Marwedel and Engel 
2016; Radanliev et al. 2020a); model-based development 
(Jensen et al. 2011) and education and training (Faller and 
Feldmüller 2015). However, as the artificial cognition in 
cyber-physical systems (CPS) is an evolutionary process 
(Wahlster et al. 2013), the challenges will be evolving 
with time (Radanliev et al. 2020a, b, c, d), which requires 
flexibility management of the complexities of the CPS. 
In addition to the evolving challenges, for creating a reli-
able, secure and economically sustainable power system, 
financial planning arrangements should be developed for 
CPS applications, e.g. Sentinel (Balaji et al. 2015 )—can 
be used to exploit the information flow for energy savings.
2.2  Future challenges for AI systems embedded 
within IoT
Building upon the present challenges, futuristic artificial 
cognition in CPS requires the deployment of self-sus-
taining networked sensors and actuators (Rajkumar et al. 
2010) operating in symbiotic relations with the physi-
cal environment modelled through a user-centric Cloud 
(Gubbi et al. 2013). Environmental natural resources are 
crucial in sustaining economic development (Stock and 
Seliger 2016), and CPS in the future should be focused 
on creating eco-industrial by-product synergy (Pan et al. 
2015).
Another challenge is the evolution into self-adapting 
cognitive decentralised CPS. This process would present 
a distributed (Wan et al. 2015) and integrated-decentral-
ised CPS swarm intelligence, based on cooperation of 
large population of simple agents (Stojmenovic 2014). 
The decentralisation of the control function to a swarm—
which implies lack of central control dictating individual 
behaviour and interactions among swarm agents—stimu-
lates the emergence of intelligent global behaviour. Indi-
vidual agents exploit cloud services to analyse, predict, 
optimise and mine scalable capabilities of historical data 
and enable applications to self-adjust their behaviour to 
self-optimise their own performance (Brettel et al. 2016; 
Shafiq et al. 2015). In such decentralised systems, individ-
ual agents’ ‘contract-based design’ is applied before ‘plat-
form-based design’ (Sangiovanni-Vincentelli et al. 2012). 
Fig. 1  Research (mind-map) plan