174 P . Radanliev et al.
1 3
While on the three-field plot (Fig.  2) we can see that US 
and China have produced a comparative number of records 
on these topics in combination, what is puzzling is that in 
Fig.  2, the UK and Brazil are also strongly represented. 
While in Fig.  3, Germany and Italy score higher than the 
UK, and Brazil is not even in the top countries selected by 
the We of Science research analysis of the 60,148 records. 
Therefore, we continued the statistical analysis of the bib-
liometric records. Although the three-fields plot in Fig.  2 
is very detailed in visualising the connections between 
research keywords, fields, and relating them by countries, 
we could not identify the collaborations between coun-
tries. To analyse which counties collaborate in the fields 
of IoT, CPS, and I4.0, we created a collaboration network 
map Fig.  4.
From the collaboration network map, we can see the his-
torical and present collaboration relationships on the topics 
of IoT, CPS and I4.0. For example, China is working closely 
with Singapore, a cluster is visible between Brazil, Portugal, 
Spain, France and Romania, and a second cluster between 
Germany, Turkey, Sweden and Austria. These clusters are 
expected, because they also represent know clusters based 
on culture, economy, tourism, etc. However, the most unex-
pected cluster is visible in the red colour, strongly represent-
ing the UK, USA and China. Since the UK has been in the 
EU until 2019, one would have expected a stronger cluster 
between the UK and other EU countries, like Germany. Per -
haps this can be explained by language and cultural similari-
ties between the UK and USA. The relationship between the 
US and China, could possibly be explained by economic 
factors. To analyse further this data records, we developed a 
conceptual structure map in Fig.  5.The conceptual structure map in Fig.  5 is designed with 
applying factorial analysis. We wanted to see how closely are 
related the keywords and research fields from the three-fields 
plot in Fig.  2. In the three-fields plot, we could only see 
the connections, but we could not see how closely if these 
areas are related. In the Fig.  5, conceptual structure map, we 
can see how close or distant are specific research areas. We 
complimented the statistical analysis with literature review 
analysis to categorise emerging themes for embedding AI 
systems within IoT systems.
Fig. 3  Bibliometric analysis with the Web of Science research analysis tool on the TOPIC: (cyber physical systems) OR TOPIC: (internet of 
things) OT TOPIC: (industry 4.0)
Fig. 4  Bibliometric analysis of 436 data records—collaboration net-
work