Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
trajectory of an agent in its environment to a low-dimensional em-
bedding lying in a behavioral space .MAP-E lites keeps track of an
archive of individuals (controllers) tried in the past along with their
associated fitness values and behavioral characterizations. The aim
is to curate a repertoire of behaviorally diverse and high-performing
agents. To this end, the behavioral space is discretized into cells
representing behavioral niches , where each niche maintains the
highest performing individual whose behavioral characterization
falls into its cell. Individuals in each niche optimize for the fit-
ness objective, yet implicitly have a pressure for diversity, as they
are driven towards empty and under-optimized cells to avoid the
selection pressure of cells with highly optimized individuals.
After initializing the archive with a few randomly initialized
controllers, MAP-E lites repeats the following steps:
(1) Select a populated cell at random,
(2)Mutate the cell’s controller ( GA) to obtain a new controller,
(3)Gather a trajectory of agent-environment interactions with
the new controller and obtain its fitness and BC,
(4)Update the archive: add the controller to the cell where the
BCfalls if Rule 1 ) the cell is empty or Rule 2 ) the fitness is
higher than that of the controller currently in the cell.
The two rules guiding additions to the archive implement a de-
coupling between exploitation (quality) and exploration (diversity).
Rule 1 implements exploration, as it ensures the preservation of con-
trollers that exhibit novel behavior (i.e. mapped to empty cells). Rule
2implements exploitation, as it enforces local competition and re-
tains only the highest performing solution in each behavioral niche.
In this manner, the exploration and exploitation objectives cannot
contradict each other. We call the traditional implementation of
MAP-E lites based on GAME-GA while MAP-E lites encompasses
both ME-GA andME-ES variants.
2.2 Evolution Strategies
Evolution Strategies ( ES) is a class of black box optimization algo-
rithms inspired by natural evolution [ 2,42]. For each generation,
an initial parameter vector (the parent ), is mutated to generate a
population of parameter vectors (the offspring ). The fitness of each
resultant offspring is evaluated and the parameters are combined
such that individuals with high fitness have higher influence than
others. As this process is repeated, the population tends towards
regions of the parameter space with higher fitness, until a conver-
gence point is reached.
We use a version of ESintroduced in Salimans et al . [43] , which
itself belongs to the subcategory of Natural Evolution Strategies
(NES) [45,50]. In NES, the population of parameter vectors θis
represented by a distribution pψ(θ), parameterized by ψ. Given an
objective function F,NES algorithms optimize the expected objec-
tive value Eθ∼pψF(θ)using stochastic gradient ascent. Recently,
Salimans et al . [43] proposed a version of the NES algorithm able to
scale to the optimization of high-dimensional parameters ( ≈105).
In their work, they address the RL problem, for which θrefers to
the parameters of a controller while the fitness function is the re-
ward obtained by the corresponding controller over an episode of
environment interactions. Given the parent controller parameters
θ, the offspring population (θi∀i∈[1..n]) is sampled from the
isotropic multivariate Gaussian distribution θi∼N(θ,σ2I)withfixed variance σ2. As in reinforce [51],θis updated according to
the following gradient approximation:
∇ψEθ∼pψ[F(θ)]≈1
nnÕ
i=1F(θi)∇ψloдpψ(θ),
where nis the offspring population size, usually large to compensate
for the high variance of this estimate. In practice, any θican be
decomposed as θi=θ+σϵi, and the gradient is estimated by:
∇ψEϵ∼N( 0,I)[F(θ+σϵ)]≈1
nσnÕ
i=1F(θi)ϵi.
As in Salimans et al . [43] , we use virtual batch normalization of
the controller’s inputs and rank-normalize the fitness F(θi). The
version of NES used in this paper is strictly equivalent to the one
proposed in Salimans et al . [43] . We simply refer to it as EShereafter.
3 METHODS
3.1 ME-ES
TheME-ES algorithm reuses the founding principles of MAP-E lites
leading to damage robustness and efficient exploration, while lever-
aging the optimization performance of ES.ME-ES curates a behav-
ioral map(BM), an archive of neural network controllers parame-
terized byθ. Every n_optim_gens generations, a populated cell and
its associated controller θcellare sampled from the archive. This
controller is then copied to θд, which is subsequently evolved for
n_optim_gens generations using ES. At each generation, offspring
parameters θiд∼N(θд,σ2I)are only used to compute an update
forθд. We only consider θдfor addition to the BMto ensure robust
evaluations ( 30episodes) and a fair comparison with competing
algorithms such as NS-ES . Algorithm 1 provides a detailed outline
of the way ME-ES combines principles from MAP-E lites and ES.
Algorithm 1 ME-ES Algorithm
1:Input: n_gens, pop_size, σ, n_optim_gens, empty behavioral
map BM, n_eval
2:Initialize: BM←(θ0∼initnormc(),F(θ0),BC(θ0))
3:forд=[0,n_gens]do
4: ifg % n_optim_gens == 0 then
5: mode←explore_or_exploit()
6: ifmode == ‘explore’ then
7: θcell←sample_explore_cell()
8: else if mode == ‘exploit’ then
9: θcell←sample_exploit_cell()
10:θд←θcell
11:θд←ES_optim(θд, pop_size, σ, objective=mode)
12: F(θд),BC(θд)←Evaluate(θд, n_eval)
13: Update_BM(θд,F(θд),BC(θд))
ME-ES variants. We define three variants of ME-ES that differ
in the objective optimized by ES:
•InME-ES exploit , the objective is the fitness function F.
F(θ)is computed by running the agent’s controller in the
environment for one episode ( directed exploitation ).