GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
752066,74134,52,30,1
Damage id01000200030004000 PerformanceME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA
(a)
752066,74134,52,30,1
Damage id050010001500Δ performance (post - pre) ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA (b)
Figure 3: Damage adaptation. a: Performance of the best recovery controller. The joint damage is represented as Jiwhere iis
the identifier of the broken joint or joints ( i∈[1..8]). Dashed line represent the score of an agent that does not move forward
but does not fall. b: Difference in performance, post- and pre-behavioral adaptation.
4.1.3 Results - Damage Adaptation. M-BOA is run on the behav-
ioral maps from each experiment. Recovery controllers extracted
from ME-GA andME-ES explore maps do not achieve high scores
(Fig. 3a). The scores are around 1000, which correspond to a motion-
less Ant (not moving forward, but not falling either). In contrast,
ME-ES explore-exploit andME-ES exploit are able to recover
from joint damage and the ant is able to move in all damage scenar-
ios (Fig. 3a). In Fig. 3b, we highlight the difference in performance
before and after adaptation. Pre-adaptation performance is com-
puted by evaluating the highest performing pre-damage controller
in each of the post-damage environments. The post-adaption per-
formance is computed by evaluating the recovery controller in each
of the damaged joint environments. In most cases, ME-ES explore-
exploit andME-ES exploit are able to significantly improve upon
the pre-damage controller (Fig. 3b). In both figures, averages and
standard errors are computed over different runs of MAP-E lites
+M-BOA (different seeds). The performance of a given recovery
controller is averaged over 30episodes.
4.1.4 Interpretation. ME-GA does not scale to the high-dimen-
sional Ant-v2 task, probably because it relies on random parameter
perturbations (i.e. a GA) for optimization, which does not scale to
high-dimensional controllers [ 47].ME-ES explore performs poorly,
as it is not interested in performance, but only in exploring the be-
havioral space, most of which is not useful. The exploitation ability
ofME-ES explore only relies on its directed exploration compo-
nent to find higher-performing solutions by chance. Indeed, neither
ME-GA norME-ES explore leverages directed exploitation. ME-ES
exploit only focuses on exploitation, but still performs undirected
exploration by retaining novel solutions that fill new cells. While
ME-ES explore-exploit targets performance only half of the time,
it still finds a BMthat is good for damage recovery. Its exploration
component enables better coverage of the behavioral space while
its exploitation component ensures high performing controllers are
in the map. Note that a good BCspace coverage is a poor indica-
tor of adaptation performance, whereas having a high-performing,
somewhat populated map is a good indicator. Directed exploitation
seems to be required to achieve good performance in the Ant-v2
task. Undirected exploration –as performed by ME-ES exploit – is
sufficient to build a behavioral map useful for damage recovery, asits recovery performance is similar to that of variants using directed
exploration and exploitation ( ME-ES explore-exploit ).
4.2 Deep Exploration
4.2.1 Domains. We use two modified domains from OpenAI
Gym based on Humanoid-v2 andAnt-v2 (Fig. 4). In Deceptive Hu-
manoid , the humanoid robot faces a U-shaped wall (like in [ 12]),
while in Ant Maze the Ant is placed in a maze similar to [ 19]. Both
environments possess a strongly deceptive reward, whose gradient
leads the agent directly into a trap. For both environments, we
use the final(x,y)position of the agent as the BC. In Deceptive
Humanoid , the fitness is defined as the cumulative reward, a mix-
ture of velocity along the x-axis and costs for joint torques. See
Brockman et al . [8] for more details. In Ant Maze , the fitness is the
Euclidean distance to the goal (green area). Controllers are run for
3000 timesteps in Ant Maze and up to 1000 timesteps in Deceptive
Humanoid , less if the agent falls over.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 4: Domains for the deep exploration study. a: Decep-
tive Humanoid domain. b: Ant Maze domain. Here the goal
is the green area and the trap is in the cul-de-sac to the right
of the agent’s starting position.
4.2.2 Results - Deceptive Humanoid. Undirected exploration
(ME-ES exploit ) is insufficient to get out of the trap and directed
exploration alone ( ME-ES explore ) falls short as well (Fig. 5a). That
said, like NS-ES ,ME-ES explore eventually explores around the
wall, as indicated by its greater than 3000 performance. Algorithms