GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
runs may explore different direction of the BC space, resulting in
high standard deviations.
Ant Maze. In the Ant Maze task, pure exploitation will lead the
agent to the deceptive trap (Fig. 4a). However, the environment
is enclosed by walls so the agent cannot explore endlessly. Thus,
performing pure exploration will eventually lead to the goal. This
explains the success of directed exploration algorithms ( NS-ES ,ME-
ES explore ) and the poor performance of directed exploitation
algorithms ( ME-ES exploit ). This environment requires a more
extensive exploration procedure to achieve the goal than Decep-
tive Humanoid . InAnt Maze , the agent needs to avoid two traps
and needs to make turns to achieve its goal, while in Humanoid
Deceptive , the agent can simply walk with an angle of 45degrees
to achieve high scores. As such, an even mix of the performance
and novelty objectives ( NSR-ES ) fails, as we try to average two
contradicting forces. NSRA-ES has a better chance of getting out
of the trap by adding more and more exploration to the mix until
the agent escapes. In doing so, however, the mixing weight can go
down to w=0and only consider the exploration objective, thus
losing sight of the goal (Fig. 7). ME-ES explore-exploit is able
to escape the trap because of its decoupled objectives; exploration
steps will lead it to explore the environment until it reaches a point
where exploitation steps allow it to reach the goal.
5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper we present ME-ES , a new QDalgorithm scaling the
powerful MAP-E lites algorithm to deep neural networks by lever-
aging ES. We present three variants of this algorithm: (1) ME-ES
exploit , where EStargets a performance objective, (2) ME-ES ex-
plore , where EStargets a novelty objective, and (3) ME-ES explore-
exploit , where EStargets performance and novelty objectives in
an alternating fashion. Because the MAP-E lites behavioral map
implicitly implements undirected exploration (update rule 1) and
undirected exploitation (update rule 2), these variants implement
directed exploitation with undirected exploration, directed explo-
ration with undirected exploitation, and decoupled directed explo-
ration and exploitation, respectively.
In a first application, we use ME-ES to curate an archive of
diverse and high-performing controllers that is subsequently used
for damage adaptation. We show that ME-ES manages to recover
from joint damage in a high-dimensional control task while ME-GA
does not. In a second application, we use ME-ES to solve strongly
deceptive exploration tasks. Here, we show that ME-ES explore-
exploit performs well in both open and closed domains, on par
with the state-of-the-art exploration algorithm NSRA-ES . As in
most DRL control tasks, the controllers optimized in this work
contain about 105parameters [ 24,43]. Previous work showed ES
could scale to even larger controllers (e.g. ≈106in Atari games)
[43], which suggests ME-ES could as well.
Others have conducted work similar to ours. Frans et al . [19] tack-
les an environment similar to Ant Maze with hierarchical RL. Their
method pre-trains independent low-level controllers to crawl in
various directions before learning a high-level control to pick direc-
tions to find the goal. On top of requiring some domain knowledge
to train low-level controllers, hierarchical RL has trouble composing
sub-controllers, a problem that is solved by resetting the agent to adefault position between sub-sequences. In this work, however, we
learn to solve the deep exploration problem by directly controlling
joints.
Concurrently to our work, Fontaine et al . [17] proposed a similar
algorithm called CMA-ME , in which MAP-E lites is combined with
CMA-ES , another algorithm from the ESfamily [ 25]. In addition
to a performance objective, CMA-ME considers two others. The
improvement objective selects for controllers that discovered new
cells or improved over already populated cells. The random direction
objective rewards controllers for minimizing the distance between
their BCand a behavioral target vector randomly sampled from
the behavioral space. Although the last objective does encourage
exploration, it is not explicitly directed towards novelty as in ME-
ES explore and is not decoupled from performance. Additionally,
although CMA-ES is generally recognized as a very powerful algo-
rithm, in practice it is limited to comparatively low-dimensional
parameter spaces due to the algorithmic complexity induced by its
covariance matrix updates (O(n2)).
Because ME-ES only affects the optimization procedure of MAP-
Elites, any application leveraging behavioral maps could benefit
from its improved optimization efficiency. In addition to the demon-
strated applications for exploration (Section 4.2) or damage adapta-
tion (Section 4.1), previous works have used MAP-E lites for maze
navigation [ 41] or to explore the behavioral space of soft robotic
arms and the design space of soft robots [ 34]. It can also co-evolve
a repertoire of diverse images matching each of the ImageNet cate-
gories [35] or generate diverse collections of 3Dobjects [29].
ME-ES could also leverage advances proposed for either MAP-
Elites or ES. Vassiliades et al . [49] , for example, propose to use a cen-
troidal Voronoi tessellation to scale MAP-E lites to high-dimensional
behavioral spaces, while Chatzilygeroudis et al . [10] improve on the
behavioral adaptation procedure to enable adaptation without the
need to reset the environment (or for humans to intervene in the
case of real robots). Finally, Gajewski et al . [21] recently proposed
to replace the performance objective of ESby an evolvability objec-
tive, which aims to maximize the effect of parameter perturbations
on behavior. Evolvability can make a good exploration objective
because perturbing evolvable controllers is likely to increase the
speed at which a behavioral map can be explored.
More generally, ME-ES could leverage a set of various objectives
in parallel. As the bottleneck lies in the computation of the 104
offspring, various objectives can be computed and optimized for
simultaneously (novelty, performance, combinations of them as in
NSR-ES , evolvability etc.). Each resulting controller can be tested 30
times and considered a candidate for the behavioral map updates,
at a negligible increase in cost of Nobjectives×30≪104.
In the deep exploration experiment, ME-ES could also be extended
to perform hierarchical evolution. In such an algorithm, solutions
arechains of controllers, where each link is a controller run for
a given amount of time. After sampling a cell and retrieving the
associated chain, the algorithm can either mutate the last controller
of the chain or add a new controller to it. This would implement
thego-explore strategy proposed in Ecoffet et al . [15] , where the
agent first returns to a behavioral cell before exploring further.
The addition of ME-ES and its variants to the QDfamily opens
new avenues, as the exploration and diversity properties of QD
algorithms can now be scaled to high-dimensional problems.