GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to facilitate learning in robot
control problems. Unlike in supervised learning, training data in
DRL is generated by having the agent interact with the environ-
ment. If the agent greedily takes actions to maximize reward –a
phenomenon known as exploitation – it may run into local optima
and fail to discover alternate strategies with larger payoffs. To avoid
this, RL algorithms also need exploration . RL algorithms usually
explore in the action space, adding random noise on a controller’s
selected actions ( ϵ-greedy) [ 20,32,33]. More directed exploration
techniques endow the agent with intrinsic motivations [4,37,44].
Most of the time, the reward is augmented with an exploration
bonus , driving the agent to optimize for proxies of uncertainty such
as novelty [ 5], prediction error [ 9,38], model-disagreement [ 46],
surprise [1] or expected information gain [26].
In contrast with QDalgorithms however, DRL algorithms are
usually concerned with training a single controller to solve tasks
[20,32,33,38]. The agent thus needs to rely on a single controller
to adapt to new environments [ 36,39], tasks [ 16], or adversarial
attacks [ 22]. Kume et al . [28] outlines perhaps the first RL algorithm
to form a behavioral repertoire by training multiple policies. Opti-
mizing for performance, this algorithm relies on the instabilities of
the underlying learning algorithm (Deep Deterministic Policy Gra-
dient [ 32]) to generate a diversity of behaviors that will be collected
in abehavioral map . Although the performance optimization of this
QDalgorithm leverages DRL, exploration remains incidental.
In recent years, Deep Neuroevolution has emerged as a powerful
competitor to SGD for training DNNs. Salimans et al . [43] , in par-
ticular, presents a scalable version of the Evolution Strategies ( ES)
algorithm, achieving performances comparable to state-of-the-art
DRL algorithms on high-dimensional control tasks like Mujoco [ 8]
and the Atari suite [ 6]. Similarly, Genetic Algorithms ( GA) were
also shown to be capable of training DNN controllers for the Atari
suite, but failed to do so on the Mujoco suite [ 47].ES, in contrast
with GA, combines information from many perturbed versions of
the parent controller to generate a new one. Doing so allows the
computation of gradient estimates, leading to efficient optimization
in high-dimensional parameter spaces like DNNs [ 43]. Recent im-
plementations also utilize the resources of computing clusters by
parallelizing the controller evaluations, making ESalgorithms com-
petitive with DRL in terms of training time [ 43]. Since Such et al .
[47] showed that even powerful, modern GAs using considerable
amounts of computation could not solve continuous control tasks
like those from the Mujoco suite, we propose to unlock QDfor
high-dimensional control tasks via a novel QD- EShybrid algorithm.
Doing so, we aim to benefit from the exploration abilities and re-
sulting behavioral repertoires of QDalgorithms, while leveraging
the ability of ESto optimize large models.
NS-ES made a first step in this direction by combining NSwith
ES: replacing the performance objective of ESwith a novelty ob-
jective [ 12]. Two variants were proposed to incorporate the perfor-
mance objective: NSR-ES , which mixes performance and novelty
objectives evenly and NSRA-ES , which adaptively tunes the ratio be-
tween the two. These methods –like most RL exploration methods–
use a mixture of exploitation and exploration objectives as a way
to deal with the exploitation-exploration tradeoff . While this might
work when the two objectives are somewhat aligned, it may beTable 1: Classification of related algorithms
Gradient-Based Mutation-Based
Pure ES GA
Exploitation
Pure NS-ES NS
Exploration
Exploration & Coupled: NSR-ES ,NSRA-ES ME-GA
Exploitation Decoupled: ME-ES
inefficient when they are not [ 40]. Several works have started to in-
vestigate this question and some propose to disentangle exploration
and exploitation into distinct phases [ 7,11,52].QDpresents a natu-
ral way of decoupling the optimization of exploitation (quality) and
exploration (diversity) by looking for high-performing solutions in
local niches of the behavioral space, leading to local competition
between solutions instead of a global competition [14, 31, 34].
Contributions. In this work, we present ME-ES , a version of
the powerful QDalgorithm MAP-E lites that scales to hard, high-
dimensional control tasks by leveraging ES. Unlike NS-ES and its
variants, which optimize a small population of DNN controllers
(e.g. 5) [12],ME-ES builds a large repertoire of diverse controllers.
Having a set of diverse, high-performing behaviors not only enables
efficient exploration but also robustness to perturbations (either
in the environment itself or in the agent’s abilities). In behavioral
repertoires, the burden of being robust to perturbations can be
shared between different specialized controllers, one of which can
solve the new problem at hand. Algorithms that train a single con-
troller, however, need this controller to be robust to all potential
perturbations. We present two applications of ME-ES . The first is
damage recovery in a high-dimensional control task: after building
a repertoire of behaviors, the agent is damaged (e.g. disabled joints)
and must adapt to succeed. We show that ME-ES can discover
adaptive behaviors that perform well despite the damage, while
a previous implementation of MAP-E lites based on GAfails. The
second application is exploration in environments with strongly
deceptive rewards. We show that agents trained with ME-ES per-
form on par with state-of-the-art exploration algorithms ( NS-ES
and variants). Table 1 presents a classification of ME-ES and re-
lated algorithms presented in this paper along three dimensions:
1) whether they use pure exploration, pure exploitation or both, 2)
whether they rely on gradient-based or mutation-based learning
algorithms and 3) whether they couple or decouple the trade-off be-
tween exploration and exploitation (if applicable). As EScomputes
natural gradient estimations through Monte-Carlo approximations
[50], we refer to ES-powered methods as gradient-based .
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 MAP-Elites
MAP-E lites was first presented in Mouret and Clune [34]. In addi-
tion to an objective function –or fitness function(F)– which mea-
sures the performance of an agent, MAP-E lites assumes the defini-
tion of a behavioral characterization (BC)mapping the state-action