Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution
Cédric Colas∗
INRIAJoost Huizinga
Uber AI Labs
Vashisht Madhavan
Element Inc.Jeff Clune
OpenAI
ABSTRACT
Quality-Diversity (QD) algorithms, and MAP-Elites (ME) in par-
ticular, have proven very useful for a broad range of applications
including enabling real robots to recover quickly from joint damage,
solving strongly deceptive maze tasks or evolving robot morpholo-
gies to discover new gaits. However, present implementations of
ME and other QD algorithms seem to be limited to low-dimensional
controllers with far fewer parameters than modern deep neural net-
work models. In this paper, we propose to leverage the efficiency of
Evolution Strategies (ES) to scale MAP-Elites to high-dimensional
controllers parameterized by large neural networks. We design and
evaluate a new hybrid algorithm called MAP-Elites with Evolution
Strategies (ME-ES) for post-damage recovery in a difficult high-
dimensional control task where traditional ME fails. Additionally,
we show that ME-ES performs efficient exploration, on par with
state-of-the-art exploration algorithms in high-dimensional control
tasks with strongly deceptive rewards.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Evolutionary robotics ;
KEYWORDS
Quality-Diversity, Evolution Strategies, Map-Elites, Exploration
ACM Reference Format:
Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune. 2020.
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution. In Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference (GECCO ’20), July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3390217
1 INTRODUCTION
The path to success is not always a straight line. This popular
saying describes, in simple terms, a key problem of non-convex
optimization. When optimizing a model for a non-convex objective
function, an algorithm that greedily follows the gradient of the
objective might get stuck in local optima. One can think of an agent
in a maze with numerous walls. An algorithm that minimizes the
∗Corresponding author: cedric.colas@inria.fr. Work conducted during an internship at
Uber AI Labs. All authors were affiliated to Uber AI Labs at the time.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7128-5/20/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3390217distance between the position of the agent and the maze center will
surely lead to the agent getting stuck in a corner. Based on this ob-
servation, Lehman and Stanley [30] proposed a thought-provoking
idea: ignore the objective and optimize for novelty instead. Novelty
search ( NS) continually generates new behaviors without consid-
ering any objective and, as such, is not subject to the local optima
encountered by algorithms following fixed objectives. In cases like
our maze example, NScan lead to better solutions than objective-
driven optimization [30].
Despite the successes of NS, objectives still convey useful in-
formation for solving tasks. As the space of possible behaviors
increases in size, NScan endlessly generate novel outcomes, few
of which may be relevant to the task at hand. Quality-Diversity
(QD) algorithms address this issue by searching for a collection
of solutions that is both diverse and high-performing [ 14,31,34].
MAP-E lites, in particular, was used to generate diverse behavioral
repertoires of walking gaits on simulated and physical robots, which
enabled them to recover quickly from joint damage [13].
InQDalgorithms like MAP-E lites or NSLC , a Genetic Algorithm
(GA) is often used as the underlying optimization algorithm. A
candidate controller is selected to be mutated and the resulting
controller is evaluated in the environment, leading to a perfor-
mance measure (fitness) and a behavioral characterization (low-
dimensional representation of the agent’s behavior). QDalgorithms
usually curate some form of a behavioral repertoire , a collection of
high-performing and/or diverse controllers experienced in the past
(sometimes called archive [14,31] or behavioral map [34]). Each
newly generated controller can thus be added to the behavioral
repertoire if it meets some algorithm-dependent conditions. From
a parallel line of work, Intrinsically Motivated Goal Exploration
Processes ( IMGEP ) also curate behavioral repertoires and are often
based on GA-like optimizations [ 3,18]. Agents are able to set their
own goals in the behavioral space, and try to reach them by com-
bining controllers that reached behavioral characterizations ( BCs)
close to these goals. Uniform goal selection here triggers a novelty
effect where controllers reaching sparse areas are used more often,
while learning-progress-based sampling implements a form of QD
where quality is defined as the ability to reliably achieve goals [ 3].
Thus far, the most successful demonstrations of QDalgorithms
have been on robotics problems with relatively simple, low-dimen-
sional controllers [ 14,30,31,34]. Modern robot controllers such as
ones based on neural networks can have millions of parameters,
which makes them difficult –though not impossible– to optimize
with Evolutionary Algorithms [ 47]. Such large controllers are usu-
ally trained through Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), where
an agent learns to perform a sequence of actions in an environment
so as to maximizes some notion of cumulative reward [ 48]. DRL is
concerned with training deep neural networks (DNNs), typicallyarXiv:2003.01825v3  [cs.NE]  5 Jun 2020