GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
•InME-ES explore , the objective is the novelty function
N(θ,k), which we define as the average Euclidean distance
between a controller’s BCand its knearest neighbors in an
archive storing all previous θд, regardless of their addition to
theBM(one per generation). Because the novelty objective
explicitly incentivizes agents to explore their environment,
we call it a directed exploration objective.
•Finally, ME-ES explore-exploit alternates between both
objectives, thus implementing a decoupled exploration and
exploitation procedure. Because it explicitly optimizes for
both objectives, ME-ES explore-exploit conducts both di-
rected exploration anddirected exploitation .
Note that ME-ES explore performs undirected exploitation; while
theESsteps do not directly optimize for fitness, performance mea-
sures are still used to update the BM(Rule 2 of the map updates).
In the same way, ME-ES exploit also performs undirected explo-
ration, as the BMis updated with novel controllers (Rule 1 of map
updates). Like ME-GA , all versions of ME-ES thus perform forms
of exploration and exploitation. Only optimization steps with ES,
however, enable agents to perform the directed version of both
exploitation and exploration.
Cell sampling. The number of generations performed by ME-ES
is typically orders of magnitude lower than MAP-E lites, as each gen-
eration of ME-ES involves a greater number of episodes of environ-
ment interaction ( 104instead of 1forME-GA ). Thus, the sampling
of the cell from which to initiate the next n_optim_gens generations
is crucial (see Algorithm 1). Here, we move away from the cell
selection via uniform sampling used in MAP-E lites, towards biased
cell sampling. We propose two distinct strategies. For exploitation
steps, we select from cells with high fitness controllers, under the
assumption that high fitness cells may lead to even higher fitness
cells. For exploration steps, we select from cells with high novelty
scores. By definition, novel controllers are in under-explored areas
of the search space and mutating these controllers should lead to
novel areas of the behavior space [ 30,31]. In practice, as the number
of cells populated increases with each generation, the bias towards
selecting cells with higher performance or novelty score diminishes.
For instance, if cells are selected proportional to their novelty, the
best controller of two that have novelty 2and 1will have a 2/3
chance of being selected, while the same controller in a group of 3
controllers with novelties [2,1,1]will only have probability 1/2of
being selected. To fight this phenomenon, we propose to restrict the
novelty-proportional selection to the five most novel cells. Similarly,
for exploitation steps, we sample either uniformly from the two
highest fitness cells ( p=0.5), which promotes exploitation from the
current best cells, or uniformly from the two highest fitness cells
from the last five updated ( p=0.5), which promotes exploitation
from newly discovered cells. We considered sampling cells with
high performance progress, but this often led to the selection of sub-
optimal controllers, as starting to move forward from a controller
going backward is one of the best way to make progress.
Hyperparameters. We use fully connected neural network con-
trollers with two hidden layers of size 256,tanh non-linearities,
Xavier initialization [ 23], an Adam optimizer [ 27] with learning
rate 0.01and a l2-coefficient of 0.005for regularization. We runESforn_optim _дens=10consecutive generations with a pop-
ulation size of n=104and a noise parameter σ=0.02. After
each step, we evaluate the average fitness F(θд), average behav-
ioral characterization BC(θд)and associated novelty score N(θд)
ofθдover n_eval=30episodes. Novelty is computed as the av-
erage distance between the controller’s BCand its k=10nearest
neighbors in the archive of all past BCs, regardless of whether they
were added to the BM. The code and environment are provided at
https://github.com/uber-research/Map-Elites-Evolutionary.
3.2 Damage Recovery
The Intelligent Trial and Error (IT&E) algorithm integrates the
evolution of a behavioral map using MAP-E lites and a subsequent
procedure enabling agents to recover from damage by searching
theBMfor efficient recovery controllers [ 13]. Here, we reuse this
setting to compare the traditional implementation of MAP-E lites
based on GAand our proposed ME-ES variants, see Fig. 1. Once the
behavioral map has been filled by ME-GA orME-ES , we can use it
for damage adaptation (e.g. loss of control for one or several joints).
As adaptation procedure, we use the map-based Bayesian optimiza-
tion algorithm ( M-BOA ), part of the original IT&E [ 13]. Bayesian
optimization is especially suitable to find the maximum of an un-
known objective function for which it is costly to obtain samples.
We define the objective function as F:BC→F.M-BOA initializes
a model ofFusing the behavioral map filled by MAP-E lites and
updates the model using Gaussian Process (GP) regression. Data
acquisition boils down to the evaluation of a controller θin the per-
turbed environment, providing a new pair (BC(θ),F(θ))to update
the modelF. We follow the implementation of Cully et al . [13]
and use a Matérn kernel function with parameters ν=5/2and
ρ=0.03as well as hyperparameters κ=0.3andσ2
noise=0.01as
Upper Confidence Bound exploration parameter and noise prior
respectively (see code).
MAP-ElitesMap updates
Interactions
Interactions
Model 
InitializationPhase 1: Map Building
Phase 2: Damage Adaptation
Damaged
Environment
M-BOABehavioral Map
Environment
Figure 1: Building repertoires for damage adaptation.
Phase 1: MAP-E lites builds a repertoire of diverse and high-
performing behaviors. Phase 2: M-BOA builds a model of the
objective function under the perturbed conditions to find a
controller robust to the damage.
3.3 Baselines and Controls
In this paper, we test ME-ES in two applications. The first is the con-
struction of behavioral repertoires for damage adaptation and the