Entropy 2021 ,23, 344 5 of 23
converted APK ﬁles to color images and used a convolutional DNN to extract dynamic
image features. Then, the DNN was trained to detect malware attacks. Singh et al. [ 46]
proposed a methodology to convert malware features into ﬁngerprint images. Then, a
CNN model was used to extract features from visualized malware for malware recognition.
Sun and Qian [ 47] generated malware feature images by aggregating static analysis of
malware using recurrent neural network (RNN) and CNN models. Feature images were
obtained by fusing original codes with predictive codes obtained from RNN. Finally, a
CNN was trained to recognize malware.
Previous works based on traditional methods are time-consuming and inefﬁcient
with the growing amount of malware. The visualization method is effective in terms of
time and processing efﬁciency. Conventional machine learning methods are not able to
handle raw pixel information from images and do not enable incremental learning. The
transformation of raw data into feature vectors needs extensive engineering and technical
knowledge. The classiﬁcation model trains the transformed form of input images. Deep
learning techniques achieve this representational learning ability to use raw input data and
allow for automated learning.
Deep learning techniques [ 48] are focused on multiple layers of abstraction, with
higher layers representing more abstract data information. Neural networks replace typical
machine learning techniques as an alternative in detecting malware. The advantages of
neural network models include incremental learning ability, training layers as required, etc.
Deep learning contributes to the development of automated and generalized models for the
detection and classiﬁcation of known and unknown malware [ 49]. CNNs are feed-forward
neural networks speciﬁcally used for image classiﬁcation problems. Considering the ability
of robust feature learning, state-of-the-art malware detection systems use CNN models [ 50]
for learning binary patterns in malware images. Ensemble models [ 51–53] can combine
multiple machine learning and deep learning models using stacking, boosting, or bagging
architecture. Cui et al. [ 54] proposed a CNN model for malware detection. Their system
worked for input images of ﬁxed sizes. Agarap et al. [ 55] trained the hybrid combination of
deep learning models and SVM on the Malimg dataset. Their approach provided insights
into designing an intelligent malware detection system. The proposed model analyzes
malware based on the vision-based technique. The advantages of the CNN model are
considered to train the malware images and to effectively classify them using the proposed
modiﬁcation of the DenseNet model.
3. Proposed Methodology
The overall design of the proposed malware detection approach is illustrated in
Figure 2. The ﬂow of the proposed modiﬁcation of DenseNet model is shown in Figure 3 .
The input binary images are fed into the DenseNet model for feature extraction and
classiﬁcation. The model is trained by providing the input image directly into the initial
convolution (Conv) layer. CNNs have a great potential to extract distinctive features that
comprehensively articulate the image and learn task-speciﬁc features. They automatically
learn features at various levels of abstraction, allowing them to learn complex functions by
modeling raw input data into the desired output. The proposed model uses DenseNet to
extract all features from malware datasets and trains the DenseNet on top of the extracted
features. Every dense layer can extract ﬁne details from binary images.