Entropy 2021 ,23, 344 3 of 23
by malware writers are recognizable in new variants, but the overall structure of the image
remains unaffected. Since it is crucial in detecting malware and to avoid information loss,
no other approach for visualization is effective.
Deep learning is a subﬁeld of machine learning, which learns the input at multiple
levels to gain better knowledge representations. Advances in computer vision with deep
learning were developed, mainly through Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Deep
learning models learn complex features and train a complex model with many convolu-
tional layers requiring millions of parameters. This eventually leads to overﬁtting in only a
few epochs, and the model does not generalize well, resulting in poor model performance.
The knowledge of CNNs thoroughly trained on a massive, well-elucidated dataset such as
ImageNet [ 13] can also be transferred to make the detection and classiﬁcation of malware
images more effective. The key idea of transfer learning is that the knowledge gained
in learning a model can help to enhance a different task in learning. CNNs are built on
increasingly deeper and input passes through many layers. The input information may
vanish before it reaches the ﬁnal layer of the network. ResNet and other CNNs address this
problem, but they generate shorter paths from preceding layers to the subsequent layers.
In this paper, a novel method is presented to classify malware variants based on the
deep learning DenseNet model [ 14] enhanced with a class-balanced loss for reweighting
the categorical cross-entropy loss. The proposed modiﬁcation of the DenseNet model
ensures information ﬂow by directly connecting all the layers with their feature maps in
the network. The feedforward approach is maintained by acquiring additional inputs from
the previous layers and passes on feature maps of the current layer to all succeeding layers.
The proposed model was practically assessed using the TensorFlow Python library [ 15]
and obtained promising results for analysis of the Malimg [ 10], Microsoft BIG 2015 [ 11],
MaleVis [12], and Malicia [16] datasets.
The contribution of this work is as follows:
 An effective and expeditious deep learning-based malware detection and classiﬁcation
system using raw binary images while requiring no binary execution (behavioral
analysis), reverse engineering, or code disassembly language skills is provided.
 The proposed methodology employs pretrained Densely Connected Convolutional
Networks (DenseNet) to achieve faster preprocessing and training of binary samples.
The DenseNet model allows for concatenation of features and utilizes fewer parame-
ters compared to other CNN models. The implicit deep supervision mechanism of the
DenseNet model contributes to effective malware detection. Additionally, the dense
connections with its regularizing power help reduce overﬁtting with smaller malware
training datasets.
 The data imbalance problem in classifying malware is tackled using reweighting of
the class-balanced categorical cross-entropy loss function in the softmax layer.
 We conduct an extensive evaluation on four different malware datasets, of which three
datasets are used for training and one dataset is used for testing the proposed model.
The results show that the proposed system is very efﬁcient and effective. It is also
resilient against sophisticated malware evolution over time and against anti-malware
evasion tactics.
 Without the need for complex feature engineering tasks, the proposed deep learning-
based malware detection model achieves higher accuracy rates of 98.23%, 98.46%, and
98.21% for the three datasets and of 89.48% for the unseen (Malicia) dataset. The model
has high computational performance, achieving an efﬁcient malware detection system.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature survey on malware
recognition and classiﬁcation. Section 3 details the proposed DenseNet-based malware
detection system. Section 4 describes the malware datasets used to assess the performance
of the proposed system. The experimental results of the proposed model and performance
analysis with other known malware detection systems are also discussed. The conclusion
of the paper is presented in Section 5.