Entropy 2021 ,23, 344 2 of 23
attachments or URLs. These malware variants can gather sensitive information from
organizations. Other examples of recent malware include WannaCry, Kovter, ZeuS, Dridex,
IcedID, Gh0st, Mirai, etc. The design of efﬁcient malware detection systems is still in an
arms race between the attackers and the security analysts.
Malware cases are analyzed using static and dynamic methods [ 8]. The code logic is
analyzed or disassembled without its execution in a static analysis method. They extract
features such as opcodes, Application Programming Interface (API) sequences, system
calls, etc. In dynamic analysis, the behavior of malware is analyzed by executing malignant
code in a safe and controlled environment. This analysis extracts network activity, system
calls, ﬁle operations, registry modiﬁcations, etc., as features. Static detection methods are
ineffective in identifying new malware as the signatures are not generalized. Dynamic
behavior-based methods improve detection accuracy, but they pose high overhead. Data
mining methods require many training samples and training time. Traditional dynamic
malware analysis methods are ineffective in the sense that they allow the malware to be
executed in a controlled environment such as a virtual box or vmware. The malware is
executed, and the various methods of its persistence mechanism, the way it is propagated,
the damage it causes to a system, and the network are investigated in detail. This requires
good expertise in the domain and a controlled environment for execution. As far as static
analysis methods are concerned, portable executable (PE) ﬁles are completely disassembled
and their hex codes are investigated to understand the ﬂow and impact of the malware.
This requires a great deal of expertise in assembly codes and a very thorough understanding
of the malware and its operations. Additionally, it also requires memory as well as time.
Though these methods are employed, combating new malware efﬁciently is becoming
more difﬁcult [9].
Visualization of malware has been recently used as a new and efﬁcient technique for
malware research. Figure 1 shows the malware images of various classes of Malimg [ 10],
Microsoft BIG 2015 [ 11], and MaleVis [ 12] datasets. The preexisting binary patterns are
being substantially reused to achieve variations, generating new patterns. This means that
malware samples can be grouped into several families and that each variant possesses its
respective family characteristics. Hence, it is critical to detect malware efﬁciently and to
identify its variations.
Entropy 2021 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 23 
 
 tains infected attachments or URLs. These malware variants can gather sensitive infor-
mation from organizations. Other exampl es of recent malware include WannaCry, 
Kovter, ZeuS, Dridex, IcedID, Gh0st, Mirai, et c. The design of efficient malware detection 
systems is still in an arms race between the attackers and the security analysts. 
Malware cases are analyzed using static and dynamic methods [8]. The code logic is 
analyzed or disassembled without its execution in a static analysis method. They extract 
features such as opcodes, Application Programming Interface (API) sequences, system 
calls, etc. In dynamic analys is, the behavior of malware is  analyzed by executing malig-
nant code in a safe and controlled environmen t. This analysis extracts network activity, 
system calls, file operations, registry modifi cations, etc., as features. Static detection 
methods are ineffective in identifying new malware as the signatures are not generalized. 
Dynamic behavior-based  methods improve detection accuracy, but they pose high 
overhead. Data mining method s require many training samp les and training time. Tra-
ditional dynamic malware analysis methods are ineffective in the sense that they allow 
the malware to be executed in a controlled environment such as a virtual box or vmware. 
The malware is executed, and the various methods of its persistence mechanism, the way 
it is propagated, the damage it causes to a system, and the network are investigated in 
detail. This requires good expertise in the domain and a controlled environment for ex-
ecution. As far as static analysis methods are concerned, portable executable (PE) files are 
completely disassembled and their hex codes ar e investigated to understand the flow and 
impact of the malware. This requires a great deal of expertise in assembly codes and a 
very thorough understanding of the malware and its operations. Additionally, it also requires memory as well as time. Though these methods are employed, combating new 
malware efficiently is beco ming more difficult [9]. 
Visualization of malware has been recently used as a new and efficient technique for 
malware research. Figure 1 shows the malware images of various classes of Malimg [10], 
Microsoft BIG 2015 [11], and MaleVis [12] datasets. The preexisting binary patterns are being substantially reused to achieve variat ions, generating new patterns. This means 
that malware samples can be grouped into several families and that each variant pos-
sesses its respective family characteristics. Hence, it is critical to detect malware effi-ciently and to identify its variations. 
 
Figure 1. A sample of malware images belonging to various classes of the malware datasets ( a) Adialer.C, ( b) Autorun.K, 
(c) Obfuscator.ACY, ( d) Ramnit, ( e) Dinwold, and ( f) Regrun. 
Motivated by the work of Nataraj et al. [10], we view a malware detection problem 
as a multi-class image classification problem by visualizing a binary code into a 
two-dimensional (2D) grayscale image. The stru cture of the PE binary file (cleanware or 
malware) is studied by converting it into an  image to provide more information about it. 
The binary images corresponding to the same class appear quite similar in structure and 
Figure 1. A sample of malware images belonging to various classes of the malware datasets ( a) Adialer.C, ( b) Autorun.K,
(c) Obfuscator.ACY, ( d) Ramnit, ( e) Dinwold, and ( f) Regrun.
Motivated by the work of Nataraj et al. [ 10], we view a malware detection problem
as a multi-class image classiﬁcation problem by visualizing a binary code into a two-
dimensional (2D) grayscale image. The structure of the PE binary ﬁle (cleanware or
malware) is studied by converting it into an image to provide more information about it.
The binary images corresponding to the same class appear quite similar in structure and
texture, where they are distinct between different classes. The various subsections of a PE
binary are visualized with different textures. The small modiﬁcations made to the binary