ERANNs: Efﬁcient Residual Audio Neural Networks for Audio Pattern Recognition
Sergey Verbitskiy1;3, Vladimir Berikov2, Viacheslav Vyshegorodtsev3,
1Novosibirsk State University, Department of Mechanics and Mathematics, Novosibirsk, Russia,
2Sobolev Institute of Mathematics SB RAS, Data Analysis Laboratory, Novosibirsk, Russia,
3Deepsound, Novosibirsk, Russia,
ABSTRACT
Audio pattern recognition (APR) is an important research topic and
can be applied to several ﬁelds related to our lives. Therefore, ac-
curate and efﬁcient APR systems need to be developed as they are
useful in real applications. In this paper, we propose a new convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) architecture and a method for im-
proving the inference speed of CNN-based systems for APR tasks.
Moreover, using the proposed method, we can improve the perfor-
mance of our systems, as conﬁrmed in experiments conducted on
four audio datasets. In addition, we investigate the impact of data
augmentation techniques and transfer learning on the performance
of our systems. Our best system achieves a mean average preci-
sion (mAP) of 0.450 on the AudioSet dataset. Although this value
is less than that of the state-of-the-art system, the proposed system
is 7.1x faster and 9.7x smaller. On the ESC-50, UrbanSound8K,
and RA VDESS datasets, we obtain state-of-the-art results with ac-
curacies of 0.961, 0.908, and 0.748, respectively. Our system for the
ESC-50 dataset is 1.7x faster and 2.3x smaller than the previous best
system. For the RA VDESS dataset, our system is 3.3x smaller than
the previous best system. We name our systems “Efﬁcient Residual
Audio Neural Networks”.
Keywords: audio pattern recognition; sound classiﬁcation; audio
tagging; residual convolutional neural networks; transfer learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Studies on audio pattern recognition (APR) have been gradually in-
creasing, and APR systems can be used in several ﬁelds that are
related to our everyday lives. The primary research subtopics of
APR are environmental sound classiﬁcation [1, 2], sound event de-
tection [3], and audio tagging (predicting the presence or absence
of sounds in audio signals) [4]. In general, we are surrounded by
environmental sounds; therefore, there are several applications of
APR systems, e.g., smart room monitoring [5] and video content
highlight generation [6]. Moreover, over the past decade, several
studies have focused on musical genre classiﬁcation [7]. There-
fore, APR systems can be used to analyze music preferences of
users of media services to improve the recommendation process.
Another application of APR systems is speech emotion classiﬁ-
cation [8]. In addition, APR systems can be used in the medical
ﬁeld, e.g., to classify respiratory diseases [9]. In this study, we
cover three APR subtasks, for which our systems are evaluated:
audio tagging (AudioSet [4]), environmental sound classiﬁcation
(ESC-50 [1] and UrbanSound8K [2]), and speech emotion classi-
ﬁcation (RA VDESS [8]).
Corresponding author: s.verbitskii@alumni.nsu.ru (Sergey Verbitskiy)The AudioSet dataset [4], which is the largest dataset contain-
ing two million audio recordings with 527 classes, is used to train
and evaluate modern APR systems. Recently, several researchers
conducted studies [10, 11, 12, 13] to obtain high performance on
the aforementioned dataset. Despite a considerable amount of ef-
fort to make APR systems more accurate for AudioSet, the systems
still have signiﬁcantly lower performance compared with modern
systems used for image recognition tasks on datasets that are of
a similar size. For instance, the state-of-the-art model achieves a
mean average precision (mAP) of 0.485 on AudioSet [10]; how-
ever, previous image classiﬁcation systems achieve a top-1 accuracy
of 0.9 [14] on ImageNet [15]. Therefore, the APR ﬁeld needs to be
explored further to develop more accurate systems.
In addition to the performance of APR systems, we need to
focus on the computational complexity of the systems. In recent
years, several studies focused on techniques to reduce the compu-
tational complexity of neural networks for diverse tasks [16], in-
cluding APR tasks [12], as it is important to implement systems for
low-powered devices and reduce the use of computing resources in
data centers. However, the best system for AudioSet [10] has low
efﬁciency, which makes it practically infeasible to use this system
in real life. Thus, there is a need to develop APR systems, which
are also compact and fast.
Considering the aforementioned issues, we suggest several
techniques to improve the performance and efﬁciency of APR sys-
tems. First, we develop a new convolutional neural network (CNN)
architecture with the widening factor [17], which is used to change
the number of parameters and ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs) of
systems. Moreover, we propose a simple method to improve the
inference efﬁciency of CNN-based systems for APR tasks. This
method is based on an increase in the stride size (from 2 to 4) of few
convolutional layers. Second, we describe and compare several data
augmentation techniques for audio pattern recognition tasks, which
are applied to improve the accuracy of systems on evaluation sets:
the temporal cropping, SpecAugment [18], modiﬁed mixup [19],
and pitch shifting [20]. To estimate the impact of diverse tech-
niques on the performance and computational complexity of APR
systems, we conduct experiments on four benchmark audio datasets
for tagging and classiﬁcation tasks: AudioSet [4], ESC-50 [1],
UrbanSound8K [2], and RA VDESS [8]. In addition, transfer learn-
ing is applied to ESC-50, UrbanSound8K, and RA VDESS: we
transfer our systems, which are pre-trained on AudioSet. Thus,
we examine the impact of transfer learning on the performance of
systems on small APR datasets. Our APR systems are known as
“Efﬁcient Residual Audio Neural Networks” (ERANNs).
Owing to the design and application of various techniques, ER-
ANNs can obtain high results on all the datasets. The proposed sys-
tem achieves an mAP of 0.450 on the AudioSet dataset. AlthougharXiv:2106.01621v7  [cs.SD]  20 Jul 2022