this value is less than that of the state-of-the-art system (0.485) [10],
our system is 7.1x faster and has 9.7x fewer parameters. Moreover,
the best system is pre-trained on ImageNet [15]; however, our sys-
tem is trained from scratch. On the ESC-50, UrbanSound8K, and
RA VDESS datasets, we obtain state-of-the-art accuracies of 0.961,
0.908, and 0.748, respectively. Previous state-of-the-art systems
achieve accuracies of 0.956 [10], 0.891 [13], and 0.721 [11], re-
spectively. Our system for ESC-50 is 1.7x faster and 2.3x smaller
than the previous best system. For RA VDESS, our system is 3.3x
smaller than the previous best system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
describes previous methods used for APR tasks. Section 3 presents
the feature extraction process, data augmentation techniques, and
the proposed CNN architecture. Section 4 provides detailed experi-
mental results and a comparison of our APR systems with previous
systems. Section 5 concludes this paper.
2. RELATED WORKS
Traditional APR systems comprised classical generative or dis-
criminative models, e.g., Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) [21],
and used time-frequency representations, e.g., the log mel spec-
trogram or mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCCs), as input.
However, later, methods with neural networks, in particular with
CNNs [19, 11, 12, 22, 13], signiﬁcantly outperformed conserva-
tive machine learning methods for APR tasks. Moreover, CNN-
based systems outperformed recurrent neural network RNN-based
systems, e.g., for sound event detection tasks [23]. Nowadays,
CNN-based systems are widely used for APR tasks.
Systems with transformers are gaining popularity for APR
tasks. A transformer-based system achieves the state-of-the-art per-
formance with an mAP of 0.485 [10] on the AudioSet dataset. How-
ever, this system has high computational complexity (526.6 million
parameters), which makes it difﬁcult to apply this system in real
life.
There are two main approaches for CNN-based systems. The
ﬁrst approach states to use models with 2D convolutional layers
and time–frequency representations, e.g., the log mel spectrogram,
as input to the ﬁrst 2D convolutional layer [11, 22]. The second
approach deﬁnes end-to-end systems [11, 12, 24, 19], where the
raw audio signal is used as input. End-to-end systems, as a rule,
comprise two parts [11, 12, 19]: the ﬁrst part includes 1D convo-
lutional layers, and the second part includes 2D convolutional lay-
ers. The ﬁrst part is applied to extract 2D features, which replace
time–frequency representations. Despite the learnable extraction of
time–frequency features in end-to-end systems, systems with the
log mel spectrogram perform better on APR tasks [11, 12]. More-
over, there are end-to-end systems, which contain only 1D convolu-
tional layers [24]. In this article, we use the ﬁrst approach and the
log mel spectrogram as input to the ﬁrst 2D convolutional layer. We
compare the aforementioned approaches below.
Residual neural networks (ResNets) [25] have shortcut connec-
tions among convolutional layers. Shortcut connections help par-
tially avoid the vanishing gradient problem. Over the past years,
the application of shortcut connections in CNN architectures be-
came a widespread technique in the area of machine learning, in-
cluding APR [11, 22, 13]. WideResNets [17] have an additional
hyperparameter—the widening factor for the width of convolutional
layers—to change the computational complexity of models. With
optimal values of the widening factor, WideResNets have better per-
formance and fewer parameters than original ResNets. The widen-ing factor was introduced in several CNN-based systems for simple
scaling, for instance, for image recognition tasks [16] (EfﬁcientNet)
and APR tasks [12] (AemNet-DW). We also use shortcut connec-
tions and the widening factor in our CNN architecture.
Transfer learning is a widespread technique in computer vi-
sion tasks. A model is trained for tasks with a large dataset and
transferred to similar tasks with smaller datasets: all parameters
of the model for the new task are initialized from the pre-trained
model, except parameters of few last layers. For APR tasks, trans-
fer learning was used by other researchers [10, 11, 12, 13] (pre-
training on AudioSet) that signiﬁcantly improved accuracy on APR
tasks with small datasets. In this article, we use ﬁne-tuning as the
transfer learning strategy (we optimize all parameters of transferred
models). Models pre-trained on the AudioSet dataset are trans-
ferred to the other three APR tasks with small datasets: ESC-50,
UrbanSound8K, and RA VDESS.
3. PROPOSED APR SYSTEM
This section describes the feature extraction process, data augmen-
tation techniques, and the proposed CNN architecture.
3.1. Feature Extraction
For each experiment, we use the log mel spectrogram as input to the
ﬁrst 2D convolutional layer of our models.
We use a sampling rate ( sr) of 44.1 kHz for all audio signals.
The short-time Fourier transform (STFT) with the Hann window of
size 1380 (31 ms) and the hop size of H= 345 (8 ms) is
applied to extract spectrograms. The number of time frames Tsis
calculated as
Ts="
srt
H#
+ 1 ="
44100t
345#
+ 1; (1)
wheretis the duration of an audio signal (in seconds). Integer t5
yields a value of Ts= 128t. For integer t >5, we pad the au-
dio signal with zeros to obtain Ts= 128t. Iftis not an integer,
we pad the audio signal with zeros to gain integer duration. Thus,
Ts=2j2Nforj7. This is a convenient way to avoid size
mismatch in shortcut connections of models with different sets of
stride sizes of convolutional layers for input audio signals with var-
ious lengths (in our models, the maximum product of stride sizes for
the temporal dimension is 128). This substantiates the selection of
H= 345 . The size of the window is selected to ensure an overlap
of 0.75.
We adopt the number of mel bins M= 128 . We suppose that
M= 128 is the best choice as a trade-off between computational
complexity and performance of models. In [11], the model with
M= 128 performed better than the model with M= 64 on the
AudioSet dataset. Large values of Mcan signiﬁcantly decrease the
efﬁciency of models.
Moreover, we determine the lower cut-off frequency
fmin= 50 Hz to remove low-frequency noise and the upper
cut-off frequency fmax=14,000 Hz to remove the aliasing effect.
Thus, the log mel spectrogram of each audio recording is rep-
resented as a 2D tensor with a shape of 128Ts.
3.2. Data Augmentation Techniques
We use several data augmentation techniques to prevent models
from overﬁtting during training and improve the performance of