4.1 Performance of the RBMs with different activation functions on MNIST data
Learning is monitored via the pseudo-likelihood function evaluated after each parameter
update over a random subset of 100 data-points drawn from the test set. Learning curves
are shown in Figure 5a for RBMs with 50 and 1200 hidden nodes and for all activation
functions studied in the previous sections. Values of the pseudo-likelihood evaluated
over mini-batches of the training set resemble very closely those reported in the ﬁgure
for the test set and, therefore, they are not showed. From the ﬁgure it is clear that, when
50 hidden units are employed, the pseudo-likelihood values of the RBM with a Linear
activation function are always larger than those of the other RBMs with non-linear ac-
tivation function, whereas, except for the Step activation function, the converse is true
for 1200 hidden units. This fact is evident in Figure 5b, where the pseudo-likelihood
and likelihood values, evaluated on the entire test set, are shown as a function of the
number of hidden nodes and by varying the activation function. The likelihood was
estimated with the Annealing Importance Sampling (AIS) procedure, employing 100
annealing runs and around 14000 intermediate temperatures (Neal, 2001). Following
Salakhutdinov and Murray (2008), error bars around the likelihood estimates are com-
puted from the predicted bounds on the estimates of the partition function. The upper
(lower) bound is determined as the mean plus (minus) three times the standard error
of the mean over the annealing runs. Annealing runs returning values larger than three
times the scaled median absolute deviations (MAD) from the median, as detected by the
“rmoutliers” MATLAB routine, were considered outliers and removed from the compu-
tation of the mean and error bars. These few atypical runs (two or three runs on average
and occurring only in few cases) were clearly unreasonable estimates of the partition
function and most likely due to the Gibbs sampler getting stuck in some local minima.
Figure 5b shows that the RBM with the Linear activation function does not beneﬁt
from increasing the size of the hidden layer beyond M= 100 : the values of both the
pseudo-likelihood and the likelihood saturate after that critical size, which reﬂects the
fact that this RBM is limited to capturing only pairwise interactions and augmenting
the hidden layer size can only increase the accuracy with which these interactions are
represented. Eventually, the ﬁgure demonstrates that pairwise interactions are already
21