as Eq. (21) would predict and as observed also in numerical experiments. Furthermore,
by inspection of Eq. (21), we have also noticed that interaction models described by the
RBMs present an increasing uncertainty in the estimates of the interaction parameters
which grows with the interaction order and which implicitly sets an upper bound on the
largest interaction order that the RBM can represent.
6 Discussion
Our study is related to several previous works where a direct or indirect link can be
traced between generalised RBMs and spin models. The expansion of log-probability
distribution of RBMs in terms of disjoint events reminds of the method of Network
Polynomials in Bayesian networks where a number of probabilistic queries could be
retrieved by evaluating partial derivatives of such a polynomial (Darwiche, 2003). Fur-
thermore, the mapping presented here can also be seen as an application to RBMs of the
-expansion proposed in Martignon et al. (1995) for detecting higher-order interactions
in neural data.
Martens and Sutskever (2010) exploit the equivalence between pairwise Markov
Random Fields (MRF) and RBMs with gaussian hidden units in order to introduce a
parallelisable scheme for efﬁcient sampling of hard-to-sample MRFs. On the same
line, and very related to our work is the analysis reported in Yoshioka et al. (2019). The
authors in this work address the question that is the inverse of what we considered here,
namely going from an interacting binary model distribution to an equivalent RBM in
the case of binary hidden units. They report an algebraic transformation of general-
ized Ising models with many-spin interactions into Boltzmann machines, exploring the
beneﬁt of the mapping in Monte Carlo simulations.
In a set of papers, Barra et al. (2012, 2018) studied the phase diagram of RBMs
by varying the prior over weight parameters and the prior over node variables, i.e. the
activation function, and focus on the conditions for the existence of a retrieval phase.
From the point of view of statistical learning, the authors argue that the retrieval phase
is associated with models that after training are capable of capturing few relevant fea-
tures from heterogeneous data while avoiding overﬁtting and that the paramagnetic to
33