1 Introduction
Many of the principal phenomena discovered and studied in the theory of neural com-
putation, artiﬁcial or biological, e.g. the formation of attractors using Hebbian learning,
the ability of approximating any function using feedforward networks or modelling
probability distribution using Boltzmann Machines, have been initially discovered by
studying networks of binary units (Hertz, 1991). Although the neural architectures in-
volved have been shown to exhibit these phenomena when other activation functions
instead of binary units are used, it is only in recent years that attention has been given to
the activation function as a crucial factor that can determine the performance of the net-
work both quantitatively and qualitatively. Notable examples are the outperformance of
Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLU)/Threshold-Linear (TL) compared to e.g. binary units in
deep neural networks trained with back-propagation (Nair and Hinton, 2010), the gen-
eral dependence of the performance of gradient based learning methods to the smooth-
ness of the activation function Panigrahi et al. (2019), and the signiﬁcantly smaller gap
between optimal capacity and what is achieved via Hebbian learning Sch ¨onsberg et al.
(2021) in networks with ReLU/TL compared to binary networks. In this paper, we fo-
cus on understanding the role of the hidden layer activation function on the distributions
that can be represented by the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM).
The RBM, originally introduced by the name of Harmonium (Smolensky, 1986),
is a bipartite undirected graphical model where only nodes belonging to one class are
visible. The interactions are allowed only between nodes belonging to different classes,
but not within the same class. In fact, the RBM owes its name to the fact that it rep-
resents a simpliﬁed version of the Boltzmann Machine (BM) (Ackley et al., 1985). As
compared to the BM, the RBM is simpler, but yet very powerful (Le Roux and Bengio,
2008), and it can be trained with relative ease and efﬁciency (Hinton, 2014). Given its
attractive features, it is widely employed in applications as a generative model of data
distributions (Salakhutdinov et al., 2007), but also in classiﬁcation tasks (Larochelle
et al., 2012). RBMs have also been used as building block of deep neural architectures,
fostering the rise of deep learning (Hinton et al., 2006; Roudi and Taylor, 2015). In neu-
roscience, RBMs have been used for modelling correlations between neuronal ﬁrings, a
2