spin glass transition conveys information on the optimal size of the training set required
for making good inferences (Barra et al., 2017); see also (Marullo and Agliari, 2021)
for a recent review of some of these results as well as the relationship between dense
associative networks and RBMs. The role of the non-linearity in the activation function
in the expressive power of the RBMs has also been studied in (Tubiana and Monasson,
2017) and (Tubiana et al., 2019) via numerical experiments and a replica analysis. In
this work, the conditions under which RBMs enter the so-called “compositional phase”
where visible conﬁgurations are composed from combinations of a number of features
encoded by simultaneously strongly activated hidden units was studied. RBMs work-
ing in such a regime can capture invariant features in the underlying distribution from
vastly distinct data conﬁgurations while the sparse activation of the hidden layer favours
their interpretation. Although all these studies address the same general question as the
one studied here, namely the relationship between the representational power of RBMs
and features of the activation function and connectivity employed, they differ from ours
in that their analyses are performed on ensembles of RBMs analysed using statistical
mechanics techniques in the thermodynamics limit. In other words, the analyses aim at
understanding the typical case behaviour of an RBM within a given statistical ensem-
ble. Our focus on the other hand has been to directly relate the marginal distribution
of the observed nodes to that of the activation function for a single realisation of the
system. It would, however be interesting to see if applying the statistical mechanics
approaches used in previous studies such as Barra et al. (2017); Tubiana and Monasson
(2017), combined with the mapping studies here as well as the existing literature on the
phase diagram of the p-spin glass models (see Barrat (1997) for a review) may allow
identiﬁcation of the phase diagram and, in particular, the most expressive regime of
RBMs with arbitrary activation functions. In this case, the small coupling expansion in
Eq. (21) could be a useful approximation to simplify the analytical calculations.
The observations summarised in the previous section on RBMs trained on the MNIST
suggest that with all the nonlinear activation functions, the interactive marginal distri-
bution of the observed nodes is a low order interaction model with a hierarchy in the
relative strength of interaction parameters that outperform simple pairwise models only
when providing a large number of hidden nodes. Although the emergence of this hi-
34