problem of particular importance in neural data analysis (Averbeck et al., 2006; Latham
and Roudi, 213), in particular for modelling correlations beyond pairwise (K ¨oster et al.,
2014). They have also been used for classifying stimuli impinging on the retina based
on the evoked neural activity (Zanotto et al., 2017; Gardella et al., 2018) and for auto-
matically categorising and discovering novel sleep stages in mice (Katsageorgiou et al.,
2018), among other examples.
Stochastic units in the standard RBM are binary and follow a Bernoulli conditional
distribution (Hinton, 2012; Fischer and Igel, 2014) and previous works have shown that
this standard RBM is a universal approximator of discrete distributions (Le Roux and
Bengio, 2008; Martens et al., 2013). Many variants to the standard binary RBM have
been developed, including RBMs with Gaussian units (Freund and Haussler, 1992),
Poisson units (Gehler et al., 2006), units following distributions belonging to the expo-
nential family (Welling et al., 2005; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2016) and Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) (Nair and Hinton, 2010). Despite this, the direct relationship between different
aspects of the architecture, e.g. the properties of the hidden nodes and the connectiv-
ity matrix, and the distribution that the network expresses is often hard to understand.
This is indeed a problem shared with most deep neural architectures (Caruana et al.,
2015; Foerster et al., 2017; Lipton, 2018), and addressing this problem for the RBMs
can serve a crucial step towards addressing it in the case of deep architectures.
In this paper we consider RBMs with binary visible units and investigate how their
representational power depends on the architectural characteristics of the machines by
studying how the marginal distribution expressed by different RBMs map into distribu-
tions of interacting binary variables over the visible nodes, also called spin models in
the statistical physics community. Speciﬁcally, in section 2 and 3, we derive an exact
mathematical expression for this mapping and describe how it can provide insights into
the way an RBM works and what kind of distributions it can represent as one varies
the activation function and the number of hidden nodes. In section 4, we test the map-
ping with numerical simulations for a number of simple models and apply it to the
study of the MNIST dataset. We compare the performances of these different RBMs
and discuss how the binary interactive models they express over the visible nodes relate
to each other. We conclude in section 5 by summarising the results and stressing the
3