4 Numerical Results
Following the theoretical discussions of the previous sections, in this section, we report
our numerical results. We ﬁrst report some simulations in which we compare the result-
ing interaction models over the binary visible nodes that emerge from our theoretical
expressions compared to what we actually ﬁnd from simulating simple RBMs. We then
study the performance and the resulting interaction model when we train RBMs with
different number of hidden nodes and activation functions on the MNIST data.
4.1 Numerical evidence of the mapping
In this ﬁrst numerical experiment, we consider a simple RBM with N= 3visible nodes,
M= 4hidden nodes and the Exponential activation function as shown in Figure 2. The
weights that are not drawn in the ﬁgure, as well as the biases on the hidden units, are
set to zero. By applying the mapping described in the previous section, namely Eq.
(14), it is easy to verify that this RBM is equivalent to a pure three-body interaction
model, that is a model in which the three visible nodes are interacting among each
other only through a three-body interaction term. The value of the three-body term is
also reported in the ﬁgure. The equivalence between the RBM and the corresponding
interaction model is proved by sampling conﬁgurations from the RBM with blocked
Gibbs sampling, measuring the frequency of observation of each state and comparing
those frequencies with the probabilities as evaluated with the interaction model. This is
shown in the histogram in Figure 2: the frequencies by which each state appears in the
samples generated by the RBM (cyan bars) match the probabilities of the same state as
predicted by the equivalent interaction model (red line).
In the second numerical experiment, reported in Figure 3, we checked the analytical
mapping of the previous section by considering larger RBMs with N= 10 visible
andM= 15 hidden nodes. The parameters of these RBMs are chosen randomly: the
weights are drawn from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and standard deviation
1=p
M, whereas the values of the hidden and visible biases are drawn from a Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and standard deviation equal to 0.1. This choice for the
parameters is to ensure that the resulting distribution in the state space is not very peaked
16