to the RBM employing the Linear activation function. This fact is unexpected given the
higher representational power of RBMs with ReLU and it might be a consequence of
the learning procedure: although a non-linear activation function allows the machine to
capture details beyond pairwise correlations and a large number of hidden nodes pro-
vides the necessary resources (parameters) to achieve this goal, the learning algorithm
might fail to explore relevant conﬁgurations in the parameter space. In fact, more gener-
ally, learning algorithms might be biased towards certain regions of the parameter space
(Baldassi et al., 2020).
Finally, RBMs with the Exponential activation function exhibits likelihood values
larger that any other RBMs for M > 400. This efﬁciency can likely be attributed to
the fact that, as discussed in section 3.3, this type of RBS effectively approximate the
symmetric tensor decomposition of the interactions of all orders.
4.2 The effective interactions between the visible nodes
In this section, we explore in more detail the properties of the resulting interaction
parameters that we ﬁnd from the expression in Eq. (14) for the different activation
functions. In particular, we investigate how the resulting parameters depend on the
number of hidden nodes and on the choice of the activation function.
In Figure 6, we show how the pairwise interactions change as we vary the number
of hidden nodes M. In the case of the Linear activation function (Figure 6a), pairwise
interactions do not change substantially after M= 100 , but only get reﬁned by the
larger number of hidden nodes. The same is true also for the resulting bias terms (not
shown), which we will refer to as the ﬁeld parameters. Given that ﬁelds and pairwise
interactions are the only parameters that an RBM with the Linear activation function
can express, the fact that these parameter do not change substantially after M= 100 is
consistent with the saturation of the likelihood and pseudo-likelihood functions shown
in Figure 5b. In the case of non-linear activation functions, such as the ReLU in Fig-
ure 6a, the magnitude of pairwise interactions increases with M. Again, this is true also
for the ﬁeld parameters. Besides getting stronger, there appears to be a clear structure
in the way the pairwise interactions in the non-linear cases change with M: the most
23