the corresponding RBM can only describe pairwise models, at odds with the other in-
vestigated cases. In particular, we have demonstrated that the Linear activation func-
tion is indeed the only possible choice which induces a model with only a ﬁnite set of
nonzero interactions given a generic RBM weight matrix. Moreover we have shown
that the RBM with the Linear activation function provides the best low rank approxi-
mation to any pairwise model and, in particular, can express a pairwise model with a
full rank connectivity matrix (Ising model) when the number of hidden nodes Mequals
the number of visible minus one. The same efﬁciency is inherited by RBMs with ReLU
(Nair and Hinton, 2010), which can be approximately interpreted as a semi-Restricted
Boltzmann Machine given the similarities of the higher order interaction terms with the
standard RBM. In both ReLU and Exponential, trivial symmetries in the pairwise rep-
resentation are broken through the presence of higher order terms which are modelled
by the same parameters, promoting the interpretability of the emerging latent variable
representation. Interestingly, in the small parameter limit, pairwise interactions will
always be parametrised by a Hopﬁeld-like term, regardless of the choice of the poten-
tial (Eq. 19). Finally, the Exponential case (Welling et al., 2005; Gehler et al., 2006)
shows a surprisingly simple representation of higher order terms which seems to gener-
alise the efﬁcient representation employed for pairwise interactions. Analogously to the
Hopﬁeld case, such a representation is shared across activation functions in the small
parameter limit (Eq. 21).
By performing numerical tests, we have veriﬁed that the expressions we report in
this paper describe correctly the interactions among the observed nodes in a number of
simple RBM architectures. As an application, we have studied the interactions induced
in RBMs trained on the MNIST data ﬁnding simple scaling relationships between pair-
wise interactions resulting from RBMs with different number of hidden nodes and acti-
vation functions. The same is true for the ﬁelds parameters whereas we did not observe
any clear pattern for the triplet interactions. In almost all investigated cases, except
for small hidden node layer, the RBM weight parameters are small enough to justify a
small parameter approximation: we have checked the approximation for the pairwise
interaction parameters, that is Eq. (19), holds with a good accuracy and we have ver-
iﬁed that the magnitude of the typical interactions decrease with the interaction order
32