1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:13524  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93030-0
www.nature.com/scientificreportsMedical imaging deep learning 
with differential privacy
Alexander Ziller1,2,4,5, Dmitrii Usynin1,2,3,4,5, Rickmer Braren1, Marcus Makowski1, 
Daniel Rueckert2,3 & Georgios Kaissis1,2,3,4*
The successful training of deep learning models for diagnostic deployment in medical imaging 
applications requires large volumes of data. Such data cannot be procured without consideration 
for patient privacy, mandated both by legal regulations and ethical requirements of the medical 
profession. Differential privacy (DP) enables the provision of information-theoretic privacy guarantees 
to patients and can be implemented in the setting of deep neural network training through the 
differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm. We here present deepee, a free-
and-open-source framework for differentially private deep learning for use with the PyTorch  deep 
learning framework. Our framework is based on parallelised execution of neural network operations to 
obtain and modify the per-sample gradients. The process is efficiently abstracted via a data structure 
maintaining shared memory references to neural network weights to maintain memory efficiency. 
We furthermore offer specialised data loading procedures and privacy budget accounting based on 
the Gaussian Differential Privacy framework, as well as automated modification of the user-supplied 
neural network architectures to ensure DP-conformity of its layers. We benchmark our framework’s 
computational performance against other open-source DP frameworks and evaluate its application 
on the paediatric pneumonia dataset, an image classification task and on the Medical Segmentation 
Decathlon Liver dataset in the task of medical image segmentation. We find that neural network 
training with rigorous privacy guarantees is possible while maintaining acceptable classification 
performance and excellent segmentation performance. Our framework compares favourably to 
related work with respect to memory consumption and computational performance. Our work 
presents an open-source software framework for differentially private deep learning, which we 
demonstrate in medical imaging analysis tasks. It serves to further the utilisation of privacy-enhancing 
techniques in medicine and beyond in order to assist researchers and practitioners in addressing the 
numerous outstanding challenges towards their widespread implementation.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a heavily data-centric domain: the success of machine learning (ML) models depends 
on the quality and quantity of data that is available during training. This is especially problematic in applications 
such as medical image analysis, in which high quality data is sparse and data utilisation is restricted. Medical 
data is highly sensitive, and regulatory, ethical and moral requirements restrict its sharing. These restrictions, 
although crucial, hinder the development of algorithms that generalise well and therefore prevent widespread 
deployment. Recent  work1 finds that even algorithms approved for diagnostic use are often trained on small (i.e. 
less than 1000 cases), single centre datasets. Considering that state-of-the-art generic computer vision models 
are customarily trained on datasets such as  ImageNet2 containing orders of magnitude more images, it becomes 
readily apparent that the access to more data will be strictly necessary for the development of the majority of deep 
learning applications in medical imaging to achieve the same success. Privacy-preserving machine learning is 
a nascent area of AI which proposes to bridge the gap between data utilisation and data protection through the 
application of privacy-enhancing  techniques3. Among these, collaborative learning protocols such as federated 
learning have arguably witnessed the widest  publicity4. They allow a confederation of clients to train ML models 
in a decentralised fashion and without sharing the raw data. However, a number of works  suggest5–7 that on its 
own, federated learning is an insufficient measure of privacy preservation. In the setting of medical imaging, 
this can result in catastrophic privacy loss for affected patients. Prior work demonstrates that federated learning 
without additional privacy-enhancing techniques can be reverse-engineered to reconstruct high-fidelity images 
which encode diagnostic information about patients, such as the absence of a breast indicative of a prior history OPEN
1Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technical 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 2Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Healthcare, Technical University 
of Munich, Munich, Germany. 3Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK. 4OpenMined, Oxford, 
UK. 5These authors contributed equally: Alexander Ziller and Dmitrii Usynin. *email: g.kaissis@tum.de