4
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:13524  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93030-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/in the segmentation setting compared to Opacus  (Student’s  t-test p<0.001  ) and Pyvacy  ( p<0.001  ). Opacus  
significantly outperformed our framework ( p<0.001  ) and Pyvacy  ( p<0.001  ) in the classification task. (All 25 
batches of 32 examples over N = 5 repetitions).
Our framework required significantly less memory than Opacus  in both the classification and segmentation 
setting (Student’s  t-test p<0.001  ). Pyvacy , due to serial processing of the individual samples in each minibatch 
suffers from a drastically diminished computational performance, however requires significantly less memory 
than both other frameworks as a result of only needing to cache a single sample’s gradients at a time ( Student’s  
t-test p<0.001  , all N = 6 repetitions).
Moreover, to exemplify our framework’s compatibility, we benchmarked an additional U-Net architecture 
utilising transposed convolutions as described in the original  work21. The Opacus  framework is incompatible 
with transposed convolutions and could thus not be assessed. Pyvacy , while requiring less memory ( p<0.001  ), 
again was significantly slower per batch compared to deepee  ( p<0.001 ).
Discussion
Here we present a novel technical implementation of the DP-SGD algorithm which we demonstrate and bench-
mark in the setting of medical image analysis. We found our technique’s computational performance and memory 
consumption to be comparable to state-of-the-art frameworks without a requirement for user-side modifications. 
Our framework thus provides formal privacy guarantees regardless of the dataset, learning task and of model 
selection. Moreover, by leveraging the current state-of-the-art in DP analysis, we demonstrate tighter privacy 
bounds compared to previous DP accounting techniques. The two applications presented provide evidence for 
the usefulness of our DP-SGD algorithm in real-world medical image processing.
Medical imaging represents a domain in which privacy-utility trade-offs are especially problematic, as mod-
els that generalise well require large and diverse multi-centre datasets during training and must not divulge 
personal test data once deployed. Such demands are—for example—placed on ML models utilised for remote 
diagnosis-as-a-service22, where expert-level algorithm performance is expected, while the model may be exposed 
to probing by malicious third parties. Formal security and secrecy mechanisms such as model encryption can 
only partially address this requirement, as even encrypted models have been found to leak sensitive information 
in previous  work23,24. Similarly, distributed learning techniques such as federated learning, often touted as being 
“privacy-preserving” because the data does not leave its owner, have been proven ineffective against attackers 
who participate in the training protocol and are able to capture updates submitted by other  participants5,6. Dif -
ferentially private model training therefore stands as the only formal mechanism for privacy protection, able to 
shield models from feature reconstruction, model inversion and membership inference  attacks6,25. Moreover, 
recent work demonstrates that DP can reduce the susceptibility of models to other adversarial interference such 
as back-door attacks26, which can be attributed to the increased robustness of DP models imparted through the 
regularising properties of noise  addition27.
Inherent to these beneficial properties of DP model training is—however—also an unavoidable net reduction 
in model utility. We identify three key components of this utility penalty: (1) Diminished task-specific perfor -
mance, e.g. in classification or segmentation tasks; (2) computational performance penalties through an increase 
in training time and memory consumption and (3) incompatibilities of the DP-SGD algorithm with the neural 
network architecture. Our work attempts to address all three of these points.
The use-cases chosen in our study, image classification and segmentation, represent two typical workflows in 
medical imaging analysis. Interestingly, we observed a marked performance decrease in the private classification 
task compared to non-private model training even under relaxed privacy guarantees. Semantic segmentation 
was possible under very strong privacy notions with unexpectedly strong performance. The only other work 
to report an ε-value in a medical image segmentation  task28 utilises a different DP technique, whose utilisation 
results in a high privacy expenditure of over 120 under the study’s assumptions, compared to 0.12 in our work. 
No previous work—to our knowledge—reports ε-values for medical image classification. At present, it is not yet 
conclusively investigated to which extent the difficulty of the task, the choice of model and the specific training 
technique influence the privacy-utility trade-off. Future work will thus have to elucidate these relationships and 
expand on recent studies in this  direction13,14,29.
Besides these factors, more refined techniques for privacy accounting are able to offer an improved analysis of 
the DP mechanism and thus allow higher utility. In the medical imaging domain, the combination of high utility 
and low privacy budget is particularly important. As datasets are complex, highly sensitive and typically small, 
each individual in the dataset experiences a relatively higher privacy loss. A tight privacy analysis allows training 
the models for a longer time before the privacy budget is exhausted, enabling higher task-specific performance 
and therefore, a better diagnostic prediction. Our work utilises Gaussian Differential Privacy, a recently intro -
duced DP formulation which—through a tight characterisation of the sub-sampled Gaussian noise mechanism 
utilised in DP-SGD—improves the outlook on the spent privacy budget compared to previous frameworks. It is 
expected that further advances, such as individual privacy  accounting30,31 will increase the granularity of privacy 
tracking further, allowing for the preservation of even higher utility during algorithm training.
Our main technical contribution is the introduction of a parallelised execution model for the DP-SGD algo-
rithm within the PyTorch  framework, which enables both fast performance and efficient memory utilisation. In 
addition, our technique-contrary to frameworks relying on the a priori  specification of per-sample  gradient cal-
culations such as Opacus - is compatible by default with any  neural network operation including (but not limited 
to) transformer architectures or transposed convolutions, as seen above. This disparity is discussed  in20, a line of 
work complementary to ours, whose authors utilise just-in-time compilation and vectorised execution to increase 
DP-SGD performance, albeit within a different machine learning framework. We moreover see a target for future 
work focused around automatic differentiation with inbuilt support for obtaining and manipulating per-sample