2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:13524  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93030-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/of breast  cancer8. Moreover, three-dimensional medical imaging can be volumetrically rendered to reconstruct 
facial contours which enable patient re-identification9. Lastly, even when identifying attributes are not directly 
present in the image, the exploitation of side information by adversaries in the setting of linkage attacks, proven 
to represent a highly effective method for membership  inference10, is also applicable to medical imaging data -
bases given that large-scale public datasets of medical images are being assembled and—increasingly—publicly 
released. Thus, solutions based on information-theoretic privacy measures are required to provide comprehensive 
and quantifiable guarantees to the involved parties. Differential privacy (DP)11 has arisen as the gold standard in 
this regard. In brief, DP is the attribute of an algorithm to be approximately invariant to the inclusion or exclu -
sion of individual patients, providing them with formal and quantifiable privacy guarantees. Although formally 
an information-theoretic privacy guarantee, in practice DP is typically achieved through computationally secure  
means, that is, an addition of carefully calibrated noise to the training process, making individual contributions 
indistinguishable from each other. In their seminal paper, Abadi et al.12 demonstrated the successful application 
of DP in the training of deep neural networks, termed differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD). 
However, the authors of this and subsequent works noted that the utilisation of DP-SGD unavoidably negatively 
affects the utility of the resulting models, a well-known effect termed the privacy-utility trade-off13. Addressing 
this trade-off14 and ultimately enabling the widespread real-world utilisation of privacy-preserving ML in medi-
cal imaging and beyond requires the introduction of robust software tools, suitable for implementation within 
widely-used deep learning libraries and implementing current best practices.
We here present deepee , a software framework for differentially private deep learning based on the  PyTorch15 
machine learning library. Our main contributions can be summarised as follows:
• We present a technical implementation of the DP-SGD algorithm based on parallelised execution, which 
makes our framework universally compatible with any neural network layer while enabling substantial per -
formance improvements.
• We implement state-of-the-art tools for production-level DP-SGD application including cryptographically 
secure random noise generation, automatic architecture modifications and privacy budgeting based on the 
Gaussian Differential Privacy (GDP) framework which offers a tight analysis of privacy consumed.
• We benchmark our toolkit against comparable DP-SGD implementations and analyse the behaviour of DP-
SGD in the setting of two medical imaging deep learning tasks: classification and semantic segmentation
• Our framework is aimed at facilitating the application of DP-SGD to arbitrary data by non-experts. For this 
purpose, it exposes standardised application programming interfaces, is highly compatible with the PyTorch  
deep learning framework and automatically enforces the relevant details to ensure the formal correctness of 
the DP-SGD algorithm application.
• The source code of our framework is documented in detail, fully tested and available publicly and freely under 
a permissive, open-source license to enable easy maintenance, rapid detection and correction of potential 
security vulnerabilities and to encourage open-source contributions.
Two notable works have presented DP frameworks for the PyTorch  machine learning library based on different 
technical implementations. The Opacus   framework16 provides an implementation of the DP-SGD algorithm based 
on temporarily caching intermediate backpropagation results. This enables very high performance for specific 
deep neural network layer types. However, it does not ensure generic compatibility with any given neural network 
operation unless the procedure for obtaining said backpropagation results is explicitly defined on the user’s side. 
At the time of writing, the framework’s privacy analysis is still based on Rényi DP (RDP)17, whose guarantees are 
not as tight as Gaussian DP (GDP). The Pyvacy18 framework implements a generic version of DP-SGD based 
on serial execution. Despite its broad compatibility, this implementation is highly computationally inefficient, 
rendering it impractical for production-level use. The framework also lacks cryptographically secure random 
number generation and utility functions for automatic neural network architecture modification.
The TensorFlow Privacy   framework19 and previous work based on the JAX  machine learning  framework20 
share some characteristics of our library, such as utilisation of the GDP accounting technique or parallelisation, 
but they are based around different base libraries and thus are not directly comparable to our work.
Results
Technical overview. We begin by providing a brief technical overview of our framework. Implementa-
tion details can be found in the “ Methods ” section. In brief, deepee  implements the DP-SGD algorithm in a 
memory-efficient and parallelised manner by increasing the efficiency of the per-sample-gradient calculation 
step drastically compared to serial processing. This occurs by creating one zero-memory-cost reference to the 
network’s weights for each sample in the minibatch, then performing a simultaneous (parallelised) forward 
and backward pass. This process introduces no additional assumptions about the network’s architecture and 
thus allows the application of the DP-SGD algorithm to any neural network architecture. This represents an 
improvement compared to prior work, which requires substantial user effort to manually specify the per-sample  
gradient calculations for unsupported layer types (e.g. pixel shuffle or transposed convolutions, transformers, etc.) 
or relies on performing forward and backward passes serially, thus magnifying time complexity. The framework 
furthermore is designed to guarantee the formal correctness of the DP-SGD procedure by e.g. removing Batch 
Normalisation layers from the architecture, employing cryptographically secure random noise and automatic 
privacy budgeting.
In the following, we demonstrate the utilisation of our framework in the settings of medical image classifica-
tion and semantic segmentation. We present model performance in private and non-private settings to evaluate