5
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:13524  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-93030-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/gradients. After all, the requirement to calculate per-sample  gradients in current DP-SGD frameworks stems 
from the inherent design philosophy of reverse-mode automatic differentiation systems, which are focused on 
efficiently obtaining gradients for minibatches but not for individual samples. We moreover note that techniques 
concerned with approximate gradient  calculations32 have some overlap with the objectives of DP-SGD, which 
inherently performs an “imprecise” gradient update step through noise addition, and could thus be utilised for 
increased performance, after considering their effect on privacy guarantees.
Similar to previous  work16, our work offers the capability to automatically modify the neural network archi -
tecture in case layers incompatible with DP-SGD are included. An example of this phenomenon in the current 
work is the deactivation of running statistics collection for Batch Normalisation layers. Moreover, our framework 
includes support for cryptographically secure random noise generation which is crucial to avoid vulnerabilities 
associated with default pseudo-random number  generators33.
We consider some limitations of our work: Our framework’s focus is to provide a generic framework for 
DP-SGD and the examples presented represent a simplification of real-life use-cases intended to illustrate its 
utilisation in medical imaging. In the segmentation case-study in particular, we provide image-level privacy guar -
antees, whereas a real-life deployment would be adjusted to offer patient-level guarantees (that is, a “summary” 
of privacy guarantees derived from the utilisation of all images of a single patient). Moreover, DP techniques 
purpose-designed for high performance in classification, such as  PATE34 could yield improved privacy-utility 
trade-offs in the classification use-case compared to DP-SGD, however at the cost of not generalising well to 
other tasks such as  segmentation28 and an additional assumption of a publicly available dataset that cannot be 
reliably expected in a sensitive setting, such as medical imaging.
In conclusion, our work aims to facilitate the utilisation of differentially private deep learning in everyday 
practice. It is well-suited to privacy-sensitive tasks such as medical imaging analysis. We publicly release our 
framework and experiments in the hope that it will stimulate future research and lead to the design of improved 
algorithms and training techniques to enable privacy-preserving machine learning with improved algorithm 
utility in medical imaging and beyond.
Methods
Framework implementation details. User -facing components. Our framework provides the following 
high-level user-facing components: (1) A collection of procedures to automatically modify the neural network 
architecture in case it contains layers which are incompatible for utilisation with DP-SGD. One example is the 
Batch Normalisation layer which maintains a (non-private) running average of statistics over more than one 
training example and is thus not compatible with the notion of per-sample  gradient calculations, which are 
required in DP-SGD. (2) A data structure encapsulating the user-supplied model architecture, responsible for 
the main model training and evaluation loop. This wrapper  internally maintains one copy of the user-supplied 
model per sample in the minibatch, performs a parallelised forward and backward pass over the minibatch 
and abstracts the gradient clipping and noise application of the DP-SGD procedure. (3) A privacy accounting  
mechanism for keeping track of the privacy spent at each training step and including a procedure to automati-
cally interrupt the training if the privacy budget is exhausted. The system is supplemented by a cryptographically 
secure random number  generator35 suitable for use on the graphics processing unit and capable of parallelising 
the random noise generation step of the DP-SGD algorithm.
DP-SGD algorithm implementation. We implement the DP-SGD algorithm as described  in12. In brief, the algo-
rithm consists of the following steps: 
1. Performing a forward pass on a minibatch of samples
2. Calculating the gradient of the loss with respect to each sample individually ( per-sample gradients)
3. Normalising ( clipping ) the per-sample gradients to a predefined L2-norm
4. Aggregating the per-sample gradients by averaging or summing over the minibatch axis
5. Adding calibrated Gaussian noise to the resulting gradient vector
In practice, step (2) of the above-mentioned procedure is the most time-consuming subroutine of the algorithm, 
as automatic differentiation systems are not designed with per-sample gradient computation in mind. To tackle 
this problem, our framework first creates a copy of the neural network for each sample in the minibatch and 
then performs step (1) of the algorithm above in parallel by dispatching one execution thread per minibatch 
sample. Thus, the backpropagation procedure yields per-sample gradients per definition (step (2) above). This 
approach has several benefits: It is computationally efficient as it is performed in parallel over the minibatch 
leveraging multi-threaded execution on e.g. the graphics processing unit (GPU). Moreover, memory only needs 
be allocated once for the neural network weights (as all copies share the same weights). Lastly, the process is 
entirely generic and can be used for any arbitrary neural network architecture without the requirement for user 
interaction. A similar technique to ours, albeit based on serial execution instead of a parallelised forward pass 
and only demonstrated for convolutional neural networks, is presented  in36, reportedly going back to (unpub-
lished) work by Goodfellow et al.
Datasets. Classification task. We evaluated our framework on a classification task on chest radiographs 
from the Paediatric Pneumonia dataset originally described  in37. Originally, the task was formulated as three-
class classification, however we merged the viral  and bacterial  pneumonia labels to obtain a binary classification 
task, in which the algorithm attempts to predict whether the radiograph shows signs of pneumonia or not. The