DelightfulTTS: The Microsoft Speech Synthesis System for
Blizzard Challenge 2021
Yanqing Liu1, Zhihang Xu1, Gang Wang1, Kuan Chen1, Bohan Li1, Xu Tan2, Jinzhu Li1, Lei He1,
Sheng Zhao1
1Microsoft Azure Speech, China
2Microsoft Research Asia, China
fyanqliu, zhihangxu, gaw, kuan.chen, bohli, xuta, jinzl, helei, szhao g@microsoft.com
Abstract
This paper describes the Microsoft end-to-end neural text to
speech (TTS) system: DelightfulTTS for Blizzard Challenge
2021. The goal of this challenge is to synthesize natural and
high-quality speech from text, and we approach this goal in
two perspectives: The ﬁrst is to directly model and generate
waveform in 48 kHz sampling rate, which brings higher per-
ception quality than previous systems with 16 kHz or 24 kHz
sampling rate; The second is to model the variation informa-
tion in speech through a systematic design, which improves
the prosody and naturalness. Speciﬁcally, for 48 kHz model-
ing, we predict 16 kHz mel-spectrogram in acoustic model, and
propose a vocoder called HiFiNet to directly generate 48 kHz
waveform from predicted 16 kHz mel-spectrogram, which can
better trade off training efﬁciency, modelling stability and voice
quality. We model variation information systematically from
both explicit (speaker ID, language ID, pitch and duration) and
implicit (utterance-level and phoneme-level prosody) perspec-
tives [1]: 1) For speaker and language ID, we use lookup em-
bedding in training and inference; 2) For pitch and duration,
we extract the values from paired text-speech data in training
and use two predictors to predict the values in inference; 3) For
utterance-level and phoneme-level prosody, we use two refer-
ence encoders to extract the values in training, and use two sep-
arate predictors to predict the values in inference. Additionally,
we introduce an improved Conformer [2] block to better model
the local and global dependency in acoustic model [3, 4]. For
task SH1, DelightfulTTS achieves 4.17 mean score in MOS test
and 4.35 in SMOS test, which indicates the effectiveness of our
proposed system.
Index Terms : Text to Speech, TTS, 48 kHz, HiFiNet, Fast-
Speech, AdaSpeech, Conformer
1. Introduction
The Blizzard Challenge1is aimed at advancing the technologies
in text to speech (TTS) [5, 6, 3] by comparing and understand-
ing different approaches, and has been organized annually since
2005 [7]. The basic task is to build high-quality TTS systems
based on the speech database provided by the organizers. Par-
ticipants use their developed systems to synthesize audio from
the given test set; the generated audio samples are used to evalu-
ate performance of different system through subjective listening
tests and objective metrics.
Typical TTS systems consist of three key components [1]:
text analysis, acoustic model, and vocoder. Firstly, input text
1https://www.synsig.org/index.php/Blizzard_
Challengeis normalized and transformed into linguistic features of dif-
ferent levels (e.g., phoneme level, syllable level, word level)
through a text analysis (TTS front-end) module. Then, these
linguistic features are transformed into an intermediate acous-
tic representation like mel-spectrogram by an acoustic model.
At last, the acoustic representation is converted to waveform
with a vocoder. Rich unit selection based concatenative speech
synthesis [8] and statistical parametric speech synthesis like
HMM/DNN/LSTM based models [9, 10, 11], have been the
most popular methods in the past. Recently, end-to-end neural
TTS has been researched extensively. Tacotron 2 [5] introduced
an attention-based encoder-decoder acoustic model to predict
mel-spectrogram given a character sequence and a WaveNet
model [12] to synthesize waveform from mel-spectrogram,
which achieves high voice quality but suffers from robustness
issues and slow speed in both training and inference. To im-
prove training speed, TransformerTTS [13] has been proposed
to synthesize high-quality speech with Transformer [14]. [15]
tried to solve the stability problems like repeated phonemes by
using linguistic features and phoneme duration with autoregres-
sive Transformer, but the inference is still slow due to autore-
gressive nature. FastSpeech [6] leads a research trend on non-
autoregressive TTS, by using feed-forward transformer in en-
coder and decoder for parallel generation and a duration predic-
tor for length duration, which is much faster and more stable
than autoregressive models like Tacotron 2 [5].
While there is much progress in the research on TTS and the
quality of synthesized speech has been impressive, the percep-
tion quality and naturalness still have large space to improve.
With this goal in mind, we participate the Blizzard Challenge
2021, and design an end-to-end neural text to speech (TTS) sys-
tem called DelightfulTTS to advance the perception quality and
naturalness. We approach this goal from two aspects: 1) The
bandwidth to convey high-quality speech should be enough. We
model and generate 48 kHz waveform, since high sampling rate
(48 kHz) can have larger range of frequency to convey expres-
sion and prosody [16] and thus can result in higher perception
quality than 16 kHz or 24 kHz. 2) The speech itself should
be expressive. We model variation information [1] in speech
through a systematic design to improve prosody and natural-
ness. TTS is a typical one-to-many mapping problem where
there could be multiple varying speech outputs (e.g., different
pitch, duration, speaker, prosody, emotion, etc) for a given text
input. Modeling these variation information [17, 3, 18, 4] can
mitigate the one-to-many mapping problem and thus improve
expressiveness and ﬁdelity of synthesized speech. We describe
the speciﬁc design in each aspect as follows:
• To generate 48 kHz waveform, typical method is to gen-
erate 48 kHz mel-spectrogram and then generate 48 kHzarXiv:2110.12612v2  [cs.SD]  19 Nov 2021