speaker-level, utterance-level, phoneme-level) [1] in the vari-
ance adaptor, we can achieve better expressiveness in prosody
and controllability in pitch and duration.
2.4. Conformer in Acoustic Model
Conformer [2] is a Transformer variant that integrates both
CNNs and Transformers components. Originally used for end-
to-end speech recognition, it exhibits better accuracy with fewer
parameters than previous work on several open ASR datasets,
and achieves a new state-of-the-art performance. The multi-
headed self-attention (MHSA) is conformer integrates an im-
portant technique from Transformer-XL[24] with relative sinu-
soidal positional encoding scheme. Conformer proposes a novel
combination of self-attention and convolution, in which self-
attention learns the global interaction while the convolutions ef-
ﬁciently capture the local correlations. We think that the global
and local interactions are especially important for TTS consid-
ering it has a longer output sequence than machine translation
or speech recognition in decoder. For non-autoregressive TTS
model, a powerful modelling unit is critical because each frame
in decoder cannot see its history as autoregressive model does.
In our proposed system, we make several improvements to the
original Conformer architecture. First, we replace Swish [25]
with ReLU and observe better generalization especially on long
sentences. Second, we switch the order of self-attention and
depthwise convolution for faster convergency. Third, we re-
place the linear layers in feed forward-modules of Macoron
[26] structure with convolution layers, which results in better
prosody and audio ﬁdelity. Altogether, our improved conformer
block is composed of four modules stacked together, i.e., a con-
volutional feed-forward module, a depthwise convolution mod-
ule, a self-attention module and a second convolutional feed-
forward module in the end, illustrated in Figure 1d.
3. Task Description, Data Processing, and
Training Strategy
3.1. Task Description
The task in Blizzard Challenge 2021 we joined is Hub task 2021
- SH1. There’re about 5 hours of speech data with 48 kHz sam-
pling rate from a female native speaker of European Spanish.
The hub task is to build a voice from the provided European
Spanish data to synthesize texts containing only Spanish words.
3.2. Data Processing
Phoneme representation is widely used as the input of end-to-
end TTS systems like recent neural TTS models [13, 15, 6, 27],
which can avoid ambiguity depending on the text context. In
this task we leverage an internal text preprocess module that
converts the input Spanish text into a phoneme sequence. First,
we split the text into sentences through sentence separation
module. Second, we perform text normalization (TN) with a
rule-based TN module. Third, we convert the normalized text
to phoneme sequence with a G2P [28] model and a Spanish lex-
icon. The duration target is extracted by an internal force align-
ment model. For acoustic model training, audio used in our
system is down-sampled to 16 kHz. Then mel-spectrograms are
computed through a short time Fourier transform (STFT) using
a 50 ms frame size, 12.5 ms frame hop, and a Hann window
function. For vocoder training, the original 48k audios were
used in the training of HiFiNet [20].3.3. Training Strategy
The overall loss function for the proposed acoustic model is
L=Lutt+Lphone +Lpitch +Ldur+Liter+Lssim (1)
where Luttis the L1 loss between predicted utterance-level
prosody vector and the vector extracted from utterance-level
reference encoder, Lphone is the L1 loss between the pre-
dicted phoneme-level prosody vectors and the vectors ex-
tracted from phoneme-level reference encoder, Lpitch /Lduris
the L1 loss between predicted pitch/duration and the ground-
truth pitch/duration. For better convergence and voice quality,
the output of each Conformer block in the mel-spectrogram
side is projected into 80-dimension mel-spectrogram respec-
tively, which is used to calculate mel-spectrogram loss with
the ground-truth mel-spectrogram. Thus, Literis the sum of
mel-spectrogram L1 loss between the predicted and ground-
truth mel-spectrogram in each Conformer block [23]. For bet-
ter audio ﬁdelity, we use SSIM (Structural SIMilarity) [29] to
measure the similarity between predicted and ground-truth mel-
spectrogram in the ﬁnal Conformer block, denoted as Lssim.
We use the predicted mel-spectrogram in the ﬁnal Conformer
block as the ﬁnal mel-spectrogram prediction. Besides the pro-
vided 5 hours data, we also use an extra internal dataset from
Microsoft, which contains about 40 hours European Spanish
data and 40 hours Mexican Spanish data. Acoustic model and
vocoder are both pretrained on the full dataset and then ﬁne-
tuned on the provided single speaker data. The Conformer mod-
ule in both phoneme and mel-spectrogram sides consist of 6
improved Conformer blocks, with attention dimension 384 and
hidden size of convolutional feed-forward module 1536. The
kernel size in the depthwise convolution module is 7. We train
DelightfulTTS on 4 NVIDIA V100 GPUs and each GPU has a
batch size of about 6000 speech frames.
4. Results
The evaluation of Blizzard Challenge 2021 includes four as-
pects: including naturalness test with MOS (mean opinion
score), similarity test with SMOS (similarity mean opinion
score), SUS intelligibility test with WER (word error rate) and
Sharvard intelligibility test with WER. In MOS part, listeners
listened to one sample and chose a score which represented how
natural or unnatural the sentence sounded on a scale of 1 to 5.
For SMOS they chose a score that represented how similar the
synthetic voice sounded to the voice in the reference samples
on a scale from 1 to 5. In intelligibility test, listeners heard one
utterance in each part and typed in what they heard. Listeners
were allowed to listen to each sentence only once. The synthe-
sized and natural audios were carefully rated by three types of
listeners who are involved by paid listeners, online volunteers,
and speech experts. Our system is denoted as system F, and
natural speech recorded by the original speaker is denoted as
System R. Overall, the naturalness (MOS) of system F is sig-
niﬁcantly higher than all other systems, and is not signiﬁcantly
different to natural speech; speaker similarity (SMOS) of sys-
tem F is better than all other systems.
4.1. Naturalness Test
Naturalness test evaluation results of all systems is showed in
Figure 2, scored by all listeners. In synthesized systems, the nat-
uralness (MOS) of system F (mean score 4.17) is signiﬁcantly
higher than all other systems, and is not signiﬁcantly different
to natural speech(mean score 4.21), while mean score of others