waveform from the generated 48 kHz mel-sepctrogram.
However, according to the recent advances in TTS [1,
19], the quality of the waveform generated by vocoder
nearly matches to that of the recording [19], while the
quality of the mel-spectrogram generated by acoustic
model still has gap to recording due to the difﬁculty of
prosody modeling. Intuitively speaking, vocoder only
need to recover phase information given ground-truth
spectrogram, while acoustic model needs to close the
large gap between text and spectrogram, such as dura-
tion, pitch, formant, voiced/unvoiced part, prosody, etc.
When increasing the sampling rate to 48 kHz, the bur-
den of acoustic model is further increased. According
to the “cannikin law (wooden barrel principle)”, the ca-
pacity of a wooden barrel is determined by its shortest
stave. Thus, to relieve the burden on acoustic model, we
predict 16 kHz mel-spectrogram in acoustic model, and
generate 48 kHz waveform from predicted 16 kHz mel-
spectrogram using our recently developed HiFiNet [20]
vocoder.
• Nevertheless, the burden of acoustic model is still
heavy due to one-to-many mapping. Thus, we model
variation information systematically from both explicit
(speaker ID, language ID, pitch, and duration) and im-
plicit (utterance-level and phoneme-level prosody) per-
spectives [1]: 1) For speaker and language ID, we use
lookup embedding in training and inference; 2) For pitch
and duration, we extract the values from paired text-
speech data in training and use two predictors to pre-
dict the values in inference; 3) For utterance-level and
phoneme-level prosody, we use two reference encoders
to extract the values in training, and use two separate
predictors to predict the values in inference. We build
the acoustic model based on non-autoregressive genera-
tion model AdaSpeech [4] and FastSpeech [6], with an
improved Conformer module [2] to better model the lo-
cal and global dependency in mel-spectrogram.
According to the ofﬁcial evaluation of Blizzard Challenge
2021 in task SH1, our proposed system achieves 4.17 mean
score in MOS test and 4.35 in SMOS test (recording has 4.21
and 4.07 mean score in MOS and SMOS test respectively),
which is better than all other participants and matches to the
quality of recording in terms of mean score perspective of MOS
and SMOS, which demonstrate the superiority of our system to
advance the perception quality and naturalness2.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the architecture of the proposed system. Section 3 de-
scribes the task, data process and training strategy. Section 4
introduces the subjective evaluation results. Finally, conclusion
and future work are presented in Section 5.
2. Our Approach
2.1. System Overview
As shown in Figure 1a, our proposed system consists of an
acoustic model that generates mel-spectrogram from text and
a vocoder that generates waveform from mel-spectrogram. To
ensure high ﬁdelity and quality of the synthesized speech, we
directly generate waveform in 48 kHz sampling rate, since it
can have larger range of frequency to convey expression and
2Audio samples: https://cognitivespeech.github.
io/delightfulttsprosody [16]. To better trade off the difﬁculty in acoustic model
and vocoder, we predict 16 kHz mel-spectrogram with acous-
tic model, and generate 48 kHz waveform from predicted 16
kHz mel-spectrogram with vocoder, which are described in Sec-
tion 2.2. The acoustic model consists of an improved Con-
former module [2] in the phoneme side and mel-spectrogram
side respectively, and a variance adaptor in between the two
conformer modules, as shown in Figure 1b. We model the
variance information through variance adaptor to improve the
prosody and naturalness in both explicit and implicit ways (Fig-
ure 1c), as introduced in Section 2.3. We introduce the details
of the improved Conformer module (Figure 1d) in Section 2.4.
The vocoder is based on our previously proposed HiFiNet [20].
We introduce each design in our proposed system in the follow-
ing subsections.
2.2. Tradeoff between Acoustic Model and Vocoder
We directly generate waveform in 48 kHz sampling rate to en-
sure high ﬁdelity and quality for speech synthesis. There is
a tradeoff in the task difﬁculty between acoustic model and
vocoder, which inﬂuences the design choices on acoustic model
and vocoder. Intuitively speaking, the burden of acoustic model
is larger than that of vocoder, according to several perspectives:
1) Information gap. V ocoder only needs to recover phase infor-
mation given spectrogram, while acoustic model needs to close
the large gap between text and spectrogram, such as duration,
pitch, formant, voiced/unvoiced part, prosody, etc. Thus, the
large information gap between text and spectrogram makes the
task of acoustic model more difﬁcult than that of vocoder. 2)
Current research progress. According to the recent advances in
TTS [1, 19], the quality of vocoding task nearly matches to that
of the recording [19], while the acoustic modeling task still has
large improvement space due to the difﬁculty of prosody mod-
eling. 3) Model capacity. We conduct a brief survey on the
size of model parameters of the mainstream acoustic models
and vocoders (mainly GAN-based) [1], and ﬁnd that the param-
eter sizes of acoustic models are usually 5x (or more) larger than
that of vocoders.
If we generate 48 kHz mel-spectrogram with acoustic
model and then generate 48 kHz waveform with vocoder, the
task difﬁculties of both acoustic model and vocoder are in-
creased, compared with 16 kHz counterparts. However, the bur-
den of acoustic model is even larger according to the analysis
above. According to the “cannikin law” (i.e., “wooden barrel
principle”), the capacity of a wooden barrel is determined by
its shortest stave. In our case, the quality of speech synthesis
would be constrained by the acoustic model if not well handled.
Thus, to relieve the burden on acoustic model, we predict 16
kHz mel-spectrogram with acoustic model, and generate 48 kHz
waveform from predicted 16 kHz mel-spectrogram using our
recently developed HiFiNet [20] vocoder, which is optimized
with a generator and discriminator-based network [21]. In this
way, the task difﬁculty of acoustic model is reduced and that
of vocoder is slightly increased (with both phase reconstruction
and super-resolution), resulting in a more balanced way.
2.3. Variation Information Modelling
TTS is a typical one-to-many mapping problem where there
could be multiple varying speech outputs (e.g., different pitch,
duration, speaker, prosody, emotion, etc) for a given text input.
It is critical to model these variation information in speech so as
to improve expressiveness and ﬁdelity of synthesized speech.
While previous works [17, 3, 18] have tried different meth-