Characterizing and overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks
To warm-up the model, we perform only regular steps in
the first epoch. Then we switch from regular steps to re-
balancing steps if |dspeed(t)|> α, where αis a hyperparam-
eter, referred to as the imbalance tolerance parameter . Once
it switches to re-balancing mode, we takes Qre-balancing
steps before returning to the regular mode. We refer to the
hyperparameter Qby the re-balancing window size .
6. Experiments and Results
6.1. Datasets, Tasks and Baselines
Colored-and-gray-MNIST (Kim et al., 2019) is a synthetic
dataset based on MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998). In the training
set of 60,000 examples, each example has two images, a
gray-scale image and a monochromatic image, with color
strongly correlated with its digit label. In the validation set
of 10,000 examples, each example also has a gray-scale
image and a corresponding monochromatic image, although
with a low correlation between the color and its label. We
consider the monochromatic image as the first modality m0
and the gray-scale one as the second modality m1. We
use a neural network with four convolutional layers as the
uni-modal branch and employ three MMTMs to connect
them. The corresponding uni-modal DNNs trained on the
monochromatic images and the gray-scale images achieve
respective validation accuracies of 41% and 99%. We use
this synthetic dataset mainly to demonstrate the proposed
greedy learner hypothesis.
ModelNet40 is one of the Princeton ModelNet datasets (Wu
et al., 2015) with 3D objects of 40 categories (9,483 training
samples and 2,468 test samples). The task is to classify a 3D
object based on the 2D views of its front and back (Su et al.,
2015). Each example is a collection of 2D images (224 ×224
pixels) of a 3D object. For the uni-modal branches, we use
ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) and apply MMTMs in the three
final residual blocks. The uni-modal DNNs achieve 89%
and 88% accuracy when learning from the front view ( m0)
and the rear view ( m1), respectively.
NVGesture (or NVIDIA Dynamic Hand Gesture
Dataset (Molchanov et al., 2015)) consists of 1,532 video
clips (1,050 training and 482 test ones) of hand gestures
divided into 25 classes. We sample 20% of training
examples as the validation set and use depth and RGB as the
two modalities. We adopt the data preparation steps used in
Joze et al. (2020) and use the I3D architecture (Carreira &
Zisserman, 2017) as uni-modal branches and MMTMs as
fusion modules in the six final inception modules. During
training, we perform spatial augmentation on the video,
including flipping and random cropping. During inference
on the validation or test set, we perform center cropping on
the video.
We provide examples of each dataset and details on datapreprocessing in Appendix A.
6.2. Validating the Greedy Learner Hypothesis
In this section, we run the conventional multi-modal learn-
ing process on tasks with different input and output pairs to
illustrate our hypothesis experimentally.
For each task introduced in §6.1, in addition to the origi-
nal dataset, we construct a dataset with two identical input
modalities by duplicating one of the modalities. For exam-
ple, when using the colored-and-gray-MNIST dataset, we
predict the digit class using two identical gray-scale images.
We train multi-modal DNNs on these datasets as explained
below for each task:
•Colored-and-gray-MNIST: we train multi-modal DNNs
using SGD with a momentum coefficient of 0.9 and a
batch size of 128. We sample 20 learning rates at random
from the interval [10−5,1]on a logarithmic scale. We
train the model four times using each of the learning rates
and random initialization of the parameters. In total, we
train 80 models.
•ModelNet40: we use SGD without momentum and use
a batch size of eight. We select nine learning rates from
10−3to1and train three copies of the model for each
learning rate. This ends up with 27 models.
•NVGesture: we use a batch size of four, SGD with a
momentum of 0.9, and uniformly sample 20 learning
rates from the interval [10−4,10−1.5]on a logarithmic
scale. We train the model three times using each learning
rate, resulting in 60 models in total.
We present the results of the experiments on ModelNet40
and NVGesture in Figure 2 and on Colored-and-gray-
MNIST in Figure 7 in Appendix B. We discuss three most
interesting phenomena that we observe in the results.
First, many models have high |dutil|. This confirms that the
multi-modal learning process encourages the model to rely
on one modality and ignore the other one, which is consis-
tent with our hypothesis. We make this observation across
all tasks, confirming that the conventional multi-modal learn-
ing process is greedy regardless of network architectures
and tasks.
Second,bdutilis distributed symmetrically around zero, and
E[bdutil]is approximately 0.0, for all the experiments using
two identical input modalities. On the other hand, if we use
two distinct modalities, bdutilis distributed asymmetrically,
and we observe |E[bdutil]|of approximately 0.3, 0.1 and 0.4
for colored-and-gray-MNIST, ModelNet40 and NVGesture,
respectively. We formalize the above observations as the
following conjecture.
There exists an ϵ >0, s.t.|E[bdutil]|> ϵ, when modalities