Characterizing and overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks
utilization rate between modalities. For example, we have
u(depth |RGB) = 0 .63andu(RGB|depth) = 0 .01for
a model trained for Hand Gesture Recognition using the
RGB and the depth modalities. Since 0≤ |u| ≤1, these
two observed values indicate that the model solely relies
on the depth modality, ignoring the RGB modality almost
completely. These observations support the conjecture that
the multi-modal learning process often results in models
that under-utilize some of the input modalities.
According our proposed greedy learner hypothesis, it is the
different speeds at which a multi-modal DNN learns from
different modalities that leads to an imbalance in conditional
utilization rate. If we intervene in the training process to
adjust these speeds, we may be able to prevent the hurtful
imbalance across input modalities. We analyze the learning
dynamics of model components and propose a metric called
conditional learning speed , defined using the gradient norm
and the norm of models’ parameters. It measures the speed
at which the model learns from one modality relative to the
other modalities. We empirically show that it is a reasonable
proxy for conditional utilization rate. We introduce a train-
ing algorithm called balanced multi-modal learning which
uses conditional learning speed to guide the model to learn
from previously underutilized modalities. We show that
models trained with this algorithm learn to use all modal-
ities appropriately and achieve stronger generalization on
three multi-modal datasets: Colored MNIST dataset (Kim
et al., 2019), ModelNet40 dataset of 3D objects (Su et al.,
2015) and NVGesture dataset (Molchanov et al., 2015).
2. Related Work
Dataset and model bias inspection in VQA Multi-modal
DNNs are expected to leverage cross-modal interactions in
VQA, but have been reported to exploit the modality-wise
bias in the data (Jabri et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2017; Win-
terbottom et al., 2020). Several frameworks were proposed
to evaluate the severity of this issue, such as constructing de-
biased datasets (Hessel & Lee, 2020; Agrawal et al., 2018),
evaluating models’ performance when eliminating cross-
modal interactions via empirical function projection (Hessel
& Lee, 2020) or via permuting the features of a modality
across samples (Gat et al., 2021). There are also efforts to
overcome this problem. Many of them rely on a question-
only branch for capturing spurious relationships between
questions and answer candidates and help through cross-
entropy re-weighing strategies (Cadene et al., 2019; Han
et al., 2021a; Lao et al., 2021). Instead of estimating the
bias through a question-only branch, Gat et al. (2020) pro-
poses to supply inputs with Gaussian perturbations to the
model and regularize it by maximizing functional entropies,
in order to force the model to use multiple sources of in-
formation. In this work, we expand the discussion fromVQA to multi-modal classification tasks. These tasks are
different from VQA but the problem identified above also
appears there. We explain this phenomenon by the greedy
nature of learning in multi-modal DNNs and design tools
to overcome inadequate modality utilization in multi-modal
classification.
Video classification How to benefit from multi-modality
in video data has been a popular research direction for video
understanding. Prior work focuses primarily on improv-
ing architectural designs of the DNNs (Ngiam et al., 2011;
Neverova et al., 2015; Tran et al., 2015; Lazaridou et al.,
2015; Pérez-Rúa et al., 2019; Joze et al., 2020; Arnab et al.,
2021; Sun et al., 2021). Our study is related to a recent
study by Wang et al. (2020a). They observe that the best uni-
modal DNNs often outperforms the multi-modal DNNs, and
propose a framework that estimates the uni-modal branches’
generalization and overfitting speeds in order to calibrate
the learning through loss re-weighing. Their proposed meth-
ods rely on estimating models’ performance occasionally
on a held-out validation set during training, which makes
it costly and unstable for small datasets. To serve a similar
purpose but not from the perspective of model optimization,
Wang et al. (2020b) design a parameter-free multi-modal
fusion framework that dynamically exchanges channels be-
tween the uni-modal branches. In this work, we provide
tools to directly examine the imbalanced modality utiliza-
tion in jointly-trained multi-modal DNNs, and implement
calibration through a computationally efficient method. We
focus on verifying our solution with intermediate fusion
as it yields better performance than late fusion (Joze et al.,
2020), though an investigation such as ours was missing in
the literature.
3. Problem Setup
Without loss of generality, we consider two input modalities,
referred to as m0andm1. We denote a multi-modal dataset
byD. This dataset consists of multiple instances (x, y),
where x= (xm0,xm1). We partition the dataset Dinto
training, validation and test sets, denoted by Dtrain,Dval,
andDtest, respectively. The goal is to use this data set to
train a model that accurately predicts yfromx.
We use a multi-modal DNN with two uni-modal branches,
denoted by ϕ0andϕ1, taking xm0andxm1as input. The
two uni-modal branches are interconnected by layer-wise
fusion modules. According to the categorization of fusion
strategies in the deep learning literature, this is considered
“intermediate fusion” (Ngiam et al., 2011; Atrey et al., 2010;
Baltrušaitis et al., 2018). It has demonstrated competitive
performance in comparison to multi-modal DNNs with late
fusion in multiple tasks (Perez et al., 2018; Joze et al., 2020;
Anderson et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020b).