Characterizing and overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks
improvement across tasks compared to the vanilla algorithm.
We did not find this strategy as helpful as reported for VQA.
Our idea can be extended naturally to tasks with more than
two modalities. The conditional learning speed of the ith
modality can be derived using the weight norm and gradient
norm of the ithuni-modal network’s parameters and the
fusion module’s parameters impacting ˆyi. The conditional
utilization rate would be computed analogously to the bi-
modal case, by passing the averaged feature maps of all
other modalities to the fusion modules. We define dspeed
by the two most different conditional learning speeds and
accelerate the learning of one modality per time. We ex-
periment with three views in ModelNet40 and find that the
guided algorithm outperforms the vanilla one as it improves
the accuracy from 91.21% to92.45%.
In summary, we present that the greediness of the current
training algorithm is an issue preventing multi-modal DNNs
from achieving better performance. The proposed method
can help to overcome this issue on multiple datasets.
7. Discussion
Our work demonstrates that the end-to-end trained multi-
modal DNNs rely on one of the input modalities to make
predictions while leaving the other modalities underutilized.
For many multi-modal classification tasks, such as video
classification, the harm of this behavior may not be as obvi-
ous as in VQA which strongly relies on cross-modal reason-
ing. However, the tools we propose in this work enable us to
have a concrete look of what the model has learned, which
has been a missing component in multi-modal learning sys-
tems. We validated our statements experimentally on three
multi-modal datasets and illustrated that using the proposed
algorithm to balance the models’ learning from different
modalities enhances generalization. This result emphasizes
that the adequate modality utilization is a desired property
that a model should achieve in multi-modal learning. In
addition to the previous discussion on this problem, our
greedy learner hypothesis provides a complementary expla-
nation and the methods inspired by it enrich the spectrum
of available tools for multi-modal learning.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by grants from the National
Institutes of Health (P41EB017183 and R21CA225175),
the National Science Foundation (HDR-1922658), the Gor-
don and Betty Moore Foundation (9683), and Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology (under the project Next
Generation Deep Learning: From Pattern Recognition to
AI). Nan Wu is supported by Google PhD Fellowship. We
thank Catriona Geras and Taro Makino for their comments
on writing. We appreciate the suggestions from ICML re-viewers.
References
Agrawal, A., Batra, D., and Parikh, D. Analyzing the be-
havior of visual question answering models. EMNLP ,
2016.
Agrawal, A., Batra, D., Parikh, D., and Kembhavi, A. Don’t
just assume; look and answer: Overcoming priors for
visual question answering. In CVPR , 2018.
Anderson, P., He, X., Buehler, C., Teney, D., Johnson, M.,
Gould, S., and Zhang, L. Bottom-up and top-down atten-
tion for image captioning and visual question answering.
CVPR , 2018.
Arnab, A., Dehghani, M., Heigold, G., Sun, C., Lu ˇci´c,
M., and Schmid, C. Vivit: A video vision transformer.
arXiv:2103.15691 , 2021.
Atrey, P. K., Hossain, M. A., El Saddik, A., and Kankanhalli,
M. S. Multimodal fusion for multimedia analysis: a
survey. Multimedia Systems , 2010.
Baltrušaitis, T., Ahuja, C., and Morency, L.-P. Multimodal
machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
2018.
Blum, A. and Mitchell, T. Combining labeled and unlabeled
data with co-training. COLT , 1998.
Brock, A., De, S., Smith, S. L., and Simonyan, K. High-
performance large-scale image recognition without nor-
malization. ICML , 2021.
Cadene, R., Dancette, C., Ben-Younes, H., Cord, M., and
Parikh, D. Rubi: Reducing unimodal biases in visual
question answering. NeurIPS , 2019.
Cao, J., Gan, Z., Cheng, Y ., Yu, L., Chen, Y .-C., and Liu,
J. Behind the scene: Revealing the secrets of pre-trained
vision-and-language models. ECCV , 2020.
Carreira, J. and Zisserman, A. Quo vadis, action recog-
nition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. CVPR ,
2017.
Gat, I., Schwartz, I., Schwing, A., and Hazan, T. Remov-
ing bias in multi-modal classifiers: Regularization by
maximizing functional entropies. NeurIPS , 2020.
Gat, I., Schwartz, I., and Schwing, A. Perceptual
score: What data modalities does your model perceive?
NeurIPS , 34, 2021.