Characterizing and Overcoming the Greedy Nature of Learning in Multi-modal
Deep Neural Networks
Nan Wu1Stanisław Jastrz˛ ebski2 1Kyunghyun Cho1 3 4 5Krzysztof J. Geras2 1 3
Abstract
We hypothesize that due to the greedy nature of
learning in multi-modal deep neural networks,
these models tend to rely on just one modality
while under-fitting the other modalities. Such
behavior is counter-intuitive and hurts the mod-
els’ generalization, as we observe empirically. To
estimate the model’s dependence on each modal-
ity, we compute the gain on the accuracy when
the model has access to it in addition to another
modality. We refer to this gain as the conditional
utilization rate . In the experiments, we consis-
tently observe an imbalance in conditional uti-
lization rates between modalities, across multiple
tasks and architectures. Since conditional utiliza-
tion rate cannot be computed efficiently during
training, we introduce a proxy for it based on the
pace at which the model learns from each modal-
ity, which we refer to as the conditional learning
speed . We propose an algorithm to balance the
conditional learning speeds between modalities
during training and demonstrate that it indeed
addresses the issue of greedy learning.1The pro-
posed algorithm improves the model’s generaliza-
tion on three datasets: Colored MNIST, Model-
Net40, and NVIDIA Dynamic Hand Gesture.
1. Introduction
In real-world problems, each instance frequently has mul-
tiple modalities associated with it. For example, we detect
cancer in both X-ray and ultrasound images. We seek clues
from images to answer questions given in text. We are nat-
urally interested in training deep neural networks (DNNs)
1Center for Data Science, New York University2NYU Gross-
man School of Medicine3Courant Institute of Mathematical Sci-
ences, New York University4Genentech5CIFAR LMB. Corre-
spondence to: Nan Wu <nan.wu@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).
1We provide an implementation of the proposed methods at
https://github.com/nyukat/greedy_multimodal_learningend-to-end to learn from all available input modalities. We
refer to such a training regime as a multi-modal learning
process and DNNs resulting from it as multi-modal DNNs .
Several recent studies have reported unsatisfactory perfor-
mance of multi-modal DNNs in various tasks (Wang et al.,
2020a; Wu et al., 2020; Gat et al., 2020; Cadene et al., 2019;
Agrawal et al., 2016; Hessel & Lee, 2020; Han et al., 2021b;
Hessel & Lee, 2020). For example, in Visual Question An-
swering (VQA), multi-modal DNNs were found to ignore
the visual modality and exploit statistical regularities shared
between the text in the question and the text in the answer
alone, resulting in poor generalization (Cadene et al., 2019;
Gat et al., 2020; Agrawal et al., 2016). Similarly, in Hu-
man Action Recognition, multi-modal DNNs trained on
images and audio were observed to perform worse than uni-
modal DNNs trained on images only (Wang et al., 2020a).
In addition to the multi-modal classifiers, the unbalanced
modality-wise utilization has been identified in the multi-
modal pre-trained models (Li et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2020).
These earlier negative findings compel us to ask, what
prevents multi-modal DNNs from achieving better perfor-
mance? In order to answer this question, we put forward
thegreedy learner hypothesis . The greedy learner hypothe-
sis states that a multi-modal DNN learns to rely on one of
the input modalities, based on which it could learn faster,
and does not continue to learn to use the other modalities.
This greediness prevents a multi-modal DNN from learn-
ing to exploit all available modalities and often results in
worse generalization. It explains the challenge in training
multi-modal DNNs and motivates us to design a better multi-
modal learning algorithm.
We first diagnose a multi-modal DNN’s ability to utilize all
modalities by analyzing its conditional utilization rates . On
a task with two modalities, m0andm1, we define a model’s
conditional utilization rates as the relative difference in ac-
curacy between two models derived from the DNN, one
using both modalities and the other using only one modality.
The conditional utilization rate of m1given m0, denoted
byu(m1|m0), measures how important it is for the model
to use m1in order to reach accurate predictions, given the
presence of m0. In several multi-modal learning tasks, we
consistently observe a significant imbalance in conditional