Characterizing and overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks
We define the conditional utilization rates as bellow.
Definition 4.1 (Conditional utilization rate) .For a multi-
modal DNN, f, taking two modalities m0andm1as inputs,
its conditional utilization rates for m0andm1are defined
as
u(m0|m1) =A(f1)−A(f′
1)
A(f1), (9)
and
u(m1|m0) =A(f0)−A(f′
0)
A(f0). (10)
The conditional utilization rate is the relative change in
accuracy between the two models within each pair. For
example, u(m0|m1)measures the marginal contribution
thatm0has in increasing the accuracy of ˆy1.
Letdutil(f)denote the difference between conditional uti-
lization rates: dutil(f) =u(m1|m0)−u(m0|m1).It is
bounded between −1and1. When dutil(f)is close to −1
or1, the model benefits only from one of the modalities
given the other but not vice versa. This implies that the
model’s ability to predict ˆy0andˆy1comes only from one of
the modalities. Thus, if we observe high |dutil(f)|, we say
thatfexhibits imbalance in utilization between modalities.
4.2. Multi-modal Learning Process is Greedy
We propose our hypothesis that builds on the following
assumptions regarding multi-modal data, as well as obser-
vations previously made in the literature.
First, for most multi-modal learning tasks, both modalities
are assumed to be predictive of the target. This can be ex-
pressed as I(Y,Xm0)>0andI(Y,Xm1)>0, where I
denotes mutual information (Blum & Mitchell, 1998; Srid-
haran & Kakade, 2008). In order to minimize one of the
modality-specific losses, e.g. CE(y,ˆy0), one can either
update the parameters of the uni-modal branch taking m0
as input, or the parameters of the fusion layers that pass
information from m1toˆy0, or both.
Second, as shown in many tasks, different modalities have
been said to be predictive of the target at different degrees.
For example, it has been observed that when training DNNs
on each modality separately, they usually do not reach the
same level of performance (Wang et al., 2020b; Joze et al.,
2020). In addition, multi-modal DNNs exhibit varying accu-
racy when trained on different subsets of modalities present
for the task (Weng et al., 2021; Pérez-Rúa et al., 2019; Liu
et al., 2018). Third, DNNs learn from different modalities at
different speeds. This has been observed in both uni-modal
DNNs and multi-modal DNNs (Wang et al., 2020a; Wu
et al., 2020).
Now we formulate the greedy learner hypothesis to explain
the behavior of multi-modal DNNs:A multi-modal learning process is greedy when it
produces models that rely on only one of the avail-
able modalities. The modality that the multi-modal
DNN primarily relies on is the modality that is the
fastest to learn from. We hypothesize that a multi-
modal learning process, in which a multi-modal
DNN is trained to minimize the sum of modality-
specific losses, is greedy.
To characterize greediness of the multi-modal learning pro-
cess, we need to repeat it several times. Every time, we
sample a learning rate from a given range and initialize
the network’ parameters randomly. Let E[bdutil]denote the
expectation of bdutilover the empirical distribution of the
models obtained. The absolute value of E[bdutil]is asso-
ciated with the greediness of the process. The higher the
|E[bdutil]|, the greedier the learning process.
To validate our hypothesis empirically, we conduct experi-
ments on several multi-modal datasets using different net-
work architectures (cf. §6.1). We show that the multi-modal
learning process cannot avoid producing models that exhibit
a high degree of imbalance in utilization between modalities.
Their performance can be improved by using a less greedy
algorithm which we will introduce in the next section.
5.Making Multi-modal Learning Less Greedy
We aim to make multi-modal learning less greedy by con-
trolling the speed at which a multi-modal DNN learns to rely
on each modality. In order to achieve this, we first define
conditional learning speed to measure the speed at which
the DNN learns from one modality. It serves as an efficient
proxy for the conditional utilization rate of the correspond-
ing modality, as shown empirically in §6.2 and §6.3. We
then propose the balanced multi-modal learning algorithm,
which controls the difference in conditional learning speed
between modalities that the model exhibits during training.
5.1. Conditional Learning Speed
As demonstrated in §4.2, the imbalance in conditional uti-
lization rates is a sign of the model exploiting the connec-
tion between the target and only one of the input modalities,
ignoring cross-modal information. However, conditional
utilization rates are designed to be measured after training
is done and they are derived from the model’s accuracy
achieved on the held-out test set. This makes conditional
utilization rate not the best tool to use to monitor training
at the real-time. We instead derive a proxy metric, called
conditional learning speed , that captures relative learning
speed between modalities during training.
Let us revisit the multi-modal DNN presented in Figure 1.