1 Supplementary Note  1: 
Auxiliary data and resources in the NSD dataset 
 
Substantial amounts of resting- state data with physiological measurements  
 
A minimum of 100 minutes of resting -state data were acquired for each NSD subject. This large amount of data is appealing 
as it enables stable estimates of network correlations88. External physiological measures (pulse oximeter, respiratory belt) 
were also acquired in most of the scan sessions that included resting -state acquisition. Visual inspections of the 
physiological data (available online) suggest that the data are of excellent qualit y and that more than 90% of the pulse data 
and more than 95% of the respiratory data are usable. These physiological data play a critical role in identifying potential contaminants of resting -state signals
89,90. Overall, the resting -state component of NSD is valuable not only for enriching 
interpretation of the core NSD experiment, but also as a standalone resource due to the sizable amount of data and use of 7T imaging.
 
 High ly reliable diffusion data and derivatives  
 
The diffusion data included with the NSD dataset complement the extensive fMRI measurements. We pre -processed the 
raw diffusion data using the state -of-the-art DESiGNER pipeline methodology91 as implemented on brainlife. io92. As there 
is no accepted map of  white matter in the human brain, the field lacks consensus on how to validate the accuracy of 
tractography results. We instead focused on reliability as a measure of quality and adopted a statistical approach that evaluates reliability of major tracts and  connectivity matrices
93. We find that the quality of the pre -processed diffusion data 
for each subject is high, as evidenced by the signal -to-noise ratio (Supplementary Figure 5B ). We then proceeded to 
perform diffusion signal modeling94–98, anatomically -informed tractography99, and profilometry100. White -matter 
microstructu ral properties are found to be highly reliable for each subject ( Extended Data Figure 6A ). Structural 
connectivity matrices101 derived from tractography results are also highly reliable, both at the group level ( Extended Data 
Figure 6B –C) as well as at the single -subject level (Extended Data Figure 6C, inset ). The ready- to-use diffusion 
derivatives provided with NSD include a variety of macrostructural and microstructural measures, white -matter tracts, and 
structural connectivity matrices, as well as intermediary pre- processed outputs (such as denoised and spatially corrected 
diffusion volu mes). These derivatives can be easily integrated into machine learning workflows, and serve as  launching 
points for scientific investigations  seeking to apply network neuroscience perspectives102,103 to understanding brain function 
in the NSD dataset.  
 
Extensive set of manually defined ROIs  
 
To increase the value of the NSD dataset to the broader community, we performed analysis of the data from the pRF and 
fLoc experiments and manually defined regions of interest (ROIs) based on the results. The defined ROIs include retinotopic 
visual areas b ased on the pRF results (V1, V2, V3, hV4), eccentricity- based regions based on the pRF results (bands 
between 0°, 0.5°, 1°, 2°, 4°, and beyond), and category -selective regions based on the fLoc results (body -, face -, place -, 
and word -selective regions). Representative examples illustrating the high quality of the localizer results and associated 
ROIs are shown in Extended Data Figure 7 . NSD also includes manual segmentations of the thalamus (LGN, pulvinar, 
superior colliculus) and the medial temporal lobe ( hippocampal subfields and surrounding subregions). These resources 
reduce overhead and facilitate scientific analyses of the NSD dataset.