4 Supplementary Note  4: 
Pre-processing of the MRI data  
 
Pre-processing of anatomical data 
 
T1 and T 2 volumes 
 
T1- and T2-weighted volumes were corrected for gradient nonlinearities using a custom Python script 
(https://github.com/Washington- University/gradunwarp ) and the proprietary Siemens gradient coefficient file retrieved from 
the scanner. The multiple T1 and T2 volumes acquired for a given subject were then co- registered 
(preprocess_nsd_structuralalignment.m ). This was accomplished by first co -registering the T1 volumes to each other (rigid -
body transformation; correlation metric; the first T1 volume serving as the target) and then by co -registering the T2 volumes 
to the T1 volumes (rigid -body transformation;  mutual information metric; the prepared T1 data serving as the target). In the 
estimation of registration parameters, a manually defined 3D ellipse was used to focus the cost metric on brain tissue. Individual volumes were manually inspected and rejected if substantial image artifacts were visible (only the 2nd and 4th T
1 
volumes for subject 8 were rejected). The final T1 and T2 data were created by performing cubic interpolation at a resolution 
of 0.5 mm. Results for the multiple acquired volumes were ave raged (within modality) to increase contrast -to-noise ratio. 
Finally, the 0.5- mm volumes were resampled to create alternative 0.8 -mm and 1.0 -mm versions. These resampled versions 
are provided for the convenience of users.  
 SWI volume (venogram)  
 We co -registered the SWI volume (magnitude component only; corrected for gradient nonlinearities) to the prepared 1.0 -
mm EPI volume ( preprocess_nsd_SWI.m ). To compensate for the acquisition being performed on different scanners, we 
used a slightly flexible nonlinea r warp as implemented in ANTs 2.1.0 (BSplineSyN with parameters [0.1, 400, 0, 3]). The 
final SWI volume was prepared in the subject -native anatomical space by performing B- spline interpolation at a resolution 
of 0.5 mm. The resulting volume was then resamp led to create alternative 0.8 -mm and 1.0 -mm versions.  
 
TOF volume (angiogram)  
 
We co -registered the TOF volume to the prepared 1.0 -mm T
1 volume ( preprocess_nsd_TOF.m ). This was accomplished 
using a slightly flexible nonlinear warp as implemented in ANTs 2.1.0 (BSplineSynN with parameters [0.1, 200, 0, 3]). To 
aid estimation of registration parameters, a temporary version of the TOF volume was used in which extremely bright pixels 
were dampened. The final TOF volume was prepared in the subject -native anatomi cal space by performing B -spline 
interpolation at a resolution of 0.5 mm. The resulting volume was then resampled to create alternative 0.8 -mm and 1.0 -mm 
versions.  
 High -resolution T
2 volume 
 We co -registered the high -resolution T
2 volume to the prepared 0.5 -mm T2 volume ( external_mtl.m ). Given that these 
volumes were acquired on different scanners, we evaluated several strategies for achieving accurate co -registration. We 
obtained the best results by performing a simple linear co -registration (affine transformation; correlation metric) in 
combination with a rectangular box that focused the cost metric on regions of interest in the medial temporal lobe. The estimated registration was subsequentl y used to map labels defined on the high -resolution T
2 volume to the subject -native 
anatomical space.  
 De-identification  
 
We mapped a liberal brain mask defined in MNI space to the subject -native anatomical space, and then used the result to 
mask and thus de-identify the anatomical volumes ( preprocess_nsd_applybrainmask.m ). 
 
FreeSurfer processing 
 
The prepared 0.8- mm T
1 volume was processed using FreeSurfer version 6.0.0 with the -hires option 
(analysis_freesurfer.m ). Manual edits of tissue segmentation (labeling voxels as gray matter, white matter, or cerebrospinal