11 Supplementary Modeling Note  1: 
Estimation of pRFs from the NSD responses  
 
For this analysis (results shown in Extended Data Figure 9 ), we used version 3 of the NSD betas (b3) in the nativesurface 
preparation. Betas for each surface vertex were z-scored within each scan session, concatenated across sessions, 
averaged across repeated trials for each distinct image, and then re -normalized using a scale and offset such that 0 
corresponds to 0% BOLD signal change and the standard deviation of the betas equals 1.  
 
To prepare stimuli for pRF estimation, the NSD images were converted to grayscale, resized to 800 pixels ´ 800 pixels 
(cubic interpolation), and squared to mimic the luminance response of the display. The images were then placed against the gray background and divided into a 51 ´ 51 grid such that the first and last grid elements were centered at the edges of 
the stimulus (each grid element spanned 0.168° ´ 0.168°). Finally, to quantify local contrast, we computed the standard 
deviation of pixel values with in each grid element.  
 
Based on the local -contrast preparation of the NSD images, we used analyzePRF ( http://cvnlab.net/analyzePRF/ ) to fit the 
Compressive Spatial Summation pRF model
80 to the trial -averaged betas obtained for each vertex. The non -shared NSD 
images were used as training data; the shared NSD images were used as validation data. pRFs were constrained to have non- negative gain. No offset term was included in the model (opt.maxpolydeg = NaN); thus, the model necessarily predicts 
a response of 0 for an image with zero contrast. For model fitting, an initial gridding of model parameters was performed 
(opt.seedmode = 2), and parameter optimization started from the best parameter combination (opt.modelmode = 2; opt.algorithm  = 'trust -region- reflective'). Model fitting produced, for each vertex, an estimate of pRF angle, eccentricity, size, 
exponent, and gain, as well as variance explained in the training data and the validation data.