16  
 
Supplementary Figure 3. Inspection of raw time -series data.  To assist interpretation of the raw data shown in this figure, 
we fit a simple ON -OFF GLM model (see Methods) that assumes a fixed response to each presented image. For each 
subject, we show results for one axial slice in one NSD run (nsd20 scan session, run01, slice 42 of 84). The image on the left shows raw fMRI data (the first acquired volume in the run). The image in the middle shows the amount of variance explained ( R
2) by the ON -OFF model. We select two voxels for detailed inspection: the voxel with the highest R2 (labeled 
‘2’) and a control voxel located 18 mm (a distance of 10 voxels) towards the anterior direction (labeled ‘1’). The plots on t he 
right show raw time -series data for these two voxels. Thin gray vertical lines mark stimulus onsets. Several observations 
can be made. First, in each subject, the raw time -series data for the high R2 voxel (bottom plot) show clear stimulus -evoked 
signals: the bla nk trials that occur intermittently during the run lead to decreases in signal intensity that are captured by the 
ON-OFF model fit. Note that during periods of time involving only stimulus trials, there are in fact small modulations present 
in the ON -OFF model fit, and these correspond to the onsets of individual images. Second, in each subject, the raw time -
series data for the control voxel (top plot) show little discernible stimulus -evoked signals, thereby providing an important 
comparison. Note that real  differences in neural activity evoked by different images are expected to manifest as signal 
fluctuations in the data, and thus may account for some of the observed time -series fluctuations. Also, note that since motion 
correction has not been performed for these raw data inspections, it is likely that the observed slow signal drifts are due, in part, to small shifts in head position. Overall, these results confirm the quality of the NSD data by demonstrating that 
stimulus- evoked signals can be readily observed in the raw time -series data.