6 representing fiber density were generated using a combination of SIFT2113 and MRTrix3  
(https://doi.org/10.25663/brainlife.app.394 ). Fiber density was quantified as the number of streamlines connecting two 
regions divided by the average volume of the two regions.  
 
Following model fitting and tractography, 61 major white- matter tracts were segmented for each run using a customized 
versi on of the white matter query language114 (https://doi.org/10.25663/brainlife.app.188 ). Then, using Vistasoft 
(https://github.com/vistalab/vistasoft ), outlier streamlines were removed (https://doi.org/10.25663/brainlife.app.195 ) and 
tract profiles (each tract sampled with 200 nodes) were generated for DTI, DKI, and NODDI measures (https://doi.org/10.25663/brainlife.app.361 ). Finally, these measures were mapped to the cortical surface following 
previously published procedures
111 using FreeSurfer  7.0 and Connectome Workbench  1.4.2 
(https://github.com/Washington- Universit y/workbench ) (https://doi.org/10.25663/brainlife.app.379 ). 
 
Pre-processing of functional data 
 
Overall strategy  
 
We implemented a pre -processing approach that aimed to preserve as much spatial and temporal detail as possible. In 
short, the fMRI data were pre -processed by performing one temporal resampling to correct for slice time differences and 
one spatial resampling to correct for head motion within and across scan sessions, EPI distortion, and gradient nonlinearities. This produced volumetric fMRI  time-series data in subject -native space for each NSD subject. The functional 
data were pre -processed independently of the anatomical data; this was done intentionally in order to avoid dependence of 
the pre -processed functional data on choices such as ho w to co- register the functional and anatomical data. Also, to 
minimize the risk of inaccurate or unwanted assumptions, we did not include any temporal filtering (e.g. detrending, confound regression, censoring). Pre -processing results were carefully visual ly inspected to ensure quality control. There 
were a few anomalous cases, such as acquisition being split across two different scan sessions; special modifications were made to the pre -processing to accurately compensate for these occurrences (see online notes for details).  
 First-stage pre -processing  
 Given the fMRI data acquired in a scan session, a series of steps were performed ( preprocess_nsd.m , preprocessfmri.m ): 
1. Temporal resampling . A cubic interpolation of each voxel’s time -series data in each run was performed. This 
interpolation corrected differences in slice acquisition times (as determined from the DICOM header) and also upsampled the data (in the same step) to either 1.333 s (standard -resolution preparation) or 1.000 s (high -resolution 
preparation). Data were prepared such that the first time -series data point coincides with the acquisition time of the 
first slice acquired in the first volume of each run. The upsampling exploits the benefits of temporal jitter between the acquisition and the experiment and synchronizes the time -series data to convenient multiples of the experiment 
trial structure
73. For example, in the standard -resolution preparation, there are 3 time points for each 4- s trial in the 
NSD experiment.  
2. Fieldmap preparation. The multiple fieldmaps acquired in the scan session (3.6 -mm slices) were upsampled using 
nearest -neighbor interpolation to match the slice resolution of the f MRI data (1.8 -mm slices). The fieldmaps were 
then phase- unwrapped using the FSL utility prelude and regularized by performing 3D local linear regression using 
an Epanechnikov kernel with radius 5 mm. Values in the magnitude component of the fieldmaps were used to regularize the fieldmaps and the regression in order to improve robustness of the field estimates. Finally, the fieldmaps were linearly interpolated over time, producing an estimate of the field for each fMRI volume acquired. This time -varying fiel dmap strategy is atypical for fMRI workflows, but we have found it to be highly effective
32. 
3. Spatial undistortion. The temporally resampled volumes from Step 1 were undistorted based on the field estimates from Step 2 using the standard unwarping method
115. Undistorte d volumes were generated using cubic 
interpolation.  
4. Motion estimation . The undistorted volumes from Step 3 were used to estimate rigid -body motion parameters using 
the SPM5 utility spm_realign (the first fMRI volume in the scan session served as the refere nce). A manually defined 
3D ellipse was used to focus the cost metric on brain regions unaffected by gross susceptibility effects. Note that 
the estimated motion parameters reflect temporally upsampled data and should be interpreted accordingly (e.g. 
when assessing framewise displacement). Also, note that the motion parameters may reflect apparent image motion 
due to respiration -induced B0 fluctuations116; this was particularly apparent in subject 3.