7 5. Spatial resampling.  A single cubic interpolation was performed on the temporally resampled volumes from Step 1 
in order to correct for the combined effects of h ead motion and spatial distortion. 
 
Gradient nonlinearity correction and session registration  Given the results of the first -stage pre -processing, we computed the mean fMRI volume and corrected this volume for 
gradient nonlinearities ( preprocess_nsd_epigradunwarp.m ). We then co -registered this gradient -corrected volume to the 
gradient -corrected volume from the first NSD scan session (affine transformation, correlation metric). Thus, the first NSD 
scan session determined the target space for preparing fMRI data from different scan sessions 
(preprocess_nsd_epialignment .m). 
 Second -stage pre -processing  
 We repeated the pre -processing steps (Steps 1– 5 above) but with the final spatial resampling step incorporating the effects 
of the gradient nonlinearity correction and the session registration ( preprocess_nsd_secondstage.m). In this way, a single 
cubic interpolation is used to compensate for the effects of head motion, spatial distortion, gradient nonlinearities, and 
session registration. For this final interpolation step, we used either a 1.8 -mm grid (standard -resolution preparation) or a 
1.0-mm grid (high -resolution preparation). The latter approach intentionally upsamples the data in order to exploit the 
benefits of small head displacements and preserve as much spatial detail as possible
32,34. To minimize storage 
requirements, the interpola tions were performed within a 3D box that was just large enough to cover the brain of each 
subject.  
 To facilitate assessment of T
2* effects, we created a bias -corrected version of the mean EPI volume 
(analysis_biascorrection.m ). For each preparation, we t ook the mean EPI volume and fit a 5th -degree 3D polynomial, 
considering only voxels labeled as cortical or cerebellar gray matter in the FreeSurfer aseg file. The fitted volume (‘coilbi as’) 
was then divided from the mean EPI volume, producing the bias -corrected volume (‘bc’).  
 
Final outputs  
 
The final result of pre- processing was volumetric fMRI time -series data in subject -native space. Two versions were 
generated: the standard- resolution version was prepared at a spatial resolution of 1.8 mm and a temporal  resolution of 
1.333 s, whereas the high -resolution version was prepared at a spatial resolution of 1 mm and a temporal resolution of 
1.000 s. These two volumetric versions of the fMRI data are the main versions of the data. However, we do create some alternative versions of the data: for example, a surface -based version of the NSD betas (‘nativesurface’) is prepared for the 
convenience of users. We prioritize the volume -based format as the main version of the data; this is primarily because it is 
a simple format, amenable for both cortical and sub -cortical analyses, and does not incorporate specific decisions about 
how to map functional data onto cortical surface representations.  
 
Calculation of coordinate transformations between volumetric and surface-based representations of 
functional and anatomical images 
 
We performed several analyses related to mapping data between different spaces:  
• Mapping between functional and anatomical spaces. We co -registered the mean fMRI volume (1 -mm preparation; 
mean of first five NSD sessions) to the prepared 1.0 -mm T2 volume 
(preprocess_nsd_functionaltostructuralalignment.m ). To compensate for acquisition on different scanners, we used 
a slightly flexible nonlinear warp as implemented in ANTs 2.1.0 (BSplineSyN with parameters [0.1, 400, 0, 3]). A 
small amount of nonlinearity was necessary to achieve accurate co -registration (see inspections provided online).  
• Changing resolutions in anatomical space.  For res ampling data to different anatomical resolutions (0.5 -, 0.8 -, or 
1.0-mm), we used an ideal Fourier filter (10th -order low -pass Butterworth filter) followed by cubic interpolation 
(changevolumeres.m ). 
• Mapping to and from fsaverage. We calculated the indexin g information that maps subject -native surfaces to and 
from fsaverage using nearest -neighbor interpolation in the spherical space defined by FreeSurfer. Visual 
inspections confirm the quality of the folding -based alignment achieved by FreeSurfer ( Supplemen tary Video 3 ).