10 The pRF results were also used to define prf-eccrois, a c ollection of ROIs consisting of concentric regions with increasing 
eccentricity coverage (0.5°, 1°, 2°, 4°, >4°). Labeled regions were confined to the same cortical extent labeled in prf-
visualrois . 
 
Results of the fLoc experiment were used to define sever al collections of category -selective ROIs, including commonly used 
ROIs such as extrastriate body area (EBA), fusiform face area (FFA), parahippocampal place area (PPA), and visual word 
form area (VWFA) ( analysis_drawrois*.m ). These ROIs were manually draw n on cortical surfaces by experts (K. Kay, A. 
White, A. Bratch) based on a combination of anatomical location (relative to sulci and gyri) and stimulus selectivity t-values 
obtained from the fLoc experiment, following general procedures used in prior studies31,121,122. For each ROI collection ( floc-
bodies, floc-faces , floc-places, floc-words ), several ROIs exhibiting preference for the associated category were defined 
(e.g., floc-faces  was based on t-values for the contrast of faces > non -faces). ROIs were defined by drawing a polygon 
around a given patch of cortex and then restricting the ROI to vertices within the polygon that satisfy t > 0. This liberal 
criterion was used to provide maximum flexibility (the user can easily restrict the ROI further using the provided t-value 
volumes).  
 
Surface -based atlas ROIs 
 To help summarize results in this paper, we defined nsdgeneral , an ROI in occipital cortex reflecting regions generally 
responsive in the NSD experiment ( analysis_drawnsdgeneral.m ). This ROI was drawn on fsaverage based on group -
average results for variance explained by the b3 version of the GLM. The ROI is shown in Figure 3F . 
 To provide anatomical reference, we defined corticalsulc, a collection of ROIs consisting of major sulci and gyri, and streams, 
a collection of ROIs reflecting large -scale divisions of visual cortex (early, midv entral, midlateral, midparietal, ventral, lateral, 
parietal). These ROI collections were manually drawn on fsaverage.  For convenience, the NSD dataset also includes a few publicly available atlases. These include Kastner2015
123, an atlas of 
visual topography, and HCP_MMP1109, a who le-brain cortical parcellation based on multimodal measures. Both atlases 
were prepared in fsaverage and converted as described below.  
 
Conversion of surface -based ROIs 
 
A number of conversions were performed to prepare volumetric versions of surface -based ROIs 
(analysis_surfaceroistovolume.m ). ROIs defined on fsaverage were mapped to subject -native surfaces using nearest -
neighbor interpolation. ROIs defined on subject -native surfaces were mapped to 0.8 -mm anatomical space by assigning 
labels to the 3 depth -dependent surfaces and then performing weighted linear conversion (as described earlier). The 0.8 -
mm volume was then mapped to the 1.0 -mm and 1.8 -mm functional spaces.