15  
 
Supplementary Figure 2. Details on the quantification of head motion.  A, Example motion parameter estimates (nsd20 
scan session, first NSD run, 1.8 -mm data p reparation). The rotation parameters, originally in radian units, are multiplied by 
50 in order to allow interpretation in terms of millimeters of displacement for a circle of diameter 100 mm77. Motion 
parameters are relative to the reference volume which is the first volume in each scan session. Framewise displacement 
(FD), calculated as the sum of the absolute differences of the motion parameters for successive pairs of volumes, is also plotted. The mean FD across volumes is indicated in the plot titles, and corresponds to the summary metric shown in Figure 
2D, middle (the inset shows results from subject 5). B, Distributions of FD. From the 1.8 -mm data preparation, we plot 
histograms of FD observed across all volumes in all NSD runs (top row) and all resting -state (RS) runs (bottom row). 
Apparent  head motion due to the interaction of respiration and the main magnetic field
127,128 is present in the NSD data and 
can be seen in the anterior -to-posterior translation parameter which corresponds to the EPI phase -encode direction (see 
panel A, subjects 3 and 5). Thus, in addition to the original FD values (blue histograms), we also plot a modified version of 
FD (orange histograms) in which we simply omit the anterior- to-posterior translation parameter. This is likely to provide 
more accurate estimates of actual head motion, though more accurate compensation might be achieved by frequency -
based filtering based on the actual respiratory behavior of each subject127,128. Using a threshold of 0.15 (vertical red lines), 
we report the percentage of volumes whose modified FD exceeds this threshold (red inset numbers). Overall, the results 
indicate that most of the data are free of large head motions (with the possible exception of subject 8) and that the NSD and  
RS runs have c omparable levels of head motion.