9 Supplementary Note  5: 
Localizers and regions of interest  
 
Analysis of the pRF experiment 
 
The pre -processed fMRI data from the pRF experiment were analyzed using the Compressive Spatial Summation model80 
as implemented in analyzePRF ( analysis_prf.m ). First, the time -series data from the three repetitions of each run type 
(multibar, wedgering) were averaged. Stimulus apertures indicating the position of the texture were prepared at a resolution 
of 200 pixels ´ 200 pixels. We then used analyzePRF (http://cvnlab.net/analyzePRF/ ) to estimate pRF parameters for each 
voxel (canonical hemodynamic response function; seedmode 2). Results were mapped to the cortical surface by performing 
linear interpolation on the volumes (1 -mm preparation) and then averaging across cortical depth. To quantify behavioral 
performance, we calculated, for each run, ( A – B)/C ´ 100, where A indicates the number of successful detections of color 
changes (button pressed within 1 s of a color change), B indicates the number of extraneous button presses, and C indicates 
the total number of color changes. Performance averaged across the six runs ranged between 93.5 –98.9% for the eight 
NSD subjects.  
 
Analysis of the fLoc experiment 
 The pre- processed fMRI data from the fLoc experiment were analyzed using GLMdenoise
35,117, a data -driven denoising 
method that derives estimates of correlated noise from the data and incorporates these estimates as nuisance regressors 
in a general linear model (GLM) analysis of the data ( analysis_floc.m ). We coded the 10 s timulus categories using a 
“condition- split” strategy32 in which the trials associated with a single category were split into separate conditions in each 
run. We used six condition- splits, thereby producing six response estimates (betas) for each category. After fi tting the GLM, 
t-values were computed from the GLM betas in order to quantify selectivity for different categories and domains (e.g., 
selectivity for faces was quantified by calculating a t-value that contrasts adult and child faces vs. all other categories). 
Results were mapped to the cortical surface by performing linear interpolation on the volumes (1 -mm preparation) and then 
averaging across cortical depth. To quantify behavioral performance, we calculated the hit rate for each run (button pressed 
withi n 1 s of an oddball image). Performance averaged across the six runs ranged between 90.8– 97.5% for the eight NSD 
subjects.  
 
Regions of interest (ROIs) 
 Volume- based subject -native ROIs 
 The thalamus  ROI collection consists of ROIs related to the lateral ge niculate nucleus, pulvinar, and superior collicus 
(external_subcortical.m ). Manual labeling of these ROIs was performed by an expert (M. Arcaro) based on the T
1 and T2 
anatomical volumes obtained for each subject as well as functional results obtained in prior studies118, projected from MNI 
space to the native space of each subject. Labels were defined in 0.5 -mm anatomical space and were resampled to create 
alternative 0.8- mm and 1.0 -mm versions. To provide labels in functional space, the 0.8 -mm anatomical volume was mapped 
to the 1.0 -mm functional space, and the 1.0 -mm anatomical volume was mapped to the 1.8 -mm functional space.  
 The MTL  ROI collection consists of ROIs related to the hippocampus and surrounding brain regions in the medial temporal 
lobe (external_mtl.m ). Manual labeling of these ROIs was performed by an expert (W. Guo) based on the high -resolution 
T
2 volume obtained for each subject, following a published protocol119. Labels were defined on the raw high -resolution 
volume, and were mapped to 0.5 -mm anatomical space using the previously determined affine transformation. Note that 
the resulting labels have so me amount of jaggedness due to the anisotropy of the voxels in the high -resolution T2 volume. 
Alternative versions of the labels were created in the same way as described for the thalamus  labels. 
 
Surface -based subject -native ROIs 
 
Results of the pRF exper iment were used to define prf-visualrois , a collection of ROIs consisting of the dorsal and ventral 
subdivisions of V1, V2, and V3, and area hV4 ( analysis_drawrois_prf*.m ). These ROIs were manually drawn on cortical 
surfaces by experts (K. Kay, J. Winawer) based on pRF angle and eccentricity estimates, following common practices120. 
The ROIs extended to the fovea (0° eccentricity) but were restricted to the extent of cortex stimulated by the pRF experiment .