3 Supplementary Note  3: 
Pre-processing and analysis of eyetracking data 
 
Eyetracking data and video recordings were carefully synchronized and cropped to match the fMRI data acquisition 
(nsd_et_crop.m ). The eyetracking data were then pre -processed to reduce noise as detailed below 
(nsd_et_preprocessing.m ). Note that the eyetracking data are variable in quality: the eyetracker frequently lost track of the 
pupil, thereby introdu cing noise to the data and causing missing samples. We carefully cleaned the data to the best of our 
ability, taking care to select parameters that work well for the majority of subjects and scan sessions. 
 
We implemented the following pre -processing steps . First, blinks and tracking noise were removed by excluding samples 
at which the pupil was lost entirely, excising data 100 ms before and 150 ms after each occurrence. Further, because 
recorded gaze positions tended to jump erratically to the screen edge whenever the pupil was lost, we excluded samples 
deviating more than 6° from central fixation, excising data 250 ms before and 250 ms after each occurrence. Next, we 
removed slow signal drift by linear detrending and median -centering of the gaze position t ime series (X and Y). This step 
assumes that the median gaze position corresponds to central fixation. Finally, the time -series data for gaze position and 
pupil size were downsampled to 100 Hz and smoothed using a 50 -ms running average. Any eyetracking run  containing 
fewer than 1/3 valid samples after pre- processing was deemed unusable and excluded from further analysis.  
 
Detailed analyses of the eyetracking data obtained for the NSD experiment are shown in Extended Data Figure 4 . Because 
two of the subject s (S3 and S8) do not have eyetracking data acquired during the NSD experiment, we considered for these 
two subjects eyetracking data acquired during the nsdsynthetic experiment (which also required central fixation) as a proxy. This allowed aggregate analyses to be performed for these subjects (panels B and C), but precluded trial -wise time -resolved 
analyses (panel F), due to the different experimental design used in the nsdsynthetic experiment.  
 Note that despite our best efforts to reduce noise in the eye tracking data, the data are still noisy. This can be appreciated 
by inspecting the eyetracking video recordings available online. Thus, not all deviations in the recorded data reflect actual  
eye movements, and results shown in Extended Data Figure 4  likely  reflect an underestimation of the true fixation accuracy 
of the subjects. As an alternative approach, it may be possible to infer eye gaze from fMRI signal intensities in and around the eyeballs
105,106. This could provide robust estimates of fixation accuracy, even for scan sessions where eyetracking was 
not conducted.