8 • Mapping to and from MNI.  Using FSL’s utility fnirt, we co -registered the subject -native prepared 1.0- mm T1 volume 
to the MNI152 T1 1-mm template provided by FSL ( preprocess_nsd_MNIandbrainmask.m ). Visual inspections 
confirm the quality of the registration (Supplementary Video 4 ). 
• Converting surface data to volumetric format.  We implemented a method that, for a given target anatomical volume 
with resolution R mm, allows each surface vertex to contribute a triangular (linear) kerne l of size +/– R mm and then 
calculates a weighted average of data values at the position of each voxel in the volume 
(cvnmapsurfacetovolume_helper.m ). 
Based on the results of the above analyses, we calculated coordinate transformations that indicate how to  map between 
the functional spaces, the anatomical spaces, the subject -native surfaces, fsaverage, and MNI space 
(preprocess_nsd_calculatetransformations.m ). Finally, we created a lightweight utility ( nsd_mapdata.{m,py} ) that uses the 
coordinate transforma tions to map user -supplied data from one space to another space under a given interpolation scheme 
(nearest -neighbor, linear, cubic, winner- take-all). For example, data in subject- native functional space can be mapped to 
MNI space or a subject -native corti cal surface using a single interpolation of the functional data. The use of interpolation to 
map volumetric data onto surface representations (as opposed to incorporating spatial kernels tailored to the cortical 
surface) helps maximize spatial resolution and avoids making strong assumptions about cortical topology. Nonetheless, the 
user is free to apply other methods (e.g., FreeSurfer, Connectome Workbench) to perform the mapping. We used the nsd_mapdata utility to perform a number of mundane but useful transformations, such as generating versions of the anatomical volumes that are matched to the functional volumes (analysis_transforms.m ). Label data (e.g. ROI labels) were 
transformed by performing a separate interpolation for each label and then a winner -take-all operation.