13 pooling field was applied to each group. Thus, the GNet model for each voxel was specified by multiple, independently 
optimized spatial pooling fields.  Model training and validation  
 Given the demanding memory requirements of training large -scale neural networks to jointly predict tens of thousands of 
voxels, we selected the four NSD subjects with the highest noise ceilings (see Figure 3G ). For the selected subjects (1, 2, 
5, 6), NSD betas were extracted from visual areas V1 –hV4. These betas were separated into those evoked by the 
shared1000 im ages and those that were not; the former were designated as the validation set, while the latter were 
designated as the training set. For example, for subject 1, there were 9,000 images ´ 3 trials = 27,000 samples in the 
training set, and 1,000 images ´ 3 trials = 3,000 samples in the validation set. After model training, accuracy was quantified 
as the voxel -wise correlation between model predictions and observed responses in the validatio n set.  
 For the AlexNet -based encoding model, parameters of the feature extractors were pre -trained based on classification of 
objects in the ImageNet database
47. For both the AlexNet - and Gabor -based encoding models, feature weights for the 
coupling model were optimized via rid ge regression, with the ridge parameter selected to maximize accuracy on a held- out 
subset (20%) of the training data. Line search was used to optimize the position and size of the Gaussian spatial pooling field for each voxel (see Extended Data Figure 10B, right ). In total, the AlexNet -based encoding model consisted of 2,692 
free parameters per voxel (2,688 feature weighting parameters, 3 spatial pooling parameters, 1 bias term), and the Gabor -
based encoding model consisted of 76 free parameters per voxel (72 feature weighting parameters, 3 spatial pooling 
parameters, 1 bias term).  For the GNet -based encoding model, parameters of the feature extractors, spatial pooling fields, and feature weights were 
all optimized via stochastic gradient descent of an 
𝐿*-norm weighted loss function:  
𝐿(𝑟',𝑟'1)=∑ ⌊𝜌'*⌋(𝑟'−𝑟'1)*
'
∑ ⌊𝜌'*⌋' 
where ⌊𝜌'*⌋ is the batchwise prediction accuracy for a given voxel 𝑣 with an imposed floor of 0.1 in order to permit 
contribution of yet -to-be-predicted voxels. In total, the GNet -based encoding model consisted of 1,034,944 free parameters 
that are shared across voxels, plus 1,307 free parameters per voxel.  
 Two versions o f the GNet model were developed and evaluated. In the single -subject GNet model, different instantiations 
of GNet were created for different subjects, and only the data from a given subject were used to train the GNet -based 
encoding model for that subject. In the multiple -subject GNet model, a single instantiation of GNet was created for all four 
subjects, and data from all subjects were used to train the GNet -based encoding models. In this scheme, all subjects share 
a common feature extractor, but each subject has independently adjusted coupling models and feature weights.  
 To train the GNet- based encoding model, stochastic gradient descent with early stopping was performed using the ADAM 
optimizer
126 (lr=10"+,β#=0.99,β*=0.99). Parameter updates for feature extractors, spatial pooling fields, and feature 
weights were alternated to promote stability of the  training procedure. 
 Note that the NSD subjects view largely non -overlapping sets of images. Thus, when training GNet on data from multiple 
subjects, we used a modified procedure for selecting batches of training data. For each iteration of training, we f irst extracted 
a batch of training samples from one subject’s data and calculated the gradient with respect to the loss function. Coupling model parameters for that subject and feature extractor parameters were then updated and the process was repeated unt il 
all batches from all subjects were used. This corresponded to one training epoch.