MASS: Masked Sequence to Sequence Pre-training for Language Generation
Kaitao Song* 1Xu Tan* 2Tao Qin2Jianfeng Lu1Tie-Yan Liu2
Abstract
Pre-training and ﬁne-tuning, e.g., BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2018), have achieved great success
in language understanding by transferring knowl-
edge from rich-resource pre-training task to the
low/zero-resource downstream tasks. Inspired
by the success of BERT, we propose MAsked
Sequence to Sequence pre-training (MASS)
for encoder-decoder based language generation.
MASS adopts the encoder-decoder framework
to reconstruct a sentence fragment given the re-
maining part of the sentence: its encoder takes
a sentence with randomly masked fragment (sev-
eral consecutive tokens) as input, and its decoder
tries to predict this masked fragment. In this way,
MASS can jointly train the encoder and decoder to
develop the capability of representation extraction
and language modeling. By further ﬁne-tuning
on a variety of zero/low-resource language gen-
eration tasks, including neural machine transla-
tion, text summarization and conversational re-
sponse generation (3 tasks and totally 8 datasets),
MASS achieves signiﬁcant improvements over
baselines without pre-training or with other pre-
training methods. Specially, we achieve state-of-
the-art accuracy (37.5 in terms of BLEU score)
on the unsupervised English-French translation,
even beating the early attention-based supervised
model (Bahdanau et al., 2015b)1.
1. Introduction
Pre-training and ﬁne-tuning are widely used when target
tasks are of low or zero resource in terms of training data,
*Equal contribution1Key Laboratory of Intelligent Percep-
tion and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Min-
istry of Education, Nanjing University of Science and Technol-
ogy2Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <tao-
qin@microsoft.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1We release the codes in https://github.com/
microsoft/MASS .while pre-training has plenty of data (Girshick et al., 2014;
Szegedy et al., 2015; Ouyang et al., 2015; Dai & Le, 2015;
Howard & Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al.,
2018). For example, in computer vision, models are usually
pre-trained on the large scale ImageNet dataset and then ﬁne-
tuned on downstream tasks like object detection (Szegedy
et al., 2015; Ouyang et al., 2015) or image segmenta-
tion (Girshick et al., 2014). Recently, pre-training methods
such as ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), OpenAI GPT (Radford
et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) have attracted a
lot of attention in natural language processing, and achieved
state-of-the-art accuracy in multiple language understanding
tasks such as sentiment classiﬁcation (Socher et al., 2013),
natural language inference (Bowman et al., 2015), named
entity recognition (Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003)
and SQuAD question answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
which usually have limited supervised data. Among the
pre-training methods mentioned above, BERT is the most
prominent one by pre-training the bidirectional encoder rep-
resentations on a large monolingual corpus through masked
language modeling and next sentence prediction.
Different from language understanding, language generation
aims to generate natural language sentences conditioned on
some inputs, including tasks like neural machine translation
(NMT) (Cho et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015a; Vaswani
et al., 2017), text summarization (Ayana et al., 2016; Suzuki
& Nagata, 2017; Gehring et al., 2017) and conversational re-
sponse generation (Shang et al., 2015; Vinyals & Le, 2015).
Language generation tasks are usually data-hungry, and
many of them are low-resource or even zero-source in terms
of training data. Directly applying a BERT like pre-training
method on these natural language generation tasks is not fea-
sible, since BERT is designed for language understanding,
which are usually handled by just one encoder or decoder.
Therefore, how to design pre-training methods for the lan-
guage generation tasks (which usually adopt the encoder-
decoder based sequence to sequence learning framework) is
of great potential and importance.
In this paper, inspired by BERT, we propose a novel ob-
jective for pre-training: MAsked Sequence to Sequence
learning (MASS) for language generation. MASS is based
on the sequence to sequence learning framework: its en-
coder takes a sentence with a masked fragment (several
consecutive tokens) as input, and its decoder predicts thisarXiv:1905.02450v5  [cs.CL]  21 Jun 2019