MASS: Masked Sequence to Sequence Pre-training for Language Generation
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
 (e)
Figure 5. The performances of MASS with different masked lengths k, in both pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stages, which include: the PPL
of the pre-trained model on English (Figure a) and French (Figure b) sentences from WMT newstest2013 on English-French translation;
the BLEU score of unsupervised English-French translation on WMT newstest2013 (Figure c); the ROUGE score (F1 score in RG-2) on
the validation set of text summarization (Figure d); the PPL on the validation set of conversational response generation (Figure e).
Method BLEU Method BLEU Method BLEU
Discrete 36.9 Feed 35.3 MASS 37.5
Table 6. The comparison between MASS and the ablation methods
in terms of BLEU score on the unsupervised en-fr translation.
lation in Figure 5c, the validation ROUGE scores on text
summarization in Figure 5d, and the validation PPL on con-
versational response generation in Figure 5e. It can be seen
that MASS achieves best performance on these downstream
tasks whenkis nearly 50% of the sentence length m. There-
fore, we set k= 50% ofmfor MASS in our experiments.
Actually,k= 50% ofmis a good balance between the
encoder and decoder. Too few valid tokens in the encoder
side or in the decoder side will bias the model to concentrate
more on the other side, which is not suitable for language
generation task that typically leverages the encoder-decoder
framework to extract the sentence representation in the en-
coder, as well as to model and generate the sentence in the
decoder. The extreme cases are k= 1 (masked language
modeling in BERT) and k=m(standard language model-
ing), as illustrated in Figure 2. Neither k= 1nork=m
can achieve good performance on the downstream language
generation tasks, as shown in Figure 5.
Ablation Study of MASS In our masked sequence to se-
quence pre-training, we have two careful designs: (1) We
mask consecutive tokens in the encoder side, and thus pre-
dict consecutive tokens in the decoder side, which can build
better language modeling capability than just predicting
discrete tokens. (2) We mask the input tokens of the de-
coder which are not masked in the encoder side (e.g., when
predicting fragment x3x4x5x6in Figure 1, only the tokens
x3x4x5are taken as the input and other tokens are masked
with[M]), to encourage the decoder to extract more useful
information from the encoder side, rather than leveraging
the abundant information from the previous tokens. In this
section, we conduct two ablation studies to verify the ef-
fectiveness of the two designs in MASS. The ﬁrst study isto randomly mask discrete tokens instead of consecutive
tokens in MASS, denoted as Discrete . The second study
is to feed all the tokens to the decoder instead of masking
the input tokens of the decoder that are not masked in the
encoder side, denoted as Feed . We compare MASS with the
two ablation methods on the unsupervised English-French
translation, as shown in Table 6. It can be seen that both Dis-
crete andFeed perform worse than MASS, demonstrating
the effectiveness of the two designs in MASS.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we have proposed MASS: masked sequence to
sequence pre-training for language generation tasks, which
reconstructs a sentence fragment given the remaining part
of the sentence in the encoder-decoder framework. MASS
just needs to pre-train one model and then ﬁne-tune on
multiple language generation tasks such as neural machine
translation, text summarization and conversational response
generation. Through experiments on the three above tasks
and total eight datasets, MASS achieved signiﬁcant improve-
ments over the baseline without pre-training or with other
pre-training methods. More speciﬁcally, MASS achieved
the state-of-the-art BLEU scores for unsupervised NMT on
three language pairs, outperforming the previous state-of-
the-art by more than 4 BLEU points on English-French.
For future work, we will apply MASS to more language
generation tasks such as sentence paraphrasing, text style
transfer and post editing, as well as other sequence genera-
tion tasks (Ren et al., 2019). We will also investigate more
of the theoretical and empirical analysis on our masked
sequence to sequence pre-training method.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China under Grant
2018YFB1004904. We thank Yichong Leng, Weicong Chen,
Yi Zhuang, Hao Sun and Yi Ren for the further develop-