7 Related Work
Peters et al. (2018) studies how the choice of neu-
ral architecture such as CNNs, Transformers and
RNNs used for language model pretraining af-
fects the downstream task accuracy and the qual-
itative properties of the contextualized word rep-
resentations that are learned. They conclude that
all architectures learn high quality representations
that outperform standard word embeddings such
as GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) for challeng-
ing NLP tasks. They also show that these archi-
tectures hierarchically structure linguistic infor-
mation, such that morphological, (local) syntactic
and (longer range) semantic information tend to be
represented in, respectively, the word embedding
layer, lower contextual layers and upper layers. In
our work, we observe that such hierarchy exists as
well for BERT models that are not trained using
the standard language modelling objective. Gold-
berg (2019) shows that the BERT model captures
syntactic information well for subject-verb agree-
ment. We build on this work by performing the test
on each layer of BERT controlling for the num-
ber of attractors and then show that BERT requires
deeper layers for handling harder cases involving
long-distance dependency information.
Tenney et al. (2019) is a contemporaneous work
that introduces a novel edge probing task to in-
vestigate how contextual word representations en-
code sentence structure across a range of syntac-
tic, semantic, local and long-range phenomena.
They conclude that contextual word representa-
tions trained on language modeling and machine
translation encode syntactic phenomena strongly,
but offer comparably small improvements on se-
mantic tasks over a non-contextual baseline. Their
result using BERT model on capturing linguis-
tic hierarchy conﬁrms our probing task results al-
though using a set of relatively simple probing
tasks. Liu et al. (2019) is another contempora-
neous work that studies the features of language
captured/missed by contextualized vectors, trans-
ferability across different layers of the model and
the impact of pretraining on the linguistic knowl-
edge and transferability. They ﬁnd that (i) con-
textualized word embeddings do not capture ﬁne-
grained linguistic knowledge, (ii) higher layers of
RNN to be task-speciﬁc (with no such pattern for
a transformer) and (iii) pretraining on a closely re-
lated task yields better performance than language
model pretraining. Hewitt and Manning (2019) isa very recent work which showed that we can re-
cover parse trees from the linear transformation of
contextual word representation consistently, better
than with non-contextual baselines. They focused
mainly on syntactic structure while our work addi-
tionally experimented with linear structures (left-
to-right, right-to-left) to show that the composi-
tionality modelling underlying BERT mimics tra-
ditional syntactic analysis.
The recent burst of papers around these ques-
tions illustrates the importance of interpreting con-
textualized word embedding models and our work
complements the growing literature with addi-
tional evidences about the ability of BERT in
learning syntactic structures.
8 Conclusion
With our experiments, which contribute to a cur-
rently bubbling line of work on neural network
interpretability, we have shown that BERT does
capture structural properties of the English lan-
guage. Our results therefore conﬁrm those of
Goldberg (2019); Hewitt and Manning (2019);
Liu et al. (2019); Tenney et al. (2019) on BERT
who demonstrated that span representations con-
structed from those models can encode rich syn-
tactic phenomena. We have shown that phrasal
representations learned by BERT reﬂect phrase-
level information and that BERT composes a hier-
archy of linguistic signals ranging from surface to
semantic features. We have also shown that BERT
requires deeper layers to model long-range depen-
dency information. Finally, we have shown that
BERT’s internal representations reﬂect a compo-
sitional modelling that shares parallels with tra-
ditional syntactic analysis. It would be inter-
esting to see if our results transfer to other do-
mains with higher variability in syntactic struc-
tures (such as noisy user generated content) and
with higher word order ﬂexibility as experienced
in some morphologically-rich languages.
Acknowledgments
We thank Grzegorz Chrupała and our anonymous
reviewers for providing insightful comments and
suggestions. This work was funded by the ANR
projects ParSiTi (ANR-16-CE33-0021), SoSweet
(ANR15-CE38-0011-01) and the French-Israeli
PHC Maimonide cooperation program.