What does BERT learn about the structure of language?
Ganesh Jawahar Beno ˆıt Sagot Djam ´e Seddah
Inria, France
fﬁrstname.lastname g@inria.fr
Abstract
BERT is a recent language representation
model that has surprisingly performed well in
diverse language understanding benchmarks.
This result indicates the possibility that BERT
networks capture structural information about
language. In this work, we provide novel sup-
port for this claim by performing a series of
experiments to unpack the elements of English
language structure learned by BERT. We ﬁrst
show that BERT’s phrasal representation cap-
tures phrase-level information in the lower lay-
ers. We also show that BERT’s intermediate
layers encode a rich hierarchy of linguistic in-
formation, with surface features at the bottom,
syntactic features in the middle and semantic
features at the top. BERT turns out to require
deeper layers when long-distance dependency
information is required, e.g. to track subject-
verb agreement. Finally, we show that BERT
representations capture linguistic information
in a compositional way that mimics classical,
tree-like structures.
1 Introduction
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers) (Devlin et al., 2018) is a
bidirectional variant of Transformer networks
(Vaswani et al., 2017) trained to jointly predict
a masked word from its context and to classify
whether two sentences are consecutive or not. The
trained model can be ﬁne-tuned for downstream
NLP tasks such as question answering and lan-
guage inference without substantial modiﬁcation.
BERT outperforms previous state-of-the-art mod-
els in the eleven NLP tasks in the GLUE bench-
mark (Wang et al., 2018) by a signiﬁcant margin.
This remarkable result suggests that BERT could
“learn” structural information about language.
Can we unveil the representations learned by
BERT to proto-linguistics structures? Answering
this question could not only help us understandthe reason behind the success of BERT but also its
limitations, in turn guiding the design of improved
architectures. This question falls under the topic of
the interpretability of neural networks, a growing
ﬁeld in NLP (Belinkov and Glass, 2019). An im-
portant step forward in this direction is Goldberg
(2019), which shows that BERT captures syntac-
tic phenomena well when evaluated on its ability
to track subject-verb agreement.
In this work, we perform a series of experiments
to probe the nature of the representations learned
by different layers of BERT.1We ﬁrst show that
the lower layers capture phrase-level information,
which gets diluted in the upper layers. Second, we
propose to use the probing tasks deﬁned in Con-
neau et al. (2018) to show that BERT captures a
rich hierarchy of linguistic information, with sur-
face features in lower layers, syntactic features in
middle layers and semantic features in higher lay-
ers. Third, we test the ability of BERT representa-
tions to track subject-verb agreement and ﬁnd that
BERT requires deeper layers for handling harder
cases involving long-distance dependencies. Fi-
nally, we propose to use the recently introduced
Tensor Product Decomposition Network (TPDN)
(McCoy et al., 2019) to explore different hypothe-
ses about the compositional nature of BERT’s rep-
resentation and ﬁnd that BERT implicitly captures
classical, tree-like structures.
2 BERT
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) builds on Transformer
networks (Vaswani et al., 2017) to pre-train bidi-
rectional representations by conditioning on both
left and right contexts jointly in all layers. The
representations are jointly optimized by predicting
randomly masked words in the input and classify-
1The code to reproduce our experiments is publicly ac-
cessible at https://github.com/ganeshjawahar/
interpret_bert