DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv(a)
DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv
SE Block (b)
DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv
SE Block (c)
FC
SigmoidGlobal Pooling
FC (d)
Fig. 1. Architecture of building block. a) The inverted residual block of MobileNetV2 [11] (which without SE module); b) The inverted residual block with
SE module behind the main Depthwise Convolution of EfﬁcientNet [15]. c) The inverted residual block with SE module after the 1×1Conv. d) The SE
module. The down sampling will be in the DWConv layer. There is no shortcut connection if the sizes of input and output features are different. Conv :
Convolution layer. DWCon : Depthwise Convolution layer.
B. Mobile Inverted Bottleneck Convolution Block
The basic mobile inverted bottleneck convolution is ob-
tained through the neural network architecture search. The
module structure is similar to the depthwise separable con-
volution, as can be seen in Fig. 1a. The mobile inverted
bottleneck convolution ﬁrst performs a 1×1point-by-point
convolution on the input and based on the expansion ratio
(expand ratio) to change the output channel dimension (for
example, when the expansion ratio is 3, the channel dimension
will be increased by 3 times. But if the expansion ratio is
1, then directly omit the 1×1point-by-point convolution
and subsequent batch normalization and activation functions).
Then proceed to the depthwise convolution of k×k. Then
restore the original channel dimension at the end of 1x1
point-by-point convolution. Finally, the drop connect and skip
connection of the input are performed.
When the SE module is attached, the operations will be
performed after the depthwise convolution k×k, as shown
in Fig. 1b. This architecture is default for EfﬁcientNet-B0, as
well as the EfﬁcientNet series.
This paper also investigates the performance of EfﬁcientNet-
B0 when the SE module is moved behind the last 1×1
convolution layer. The architecture of this block is shown in
Fig. 1c.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
This paper evaluates the variants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 on
ImageNet dataset [10] and compare them in term of Top-1
error.
A. Dataset
The ILSVRC 2012 classiﬁcation dataset [10] consists 1.2
million images for training, and 50,000 for validation, from
1,000classes. This paper adopts the same data augmentationscheme for training images as in [15], and apply a single-crop
with size 224×224at test time. Following [15], we report the
Top-1 classiﬁcation errors on the validation set.
B. Implementation Details
This paper implements all variants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 on
Tensorﬂow. The training procedure follows the schema pro-
posed in [15]. All models are trained using back-propagation
[6] by Stochastic Gradient Descent [9] with Nesterov mo-
mentum [8] (NAG) optimizer implemented by Tensorﬂow for
350 epochs. At the ﬁrst 5 epochs, the learning rate increases
linearly from 0 to 0.4. Then, its value will be decayed with
a cosine shape (the learning rate of epoch t≤300 is set to
0.5×lr×(cos(π×t/300)+1) ). The parameters are initialized
by Xavier’s initializer [1]. The other settings are: weight decay
of 0.0001, momentum of 0.9, and batch size of 2048.
All networks were trained on Google Colab service with
TPU environment.
C. Performance Evaluation
Table II shows the comparison on Top-1 error of vari-
ants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 when the SE modules are reposi-
tioned/removed.
It’s easy to see that if we do the change (re-positioning or
removing) on noskip blocks, the accuracy slightly drops with
just 0.1% while the number of parameters decreases at 3%.
But if we do the same change on hasskip blocks, the accuracy
drops a little bit larger at 0.7% while the number of parameters
decreases at 8%. If all blocks are applied, the accuracy drops
much at 1% and 1.4% compared to 12% drop for number of
parameters.
One note here is if we reposition the SE modules on only
noskip-blocks or hasskip-blocks, the performance is similar to
the removing case. It means the affect of SE modules when
it’s at the end almost is absent. However, when the change is