by a1×1expansion convolution followed by depthwise
convolutions and a 1×1projection layer. The input and output
are connected with a residual connection if and only if they
have the same number of channels and spatial sizes. This
structure maintains a compact representation at the input and
the output while expanding to a higher-dimensional feature
space internally to increase the expressiveness of nonlinear
perchannel transformations.
EfﬁcientNets [15], a family of efﬁciently scaled convolu-
tional neural nets, have recently emerged as state-of-the-art
models for image classiﬁcation tasks. EfﬁcientNets optimize
for accuracy as well as efﬁciency by reducing model size
and ﬂoating point operations executed while still maintaining
model quality.
The architecture of EfﬁcientNet was designed by performing
the neural architecture search, a technique for automating the
design of neural networks. It optimizes both the accuracy
and efﬁciency as measured on the ﬂoating-point operations
per second (FLOPS) basis. This developed architecture uses
the mobile inverted bottleneck convolution (MBConv). The
researchers then scaled up this baseline network to obtain
a family of deep learning models, called EfﬁcientNets. The
architecture of EfﬁcientNet-B0, the basic network model in
the EfﬁcientNets series, is given in the Table I.
The efﬁciency is the utmost important problem for mobile-
size convolution model. The efﬁcient operations have been
extensively studied in the MobileNet family [11], [14]. Spare
depthwise convolution and the inverted bottleneck block are
the core ideas for efﬁcient mobile size network. MnasNet [14]
and EfﬁcientNet [15] takes a step further to develop MBConv
operation based on the mobile inverted bottleneck in [11].
EfﬁcientNet shows that the models with MBConv operations
not only achieving the state-of-the-art in ImageNet challenge
but also very efﬁcient.
B. Squeeze-and-Excitation Block
Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks [4] introduce a building
module for CNNs that improves channel interdependencies at
almost no computational cost. CNNs use their convolutional
ﬁlters to extract hierarchal information from images. Lower
layers ﬁnd trivial pieces of context like edges or high frequen-
cies, while upper layers can detect faces, text or other complex
geometrical shapes. They extract whatever is necessary to
solve a task efﬁciently.
All of this works by fusing the spatial and channel infor-
mation of an image. The different ﬁlters will ﬁrst ﬁnd spatial
features in each input channel before adding the information
across all available output channels.
All you need to understand for now is that the network
weights each of its channels equally when creating the output
feature maps. SENets are all about changing this by adding a
content aware mechanism to weight each channel adaptively.
In it’s most basic form this could mean adding a single
parameter to each channel and giving it a linear scalar how
relevant each one is.TABLE I
EFFICIENT NET-B0 B ODY ARCHITECTURE .MBC ONV : M OBILE INVERTED
BOTTLENECK CONVOLUTION ,THE FOLLOWING NUMBER IS THE
EXPANDED FACTOR .
Stage Operator Resolution #Channels #Blocks
i ˆFiˆHi×ˆWiˆCiˆLi
1 Conv3x3 224×224 32 1
2 MBConv1, k3x3 112×112 16 1
3 MBConv6, k3x3 112×112 24 2
4 MBConv6, k5x5 56×56 40 2
5 MBConv6, k3x3 28×28 80 3
6 MBConv6, k5x5 14×14 112 3
7 MBConv6, k5x5 14×14 192 4
8 MBConv6, k3x3 7×7 320 1
9 Conv1x1 & Pooling 7×7 1280 1
10 FC 1×1 1000 1
However, the authors push it a little further. First, they get a
global understanding of each channel by squeezing the feature
maps to a single numeric value. This results in a vector of size
n, wherenis equal to the number of convolutional channels.
Afterwards, it is fed through a two-layer neural network, which
outputs a vector of the same size. These nvalues can now be
used as weights on the original features maps, scaling each
channel based on its importance.
Speciﬁctly, at ﬁrst, they squeeze each channel to a single
numeric value using average pooling. Then, a fully connected
layer followed by a ReLU function adds the necessary non-
linearity. It’s output channel complexity is also reduced by
a certain ratio. After that, a second fully connected layer
followed by a Sigmoid activation gives each channel a smooth
gating function. At last, they weight each feature map of the
convolutional block based on the result of the side network.
These four steps add almost no additional computing cost (less
than 1%) and can be added to any model.
The authors show that by adding SE modules to ResNet-
50 you can expect almost the same accuracy as ResNet-101
delivers. This is impressive for a model requiring only half of
the computational costs. The paper further investigates other
architectures like Inception, Inception-ResNet and ResNeXt.
The latter leads them to a modiﬁed version that shows a top-5
error of 3.79% on ImageNet.
III. N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE
A. Architecture of EfﬁcientNet-B0
EfﬁcientNet-B0 is the basic network model in the Efﬁ-
cientNets series. The core structure of the network is the
mobile inverted bottleneck convolution (MBConv) module,
which also introduces the attention thought of the compression
and excitation module [4]. Its architecture is shown in Table I.
All layers are followed by a batchnorm and ReLU nonlinearity
activation with the exception of the ﬁnal fully connected
layer which has no nonlinearity and feeds into a softmax
layer for classiﬁcation. Down sampling is handled with strided
convolution in the depthwise convolutions of ﬁrst block in each
stage, as well as in the ﬁrst layer. A ﬁnal average pooling
reduces the spatial resolution to 1 before the fully connected
layer.