NAS-Bench-101
Figure 8: Generalization bootstrap experiments. Each line
marks the median of 100 runs and the shaded region is
the 25% to 75% interquartile range. (top) Comparing ran-
dom search (RS), non-regularized evolution (NRE), and
regularized evolution (RE) against NAS-Bench-Mini and
NAS-Bench-101. (middle) Comparing RE runs with dif-
ferent mutation rates. (bottom) Comparing RE runs with
different tournament sizes.
(A;H ), where we computed f(A;H )for all settings of
AandH. This let us compute the exact hyperparameter-
optimized accuracy, f(A) = max Hf(A;H ):We can also
measure how well this correlates with the approximation we
use in NAS-Bench-101. To do this, we chose a set of hyper-
parametersHyby optimizing the mean accuracy across all
of the architectures for a given dataset. This allows us to
map each architecture Ato its approximate hyperparameter-
optimized accuracy, fy(A) =f(A;Hy):(This approximate
accuracy is analogous to the one computed in the NAS-
Bench-101 metrics, except there the average was over 50
random architectures, not all of them.)
We ﬁnd that fyandfare quite strongly correlated across
models, with a Spearman rank correlation of 0:9155 ; Fig-
ure 9 provides a scatter plot of fagainstfyfor the archi-
tectures. The ranking is especially consistent for the best
architectures (points near the origin).
0 25 50 75 100 125 150
rank arch with ﬁxed hp050100150 rank arch with best hp
Figure 9: Scatter plot between ranks of f(vertical axis)
andfy(horizontal axis) on the NAS-HPO-Bench-Protein
dataset. Ideally, the points should be close to the diagonal.
The high correlation at low-rank means the best architec-
tures are ranked identically when using HandHy.
5.2. Absolute accuracy of models
The choice of search space, hyperparameters, and training
techniques were designed to ensure that NAS-Bench-101
would be feasible to compute with our resources. Unfortu-
nately, this means that the models we evaluate do not reach
current state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10. This is
primarily because: (1) the search space is constrained in
both size and selection of operations and does not contain
more complex architectures, such as those used by NASNet
(Zoph et al., 2018); (2) We do not apply the expensive “aug-
mentation trick” (Zoph et al., 2018) by which models’ depth
and width are increased by a large amount and the train-
ing lengthened to hundreds of epochs; and (3) we do not
utilize more advanced regularization like Cutout (DeVries
& Taylor, 2017), ScheduledDropPath (Zoph et al., 2018)
and decoupled weight decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019)
in order to keep our training pipeline similar to previous
standardized models like ResNet.
6. Conclusion
We introduced NAS-Bench-101, a new tabular benchmark
for neural architecture search that is inexpensive to evalu-
ate but still preserves the original NAS optimization prob-
lem, enabling us to rigorously compare various algorithms
quickly and without the enormous computational budgets
often used by projects in the ﬁeld. Based on the data we gen-
erated for this dataset, we were able to analyze the properties
of an exhaustively evaluated set of convolutional neural ar-
chitectures at unprecedented scale. In open-sourcing the
NAS-Bench-101 data and generating code, we hope to make
NAS research more accessible and reproducible. We also
hope that NAS-Bench-101 will be the ﬁrst of a continu-
ally improving sequence of rigorous benchmarks for the
emerging NAS ﬁeld.