NAS-Bench-101
4. NASBench as a Benchmark
4.1. Comparing NAS algorithms
In this section we establish baselines for future work by
using our dataset to compare some popular algorithms for
which open source code is available. Note that the intention
is not to answer the question “ Which methods work best on
this benchmark? ”, but rather to demonstrate the utility of a
reproducible baseline.
We benchmarked a small set of NAS and hyperparame-
ter optimization (HPO) algorithms with publicly available
implementations: random search (RS) (Bergstra & Ben-
gio, 2012), regularized evolution (RE) (Real et al., 2018),
SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011), TPE (Bergstra et al., 2011),
Hyperband (HB) (Li et al., 2018), and BOHB (Falkner et al.,
2018). We follow the guidelines established in Section 2.6.
Due to its recent success for NAS (Zoph & Le, 2016), we
also include our own implementation of reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) as an additional baseline, since an ofﬁcial imple-
mentation is not available. However, instead of using an
LSTM controller, which we found to perform worse, we
used a categorical distribution for each parameter and op-
timized the probability values directly with REINFORCE.
Supplement S2 has additional implementation details for all
methods.
NAS algorithms based on weight sharing (Pham et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018b) or network morphisms (Cai et al.,
2018; Elsken et al., 2018) cannot be directly evaluated
on the dataset, so we did not include them. We also do
not include Gaussian process–based HPO methods (Shahri-
ari et al., 2016), such as Spearmint (Snoek et al., 2012),
since they tend to have problems in high-dimensional dis-
crete optimization tasks (Eggensperger et al., 2013). While
Bayesian optimization methods based on Bayesian neural
networks (Snoek et al., 2015; Springenberg et al., 2016)
are generally applicable to this benchmark, we found their
computational overhead compared to the other methods
to be prohibitively expensive for an exhaustive empirical
evaluation. The benchmarking scripts we used are publicly
available3. For all optimizers we investigate their own main
meta-parameters in Supplement S2.2 (except for TPE where
the open-source implementation does not allow to change
the meta-parameters) and report here the performance based
on the best found settings.
Figure 7 (left) shows the mean performance of each of these
NAS/HPO algorithms across 500 independent trials. The
x-axis shows estimated wall-clock time , counting the evalua-
tion of each architecture with the time that the corresponding
training run took. Note that the evaluation of 500 trials of
each NAS algorithm (for up to 10M simulated TPU sec-
onds, i.e., 115 TPU days each) was only made possible by
3https://github.com/automl/nas_benchmarksvirtue of our tabular benchmark; without it, they would have
amounted to over 900 TPU years of computation.
We make the following observations:
RE, BOHB, and SMAC perform best and start to outper-
form RS after roughly 50 000 TPU seconds (the equiva-
lent of roughly 25 evaluated architectures); they achieved
the ﬁnal performance of RS about 5 times faster and
continued to improve beyond this point.
SMAC, as a Bayesian optimization method, performs
this well despite the issue of invalid architectures; we
believe that this is due to its robust random forest model.
SMAC is slightly slower in the beginning of the search;
we assume that this is due to its internal incumbent esti-
mation procedure (which evaluates the same architecture
multiple times).
The other Bayesian optimization method, TPE, struggles
with this benchmark, with its performance falling back to
random search.
The multi-ﬁdelity optimization algorithms HB and BO-
HB do not yield the speedups frequently observed com-
pared to RS or Bayesian optimization. We attribute this
to the relatively low rank-correlation between the perfor-
mance obtained with different budgets (see Figure 7 in
Supplement S2).
BOHB achieves the same test regret as SMAC and RE
after recovering from misleading early evaluations; we
attribute this to the fact, that, compared to TPE, it uses a
multivariate instead of a univariate kernel density estima-
tor.
Even though RL starts outperforming RS at roughly the
same time as the other methods, it converges much slower
towards the global optimum.
Besides achieving good performance, we argue that robust-
ness, i.e., how sensitive an optimizer is to the randomness
in both the search algorithm and the training process, plays
an important role in practice for HPO and NAS methods.
This aspect has been neglected in the NAS literature due
to the extreme cost of performing many repeated runs of
NAS experiments, but with NAS-Bench-101 performing
many repeats becomes trivial. Figure 7 (right) shows the
empirical cumulative distribution of the regret after 10M
seconds across all 500 runs of each method. For all meth-
ods, the ﬁnal test regrets ranged over roughly an order of
magnitude, with RE, BOHB, and SMAC showing the most
robust performance.
4.2. Generalization bootstrap
To test the generalization of our ﬁndings on the dataset, we
ideally would need to run the benchmarked algorithms on
a larger space of architectures. However, due to computa-
tional limitations, it is infeasible for us to run a large number
of NAS trials on a meaningfully larger space. Instead, to
provide some preliminary evidence of generalization, we