NAS-Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Architecture Search
Chris Ying* 1Aaron Klein* 2Esteban Real1Eric Christiansen1Kevin Murphy1Frank Hutter2
Abstract
Recent advances in neural architecture search
(NAS) demand tremendous computational re-
sources, which makes it difﬁcult to reproduce
experiments and imposes a barrier-to-entry to re-
searchers without access to large-scale computa-
tion. We aim to ameliorate these problems by in-
troducing NAS-Bench-101, the ﬁrst public archi-
tecture dataset for NAS research. To build NAS-
Bench-101, we carefully constructed a compact,
yet expressive, search space, exploiting graph iso-
morphisms to identify 423k unique convolutional
architectures. We trained and evaluated all of
these architectures multiple times on CIFAR-10
and compiled the results into a large dataset of
over 5 million trained models. This allows re-
searchers to evaluate the quality of a diverse range
of models in milliseconds by querying the pre-
computed dataset. We demonstrate its utility by
analyzing the dataset as a whole and by bench-
marking a range of architecture optimization al-
gorithms.
1. Introduction
Many successes in deep learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014) have re-
sulted from novel neural network architecture designs. For
example, in the ﬁeld of image classiﬁcation, research has
produced numerous ways of combining neural network lay-
ers into unique architectures, such as Inception modules
(Szegedy et al., 2015), residual connections (He et al., 2016),
or dense connections (Huang et al., 2017). This prolifera-
tion of choices has fueled research into neural architecture
search (NAS) , which casts the discovery of new architec-
*Equal contribution1Google Brain, Mountain
View, California, USA2Department of Computer Sci-
ence, University of Freiburg, Germany. Correspon-
dence to: Chris Ying <contact@chrisying.net >, Aaron
Klein <kleinaa@cs.uni-freiburg.de >, Esteban Real
<ereal@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).tures as an optimization problem (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph
& Le, 2016; Real et al., 2017; Elsken et al., 2019). This
has resulted in state of the art performance in the domain
of image classiﬁcation (Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2018), and has shown promising results in
other domains, such as sequence modeling (Zoph & Le,
2016; So et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, NAS research is notoriously hard to repro-
duce (Li & Talwalkar, 2019; Sciuto et al., 2019). First,
some methods require months of compute time ( e.g., Zoph
et al., 2018), making these methods inaccessible to most
researchers. Second, while recent improvements (Liu et al.,
2018a; Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018b) have yielded
more efﬁcient methods, different methods are not compa-
rable to each other due to different training procedures and
different search spaces, which make it difﬁcult to attribute
the success of each method to the search algorithm itself.
To address the issues above, this paper introduces NAS-
Bench-101, the ﬁrst architecture-dataset for NAS. To build
it, we trained and evaluated a large number of different con-
volutional neural network (CNN) architectures on CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), utilizing over 100 TPU
years of computation time. We compiled the results into a
large table which maps 423k unique architectures to metrics
including run time and accuracy. This enables NAS experi-
ments to be run via querying a table instead of performing
the usual costly train and evaluate procedure. Moreover, the
data, search space, and training code is fully public1, to
foster reproducibility in the NAS community.
Because NAS-Bench-101 exhaustively evaluates a search
space, it permits, for the ﬁrst time, a comprehensive analysis
of a NAS search space as a whole. We illustrate such po-
tential by measuring search space properties relevant to
architecture search. Finally, we demonstrate its application
to the analysis of algorithms by benchmarking a wide range
of open source architecture/hyperparameter search meth-
ods, including evolutionary approaches, random search, and
Bayesian optimization.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
We introduce NAS-Bench-101, the ﬁrst large-scale, open-
1Data and code for NAS-Bench-101 available at https://
github.com/google-research/nasbench .