NAS-Bench-101
Figure 4: Measuring the aggregated impact of replacing one
operation with another on (left) absolute validation accuracy
and (right) relative training time.
Figure 5: Comparing mean validation accuracy and training
time for cells by (left) depth, measured by length of longest
path from inpu to output, and (right) width, measured by
maximum directed cut on the graph.
pooling operations with 11convolutions is not necessarily
a globally optimal choice.
In Figure 5, we also investigate the role of depth vs. width.
In terms of average validation accuracy, it appears that a
depth of 3 is optimal whereas increasing width seems to in-
crease the validation accuracy up to 5, the maximum width
of networks in the dataset. The training time of networks
increases as networks get deeper and wider with one ex-
ception: width 1 networks are the most expensive. This
is a consequence of the combine semantics (see Section
2.3), which skews the training time distributions because all
width 1 networks are simple feed-forward networks with no
branching, and thus the activation maps are never split via
their channel dimension.
3.3. Locality
NASBench exhibits locality , a property by which architec-
tures that are “close by” tend to have similar performance
metrics. This property is exploited by many search algo-
rithms. We deﬁne “closeness” in terms of edit-distance : the
smallest number of changes required to turn one architecture
into another; one change entails ﬂipping the operation at a
vertex or the presence/absence of an edge. A popular mea-sure of locality is the random-walk autocorrelation (RWA),
deﬁned as the autocorrelation of the accuracies of points vis-
ited as we perform a long walk of random changes through
the space (Weinberger, 1990; Stadler, 1996). The RWA
(Figure 6, left) shows high correlations for lower distances,
indicating locality. The correlations become indistinguish-
able from noise beyond a distance of about 6.
Figure 6: (left) RWA for the full space and the FDC relative
to the global maximum. To plot both curves on a common
horizontal axis, the autocorrelation curve is drawn as a func-
tion of the square root of the autocorrelation shift, to account
for the fact that a random walk reaches a mean distancep
N
afterNsteps. (right) Fraction of the search space volume
that lies within a given distance to the closest high peak.
While the RWA aggregates across the whole space, we can
also consider regions of particular interest. For example,
Figure 3 (right) displays the neighbors of the Inception-
like cell, indicating a degree of locality too, especially in
terms of accuracy. Another interesting region is that around
a global accuracy maximum. To measure locality within
this neighborhood, we used the ﬁtness-distance correlation
metric (FDC, Jones et al. (1995)). Figure 6 (left) shows that
there is locality around the global maximum as well and the
peak also has a coarse-grained width of about 6.
More broadly, we can consider how rare it is to be near a
global maximum. In the cell encoding described in Sec-
tion 2.2, the best architecture ( i.e., the one with the highest
mean testing accuracy) has 4 graph isomorphisms, produc-
ing 4 distinct peaks in our encoded search space. Moreover
there are 11 other architectures whose mean test accuracy
is within 2 times standard error of the mean of the best
graph. Including the isomorphisms of these, too, there are
11 570 points in the 510M-point search space corresponding
to these top graphs , meaning that the chance of hitting one
of them with a random sample is about 1 to 50000. Figure 6
(right) shows how much volume of the search space lies
near these graphs; in particular, 35.4% of the search space is
within a distance of 6 from the closest top graph. Since the
basin of attraction for local search appears to have a width
of about 6, this suggests that locality-based search may be a
good choice for this space.