NAS-Bench-101
source architecture dataset for NAS (Section 2);
We illustrate how to use the dataset to analyze the nature
of the search space, revealing insights which may guide
the design of NAS algorithms (Section 3);
We illustrate how to use the dataset to perform fast bench-
marking of various open-source NAS optimization algo-
rithms (Section 4).
2. The NASBench Dataset
The NAS-Bench-101 dataset is a table which maps neural
network architectures to their training and evaluation met-
rics. Most NAS approaches to date have trained models on
the CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation set because its small images
allow relatively fast neural network training. Furthermore,
models which perform well on CIFAR-10 tend to perform
well on harder benchmarks, such as ImageNet (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) when scaled up (Zoph et al., 2018)). For these
reasons, we also use CNN training on CIFAR-10 as the basis
of NAS-Bench-101.
2.1. Architectures
Similar to other NAS approaches, we restrict our search
for neural net topologies to the space of small feedforward
structures, usually called cells, which we describe below.
We stack each cell 3 times, followed by a downsampling
layer, in which the image height and width are halved via
max-pooling and the channel count is doubled. We repeat
this pattern 3 times, followed by global average pooling and
a ﬁnal dense softmax layer. The initial layer of the model
is a stem consisting of one 33convolution with 128
output channels. See Figure 1, top-left, for an illustration
of the overall network structure. Note that having a stem
followed by stacks of cells is a common pattern both in
hand-designed image classiﬁers (He et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018) and in NAS search spaces for
image classiﬁcation. Thus, the variation in the architectures
arises from variation in the cells.
The space of cell architectures consists of all possible di-
rected acyclic graphs on Vnodes, where each possible node
has one ofLlabels, representing the corresponding opera-
tion. Two of the vertices are specially labeled as operation
INandOUT, representing the input and output tensors to
the cell, respectively. Unfortunately, this space of labeled
DAGs grows exponentially in both VandL. In order to
limit the size of the space to allow exhaustive enumeration,
we impose the following constraints:
We setL= 3, using only the following operations:
–33convolution
–11convolution
–33max-pool
We limitV7.
We limit the maximum number of edges to 9.
conv stemstack 1stack 2stack 3
downsampledownsampleglobal avg pooldense
cell 
2-3
cell 
2-2
cell 
2-1
in1x1 3x3 3x3 3x3 
MP out
in1x1 
3x3 3x3 
MP 3x3 out
inout
F= 
64F= 
64
F= 
64+
&
F= 
64
1x1 proj 1x1 proj1x1 proj +
1x1 projF=128
F=128Figure 1: (top-left) The outer skeleton of each model. (top-
right) An Inception-like cell with the original 5x5 convolu-
tion approximated by two 3x3 convolutions (concatenation
and projection operations omitted). (bottom-left) The cell
that attained the lowest mean test error (projection layers
omitted). (bottom-right) An example cell that demonstrates
how channel counts are automatically determined (“+” de-
notes addition and “&” denotes concatenation; 11projec-
tions are used to scale channel counts).
All convolutions utilize batch normalization followed by
ReLU. These constraints were chosen to ensure that the
search space still contains ResNet-like and Inception-like
cells (He et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2016). An example of
an Inception-like cell is illustrated in Figure 1, top-right. We
intentionally use convolutions instead of separable convolu-
tions to match the original designs of ResNet and Inception,
although this comes as the cost of being more parameter-
heavy than some of the more recent state-of-the-art archi-
tectures like AmoebaNet (Real et al., 2018).
2.2. Cell encoding
There are multiple ways to encode a cell and different en-
codings may favor certain algorithms by biasing the search
space. For most of our experiments, we chose to use a very
general encoding: a 7-vertex directed acyclic graph, rep-
resented by a 77upper-triangular binary matrix, and a
list of 5 labels, one for each of the 5 intermediate vertices
(recall that the input and output vertices are ﬁxed) Since
there are 21 possible edges in the matrix and 3 possible
operations for each label, there are 22135510Mtotal
unique models in this encoding. In Supplement S3, we also