NAS-Bench-101
101102103104105106107
estimated wall-clock time (seconds)10−310−2test regret
HB∗
RS
SMAC
TPE
RE
BOHB∗
RL
10−310−2
ﬁnal test regret0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFHB∗
RS
SMAC
TPE
RE
BOHB∗
RL
Figure 7: (left) Comparison of the performance of various search algorithms. The plot shows the mean performance of 500
independent runs as a function of the estimated training time. (right) Robustness of different optimization methods with
respect to the seed for the random number generator. *HB and BO-HB are budget-aware algorithms which query the dataset
a shorter epoch lengths. The remaining methods only query the dataset at the longest length (108 epochs).
perform a bootstrapped experiment: we set aside a subset
of NAS-Bench-101, dubbed NAS-Bench-Mini, and com-
pare the outcomes of algorithms run on NAS-Bench-Mini
compared to the full NAS-Bench-101. NAS-Bench-Mini
contains all cells within the search space that utilize 6or
fewer vertices ( 64:5kunique cells), compared to the full
NAS-Bench-101 that uses up to 7vertices ( 423kunique
cells).
We compare two very similar algorithms (regularized evolu-
tion, RE, and non-regularized evolution, NRE) to a baseline
(random search, RS). RE and NRE are identical except that
RE removes the oldest individual in a population to main-
tain the population size whereas NRE removes the lowest
ﬁtness individual. Figure 8 (top) shows the comparison
on NAS-Bench-Mini and NAS-Bench-101 on 100 trials of
each algorithm to a ﬁxed time budget. The plots show that
the rankings of the three algorithms (RS <NRE<RE)
are consistent across the smaller dataset and the larger one.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that NAS-Bench-Mini can
generalize to NAS-Bench-101 for different hyperparame-
ter settings of a single algorithm (regularized evolution)
in Figure 8 (middle, bottom). This suggests that conclu-
sions drawn from NAS-Bench-101 may generalize to larger
search spaces.
5. Discussion
In this section, we discuss some of the choices we made
when designing NAS-Bench-101.
5.1. Relationship to hyperparameter optimization
All models in NAS-Bench-101 were trained with a ﬁxed
set of hyperparameters. In this section, we justify that
choice. The problem of hyperparameter optimization (HPO)
is closely intertwined with NAS. NAS aims to discover goodneural network architectures while HPO involves ﬁnding
the best set of training hyperparameters for a given archi-
tecture. HPO operates by tuning various numerical neural
network training parameters ( e.g., learning rate) as well as
categorical choices ( e.g., optimizer type) to optimize the
training process. Formally, given an architecture A, the task
of HPO is to ﬁnd its optimal hyperparameter conﬁguration
H:
H(A) = arg max
Hf(A;H );
wherefis a performance metric, such as validation accu-
racy and the arg max is over all possible hyperparameter
conﬁgurations. The “pure” NAS problem can be formu-
lated as ﬁnding an architecture Awhen all architectures
are evaluated under optimal hyperparameter choices:
A= arg max
Af(A;H(A));
In practice, this would involve running an inner HPO search
for each architecture, which is computationally intractable.
We therefore approximate AwithAy:
AAy= arg max
Af(A;Hy);
whereHyis a set of hyperparameters that has been es-
timated by maximizing the average accuracy on a small
subsetSof the architectures:
Hy(S) = arg max
Hff(A;H ) :A2Sg:
For example, in Section 2.4, Swas a random sample of 50
architectures.
To justify the approximation above, we performed a study
on a different set of NAS-HPO-Bench (Klein & Hutter,
2019) datasets (described in detail in Supplement S5) These
are smaller datasets of architecture–hyperparameter pairs