NAS-Bench-101
discuss an alternative encoding.
However, a large number of models in this space are invalid
(i.e., there is no path from the input vertex, or the number of
total edges exceeds 9). Furthermore, different graphs in this
encoding may not be computationally unique. The method
which we used to identify and enumerate unique graphs is
described in Supplement S1. After de-duplication, there are
approximately 423k unique graphs in the search space.
2.3. Combine semantics
Translating from the graph to the corresponding neural net-
work is straightforward, with one exception. When multiple
edges point to the same vertex, the incoming tensors must
be combined. Adding them or concatenating them are both
standard techniques. To support both ResNet and Inception-
like cells and to keep the space tractable, we adopted the
following ﬁxed rule: tensors going to the output vertex
are concatenated and those going into other vertices are
summed. The output tensors from the input vertex are pro-
jected in order to match the expected input channel counts
of the subsequent operations. This is illustrated in Figure 1,
bottom-right.
2.4. Training
The training procedure forms an important part of an ar-
chitecture search benchmark, since different training proce-
dures can lead to very substantial performance differences.
To counter this issue and allow comparisons of NAS algo-
rithms on equal grounds, we designed and open-sourced a
single general training pipeline for all models in the dataset.
Choice of hyperparameters. We utilize a single, ﬁxed set
of hyperparameters for all NAS-Bench-101 models. This set
of hyperparameters was chosen to be robust across different
architectures by performing a coarse grid search optimiz-
ing the average accuracy of a set of 50 randomly-sampled
architectures from the space. This is similar to standard
practice in the literature (Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018a;
Real et al., 2018) and is further justiﬁed by our experimental
analysis in Section 5.1.
Implementation details. All models are trained and evalu-
ated on CIFAR-10 (40k training examples, 10k validation
examples, 10k testing examples), using standard data aug-
mentation techniques (He et al., 2016). The learning rate
is annealed via cosine decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017)
to 0 in order to reduce the variance between multiple inde-
pendent training runs. Training is performed via RMSProp
(Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) on the cross-entropy loss with
L2 weight decay. All models were trained on the TPU v2 ac-
celerator. The code, implemented in TensorFlow, along with
all chosen hyperparameters, is publicly available at https:
//github.com/google-research/nasbench .3 repeats and 4 epoch budgets. We repeat the train-
ing and evaluation of all architectures 3 times to ob-
tain a measure of variance. Also, in order to allow the
evaluation of multi-ﬁdelity optimization methods, e.g.,
Hyperband (Li et al., 2018)), we trained all our archi-
tectures with four increasing epoch budgets: Estop2
fEmax=33;Emax=32;Emax=3;Emaxg=f4;12;36;108g
epochs. In each case, the learning rate is annealed to 0 by
epochEstop.2We thus trained 3423k1:27Mmodels
for each value of Estop, and thus 41:27M5Mmodels
overall.
2.5. Metrics
We evaluated each architecture Aafter training three times
with different random initializations, and did this for each
of the 4budgetsEstopabove. As a result, the dataset is
a mapping from the (A;E stop;trial #)to the following
quantities:
training accuracy;
validation accuracy;
testing accuracy;
training time in seconds; and
number of trainable model parameters.
Only metrics on the training and validation set should be
used to search models within a single NAS algorithm, and
testing accuracy should only be used for an ofﬂine evalu-
ation. The training time metric allows benchmarking al-
gorithms that optimize for accuracy while operating under
a time limit (Section 4) and also allows the evaluation of
multi-objective optimization methods. Other metrics that do
not require retraining can be computed using the released
code.
2.6. Benchmarking methods
One of the central purposes of the dataset is to facilitate
benchmarking of NAS algorithms. This section establishes
recommended best practices for using NAS-Bench-101
which we followed in our subsequent analysis; we also
refer to Supplement S6 for a full set of best practices in
benchmarking with NAS-Bench-101.
The goal of NAS algorithms is to ﬁnd architectures that
have high testing accuracy at epoch Emax. To do this, we
repeatedly query the dataset at (A;E stop)pairs, where Ais
an architecture in the search space and Estopis an allowed
number of epochs ( Estop2f4;12;36;108g). Each query
does a look-up using a random trial index, drawn uniformly
2Instead of 4 epoch budgets, we could have trained single
long runs and used the performance at intermediate checkpoints
as benchmarking data for early stopping algorithms. However,
because of the learning rate schedule, such checkpoints would have
occurred when the learning rates are still high, leading to noisy
accuracies that do not correlate well with the ﬁnal performance.