practical tool allowing users to control the stylistic degree
of the glyph is of great value. Further, as users are prone
to trying various settings before obtaining desired effects,
real-time response to online adjustment is important.
In the literature, some efforts have been devoted to ad-
dressing fast scale-controllable style transfer . They trained
fast feed-forward networks, with the main focus on the scale
of textures like the texture strength [ 2], or the size of tex-
ture patterns [ 17]. Up to our best knowledge, there has been
no work discussing the real-time control of glyph defor-
mations , which is rather crucial for text style transfer.
In view of the above, we are motivated to investigate a
new problem of fast controllable artistic text style transfer
from a single style image. We aim at the real-time adjust-
ment for the stylistic degree of the glyph in terms of shape
deformations. It can allow users to navigate around dif-
ferent forms of the rendered text and select the most de-
sired one, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b)(c). The challenges of
fast controllable artistic text style transfer lie in two as-
pects. On one hand , in contrast to well-deﬁned scales such
as the texture strength that can be straightforwardly mod-
elled by hyper-parameters, the glyph deformation degree
is subjective, neither clearly deﬁned nor easy to parame-
terize. On the other hand , there does not exist a large-scale
paired training set with both source text images and the cor-
responding results stylized (deformed) in different degrees.
Usually, only one reference image is available for a certain
style. It is thus also not straightforward to train data-driven
models to learn multi-scale glyph stylization.
In this work, we propose a novel Shape-Matching GAN
to address these challenges. Our key idea is a bidirectional
shape matching strategy to establish the shape mapping be-
tween source styles and target glyphs through both back-
ward and forward transfers. We ﬁrst show that the glyph
deformation can be modelled as a coarse-to-ﬁne shape map-
ping of the style image, where the deformation degree is
controlled by the coarse level. Based on this idea, we de-
velop a sketch module that simpliﬁes the style image to var-
ious coarse levels by backward transferring the shape fea-
tures from the text to the style image. Resulting coarse-
ﬁne image pairs provide a robust multi-scale shape map-
ping for data-driven learning. With this obtained data, we
build a scale-controllable module, Controllable ResBlock ,
that empowers the network to learn to characterize and infer
the style features on a continuous scale from the mapping.
Eventually, we can forward transfer the features of any
speciﬁed scale to target glyphs to achieve scale-controllable
style transfer. In summary, our contributions are threefold:
•We investigate the new problem of fast controllable
artistic text style transfer, in terms of glyph deforma-
tions, and propose a novel bidirectional shape match-
ing framework to solve it.
•We develop a sketch module to match the shape fromthe style to the glyph, which transforms a single style
image to paired training data at various scales and thus
enables learning robust glyph-style mappings.
•We present Shape-Matching GAN to transfer text
styles, with a scale-controllable module designed to al-
low for adjusting the stylistic degree of the glyph with
a continuous parameter as user input and generating
diversiﬁed artistic text in real-time.
2. Related Work
Image style transfer . Leveraging the powerful repre-
sentation ability of neural networks, Gatys et al. pioneered
on the Neural Style Transfer [ 10], where the style was effec-
tively formulated as the Gram matrix [ 9] of deep features.
Johnson et al. trained a feed-forward StyleNet [ 18] using
the loss of Neural Style Transfer [ 10] for fast style trans-
fer [26,15,22,21,6]. In parallel, Li et al. [19,20] repre-
sented styles by neural patches, which can better preserve
structures for photo-realistic styles. Meanwhile, other re-
searchers regard style transfer as an image-to-image transla-
tion problem [ 16,31], and exploited Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [ 12] to transfer specialized styles such as
cartoons [ 7], paintings [ 25] and makeups [ 8,5]. Compared
to Gram-based and patch-based methods, GAN learns the
style representation directly from the data, which can po-
tentially yield more artistically rich results.
Artistic text style transfer . The problem of artistic text
style transfer was ﬁrst raised by Yang et al. [28]. The au-
thors represented the text style using image patches, which
suffered from a heavy computational burden due to the
patch matching procedure. Driven by the progress of neural
network, Azadi et al. [1] trained an MC-GAN for fast text
style transfer, which, however, can only render 26capital
letters. Yang et al. [29] recently collected a large dataset
of text effects to train the network to transfer text effects
for any glyph. Unlike the aforementioned methods that
assume the input style to be well-designed text effects, a
patch-based model UT-Effect [ 30] stylized the text with ar-
bitrary textures and achieved glyph deformations by shape
synthesis [ 24], which shows promise for more application
scenarios. Compared to UT-Effect [ 30], our GAN-based
method further enables the continuous adjustment of glyph
deformations via a controllable parameter in real-time.
Multi-scale style control . To the best of our knowledge,
the research on the multi-scale style control currently fo-
cuses on two kinds of scales: the strength and the stoke
size of the texture. The texture strength determines the
texture similarity between the result and the style image
(Fig. 2(c)). It is mainly controlled by a hyper-parameter
to balance the content loss and style loss [ 10]. As a result,
one has to re-train the model for different texture strengths.
Babaeizadeh et al. [2] performed efﬁcient adjustment of
4443