baseline w/o CR full model w/o TN(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9: Analysis for the network conﬁgurations in controllable
artistic text style transfer. For the ﬁrst column, from top to bot-
tom: target text, style image, the enlarged patches from the results
without and with the texture network, respectively. Remaining
columns: (a)-(c) Results with ℓ= 0.0,0.5,1.0, respectively.
(a) style image (b) target text (c) w/o TB (d) full model
Figure 10: Effect of the proposed sketch module. The red box area
is enlarged and the contrast is enhanced in the top right corner for
better visual comparison.
formation Block (TB) in GBwith a simple sigmoid layer.
The resulting na ¨ıve sketch module is still able to simplify
the shape, but cannot match it with the glyph. Without
robust mappings, the shape of the stylized text is not cor-
rectly adjusted and is as rigid as the input text as shown in
Fig.10(c). By contrast, our full model successfully synthe-
sizes a rounded h-shaped balloon in Fig. 10(d).
Loss function . We study the effect of the glyph legibil-
ity loss (Eq. ( 7)) in Fig. 11. When transferring a trickle of
wafting smoke onto a rigid Chinese character with a high
deformation degree ℓ= 0.75, the strokes of this character
demonstrate irregular shapes, uneven thickness, and even
fractures in Fig. 11(c). Although very similar to the style,
the character is unrecognizable. As shown in Fig. 11(d), by
settingλgly
S= 1, our glyph legibility loss effectively pre-
serves the trunk of the strokes, while allowing a high free-
dom to deform the contours of the strokes, thus achieving a
balance between legibility and artistry.
5.4. Applications
In addition to the poster and dynamic typography design
shown in Fig. 1(d)-(f), we further present two other appli-
cations of our method as follows.
Structure/texture mash-up . The disentanglement of
structures and textures enables us to combine different
styles to create some brand-new text styles. Some exam-
(a) style image (b) target text (c) w/o Lgly(d) full modelSFigure 11: Effect of the glyph legibility loss Lgly
S.
(a) diverse structure/texture mixture
(b) stroke-based art design 
Figure 12: Applications of our method.
ples are shown in Fig. 12(a), where we apply the textures of
maple ,water andsmoke to the text with the shape charac-
teristics of maple , respectively.
Stroke-based art design . Since no step specially tai-
lored for the text is used, our method can be easily extended
to style transfer on more general shapes such as symbols
and icons. In Fig. 12(b), we show an example for synthesiz-
ing wings made of maple leaves from a user-provided icon.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we present a fast artistic text style transfer
deep network that allows for ﬂexible, continuous control of
the stylistic degree of the glyph. We formulate the task of
glyph deformation as a coarse-to-ﬁne mapping problem and
propose a bidirectional shape matching framework. A novel
sketch module is proposed to reduce the structural discrep-
ancy between the glyph and style to provide robust map-
pings. Exploiting the proposed Controllable ResBlock, our
network is able to effectively learn the many-to-one shape
mapping for multi-scale style transfer. We validate the ef-
fectiveness and robustness of our method by comparisons
with state-of-the-art style transfer algorithms.
Acknowledgement. This work was supported in part by Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
No. 61772043, and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under contract No. L182002 and No. 4192025. This work was
supported by China Scholarship Council. We thank the Unsplash
users (Aaron Burden, Andre Benz, Brandon Morgan, Brooke Ca-
gle, Florian Klauer, Grant Mccurdy and Stephen Hocking) who
put their photos under the Unsplash license for public use.
4449