(b) stylistic degree of glyph (c) strength (d) stroke size
 (a) input
Figure 2: Comparing different scale effects in text style trans-
fer. (a) shows the reference style and target text. In remaining
columns, each shows the results with increasing (b) glyph defor-
mation degree; (c) texture strength; and (d) stroke size. Results in
(b) are generated by our proposed method, while (c) and (d) are
generated by Neural Style Transfer [ 10].
the texture strength, with an auxiliary network to input ad-
ditional parameters to modulate the style transfer process.
Meanwhile, the stroke size depicts the scale of texture pat-
terns (Fig. 2(d)), e.g., size or spatial frequency. Jing et
al.[17] proposed a stroke-controllable neural style trans-
fer network (SC-NST) with adaptive receptive ﬁelds for
stroke size control. Our work explores the glyph deforma-
tion degree (Fig. 2(b)), a different and important dimension
of “scale” that is unexplored in prior work.
3. Problem Overview
We start by giving operative requirements for our new
task. Considering the maple style for instance, it will look
weird to have artistic text with the texture of leaves, but
without the leave-like shapes (see an example in Fig. 9),
demonstrating the need of shape deformation and matching
in addition to merely transferring texture patterns. Mean-
while, the optimal scale to balance the legibility and artistry
can vary a lot for different styles and text contents, not
to mention the subjective variation among people. Taking
Fig.2(b) for example, one may see that the glyph with more
complex strokes is more vulnerable to large glyph deforma-
tion [ 27]. Therefore, users will enjoy the freedom to navi-
gate through the possible scale space of glyph deformations,
without the hassle of re-training one model per scale. Con-
cretely, a controllable artistic text style transfer shall ensure:
•Artistry : The stylized text should mimic the shape
characteristics of the style reference, at any scale.
•Controllability : The glyph deformation degree needs
be adjusted in a quick and continuous way.
The two requirements distinguish our problem from those
studied by previous multi-scale style transfer methods,
which are either unable to adjust the shape at all [ 2,17]
(e.g., Fig. 2(c)(d)) or fail to do so efﬁciently [ 30].
(a)
(b)(c)(a)
(b)(c)
(a) (b) (c)Structure map X Slightly simplified X
Heavily simplified X Mildly simplified XFigure 3: Illustration of bidirectional shape matching. Left two
columns: a leaf-shaped structure map and its three backward sim-
pliﬁed versions. Right columns: forward shape mappings under
(a) slight, (b) moderate, and (c) heavy deformations.
Our solution to this problem is a novel bidirectional
shape matching strategy. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the tar-
get structure map is ﬁrst (backward ) simpliﬁed to differ-
ent coarse levels, and then its stylish shape features can
be characterized by the (forward ) multi-level coarse-to-ﬁne
shape mappings, to realize multi-scale transfer. As shown
in Fig. 3(a)-(c), similar horizontal strokes at different levels
are mapped to different shapes, and the coarser the level,
the greater the deformation between the mapped shapes.
Artistry is met since the targets in these mappings are ex-
actly the reference ﬁne-level stylish shapes while Control-
lability can be achieved via training a feed-forward network.
To sum up, we formulate the new task of scale-
controllable artistic text style transfer as learning the func-
tion to map the style image from different coarse levels back
to itself in a fast feed-forward way . Still, two technical road-
blocks remain to be cleared. First, how to simplify the shape
to make the obtained mapping applicable to the text images.
Second, how to learn the many-to-one (multiple coarse lev-
els to a ﬁne level) mapping without model collapse. Sec. 4
will detail how we address these challenges with our net-
work design.
4. Shape-Matching GAN
Assume that YandIdenote the style image and text im-
age provided by users, respectively. We study the problem
of designing a feed-forward stylization model Gto render
artistic text under different deformation degrees controlled
by a parameter ℓ∈[0,1], where larger ℓcorresponds to
greater deformations. We further decompose the style trans-
fer process into two successive stages: structure transfer and
texture transfer, which are modelled by generators GSand
GT, separately. The advantage of such decomposition is
that we can disentangle the inﬂuence of textures and ﬁrst
focus on the key shape deformation problem. We denote
G=GT◦GS, and formulate the stylization process as:
IY
ℓ=GT(GS(I,ℓ)), IY
ℓ∼p(IY
ℓ|I,Y,ℓ), (1)
where the target statistic p(IY
ℓ)of the stylized image IY
ℓis
characterized by the text image I, the style image Yand the
4444