(a)
(b)
(c)
Input Artistic text style transfer results under the control of continuously changing paramet ers
Figure 8: Qualitative comparison between the proposed method and other scale-controllable style transfer methods. For the ﬁrst column,
from top to bottom: target text, style image, the enlarged patches from the style image and their corresponding structure maps. Remaining
columns: Results by (a) stroke-controllable neural style transfer (SC-NST) [ 17] with stroke size evenly increasing from 256to768; (b)
UT-Effect [ 30] with resolution level evenly increasing from 1to7; (c) the proposed method with ℓevenly increasing from 0to1. All
results are produced by one single model for each method. For UT-Effect [ 30] and our method, the red box region is shown enlarged in the
bottom with the corresponding structure map provided for better visual comparison.
NST [ 17] does not synthesize the textures in the correct re-
gion due to its unsupervised setting. Regardless of this fac-
tor, it can adjust the texture size, but is ineffective in control-
ling the glyph deformation. UT-Effect [ 30] matches bound-
ary patches at multiple resolutions for structure transfer,
which has several drawbacks: First, as shown in Fig. 8(b),
the greedy-based patch matching fails to global consistently
stylize the glyph. Second, the patch blending procedure
inevitably eliminates many shape details. Third, the con-
tinuous transformation is not supported. On the contrary,
the proposed method achieves continuous transformation
with ﬁne details, showing a smooth growing process of the
leaves as they turn more luxuriant. In terms of efﬁciency, for
256×256images in Fig. 8, the released MATLAB-based
UT-Effect [ 30] requires about 100 s per image with Intel
Core i7-6500U CPU (no GPU version available). In com-
parison, our feed-forward method only takes about 0.43 s
per image with Intel Xeon E5-2650 CPU and 16 ms per
image with a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU, which implies a
potential of nearly real-time user interaction.
5.3. Ablation Study
Network architecture . To analyze each component in
our model, we design the following experiments with dif-
ferent conﬁgurations:
•Baseline: Our baseline model contains only a texture
network trained to directly map the structure map X
back to the style image Y.
•W/o CR: This model contains a na ¨ıve glyph networkand a texture network. The na ¨ıve glyph network is con-
trolled by ℓvia the commonly used label concatenation
instead of using the Controllable ResRlock (CR).
•W/o TN: This model contains a single glyph network
without the Texture Network (TN), and is trained to
directly map the sketchy structure map ˜XℓtoY.
•Full model: The proposed model with both the glyph
network and the texture network.
Fig.9displays the stylization results of these models. With-
out structure transfer, the contours of the stylized text by
baseline model are rigid, showing poor shape consistency
with the reference style. The na ¨ıve glyph network could
create leaf-like shapes, but fails to learn the challenging
many-to-one mapping. It simply ignores the conditional
ℓ, and generates very similar results. This problem is well
solved by the proposed Controllable ResBlock. As shown
in the fourth column of Fig. 9, our glyph network can even
learn the multi-scale structure transfer and texture transfer
simultaneously, although the rendered texture is ﬂat and has
checkerboard artifacts. By handing the texture transfer task
over to a separate texture network, our full model can syn-
thesize high-quality artistic text, with both shape and texture
consistency w.r.t. the reference style.
Sketch module . In Fig. 10, we examine the effect of
the sketch module GBthrough a comparative experiment.
As introduced in Sec. 4.1, our sketch module aims to trans-
fer the shape characteristics of the text to the style image
to provide a robust mapping between the source and tar-
get domains. To make a comparison, we replace the Trans-
4448