LTadvLT
matting
Stage I: Input Preprocessing (Backward Structure Transfer)
Stage II: Forward Style (Structure and Texture) Transfer 
Sketch
Module
GBℓ
Input  Y
cropping{
x yStructure  X}
Glyph
GSTexture
GT
Glyph
GSTexture
GTDS DT
LSStage II
Train and test on text images  Train on input style
Loss functionℓ
xℓ~
Sketchy structure Xℓ~
ℓ
ℓ
glyLSrecLSadv
rec
LTstyleFigure 4: Overview of our bidirectional shape matching framework.
controllable parameter ℓ.
As outlined in Sec. 3, our solution to structure transfer
is bidirectional shape matching. Assume the structure map
Xto mask the shape of the style subject in Yis given,
which can be easily obtained by image editing tools such
as Photoshop or existing image matting algorithms. In the
stage of backward structure transfer, we preprocess Xto ob-
tain training pairs {˜Xℓ,X}forGS, where˜Xℓis a sketchy
(coarse) version of Xwith the shape characteristics of the
text, andℓcontrols the coarse level. In the stage of forward
structure transfer, GSlearns from {˜Xℓ,X}to stylize the
glyph with various deformation degrees. Fig. 4summarizes
the overall framework built upon two main components:
•Glyph Network GS: It learns to map ˜Xℓwith defor-
mation degree ℓtoXduring training. In testing, it
transfers the shape style of Xonto the target text im-
ageI, producing the structure transfer result IX
ℓ.
•Texture Network GT: It renders the texture in the
style image YonIX
ℓto yield the ﬁnal artistic text IY
ℓ.
The generators are accompanied with corresponding dis-
criminators DSandDTto improve the quality of the results
through adversarial learning. In the following, we present
the details of our bidirectional shape matching and the pro-
posed controllable module that enables GSto learn multi-
scale glyph deformations in Sec. 4.1. The texture transfer
networkGTis then introduced in Sec. 4.2.
4.1. Bidirectional Structure Transfer ( GS)
Backward structure transfer. To transfer the glyph
characteristics to Xat different coarse levels, we propose a
sketch module GBcomposed of a smoothness block and a
transformation block, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Inspired by the
Source domain Target domain DBTestTrain
Sketch Module GBSmooth domain 
Smoothness block
ℓ
ℓTransformation 
block
(a) Overview of our sketch module
Y X sigmoid (Xℓ ) t Xℓ~ -
(b) Effect of the transformation blockFigure 5: Backward structure transfer by sketch module GB
Gaussian scale-space representation [ 3,23] for simplifying
images at different scales, our smoothness block is set as a
ﬁxed convolutional layer with Gaussian kernel, whose stan-
dard deviation σ=f(ℓ)is controlled by ℓand a linear func-
tionf(·). Our key idea is to bridge the source style domain
and the target text domain using the smoothness block that
maps the text image and Xinto a smooth domain, where the
details are eliminated and the contours demonstrate similar
smoothness. Structure transfer is then achieved by training
the transformation block to map the smoothed text images
back to the text domain to learn the glyph characteristics.
The advantages of our sketch module are twofold: 1) the
coarse level (and thus the deformation degree) can be natu-
rally parameterized by σ; and 2) the training process of GB
only requires easily accessible text images. Once trained, it
can be applied to arbitrary input styles.
4445