RADAIDEH ET AL ., 2021
generation using 1, 8, 16, and 32 processors. First we can notice a large decrease in computational time when increasing
the number of processors for all four algorithms. Second, we can notice that HHO is signiﬁcantly slower than other
algorithms, even compared to its closest EA fellow, GWO. The algorithm steps of GWO can be completely parallelized
due to the nature of the algorithm. However, HHO algorithm has some serial steps, in particular, when executing soft
and hard besieges, which require dependency between the population individuals. This makes HHO multiprocessing
slower than GWO. Third, we can see that PESA is slower than PPO and GWO when using single processor, while its
superior performance is clearly observed after activating its two-levels of parallelism. Overall, in Figure 2, moving
from 1 processor to 32, the speedup factor of HHO is only 3, GWO is 30, PPO is also 30, and PESA is 46.
Figure 2: Comparison of multiprocessing performance of different NEORL algorithms
3.5 Restart Capabilities
NEORL provides restart capabilities for the user to restart the search from a recent checkpoint. This feature is useful for
long optimization runs, when the search could terminate due to technical issues or power outage. For the RL neural
optimizers, the neural network model can be saved periodically using the ﬂag save_model in the RLLogger , see line
5 of Listing 5. Similarly, for the evolutionary or neuroevolution optimizers, the user can use the argument x0(see line
4 or line 8 of Listing 4), to specify the initial population. The user can recover a population using the best individuals of
the previous generations, and use that population to continue the search.
3.6 Hyperparameter Tuning
In certain cases when the problem is high-dimensional and the ﬁtness function is very expensive and complex, the
performance of the algorithms may become sensitive to their hyperparameters (e.g. nwolves ,chi,chain_size ,
n_steps ). To keep the user isolated from the tedious burden of manual and trial-and-error tuning, NEORL provides four
systematic and automatic methods to assess the optimizer performance under different combination of hyperparameters
for a certain problem/ﬁtness setup. The top hyperparameter sets are reported by these methods for the user to use for
further analysis. The tuning methods are: exhaustive grid search, random search, Bayesian search, and evolutionary
search. In addition, most of these methods support parallel search to signiﬁcantly accelerate the tuning process. We
refer the user to this link3, which contains a Python example of how to use NEORL grid search, and other methods can
be accessed from the same webpage.
We compare the hyperparameter search algorithms in tuning ES/GA to minimize a 20-dimension sphere function of
Eq.(10). We target three hyperparameters of ES: cxpb ,mutpb , and alpha , which are respectively the crossover
probability, mutation probability, and probability of blending during crossover (i.e. all hyperparameters have a range
of 0 to 1). All four methods have been executed to evaluate 100 combinations of the previous hyperparameters, and
the minimum ﬁtness of every 10 combinations is plotted in Figure 3 for consistency across methods. All methods
seem to perform in a comparable manner given the converged ﬁtness is close between the four methods. Bayesian
and evolutionary methods seem to show quicker convergence than grid and random searches due to their systematic
3Grid Search: https://neorl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tune/grid.html
12