RADAIDEH ET AL ., 2021
to enhance exploration and greedy replay to improve algorithm exploitation. The replay memory stores all individuals
in a shared memory across the hybrid algorithms, and replays them with different rates based on their ﬁtness value,
such that exploration and exploitation can be balanced during search. Two variants of PESA are currently available in
NEORL. Classical PESA, which combines GA, PSO, and SA, and it proved to be effective in discrete optimization.
Modern PESA2, which hybridizes GWO, DE, and WOA, proved to be effective in continuous optimization. PESA and
PESA2 are candidates to solve expensive problems when computing power is available, as both PESA variants are fully
parallelized with parallel efﬁciency >85% when tested on 200 processors.
For expensive optimization with limited computing power, NEORL offers hybrid neuroevolution algorithms, where
neural networks act as surrogate models to assist EA search. Currently, we provide an implementation of the recent
ofﬂine data-driven evolutionary optimization concept [ 58], where only small number of ﬁtness evaluations are needed
to build a surrogate model, such that the surrogate can replace the original ﬁtness function in EA optimization. The
original implementation involves using surrogate models of radial basis function networks to assist GA. The authors
extend this methodology to more modern algorithms, where we use deep feedforward neural networks as surrogate
models through TensorFlow to assist HHO described in section 2.1, where all discrete, continuous, and mixed-discrete
spaces are handled. In addition, compared to [ 58], the neuroevolution Harris hawks optimizer offers parallel training of
the surrogate models as well as parallel evaluation of the initial hawks used to construct the surrogate models. These
surrogate-based neuroevolution algorithms are useful for large-scale optimization problems with limited computing
power. Lastly, Table 1 shows a summary of all hybrid neuroevolution algorithms in NEORL and their supported spaces.
2.4 Multiobjective Optimization and Constrained Handling
Without loss of generality, multiobjective optimization can be formulated as follows:
min
~ xF(~ x) = (f1(~ x);f2(~ x);:::;fk(~ x))
subject to;
gi(~ x)0; i= 1;2;:::;m;
hj(~ x) = 0; j = 1;2;:::;p;
k2;(9)
wherekis the number of objective functions. The set of solutions ~ xthat satisﬁes all constraints deﬁnes the feasible
region 
, i.e.~ x2
.
Solving multiobjective optimization can be done either through solving the problem directly by trying to optimize
each objective through using posteriori methods, or through using priori methods, which what we currently support in
NEROL. Priori methods involve the users by specifying their preferences beforehand to formulate a single-objective
optimization problem, such that optimal solutions to the single-objective problem are feasible solutions to the multi-
objective problem. Linear scalarization, -constrained, achievement scalarizing function, and Sen’s Multi-Objective
Programming are among the common priori methods [59].
The usage of priori methods is advantageous for NEORL, since the formulation of the ﬁtness function will be consistent
across EA, neural networks, and neuroevolution. RL algorithms are expected reward (ﬁtness) as a scalar value.
Adding special algorithms to NEORL for multiobjective optimization such as non dominated sorting genetic algorithm
(NSGA-II) is left for future releases. Currently, to preserve a generic implementation, the user can use variety of priori
methods to convert multiobjective to single objective problem. Indeed, NEORL demonstrated successful results with
complex multiobjective optimization problems, which are illustrated here [34, 55, 44], where -constrained and linear
scalarization in conjunction with different neural, evolutionary, and neuroevolution algorithms have been effective in
solving the multiobjective optimization.
For constraint handling, we give the user the freedom to handle the constraints internally within the ﬁtness function,
before returning the ﬁtness value to the optimizer. This ﬂexibility gives the user a chance to explore different constraint
handling methods on the same problem such as applying hard penalty, self-adaptive penalty, or -constrained [60].
3 NEORL Structure
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the main steps to do to setup and solve an optimization problem via NEORL.
8