RADAIDEH ET AL ., 2021
from neural networks, evolutionary computation, and neuroevolution in a cohesive environment is the core contribution
of this work. Furthermore, some of these algorithms are actually proposed and developed by the authors.
Featuring +25 algorithms from different categories in NEORL is vital to accommodate the “No Free Lunch Theorems
for Optimization” [ 78], which state that “for any optimization algorithm, any elevated performance over one class of
problems is offset by performance over another class”, which would imply that any optimization algorithm performance
averaged over all possible problems will be close to random search. Therefore, providing the ability to deploy variety of
algorithms with different natures from neural, evolutionary, and neuroevolution categories on the same problem, can
provide the analyst of more comprehensive results than relying on a single algorithm.
In conclusion, solving optimization problems is at the heart of many disciplines to ﬁnd the most optimal solutions
to their problems, which require advanced algorithms and friendly framework implementation. In this work, we
proposed and benchmarked NEORL, which is a framework for NeuroEvolution Optimization with Reinforcement
Learning. NEORL was developed with a main purpose to resolve the issues facing other Python optimization
frameworks by providing an interface of state-of-the-art algorithms in the ﬁeld of evolutionary computation, neural
networks, reinforcement learning, and hybrid neuroevolution algorithms. The novelty of NEORL originates from the
diversity of the implemented algorithms, advanced implementation, user-friendly interface, parallel computing support,
hyperparameter tuning, detailed documentation, and demonstration of applications in mathematical and real-world
engineering optimization. NEORL was benchmarked against many algorithms from the literature and against other
popular optimization frameworks (nlopt, EvoloPy, DEAP, PyOpt); showing an excellent and competitive performance.
Future steps of NEORL will focus on two major paths. First, we will add special algorithms and capabilities for direct
multi-objective optimization if the user prefers to avoid using priori conversion methods. Second, more advanced
applications will be pursued by the authors, in which NEORL is utilized directly to solve large-scale design problems
with more problem-dependent physics guidance, which can be obtained in form of sensitivity coefﬁcients [ 79,80]
or data-driven physical closures [ 81]. Given its open-source nature, the authors also welcome contributions from
researchers around the world who are willing to enrich NEORL family with new algorithms and/or applications.
6 Data Availability
NEORL framework is open-source, and it can be accessed from: https://github.com/mradaideh/neorl. The documentation
and tutorials are available here: https://neorl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html.
All scripts used in this paper can be found under the examples directory within NEORL:
https://github.com/mradaideh/neorl/tree/master/examples/journal_tests.
Acknowledgment
This work is sponsored by Exelon Corporation, a nuclear electric power generation company, under the award
(40008739). The authors would like to thank Benoit Forget of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Isaac
Wolverton and Joshua Joseph of MIT Quest for Intelligence, and James J. Tusar and Ugi Otgonbaatar of Exelon
corporation, for their feedback and discussions in the early phase of the project.
Credit Author Statement
Majdi I. Radaideh : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Visualisation,
Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft.
Katelin Du : Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft.
Paul Seurin : Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft.
Devin Seyler : Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft.
Xubo Gu : Methodology, Software, Writing – Review and Edit.
Haijia Wang : Methodology, Software, Writing – Review and Edit.
Koroush Shirvan : Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Resources, Writing – Review and Edit.
References
[1]R. H. Stewart, T. S. Palmer, B. DuPont, A survey of multi-objective optimization methods and their applications for nuclear
scientists and engineers, Progress in Nuclear Energy (2021) 103830.
20