RADAIDEH ET AL ., 2021
have limited scope in tackling the optimization problem directly, supervised networks excelled as surrogate models to
assist EA in tackling expensive ﬁtness functions [ 47]. A class of hybrid neuroevolution algorithms involves using EA
to optimize the problem, while neural networks are trained based on evolutionary-generated data to approximate the
original ﬁtness function [ 48]. For example, feedforward [ 49] and Bayesian [ 50] neural network surrogates were used to
assist EA in optimizing expensive functions. To our knowledge, currently, there is also no framework providing generic
implementation of neuroevolution for optimization purposes either as an optimizer or as a hybrid surrogate algorithm.
Lastly, gradient-based or deterministic optimization algorithms exist in the literature and have been used for decades.
This optimization category offers fast search and convergence, but suffers from major issues such as local optima
entrapment, requirement of derivation (i.e. closed-form ﬁtness function is needed), and computational limitations
to calculate the derivatives of high-dimensional problems. Indeed, these limitations encourage the development
of the prescribed three optimization categories (neural, evolutionary, neuroevolution). Fortunately, gradient-based
algorithms are well-implemented and tested. For example, nlopt [ 51], PyOpt [ 52], and scipy.optimize [ 53] are just
few examples of robust Python implementation of popular algorithms such as BFGS, Newton-Conjugate-Gradient,
Sequential Least Squares Programming (SLSQP), Method of Moving Asymptotes, Preconditioned truncated Newton,
and a variety of trust-region-based methods. Given that gradient-based algorithms are mature enough with solid
literature implementation, this category is not discussed further here.
In this work, we propose NEORL (NeuroEvolution Optimization with Reinforcement Learning) as a new open-source
Python framework that brings the latest developments of machine learning and evolutionary computation to serve
the optimization research community, including energy and engineering applications. The novelty and uniqueness of
NEORL compared to other optimization frameworks can be summarised as follows:
•NEORL offer a diverse set of +25 algorithms that belong to evolutionary computation, neural networks, and
neuroevolution categories. The diversity of the implemented algorithms allow the user to test different types of
algorithms on the same problem; obtaining a more comprehensive understanding and better results.
•NEORL includes efﬁcient implementation of previously proposed algorithms. It also includes new algorithms
proposed and developed by the authors themselves such as RL-informed evolutionary algorithms, EA with
prioritized experience replay, and neural Harris hawks optimizer.
•NEORL supports discrete, categorical, and continuous search spaces as well as mixed discrete-categorical-
continuous optimization. We demonstrate how to use NEORL to solve the combinatorial travelling salesman
problem, mixed-integer optimization, and pure continuous engineering optimization.
•NEORL supports parallel computing. Vast majority of NEORL algorithms offer parallel optimization to
accelerate the optimization of expensive ﬁtness functions, which can be simply activated by a ﬂag. This
highlights a major advantage of NEORL over other frameworks for large-scale expensive problems.
•NEORL supports internal hyperparameter tuning. NEORL offers automatic search to tune the optimizer
hyperparameters to maximize its performance. Some algorithms, especially neural-based, have multiple
hyperparameters to tune. The user can choose between grid search, random search, evolutionary search, or
Bayesian search for that purpose.
•NEORL is fully documented with a variety of unit tests, benchmarks, and engineering examples, which enable
a friendly user experience.
For the remaining sections of this work, the optimization methodology of major NEORL algorithms are described in
section 2. In section 3, NEORL structure is presented, which includes a step-by-step procedure to construct a complete
NEORL problem, and a comparison with existing frameworks. Section 4 presents NEORL application to variety of
energy optimization problems that belong to nuclear power and fuel cell energy production. The reader can also ﬁnd
additional applications of NEORL in the webpage2. Discussions and conclusions of this work are highlighted in section
5.
2https://neorl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
3