Meta-Learning with Adaptive Hyperparameters
Sungyong Baik Myungsub Choi Janghoon Choi Heewon Kim Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University
{dsybaik, cms6539, ultio791, ghimhw, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
The ability to quickly learn and generalize from only few examples is an essential
goal of few-shot learning. Meta-learning algorithms effectively tackle the problem
by learning how to learn novel tasks. In particular, model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) encodes the prior knowledge into a trainable initialization, which allowed
for fast adaptation to few examples. Despite its popularity, several recent works
question the effectiveness of MAML initialization especially when test tasks are
different from training tasks, thus suggesting various methodologies to improve
the initialization. Instead of searching for a better initialization, we focus on a
complementary factor in MAML framework, the inner-loop optimization (or fast
adaptation). Consequently, we propose a new weight update rule that greatly
enhances the fast adaptation process. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a small meta-
network that can adaptively generate per-step hyperparameters: learning rate and
weight decay coefﬁcients. The experimental results validate that the Adaptive
Learning of hyperparameters for FastAdaptation ( ALFA ) is the equally important
ingredient that was often neglected in the recent few-shot learning approaches.
Surprisingly, fast adaptation from random initialization with ALFA can already
outperform MAML.
1 Introduction
Inspired by the capability of humans to learn new tasks quickly from only few examples, few-shot
learning tries to address the challenges of training artiﬁcial intelligence that can generalize well with
the few samples. Meta-learning, or learning-to-learn , tackles this problem by investigating common
prior knowledge from previous tasks that can facilitate rapid learning of new tasks. Especially,
gradient (or optimization) based meta-learning algorithms are gaining increased attention, owing
to its potential for generalization capability. This line of works attempts to directly modify the
conventional optimization algorithms to enable fast adaptation with few examples.
One of the most successful instances for gradient-based methods is model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) [ 8], where the meta-learner attempts to ﬁnd a good starting location for the network
parameters, from which new tasks are learned with few updates. Following this trend, many recent
studies [ 3,9,11,30,39,41] focused on learning a better initialization. However, research on the
training strategy for fast adaptation to each task is relatively overlooked, typically resorting to
conventional optimizers ( e.g.SGD). Few recent approaches explore better learning algorithms for
inner-loop optimization [ 6,15,26,27], however they lack the adaptation property in weight updates,
which is validated to be effective from commonly used adaptive optimizers, such as Adam [16].
In this paper, we turn our attention to an important but often neglected factor for MAML-based
formulation of few-shot learning, which is the inner-loop optimization. Instead of trying to ﬁnd
a better initialization, we propose Adaptive Learning of hyperparameters for Fast Adaptation1,
named ALFA, that enables training to be more effective with task-conditioned inner-loop updates
1The code is available at https://github.com/baiksung/ALFA
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.