𝜃1∗𝜃𝑠1∗𝜃2∗
𝜃𝑠2∗𝜃=𝜃𝑖,0
𝜃1∗𝜃𝑠1∗𝜃2∗
𝜃𝑠2∗𝜃𝑠𝑖∗Optimal param. for support set
𝜃𝑖∗True optimal parameter
𝜃𝑖,𝑗+1←𝜷𝑖,𝑗⨀𝜃𝑖,𝑗−𝜶𝑖,𝑗⨀∇𝜃ℒ𝒯𝑖𝒟𝑖𝜃𝑖,𝑗+1←𝜃𝑖,𝑗−𝛼∇𝜃ℒ𝒯𝑖𝒟𝑖𝜃=𝜃𝑖,0
𝜃1,1
𝜃1,2𝜃2,1
𝜃2,2𝜃1,1
𝜃1,2𝜃2,1
𝜃2,2(b) ALFA (a) SGD
𝜃0Initial parameterFigure 1: Overview of our proposed inner-loop optimization for few-shot learning. (a) Conventional
optimizer ( e.g., SGD) updates the parameters in the direction of the gradient of task-speciﬁc loss
rLDi
Tiwith a ﬁxed learning rate . The updates guide the parameters to the optimal values for
training (or support) dataset, 
si. (b) ALFA adapts the learning rate i;jand the regularization
hyperparameter i;jw.r.t. thei-th task and the j-th inner-loop update step. The adaptive regulariza-
tion effects of ALFA aims to facilitate better generalization to arbitrary unseen tasks, pushing the
parameters closer to the true optimal values 
i.
from any given initialization. Our algorithm dynamically generates two important hyperparameters
for optimization: learning rates and weight decay coefﬁcients. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a small
meta-network that generates these hyperparameters using the current weight and gradient values
for each step, enabling each inner-loop iteration to be adaptive to the given task. As illustrated in
Figure 1, ALFA can achieve better training and generalization, compared to conventional inner-loop
optimization approaches, owing to per-step adaptive regularization and learning rates.
With the proposed training scheme ALFA, fast adaptation to each task from even a random initial-
ization shows a better few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy than MAML. This suggests that learning
a good weight-update rule is at least as important as learning a good initialization. Furthermore,
ALFA can be applied in conjunction with existing meta-learning approaches that aim to learn a good
initialization.
2 Related work
The main goal of few-shot learning is to learn new tasks with given few support examples while
maintaining the generalization to unseen query examples. Meta-learning aims to achieve the goal
by learning prior knowledge from previous tasks, which in turn is used to quickly adapt to new
tasks [ 4,12,32,33,36]. Recent meta-learning algorithms can be divided into three main categories:
metric-based [ 17,34,35,24,38], network-based [ 21,22,31], and gradient-based [ 8,23,27,28]
algorithms. Among them, gradient (or optimization) based approaches are recently gaining increased
attention for its potential for generalizability across different domains. This is because the gradient-
based algorithms focus on adjusting the optimization algorithm itself, instead of learning feature
space (metric-based) or designing network architecture speciﬁcally for fast adaptation (model-based).
In this work, we concentrate on discussing gradient-based meta-learning approaches, in which there
are two major directions: learning the initialization and learning the update rule.
One of the most recognized algorithms for learning a good initialization is MAML [ 8], which is
widely used across diverse domains due to its simplicity and model-agnostic design. Such popularity
led to a surge of MAML-based variants [ 2,3,9,10,11,13,14,25,26,27,30,37,39,41,42,44],
where they try to resolve the known issues of MAML, such as (meta-level) overﬁtting.
On the other hand, complementary studies on optimization algorithms, including better weight-
update rules, have attracted relatively less attention from the community. This is evident from many
recent MAML-based algorithms which settled with simple inner-loop update rules, without any
regularization that may help prevent overﬁtting during fast adaptation to new tasks with few examples.
Few recent works attempted to improve from such naïve update rules by meta-learning the learning
rates [ 2,20,30] and learning to regularize the gradients [ 6,10,19,25,27]. However, these methods
lack an adaptive property in the inner-loop optimization in that its meta-learned learning rate or
regularization terms do not adapt to each task. By contrast, Ravi et al. [28] learn the entire inner-loop
optimization directly through LSTM that generates updated weights (utilizing the design similar
to [1]). While such formulation may be more general and provide a task-adaptive property, learning
2