Note that the latest progress in Li et al. (2017) is somewhat
similar to this paper in that they proposed a long short-term
memory neural network extended model (LSTME) to predict
PM2.5. The difference is that Li et al. (2017) fed LSTMs with historical
PM2.5concentration data from different stations and combined
auxiliary data with a neural network. Correspondingly, in the
LSTM-FC neural network, all local features of a station were fed into
a single LSTM, including both PM 2.5concentration data and auxil-
iary data. The spatial information was handled by a neural network.
Consequently, LSTM-FC model made better use of the geographic
information of auxiliary data.
2.2. LSTM-based temporal simulator
For general-purpose time series modeling and prediction, the
long short-term memory model has proven its excellent ability to
memorize long-range dependencies in many studies ( Xu and Niu
(2018) ). In this subsection, we build a LSTM-based model to simu-
late the variation of PM 2.5, which follows the standard LSTM struc-
ture. As illustrated in Fig. 3 , each LSTM block consists of a memory
cell and three gates: the input gate, forget gate, and output gate.
Serving as an accumulator of status information, the memory
cell preserves the hidden information in the time series so that the
LSTM can exploit long-range temporal context. The three gates
with a sigmoid activation function control changes in cell status.
When a new input xtcomes, its information will be written into a
cell if the input gate itis activated. The cell status at ðt/C01Þwill be
”forgotten ”if the forget gate ftis off. The output gate determines
whether the latest cell status will be propagated to the output stateht. The range of the sigmoid function is (0,1), which lets the gates be
half-opened. The key formulation of the LSTM is shown in (1)
below, where +denotes the Hadamard product and tanh is applied
in an element-wise fashion. xt,ctand htare the input, memory cell
status and output, respectively, of the LSTM at time t.it,otand ftare
the function values of the input gate, output gate, and forget gate.
Ws denotes the weight matrices, whose subscripts indicate which
two variables are connected by this matrix. For example, ”Wxi”is the
weight matrix between the input and input gate. ”b”s are biases of
gates.
it¼sðWxixtþWhiht/C01þWci+ct/C01þbiÞ
ft¼s/C16
WxfxtþWhfht/C01þWcf+ct/C01þbf/C17
ct¼ft+ct/C01þit+tanhðWxcxtþWhcht/C01þbcÞ
ot¼sðWxoxtþWhoht/C01þWco+ctþboÞ
ht¼ot+tanhðctÞ(1)
In the air quality prediction, the input gate controls the new
observation's impact on the prediction; meanwhile, the output gate
controls the impact of past trends. For example, when PM 2.5con-
centration changes slowly, the output gate trends to off to keep the
trend information; when PM 2.5concentration changes drastically,
the input gate opens to obtain new observations.
2.3. NN-based spatial combinatory
We build a standard three-layer fully-connected neural network
as a spatial combinator to integrate the prediction of different
temporal simulators, as shown in Fig. 4 . Neural networks have a
strong ability of non-linear expression ( Barron (1994) ) that is why
they are suitable to act as spatial combinators.
O¼XNð2Þ
j¼1wð2Þ
js XNð1Þ
i¼1wð1Þ
jiIi!
(2)
The sigmoid function is chosen as the activation function, which
has been widely used in machine learning. For the sake of
simplicity, we denoted the number of neurons in ith layer as NðiÞ,
Fig. 3. LSTM structure. The LSTM contains an input gate, forget gate, output gate, and
memory cell. xtand htare the input and output of the LSTM, respectively.Fig. 4. Layout of three-layer fully-connected neural network. Iiis the ith input, jis the
jth hidden neuron, and Ois the output.J. Zhao et al. / Chemosphere 220 (2019) 486 e492 489