experimental results and discussion, and conclusions are drawn in
section 4.
2. Method
In this section, we introduce the details of our LSTM-FC model.
The goal of our model is to forecast the PM 2.5over 48 h, spe-
ciﬁcally, for the next 1 e6 h, we predict the real-valued concentra-
tion of PM 2.5, and with respect to 7 e12, 13e24, 25e48 h, we predict
the maximum and minimum concentration for each time interval
respectively, as seen in Fig. 1 (a). To make a forecast, some related
data in the past hours is entered into the model, so our model is a
multi-step-ahead forecasting model as seen in Fig. 1 (b).
2.1. LSTM-FC neural network
Fig. 2 presents the framework of the LSTM-FC model, which is
comprised of two main components: an LSTM-based temporal
simulator, and a neural network-based spatial combinatory.
The bottom part of Fig. 2 shows the input feature vectors Xt/C01;/
;Xt/C0Rmeasured in the past Rhours, including the district-level
meteorological data, air quality data of the given station and
neighbor stations in the past Rhours, and the day of the week.
Meteorological data contains weather, temperature, pressure, hu-
midity, wind speed, and wind direction information, all of whichhave strong in ﬂuences on air quality ( Su et al. (2016) ). Air quality
data is the concentration of six main pollutants, PM2:5,PM10,NO2,
CO,O3, and SO2, measured by the monitoring stations. The red star
stands for the station we want to predict, i.e., the central station.
The blue stars are neighbor stations, whose reading implies
geographical dependence.
The input vectors are ﬁrst entered into the temporal simulator
component, as depicted in the middle of Fig. 2 , which simulates the
variation of PM 2.5concentration readings of each station. Note that
the LSTM-based temporal simulator only exploits the temporal
information. Then the predictions of the central station and sur-
rounding stations given by LSTMs are entered into the fully-
connected neural network-based spatial combinatory. The ﬁnal
output is the ﬁnal prediction of the central station.
The innovation of our model is two-fold: (1) The temporal
simulator and spatial combinatory handled temporal information
and spatial information, respectively, leading to an effective and
interpretable prediction result. The LSTM-based temporal simu-
lator fed with all local historical data which could handle the long-
range dependencies. Meanwhile, the spatial combinatory com-
bined the predictions of the surrounding temporal simulators. (2)We combined the spatial information of surrounding stations ac-
cording to geographical distance, instead of using data from all
stations in Beijing, which averted over- ﬁtting and mitigated the
computational challenge.
Fig. 2. Framework of LSTM-FC neural network. Xt/C0R;Xt/C0Rþ1;/;Xt/C0mare the feature vectors measured in the past Rhours; Y_t/C24tþK
T is PM 2.5contamination predictions of the central
station (red star) and neighbor stations (blue stars) given by the temporal simulator, and Y_t/C24tþK
TþSis the prediction of the central station. (For interpretation of the references to colour
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)J. Zhao et al. / Chemosphere 220 (2019) 486 e492 488