(2001) ). The main advantage of physical-model-based methods is
that they can give sights into physical and chemical processes that
govern the dispersion and transformation of atmospheric pollut-
ants ( Vardoulakis et al. (2003) ). However, these models are usually
based on a number of empirical assumptions and parameters that
might not be applicable to all urban environments. Physical-model-
based methods often require experts to adjust parameters to adapt
to different cities ( Zheng et al. (2013) ). We instead explore a data-
driven method to predict urban air quality, which has the advan-
tage of automatically adjusting the parameters and giving the same
or even more accurate prediction result as the physical-model-
based methods.
Recent evolutions in sensor technology and big data have pro-
vided the environmental community with continuously expanding
resources for data collection. Many data-driven methods, especially
neural network methods, have been used by scholars to predict gas
and particulate matter pollution ( Vitolo et al. (2015) ;Li et al. (2011) ;
Li et al. (2016) ).Kukkonen et al. (2003) considered hourly predic-
tion of the concentration of NO2and PM10on the dataset of two
stations in central Helsinki, and compared the performances of ﬁve
classical neural network models and other statistical models;Grivas and Chaloulakou (2006) used various developed neural
network models to provide reliable predictions of PM
10hourly
concentrations 24 h in advance, and they all found that the pre-
diction performances of neural networks were superior to other
models. However most of the neural networks in these works
aerely based on multilayer neural networks, which were not spe-
ciﬁcally designed for time series model, so it was meaningful to
explore the use of neural networks designed speci ﬁcally for timeseries to predict air quality, like LSTM. In recent years, Some more
sophisticated data-driven methods had been proposed. Zheng et al.
(2015) proposed a data-driven method to forecast the air quality
over 48 h by considering meteorological data, weather forecasts,
and the air quality data of monitoring stations. Deng et al. (2017)
proposed a cellular automata (CA) model based on a multivariate
regression model and several physical models to analyze the gen-
eration and diffusion of PM 2.5.
The above papers were very helpful for PM 2.5prediction. How-
ever, these papers could not capture the long-term features and
short-term features at the same time, and could not learn both
temporal and spatial properties in one model. To handle this multi-
dimensional multi-step prediction problem, we proposed a data-
driven model, named Long Short-Term Memory - Fully Connected
Neural Network, to predict PM 2.5contamination of a speci ﬁc air
quality monitoring station over 48 h using historical air quality data,
meteorological data, weather forecast data, and the day of the week
when the observation came from (also called time stamp data). First,
we feed all local historical data into an LSTM model, which simulates
the variation of a monitoring station's PM 2.5records, and gives a pre-
prediction, then we de ﬁne the nearest ﬁve monitors of a speci ﬁc
monitor (central monitor) as its neighbor monitor, and use a fully-
connected neural network-based spatial combinatory to integrate
the pre-predictions of neighbor monitors and give the ﬁnal PM 2.5
prediction of the central station. A linear interpolation method is
used to ﬁlled the missing data in the dataset. The experiments on a
real dataset illustrate the effectiveness of our methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2presents
the details of the LSTM-FC neural network. Section 3reports the
Fig. 1. (a) We predict the real values for the ﬁrst 6 h, and the minimum and maximum for 7 e12, 13e24, 25e48 h. (b) R-input-6-output multi-step-ahead prediction for the ﬁrst 6 h,
and R-input-2-output for 7 e12, 13e24, 25 e48 h.J. Zhao et al. / Chemosphere 220 (2019) 486 e492 487