PC-PG: Policy Cover Directed Exploration for
Provable Policy Gradient Learning
Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, Redmond
alekha@microsoft.comSham Kakade
University of Washington and Microsoft Research NYC
sham@cs.washington.edu
Mikael Henaff
Facebook AI Research
mikaelhenaff@fb.comWen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu
Abstract
Direct policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning are a successful approach
for a variety of reasons: they are model free, they directly optimize the performance
metric of interest, and they allow for richly parameterized policies. Their primary
drawback is that, by being local in nature, they fail to adequately explore the
environment. In contrast, while model-based approaches and Q-learning can, at
least in theory, directly handle exploration through the use of optimism, their ability
to handle model misspeciﬁcation and function approximation is far less evident.
This work introduces the the POLICY COVER GUIDED POLICY GRADIENT (PC-
PG) algorithm, which provably balances the exploration vs. exploitation tradeoff
using an ensemble of learned policies (the policy cover). PC-PG enjoys polynomial
sample complexity and run time for both tabular MDPs and, more generally,
linear MDPs in an inﬁnite dimensional RKHS. Furthermore, PC-PG also has strong
guarantees under model misspeciﬁcation that go beyond the standard worst case `1
assumptions; these include approximation guarantees for state aggregation under
an average case error assumption, along with guarantees under a more general
assumption where the approximation error under distribution shift is controlled.
We complement the theory with empirical evaluation across a variety of domains
in both reward-free and reward-driven settings.
1 Introduction
Policy gradient methods are a successful class of Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods, as they are
amenable to parametric policy classes, including neural policies [ 55,56]), and they directly optimizing
the cost function of interest. While these methods have a long history in the RL literature [ 33,37,62,
68], only recently have their theoretical convergence properties been established: roughly when the
objective function has wide coverage over the state space, global convergence is possible [ 1,3,12,27].
In other words, the assumptions in these works imply that the state space is already well-explored.
Conversely, without such coverage (and, say, with sparse rewards), policy gradients often suffer from
the vanishing gradient problem.
With regards to exploration, at least in the tabular setting, there is an established body of algorithms
which provably explore in order to achieve sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning, including model
based methods [ 9,13,20,29,35,36], model free approaches such as Q-learning [ 22,31,40,
60], Thompson sampling [ 5,47,51], and, more recently, policy optimization approaches [ 17,24].
There are also a number of provable reinforcement learning algorithms balancing exploration and
exploitation for MDPs with linearly parameterized dynamics, including [7, 17, 30, 32, 70–72].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.