originate from functional evolutionary principles promoting the
survival of our ancestors who, as hunter-gatherers, lived in small,close-knit groups ( Haselton et al., 2005 ;Tooby and Cosmides,
2005 ). Cognitive biases can be caused by a mismatch between
evolutionarily rationalized “heuristics ” (“evolutionary
rationality ”:Haselton et al., 2009 ) and the current context or
environment ( Tooby and Cosmides, 2005 ). In this view, the same
heuristics that optimized the chances of survival of our ancestorsin their (natural) environment can lead to maladaptive (biased)behavior when they are used in our current (arti ﬁcial) settings.
Biases that have been considered as examples of this kind ofmismatch are the Action bias (preferring action even when thereis no rational justi ﬁcation to do this, Baron and Ritov, 2004 ;Patt
and Zeckhauser, 2000 ), Social proof (the tendency to mirror or
copy the actions and opinions of others, Cialdini, 1984 ), the
Tragedy of the commons (prioritizing personal interests over the
common good of the community, Hardin, 1968 ), and the Ingroup
bias (favoring one ’s own group above that of others, Taylor and
Doria, 1981 ).
This hard-wired (neurally inherent and/or evolutionary
ingrained) character of biased thinking makes it unlikelythat simple and straightforward methods like traininginterventions or awareness courses will be very effectiveto ameliorate biases. This dif ﬁculty of bias mitigation
seems indeed supported by the literature ( Korteling et al.,
2021 ).
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE IS NOT THE
SAME AS HUMAN-LIKE INTELLIGENCE
Fundamental Differences Between
Biological and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
We often think and deliberate about intelligence with an
anthropocentric conception of our own intelligence in mindas an obvious and unambiguous reference. We tend to usethis conception as a basis for reasoning about other, lessfamiliar phenomena of intelligence, such as other forms ofbiological and arti ﬁcial intelligence ( Coley and Tanner,
2012 ) .T h i sm a yl e a dt of a s c i n a t i n gq u e s t i o n sa n di d e a s .
An example is the discussion about how and when thepoint of “intelligence at human level ”will be achieved. For
instance, Ackermann. (2018) writes: “Before reaching
superintelligence, general AI means that a machine willhave the same cognitive capabilities as a human being ”.
So, researchers deliberate ex tensively about the point in
time when we will reach general AI, (e.g., Goertzel, 2007 ;
Müller and Bostrom, 2016 ). We suppose that these kinds of
questions are not quite on target. There are (in principle)many different possible types of (general) intelligenceconceivable of which human-like intelligence is just one ofthose. This means, for example that the development of AI isdetermined by the constraint of physics and technology, and
not by those of biological evolution. So, just as the
intelligence of a hypothetical extraterrestrial visitor of ourplanet earth is likely to have a di fferent (in-)org anic structurewith different characteristics, strengths, and weaknesses,
than the human residents this will also apply to arti ﬁcial
forms of (general) intelligence. Below we brie ﬂys u m m a r i z ea
few fundamental differences between human and arti ﬁcial
intelligence ( Bostrom, 2014 ):
-Basic structure: Biological (carbon) intelligence is based on
neural “wetware ”which is fundamentally different from
artiﬁcial (silicon-based) intelligence. As opposed to
biological wetware, in silicon, or digital, systems “hardware ”
and “software ”are independent of each other ( Kosslyn and
Koenig, 1992 ). When a biological system has learned a new
skill, this will be bounded to the system itself. In contrast, if anAI system has learned a certain skill then the constitutingalgorithms can be directly copied to all other similar digital
systems.
-Speed: Signals from AI systems propagate with almost thespeed of light. In humans, the conduction velocity of nervesproceeds with a speed of at most 120 m/s, which is extremelyslow in the time scale of computers ( Siegel and Sapru, 2005 ).
-Connectivity and communication: People cannot directlycommunicate with each other. They communicate vialanguage and gestures with limited bandwidth. This isslower and more dif ﬁcult than the communication of AI
systems that can be connected directly to each other.Thanks to this direct connection, they can also collaborate
on the basis of integrated algorithms.
-Updatability and scalability: AI systems have almost noconstraints with regard to keep them up to date or toupscale and/or re-con ﬁgure them, so that they have the
right algorithms and the data processing and storagecapacities necessary for the tasks they have to carry out.This capacity for rapid, structural expansion and immediateimprovement hardly applies to people.-In contrast, biology does a lot with a little: organic brains aremillions of times more ef ﬁcient in energy consumption than
computers. The human brain consumes less energy than a
lightbulb, whereas a supercomputer with comparable
computational performance uses enough electricity to powerquite a village ( Fischetti, 2011 ).
These kinds of differences in basic structure, speed,
connectivity, updatability, scalability, and energy consumptionwill necessarily also lead to different qualities and limitationsbetween human and arti ﬁcial intelligence. Our response speed to
simple stimuli is, for example, many thousands of times slowerthan that of arti ﬁcial systems. Computer systems can very easily
be connected directly to each other and as such can be part of one
integrated system. This means that AI systems do not have to be
seen as individual entities that can easily work alongside eachother or have mutual misunderstandings. And if two AI systemsare engaged in a task then they run a minimal risk to make amistake because of miscommunications (think of autonomousvehicles approaching a crossroad). After all, they are intrinsicallyconnected parts of the same system and the same algorithm(Gerla et al., 2014 ).
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 5Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence