Only when humans develop a proper of these “interspecies ”
differences they can effectively capitalize on the potentialbeneﬁts of AI in (future) human-AI teams. Given the high
ﬂexibility, versatility, and adaptability of humans relative to AI
systems, the ﬁrst challenge becomes then how to ensure human
adaptation to the more rigid abilities of AI?
4In other words: how
can we achieve a proper conception the differences betweenhuman- and arti ﬁcial intelligence?
Framework for Intelligence Awareness
Training
For this question, the issue of Intelligence Awareness in human
professionals needs to be addressed more vigorously. Next tocomputer tools for the distribution of relevant awareness
information ( Collazos et al., 2019 ) in human-machine systems,
this requires better education and training on how to deal withthe very new and different characteristics, idiosyncrasies, andcapacities of AI systems. This includes, for example, a properunderstanding of the basic characteristics, possibilities, andlimitations of the AI ’s cognitive system properties without
anthropocentric and/or anthropomorphic misconceptions. Ingeneral, this “Intelligence Awareness ”is highly relevant in
order to better understand, investigate, and deal with themanifold possibilities and challenges of machine intelligence.This practical human-factors challenge could, for instance, be
tackled by developing new, targeted and easily con ﬁgurable
(adaptive) training forms and learning environments forhuman-AI systems. These ﬂexible training forms and
environments, (e.g. simulations and games) should focus atdeveloping knowledge, insight and practical skills concerningthe speci ﬁc, non-human characteristics, abilities, and limitations
of AI systems and how to deal with these in practical situations.People will have to understand the critical factors determining thegoals, performance, and choices of AI? Which may in some caseseven include the simple notion that AIs excite as much about theirperformance in achieving their goals as your refrigerator does for
keeping your milkshake well. They have to learn when and under
what conditions decisions are safe to leave to AI and when ishuman judgment required or essential? And more in general: howdoes it “think ”and decide? The relevance of this kind of
knowledge, skills and practices will only become bigger whenthe degree of autonomy (and genericity) of advanced AI systemswill grow.
What does such an Intelligence Awareness training curriculum
look like? It needs to include at least a module on the cognitivecharacteristics of AI. This is basically a subject similar to thosesubjects that are also included in curricula on human cognition.
This broad module on the “Cognitive Science of AI ”may involve
a range of sub-topics starting with a revision of the concept of"Intelligence" stripped of anthropocentric and anthropomorphicmisunderstandings. In addition, this module should focus atproviding knowledge about the structure and operation of theAI operating system or the “AI mind. ”This may be followed by
subjects like: Perception and interpretation of information by AI,AI cognition (memory, information processing, problem solving,biases), dealing with AI possibilities and limitations in the
“human ”areas like creativity, adaptivity, autonomy, re ﬂection,
and (self-) awareness, dealing with goal functions (valuation ofactions in relation to cost-bene ﬁt), AI ethics and AI security. In
addition, such a curriculum should include technical modulesproviding insight into the working of the AI operating system.Due to the enormous speed with which the AI technology andapplication develops, the content of such a curriculum is also verydynamic and continuously evolving on the basis of technologicalprogress. This implies that the curriculum and training-aids and-environments should be ﬂexible, experiential, and adaptive,
which makes the work form of serious gaming ideally suited.
Below, we provide a global framework for the development of
new educational curricula on AI awareness. These subtopics gobeyond learning to effectively “operate, ”“control ”or interact with
speciﬁc AI applications (i.e. conventional human-machine
interaction):
-Understanding of underlying system characteristics of the AI
(the “AI brain ”). Understanding the speci ﬁc qualities and
limitations of AI relative to human intelligence.-Understanding the complexity of the tasks and of theenvironment from the perspective of AI systems.
-Understanding the problem of biases in human cognition,
relative to biases in AI.-Understanding the problems associated with the control of AI,predictability of AI behavior (decisions), building trust,maintaining situation awareness (complacency), dynamictask allocation, (e.g. taking over each other ’s tasks) and
responsibility (accountability).-How to deal with possibilities and limitations of AI in the ﬁeld
of“creativity ”, adaptability of AI, “environmental awareness
”,
and generalization of knowledge.-Learning to deal with perceptual and cognitive limitations and
possible errors of AI which may be dif ﬁcult to comprehend.
-Trust in the performance of AI (possibly in spite of limitedtransparency or ability to “explain ”) based on veri ﬁcation and
validation.-Learning to deal with our natural inclination toanthropocentrism and anthropomorphism ( “theory of
mind ”) when reasoning about human-robot interaction.
-How to capitalize on the powers of AI in order to deal with theinherent constraints of human information processing (andvice versa).-Understanding the speci ﬁc characteristics and qualities of
the man-machine system and being able to decide on when,
for what, and how the integrated combination of human-and AI faculties may perform at best overall systempotential.
In conclusion: due to the enormous speed with which the
AI technology and application evolves we need a moreversatile conceptualization of intelligence and anacknowledgment of its many possible forms and
4Next to the issue of Human-Aware AI, i.e. tuning AI to the cognitive
characteristics of humans.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 10Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence