THE IMPACT OF MULTIPLE NARROW AI
TECHNOLOGY
AGI as the Holy Grail
AGI, like human general intelligence, would have many obvious
advantages, compared to narrow (limited, weak, specialized) AI.An AGI system would be much more ﬂexible and adaptive. On
the basis of generic training and reasoning processes it wouldunderstand autonomously how multiple problems in all kinds ofdifferent domains can be solved in relation to their context, (e.g.Kurzweil, 2005 ). AGI systems also require far fewer human
interventions to accommodate the various loose ends amongpartial elements, facets, and perspectives in complex situations.
AGI would really understand problems and is capable to view
them from different perspectives (as people —ideally —also can
do). A characteristic of the current (narrow) AI tools is that theyare skilled in a very speci ﬁc task, where they can often perform at
superhuman levels, (e.g. Goertzel, 2007 ;Silver et al., 2017 ). These
speciﬁc tasks have been well-de ﬁned and structured. Narrow AI
systems are less suitable, or totally unsuitable, for tasks or taskenvironments that offer little structure, consistency, rules orguidance, in which all sorts of unexpected, rare or uncommonevents, (e.g. emergencies) may occur. Knowing and followingﬁxed procedures usually does not lead to proper solutions in these
varying circumstances. In the context of (unforeseen) changes in
goals or circumstances, the adequacy of current AI is considerablyreduced because it cannot reason from a general perspective andadapt accordingly ( Lake et al., 2017 ;Horowitz, 2018 ). As with
narrow AI systems, people are then needed to supervise on thesedeviations in order to enable ﬂexible and adaptive system
performance. Therefore the quest of AGI may be consideredas looking for a kind of holy grail.
Multiple Narrow AI is Most Relevant Now!
The potential high prospects of AGI, however, do not imply thatAGI will be the most crucial factor in future AI R&D, at least forthe short- and mid-term. When re ﬂecting on the great potential
beneﬁts of general intelligence, we tend to consider narrow AI
applications as separate entities that can very well beoutperformed by a broader AGI that presumably can dealwith everything. But just as our modern world has evolvedrapidly through a diversity of speci ﬁc (limited) technological
innovations, at the system level the total and wide range of
emerging AI applications will also have a groundbreaking
technological and societal impact ( Peeters et al., 2020 ). This
will be all the more relevant for the future world of big data,in which everything is connected to everything through theInternet of Things . So, it will be much more pro ﬁtable and
beneﬁcial to develop and build (non-human-like) AI variants
that will excel in areas where people are inherently limited. Itseems not too far-fetched to suppose that the multiple variants ofnarrow AI applications also gradually get more broadlyinterconnected. In this way, a development toward an everbroader realm of integrated AI applications may be expected.In addition, it is already possible to train a language model AI
(Generative Pre-trained Transformer3, GPT-3) with a gigantic
dataset and then have it learn various tasks based on a handful ofexamples —one or few-shot learning. GPT-3 (developed by
OpenAI) can do this with language-related tasks, but there isno reason why this should not be possible with image and sound,or with combinations of these three ( Brown, 2020 ).
Besides, the moravec Paradox implies that the development of
AI“partners ”with many kinds of human (-level) qualities will be
very dif ﬁcult to obtain, whereas their added value, (i.e. beyond the
boundaries of human capabilities) will be relatively low. The mostfruitful AI applications will mainly involve supplementinghuman constraints and limitations. Given the presentincentives for competitive technological progress, multipleforms of (connected) narrow AI systems will be the majordriver of AI impact on our society for short- and mid-term.For the near future, this may imply that AI applications willremain very different from, and in many aspects almost
incomparable with, human agents. This is likely to be true
even if the hypothetical match of arti ﬁcial general intelligence
(AGI) with human cognition were to be achieved in the future inthe longer term. Intelligence is a multi-dimensional (quantitative,qualitative) concept. All dimensions of AI unfold and grow alongtheir own different path with their own dynamics. Therefore, overtime an increasing number of speci ﬁc (narrow) AI capacities may
gradually match, overtake and transcend human cognitivecapacities. Given the enormous advantages of AI, for examplein the ﬁeld of data availability and data processing capacities, the
realization of AGI probably would at the same time outclass
human intelligence in many ways. Which implies that the
hypothetical point of time of matching human- and arti ﬁcial
cognitive capacities, i.e. human-level AGI, will probably be hardto de ﬁne in a meaningful way ( Goertzel, 2007 ).
3
So when AI will truly understand us as a “friend, ”“partner, ”
“alter ego ”or“buddy, ”as we do when we collaborate with other
humans as humans, it will surpass us in many areas at the sameMoravec (1998) time. It will have a completely different pro ﬁle of
capacities and abilities and thus it will not be easy to reallyunderstand the way it “thinks ”and comes to its decisions. In
the meantime, however, as the capacities of robots expand and
move from simple tools to more integrated systems, it is important
to calibrate our expectations and perceptions toward robotsappropriately. So, we will have to enhance our awareness andinsight concerning the continuous development and progression ofmultiple forms of (integrated) AI systems. This concerns forexample the multi-facetted nature of intelligence. Different kindof agents may have different combinations of intelligences of verydifferent levels. An agent with general intelligence may for examplebe endowed with excellent abilities on the area of imagerecognition and navigation, calculation, and logical reasoningwhile at the same time being dull on the area of social
interaction and goal-oriented problem solving. This awareness
of the multi-dimensional nature of intelligence also concernsthe way we have to deal with ( and capitalize on)
anthropomorphism. That is the human tendency in human-robot interaction to characterize non-human artifacts that
3Unless of course AI will be deliberately constrained or degraded to human-level
functioning.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 8Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence