Human- versus Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
J. E. (Hans). Korteling*, G. C. van de Boer-Visschedijk, R. A. M. Blankendaal,
R. C. Boonekamp and A. R. Eikelboom
TNO Human Factors, Soesterberg, Netherlands
AI is one of the most debated subjects of today and there seems little common understanding
concerning the differences and similarities of human intelligence and arti ﬁcial intelligence.
Discussions on many relevant topics, such as trus tworthiness, explainability, and ethics are
characterized by implicit anthropocentric an d anthropomorphistic conceptions and, for
instance, the pursuit of human-like inte lligence as the golden standard for Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence. In order to provide more agre ement and to substantiate possible future
research objectives, this paper presents thre e notions on the similarities and differences
between human- and arti ﬁcial intelligence: 1) the fundamental constraints of human (and
artiﬁcial) intelligence, 2) human intelligence as one of many possible forms of general
intelligence, and 3) the high potential impact of multiple (integrated) forms of narrow-hybrid
AI applications. For the time being, AI systems will have fundamentally different cognitive
qualities and abilities than biological systems. For this reason, a most prominent issue is howwe can use (and “collaborate ”with) these systems as effectively as possible? For what tasks
and under what conditions, decisions are safe to leave to AI and when is human judgmentrequired? How can we capitalize on the speci ﬁc strengths of human- and arti ﬁcial intelligence?
How to deploy AI systems effectively to complement and compensate for the inherentconstraints of human cognition (and vice versa)? Should we pursue the development of AI“partners ”with human (-level) intelligence or sho uld we focus more at supplementing human
limitations? In order to answer these questi ons, humans working with AI systems in the
workplace or in policy making have to develop an adequate mental model of the underlying‘psychological ’mechanisms of AI. So, in order to obtain w ell-functioning human-AI systems,
Intelligence Awareness in humans should be addressed more v igorously. For this purpose a
ﬁrst framework for educational content is proposed.
Keywords: human intelligence, arti ﬁcial intelligence, arti ﬁcial general intelligence, human-level arti ﬁcial intelligence,
cognitive complexity, narrow arti ﬁcial intelligence, human-AI collaboration, cognitive bias
INTRODUCTION: ARTIFICIAL AND HUMAN INTELLIGENCE,
WORLDS OF DIFFERENCE
Artiﬁcial General Intelligence at the Human Level
Recent advances in information technology and in AI may allow for more coordination and
integration between of humans and technology. Therefore, quite some attention has beendevoted to the development of Human-Aware AI, which aims at AI that adapts as a “team
member ”to the cognitive possibilities and limitations of the human team members. Also
metaphors like “mate, ”“partner, ”“alter ego, ”“Intelligent Collaborator, ”“buddy ”and “mutual
understanding ”emphasize a high degree of collaboration, similarity, and equality in “hybrid
teams ”. When human-aware AI partners operate like “human collaborators ”they must be able toEdited by:
Esma Aïmeur,
Université de Montréal, Canada
Reviewed by:
Cesar Collazos,
University of Cauca, Colombia
Ranilson Oscar Araújo Paiva,
Federal University of Alagoas, Brazil
*Correspondence:
J. E. (Hans). Korteling
hans.korteling@tno.nl
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
AI for Human Learning and
Behavior Change,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence
Received: 29 October 2020
Accepted: 01 February 2021
Published: 25 March 2021
Citation:
Korteling J E(H),
van de Boer-Visschedijk GC,
Blankendaal RAM, Boonekamp RC
and Eikelboom AR (2021) Human-
versus Arti ﬁcial Intelligence.
Front. Artif. Intell. 4:622364.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.622364
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 1CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
published: 25 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/frai.2021.622364