conscious attention, processed in the neural networks of our brain
(Minsky, 1986 ;Moravec, 1988 ;Grind, 1997 ). In order to achieve
this, the brain has a number of universal (inherent) workingmechanisms, such as association and associative learning ( Shatz,
1992 ;Bar, 2007 ), potentiation and facilitation ( Katz and Miledi,
1968 ;Bao et al., 1997 ), saturation and lateral inhibition ( Isaacson
and Scanziani, 2011 ;Korteling et al., 2018a ).
These kinds of basic biological and perceptual-motor
capacities have been developed and set down over manymillions of years. Much later in our evolution —actually only
very recently —our cognitive abilities and rational functions have
started to develop. These cognitive abilities, or capacities, areprobably less than 100 thousand years old, which may be quali ﬁed
as“embryonal ”on the time scale of evolution, (e.g. Petraglia and
Korisettar, 1998 ;McBrearty and Brooks, 2000 ;Henshilwood and
Marean, 2003 ). In addition, this very thin layer of human
achievement has necessarily been built on these “ancient ”
neural intelligence for essential survival functions. So, our“higher ”cognitive capacities are developed from and with
these (neuro) biological regulation mechanisms ( Damasio,
1994 ;Korteling and Toet, 2020 ). As a result, it should not be
a surprise that the capacities of our brain for performing theserecent cognitive functions are still rather limited. Theselimitations are manifested in many different ways, for instance:
-The amount of cognitive information that we can consciously
process (our working memory, span or attention) is very
limited ( Simon, 1955 ). The capacity of our working memory
is approximately 10 –50 bits per second ( Tegmark, 2017 ).
-Most cognitive tasks, like reading text or calculation, requireour full attention and we usually need a lot of time to executethem. Mobile calculators can perform millions times morecomplex calculations than we can ( Tegmark, 2017 ).
-Although we can process lots of information in parallel, wecannot simultaneously execute cognitive tasks that requiredeliberation and attention, i.e., “multi-tasking ”(Korteling,
1994 ;Rogers and Monsell, 1995 ;Rubinstein, Meyer, and
Evans, 2001 ).
-Acquired cognitive knowledge and skills of people (memory)tend to decay over time, much more than perceptual-motorskills. Because of this limited “retention ”of information we
easily forget substantial portions of what we have learned(Wing ﬁeld and Byrnes, 1981 ).
Ingrained Cognitive Biases
Our limited processing capacity for cognitive tasks is not the only
factor determining our cognitive intelligence. Except for anoverall limited processing capacity, human cognitive
information processing shows systematic distortions. These are
manifested in many cognitive biases ( Tversky and Kahneman,
1973 ,Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ). Cognitive biases are
systematic, universally occurring tendencies, inclinations, ordispositions that skew or distort information processes in waysthat make their outcome inaccurate, suboptimal, or simplywrong, (e.g. Lichtenstein and Slovic, 1971 ;Tversky and
Kahneman, 1981 ). Many biases occur in virtually the same
way in many different decision situations ( Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf,2002 ;Kahneman, 2011 ;Toet et al., 2016 ). The literature provides
descriptions and demonstrations of over 200 biases. Thesetendencies are largely implicit and unconscious and feel quitenaturally and self/evident when we are aware of these cognitive
inclinations ( Pronin et al., 2002 ;Risen, 2015 ;Korteling et al.,
2018b ). That is why they are often termed “intuitive ”(Kahneman
and Klein, 2009 )o r “irrational ”(Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf, 2002 ).
Biased reasoning can result in quite acceptable outcomes innatural or everyday situations, especially when the time cost ofreasoning is taken into account ( Simon, 1955 ;Gigerenzer and
Gaissmaier, 2011 ). However, people often deviate from
rationality and/or the tenets of logic, calculation, andprobability in inadvisable ways ( Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ;
Shaﬁr and LeBoeuf, 2002 ) leading to suboptimal decisions in
terms of invested time and effort (costs) given the available
information and expected bene ﬁts.
Biases are largely caused by inherent (or structural)
characteristics and mechanisms of the brain as a neuralnetwork ( Korteling et al., 2018a ;Korteling and Toet, 2020 ).
Basically, these mechanisms —such as association, facilitation,
adaptation, or lateral inhibition —result in a modi ﬁcation of
the original or available data and its processing, (e.g. weightingits importance). For instance, lateral inhibition is a universalneural process resulting in the magni ﬁcation of differences in
neural activity (contrast enhancement), which is very useful forperceptual-motor functions, maintaining physical integrity and
allostasis, (i.e. biological survival functions). For these functions
our nervous system has been optimized for millions of years.However, “higher ”cognitive functions, like conceptual thinking,
probability reasoning or calculation, have been developed onlyvery recently in evolution. These functions are probably less than100 thousand years old, and may, therefore, be quali ﬁed as
“embryonal ”on the time scale of evolution, (e.g. McBrearty
and Brooks, 2000
;Henshilwood and Marean, 2003 ;Petraglia
and Korisettar, 2003 ). In addition, evolution could not develop
these new cognitive functions from scratch, but instead had tobuild this embryonal, and thin layer of human achievement from
its“ancient ”neural heritage for the essential biological survival
functions ( Moravec, 1988 ). Since cognitive functions typically
require exact calculation and proper weighting of data, datatransformations —like lateral inhibition —may easily lead to
systematic distortions, (i.e. biases) in cognitive informationprocessing. Examples of the large number of biases caused bythe inherent properties of biological neural networks are:Anchoring bias (biasing decisions toward previously acquiredinformation, Furnham and Boo, 2011 ;Tversky and Kahneman,
1973 ,Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ), the Hindsight bias (the
tendency to erroneously perceive events as inevitable or more
likely once they have occurred, Hoffrage et al., 2000 ;Roese and
Vohs, 2012 ) the Availability bias (judging the frequency,
importance, or likelihood of an event by the ease with whichrelevant instances come to mind, Tversky and Kahnemann, 1973 ;
Tversky and Kahneman, 1974 ), and the Con ﬁrmation bias (the
tendency to select, interpret, and remember information in a waythat con ﬁrms one ’s preconceptions, views, and expectations,
Nickerson, 1998 ). In addition to these inherent (structural)
limitations of (biological) neural networks, biases may also
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 4Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence