Complexity and Moravec ’s Paradox
Because biological, carbon-based, brains and digital, silicon-
based, computers are optimized for completely different kindsof tasks (e.g., Moravec, 1988 ;Korteling et al., 2018b ), human and
artiﬁcial intelligence show fundamental and probably far-
stretching differences. Because of these differences it may bevery misleading to use our own mind as a basis, model or analogyfor reasoning about AI. This may lead to erroneous conceptions,for example about the presumed abilities of humans and AI toperform complex tasks. Resulting ﬂaws concerning information
processing capacities emerge often in the psychological literaturein which “complexity ”and “difﬁculty ”of tasks are used
interchangeably (see for examples: Wood et al., 1987 ;
McDowd and Craik, 1988 ). Task complexity is then assessed
in an anthropocentric way, that is: by the degree to which we
humans can perform or master it. So, we use the difﬁculty to
perform or master a task as a measure of its complexity , and task
performance (speed, errors) as a measure of skill and intelligenceof the task performer. Although this could sometimes beacceptable in psychological research, this may be misleading ifwe strive for understanding the intelligence of AI systems. For usit is much more dif ﬁcult to multiply two random numbers of six
digits than to recognize a friend on a photograph. But when itcomes to counting or arithmetic operations, computers arethousands of times faster and better, while the same systemshave only recently taken steps in image recognition (which only
succeeded when deep learning technology, based on some
principles of biological neural networks, was developed). Ingeneral: cognitive tasks that are relatively dif ﬁcult for the
human brain (and which we therefore ﬁnd subjectively
difﬁcult) do not have to be computationally complex, (e.g., in
terms of objective arithmetic, logic, and abstract operations). Andvice versa: tasks that are relatively easy for the brain (recognizingpatterns, perceptual-motor tasks, well-trained tasks) do not haveto be computationally simple. This phenomenon, that which iseasy for the ancient, neural “technology ”of people and dif ﬁcult
for the modern, digital technology of computers (and vice versa)has been termed the moravec ’s Paradox. Hans Moravec (1988)
wrote: “It is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult
level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, anddifﬁcult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old
when it comes to perception and mobility. ”
Human Superior Perceptual-Motor
Intelligence
Moravec ’s paradox implies that biological neural networks are
intelligent in different ways than arti ﬁcial neural networks.
Intelligence is not limited to the problems or goals that we as
humans, equipped with biological intelligence, ﬁnd dif ﬁcult
(Grind, 1997 ). Intelligence, de ﬁned as the ability to realize
complex goals or solve complex problems, is much more thanthat. According to Moravec (1988) high-level reasoning requires
very little computation, but low-level perceptual-motor skillsrequire enormous computational resources. If we express thecomplexity of a problem in terms of the number of elementarycalculations needed to solve it, then our biological perceptualmotor intelligence is highly superior to our cognitive intelligence.
Our organic perceptual-motor intelligence is especially good atassociative processing of higher-order invariants ( “patterns ”)i n
the ambient information. These are computationally more
complex and contain more information than the simple,
individual elements ( Gibson, 1966 ,Gibson, 1979 ). An example
of our superior perceptual-motor abilities is the Object Superiority
Effect : we perceive and interpret whole objects faster and more
effective than the (more simple) individual elements that make upthese objects ( Weisstein and Harris, 1974 ;McClelland, 1978 ;
Williams and Weisstein, 1978 ;Pomerantz, 1981 ). Thus, letters are
also perceived more accurately when presented as part of a wordthan when presented in isolation, i.e. the Word superiority effect,(e.g.Reicher, 1969 ;Wheeler, 1970 ). So, the difﬁculty of a task does
not necessarily indicate its inherent complexity .A s Moravec
(1988) puts it: “We are all prodigious Olympians in perceptual
and motor areas, so good that we make the dif ﬁcult look easy.
Abstract thought, though, is a new trick, perhaps less than 100thousand years old. We have not yet mastered it. It is not all thatintrinsically dif ﬁcult; it just seems so when we do it. ”
The Supposition of Human-like AGI
So, if there would exist AI systems with general intelligence that
can be used for a wide range of complex problems and objectives,those AGI machines would probably have a completely differentintelligence pro ﬁle, including other cognitive qualities, than
humans have ( Goertzel, 2007 ). This will be even so, if we
manage to construct AI agents who display similar behaviorlike us and if they are enabled to adapt to our way of thinking andproblem-solving in order to promote human-AI teaming. Unlesswe decide to deliberately degrade the capabilities of AI systems
(which would not be very smart), the underlying capacities andabilities of man and machines with regard to collection andprocessing of information, data analysis, probability reasoning,logic, memory capacity etc. will still remain dissimilar. Because ofthese differences we should focus at systems that effectivelycomplement us, and that make the human-AI system stronger
and more effective. Instead of pursuing human-level AI it would
be more bene ﬁcial to focus on autonomous machines and
(support) systems that ﬁll in, or extend on, the manifold gaps
of human cognitive intelligence. For instance, whereas people areforced —by the slowness and other limitations of biological
brains —to think heuristically in terms of goals, virtues, rules
and norms expressed in (fuzzy) language, AI has alreadyestablished excellent capacities to process and calculate directlyon highly complex data. Therefore, or the execution of speci ﬁc
(narrow) cognitive tasks (logical, analytical, computational),modern digital intelligence may be more effective and ef ﬁcient
than biological intelligence. AI may thus help to produce better
answers for complex problems using high amounts of data,consistent sets of ethical principles and goals, probabilistic-,and logic reasoning, (e.g. Korteling et al., 2018b ). Therefore,
we conjecture that ultimately the development of AI systemsfor supporting human decision making may appear the mosteffective way leading to the making of better choices or thedevelopment of better solutions on complex issues. So, thecooperation and division of tasks between people and AI
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 6Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence