sense, understand, and react to a wide range of complex human
behavioral qualities, like attention, motivation, emotion,creativity, planning, or argumentation, (e.g. Krämer et al.,
2012 ;van den Bosch and Bronkhorst, 2018 ;van den Bosch
et al., 2019 ). Therefore these “AI partners, ”or“team mates ”
have to be endowed with human-like (or humanoid) cognitiveabilities enabling mutual understanding and collaboration (i.e.“human awareness ”).
However, no matter how intelligent and autonomous AI
agents become in certain respects, at least for the foreseeablefuture, they probably will remain unconscious machines orspecial-purpose devices that support humans in speci ﬁc,
complex tasks. As digital machines they are equipped with acompletely different operating system (digital vs biological) andwith correspondingly different cognitive qualities and abilities
than biological creatures, like humans and other animals
(Moravec, 1988 ;Klein et al., 2004 ;Korteling et al., 2018a ;
Shneiderman, 2020a ). In general, digital reasoning- and
problem-solving agents only compare very super ﬁcially to
their biological counterparts, (e.g. Boden, 2017 ;Shneiderman,
2020b ). Keeping that in mind, it becomes more and more
important that human professionals working with advancedAI systems, (e.g. in military- or policy making teams) develop aproper mental model about the different cognitive capacities ofAI systems in relation to human cognition. This issue willbecome increasingly relevant when AI systems become more
advanced and are deployed with higher degrees of autonomy.
Therefore, the present paper tries to provide some more clarityand insight into the fundamental characteristics, differences andidiosyncrasies of human/biological and arti ﬁcial/digital
intelligences. In the ﬁnal section, a global framework for
constructing educational content on this “Intelligence
Awareness ”is introduced. This can be used for the
development of education and training programs for humanswho have to use or “collaborate with ”advanced AI systems in
the near and far future.
With the application of AI systems with increasing autonomy
more and more researchers consider the necessity of vigorously
addressing the real complex issues of “human-level intelligence ”
and more broadly artiﬁcial general intelligence , or AGI, (e.g.
Goertzel et al., 2014 ). Many different de ﬁnitions of A(G)I have
already been proposed, (e.g. Russell and Norvig, 2014 for an
overview). Many of them boil down to: technology containing or
entailing (human-like) intelligence , (e.g. Kurzweil, 1990 ). This is
problematic. Most de ﬁnitions use the term “intelligence ”,a sa n
essential element of the de ﬁnition itself, which makes the
deﬁ
nition tautological. Second, the idea that A(G)I should be
human-like seems unwarranted. At least in natural environments
there are many other forms and manifestations of highly complex
and intelligent behaviors that are very different from speci ﬁc
human cognitive abilities (see Grind, 1997 for an overview).
Finally, like what is also frequently seen in the ﬁeld of biology,
these A(G)I de ﬁnitions use human intelligence as a central basis
or analogy for reasoning about the —less familiar —phenomenon
of A(G)I ( Coley and Tanner, 2012 ). Because of the many
differences between the underlying substrate and architectureof biological and arti ﬁcial intelligence this anthropocentric way ofreasoning is probably unwarranted. For these reasons we propose
a (non-anthropocentric) de ﬁnition of “intelligence ”as:“the
capacity to realize complex goals ”(Tegmark, 2017 ). These
goals may pertain to narrow, restricted tasks (narrow AI) or to
broad task domains (AGI). Building on this de ﬁnition, and on a
deﬁnition of AGI proposed by Bieger et al. (2014) and one of
Grind (1997) ,w ed e ﬁne AGI here as: “Non-biological capacities to
autonomously and ef ﬁciently achieve complex goals in a wide
range of environments ”.AGI systems should be able to identify
and extract the most important features for their operation andlearning process automatically and ef ﬁciently over a broad range
of tasks and contexts. Relevant AGI research differs from theordinary AI research by addressing the versatility and wholenessof intelligence, and by carrying out the engineering practiceaccording to a system comparable to the human mind in a
certain sense ( Bieger et al., 2014 ).
It will be fascinating to create copies of ourselves which can
learn iteratively by interaction with partners and thus becomeable to collaborate on the basis of common goals and mutualunderstanding and adaptation, (e.g. Bradshaw et al., 2012 ;
Johnson et al., 2014 ). This would be very useful, for example
when a high degree of social intelligence of AI will contribute tomore adequate interactions with humans, for example in healthcare or for entertainment purposes ( Wyrobek et al., 2008 ). True
collaboration on the basis of common goals and mutualunderstanding necessarily implies some form of humanoid
general intelligence. For the time being, this remains a goal on
a far-off horizon. In the present paper we argue why for mostapplications it also may not be very practical or necessary (andprobably a bit misleading) to vigorously aim or to anticipate onsystems possessing “human-like ”AGI or “human-like ”abilities
or qualities. The fact that humans possess general intelligencedoes not imply that new inorganic forms of general intelligenceshould comply to the criteria of human intelligence. In thisconnection, the present paper addresses the way we thinkabout (natural and arti ﬁcial) intelligence in relation to the
most probable potentials (and real upcoming issues) of AI in
the short- and mid-term future. This will provide food for
thought in anticipation of a future that is dif ﬁcult to predict
for a ﬁeld as dynamic as AI.
What Is “Real Intelligence ”?
Implicit in our aspiration of constructing AGI systems possessing
humanoid intelligence is the premise that human (general)intelligence is the “real”form of intelligence. This is even
already implicitly articulated in the term “Artiﬁcial
Intelligence ”, as if it were not entirely real, i.e., real like non-
artiﬁcial (biological) intelligence. Indeed, as humans we know
ourselves as the entities with the highest intelligence ever
observed in the Universe. And as an extension of this, we liketo see ourselves as rational beings who are able to solve a widerange of complex problems under all kinds of circumstancesusing our experience and intuition, supplemented by the rules oflogic, decision analysis and statistics. It is therefore not surprisingthat we have some dif ﬁculty to accept the idea that we might be a
bit less smart than we keep on telling ourselves, i.e., “the next
insult for humanity ”(van Belkom, 2019 ). This goes as far that the
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 2Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence