super ﬁcially look similar to us as possessing human-like traits,
emotions, and intentions, (e.g., Kiesler and Hinds, 2004 ;Fink,
2012 ;Haring et al., 2018 ). Insight into these human factors issues is
crucial to optimize the utility, performance and safety of human-AI
systems ( Peeters et al., 2020 ).
From this perspective, the question whether or not “AGI at the
human level ”will be realized is not the most relevant question for
the time being. According to most AI scientists, this will certainlyhappen, and the key question is not IF this will happen, butWHEN, (e.g., Müller and Bostrom, 2016 ). At a system level,
however, multiple narrow AI applications are likely to overtakehuman intelligence in an increasingly wide range of areas.
CONCLUSIONS AND FRAMEWORK
The present paper focused on providing some more clarity andinsight into the fundamental characteristics, differences andidiosyncrasies of human and arti ﬁcial intelligences. First we
presented ideas and arguments to scale up and differentiate ourconception of intelligence, whether this may be human orartiﬁcial. Central to this broader, multi-faceted, conception
of intelligence is the notion that intelligence in itself is a
matter of information and computation, independent of its
physical substrate. However, the nature of this physicalsubstrate (biological/carbon or digital/silicon), willsubstantially determine its po tential envelope of cognitive
abilities and limitations. Organic cognitive faculties ofhumans have been very recently developed during theevolution of mankind. These “embryonal ”faculties have
been built on top of a biological neural network apparatusthat has been optimized for allostasis and (complex) perceptualmotor functions. Human cognition is therefore characterizedby various structural limitations and distortions in its capacity
to process certain forms of non-biological information.
Biological neural networks are, for example, not very capableof performing arithmetic calculations, for which my pocketcalculator ﬁts millions of times better. These inherent and
ingrained limitations, that are due to the biological andevolutionary origin of human intelligence, may be termed“hard-wired. ”
In line with the Moravic ’s paradox , we argued that intelligent
behavior is more than what we, as homo sapiens, ﬁnd dif ﬁcult. So
we should not confuse task-dif ﬁculty (subjective,
anthropocentric) with task-complexity (objective). Instead weadvocated a versatile conceptualization of intelligence and an
acknowledgment of its many possible forms and compositions.
This implies a high variety in types of biological or other forms ofhigh (general) intelligence with a broad range of possibleintelligence pro ﬁles and cognitive qualities (which may or may
not surpass ours in many ways). This would make us better awareof the most probable potentials of AI applications for the short-and medium-term future. For example, from this perspective, ourprimary research focus should be on those components of theintelligence spectrum that are relatively dif ﬁcult for the human
brain and relatively easy for machines. This involves primarily thecognitive component requiring calculation, arithmetic analysis,statistics, probability calculation, data analysis, logical reasoning,
memorization, et cetera.
In line with this we have advocated a modest, more humble,
view of our human, general intelligence. Which also implies that
human-level AGI should not be considered as the “golden
standard ”of intelligence (to be pursued with foremost
priority). Because of the many fundamental differencesbetween natural and arti ﬁcial intelligences, human-like AGI
will be very dif ﬁcult to accomplish in the ﬁrst place (and also
with relatively limited added value). In case an AGI will beaccomplished in the (far) future it will therefore probably havea completely different pro ﬁle of cognitive capacities and abilities
than we, as humans, have. When such an AGI has come so farthat it is able to “collaborate ”like a human, it will at the same time
be likely that can in many respects already function at highly
superior levels relative to what we are able to. For the time being,
however, it will not be very realistic and useful to aim at AGI thatincludes the broad scope of human perceptual-motor andcognitive abilities. Instead, the most pro ﬁtable AI applications
for the short- and mid-term future, will probably be based onmultiple narrow AI systems. These multiple narrow AIapplications may catch up with human intelligence in anincreasingly broader range of areas.
From this point of view we advocate not to dwell too
intensively on the AGI question, whether or when AI willoutsmart us, take our jobs, or how to endow it with all kinds
of human abilities. Given the present state of the art it may be wise
to focus more on the whole system of multiple AI innovationswith humans as a crucial connecting and supervising factor. Thisalso implies the establishment and formalization of legalboundaries and proper (effective, ethical, safe) goals for AIsystems ( Elands et al., 2019 ;Aliman, 2020 ). So this human
factor (legislator, user, “collaborator ”) needs to have good
insight into the characteristics and capacities of biological andartiﬁcial intelligence (under all sorts of tasks and working
conditions). Both in the workplace and in policy making themost fruitful AI applications will be to complement and
compensate for the inherent biological and cognitive
constraints of humans. For this reason, prominent issuesconcern how to use it intelligently? For what tasks and underwhat conditions decisions are safe to leave to AI and when ishuman judgment required? How can we capitalize on thestrengths of human intelligence and how to deploy AI systemseffectively to complement and compensate for the inherentconstraints of human cognition. See ( Hoffman and Johnson,
2019
;Shneiderman, 2020a ;Shneiderman, 2020b ) for recent
overviews.
In summary: No matter how intelligent autonomous AI agents
become in certain respects, at least for the foreseeable future, they
will remain unconscious machines. These machines have afundamentally different operating system (biological vs digital)with correspondingly different cognitive abilities and qualitiesthan people and other animals. So, before a proper “team
collaboration ”can start, the human team members will have
to understand these kinds of differences, i.e., how humaninformation processing and intelligence differs from thatof–the many possible and speci ﬁc variants of —AI systems.
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 9Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence