systems will have to be primarily determinated by their mutually
speciﬁc qualities. For example, tasks or task components that
appeal to capacities in which AI systems excel, will have to be less(or less fully) mastered by people, so that less training will
probably be required. AI systems are already much better than
people at logically and arithmetically correct gathering (selecting)and processing (weighing, prioritizing, analyzing, combining)large amounts of data. They do this quickly, accurately andreliably. They are also more stable (consistent) than humans,have no stress and emotions and have a great perseverance and amuch better retention of knowledge and skills than people. As amachine, they serve people completely and without any “self-
interest ”or“own hidden agenda. ”Based on these qualities AI
systems may effectively take over tasks, or task components, frompeople. However, it remains important that people continue to
master those tasks to a certain extent, so that they can take over
tasks or take adequate action if the machine system fails.
In general, people are better suited than AI systems for a much
broader spectrum of cognitive and social tasks under a widevariety of (unforeseen) circumstances and events ( Korteling et al.,
2018b ). People are also better at the social-psychosocial
interaction for the time being. For example, it is dif ﬁcult for
AI systems to interpret human language and -symbolism. Thisrequires a very extensive frame of reference, which, at least untilnow and for the near future, is dif ﬁcult to achieve within AI. As a
result of all these differences, people are still better at responding
(as a ﬂexible team) to unexpected and unpredictable situations
and creatively devising possibilities and solutions in open and ill-deﬁned tasks and across a wide range of different, and possibly
unexpected, circumstances. People will have to make extra use oftheir speci ﬁc human qualities, (i.e. what people are relatively good
at) and train to improve relevant competencies. In addition,human team members will have to learn to deal well with theoverall limitations of AIs. With such a proper division of tasks,capitalizing on the speci ﬁc qualities and limitations of humans
and AI systems, human decisional biases may be circumventedand better performance may be expected. This means that
enhancement of a team with intelligent machines having less
cognitive constraints and biases, may have more surplus valuethan striving at collaboration between humans and AI that havedeveloped the same (human) biases. Although cooperation inteams with AI systems may need extra training in order toeffectively deal with this bias-mismatch, this heterogeneity willprobably be better and safer. This also opens up the possibility ofa combination of high levels of meaningful human control ANDhigh levels of automation which is likely to produce the mosteffective and safe human-AI systems ( Elands et al., 2019 ;
Shneiderman, 2020a ). In brief: human intelligence is not the
golden standard for general intelligence; instead of aiming at
human-like AGI, the pursuit of AGI should thus focus on
effective digital/silicon AGI in conjunction with an optimal
conﬁguration and allocation of tasks.
Explainability and Trust
Developments in relation to arti ﬁcial learning, or deep
(reinforcement) learning, in particular have beenrevolutionary. Deep learning simulates a network resemblingthe layered neural networks of our brain. Based on large
quantities of data, the network learns to recognize patternsand links to a high level of accuracy and then connect themto courses of action without knowing the underlying causal links.
This implies that it is dif ﬁcult to provide deep learning AI with
some kind of transparency in how or why it has made a particularchoice by, for example, by expressing an intelligible reasoning (forhumans) about its decision process, like we do, (e.g. Belkom,
2019 ). In addition, reasoning about decisions like humans do is a
very malleable and ad hoc process (at least in humans). Humansare generally unaware of their implicit cognitions or attitudes, andtherefore not be able to adequately report on them. It is thereforerather dif ﬁcult for many humans to introspectively analyze their
mental states, as far as these are conscious, and attach the resultsof this analysis to verbal labels and descriptions, (e.g. Nosek et al.
(2011) . First, the human brain hardly reveals how it creates
conscious thoughts, (e.g. Feldman-Barret, 2017 ). What it
actually does is giving us the illusion that its products revealits inner workings. In other words: our conscious thoughts tell usnothing about the way in which these thoughts came about. Thereis also no subjective marker that distinguishes correct reasoningprocesses from erroneous ones ( Kahneman and Klein, 2009 ). The
decision maker therefore has no way to distinguish betweencorrect thoughts, emanating from genuine knowledge andexpertize, and incorrect ones following from inappropriateneuro-evolutionary processes, tendencies, and primal
intuitions. So here we could ask the question: isn ’t it more
trustworthy to have a real black box, than to listen to aconfabulating one? In addition, according to Werkhoven et al.
(2018) demanding explainability observability, or transparency
(Belkom, 2019 ;van den Bosch et al., 2019 ) may cause arti ﬁcial
intelligent systems to constrain their potential bene ﬁt for human
society, to what can be understood by humans.
Of course we should not blindly trust the results generated by
AI. Like other ﬁelds of complex technology, (e.g. Modeling &
Simulation), AI systems need to be veri ﬁed (meeting
speci ﬁcations) and validated (meeting the systems ’goals) with
regard to the objectives for which the system was designed. In
general, when a system is properly veri ﬁed and validated, it may
be considered safe, secure and ﬁt for purpose. It therefore
deserves our trust for (logically) comprehensible and objectivereasons (although mistakes still can happen). Likewise peopletrust in the performance of aero planes and cell phones despitewe are almost completely ignorant about their complex innerprocesses. Like our own brains, arti ﬁcial neural networks are
fundamentally intransparant ( Nosek et al., 2011 ;Feldman-
Barret, 2017 ). Therefore, trust in AI should be primarily
based on its objective performance. This forms a more
important base than providing trust on the basis of subjective
(trickable) impressions, stories, or images aimed at belief andappeal to the user. Based on empirical validation research,developers and users can explicitly verify how well the systemis doing with respect to the set of values and goals for which themachine was designed. At some point, humans may want to trustthat goals can be achieved against less cost and better outcomes,when we accept solutions even if they may be less transparent forhumans ( Werkhoven et al., 2018 ).
Frontiers in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 4 | Article 622364 7Korteling et al. Human vs Arti ﬁcial Intelligence