coupled cluster (CCSD(T)) based training data, showing great
potential for applications where a prediction accuracy beyond
density functional theory (DFT) is needed. In order to further
improve data ef ﬁciency, GNNFF190and NewtonNet192introduce
more physical priors in the form of latent force vectors as well as
operators containing physical information. This leads to good
prediction accuracy with higher computational ef ﬁciency at only
1–10% of the training data compared to other models.
To improve generalization, hybrid models such as
SpookyNet193explicitly include electronic structure information
such as total charge or spin state, not included in most machine-
learned potentials, by applying self-attention in a transformer
architecture. Empirical augmentations to include non-local and
long-range contributions such as electrostatic interaction and
dispersion improve transferability and at the same time enable
interpretability193.
GNN for large-scale MD simulations . Many applications
require models that scale to large system sizes. For example,
simulations of biological systems, e.g., to study protein dynamics
or drug binding mechanisms involve orders of magnitude more
atoms than many other applications, while con ﬁguration changes
occur on much longer timescales (10−3−103s) than a typical MD
timestep (10−15s). One way to address this enormous challenge is
the development of models in a QM/MM-inspired approach,
where only a small relevant subsystem, e.g., a reaction site, needs
to be simulated at ab initio accuracy, while the rest of the system
can be described using classical force ﬁelds.
GNNs also have the potential to support (adaptive) coarse-
graining methods. They were shown to be useful in mapping
atoms of a molecule into coarse-grained groups needed for large-
scale simulations. The Deep Supervised Graph Partitioning
Model (DSGPM)194 treats mapping operators as a graph
segmentation problem. It predicted a coarse-grained mapping
nearly indistinguishable from human annotations (see Fig. 2d).
Furthermore, the machine learning framework by Wang et al.195,
which generates a coarse-grained force ﬁeld, was further
improved by Husic et al.196replacing manual input features with
a GNN architecture making the models transferable across
different molecular systems such as small proteins.
Excited states dynamics . GNNs were also shown as a very
promising tool to tackle the challenging task of simulating excited
state dynamics of complex systems197. Unlike ground-state
dynamics, multiple potential energy surfaces as well as their
crossings and couplings must be considered, leading to a higher
dimensionality and complexity of the problem. Furthermore,
even the generation of reliable training data using quantum
mechanical calculations is challenging.
Westermayr et al. developed SchNarc198for photodynamics
simulations by adapting SchNet for excited states potentials,
forces, and couplings, combining it with the MD framework
SHARC (surface hopping including arbitrary couplings). While
SchNarc is molecule speci ﬁc and was applied to two compounds,
CH 2NHþ
2and CSH 2, Axelrod et al. developed the ﬁrst
transferable excited state potential (see Fig. 2d)199. The diabatic
artiﬁcial neural network (DANN) is based on PaiNN combined
with a physics-informed diabatic model for photodynamic
simulations for virtual screening. The resulting machine-learned
potential is transferable among azobenzene derivatives and
estimated to be multiple orders of magnitude faster than the
underlying quantum mechanical calculation method, even
considering computational effort for transfer which required
additional training data.
Reaction prediction and retrosynthesis . While reliable property
prediction and simulation methods are crucial for virtual mole-
cular design, synthesis is often one of the main bottlenecks in theoverall development process of new molecules. Progress in
reaction prediction and retrosynthesis, i.e., the prediction of a
reaction outcome and the design of synthetic routes for a desired
product, can help to accelerate and also automate200the devel-
opment of new molecules. However, the two problems are still
considered challenging due to the vast chemical space and cur-
rently require skills and experience from well-trained chemists.
Therefore, many machine learning algorithms, e.g., seq2seq
models and transformers, have been proposed for synthesis pre-
diction and retrosynthesis, aiming at reducing manual effort. In
many cases, molecules are embedded as SMILES codes, and
reaction predictions as well as retrosynthesis predictions are
formulated as natural language processing tasks201–204. Further-
more, ﬁngerprints are widely used as structure encodings and
neural networks trained on them are able to predict the most
probable transformations for given molecules205,206. GNN based
graph embeddings have recently attracted growing attention, due
to the natural representation of molecular structures as graphs.
Prediction of reactivity with GNNs has been formalized into
reaction center identi ﬁcation and graph edit tasks. Jin et al.
developed a GNN-based approach to scoring each pair of
connected atoms with bond change likelihood, followed by the
selection of bonds with the highest score and transformation to
potential products using a Weisfeiler-Lehman Difference Network
(WLDN)207,208. The WLN architecture is also adopted by Struble
and coworkers209to perform multitask prediction of aromatic C-H
functionalization reactions with site selectivity, while Guan et al.
predict reaction outcomes with regio-selectivity through combin-
ing molecule representations learned by the WLN with on-the- ﬂy
calculated quantum mechanical descriptors210. In 2020, Nikitin
et al. introduced a strategy to treat reaction prediction as a node
classi ﬁcation problem, where the role of each node in the reactant
graphs is predicted by a GNN with a self-attention mechanism and
pseudo-global nodes211.
Furthermore, predicting reaction products as the result of a
sequence of graph editing actions on the reactant molecules has
also been investigated. One example is the work by Do et al.where graph editing actions are predicted by a reinforcement
learning algorithm based on reactant and reagent molecule
representations generated by GNNs
212. In 2019, Bradshaw et al.
developed a generative model that uses GNNs to predict a series
of electron movements for reactions, through which the products
and reaction mechanisms are predicted at the same time213.
Apart from product prediction, GNNs are also employed to
predict important reaction properties including bond dissociation
energies214,215, transition states216, and activation energies217.
For the retrosynthesis task, recent studies can be divided into
template-based and template-free approaches. The former matches
the graph embedding of the product molecule to a large number of
reaction templates, which determine bond changes and thus
predict possible reactants, while the latter bypass the templates and
directly modi ﬁes input graphs to generate synthetic precursors.
Examples of template-based retrosynthesis prediction include the
work by Dai et al., who predict the probability distribution of
reaction templates to be ﬁtted to the reaction outcomes by a
Conditional Graph Logic Network (GLN)218. The reactants are
generated by the GLN as the result of a probability prediction given
the reaction outcome and the selected template. Another example
by Ishida et al. uses GCNs to classify single retrosynthesis steps into
reaction templates, where integrated gradients are applied to
visualize atom contributions toward the GCN prediction219.M o r e
recently, Chen and coworkers proposed a framework based on
MPNNs with a global attention mechanism to predict the reaction
center of a target molecule, as well as the corresponding “local”
reaction template based on atoms and bonds in the reaction center,
which is then applied to generate reactants220.COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 REVIEW ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat 9