(ACSF)65,66, angular Fourier series (AFS)67, the smooth overlap
of atomic orbitals (SOAP)67, partial radial distribution function
(PRDF)68, many-body tensor (MBTR)69, Spectral London
Axilrod-Teller-Muto (SLATM)70and the Faber-Christensen-
Huang-Lilienfeld (FCHL)71representation. Many of those
descriptors expand geometric information into symmetry or
basis functions. The resulting vector representation is typically
used as input for conventional machine learning models such as
neural networks or Gaussian Processes. Geometric information
can also be used for node or edge representations in graph neural
networks. Graph networks have been adopting distances61,
bond72and even dihedral angles26,73, motivated by the
comparison to force ﬁelds74. Angles or distances are similarly
expanded into Gaussian-like22, radial23and spherical Fourier-
Bessel functions28. Although architectures such as the Behler-
Parinello (BP) neural network potentials8or SchNet22are not
strictly graph networks in terms of the chemical graph, and often
do not refer to themselves as such, they can be summarized
within the term geometric deep learning75,76.
Under the term geometric deep learning, architectures and
descriptors are summarized that focus on manifolds, geometric
data, or structured data77,78. This includes the work on 3D point
clouds79, which aims at learning segmentation and object
detection of a large number of 3D points. In the case of
PointNet ++80a graph is constructed which reduces the point set
from learned descriptors using the points ’features. Commonly,
adjacency matrices are de ﬁned by using distance cutoffs between
points in 3D clouds, while edges carry explicit information about
distances between nodes, i.e., points. Graph pooling or coarsening
algorithms81,82that reduce the input representation and condense
structure information are also promising for GNNs to tackle
larger molecules such as proteins or polymers.
Eventually, the representation of materials for graph networks
can be structural or geometric but must follow certain symmetry
considerations83,84. For example molecules without external ﬁelds
have rotational and translation symmetries. If they are incorpo-
rated into the model and its representation, less data are requiredand overall performance can be improved. This concept can be
extended to equivariant representations
85,86, which in combina-
tion with equivariant ﬁlters, enable equivariant graph neural
networks29,87. Scalar features are extended to (directional)
features, like vectors and higher-order tensors (in the geometric
context of the term tensor), since, embedded in 3D Euclidean
space, they can transform predictably under geometric rotation,
reﬂection, and translation25,87.
For solid crystals and periodic structures, the periodicity and
space group symmetries are additional symmetries to be added to
the representation for GNNs. Periodic extensions of the crystal
graph2,53of the unit cell have been introduced61and their
representation builds on the idea of a k-point mesh of
Monkhorst-Pack grid points to sample the Brillouin zone88.
State-of-the-art architectures and benchmarks . Different
architectures have been proposed in the literature to improve the
performance of GNNs on typical tasks arising in chemistry and
materials sciences. Table 2shows a list of popular benchmark
datasets for different materials classes, i.e., molecules62,89–99or
crystals100–102, and respective supervised tasks, i.e., regression or
classi ﬁcation. While some datasets contain experimental data, the
largest datasets typically use computational methods to generate
labels. Most datasets in this table can be downloaded from data
collections such as TUDatasets103and MoleculeNet95. While a
large variety of datasets and tasks exist for chemistry, there are
only a few large datasets for materials, limited to crystalline
structures. Recent datasets were constructed by ﬁltering theMaterials Project (MP)100and Open Quantum Materials Data-
base (OQMD)101for speci ﬁc targets such as electronic band-gap
or formation energy while removing incomplete data88.
In Section ‘Basic principles ’, the message passing framework
for GNNs has been illustrated. Here, we will discuss modi ﬁed and
extended GNN models, which are relevant for materials science
and chemistry. However, listing all graph network architectures
would be beyond the scope of this review.
Some of the earliest work on neural networks for molecular
graphs dates back to the 90s and 2000s, without explicitly
referring to the term graph neural network8,33. In 2017, a graph
convolutional network was proposed by Kipf et al.34for semi-
supervised learning, which can be interpreted as a ﬁrst-order
approximation of spectral graph convolutions35,36. In Table 3,w e
distinguish GNN architectures that operate on the graph ’s
spectrum in category spectral convolution and GCN models that
process the structure of the graph in spatial convolution, which in
principle includes message passing schemes that pass information
along edges in the graph. We added a soft distinction in this
category to separate models that follow the convolution naming
and models that explicitly refer to the term message passing and
its extension.
The addition of more complicated node aggregation functions
such as gated recurrent units104or long short-term memories105
has been employed by GraphSAGE for inductive learning106. For
graph embedding tasks, a state- or super-node21, which is
connected to all nodes, extends the message passing framework to
help extract global graph information, in addition to the ﬁnal
node aggregation step. A message passing neural network
(MPNN) with edge features capturing bond information was
applied to molecular graphs21and crystal graphs53. A variant of
the original MPNN involves directed edge embeddings and
message passing between edges in D-MPNN40. Known from
models in natural language processing107, masked self-attention
layers which attend over the node ’s neighborhood have been
suggested for graph attention networks108and used explicitly for
molecules in Attentive Fingerprint models54. More attention-
based architectures are listed in Table 3.
Besides graph models which focus on the chemical graph, there
is a large group of models explicitly designed for learning
quantum properties. They commonly take atomic numbers and
positions as input and train on data derived from (approximate)
solutions of the steady-state Schrödinger equation. A popular
benchmark dataset is the QM9 dataset62with 13 quantum
properties of small molecules with up to nine atoms apart from
hydrogen. The improvement of graph networks on QM9 property
prediction over the past few years is highlighted in Fig. 1b.
Among the ﬁrst graph networks that reached chemical accuracy
on QM9 is SchNet22, which makes use of convolutional ﬁlters for
inter-atomic distances and applies skip connections between node
updates. One improvement to SchNet was to update the
positional features along the graph edges as seen in Jørgensen
et al.109. The application of GNNs to crystals using geometric
information has been explored by MEGNET61, which further
leverages global properties such as temperature, which is of
importance for solid-state crystalline systems. The potential
energy of molecules depends on bond angles and therefore, in
DimeNet28,72, edge embedding uses messages passing steps from
atomic triplets and bond pairs in order to incorporate angular
features. This formalism has been adopted in other recent
GNNs110,111and can be further extended to include dihedral (or
torsion) angles26,112,113.
For explicit angle plus node information in directed edge
updates as in DimeNet28,72, the message passing essentially
operates on higher order paths73ork-pairs of atoms50. This is
unfeasible for fully connected larger graphs because the numberREVIEW ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6
4 COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat