extensions and modi ﬁcations of the message passing schemes are
discussed in Section ‘State-of-the-art architectures and bench-
marks ’and include edge updates40, skip connections41, and
geometric information26,42,43.
A main open research question of GNNs revolves around their
limited expressive performance for speci ﬁc tasks44and how
GNNs compare with Weisfeiler –Lehman hierarchy for graph
isomorphism testing45,46. With regard to this topic, there are
many promising extensions to GNNs proposed in literature, such
as hypergraph representations47,48, universal equivariant
models49or higher-order graph networks50. Furthermore, the
challenge of over-smoothing due to commonly used aggregation
functions38, transfer and multitask learning51, as well as training
(in)stability52are subject of current research.
Structure representation . Many graph networks directly use the
chemical graph as input, representing both molecules21andinorganic compounds24,53, and offering advantages over com-
positional or ﬁxed-sized vector representations in terms of ﬂex-
ibility and scalability. Consequently, GNNs can be applied for
tasks such as drug design or material screening54, which require
knowledge about functional groups, scaffolds55or the full che-
mical structure and its topology. In molecular applications, the
chemical graph is often extracted from SMILES codes and aug-
mented with features that can be readily obtained from che-
minformatics software such as RDKit56or OpenBabel57.
Common features for atoms, bonds, and the molecule itself are
listed in Table 1. Besides hand-crafted input features, learned
embeddings of molecules and materials motivated by word
embedding techniques in natural language processing have beenexplored which can be used for downstream tasks
48,58–60. For
speciﬁc tasks in chemistry, the connectivity of atoms in molecules
(i.e., the molecular graph) contains suf ﬁcient and complete
information to predict given molecular properties which do not
depend on the exact geometry. Geometry or stereochemical
information can be taken into account e.g., in form of additional
edge features representing the distance between atoms61.I n
contrast to that, in materials applications, atom connectivity is
not well de ﬁned in most cases (apart from e.g., covalently linked
frameworks) and graphs have to be extracted from crystal
structures based on distance heuristics.
The sole chemical graph and its connectivity are often not
sufﬁcient to accurately predict quantum-mechanical or
electronic-structure properties62that strongly depend on the
exact molecular geometry, even though ground-state or equili-
brium geometries can in principle be inferred from the molecular
graph alone. In tasks that intrinsically involve geometric
dependencies, e.g., predicting the potential energy surface of
molecules and materials, it becomes obvious that geometric
information is required. The representation of positional and
geometric information to learn quantum properties has been
explored among others in the work of Lilienfeld et al.63and
Behler et al.64and lead to a large variety of descriptors. Some
examples of descriptors are atomic centered symmetry functions
Fig. 1 Overview of the message passing principle and performances of GNNS. a Schematic depiction of the message passing operation for molecules and
crystalline materials. bQM9 benchmark. Mean absolute error of the prediction of internal (red circles), highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO, orange
triangles), and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO, inverted blue triangles) energies for different GNN models since 2017.
Table 1 Table of typical (molecular) graph features used in
literature54,269.
Graph-level Attributes Description
nodes atom-type type of atoms (one-hot)
chirality R or S (one-hot or null)
degree number of covalent bonds (one-hot)radical number of radical electrons (integer)
hybridization sp, sp
2,s p3…(one-hot)
aromaticity part of an aromatic system (binary)
charge formal charge (integer)
edges bond-type single, double, …(one-hot)
conjugation is conjugated (binary)
ring bond is part of a ring (binary)
stereo None, Any, Z, E (one-hot)
graph weight average atomic weight ( ﬂoat)
bonds average bonds per atom ( ﬂoat)
They can be further combined with geometric features61.COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 REVIEW ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat 3