which are chemical graphs of atoms and bonds, or even 3D
structures or point clouds of atoms. Therefore, GNNs have access
to a complete representation of materials on the atomic level22,
with a lot of ﬂexibility to incorporate physical laws23, as well as
phenomena on larger scales, such as doping and disorder. Using
that information, GNNs can learn internal materials representa-
tions that are useful and informative for speci ﬁc tasks such as the
prediction of given materials ’properties. Therefore, GNNs can
complement or even replace hand-crafted feature representations
which were and are widely used in the context of natural sciences
in general. A similar trend toward representation learning
methods has also been observed in other application areas during
the last years, where end-to-end trainable models show a sys-
tematic advantage over traditional feature-based methods24.
However, despite promising recent developments toward higher
sample ef ﬁciency25,26, this often comes at the cost of higher data
requirements27, potentially limiting the applicability of existing
GNNs to applications where large amounts of data are available.
Overall, GNNs outperformed conventional machine learning
models in predicting molecular properties throughout the last
years22,28,29. While GNNs are not as widely applied (yet) in
materials science as they are in chemistry, there are advantages
and the potential to outperform other machine learning methods
and thus boost virtual materials design and materials science in
general, which will be discussed in this article.
In section ‘Graph neural networks in materials science and
chemistry ’, we will introduce the general formalism of GNNs and
discuss the way they transform the atomic structure of materials and
molecules and use it to predict materials ’properties. We will present
and compare state-of-the-art arch itectures and benchmark datasets,
as well as summarize initial efforts t oward inverse materials design
based on GNNs. The section ‘Applications ’covers a wide range of
current application areas but also open challenges for GNNs in
chemistry and materials science. In section ‘Outlook ’we conclude
with a perspective on necessary and expected future developments
and so far unused potential o f GNNs in materials science.
Graph neural networks in materials science and chemistry
Basic principles . In the most general sense, graphs are used to
describe abstract structures consisting of entities or objects
represented as vertices (or nodes) and their connections, called
edges. Formally, a graph is a tuple G=(V,E) of a set of vertices
v∈Vand a set of edges ev,w=(v,w)∈E, which de ﬁnes the
connection between vertices. Potential tasks that can be solved
using graph neural networks (GNNs) include classi ﬁcation or
regression of graph properties on graph level (molecular property
prediction), node level (classi ﬁcation of members, i.e., nodes, of a
social graph), or edge level (prediction of relations, i.e., edges,
between objects in a scene graph). In materials science and
chemistry, most tasks involve graph-level predictions, which will
be the focus of this paper.
The concept of graphs is used in mathematical chemistry to
represent the structure of compounds. The molecular structure is
represented by an undirected graph, where nodes correspond to
atoms and edges correspond to chemical bonds. In fact, chemical
graphs were ﬁrst considered as early as in 187430and their idea
traces back further31, which may place them even before the
advent of the term graph in modern graph theory32. The
description of molecules as graphs can also be transferred to
solid-state materials, even though bonds might not be uniquely
deﬁned in crystals, and the exact three-dimensional arrangement
of atoms plays a more decisive role.
Since their proposal17–19, GNNs have become a popular
machine learning method for processing irregularly shaped data
encoded as graphs. They can be seen as an alternative toapproaches, where prede ﬁned feature representations of mole-
cules or materials are used as input to conventional machine
learning models such as densely connected neural networks,
random forest models, or Gaussian process regression models. Inthe case of GNNs, the full molecular structure or even geometry is
used as input and the GNN itself learns informative molecular
representations to predict given target properties. Due to their
popularity and wide applicability, a large number of different
GNN architectures have been proposed
18,20,21,33–35. While the
exact architecture type can notably differ, ranging from the
initially proposed recursive GNNs18to spectral neural ﬁlters35,36
and ﬁnally to spatial or convolutional GNNs34, most GNNs
designed for chemistry and materials science can be summarized
under the framework of Message Passing Graph Neural Networks
(MPNN) as suggested by Gilmer et al.21. In this section, we give
an overview of ideas of the message passing framework and
discuss how learned graph- or node-level embeddings can be used
for materials property prediction.
For MPNNs, associated node or edge information (e.g., atom
and bond types) is commonly provided by node attributes h0
v2
Rdand edge attributes h0
e2Rc. Details about feature and
structure representations are discussed in Section ‘Structure
representation ’. Using node and edge features in combination
with the graph ’s structure, GNNs are capable of deriving a node-
level embedding of the graph, i.e., learned vectors representing
each atom including its individual chemical environment. This is
done in the so-called message passing phase, in which node
information is propagated in form of messages mvthrough edges
to neighboring nodes. The embedding of each node is then
updated based on all incoming messages. The locality of the
message passing is sought to be alleviated by repeating the
message passing phase t=1…Ktimes, in principle allowing
information to travel longer distances, i.e., within the K-hop
neighborhood. In practice, however, information from long-range
dependencies can be distorted in node bottlenecks, referred to as
over-squashing37, or be washed out, leaving indistinguishable
representations of neighboring nodes, known as over-
smoothing38. Note that for typical (not fully linear) molecules
and crystal unit cells with natoms, only approximately log n
message passing steps are required to pass information to all
other atoms. The information processing is facilitated by the
learnable functions Ut(⋅) for node update and Mt(⋅) for the
message generation. Finally, in the readout phase, a graph-level
embedding yis obtained by pooling node embeddings of the
entire graph via a parametric readout function R(⋅). The ﬁnal
representation of the graph is used for training both regression
and classi ﬁcation tasks. In summary, the MPNN scheme reads21:
mtþ1
v¼∑
w2NðvÞMtðht
v;ht
w;evwÞð1Þ
htþ1
v¼Utðht
v;mtþ1
vÞ ð2Þ
y¼RðfhK
vjv2GgÞ; ð3Þ
where N(v)={u∈V∣(v,u)∈E} denotes the set of neighbors of
node v. Note that readout and aggregation can be in principle any
mathematical operation that is permutation invariant, e.g., a sum,
mean or maximum operation similar to Eq. ( 1) or learnable such
as the Set2Set encoder proposed by Vinyals et al.39, which was
originally used for the readout R(⋅). The learnable functions are
mostly neural networks and eventually determine the perfor-
mance characteristics of the GNN, both in prediction accuracy
and computational cost. Figure 1a shows a schematic of the
message passing scheme for the example of a molecular graph.
Message passing can also be understood as a convolution
operation running over each node in a graph. DifferentREVIEW ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6
2 COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat