splits, cleaning steps, e.g., of ill-converged molecules in QM9,
multi-task vs. single task settings, where a separate model for each
QM9 target is usually trained61, and differences in used loss
metrics (a mean absolute error loss was found to yield loweroverall test errors
23than the mean squared error loss used in
previous models22, although the mean absolute error is typically
given as a benchmark reference). It has to be noted that
hyperparameters are generally very important and are often not
exhaustively optimized for GNNs which can cause differences in
performance apart from the model architecture125–127.
GNNs in generative models and reinforcement learning .A n
important challenge in materials science is inverse materials
design, aiming to generate new materials or molecules that pos-
sess required properties and ful ﬁll speci ﬁc criteria128. GNN-based
generative methods have been suggested to deal with this chal-
lenge in the context of chemistry, e.g., for drug discovery129and
retrosynthesis130. In most cases, only the chemical structure of
molecules is generated, i.e., the connectivity of the molecular
graph, without additional information on speci ﬁc 3D geometry.
Initial graph generative models were designed to generate
graphs based on simpli ﬁed theoretical assumptions, such as the
random Erdös-Renyi (ER) model131, and improvements thereof
using small-world approaches132or the Kronecker graph
model133. While these traditional approaches attempt to model
real-world graphs, they are based on several assumptions about
the nature of graphs generated and are thus in ﬂexible for many
data-related applications. Machine learning approaches for graph
generation are promising because they can directly learn to
generate realistic graphs from the distribution of observed datawhile accommodating goal-directed tasks such as property
optimization. Examples include variational autoencoders
(VAEs)
134, generative adversarial networks (GANs)135, reinforce-
ment learning136, recurrent neural networks (RNNs)137, and
ﬂow-based generative models138–140.
Several architectures of VAEs have been developed to work
with different types of input data, such as images141, text-based
data142,143, or graphs144,145. Kipf et al. introduced a variational
graph auto-encoder (VGAE) to learn latent representations of
undirected graphs and applied it to a link prediction task in
citation networks144. Liu et al. introduced a Constrained Graph
Variational Autoencoder (CGVAE), in which node type informa-
tion is learned from and added to the latent vectors146. Starting
from a set of these latent node representations, CGVAE iteratively
forms valid molecules following hard valency constraints derived
from the explicit node types. Jin et al. introduced Junction Tree
Variational Autoencoder (JT-VAE) to work directly on molecular
graphs and achieved an improvement over baseline methods in
molecular design tasks147. The JT-VAE approach encodes and
decodes molecules in two steps: First, tree-structured objects
called junction trees are generated which represent trees of
molecular subgraphs and their arrangements. GNN-based
encoders and decoders are used to generate latent embeddings
of the junction trees. In parallel, molecular graph embeddings are
generated using GNNs, and junction trees are decoded into
molecular representations21. These are then encoded to a latent
vector and decoded back to their original representations using
graph and tree-based encoders and decoders. While this scheme
works well for molecules, it is hard to adapt for crystalline
materials, where the graphs are less tree-like and the de ﬁnition of
scaffolds is not as straightforward.
GANs have shown promising results in a number of ﬁelds,
such as image148or sequence149generation, and have also been
applied to 3D grid representations of materials150and graphs151.
De Cao et al. introduced MolGAN152as a framework forgenerating molecular graphs using GNNs. The generator learns to
directly output the graph ’s representation. While the standard
GAN loss forces the generator to generate molecules following a
particular prior distribution, the authors add a reinforcementlearning (RL) objective to generate molecules with optimized
properties. The generation of invalid molecules is avoided by the
assignment of zero reward to them. While direct prediction of
outputs is appealing in methods using VAEs or GANs, they
usually predict outputs of small, ﬁxed sizes. Therefore, another
branch of deep graph generative models employs sequential
decision-making procedures to overcome these limitations.
You et al. identify three challenging aspects when graphs are
generated directly
137. First, as these methods need to model the
adjacency matrix in some form, the output size grows as Oðn2Þfor
graphs with a maximum number of nnodes. This is especially
undesirable for large and sparse graphs as the model dedicates
much of its capacity to learn which nodes are not connected.
Second, graph isomorphism complicates the calculation of
reconstruction losses for VAEs and usually involves expensive
graph matching procedures. Third, VAEs assume the outputs, e.g.,
the entries of an adjacency matrix, to be i.i.d., which is not true inpractice. As a solution, the authors propose GraphRNN, a
framework in which graphs are represented as sequences of node
and edge additions. By using recurrent networks, graph constitu-
ents are generated conditioned on previous additions, thus taking
into account the history of modi ﬁcations. Another sequential graph
generation scheme was proposed by Li et al.
153. In this framework,
the generation process is decomposed into modular steps, e.g.,
whether to add a node or which nodes to connect. Each module is a
fully-connected neural network modeling probabilities of executing
particular types of modi ﬁcations.
You et al. suggested a purely RL-based approach based on
Graph Convolutional Policy Networks (GCPN)154(see Fig. 2b).
In this setting, the agent explores the chemical space and
generates new molecular graphs by modifying the starting
molecules according to the reward function, representing the
molecular property to optimize. Atance et al. recently introduced
a similar RL approach based on Gated GNNs155, outperforming
other GNN-based approaches in molecular graph generation
tasks156. Another sequential approach based on conditional graph
generative models has been used by Li et al. on drug design
tasks157. The previous two works inspired recent molecular graph
generation frameworks such as GraphINVENT156.
More recently, attention has turned to generative modeling
based on normalizing ﬂows (NFs)158, capable of modeling
complex target distributions by directly mapping them to simpler
ones using revertible bijective transformations. NFs potentially
offer signi ﬁcant improvements in the ﬁeld of graph generation
because they allow exact evaluation and inference of the
probability distribution. This approach has been applied in a
number of molecular tasks129,159–161.
Overall, graph generative models have been extensively applied
for molecular materials and stayed up to date with recent
developments in the ﬁeld of graph generation. However, these
remain under-explored for crystalline materials, mainly due to
graph representation challenges162.W h i l e ﬁnding such a reliable
graph representation is still an open question128and will likely
remain case-speci ﬁc, we believe that using generative models based
on GNNs is a promising research direction in inverse design,
especially given current breakthroughs such as normalizing ﬂows.
Applications
After introducing the basic principles of GNNs as well as selected
GNN architectures and benchmark datasets, we will provide a
structured overview of GNN applications in chemistry andREVIEW ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6
6 COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat