is challenging to solve with conventional machine learning
models, as they typically require prede ﬁned molecular repre-
sentations (e.g., molecular feature vectors or molecular ﬁnger-
prints) which are informative for the label to predict. GNNs haveaccess to the full chemical graph or even molecular geometry and
learn to extract feature representations, which yields an advantage
over other machine learning models. Compared to domain
knowledge-informed feature representations combined with
conventional machine learning models, e.g., Gaussian process
regression, GNNs often have comparably high data requirements
but outperform conventional models when enough data is
available. Once trained, accurate machine learning models can
then be used to accelerate the high-throughput virtual screening
of molecules
163,164toﬁnd promising candidate molecules for
many different applications. However, property prediction is not
the only application of GNNs. They were also successfully applied
to provide trainable interatomic potentials to accelerate costly ab
initio molecular dynamics simulations, as well as to predict the
outcome of chemical reactions and synthetic routes.
Molecular property prediction . Among the most relevant mole-
cular properties in the area of drug discovery are the ADMET
(absorption, distribution, metabolism, exclusion, and toxicity)
properties of potential drug-like molecules (see Fig. 2a)165–168.A
review on GNNs for drug design can be found in Xiong et al.169.
In recent years, one application focus were Covid 19 related
challenges, where GNNs were used for e.g., ﬁnding new drug
candidates170or detecting infections in medical images171,172.
Similar methods are also applicable to other challenges in drug
design and medicine.
Furthermore, GNNs were applied to predict electronic and
optical properties of molecules. For many applications such as
organic electronics, organic photovoltaics, and organic light-
emitting diodes, the energy of the highest occupied molecular
orbital (HOMO), the lowest unoccupied MO (LUMO), and the
optical gap are of high importance for the device ef ﬁciency. These
properties can therefore be found in numerousdatabases
62,90,173–177. Related properties include (transition) dipole
moment62,178, ionization potential, and electron af ﬁnity90.I n
devices, these properties often depend on the molecular environ-
ment, which can be modeled and accounted for with GNNs (see
Fig. 2a)179. For certain applications such as opto-electronic
materials174,175, GNNs have been proposed to complement scalar
molecular properties with spectroscopic properties112.
The aforementioned properties are often determined using
computationally expensive simulation methods. Cheaper, mostly
semi-empirical methods can provide fast but potentially less
accurate estimates. GNNs have been used to represent Kohn-
Sham wavefunctions and energy levels in a minimal basis
representation180, as well as for delta-learning from semi-
empirical methods to DFT computed molecular properties177.
For applications where not enough data is available to train
GNNs, the representations learned by GNNs on large generic
datasets can also be transferred to supervised tasks with little
data20,181,182, where they are used as input for other machine
learning models such as gradient-boosted models183.
Further application areas of GNNs spread across all application
domains of molecular materials, including the prediction of
toxicity of molecules to bees (see Fig. 2a),184determining the
quality of a material for fuel ignition185and the classi ﬁcation of
different phases of materials, in particular water186. It should be
noted that another review paper on molecular property predic-
tion utilizing GNNs exists by Wieder et al.120. In many
application areas, tools such as GNNExplainer187are used to
validate and analyze GNN predictions, e.g., in the prediction of
scents188and for porous organic cages189.Dynamics simulations . Molecular dynamics simulations are an
important tool for understanding dynamic processes and
mechanisms on a microscopic level in various areas of chemistry,
biology, and materials science. Besides the prediction of equili-brium properties of molecules and materials, they also offer the
possibility to simulate excited states and non-equilibrium
dynamics, as well as slow processes and rare events.
In molecular dynamics simulations, total energy and forces are
needed in every time step to propagate the system. Computa-
tionally demanding ab initio methods that calculate the energy
and forces of a particular atomic con ﬁguration of a system at
every time step are therefore often too costly. Machine learning
methods can replace ab initio calculations to speed up
simulations while ideally retaining their accuracy
9. Therefore,
long and highly accurate MD simulations can be performed based
on machine-learned potentials, which have not been possible
using classical force ﬁelds nor ab initio methods. GNNs are
perfectly suited for this task, as atomic forces depend on the
(local) atomic environment and global aggregation is not needed.
The concept of integrating machine learning models in
atomistic simulations was demonstrated multiple times using
for example SchNet22, PhysNet23, DimeNet28, or DimeNet ++72.
However, there are several open challenges that need to be
overcome in order to move to larger systems, longer time scales,
higher data ef ﬁciency, better generalization and transferability,
and eventually more accurate and realistic applications. Usually,
machine learning models learn the potential energy surface and
calculate forces using derivatives of the energy predictions. This
ensures that energy predictions and forces are consistent. Since
only forces are required in MD simulations, architectures are
being developed in which these forces are predicted directly —so
that the costly derivative calculations are omitted. In the GNN
framework (GNNFF190), a message passing step builds upon an
embedding step in which node and edge features include atom
type and interatomic distances respectively. Force magnitudes per
atom are then calculated from the sum of the forces of the
neighboring atoms. Evaluation on the ISO17 database revealshigher force accuracies compared to SchNet while being
1.6 × faster. The approach is also shown to be scalable to larger
systems. Due to the direct prediction of the forces, the energy of
the system is however not necessarily preserved, making the
model not suitable to predict energy-related properties.
ForceNet
191is based on an encoder-decoder architecture and
tries to completely capture 3D geometry through a speci ﬁc design
of the message passing structure. In contrast to models such as
SchNet and DimeNet, ForceNet encodes physical information
without constraining the model architecture to enforce physical
invariances. Instead, physics-based data augmentation is per-
formed on the data level to achieve rotational invariance. The
evaluation was performed on the OC20 dataset which contains
DFT calculated energies and per-atom forces of more than 200
million large atomic structures (20 –200 atoms) including non-
equilibrium structures from optimization trajectories. The result-
ing mean absolute force errors are comparable to DimeNet ++,
while being faster in training and prediction.
A promising approach to encoding more physical information
about a system is the design of equivariant models. Models that
are based on equivariant message passing, e.g., PaiNN29,
NequIP25, NewtonNet192, are shown to signi ﬁcantly increase
data ef ﬁciency and predictive performance compared to models
that are based on invariant convolutions. The Neural Equivariant
Interatomic Potential (NequIP25) predicts both energy and forces
utilizing E(3)-equivariant convolutions over geometric tensors.
Evaluated on the MD17 data set its accuracy exceeds those of
existing models while needing up to three orders of magnitude
less training data. Due to its data ef ﬁciency, it was also used withREVIEW ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6
8 COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat