For template-free retrosynthesis, Yan et al. use an edge-
enhanced graph attention network to locate the reaction center in
product molecules, which are transformed through bond
dissociation into molecular fragments called synthons221. The
synthon graphs are converted to SMILES and expanded to
reactants by a sequence-to-sequence algorithm. At the same time,
Somnath et al. proposed an approach that uses GNNs to predict a
series of graph edits that transform a product into synthons that
are further completed into reactants with leaving groups
predicted by another GNN (see Fig. 2d)222. A similar strategy is
adopted by Shi et al., where synthons are expanded to reactants
by a variational graph translation223.
In 2021, Sacha et al. proposed a model that formulates both
retrosynthesis and forward synthesis tasks as a sequence of graph
edit actions that are predicted by an encoder-decoder structure
constructed by stacking graph convolutional layers130.
Crystalline and solid state systems . Compared to molecules,
crystal structures and solid-state materials have some additional
challenges, such as periodic boundary conditions for crystals and
multiple kinds of disorder, either in form of perturbations in the
crystal structure itself or in the (lack of) long-range ordering of
atoms. We will present different recent applications of GNNs in
solid state systems, from predicting global properties of crystal
structures with and without disorder, over driving atomistic
simulations, to the design of new materials aided by materials
synthesis prediction, active learning, and inverse design. Table 4
gives an overview of datasets used in the following applications.
We will also discuss approaches in which the trained GNN
models have been analyzed to enable further insight into speci ﬁc
scienti ﬁc questions, which is often equally important as accurate
numerical predictions.
Materials property prediction and materials design . GNNs can be
used to predict a multitude of materials properties, ranging from
formation energies24,224–228and synthesizability prediction229
over band-gaps230–232 and other functional properties to
mechanical properties61,233. The most straightforward application
of property prediction models is the screening of large (unla-
beled) crystal databases, where exhaustive screening usingconventional simulation techniques (e.g., DFT) is often not fea-
sible. Screening using GNNs only requires labels from simulation
or experiment for the training set while providing fast predictions
on the full database - provided the model generalizes well.
Wang et al. use a crystal GNN to predict methane adsorption
volumes in metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)234. The pooling
function leverages domain knowledge by additionally including
structural properties (see Fig. 2f), e.g., the pore limiting diameter,
achieving better performance than previous work235. They apply
the model to the screening of a hypothetical MOF database by
Wilmer et al.236andﬁnd several high-performing candidates234.
Gu et al. use an ensemble of attention crystal GNNs to screen alloy
catalysts for CO 2reduction237. Only bulk-relaxed structures
without the adsorbate (e.g., from the Materials Project (MP)100
database) are needed as input, removing the costly DFT relaxationfrom the screening process. The performance approaches that of
base-line models trained on fully relaxed structures
237.
An interesting application of GNNs was presented by Goodall
et al., who use GNNs for representation learning of chemical
formulas238. The chemical formula is represented as a dense
weighted graph, in which each node corresponds to a chemical
element weighted by the fraction of this element in the chemical
formula. This graph representation was used to train a GNN in a
supervised way to obtain a mapping from the chemical formula to
an embedding. It was demonstrated that this representation has a
better sample ef ﬁciency than other structure agnostic approaches.
Schmidt et al. use a crystal graph attention network for stability-
screening of non-relaxed hypothetical materials, predicting the
convex hull distance24. Only graph distances are included, making
the model usable for hypothetical materials where the exact
coordinates might be unknown. A vast database is used, combining
MP, AFLOW239and group-internal datapoints. Transfer learning
then allows the screening of 15 million tetragonal perovskites of
composition ABCD 2. Dai et al. use GNNs to predict magnetostric-
tion of polycrystalline systems (see Fig. 2g)240. Instead of using
GNNs to model the atoms in the unit cell, individual grains and
their interactions to neighboring grains are represented by nodesand edges in the GNN. This shows that GNNs can be used on
different scales to predict materials properties.
Typically, screening of materials databases using ML models is
only possible if training data is available which covers the target
materials distribution, i.e., which adequately allows generalization
to the rest of the database. Active learning offers a promising
solution when the available data does not ful ﬁll this criterion.
Based on uncertainty quanti ﬁcation, the training dataset can then
be iteratively extended to include previously uncertain data points
and thereby ef ﬁciently explore the chemical space. Lu et al. use
active learning to search for 2D ferromagnetic materials with a
custom crystal graph multilayer descriptor in a small dataset
241.
Further applications of active learning based GNNs in materials
science are promising and can be expected in the future.
Disordered systems and defects . Disordered materials are a wide
and particularly interesting ﬁeld of study, as the effects of disorder
can in ﬂuence or even dominate material properties. Disorder
ranges from weak disorder (defects, dislocations, grain bound-
aries) to strong disorder (e.g., glassy systems and inhomogeneous
systems such as porous materials) and includes topological/
structural disorder, orientational disorder (spins, dipoles), or
substitutional disorder (chemical doping, compositional
disorder)242. Due to its inherent multi-scale nature, disorder
poses severe challenges not only to materials modeling and
simulation, but also to materials synthesis, characterization, and
fundamental description. Graph neural networks can be extended
to model various forms of disordered systems and predict their
local and global properties. In contrast to quantum mechanicalTable 4 Selected application-speci ﬁc datasets for solid-state
systems.
Dataset Size
AFLOW239- calculated properties of materials >3,400,000
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)299-
extensive and well curated experimental database≈210,000
Pure carbon and C-H-N-O structures at different
pressures300≈200,000
Materials Project100- calculated properties of materials ≈145,000
Hypothetical MOF database236137,953
NREL Materials Database (NRELMatDB)301-
computational materials database focused on renewable
energy applications≈60,000
CO and H surface binding energy dataset302≈40,000
Inorganic materials synthesis recipes303 19,488
Perovskite structures and energies30418,928
CoRE MOF database305- Experimental MOF database >14,000
bcc iron structures with energies and various kinds of
defects30612,193
MOF methane adsorption volume of CoRE MOFs (from
GCMC)23410,102
Elemental boron structures with energies307 5038
Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB)308,309≈4000
DDEC MOF point charges310 2932REVIEW ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6
10 COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat