methods such as DFT, crystalline systems with substitutional
disorder can be modeled using larger, more representative unit
cells or by de ﬁning atoms/nodes with mixed occupations. Fur-
thermore, amorphous systems can be modeled explicitly by usingrepresentative simulation boxes and aggregating over learned
atom representations characteristic of the properties of the
amorphous system. In the following, we will present seminal
work in that direction.
One important challenge for machine learning models is how
to represent substitutional disorder such as doping and fractional
occupancies in the crystal graph. Chen et al. addressed this
question with a MEGNet model with trainable 16-dimensional
embeddings for each atom which were pre-trained on a dataset
with only ordered structures
243. The pre-trained embeddings
were used to represent doped crystal sites by doing a weighted
average of the elemental embeddings, weighted with (logarithmic
or appropriately scaled) occupancies of the elements on the
crystal sites. Additionally, it was also demonstrated how to
perform multi- ﬁdelity training with band gaps of different levels
of DFT by encoding the DFT level in the global state of the
MEGNet. Similarly, Wang et al. have trained a crystal GNN
model on predicting the phase stability of materials (see Fig. 2f),
classifying materials as metal or insulator and predicting the band
gap of semiconductors244. They train a crystal GNN on undoped
crystal structures and use this trained model to predict the
properties of doped crystal structures, which they validate with
DFT calculations. They ﬁnd that the crystal GNN and the DFT
usually predict the same trend, despite the crystal GNN not being
trained on doped crystal structures244. Frey et al. use a crystal
GNN model to predicted the properties of 2D materials with
point defects (see Fig. 2f)245. However, the crystal GNN is only
used to screen the properties of ordered structures to ﬁnd
promising host structures. The properties of the disordered
structures were then partially calculated with DFT to train a
random forest model on physics-based features which was used to
screen additional structures. Another study predicted the proper-
ties of bcc iron structures with point defects246.
A very special application of GNNs is glassy systems. There have
been works that predicted the properties of glasses247and which
used inverse design to ﬁnd glasses with new properties248.S w a n s o n
et al. trained a classi ﬁer on predicting if a system is in a liquid or a
glassy phase only by the positions of the atoms (see Fig. 2h)249.
They veri ﬁed that a GNN was signi ﬁcantly better than a CNN for
this task and used self-attention to interpret the reasoning of the
trained classi ﬁer. Consequently, the trained GNN was interpreted
toﬁnd previously unknown relationships. Three simple and
previously unknown formulas were developed, which describe the
reasoning of the classi ﬁer and which could be used to differentiate
the two phases. Initial work on predicting polymer properties using
GNNs was based on learning representations of single
monomers250or of unit cells of crystalline polymers251.
Aiding simulations . Analogous to atomistic dynamics simulations
of molecular systems, GNNs can also be used to simulate the
dynamic behavior of crystals, i.e., to predict potential energy,
forces, and partial charges, in order to drive molecular dynamics
simulations. To predict forces for molecular dynamics of crystals,
most approaches use conventional machine learning methods252,
but there are ﬁrst examples that use GNNs190,253. Raza et al. use a
GNN with node-level readouts to predict partial charges of MOFs
for molecular simulations of gas adsorption254. For each atom, a
probability distribution of charge is learned and optimized
globally using the maximum likelihood principle under a charge
neutrality constraint. Park et al. predict forces for molecular
dynamics directly using a GNN with edge-level readouts that are
used to predict the magnitude of the force between atoms190(seealso Section ‘Molecular systems ’). This avoids calculating the
derivative of the potential energy and speeds up the simulation,
yielding good accuracy in chemical reactions occurring at the
surface of a test system of Al 2O3in contact with HF gas (see
Fig.2g). Also, good scaling accuracy transferring a model trained
on a 1 × 2 × 1 supercell to a 1 × 2 × 2 supercell (Li 7P3S11) is
achieved. This approach allows simulations of a larger scale than
possible using ab initio methods with similar accuracy and might
make it possible to simulate mesoscopic phenomena such as grain
boundaries in the future.
Solid state synthesis prediction . While predicting synthesizability
overall229is important in the design process of new materials,
predicting the products of solid state synthesis is a challenging
task and interesting application area of GNNs. Malik et al. have
developed a pipeline to predict the major outcome of solid-state
reactions255. In this pipeline, GNNs were used to represent the
precursors of a reaction in a set-like fashion as a dense graph
while a long short-term memory layer is used to represent the
series of processing actions in the reaction. Current limitations in
the availability of systematic (experimental) synthesis data,
including reaction conditions11, hinder further progress in this
area. The use of electronic lab notebooks and repositories speci-
ﬁcally designed for chemistry and materials science has a large
potential to alleviate that challenge256,257.
Periodic graph generation . A major requirement for the graph-
based inverse design of crystal structures is the possibility to gen-
erate new periodic graphs based on a vector representation.
Recently, this problem has been addressed with a new architecture
called PGD-VAE162, a variational autoencoder capable of gen-
erating new periodic graph structures. Another work using a VAE
focuses on predicting stable crystal structures using GNNs258.N e w
structures are generated in a three-step approach: First, the com-
position, lattice, and number of atoms of a sampled point in the
latent space are decoded using a multilayer perceptron. Afterward,
a random structure with these properties is assembled and a GNNtrained on moving atoms to their equilibrium positions is used to
generate stable structures. Despite these promising efforts, the
design of solid state materials and crystal structures using GNNs is
only at the beginning. Multiple challenges need to be solved to
achieve wide applicability and transferability of methods to mul-
tiple classes of materials, ranging from densely packed crystals over
porous materials to amorphous systems need to be solved.
Outlook
GNNs became a very versatile and important tool very quickly. A
lot has been achieved already, not only in terms of fundamental
method development tailor-made for requirements of materials
science and chemistry (see Section ‘Graph neural networks in
materials science and chemistry ’), but also in terms of applica-
tions (see Section ‘Applications ’), where GNNs were successfully
applied for materials simulation, screening, design, and synthesis.
However, there is a wide range of open questions and challenges
which need to be solved in order to leverage the full potential of
GNNs in materials science and chemistry.
Despite the growing amount of research and publications on
GNN model development and application, GNN models remain
expert tools, i.e., they are comparably hard to implement, adapt,
transfer, train, and apply to given datasets and applications.
Libraries such as PyTorch Geometric
259, DGL260or the Keras
based KGCNN261implement a selection of state-of-the-art GNN
layers and models. However, the use of such libraries in many
cases requires expert knowledge which goes beyond the knowl-
edge needed for the successful application of more establishedCOMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 REVIEW ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS MATERIALS |            (2022) 3:93 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00315-6 | www.nature.com/commsmat 11