CERT: Contrastive Self-supervised Learning for Language Understanding
3. Contrastive Self-supervised Learning
Self-supervised learning (SSL) (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020b,a) is
a learning paradigm which aims to capture the intrinsic patterns and properties of input
data without using human-provided labels. The basic idea of SSL is to construct some
auxiliary tasks solely based on the input data itself without using human-annotated labels
and force the network to learn meaningful representations by performing the auxiliary tasks
well, such rotation prediction (Gidaris et al., 2018), image inpainting (Pathak et al., 2016),
automatic colorization (Zhang et al., 2016), context prediction (Nathan Mundhenk et al.,
2018), etc. The auxiliary tasks in SSL can be constructed using many dierent mechanisms.
Recently, a contrastive mechanism (Hadsell et al., 2006) has gained increasing attention and
demonstrated promising results in several studies (He et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020b). The
basic idea of contrastive SSL is: generate augmented examples of original data examples,
create a predictive task where the goal is to predict whether two augmented examples are
from the same original data example or not, and learn the representation network by solving
this task.
EncoderMomentumEncoder𝑥!"#$%𝑥&'#%𝑥('#%𝑥)'#%⋯𝑞𝑘(𝑘)𝑘*⋯SimilarityContrastiveloss
Figure 1: Keys in the queue are encoded using a momentum encoder. Given an augmented
data example in the current minibatch (called query) and a key in the queue, they
are considered as a positive pair if they originate from the same data example, and
a negative pair if otherwise. A similarity score is calculated between the encoding
of the query and the encoding of each key. Contrastive losses are dened on the
similarity scores and binary labels.
Dierent methods have been proposed to implement contrastive SSL. In SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020a) designed for image data, given the input images, random data augmentation
is applied to these images. If two augmented images are created from the same original
image, they are labeled as being similar; otherwise, they are labeled as dissimilar. Then
4