CERT: Contrastive Self-supervised Learning for Language Understanding
CoLA STS-B
Back-translation (median) 62.1 89.8
EDA (median) 60.5 89.9
Back-translation (best) 62.9 90.6
EDA (best) 62.3 90.2
Table 4: Performance on CoLA and STS-B, under dierent data-augmentation methods.
translation on STS-B is 0.1% lower than that of EDA. The reason that back-translation
works better is probably because back-translation performs augmentation at the sentence
level globally: the entire sentence is translated back and forth, while EDA performs augmen-
tation at the word/phrase level locally. Therefore, back-translation can better capture the
global semantics of sentences while EDA captures local semantics. Another reason might be
that the sentences augmented by back-translation are more dierent from the original ones.
In contrast, the sentences augmented by EDA are close to the original ones since EDA per-
forms local edits of the original sentences and keeps the majority of a sentence untouched.
It is more dicult to predict whether two augmented sentences by back-translation are
from the same original sentence than to predict those augmented by EDA. Solving a more
challenging CSSL task usually leads to better representations.
CoLA STS-B
Target Training Data (median) 62.1 89.8
BERT Training Data (median) 60.0 90.3
Target Training Data (best) 62.9 90.6
BERT Training Data (best) 61.3 90.8
Table 5: Performance on CoLA and STS-B, under dierent pretraining corpus of CSSL.
Ablation on CSSL Pretraining Corpora Another interesting point to study is what
corpora should be used for training CSSL. In CERT, by default, we use the training data
(excluding labels) of the target task for CSSL. We compare with the following setting. We
randomly sample xsentences from the training corpora of BERT, where xis the number
of training sentences in the target task. Table 5 shows the performance on CoLA and
STS-B, with CSSL pretrained on dierent corpora. On the CoLA task, better performance
is achieved when using the training data of CoLA for CSSL. On the STS-B task, better
performance is achieved when using the BERT pretraining corpus for CSSL. From this
study, we do not reach a clear conclusion regarding which one is better. In practice, it
might be useful to try both and nd out which one is more eective.
6. Related Works
6.1. Pretraining for learning language representation
Recently, pretraining on large-scale text corpus for language representation learning has
achieved substantial success. The GPT model (Radford et al., a) is a language model (LM)
based on Transformer. Dierent from Transformer which denes a conditional probability
11