CERT: Contrastive Self-supervised Learning for Language Understanding
on an output sequence given an input sequence, GPT denes a marginal probability on a
single sequence. In GPT, the conditional probability of the next token given the historical
sequence is dened using the Transformer decoder. The weight parameters are learned by
maximizing the likelihood on the sequence of tokens. GPT-2 (Radford et al., b) is an ex-
tension of GPT, which modies GPT by moving layer normalization to the input of each
sub-block and adding an additional layer normalization after the nal self-attention block.
Byte pair encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2015) is used to represent the input sequence of
tokens. BERT-GPT (Wu et al., 2019) is a model used for sequence-to-sequence modeling
where pretrained BERT is used to encode the input text and GPT is used to generate the
output text. In BERT-GPT, the pretraining of the BERT encoder and the GPT decoder
is conducted separately, which may lead to inferior performance. Auto-Regressive Trans-
formers (BART) (Lewis et al., 2019) has a similar architecture as BERT-GPT, but trains
the BERT encoder and GPT decoder jointly. To pretrain the BART weights, the input
text is corrupted randomly, such as token masking, token deletion, text inlling, etc., then
the network is learned to reconstruct the original text. ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019) uses
parameter-reduction methods to reduce the memory consumption and increase the train-
ing speed of BERT. It also introduces a self-supervised loss which models inter-sentence
coherence. RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) is a replication study of BERT pretraining. It
shows that the performance of BERT can be signicantly improved by carefully tuning the
training process, such as (1) training the model longer, with bigger batches, over more data;
(2) removing the next sentence prediction objective; (3) training on longer sequences, etc.
XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) learns bidirectional contexts by maximizing the expected likeli-
hood over all permutations of the factorization order and uses a generalized autoregressive
pretraining mechanism to overcome the pretrain-netune discrepancy of BERT. T5 (Rael
et al., 2019) compared pretraining objectives, architectures, unlabeled datasets, transfer
approaches on a wide range of language understanding tasks and proposed a unied frame-
work that casts these tasks as a text-to-text task. The unied model was trained on a large
Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus, which was then transferred to diverse downstream tasks.
ERNIE 2.0 (Sun et al., 2019) proposed a continual pretraining framework which builds and
learns incrementally pretraining tasks through constant multi-task learning, to capture the
lexical, syntactic and semantic information from training corpora.
6.2. Contrastive Self-supervised learning
Contrastive self-supervised learning has arisen much research interest recently. Hna et
al. (H ena et al., 2019) studied data-ecient image recognition based on contrastive pre-
dictive coding (Oord et al., 2018), which predicts the future in latent space by using powerful
autoregressive models. Srinivas et al. (Srinivas et al., 2020) proposed to learn contrastive
unsupervised representations for reinforcement learning. Khosla et al. (Khosla et al., 2020)
investigated supervised contrastive learning, where clusters of points belonging to the same
class are pulled together in embedding space, while clusters of samples from dierent classes
are pushed apart. Klein and Nabi (Klein and Nabi, 2020) proposed a contrastive self-
supervised learning approach for commonsense reasoning. He et al. (He et al., 2020) pro-
posed an Self-Trans approach which applies contrastive self-supervised learning on top of
networks pretrained by transfer learning.
12