CERT: Contrastive Self-supervised Learning for Language Understanding
2018), generating future tokens (Radford et al., a), denoising corrupted tokens (Lewis et al.,
2019), etc. In these works, the targets to be predicted are mostly at the word level. As a
result, the global semantics at the sentence level may not be suciently captured.
To address this issue, we propose CERT: Contrastive self-supervised Encoder Represen-
tations from Transformers, which uses contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) (He et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2020a) to learn sentence-level representations. Recently, CSSL has shown
promising results in learning visual representations in an unsupervised way (He et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020a). The key idea of CSSL is: create augments of original examples, then
learn representations by predicting whether two augments are from the same original data
example or not. CERT creates augments of sentences using back-translation (Edunov et al.,
2018), then netunes a pretrained language representation model (e.g., BERT, BART) by
predicting whether two augments are from the same original sentence or not. Dierent from
existing pretraining methods where the prediction tasks are dened on tokens, CERT denes
the prediction task on sentences, which can presumably better capture global semantics at
the sentence level.
CERT uses back-translation (Edunov et al., 2018) to perform sentence augmentation.
Given a sentence xin source language S, we use an S-to-T translation model to translate x
into a sentence yin target language T. Then we use a T-to-S translation model to translate
yintox0in the source language. x0is regarded as an augment of x. Translation models for
dierent target languages are used to create dierent augments of a source sentence. Given
these augmented sentences, a Momentum Contrast (MoCo) (He et al., 2019) method is used
to perform CSSL. MoCo maintains a queue of augmented sentences (called keys) which are
encoded using a pretrained text-encoder (e.g., BERT) with momentum updates. Given an
augmented sentence (called query), a similarity score is calculated between the BERT (or
any other pretrained text-encoder) encoding of the query and each key in the queue. The
query and a key are labeled as a positive pair if they are augments of the same original
sentence and as a negative pair if otherwise. These binary labels and similarity scores are
used to dene contrastive losses (Hadsell et al., 2006). The weights of the pretrained text
encoder are further pretrained by minimizing the contrastive losses. To apply the pretrained
CERT model on a downstream task, we netune the CERT weights using input data and
labels from the downstream task. CERT is a 
exible module that can be integrated with any
pretrained language representation models, such as BERT, BART, ERNIE 2.0 (Sun et al.,
2019), T5 (Rael et al., 2019), etc. We evaluate CERT on 11 natural language understanding
tasks in the GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) benchmark where CERT outperforms BERT on
7 tasks, achieves the same performance as BERT on 2 tasks, and performs worse than
BERT on 2 tasks. On the averaged score of the 11 tasks, CERT outperforms BERT. These
results demonstrate the eectiveness of contrastive self-supervised learning for language
representation by capturing sentence-level semantics.
The major contributions of this paper are as follows:
We propose CERT, a new language representation pretraining method based on con-
trastive self-supervised learning. The predictive tasks of CERT are dened at the sentence
level, thus presumably can better capture sentence-level semantics.
We perform evaluation of CERT on 11 natural language understanding tasks in the GLUE
benchmark, where CERT outperforms BERT on the averaged score of 11 tasks.
2