SPEECH RECOGNITION WITH NO SPEECH OR WITH NOISY SPEECH
Gautam Krishna?Co Tran?zJianguo YuyzAhmed H Tewﬁk?
?Brain Machine Interface Lab, The University of Texas at Austin
yUniversity of Aizu
ABSTRACT
The performance of automatic speech recognition sys-
tems(ASR) degrades in the presence of noisy speech. This
paper demonstrates that using electroencephalography
(EEG) can help automatic speech recognition systems
overcome performance loss in the presence of noise. The
paper also shows that distillation training of automatic
speech recognition systems using EEG features will in-
crease their performance. Finally, we demonstrate the
ability to recognize words from EEG with no speech sig-
nal on a limited English vocabulary with high accuracy.
Index Terms —Electroencephalograpgy(EEG), Speech
Recognition, Distillation, Deep Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Traditional state of art Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR)
systems mainly uses acoustic features for doing speech recog-
nition. In [1] authors show how combining acoustic and ar-
ticulatory features can help in designing robust speech recog-
nition systems. Recently, researchers have used Functional
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) signals for doing speech
recognition with 74.7 % accuracy [2]. In [3, 4] authors pro-
vide interesting results on how Electrocorticography (ECoG)
signals, which is an invasive approach can help in speech
recognition.
Electroencephalography (EEG) on other hand is a non inva-
sive approach. It is a measure of electrical activity of the hu-
man brain. In [5] authors demonstrate decoding vowel articu-
lation using EEG cortical currents. In our work we used only
surface EEG potentials, which are directly obtained from the
EEG sensors.
In [6] authors used EEG signals to perform envisioned speech
recognition using random forest algorithm and they reported
an average accuracy of 85.2 %. In our work we used a deep
learning model and achieved a highest test accuracy of 99.38
%. In [7] authors propose neural network based model which
predicts phonemes from EEG but in our work the model di-
rectly predicts words with higher accuracy and we also study
the effect of noisy speech. References [8, 9, 10, 11] describes
various techniques to perform speech recognition with noisy
zEqual author contributionspeech but as far as we know our work is ﬁrst demonstration
of EEG’s ability to overcome performance loss in presence
of background noise and our approach demonstrates a signif-
icant high recognition accuracy of 99.38 % for recognition of
limited words in presence of background noise.
In [12] Hinton proposed the concept of distilling the
knowledge in neural networks, where a simple model learns a
complex task by imitating the solution of a more complicated
and ﬂexible model. In [13] authors demonstrate the integra-
tion of acoustic and articulatory features using Generalized
Distillation.
Motivated by the results presented in [2, 7, 14, 5, 15, 6, 16,
17], primary goal of our research was to create a state of art
ASR system and train it with EEG features, acoustic features,
concatenation of acoustic - EEG features and investigate its
performance in absence and presence of background noise.
We tested our model for recognition of the ﬁve English vow-
els and four English words ’yes’, ’no’ , ’left’, ’right’.
Inspired from [12] and [13] we further tried implementing
Generalized Distillation in the speech recognition task in
order to integrate EEG information into speech recognition
system and observed that distillation training with EEG im-
proves the recognition accuracy of our ASR model.
Major contributions of our paper are as follows: we iden-
tiﬁed a set of EEG features which are better representation
of speech, we proposed a deep learning model that is capa-
ble of learning EEG features and perform speech recognition
with no speech as input, we demonstrate the ability of EEG
features to make up for ASR performance lost due to back-
ground noise and we show that performance of ASR system
can be improved by distillation training with EEG features.
2. AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION SYSTEM
MODEL
For this work we created an ASR model using gated recur-
rent unit (GRU) networks [18]. The model was created using
Google TensorFlow deep learning library. GRU has an ar-
chitecture similar to long short term memory (LSTM) but has
less parameter’s compared to LSTMs. Hence GRU’s are ideal
for recurrent neural network applications where less amount
of training data is available. A GRU cell architecture is shownarXiv:1903.00739v1  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2019