10 Xiaokang Chen et al.
Semantic segmentation on ADE 20K.We use AdamW
as the optimizer. The input resolution is 512 ×512. The
batch size is 16. For the ViT-B, the layer-wise decay rate
is 0.65 and the drop path rate is 0 .1. We search from
four learning rates, 1e-4, 2e-4, 3e-4 and 4e-4, for all the
results in Table 2. For the ViT-L, the layer-wise decay
rate is 0 .95 and the drop path rate is 0 .15. We search
from three learning rates for all the methods, 3e-5, 4e-5,
and 5e-5, We conduct fine-tuning for 160K steps. We
do not use multi-scale testing.
Object detection and instance segmentation on
COCO. We utilize multi-scale training and resize the
image with the size of the short side between 480 and
800 and the long side no larger than 1333. The batch
size is 32. For the ViT-S, the learning rate is 3e-4, the
layer-wise decay rate is 0 .75, and the drop path rate is
0.1. For the ViT-B, the learning rate is 3e-4, the layer-
wise decay rate is 0 .75, and the drop path rate is 0 .2.
For the ViT-L, the learning rate is 2e-4, the layer-wise
decay rate is 0 .8, and the drop path rate is 0 .2. We
train the network with the 1 ×schedule: 12 epochs with
the learning rate decayed by 10 ×at epochs 9 and 11.
We do not use multi-scale testing. The Mask R-CNN
implementation follows MMDetection [14].
Fig. 10: Illustrating the cross-attention unit in attentive
probing. The attention map (bottom) is the average
of cross-attention maps over 12 heads between the ex-
tra class token and the patches. One can see that the
attended region lies mainly in the object, which helps
image classification.
5.3 Pretraining Evaluation
Linear probing. Linear probing is widely used as a
proxy of pretraining quality evaluation for self-supervised
representation learning. It learns a linear classifier over
the image-level representation output from the pre-
trained encoder by using the labels of the images, and
then tests the performance on the validation set.
Attentive probing. The output of the encoder pre-
trained with MIM methods are representations for allthe patches. It is not suitable to linearly probe the repre-
sentation, averagely-pooled from patch representations,
because the image label in ImageNet-1K only corre-
sponds to a portion of patches. It is also not suitable to
use the default class token within the encoder because
the default class token serves as a role of aggregating the
patch representations for better patch representation
extraction and is not merely for the portion of patches
corresponding to the image label.
To use the image-level label as a proxy of evaluating
the pretraining quality for the encoder pretrained with
MIM methods, we need to attend the patches that are
related to the label. We introduce a simple modification
by using a cross-attention unit with an extra class token
(that is different from the class token in the encoder) as
the query and the output patch representations of the
encoder as the keys and the values, followed by a linear
classifier. The introduced cross-attention unit is able to
care mainly about the patches belonging to the 1000
classes in ImageNet-1K and remove the interference of
other patches. Figure 10 illustrates the effect of the cross-
attention unit, showing that the extra cross-attention
unit can to some degree attend the regions that are
related to the 1000 ImageNet-1K classes.
Results. Table 1 shows the results with three schemes,
linear probing (LIN), attentive probing (ATT), and fine-
tuning (FT) for representative contrastive self-supervised
pretraining (MoCo v3 and DINO) and MIM (BEiT and
MAE) methods, as well as our approach with the targets
formed with the DALL-E tokenizer (trained on 400M
images) and the d-VAE tokenizer (trained on ImageNet-
1K without using the labels), denoted as CAE* and
CAE, respectively. The models of MAE with 300 epochs
and BEiT are pretrained by us using the official im-
plementations, and other models are officially released
models.
We highlight a few observations. The fine-tuning per-
formance for these methods are very similar and there is
only a minor difference similar to the observation [ 104].
We think that the reason is that self-supervised pretrain-
ing and fine-tuning are conducted on the same dataset
and no extra knowledge is introduced for image clas-
sification. The minor difference might come from the
optimization aspect: different initialization (provided by
pretrained models) for fine-tuning.
In terms of linear probing, the scores of the con-
trastive self-supervised learning methods, MoCo v3 and
DINO, are higher than the MIM methods. This is as
expected because contrastive self-supervised learning
focuses mainly on learning the representations for 1000
classes (See discussion in Section 4). The pretraining
is relatively easier than existing MIM methods as con-
trastive self-supervised learning mainly cares about the