6 Xiaokang Chen et al.
Xv
Zv
Zm
Ym
`z
Zm
Xm
`y
Ym
F
H
G
F
Qm
(a)
Xv
Ym
`y
Ym
R
Qm
Yv (b)
~X
Z
Y
X
F
G
`y
X
N (c)
Ym
`y
Xm
R
Qm
Yv
Xv
Zv
F0 (d)
Fig. 5: The computational graphs for (a) a context autoencoder (CAE), (b) BEiT [ 4], (c) a denoising autoencoder
(DAE), and (d) MAE [ 38] and the one stream in SplitMask [ 29]. The parts in cornflower blue are for loss function.
(a) The encoder Freceives visible patches Xvand outputs their latent representations Zv. The latent contextual
regressor Hpredicts the latent representations Zmfor masked patches from Zv. The decoder predicts the targets
Ymfor masked patches from Zm.ℓzandℓyare the loss functions. During training, the gradient is stopped for ¯Zm.
See the detail in Section 3. (b) The input includes both visible patches Xvand mask queries Qmrepresenting
masked patches, and the representations for them are updated within the function R. (c) The function Nis a
noising function generating the noisy version ˜Xfrom the input X.FandGare the normal encoder and decoder,
respectively. (d) The two functions, F′andR, are both based on self-attention. F′(called encoder in MAE) only
processes the visible patches Xv, andR(called decoder in MAE) processes both the latent representations Zvof
the visible patches and the mask queries ( Qm) and updates them simultaneously. For simplicity, the positional
embeddings are not included in computational graphs. (a) CAE and (c) DAE perform the encoding and MIM task
completion roles explicitly and separately, (b) BEiT and (d) MAE perform the encoding and MIM task completion
roles implicitly and simultaneously.
pletion helps that downstream task applications take
good advantage of representation pretraining.
We provide the computational graph for CAE, BEiT [ 4],
denoising autoencoder, Masked Autoencoder [ 38] and
SplitMask [ 29] (one stream) in Figure 5. Compared to
our CAE, the main issue of MAE is that the so-called de-
coderRmight have also the encoding role, i.e., learning
semantic representations of the visible patches.
Comparison to contrastive self-supervised learn-
ing. Typical contrastive self-supervised learning meth-
ods, e.g., SimCLR [ 18] and MoCo [ 39,21], pretrain the
networks by solving the pretext task, maximizing the
similarities between augmented views (e.g., random
crops) from the same image and minimizing the similar-
ities between augmented views from different images.
It is shown in [ 18] that random cropping plays an
important role in view augmentation for contrastive self-
supervised learning. Through analyzing random crops
(illustrated in Figure 3), we observe that the center pix-
els in the original image space have large chances to
belong to random crops. We suspect that the global
representation, learned by contrastive self-supervised
learning for a random crop possibly with other aug-
mentation schemes, tends to focus mainly on the center
pixels in the original image, so that the representations
of different crops from the same image can be possibly
similar. Figure 6 (the second row) shows that the center
region of the original image for the typical contrastive
self-supervised learning approach, MoCo v3, is highlyattended. The part in random crops corresponding to
the center of the original image is still attended as shown
in Figure 8.
In contrast, our CAE method (and other MIM meth-
ods) randomly samples the patches from the augmented
views to form the visible and masked patches. All the
patches are possible to be randomly masked for the aug-
mented views and accordingly the original image. Thus,
the CAE encoder needs to learn good representations
for all the patches, to make good predictions for the
masked patches from the visible patches. Figure 6 (the
third row) illustrates that almost all the patches in the
original images are considered in our CAE encoder.
Considering that the instances of the 1000 categories
in ImageNet-1K locate mainly around the center of the
original images [ 71], typical contrastive self-supervised
learning methods, e.g., MoCo v3, learn the knowledge
mainly about the 1000 categories, which is similar to
supervised pretraining. But our CAE and other MIM
methods are able to learn more knowledge beyond the
1000 categories from the non-center image regions. This
indicates that the CAE has the potential to perform
better for downstream tasks.
4.3 Interpretation
Intuitive Interpretation for CAE. Humans are able
to hallucinate what appears in the masked regions and
how they appear according to the visible regions. We