4 Xiaokang Chen et al.
values are the same before linear projection and consist
of the visible patch representations Zvand the output
of the previous cross-attention layer (mask queries for
the first cross-attention layer). The corresponding posi-
tional embeddings of the masked patches are considered
when computing the cross-attention weights between
the queries and the keys. In this process, the latent rep-
resentations Zvof the visible patches are not updated.
Decoder. The decoder Gmaps the latent represen-
tations Zmof the masked patches to some forms of
masked patches, Ym. The decoder, similar to the en-
coder, is a stack of transformer blocks that are based on
self-attention, followed by a linear layer predicting the
targets. The decoder only receives the latent represen-
tations of the masked patches (the output of the latent
contextual regressor), and the positional embeddings of
the masked patches as input without directly using the
information of the visible patches.
3.2 Objective Function
Masking. Following BEiT [ 4], we adopt the random
block-wise masking strategy (illustrated in Figure 3) to
split the input image into two sets of patches, visible
and masked patches. For each image, 98 of 196 (14 ×14)
patches are masked.
Targets. The targets ¯Zmfor the representations of
the masked patches are formed as follows. We feed the
masked patches Xminto the encoder, which is the same
as the one for encoding visible patches, and generate
the representations ¯Zmof the masked patches as the
representation targets.
The targets ¯Ymfor the patch reconstruction are
formed by the discrete tokenizer, e.g., the tokenizer
trained with d-VAE on ImageNet-1K without using the
labels or the DALL-E tokenizer (trained with d-VAE on
400M images) [ 69] used in BEiT [ 4]. The input image
is fed into the tokenizer, assigning a discrete token to
each patch for forming the reconstruction targets ¯Ym.
Loss function. The loss function consists of a re-
construction loss: ℓy(Ym,¯Ym), and an alignment loss:
ℓz(Zm,¯Zm), corresponding to masked patch reconstruc-
tion and masked representation prediction, respectively.
The whole loss is a weighted sum:
ℓy(Ym,¯Ym) +λ ℓz(Zm,sg[¯Zm]). (1)
We use the MSE loss for ℓz(Zm,¯Zm) and the cross-
entropy loss for ℓy(Ym,¯Ym).sg[·] stands for stop gradi-
ent.λis 2 in our experiments.
Fig. 3: Illustration of random block-wise sampling (1st
and 3rd images) and random cropping (2nd and 4th
images). The colored regions are masked regions. The
boxes correspond to cropped regions. Random block-
wise sampling is used in our approach. Random cropping
is a key data-augmentation scheme for contrastive self-
supervised pretraining.
4 Discussions
4.1 Analysis
Predictions are made in the encoded represen-
tation space. Our CAE attempts to make predictions
in the encoded representation space: predict the rep-
resentations for the masked patches from the encoded
representations of the visible patches. In other words, it
is expected that the output representations of the latent
contextual regressor also lie in the encoded representa-
tion space, which is ensured by prediction alignment.
This encourages the learned representation to take on
a large extent of semantics for prediction from visible
patches to masked patches, benefiting the representation
learning of the encoder.
We empirically verify that the predicted representa-
tions lie in the encoded representation space through
image reconstruction. We train the CAE using the pixel
colors as the prediction targets, for two cases: with
and without the alignment, i.e., masked representation
prediction. For reconstruction, we feed all the patches
(without masking, all the image patches are visible)
of an image (from the ImageNet validation set) into
the pretrained encoder, then skip the latent contextual
regressor and directly send all the encoded patch repre-
sentations to the pretrained decoder for reconstructing
the whole image.
Figure 4 provides reconstruction results for several
examples randomly sampled from the ImageNet-1K val-
idation set. One can see that our approach can success-
fully reconstruct the images, implying that the input
and output representations of latent contextual regressor
are in the same space. In contrast, without the align-
ment, the reconstructed images are noisy, indicating the
input and output representations of latent contextual
regressor are in different spaces. The results suggest that
the explicit prediction alignment is critical for ensuring