2 Xiaokang Chen et al.
task i.e., reconstructing the patch tokens or the pixel
colors. These methods mix the two tasks: learning the
encoder (representation) and reconstructing the masked
patch. The subsequent method, masked autoencoder
(MAE) [ 38] adopts an encoder-decoder architecture, par-
tially decoupling the two tasks. As a result, the represen-
tation quality is limited. Most previous methods, except
iBoT [ 104], lack an explicit modeling between encoded
representations of visible patches and masked patches.
We present a context autoencoder (CAE) approach,
illustrated in Figure 1, for improving the encoding qual-
ity. We pretrain the encoder through making predictions
for the masked patches in the encoded representation
space. The pretraining task is a combination of masked
representation prediction and masked patch reconstruc-
tion. the pretraining network is an encoder-regressor-
decoder architecture. The encoder takes only the visible
patches as input and learns the representations only for
the visible patches. The regressor predicts the masked
patch representations, which is expected to be aligned
with the representations of the masked patches com-
puted from the encoder, from the visible patch represen-
tations. The decoder reconstructs the masked patches
from the predicted masked patch representations with-
out receiving the representations of the visible patches.
The prediction in the encoded representation space
from the visible patches to the masked patches gener-
ates a plausible semantic guess for the masked patches,
which lies in the same semantic space for the visible
patches. We assume that the prediction is easier if the
encoded representations take higher semantics and that
the accurate prediction encourages that the encoded
representations take on a larger extent of semantics,
empirically validated by the experiments.
The CAE design also encourages the separation of
learning the encoder and completing the pretraining
tasks: the responsibility of representation learning is
mainly taken by the encoder and the encoder is only
for representation learning. The reasons include: the
encoder in the top stream in Figure 1 operates only
on visible patches, only focusing on learning semantic
representations; the regression is done on the encoded
representation space, as a mapping between the repre-
sentations of the visible patches and the masked patches;
the decoder operates only on the predicted representa-
tions of the masked patches.
We present the empirical performance of our ap-
proach on downstream tasks, semantic segmentation,
object detection and instance segmentation, and classifi-
cation. The results show that our approach outperforms
supervised pretraining, contrastive self-supervised pre-
training, and other MIM methods.2 Related Work
Self-supervised representation learning has been widely
studied in computer vision , including: context predic-
tion [ 24,75], clustering-based methods [ 88,93,8,1,105,
45,9,36], contrastive self-supervised learning [ 55,65,41,
80], instance discrimination [ 28,27], image discretiza-
tion [ 34,35], masked image modeling [ 59,31,74], and in-
formation maximization [ 30,97,5]. The following mainly
reviews closely-related methods.
Autoencoding. Traditionally, autoencoders were used
for dimensionality reduction or feature learning [ 53,32,
43,42,70,78,51]. The denoising autoencoder (DAE) is
an autoencoder that receives a corrupted data point
as input and is trained to estimate the original, un-
corrupted data point as its output. The variants or
modifications of DAE were adopted for self-supervised
representation learning, e.g., corruption by masking pix-
els [79,66,15], removing color channels [ 100], shuffling
image patches [ 64], denoising pixel-level noise [ 2] and so
on.
Contrastive self-supervised learning. Contrastive
self-supervised learning, referring in this paper to the
self-supervised approaches comparing random views
with contrastive loss or simply MSE loss that are related
as shown in [ 33], has been popular for self-supervised rep-
resentation learning [ 18,39,73,21,37,11,20,10,85,67]. The
basic idea is to maximize the similarity between the
views augmented from the same image and optionally
minimize the similarity between the views augmented
from different images. Random cropping is an important
augmentation scheme, and thus typical contrastive self-
supervised learning methods (e.g., MoCo v3) tend to
learn knowledge mainly from the central regions of the
original images. Some dense variants [ 82,90] eliminate
the tendency in a limited degree by considering an extra
contrastive loss with dense patches.
Masked image modeling. Motivated by BERT for
masked language modeling [ 23], the method studied
in [26] and BEiT [ 4] use the ViT structure to solve the
masked image modeling task, e.g., estimate the pixels
or the discrete tokens. The follow-up work, iBOT [ 104],
combines the MIM method (BEiT) and a contrastive
self-supervised approach (DINO [ 11]). But they do not
have explicitly an encoder for representation learning
or a decoder for pretraining task completion, and the
ViT structure is essentially a mixture of encoder and
decoder, limiting the representation learning quality.
Several subsequent MIM methods are developed to
improve the encoder quality, such as designing pretrain-
ing architectures: Masked Autoencoder (MAE) [ 38],
SplitMask [ 29], and Simple MIM (SimMIM) [ 91]; adopt-