Context Autoencoder for Self-Supervised Representation Learning 5
Fig. 4: Illustrating that predictions are made in the representation space. We reconstruct the image by feeding the
full image (1st, 4th, and 7th) into the pretrained CAE encoder and then the pretrained CAE decoder outputting
the reconstructed image (2nd, 5th, and 8th). It can be seen that the image can be constructed with the semantics
kept when skipping latent contextual regressor, verifying the input and the predicted representations lie in the same
space. We also show the reconstructed images (3rd, 6th, and 9th) from the encoder and the decoder pretrained
without the alignment constraint. We can see that those images are meaningless, indicating that the alignment
constraint is critical for ensuring that predictions are made in the representation space.
that predictions are made in the encoded representation
space.
Representation alignment in CAE and contrastive
self-supervised learning. Representation alignment is
also used in contrastive self-supervised learning methods,
such as MoCo, BYOL, SimCLR, and methods mixing
contrastive self-supervised learning and masked image
modeling, such as iBOT, and MST. The alignment loss
could be the MSE loss or the contrastive loss that CAE
may also take advantage of.
In the CAE, the alignment is imposed over the rep-
resentations Zm=H(F(Xv)) - predicted from the rep-
resentations F(Xv) of visible patches through the re-
gressor H, and the representations ¯Zm=F(Xm) - com-
puted from the encoder F. Both Zmand¯Zmare about
the masked patches, and lie in the representation space
output from the encoder .
Differently, the alignment in the most contrastive
self-supervised learning methods is imposed over the rep-
resentations {P(F(V1)),P(F(V2)),···,P(F((VN))},
where Pis a projector, and some views may be processed
with the EMA version of the encoder and the projector.
TheNrepresentations to be aligned are about different
views {V1,V2,···,VN}(in iBoT and MST, the views
are masked views and full views), and are not directly
output from the encoder. It is not quite clear how the
projector works, and it is reported in [ 68] that the pro-
jector is a part-to-whole process mapping the object
part representation to the whole object representation
for contrastive self-supervised learning.
4.2 Connection
Relation to autoencoder. The original autoencoder [ 53,
32,43] consists of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder
maps the input into a latent representation, and the
decoder reconstructs the input from the latent represen-
tation. The denoising autoencoder (DAE) [ 79], a variantof autoencoder, corrupts the input by adding noises and
still reconstructs the non-corrupted input.
Our CAE encoder is similar to the original autoen-
coder and also contains an encoder and a decoder. Dif-
ferent from the autoencoder where the encoder and the
decoder process the whole image, our encoder takes a
portion of patches as input and our decoder takes the
estimated latent representations of the other portion of
patches as input. Importantly, the CAE makes predic-
tions in the latent space from the visible patches to the
masked patches.
Relation to BEiT, iBoT and MAE. The CAE en-
coder processes the visible patches, to extract their
representations, without making predictions for masked
patches. Masked representation prediction is made through
the regressor and the prediction alignment, ensuring
that the output of the regressor lies in the representa-
tion space same with the encoder output. The decoder
only processes the predicted representations of masked
patches. Our approach encourages that the encoder
takes the responsibility of and is only for representation
learning.
In contrast, BEiT [ 4] and the MIM part of iBOT
do not separate the representation extraction role and
the task completion role and uses a single network,
with both the visible and masked patches as the input,
simultaneously for the two roles. In MAE [ 38], the so-
called decoder may play a partial role for representation
learning as the representations of the visible patches are
also updated in the MAE decoder. Unlike CAE, MAE,
iBoT, BEiT do not explicitly predict the representations
of masked patches from the representations of visible
patches (that lie in the encoded representation space)
for masked patches.
When the pretrained encoder is applied to down-
stream tasks, one often replaces the pretext task com-
pletion part using the downstream task layer, e.g., seg-
mentation layer or detection layer. The separation of
representation learning (encoding) and pretext task com-