Context Autoencoder for Self-Supervised Representation Learning 7
Fig. 6: Illustrating the attention map averaged over 12 attention heads between the class token and the patch
tokens in the last layer of the ViT encoder pretrained on ImageNet-1K. The region inside the blue contour is
obtained by thresholding the attention weights to keep 50% of the mass. The four rows are: (1) input image, (2)
MoCo v3, a typical contrastive self-supervised learning method, (3) MAE, and (4) our CAE. One can see that
MoCo v3 tends to focus mainly on the centering regions and little on other patches, and our CAE tends to consider
almost all the patches.
Fig. 7: t-SNE visualization (one color for one category) of
representations extracted from the images in ADE20K.
Left: ViT pretrained with our CAE; Right: ViT with
random weights.
speculate that humans do this possibly in a way similar
as the following example: given that only the region of
the dog’s head is visible and the remaining parts are
missing, one can (a) recognize the visible region to be
about a dog, (b) predict the regions where the other
parts of the dog appear, and (c) guess what the other
parts look like.
Our CAE encoder is in some sense like the human
recognition step (a). It understands the content by map-
ping the visual patches into latent representations that
lie in the subspace that corresponds to the categorydog2. The latent contextual regressor is like step (b). It
produces a plausible hypothesis for the masked patches,
and describes the regions corresponding to the other
parts of the dog using latent representations. The CAE
decoder is like step (c), mapping the latent representa-
tions to the targets. It should be noted that the latent
representations might contain other information besides
the semantic information, e.g., the part information and
the information for making predictions.
We adopt t-SNE [ 77] to visualize the high-dimensional
patch representations output from our CAE encoder on
ADE20K [ 103] in Figure 7. ADE20K has a total of 150
categories. For each patch in the image, we set its label to
be the category that more than half of the pixels belong
to. We collect up to 1000 patches for each category from
sampled 500 images. As shown in the figure, the latent
representations of CAE are clustered to some degree for
different categories (though not perfect as our CAE is
pretrained on ImageNet-1K). Similar observations could
be found for other MIM methods.
Probabilistic interpretation for CAE. The MIM
problem can be formulated in the probabilistic form,
maximizing the probability of the predictions Ymof
the masked patches given the conditions, the visible
patches Xv, the positions Pvof the visible patches,
2Our encoder does not know that the subspace is about a
dog, and just separates it from the subspaces of other cate-
gories.