Context Autoencoder for Self-Supervised Representation Learning 3
ing new reconstruction targets: Masked Feature Predic-
tion (MaskFeat) [ 83], Perceptual Codebook for BEiT
(PeCo) [ 25], and data2vec [ 3]. The technical report1
of our approach was initially published as an arXiv pa-
per [19], and was concurrent to data2vec [ 3], MAE [ 38],
and other methods, such as [ 29,91]. After that, MIM
methods have developed rapidly, e.g., extended to fre-
quency/semantic domain [ 87,61,84,58], combined with
contrastive self-superivsed learning [ 72,49,94,47], effi-
cient pretraining [ 101,46,13], mask strategy design [ 50,
54,57], scalability of MIM [ 92], and interpretation of
MIM [89,56,52].
The core idea of our approach is making predictions
in the encoded representation space. We jointly solve
two pretraining tasks: masked representation prediction
- predict the representations for the masked patches,
where the representations lie in the representation space
output from the encoder, and masked patch reconstruc-
tion - reconstruct the masked patches.
Our approach is clearly different from MAE [ 38]
(Figure 2 (top)). Our approach introduces an extra
pretraining task, masked representation prediction, and
encourages the separation of two roles: learning the
encoder and completing pretraining tasks; in contrast,
MAE partially mixes the two roles, and has no explicit
prediction of masked patch representations.
On the other hand, our approach differs from data2vec [ 3]
and iBoT [ 104] (Figure 2 (bottom)). Similar to BEiT,
in data2vec and iBoT, there is no explicit module sepa-
ration of learning the encoder and estimating the mask
patch representations, and the target representations
are formed from the full view (as the teacher) with the
same network as the student network for processing the
masked view and predicting the masked patch repre-
sentations (except a centering process in iBoT for the
teacher following DINO). In contrast, our approach is
simple: form the target representations merely from the
output of the encoder, and the encoder-regressor design
is straightforward and explainable: the regressor pre-
dicts the representations of masked patches to match
the representations computed directly from the encoder.
3 Approach
3.1 Architecture
Our context autoencoder (CAE) is a masked image
modeling approach. The network shown in Figure 1 is
an encoder-regressor-decoder architecture. The key is to
make predictions from visible patches to masked patches
in the encoded representation space. The pretraining
1https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03026‘
Encoder
Decoder
(a)
(b)
Alignment
Projector
Encoder
Encoder
Projector
Mask query
Masked patch
Target
Visible patch
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: The pipeline of MAE (top), and the MIM part
of iBoT (bottom). The centering module is not depicted
in the bottom stream. The pretrained encoder in (a) is
applied to downstream tasks by simply replacing the
pretext task part (b) with the downstream task part.
//means stop gradient.
tasks include: masked representation prediction and
masked patch reconstruction.
We randomly split an image into two sets of patches:
visible patches Xvand masked patches Xm. The encoder
takes the visible patches as input; the regressor predicts
the representations of the masked patches, which are
expected to be aligned with the representations com-
puted from the encoder, from the representations of the
visible patches conditioned on the positions of masked
patches; the decoder reconstructs the masked patches
from the predicted encoded representations.
Encoder. The encoder Fmaps the visible patches Xvto
the latent representations Zv. It only handles the visible
patches. We use the ViT to form our encoder. It first
embeds the visible patches by linear projection as patch
embeddings, and adds the positional embeddings Pv.
Then it sends the combined embeddings into a sequence
of transformer blocks that are based on self-attention,
generating Zv.
Regressor. The latent contextual regressor Hpredicts
the latent representations Zmfor the masked patches
from the latent representations Zvof the visible patches
output from the encoder conditioned on the positions
of the masked patches. We form the latent contextual
regressor Husing a series of transformer blocks that are
based on cross-attention.
The initial queries Qm, called mask queries, are mask
tokens that are learned as model parameters and are
the same for all the masked patches. The keys and the