Toward the Fundamental Limits of Imitation
Learning
Nived Rajaraman
University of California, Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@berkeley.eduLin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu
Jiantao Jiao
University of California, Berkeley
jiantao@eecs.berkeley.eduKannan Ramchandran
University of California, Berkeley
kannanr@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) aims to mimic the behavior of an expert policy in a sequen-
tial decision-making problem given only demonstrations. In this paper, we focus
on understanding the minimax statistical limits of IL in episodic Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). We ﬁrst consider the setting where the learner is provided a
dataset ofNexpert trajectories ahead of time, and cannot interact with the MDP.
Here, we show that the policy which mimics the expert whenever possible is in
expectation .jSjH2log(N)
Nsuboptimal compared to the value of the expert, even
when the expert plays a stochastic policy. Here Sis the state space and His the
length of the episode. Furthermore, we establish a suboptimality lower bound of
&jSjH2=Nwhich applies even if the expert is constrained to be deterministic, or if
the learner is allowed to actively query the expert at visited states while interacting
with the MDP for Nepisodes. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst algorithm with
suboptimality having no dependence on the number of actions, under no additional
assumptions. We then propose a novel algorithm based on minimum-distance
functionals in the setting where the transition model is given and the expert is
deterministic. The algorithm is suboptimal by .jSjH3=2=N, matching our lower
bound up to ap
Hfactor, and breaks the O(H2)error compounding barrier of IL.
1 Introduction
Imitation learning or apprenticeship learning is the study of learning from demonstrations in a
sequential decision-making framework in the absence of reward feedback. The imitation learning
problem differs from the typical setting of reinforcement learning in that the learner no longer has
access to reward feedback to learn a good policy. In contrast, the learner is given access to expert
demonstrations, with the objective of learning a policy that performs comparably to the expert’s with
respect to the unobserved reward function . This is motivated by the fact that the desired behavior in
typical reinforcement learning problems is easy to specify in words, but hard to capture accurately
through manually-designed rewards [ AN04 ]. Imitation learning has shown remarkable success in
practice over the last decade - the work of [ ACQN07 ] showed that using pilot demonstrations to learn
the dynamics and infer rewards can signiﬁcantly improve performance in autonomous helicopter
ﬂight. More recently, the approach of learning from demonstrations has shown to improve the state-
of-the-art in numerous areas: autonomous driving [ HVP+18,PCS+20], robot control [ ACVB09 ],
game AI [ILP+18, Vin19] and motion capture [MTD+17] among others.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.