bation in their iterative learning procedure. These methods
do not scale to large numbers of training iterations due to
the composition theorem of di erential privacy which causes
the privacy budget to accumulate across iterations. The only
exceptions are the works of Phan et al. [55, 56] that replace
the non-linear functions in deep learning with polynomial
approximations and then apply objective perturbation. With
this transformation, they achieve high model utility for =1,
as shown in Table 3. However, we note that this polynomial
approximation is a non-standard approach to deep learning
which can limit the model’s learning capacity, and thereby
diminish the model’s accuracy for complex tasks.
Machine learning with relaxed DP deﬁnitions. To avoid
the stringent composition property of di erential privacy, sev-
eral proposed privacy-preserving deep learning methods adopt
the relaxed privacy deﬁnitions introduced in Section 2.1. Ta-
ble 4 lists works that use gradient perturbation with relaxed
notions of di erential to reduce the overall privacy budget
during iterative learning. The utility beneﬁt of using relax-
ation is evident from the fact that the privacy budget for deep
learning algorithms is signiﬁcantly less than the prior works
of Shokri and Shmatikov [60] and Zhao et al. [79] which do
not use any relaxation.
While these relaxed deﬁnitions of di erential privacy make
complex iterative learning feasible for reasonable values,
they might lead to more privacy leakage in practice. The main
goal of our study is to evaluate the impact of implementation
decisions regarding the privacy budget and relaxed deﬁnitions
of dierential privacy on the concrete privacy leakage that
can be exploited by an attacker in practice. We do this by
experimenting with various inference attacks, described in
the next section.
3 Inference Attacks on Machine Learning
This section surveys the two types of inference attacks, mem-
bership inference (Section 3.1) and attribute inference (Sec-
tion 3.2), and explains why they are useful metrics for evalu-
ating privacy leakage. Section 3.3 brieﬂy summarizes other
relevant privacy attacks on machine learning.
3.1 Membership Inference
The aim of a membership inference attack is to infer whether
or not a given record is present in the training set. Membership
inference attacks can uncover highly sensitive information
from training data. An early membership inference attack
showed that it is possible to identify individuals contributing
DNA to studies that analyze a mixture of DNA from many
individuals, using a statistical distance measure to determine
if a known individual is in the mixture [27].
Membership inference attacks can either be completely
black-box where an attacker only has query access to thetarget model [61], or can assume that the attacker has full
white-box access to the target model, along with some auxil-
iary information [74]. The ﬁrst membership inference attack
on machine learning was proposed by Shokri et al. [61]. They
consider an attacker who can query the target model in a
black-box way to obtain conﬁdence scores for the queried
input. The attacker tries to exploit the conﬁdence score to
determine whether the query input was present in the train-
ing data. Their attack method involves ﬁrst training shadow
models on a labelled data set, which can be generated either
via black-box queries to the target model or through assump-
tions about the underlying distribution of training set. The
attacker then trains an attack model using the shadow models
to distinguish whether or not an input record is in the shadow
training set. Finally, the attacker makes API calls to the target
model to obtain conﬁdence scores for each given input record
and infers whether or not the input was part of the target
model’s training set. The inference model distinguishes the
target model’s predictions for inputs that are in its training set
from those it did not train on. The key assumption is that the
conﬁdence score of the target model is higher for the training
instances than it would be for arbitrary instances not present
in the training set. This can be due to the generalization gap,
which is prominent in models that overﬁt to training data.
A more targeted approach was proposed by Long et al. [44]
where the shadow models are trained with and without a tar-
geted input record t. At inference time, the attacker can check
if the input record twas present in the training set of tar-
get model. This approach tests the membership of a speciﬁc
record more accurately than Shokri et al.’s approach [61]. Re-
cently, Salem et al. [59] proposed more generic membership
inference attacks by relaxing the requirements of Shokri et
al. [61]. In particular, requirements on the number of shadow
models, knowledge of training data distribution and the tar-
get model architecture can be relaxed without substantially
degrading the e ectiveness of the attack.
Yeom et al. [74] recently proposed a more computationally
ecient membership inference attack when the attacker has
access to the target model and knows the average training loss
of the model. To test the membership of an input record, the
attacker evaluates the loss of the model on the input record
and then classiﬁes it as a member if the loss is smaller than
the average training loss.
Connection to Di erential Privacy. Dierential privacy, by
deﬁnition, aims to obfuscate the presence or absence of a
record in the data set. On the other hand, membership in-
ference attacks aim to identify the presence or absence of
a record in the data set. Thus, intuitively these two notions
counteract each other. Li et al. [42] point to this fact and
provide a direct relationship between di erential privacy and
membership inference attacks. Backes et al. [4] studied mem-
bership inference attacks on microRNA studies and showed
that di erential privacy can reduce the success of membership
USENIX Association 28th USENIX Security Symposium    1901