Evaluating Di erentially Private Machine Learning in Practice
Bargav Jayaraman and David Evans
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Abstract
Dierential privacy is a strong notion for privacy that can be
used to prove formal guarantees, in terms of a privacy budget,
, about how much information is leaked by a mechanism.
When used in privacy-preserving machine learning, the goal
is typically to limit what can be inferred from the model about
individual training records. However, the calibration of the
privacy budget is not well understood. Implementations of
privacy-preserving machine learning often select large values
ofin order to get acceptable utility of the model, with little
understanding of the impact of such choices on meaningful
privacy. Moreover, in scenarios where iterative learning pro-
cedures are used, relaxed deﬁnitions of di erential privacy are
often used which appear to reduce the needed privacy budget
but present poorly understood trade-o s between privacy and
utility. In this paper, we quantify the impact of these choices
on privacy in experiments with logistic regression and neural
network models. Our main ﬁnding is that there is no way
to obtain privacy for free—relaxed deﬁnitions of di erential
privacy that reduce the amount of noise needed to improve
utility also increase the measured privacy leakage. Current
mechanisms for di erentially private machine learning rarely
oer acceptable utility-privacy trade-o s for complex learn-
ing tasks: settings that provide limited accuracy loss provide
little e ective privacy, and settings that provide strong privacy
result in useless models.
1 Introduction
Dierential privacy has become a de facto privacy standard,
and nearly all works on privacy-preserving machine learning
use some form of di erential privacy. These works include
designs for di erentially private versions of prominent ma-
chine learning algorithms including empirical risk minimiza-
tion [11, 12] and deep neural networks [1, 60].
While many methods for achieving di erential privacy
have been proposed, it is not well understood how to use
these methods in practice. In particular, there is little concreteguidance on how to choose an appropriate privacy budget
, and limited understanding of how variants of the di eren-
tial privacy deﬁnition impact privacy in practice. As a result,
privacy-preserving machine learning implementations tend to
choose arbitrary values for as needed to achieve acceptable
model utility. For instance, the implementation of Shokri and
Shmatikov [60] requires proportional to the size of the tar-
get deep learning model, which could be in the order of few
millions. Setting to such arbitrarily large values severely
undermines privacy, although there is no consensus on a hard
threshold value for above which formal guarantees di eren-
tial privacy provides become meaningless in practice.
One proposed way to improve utility for a given privacy
budget is to relax the deﬁnition of di erential privacy. Several
relaxed deﬁnitions of di erential privacy have been proposed
that are shown to provide better utility even for small val-
ues [9, 18, 49]. How much privacy leakage these relaxations
allow in adversarial scenarios, however, is not well under-
stood. We shed light on this question by evaluating the relaxed
dierential privacy notions for di erent choices of values
and empirically measuring privacy leakage, including how
many individual training records are exposed by membership
inference attacks on di erent models.
Contributions. Our main contribution is the evaluation of
dierential privacy mechanisms for machine learning to un-
derstand the impact of di erent choices of and di erent
relaxations of di erential privacy on both utility and privacy.
We focus our evaluation on gradient perturbation mechanisms,
which are applicable to a wide class of machine learning al-
gorithms including empirical risk minimization (ERM) algo-
rithms such as logistic regression and deep learning (Section
2.2). Our experiments cover three popular di erential privacy
relaxations: di erential privacy with advanced composition,
zero-concentrated di erential privacy [9], and Rényi di eren-
tial privacy [49] (described in Section 2.1). These variations
allow for tighter analysis of cumulative privacy loss, thereby
reducing the noise that must be added in the training process.
We evaluate the concrete privacy loss of these variations using
USENIX Association 28th USENIX Security Symposium    1895