training process. We consider these out of scope for this paper,
and assume a clean training process not under the control of
the adversary.
4 Empirical Evaluation
To quantify the privacy leakage of the di erentially private im-
plementations for machine learning, we conduct experiments
to measure how much an adversary can infer from a model.
As motivated in Section 3, we measure privacy leakage using
membership and attribute inference in our experiments. Note,
however, that the conclusions we can draw from experiments
like this are limited to showing a lower bound on the informa-
tion leakage since they are measuring the e ectiveness of a
particular attack. Such experimental results cannot be used
to make strong claims about what the best possible attack
would be able to infer, especially in cases where an adversary
has auxiliary information to help guide the attack. Evidence
from our experiments, however, does provide clear evidence
for when implemented privacy protections do not appear to
provide su cient privacy.
4.1 Experimental Setup
We evaluate the privacy leakage of two di erentially private
algorithms using gradient perturbation: logistic regression for
empirical risk minimization (Section 4.2) and neural networks
for non-convex learning (Section 4.3). For both, we consider
the di erent relaxed notions of di erential privacy and com-
pare their privacy leakage. The variations that we implement
are naïve composition (NC), advanced composition (AC),
zero-concentrated di erential privacy (zCDP) and Rényi dif-
ferential privacy (RDP) (see Section 2.1 for details). We do
not include CDP as it has the same composition property as
zCDP (Table 1). For RDP, we use the RDP accountant (previ-
ously moments accountant) of TF Privacy framework [2].
We evaluate the models on two main metrics: accuracy
loss, the model’s accuracy loss on test set with respect to the
non-private baseline, and privacy leakage , the attacker’s ad-
vantage as deﬁned by Yeom et al. [74]. To evaluate out the
inference attack, we provide the attacker with a set of 20,000
records consisting of 10,000 records from training set and
10,000 records from the test set. We call records in the train-
ing set members , and the other records non-members . These
labels are not known to the attacker. The task of the attacker
is to predict whether or not a given input record belongs to the
training set (i.e., if it is a member). The privacy leakage metric
is calculated by taking the di erence between the true positive
rate (TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR) of the inference
attack. Thus the privacy leakage metric is always between 0
and 1, where the value of 0 indicates that there is no leakage.
For example, if an attacker performs membership inference
on a model and obtains a privacy leakage of 0.7 then it implies
that for every 100 wrong membership predictions made bythe attacker, 170 ‘true’ members are revealed to the attacker.
In other words, 170 training records are revealed to the at-
tacker. To better understand the potential impact of leakage,
we also conduct experiments to estimate the actual number
of members who are at risk for disclosure in a membership
inference attack.
Data sets. We evaluate our models over two data sets for
multi-class classiﬁcation tasks: CIFAR-100 [38] and Purchase-
100[36]. CIFAR-100 consists of 2828images of 100 real
world objects, with 500 instances of each object class. We
use PCA to reduce the dimensionality of records to 50. The
Purchase-100 data set consists of 200,000 customer purchase
records of size 100 each (corresponding to the 100 frequently-
purchased items) where the records are grouped into 100
classes based on the customers’ purchase style. For both data
sets, we use 10,000 randomly-selected instances for training
and 10,000 randomly-selected non-training instances for the
test set. The remaining records are used for training shadow
models and inference model.
Attacks. For our experiments, we use the attack frameworks
of Shokri et al. [61] and Yeom et al. [74] for membership
inference and the method proposed by Yeom et al. [74] for
attribute inference. In Shokri et al.’s framework [61], multiple
shadow models are trained on data that is sampled from the
same distribution as the private data set. These shadow mod-
els are used to train an inference model to identify whether
an input record belongs to the private data set. The inference
model is trained using a set of records used to train the shadow
models, a set of records randomly selected from the distribu-
tion that are not part of the shadow model training, along with
the conﬁdence scores output by the shadow models for all
of the input records. Using these inputs, the inference model
learns to distinguish the training records from the non-training
records. At the inference stage, the inference model takes an
input record along with the conﬁdence score of the target
model on the input record, and outputs whether the input
record belongs to the target model’s private training data set.
The intuition is that if the target model overﬁts on its training
set, its conﬁdence score for a training record will be higher
than its conﬁdence score for an otherwise similar input that
was not used in training. The inference model tries to exploit
this property. In our instantiation of the attack framework,
we use ﬁve shadow models which all have the same model
architecture as the target model. Our inference model is a
neural network with two hidden layers of size 64. This setting
is consistent with the original work [61].
The attack framework of Yeom et al. [74] is simpler than
Shokri et al.’s design. It assumes a white-box attacker with
access to the target model’s expected training loss on the pri-
vate data set, in addition to having access to the target model.
For membership inference, the attacker simply observes the
target model’s loss on the input record. The attacker classiﬁes
the record as a member if the loss is smaller than the target
USENIX Association 28th USENIX Security Symposium    1903