102
101
100101102103
Privacy Budget ()
0.000.050.100.150.200.25Privacy Leakage
-DP Bound
RDP
zCDP
ACNC(a) Shokri et al. membership inference
102
101
100101102103
Privacy Budget ()
0.000.050.100.150.200.25Privacy Leakage
-DP Bound
RDP
zCDP
ACNC (b) Yeom et al. membership inference
102
101
100101102103
Privacy Budget ()
0.000.050.100.150.200.25Privacy Leakage
-DP Bound
RDP zCDP
AC
NC (c) Yeom et al. attribute inference
Figure 7: Inference attacks on neural network ( Purchase-100 ).
4.4 Discussion
While the tighter cumulative noise bounds provided by re-
laxed variants of di erential privacy improve model utility for
a given privacy budget, the reduction in noise increases vul-
nerability to inference attacks. Thus, privacy does not come
for free, and the relaxations of the di erential privacy def-
inition that result in lower noise requirements come with
additional privacy risks. While these relaxed deﬁnitions still
satisfy the (;)-dierential privacy guarantees, the concrete
value of these guarantees diminishes rapidly with high val-
ues and non-zero . Although the theoretical guarantees pro-
vided by di erential privacy are very appealing, once values
exceed small values, the practical value of these guarantees
is insigniﬁcant—in most of our inference attack ﬁgures, the
theoretical bound given by -DP falls o the graph before
any measurable privacy leakage occurs (and at levels well
before models provide acceptable utility). The value of these
privacy mechanisms comes not from the theoretical guaran-
tees, but from the impact of the mechanism on what realistic
adversaries can infer.
We note that in our inference attack experiments, we use
equal numbers of member and non-member records which
provides 50-50 prior success probability to the attacker. Thus,
even an-DP implementation might leak even for small 
values, though we did not observe any such leakage. Alterna-
tively, a skewed prior probability may lead to smaller leakage
even for large values. Our goal in this work is to evaluate
scenarios where risk of inference is high, so the use of 50-50
prior probability is justiﬁed. We also emphasis that our results
show the privacy leakage due to two particular membership
inference attacks. Attacks only get better, so future attacks
may be able to infer more than is shown in our experiments.
5 Conclusion
Dierential privacy has earned a well-deserved reputation
providing principled and powerful mechanisms for ensuringprovable privacy. However, when it is implemented for chal-
lenging tasks such as machine learning, compromises must
be made to preserve utility. It is essential that the privacy
impact of those compromises is well understood when di er-
ential privacy is deployed to protect sensitive data. Our results
are a step towards improving that understanding, and reveal
that the commonly-used relaxations of di erential privacy
may provide unacceptable utility-privacy trade-o s. We hope
our study will encourage more careful assessments of the
practical privacy value of formal claims based on di erential
privacy, and lead to deeper understanding of the privacy im-
pact of design decisions when deploying di erential privacy,
and eventually to solutions that provide desirable, and well
understood, utility-privacy trade-o s.
Availability
Open source code for reproducing all of our experiments is
available at https://github.com/bargavj/EvaluatingDPML .
Acknowledgments
The authors are deeply grateful to Úlfar Erlingsson for point-
ing out some key misunderstandings in an early version of
this work and for convincing us of the importance of per-
instance gradient clipping, and to Úlfar, Ilya Mironov, and
Shuang Song for help validating and improving the work.
We thank Vincent Bindschaedler for shepherding our paper.
We thank Youssef Errami and Jonah Weissman for contribu-
tions to the experiments, and Ben Livshits for feedback on the
work. Atallah Hezbor, Faysal Shezan, Tanmoy Sen, Max Nay-
lor, Joshua Holtzman and Nan Yang helped systematize the
related works. Finally, we thank Congzheng Song and Samuel
Yeom for providing their implementation of inference attacks.
This work was partially funded by grants from the National
Science Foundation SaTC program (#1717950, #1915813)
and support from Intel and Amazon.
USENIX Association 28th USENIX Security Symposium    1909