Policy Gradient Assisted MAP-Elites GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France
Figure 3: Results for the compared algorithms in each evaluation task. Each task is repeated for 20 runs with different random
seeds, over one-million controller evaluations for each run. Each evaluation metrics is displayed with the median over the 20
seeds as a solid line with a shaded area around it bounded by the first and third quartiles.
•Coverage : The total number of solutions in the archive. Full
coverage is achieved when a solution is found for each cell in the
archive.
•Max Fitness : The overall fittest solution in the archive.
•Fitness Difference : To evaluate the robustness of each algo-
rithm in stochastic environments, the fitness difference between
a single evaluation and the fitness averaged over 10 evaluations
for the current max fitness solution is considered. Each algorithm
is only allowed a single evaluation for adding solutions to the
archive which needs to be robust for the algorithm to be efficient
in stochastic environments. We use the solution with max fitness
for assessing robustness as it is likely the most sensitive to noise.
4.5 Experimental Results
Figure 3 shows the main evaluation metrics for each algorithm in
each task. PGA-MAP-Elites achieves the best overall repertoire in
all tasks as seen by the significantly higher QD-Scores compared to
other algorithms ( p<10−5). The coverage metric shows that PGA-
MAP-Elites retains the divergent search capability of MAP-Elites
and achieves similar or better ( p<0.03for QDAnt and QDHopper)
coverage in each task. Compared to other algorithms PGA-MAP-
Elites has better coverage in all tasks ( p<10−5). Although standard
MAP-Elites achieves a good coverage in all tasks, the generated
archives (Fig. 4) show that most behaviors found are of low fit-
ness. PGA-MAP-Elites on the other hand is able to combine thisgood coverage with finding high-performing solutions across the
behavior space (Fig. 4).
In the max fitness metric, PGA-MAP-Elites outperforms all other
algorithms in the QDWalker and QDHopper tasks ( p<0.01). In
QDHalfCheetah the max fitness difference is not statistically signifi-
cant between PGA-MAP-Elites and TD3 but in QDAnt TD3 achieves
a higher max fitness ( p<10−6). It is not surprising that TD3 is
able to find a few higher-performing behaviors in certain tasks as
the critics in TD3 only have to estimate the action-value function
well around the current policy for TD3 to continuously improve. In
PGA-MAP-Elites, the critics need to estimate the action-value func-
tion over the entire behavior space which likely is more difficult.
The archive plots (Fig. 4) confirm that TD3 can find best solution
with a similar fitness to those found by PGA-MAP-Elites. However,
PGA-MAP-Elites finds many more solutions in the medium to high
fitness range leading to much better archives overall.
The fitness difference metric shows that PGA-MAP-Elites learns
very robust behaviors in all tasks, except in QDHopper where the
fitness difference (loss in this case) is large. The fitness difference
for the PG only variant shows that the PG variation operator helps
to improve sensitivity also in this task. This indicates that the
sensitivity to noise exhibited by PGA-MAP-Elites in the QDHopper
task is related to the GA variation operator. A solution to this could
thus be to apply a step of PG variation to each solution after the
GA variation has been applied.