Policy Gradient Assisted MAP-Elites
Olle Nilsson
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
olle.nilsson19@imperial.ac.ukAntoine Cully
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
a.cully@imperial.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Quality-Diversity optimization algorithms such as MAP-Elites, aim
to generate collections of both diverse and high-performing solu-
tions to an optimization problem. MAP-Elites has shown promising
results in a variety of applications. In particular in evolutionary
robotics tasks targeting the generation of behavioral repertoires
that highlight the versatility of robots. However, for most robot-
ics applications MAP-Elites is limited to using simple open-loop
or low-dimensional controllers. Here we present Policy Gradient
Assisted MAP-Elites (PGA-MAP-Elites), a novel algorithm that en-
ables MAP-Elites to efficiently evolve large neural network con-
trollers by introducing a gradient-based variation operator inspired
by Deep Reinforcement Learning. This operator leverages gradi-
ent estimates obtained from a critic neural network to rapidly find
higher-performing solutions and is paired with a traditional genetic
variation to maintain a divergent search behavior. The synergy of
these operators makes PGA-MAP-Elites an efficient yet powerful
algorithm for finding diverse and high-performing behaviors. We
evaluate our method on four different tasks for building behavioral
repertoires that use deep neural network controllers. The results
show that PGA-MAP-Elites significantly improves the quality of
the generated repertoires compared to existing methods.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Evolutionary robotics .
KEYWORDS
Quality-Diversity, MAP-Elites, Neuroevolution
ACM Reference Format:
Olle Nilsson and Antoine Cully. 2021. Policy Gradient Assisted MAP-Elites.
In2021 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO ’21),
July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3449639.3459304
1 INTRODUCTION
Diversity is a catalyst of life. By finding a novel adaptation to the
environment, species can thrive while being neither the fastest,
strongest nor tallest globally [ 31]. This notion inspired researchers
in Evolutionary Computation (EC) to pursue Quality-Diversity
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8350-9/21/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3449639.3459304
Derive Fitness Gradient
Update ArchiveTrain CriticMAP-Elites
Archive
Experience 
Replay BuﬀerEnvironment
PG
variation
GA
variationFigure 1: The conceptual approach behind PGA-MAP-Elites.
While executing a standard MAP-Elites loop of repeated se-
lection, variation and evaluation of solutions, the variation
is split between two independent operators: 1) A Policy Gra-
dient (PG) variation for directed performance improvement.
2) A genetic (GA) variation for divergent search. By training
a critic neural network asynchronously to the MAP-Elites
loop using experience collected during evaluations, perfor-
mance gradients can swiftly be derived for any solution.
(QD) optimization [ 15,43,44]. In QD optimization, performance-
based competition is considered only locally between solutions
characterized as similar. Rather than optimizing strictly for a sin-
gle best-performing solution, QD optimization algorithms aim to
return a collection of solutions that are both as diverse as possible
and as high-performing as possible. In robotics, this allows learning
a repertoire of behaviors which is useful since this provides alterna-
tives if one behavior suddenly becomes ineffective due to changes
in the environment or damage to the robot [ 13,47,48]. In many
cases, it is also desirable for a robot to discover the entire range
of behaviors it is capable of rather than just a single behavior that
maximizes a certain objective [ 11,16]. Greedily optimizing a given
objective may also cause the optimization process to prematurely
converge to a local optimum, while simultaneously searching for di-
verse behaviors can help to find stepping stones that overcome local
optima and lead to finding globally more optimal behaviors [ 17,32].
QD optimization algorithms such as Multi-dimensional Archive
of Phenotypic Elites (MAP-Elites) [ 13,40,48], are traditionally
driven by a Genetic Algorithm (GA) for their capability of diver-
sifying the search. This reliance on GAs limits the applicability
of MAP-Elites to problems of low dimensionality. Typically the
number of optimized parameters is kept below 100 [ 13,15,40]. GAs
are also inefficient [ 12,20] and prone to finding unstable solutions
located on narrow peaks in the optimization landscape that are not
repeatable in stochastic environments [14, 19, 25].
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [ 37–39] algorithms are
based on an opposing methodology where a single performance-
maximizing behavior is sought. In DRL, behaviors are learned via a