GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France O. Nilsson and A. Cully
deep neural network (DNN) controller that is trained to predict the
“optimal” action—the action that will most likely lead to maximiz-
ing the defined objective—to take given an observation. DRL lever-
ages the function approximation strength of DNNs and powerful
gradient-based training techniques, such as backpropagation [35],
to guide the learning process directly towards improving perfor-
mance. Using these techniques, DRL algorithms can solve problems
in robotics that require the complex and precise control only achiev-
able by DNNs with tens of thousands of parameters, in stochastic
environments where learning robust behaviors is essential [ 22,33].
This paper introduces the Policy Gradient Assisted MAP-Elites
(PGA-MAP-Elites) algorithm, an extension of MAP-Elites which
incorporates gradient-based optimization via a method based on
DRL algorithm Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient
(TD3) [ 22]. By evaluating PGA-MAP-Elites on a set of stochastic
behavior generation tasks requiring robots to be controlled by large
DNN, we show that PGA-MAP-Elites successfully scales the gener-
ation of behavioral repertoires to new domains where current ver-
sions of MAP-Elites fail. In these tasks PGA-MAP-Elites achieves a
powerful illumination of the search space, finding high-performing
and robust solutions across the entire range of possible behaviors,
where the highest performing solutions found rival those of modern
DRL algorithms. The benchmark tasks used to evaluate PGA-MAP-
Elites have been made available as the OpenAI Gym [ 5] based open-
source module QDgym (https://github.com/ollenilsson19/QDgym).
This module does not rely on any proprietary software, making our
benchmarks easy to use for other researchers.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1 Quality-Diversity Optimization
In contrast to standard optimization algorithms, which search for a
single global solution regardless of its characteristics, QD optimiza-
tion algorithms differentiate between solutions that have different
characteristics. The domain that characterizes solutions is called
the behavioral space [ 15] and is defined based on some property
of solutions that is meaningful for the type of diversity sought.
Characterization of a solution is called a behavioral descriptor (BD),
denoted b, that measures where in the behavioral space a solution
lies. For example, if the task is for a robot to discover the range of
gaits it is capable of, the BD may be the proportion of time each foot
of the robot is in contact with the ground in a gait [ 7,13,48]. The
task of QD optimization algorithms is thus to produce a collection
of solutions that are as diverse as possible based on the defined
behavioral space, and as high-performing as possible in its local
region of the behavioral space. Each solution only competes based
on performance with solutions that have similar BDs, or in other
words, exist within the same niche of behavior.
2.2 MAP-Elites Algorithm
MAP-Elites is a simple but effective QD optimization algorithm
that has been used to teach robots how to adapt to damage [ 13,47,
48], generate aerodynamic designs [ 23] and to create content for
games [ 1,2]. In MAP-Elites, the behavioral space is discretized into
a grid, which forms an archive for storing solutions where each cell
corresponds to a behavioral niche. The goal of the algorithm is to
return an archive with a maximum number of cells filled, whereAlgorithm 1 MAP-Elites algorithm. Adapted from [48].
1:procedure MAP-Elites ( )
2:(X,P)←− create _empty _archive()
3:𝑖=0
4: while𝑖<𝐼do ⊲Main Loop:𝐼evaluations, batch-size 𝑏
5: if𝑖<𝐺then ⊲Initialization: 𝐺random x.
6: bx1,...,bx𝑏=random _solutions(𝑏)
7: else ⊲Selection and variation
8: x1,..., x𝑏=selection(X,𝑏) ⊲Uniform sampling
9: bx1,...,bx𝑏=variation(x1,..., x𝑏)
10:𝑖+=𝑏
11: ADD _TO_ARCHIVE(bx1,...,bx𝑏,X,P)
12: return archive(X,P)
13:procedure ADD _TO_ARCHIVE (Solution-List ,X,P)
14: forxinSolution-List do
15:(𝑝,b)←− evaluate(x)
16:𝑐←−get_cell_index(b)
17: ifP(𝑐)=𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦 orP(𝑐)<𝑝then
18:P(𝑐)←−𝑝,X(𝑐)←− x
the solution in each cell is the highest performing solution possible
within that niche. The MAP-Elites algorithm follows a repeated
loop of uniformly selecting solutions from the current archive,
applying a variation to the selected solutions to form new ones and
evaluating the new solutions for addition to the archive. Solutions
are added to the archive based on the status of the cell a solution’s
BD falls within. If that cell is empty the solution is added. If that
cell is not empty, the solution replaces the one currently in that cell
if the new solution has a higher performance based on a defined
fitness function. For robotics applications, solutions are vectors x
that parameterize controllers (such as neural networks) to control
a robot with the goal of solving a certain task. The selection and
variation are repeated until 𝐼solutions have been evaluated and the
final archive is returned as the solution of the algorithm. To initialize
the MAP-Elites algorithm an empty archive is first generated. The
archive is represented by X, that stores the parameter vector of the
solution in each cell 𝑐, andP, that stores the corresponding fitness
value𝑝. The archive is then initialized by 𝐺random solutions before
entering the selection and variation loop. The MAP-Elites algorithm
is further detailed in Alg. 1.
By using a GA as the variation operator, MAP-Elites achieves a
divergent search indirectly via the behavior-based archiving and
a variation agnostic to the fitness objective. This divergent search
methodology may cause inefficiencies or failure to learn. Even in
problems where only a few parameters are optimized, the GA vari-
ation causes a slow convergence [ 20]. In problems that require
behaviors to be encoded by DNNs with a large number of param-
eters, MAP-Elites with a GA variation typically fails to find the
locally optimal behaviors due to a lack of directed search power [ 7].
In stochastic tasks the archiving methodology can cause ineffi-
ciencies if the behaviors found are not robust, as the expected
fitness and BD of each solution need to be calculated by averaging
over several evaluations. This averaging requirement can reduce