GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France O. Nilsson and A. Cully
QDWalkerPGA-MAP-Elites MAP-Elites MAP-Elites-ES QD-RL PGA-MAP-Elites PG only TD3 w. archiveQDHalfCheetah
5001000150020002500
Fitness
−10000100020003000
Fitness
Figure 4: Typical archives found by each algorithm in the QDWalker and QDHalfCheetah tasks. In these tasks the archives
form square grids as the BDs are 2-dimensional. Increasing feet contact time from left to right and from bottom to top.
MAP-Elites-ES finds good behaviors in the QDAnt and QD-
HalfCheetah tasks where it looks like it would eventually catch
up with PGA-MAP-Elites given additional evaluations. However,
despite finding a few good behaviors the overall repertoires found
by MAP-Elites-ES have far fewer behaviors than other algorithms.
MAP-Elites-ES therefore also lacks in the QD-Score metric. Figure 4
shows that the final archive for QDHalfCheetah is typically scat-
tered but MAP-Elites-ES is able to find a number of high-performing
behaviors in one local region of the behavior space. Given enough
evaluations, MAP-Elites-ES would likely build strong repertoires in
these two tasks. In the QDWalker and QDHopper tasks MAP-Elites-
ES seemingly fails to find high-performing behaviors which may
be related to the behavior space being relatively easy to cover and
doing so does not correlate strongly with finding high-performing
behaviors. The learning process of MAP-Elites-ES could thus be
halted by its directed optimization for diversity, as finding behav-
iors that cover new regions of the behavior space is not necessarily
meaningful for advancing the learning process.
QD-RL seemingly fails in all tasks which is likely related to the
method used to directly optimize for diversity. Like in MAP-Elites-
ES, the directed optimization for diversity may not be meaningful
given that diversity in the BD and performance are not aligned.
Moreover, as QD-RL optimizes for diversity based on an MDP, it
assumes that the sum of the novelty of each state (based on the
state-BD) provides a meaningful characterization for the novelty
of the entire behavior. We define the state-BD at each time-step as
the feet contact time up to that time-step as this is the space where
we seek diversity. This is likely not appropriate for QD-RL. The
ability to define a state-BD compatible with the commonly used
BD considered in this paper remains an open question. QD-RL per-
forms slightly better in QDHalfCheetah . In this task QD-RL finds
behaviors able to survive the entire 1000 simulation steps without
falling over, creating an increased resource demand for QD-RL in
this task compared to other tasks. The use of only four agents in
parallel (following the source code provided by the QD-RL authors)
compared to 100 in PGA-MAP-Elites means our resources can not
run QD-RL for more than 2×105evaluations in QDHalfCheetah.5 CONCLUSIONS
This paper present the PGA-MAP-Elites algorithm as an approach
to building high-quality behavior repertoires for simulated robots
where large DNN controllers are required. PGA-MAP-Elites in-
troduces a PG-based variation to MAP-Elites for increased search
power and data-efficiency and pairs it with the exploration capa-
bilities of GA-based variation. The evaluation on four different
repertoire-building tasks shows that PGA-MAP-Elites is able to
efficiently build high-quality repertoires that significantly outper-
form those found by existing methods and successfully scales the
use of MAP-Elites to evolving controllers with more than 20000
parameters.
PGA-MAP-Elites was developed to specifically target the gener-
ation of behavior repertoires for locomotion, but for future work
we will investigate our approach for manipulation-based tasks and
tasks where the BDs are aligned with performance to a high de-
gree. Task with highly deceptive fitness structures are of particular
interest as the MAP-Elites-ES and QD-RL approaches are likely to
be more competitive in comparison in such tasks because of their
ability to directly optimize for diversity.
This paper has shown clear benefits for using a PG variation
with MAP-Elites. The benefits of using a PG variation come with
the costs of the limitations of PG methods. In particular, the type
of controllers that can be used with PGA-MAP-Elites are limited
to differentiable function approximators such as neural networks.
The setup of the PG variation is also limited to problems with
full observability, satisfying the theoretical constraints of an MDP.
These are two restrictions that do not apply to standard MAP-Elites
variants.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) grant EP/V006673/1 project REcoVER.
We also want to thank the members of the Adaptive and Intelligent
Robotics Lab at Imperial College London for their useful comments.