19 
 system applications. The PageRank algorithm, for example, which is the fundamental search 
engine mechanism of Google, uses the topology of the web as an indicator of the value attached 
to any page (Brin & Page, 1998). Using a number of computational experiments on artificial and 
real networks in call data from a telecom company, Kiss and Bichler (2008) observed a significant 
increase in message diffusion when using influencers. Several studies have measured social 
influence by counting how much information related to a topic can be diffused in a network. 
Focusing on viral marketing, researchers have used social media platforms, such as Twitter, to 
measure a user’s influence (see Riquelme & González-Cantergiani, 2016). An interesting 
extension of this stream of research is represented by the notion that individuals who want to 
emerge as influencers compete in order to do so, a concept known as competitive influence 
maximization. Using the Competitive Influence Improvement (CI2) algorithm, for example, it is 
possible to identify the minimum number of influential nodes within an influencer’s networks 
(Bozorgi et al., 2017). In short, the use of networks in marketing and AI highlights the increasing 
role of AI applications, such as algorithms, in identifying patterns of influence that affect both 
consumer choices and firms’ product offerings. 
3.2. Major research themes and topics  
While the twentieth century observed a lack of application of intelligent systems in 
marketing (Gill, 1995), recent years have been characterized by rapid advancements in information 
technology (Naudé, 2020). Currently, AI is being applied in various contexts, from automated fact-
checking in journalism to powering chatbots that interact with customers on e-commerce websites. 
To identify the reference points of AI and marketing, we utilized systematic search methods using 
multiple sources as an initial foundation. Building upon the results of content analysis, combined 
with the HOMALS technique (shown in Figure 3), we present the four major research themes