38 
 will pose additional technological and behavioral challenges. A set of 21 descriptors, along with 
keywords, are provided in the supplementary material, enabling the replicability of this study.  
As with most studies, this research has its limitations. While we see value in the approach 
undertaken in this study, as it does not impose specific time or subject constraints, limitations can 
be seen, firstly, in our methodology. The methodological approach employed in this study is 
subject to a certain degree of author subjectivity by virtue of the process of developing the 
codebook (Furrer et al., 2020). Secondly, the search  query performed using an ‘umbrella 
approach’, while having the merit of providing an in-depth overview of studies at the intersection 
between marketing and AI, it does not focus on any specific sub-field of marketing and AI (e.g., 
AI and neuromarketing), offering the opportunity for researchers interested in specific sub-fields 
to perform additional review studies depending on their topics of interest in AI. Therefore, future 
studies could build upon the work of this review by conducting a more focused analysis of specific 
areas and sub-fields of marketing (e.g., retail marketing, direct marketing, and social media 
marketing, among others) and AI. Third, while the inclusion of research from peer-reviewed 
journals is common practice in literature reviews, relevant research published in books or 
conference proceedings is not reviewed, potentially introducing publication bias (Kepes et al., 
2012). Finally, while this review paper offers an initial discussion of the implications of the 
ongoing crisis triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic for marketing and AI, we believe that the real 
impact of this disruption is not yet fully understood. Hence, more research will be necessary to 
obtain a complete account of how pandemics and other unforeseen events impact marketing and 
AI. Despite such limitations, our study suggests several directions that we hope will inspire future 
studies and attract further attention to this timely topic from both scientific and societal 
standpoints.