15 
 implement a customer-facing approach across the entire organization. Therefore, AI plays a crucial 
role in transforming data into marketing insights (Shah et al., 2006). For example, AI includes text 
and voice-driven conversational agents (De Keyser et al., 2019) that exhibit aspects of human 
intelligence (Huang & Rust, 2018; Rust, 2020). This state-of-the-art technology includes 
perception, reasoning, and actuation, combined in the form of algorithms, which lead to improved 
customer service and performance (Belanche et al., 2020). Accordingly, in order to better explain 
the value of AI within the CRM range of actuation, it is important to acknowledge two spectrums: 
service encounter characteristics and customer features that must be considered permanent 
adjusters of conversational agents (Bock et al., 2020).  
When considering service encounters, the notion of the customer journey has particular 
relevance. This, according to D’Arco and colleagues (2019), is useful when trying to understand 
the ways in which AI can assist in different areas (ranging from customer profiling to the 
management of CRM initiatives), ultimately contributing to the improvement of the customer 
journey across all touchpoints. Consequently, Ngai and colleagues (2009) and, recently, Paschen 
and colleagues (2020) acknowledged that advanced marketing intelligent systems could equally 
benefit different sales funnel stages, seemingly increasing customer lifetime value through the 
promotion of loyalty programs and one-to-one marketing initiatives.  
When it comes to the customer features that must be considered when managing 
relationships with clients and considering the bots’ permanent adaptation, particular attention is 
given to constant updating of the data collected. According to Heaven (2020), during the COVID-
19 pandemic, an AI-powered credit card fraud detection system was not able to cope with what 
seemed to be erratic consumer behavior. During the initial period of the recent global pandemic, 
some consumers were demonstrating unusual consumption activities towards certain products and