23 
 2020a). Accordingly, data collection through speech recognition, in which the clients’ tone of 
voice when communicating with voice bots, along with other data used to improve marketing 
strategies, requires alignment with the General Data Protection Regulation and approval of the 
client (Butterworth, 2018). Hence, in order to reduce consumers’ skepticism and avoid speciesism 
toward AI (Schmitt, 2020), practitioners are reminded of ethical codes (Stone et al., 2020) and the 
importance of data protection (Kolbjørnsrud et al., 2017).  
Theme 3: Performance 
Scholarly literature on AI and marketing examines performance under two separate lenses. 
The first lens focuses on how AI tools and techniques score in terms of performance with respect 
to more conventional tools and methods. Such a comparison, in terms of performance, is 
particularly valuable in solving the higher accuracy versus higher cost trade-off typically 
associated with these methods. AI, through its technological enablers (Bock et al., 2020), which 
are considered a prerequisite for its development, performs better in its ability to make predictions 
as it can accommodate highly nonlinear and complex relationships between inputs and outputs 
(Russell & Norvig, 2016; Syam & Sharma, 2018).  
The second lens treats performance as an outcome variable. It focuses on how and if AI 
can contribute to performance in terms of competitive advantage efficiency, sales prevision, sales 
performance, and value creation for customers, among others. Companies can benefit from AI by 
translating big data into information and knowledge, allowing them to develop more effective 
marketing and sales strategies, which often translate into a sustainable competitive advantage 
(Paschen et al., 2020). By using decision support systems, marketers enhance the efficiency of 
marketing programs by fully utilizing all available databases (Kim & Street, 2004) and estimating 
the net customer lifetime value from customers’ purchasing behaviors (Chan & Ip, 2011). In