32 
 research. Finally, the possibility promoted by AI applications in terms of co-creating (Buhalis & 
Sinarta, 2019), customizing and personalizing solutions, developing simultaneously massified and 
customized proposals with several online possibilities of configuration, gives rise to the idea that 
on-demand solutions are the future, that consumers are unique, and that their needs should be 
inspirational. This technological alteration has enabled the ‘everyone’s an expert’ era, in which 
consumers want everything, anywhere, at a good quality, at a fair price, in a differentiated way, 
and right now. Understanding how managers might cope with such an array of strains represents 
the next challenge for researchers.  
4.3. Future research avenues regarding context and methodology  
This study found that the vast majority of research at the intersection of marketing and AI 
has focused on market contexts such as Europe (Baesens et al., 2004; Casabayó et al., 2004; Kühl 
et al., 2019), North America (Belanche et al., 2019; Moriuchi, 2019), and Asia (Chopra, 2019; 
Seranmadevi & Kumar, 2019; Wang et al., 2020). Given the nascent nature of the research field 
under study, future research could examine the development of AI technology in countries located 
in the southern hemisphere, taking into consideration the research avenues proposed in Table 4. 
Moreover, a multi-country approach could present a promising research avenue, particularly 
considering international differences in ethical standards and institutional and technical 
developments . Furthermore, from a customer perspective, further insights into multi-country and 
multi-cultural contexts would prove useful, as shown in a study conducted by Belanche and 
colleagues (2019), who compared Portugal, the UK, and the US. Their study indicated that the 
influence of subjective norms on the use of AI-powered devices transcends national borders and 
is much stronger in the UK and the US compared to Portugal, where perceived usefulness was 
considered much lower.