12 
 theoretical foundations and macro-level elements of marketing research (e.g., firms, institutions, 
environment) (Tam et al., 1994; Weber & Schütte, 2019 Wirtz et al., 2018; Zenobia et al., 2009). 
In addition to labeling the map’s poles, it is also important to acknowledge that the greater 
the distance between the descriptors in the map, the lesser their association, thus indicating 
potential research gaps and future research opportunities (López-Duarte et al., 2016). In this way, 
we outline the theoretical foundations revealed by our content analysis. We present the findings 
pertaining to the predominant research themes concerning AI and marketing in the following sub-
sections. In line with the identified descriptors and their positions within the domains illustrated in 
Figure 3, these findings serve to establish a foundation for future research directions, as presented 
in Section 4.3  
3.1. Theoretical foundations 
3.1.1. Behavioral Theories  
A primary goal of marketing science is to describe, model, and predict the behavior of 
consumers towards products. As a result of the emergence of a new type of customer (i.e., an 
individual that is more informed, demanding, sophisticated, and whose needs are rapidly changing) 
(Klaus & Zaichkowsky, 2020), and in light of the ‘new normal’ reality caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic, marketers face additional issues when it comes to understanding customer behavior 
(Sheth, 2020). The importance of the insights unveiled by user data shared on the internet has been 
of particular interest to marketers in recent years. In particular, further comprehension of 
                                                 
 
 
 
3 The entire sample of 164 papers was considered when developing insights based on theoretical groundwork, research 
themes, methodologies (Aguinis et al., 2009), and geographical contexts. However, due to space limitations, we have 
adopted a parsimonious approach, and we highly encourage readers to further explore the entire list of articles 
available in the supplementary material.