14 
 AI can be regarded as an ethical problem-solver that requires the commitment of all hierarchical 
levels within a firm (Amen et al., 2020a; Belk, 2016; 2020). Otherwise, intentions to use AI run 
the risk of being jeopardized. To embrace AI, all levels within the firm are expected to have an 
aligned vision when it comes to its utilization. As such, the employment of AI-powered marketing 
tools should be aligned with the ways in which consumers perceive them, guaranteeing that the 
development of managerial decision-making is in accordance with the process of understanding 
customers (Longoni et al., 2019). 
3.1.2. Foundations of Customer Relationship Management (CRM) 
Customer relationship management (CRM) encompasses the processes and enabling systems 
supporting a strategy that attempts to create profitable long-term relationships with specific 
customers. CRM has grown in importance in line with our increasing awareness that customer 
acquisition is costlier than maintaining existing customers (Ling & Yen, 2001). With this in mind, 
several outcomes of AI can contribute towards leveraging the enhancement of relationships. 
Building upon AI’s ability to predict which customers are most likely to respond to marketing 
campaigns using traditional RFM (recency, frequency, and monetary value) methods with 
demographic and psychographic variables (Cui et al., 2012), the focus of CRM has been on the 
use of new technologies and methods (Chatterjee et al., 2019). Thus, recent advancements in 
technology amplify CRM’s potential through the effective use of collected data and prominent 
interactivity in a way that fosters customer relationships (Bock et al., 2020; Kaplan & Haenlein, 
2019) and ultimately enables customer-centricity (Latinovic & Chatterjee, 2019), co-creation, and 
co-production (Ranjan & Read, 2016). 
In line with the evolution of AI and marketers’ growing aspirations towards customer-
centricity (Sheth et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2020), CRM has been viewed as a way by which to