9 
 of publications reviewed in our study were published in journals with an Impact Factor of above 
1.0 (2020 impact factor). This is in line with the research of Paul and Rosado-Serrano (2019) and 
Chatterjee and Sahasranamam (2018), who define influential articles as those published in SSCI 
indexed journals with an impact factor above 1.0, a necessary condition required in order to shape 
research fields and provide a baseline for further developments. 
-----Insert Table 2 about here--- 
2.3. The building of the codebook 
The protocol for building the codebook (see Figure 1) consisted of identifying the main 
descriptors within the research field and carrying out the MCA (Dabić et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 
2008, 2020). Following the methodological procedure outlined in López-Duarte and colleagues 
(2016, p. 512), using QDA Miner v.5 and Wordstat v.8 software, this stepwise process consists of 
“(I) extracting the key content from the articles’ titles, abstracts, and keywords; (II) classifying it 
in order to build a reduced list of the core descriptors; (III) revising the codebook by merging the 
similar categories in order to obtain a meaningful list of descriptors in terms of content and 
frequency”. The genesis of the initial codebook was based on previous literature reviews 
conducted within the two respective research fields (Baesens et al., 2009; Davenport et al., 2020; 
Martínez-López & Casillas, 2013; Kumar et al., 2019) (see Table 1). Building upon the initial 
classification and categorization, the authors extracted the key content and generated the final 
codebook, which consisted of 887 terms classified into 21 descriptors. The descriptors were further 
clustered into six broad themes according to their characteristics: theoretical 
approaches/frameworks, marketing and AI major research themes and topics, methodologies used, 
geographical scope, industrial sectors, and levels of research. The entire list of keywords and 
descriptors is available in the supplementary material.