36 
 spend time on a website (Sengupta, 2018). This challenges the very concept of conventional online 
convenience (Duarte et al., 2018), demonstrating that consumers are more and more inclined to 
believe that AI-based technology will make the “best decision” for them, as they can filter content 
according to a user’s profile, based on their track record of purchases and preferences. On these 
grounds, marketers should consider AI mechanisms as a hub facilitating the capturing, coding, 
retrieval, and sharing of knowledge. Health issues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have 
accelerated the adoption of e-commerce by five years (Haller et al., 2020), with an expected decline 
in department stores of around 60% and a projected increase of 20% in e-commerce, which is in 
line with recent research on the phenomenon conducted by Stewart (2020). Thus, given that AI-
powered marketing tools can improve the customer experience, driving online sales and, 
ultimately, creating value for all those involved (Barnes, 2020), they represent one of the fields 
that may benefit from the pandemic. 
 
5. Conclusion 
Research positioned at the intersection of AI and marketing has flourished in recent times. 
Our review of the academic contributions on this subject across more than 30 years indicates a 
spike in the number of papers published from 2017 onwards. This academic interest has been 
accompanied by an equal increase in the attention paid to AI applications by companies such as 
Google, Spotify, and Under Armor, to name a few. Hence, the knowledge accumulated on AI and 
marketing offers the opportunity for the systematization and assessment of existing contributions. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine research on AI and marketing in order to 
provide an extensive and holistic review of the existing literature on this topic. Using content 
analysis, combined with HOMALS statistical procedure, we reviewed relevant literature published 
between 1987 and 2020. Based on the analysis of these works, this study offers the following