28 
 than for their usefulness. A similar conclusion was also reached by Sohn and Kwon (2020), who 
stated that customers may value enjoyment over practical use because the diffusion of AI-based 
products is moving towards the early adoption stage, in which individuals are generally curious 
about new technology.  
The demographic profile of users in relation to their tendency to adopt or use AI is an 
additional research stream in itself, deserving further exploration. Previous studies have focused 
on two demographics, namely, age and gender (De Cicco et al., 2020). With respect to age, several 
studies have reached the conclusion that younger users have more positive attitudes towards AI 
when compared to older people, particularly in the context of robotic services (Onorato, 2018). 
For gender, previous studies tend to agree that men seem to express fewer negative perceptions 
than women when it comes to AI technology in contexts such as children’s education (Zawacki-
Richter et al., 2019) or hotel services (Ivanov & Webster, 2018). Similar conclusions have also 
been reached by Davenport and colleagues (2020), who suggest that women are less likely than 
men to adopt AI. The relationship between AI and gender has also been explored in terms of the 
gender profiling of online content. Capturing gender differences by using AI-based applications 
has been deemed relevant to companies as it allows for the improvement of several commercial 
domains, including product development and target advertisement (Mukherjee & Bala, 2017). 
After exploring the ways in which demographic characteristics can impact the adoption and use of 
AI, it would be interesting to examine whether gender traits (e.g., voice, appearance, etc.) of AI-
based applications and technology are more or less likely to influence adoption based on 
similarities or dissimilarities between the user’s gender and the gender traits attributed to AI.  
An additional area that deserves further exploration is the relationship between culture and 
AI. While previous studies have argued for the importance of incorporating cultural differences in