31 
 replacing or augmenting marketers’ activities, further investigation is needed into the adoption of 
a holistic approach that pushes firms to have a different conception of resources and workplace.  
Additionally, the path towards the concretization of digital transformation (Rogers, 2016) 
and the paradigm of Industry 4.0 seem to be dependent on institutional support. Therefore, research 
on the role of institutions  at local, national, and international levels could be considered a fruitful 
avenue for future research through the exploration, for example, of the extent to which public 
policies and initiatives that promote AI without harming consumers’ interests are effective in 
encouraging the adoption of AI, both by organizations and by individuals.  
AI’s application in marketing enables the evolution of STP by enhancing the understanding 
of consumers’ needs and wants. Accordingly, tech-savvy companies trace and use digital 
footprints (i.e., Amazon’s “anticipatory” shipping) and comprehend consumers more than ever 
before. These developments, as anticipated by Kotler and colleagues (2016), have affected the 
transfer from “what is shopped is shipped” to another possibility, in which shipping is an 
antecedent of shopping. Additionally, mechanisms such as emotion-sensing technology and 
emotionally intelligent machines, materialized in devices (i.e., Walmart’s emotion-sensing 
internet-connected shopping cart), truly favor the customer experience. However, all of these 
advancements come with ethical concerns. Therefore, promoting a win-win-win situation for all 
involved - individuals, firms, and all other stakeholders - remains questionable due to ethical 
concerns and represents an opportunity for future research.  
A firm’s ability to adopt AI marketing advantages in content creation and communication 
will ultimately exponentiate inbound marketing (Lusch & Vargo, 2009). The opportunity to 
understand whether or not overwhelming messages could be avoided by targeting the right people 
with the most efficient media and message types would be another fruitful avenue for future