34 
 could be of crucial value to the long-term reduction of the effects of disasters. As our society is 
still in the middle of the pandemic and long-term effects are still unknown, marketing researchers 
and practitioners have the opportunity to evaluate current effects and maximize preparedness for 
the upcoming period. Under these circumstances, delivering customer convenience and building 
trust are both significant challenges. At the same time, a number of online businesses in retail and 
education, among others, were able to adapt quickly and develop new offerings based on AI-
powered applications. The COVID-19 outbreak accelerated the implementation of AI’s application 
in marketing (e.g., chatbots, virtual assistants), gradually replacing human-to-human contact. The 
future of marketing thus truly depends on digital savviness (Sheth, 2020) and state-of-the-art 
technologies (Rust, 2020), with AI acting as a cornerstone of marketing development. 
---Insert Table 4 about here--- 
4.5. Implications for practice  
With the upheaval of information technology, marketers’ skills, such as creativity and 
content creation, and competencies, such as data analysis and reporting skills, have experienced 
significant changes (Davenport & Ronanki, 2018). With the assistance of AI, marketers are tapping 
into the profound knowledge of clients’ needs, enabling them to perform effective data analysis 
and organize their activities towards customer-centricity. As such, the adoption of AI in marketing 
has revolutionized the job requirements of marketers and their overall labor market in terms of 
skills (Huang & Rust, 2020). However, it seems to free up offices and workstations, allowing work 
to be conducted remotely (Makarius et al., 2020).  
Building upon the labor market revolution, marketers’ competencies are expected to evolve 
in order to remain competitive as they cope with the unprecedented crisis evoked by the COVID-
19 pandemic. Intelligent marketing systems are also likely to require constant updates given the