33 
 Overall, the findings of this review indicate that the marketing and AI research field is still 
in a nascent stage in which many areas remain unexplored. In this regard, the adoption of a multi-
level methodological exploratory approach (Jones et al., 2016) promises to further increase our 
understanding of the role of AI in marketing. Additionally, the vast majority of studies are 
conceptual studies, demonstrating a need for more direct and indirect observations of AI in 
marketing that could, for example, test conceptual findings in underexplored sets of individuals, 
such as digital natives and digital immigrants. 
4.4. Future research avenues regarding marketing AI and the COVID-19 pandemic 
  The impact of AI on marketing cannot yet be quantified in the ‘new normal’ reality caused 
by the COVID-19 pandemic (Naudé, 2020) as it is characterized by erratic customer behavior 
(giving rise to noisy and outlying data) and discrepant institutional data privacy regulations 
(Ameen et al., 2020a). Given that this situation is unlikely to change in the short term, AI-powered 
marketing tools will depend more on rigorous human-AI interaction (Coldewey, 2018). Thus, 
given marketers’ need to innovate and adapt to the new reality (Wang et al., 2020), future research 
is needed on the ways in which marketers can understand and anticipate customers’ behavior and 
businesses’ actions through AI. As AI is dependent on data, the following questions should be 
tackled by future researchers: 1) To what extent are marketers willing to gather and share data - 
both existing and new - in order to inform new AI marketing models? 2) Has the COVID-19 
pandemic changed marketers’ approaches to data protection? And if so, how? 3) In light of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, what role will AI-powered marketing tools play in understanding 
consumers’ attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors? 
Bearing in mind that pandemics and other catastrophes have a tendency to repeatedly affect 
society (Donthu & Gustafsson, 2020), learning from the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic