30 
 4.2. Future research avenues regarding Marketing AI characteristics  
The spectrum of benefits enabled by the intersection of AI and marketing is developing 
intensely and rapidly. In light of the ‘new normal’ landscape caused by the COVID-19 pandemic 
and the necessity to self-isolate and depend on technology more than usual (Donthu & Gustafsson, 
2020), AI-powered marketing tools are expected to play a central role in our future understanding 
of consumer’s attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. In fact, even before the pandemic, AI had 
demonstrated its ability to assist in shopping processes and enhance customer experience (Ameen 
et al., 2020b; Gacanic & Wagner, 2019). Accordingly, AI-powered marketing tools facilitate easy 
access to information, assistance in the comparison process, accelerated checkout, and the ultimate 
growth of overall marketing performance (Martínez-López & Casillas, 2013). Despite these 
benefits, concerns over ethical issues (e.g., transparency, justice, fairness, and privacy), data 
protection, and employment opportunities (Makarius et al., 2020) remain some of the major 
drawbacks of AI technologies. As such, the promising nature of AI may depend on understanding 
its challenges and its opportunities. One of the major challenges lies in managerial abilities when 
it comes to comprehending the benefits of new technology and its subsequent contributions to 
product and service improvements. For businesses, the adoption of AI substantially changes the 
ways that both marketing strategies and customer behaviors are regarded (Davenport et al., 2020).  
In this line, as AI has shifted the paradigm from a rule-based expert systems’ approach to 
a data-driven approach, the implementation of AI within organizations seems to undermine 
inherited methods of skill development and training (Huang & Rust, 2020). Hence, further 
investigation regarding the revolution of the labor market and marketers’ competences  is needed, 
particularly when it comes to soft and hard skills. Building upon the suggestion of Davenport and 
colleagues (2020) and Huang and Rust (2020) that, depending on the nature of the task, AI is either