25 
 Cherviakova & Cherviakova, 2018) are issues which have received significant attention among 
marketing scholars and practitioners (Rust et al., 2020).  
The advances in this field allow different segments and generational cohorts to be better 
served (Lei & Moon, 2015), enabling the anticipation of customer profile shifts as well as post-
demographic consumption (Pitt et al., 2018). Arising from the eager attempt to implement the 
“shipping-then-shopping” model (Davenport et al., 2020), positioning the right proposal in the 
right segment has been a concern of some researchers (Wu et al., 2015; Lei & Moon, 2015). 
Research conducted by Chica and colleagues (2016) enhanced brand positioning with the 
assistance of mechanisms involving complex choices that permitted the modeling and evaluation 
of brand decisions in an intelligent way. One of the best examples of the power of AI can be seen 
in the correct recommendations that Google’s algorithms can produce, based on millions of 
unconsciously made incorrect entries (Makridakis, 2017). 
Within this research stream, a large body of literature has focused on neural networks and 
artificial neural networks (ANN). ANN represent a type of AI computing based on a nonlinear, 
nonparametric regression model that mimics the structure and function of the brain (Ha et al., 
2005). The main advantage of neural networks is that they can estimate very complex relationships 
(D’Haen & Van den Poel, 2013). Hence, neural networks have been seen to be more accurate in 
classifying potential customers into groups for market segmentation in comparison to discriminant 
analysis and logistic regression (Fish et al., 1995) and can outperform multinomial logit in terms 
of brand share estimation (Fish et al., 2004). The predictive power of neural networks has been 
used, for instance, to predict customer churn in the mobile telecommunications industry, using 
subscriber contractual information and call pattern changes (Wei & Chiu, 2002). Additional 
examples of studies using neural networks include Li (2000), who developed an ANN to analyze