This new imaginary appears to be rooted at the heart of an enigmatic synchrony: predictive analy-
tics are fast emerging at a time when the future appears more unpredictable and ungovernable thanever. The cosmology of the modern world is filled with radical threats. To mention but one very recent
example, the latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change paints a sobering picture
of the planet ’s future in the face of rising temperatures (IPCC, 2021 ). As a result, a variety of post-
apocalyptic narratives has been flourishing for some time, from collapsology to radical trans-humanism and the most basic survivalism (Chateauraynaud and Debaz, 2019 ). In this context, new
attempts to grasp the future through predictive analytics involve a special kind of ‘ontopolitics ’
(Chandler, 2018 ) characterised by normative stances about which forms of life are to be valorised
and preserved (or not) in order to cope with uncertain futures. Or, in Jasanoff ’s terminology, govern-
ance through algorithms arguably constitutes a peculiar form of co-production, which she defines as
‘shorthand for the proposition that the ways in which we know and represent the world (both nature
and society) are inseparable from the ways in which we choose to live in it ’(Jasanoff, 2004 , p. 3).
Building on an extensive interdisciplinary body of literature, we thus provide a first outline of the
emerging sociotechnical imaginary as well as the modalities of its development. We supplement our
findings drawing examples from official documents emanating from European institutions devoted to
AI and predictive analytics. We do not claim this to be a comprehensive discursive analysis. Rather, thesamples are provided instrumentally as qualitative augmentations of descriptive and theoreticalpropositions (Baxter and Jack, 2008 ; Stake, 1995 ). Indeed, official discourses of the state provide a
particularly fertile ground to grasp ‘the coalescence of the collective imagination with scientific and
technological production ’(Hajer, 2010 , p. 27) and in this context ‘law emerges as an especially fruitful
site in which to examine imaginaries in practice ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 25). We focus particularly
on statements in which ‘the future ’as an abstract category is disclosed and related to (Rieder, 2018 ).
Among the widespread use of broad concepts such as ‘prediction ’,‘prevision ’and ‘anticipation ’,w e
pay particular attention to the pervasive notion of ‘real-time ’, and ‘real-time prediction ’. This peculiar
and counter-intuitive idea is symptomatic of the tensions that characterise a profound dynamic ofreconfiguration of the temporalities of our world, stemming from real-time calculations, and affecting
the links between past, present and future (Amoore and Piotukh, 2015 ). This reconfiguration carries
significant normative consequences, particularly as regards the valorisation or exclusion of certainforms of life.
The paper is structured in three parts. First, we analyse the contemporary theme of ‘real-time pre-
diction ’and contextualise the growing popularity of this oxymoron in the context of what we define as
‘life as pure contingency ’. Second, we discuss the epistemological and normative dimensions of ‘gov-
erning the future ’through predictive analytics. Finally, we sketch the contours of the new
sociotech-
nical imaginary that emerges from the convergence between governance and AI. As this paper
represents the first step of a broader project on ‘AI, Law and the Future ’, we conclude by setting
the scene for future research.
2 Real-time predictions of contingent life
2.1 From complexity to pure contingency
Whether forged in hard or social sciences, contemporary theories (in Western societies) tackling fun-
damental questions about life increasingly converge towards conceiving of it as pure contingency as
opposed to a system marked by linear and deterministic temporality (Anderson, 2010a ). This entails
three crucial aspects.
First, life is conceived of in terms of irreducible complexity (Holland, 2014 ; Morin, 2008 ). This
complexity is among other things the result of a globalised world woven by a multiplicity of hetero-
geneous flows and connections, embodied in the figure of the ‘network ’. The governance of complex
life revolves around the problem of the relationship between ‘good ’and ‘bad’flows or connections
(such as transnational terrorists, personal data, epidemics, etc.). The complexity of life can also be72 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press