identification. Relevance also depends on human decisions evaluating their possible meaning in the
specific context of police activities.
The ability of AI systems to unveil new information hidden within datasets provides them with an
aura of ‘epistemological authority ’, the apparent unquestionability of which masks the collaborative
efforts, methodological options and value judgments involved in identifying patterns (Amoore,2019 ). For example, recent research reveals the full extent of the constructive process leading to the
emergence of patterns structuring police activity –a process that ‘makes patterns political ’
(Kaufmann et al. ,2019 , p. 684). The complex assemblage of actors, algorithms, theories and decisions
that contribute to the emergence of patterns (Ananny, 2015 ) signals their intrinsically normative
dimensions (Winner, 2020 ): they formalise conceptions of crime that are themselves based on specific
ideas about how to govern it.
This type of analysis not only debunks the alleged neutrality of AI systems; it also breaks with rep-
resentational schemes that narrow the complexity and richness of experience in favour of abstractformalisms or questionable reifications. In contrast, what emerges is the importance of teasing outthe plurality of forms of knowledge that can be inferred from AI systems (Kaufmann et al. ,2019 ,
p. 680) –what we call epistemological heterogeneity. Predictive practices therefore do more than just
gather the knowledge that is necessary to know the future: they enable performative operations thatestablish the presence of the future in different ways (Aykut et al. ,2019 ).
This epistemological heterogeneity questions the type of rationality that predictive analytics are
based upon. Early modern rationality rests on the notion that the human observer occupies an exter-
nal, neutral and objective position with respect to the world they are studying (Esposito, 2011a ; Latour,
2002 ). The distinction between a knowable subject and a knowable object is ill-equipped to discern the
self-referential circularities of predictive or oracular logics
2–that is, the consequences that the actions
of the observer and the act of observing itself have on events (Barad, 2007 ). For instance, a recent ana-
lysis of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis has highlighted how the ‘models being used to forecast future
developments in the markets have not taken into account the extent to which current predictionswould affect the future ’(Esposito, 2011a , p. 16).
Additionally, in the context of predictive analytics, even linear relationships of cause and effect are
transformed through retroactive loops (Hofstadter, 2008 ) by virtue of which desired effects end up
becoming originating causes that are difficult to control (Esposito, 2011a , p. 15). Paradoxically, the
development of devices capable of performing complex tasks through reflexive processes, similar to
those of humans, makes predicting the effects of predictive systems increasingly hard (European
Commission, 2018a ). This (rather ironic) tension is apparent in a recent report of the Council of
Europe on advanced digital technologies. The report highlights the extreme difficulty of making accur-ate predictions about the long-term effects of the digital revolution (European Commission, 2018b ), as
well as the great complexity of these technologies:
‘[m]achine learning and deep learning systems become progressively complex, not only due to
the availability of data, but also due to increased programming complexity. As a result, these sys-
tems are subject to three types of vulnerability: first, increased programming complexity increases
the propensity of these systems to generate stochastic components (i.e. make mistakes); secondly,this complexity opens the door to a wide range of adversarial attacks; and thirdly, the unpredict-ability of their outputs can generate unintended yet highly consequential adverse third party
effects ( ‘externalities ’).’(European Commission, 2018a , p. 21)
Contemporary digital technologies are therefore just as likely to provoke new crises as they are to help
us solve existing and emerging ones (Hui Kyong Chun, 2011 , p. 92). In this context, we must question
2In these, the observer is located within the world they observe and are subject to its inescapable principles. This is won-
derfully illustrated by the myth of Oedipus and its self-fulfilling prophecy: the observer who wants to escape the prediction
announced by the oracle contributes to its realisation (Rosset, 2012 ).76 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press