probable, but the probabilities are unknown –or, more broadly, the potentially hazardous effects of a
phenomenon, product or process have been identified but the scientific assessment does not allow foran exact determination of the risk of harm (Bourguignon, 2015 ).
Much of the debate on AI and the precautionary principle to date has focused on a precautionary
approach toAI and how this could potentially stifle technological progress. The fear is that an excess of
precaution by public authorities will hinder innovation, thus creating unnecessary obstacles to the ful-filment of AI ’s potential (Castro and McLaughlin, 2019 ). However, an analysis of relevant policy docu-
ments suggests this fear is unwarranted. For example, the recent EU ‘White Paper on Artificial
Intelligence ’(European Commission, 2020c ) does not mention the precautionary principle at all,
and no concession is made for the possibility of a precautionary approach toAI. Conversely, the
potential of AI-powered predictive analytics is heavily relied upon for varied purposes including
the prevention of diseases, climate change mitigation, etc. Scepticism towards precaution as a logic
is of course not new (Clarke, 2005 ; Sunstein, 2002 ). What is interesting here is the apparent paradox
inherent to AI, which refracts precautionary attempts while at the same time it is increasingly embed-ded in large-scale preventative actions. Indeed, in contrast with rule-makers ’hesitancy in applying pre-
caution to AI as an object of regulation , the use of predictive analysis systems for precautionary
purposes is establishing itself in a number of areas.
Perhaps the most obvious example is the environmental sphere, where predictive analytics improve
understanding of a series of phenomena as complex as climate change or the evolution of biodiversity
(Hallgren et al. ,2016 ; Hampton et al. ,2013 ). Experts in these fields emphasise the need for massive
data collection, from disparate sources, over a long period of time and on a large spatial scale, in orderto better grasp the characteristics of these phenomena and take action.
3
The logic of pre-emption takes preventative action one step further. It prompts action prior to any
formation and identification of a real threat, which is considered in the abstract as likely to have con-
siderable impact. Recourse to this logic implies a different ‘epistemic situation ’: no longer one of
uncertainty, but one of ignorance. Pre-emption is aimed at cases in which both the impacts of a poten-tial situation on society and their probabilities are unknown. In this sense, while the precautionary
logic can be said to react to ‘known unknowns ’, the pre-emptive logic entails the neutralisation of
risks before knowledge of their potential even consolidates: ‘unknown unknowns ’(Massumi, 2007 ;
Rasmussen, 2004 ).
It may appear paradoxical or oxymoronic that predictive analytics would be used to inspire pre-
emptive action since, by definition, their predictions are based on known and existing data, in contrast
with the ignorance that inspires the pre-emptive logic. Yet, reliance on predictive analytics for pre-emptive purposes has become increasingly common in the fight against crime and terrorism, in par-ticular through ‘predictive justice ’(McCulloch and Wilson, 2015 ). Based on profiling and risk analysis,
this process of neutralisation aims at anticipating individuals ’capabilities, intentions or desires in
order to intervene by structuring the possible scope of their action. In other words, ‘pre-emptive pre-
dictions are intentionally used to diminish a person ’s range of future options ’(Kerr and Earle, 2013 ,
p. 67, emphasis in original). For this reason, this form of algorithmic governance predominantly
focuses on the predispositions of individuals, as evidenced by the establishment of profiles or scores,
evaluating the potential for dangerousness, failure or fallibility.
This new mode of governance has been described as emblematic of our contemporary ‘societies of
clairvoyance ’(Neyrat, 2010 ). Increasing recourse to this logic of action signals how our societies nur-
ture a very limited and problematic relationship with the future: they foster an actuarial and pre-
emptive temporality that crushes the present into predetermined courses of action (Mantello, 2016 ;
3There is a deeply shared conviction that climate modelling powered by big data, while not a ‘silver bullet ’, will allow gov-
ernments to soften the blow of climate change and prevent some of its consequences. For example, the potential of predictive
analytics has been described as capable of a ‘sustainability revolution ’(Herweijer and Ramchandani, 2018 ) as well as improv-
ing local biodiversity and conservation efforts (Norouzzadeh et al. ,2018 ).78 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press