dynamic and complex socio-technical systems generates a new and increasingly urgent frontier
for computational research. ’(Yeung, 2019 , p. 67)
‘Potentially catastrophic outcomes ’,‘complex socio-technical systems ’,‘to predict ’and ‘model ’emerge
as key discursive elements of the contemporary bond between the ontology of life as pure contingencyand the emerging epistemology of digital devices based on AI.
2.2 From conditional future to real time
When reading official documents of European institutions as well as the literature on predictive ana-lytics, one notion keeps surfacing, and its meaning remains uneasy to grasp: ‘real-time ’or‘real-time
prediction ’, often presented as one of the key characteristics of AI (Yeung, 2019 , p. 22).
For example, the Communication of 24 April 2018 of the European Commission, entitled Towards
a Common European Data Space , mentions this notion several times (explicitly or implicitly):
‘In manufacturing, real-time sensor data supports predictive maintenance. Data-driven innov-
ation …can help with crisis management and in developing environmental and financial pol-
icies. Sharing research data on the outbreak of epidemics can advance relevant research muchfaster and contribute to a more timely response. High-resolution satellite data …contributes
to the real-time monitoring of natural water resources to prevent drought or pollution. ’
(European Commission, 2018a ,p .2 )
To predict in real time is a convoluted notion, comprising predicting as time passes, predicting
through instantaneous translations of reality, predicting as an immediate adjustment to reality. To pre-
dict: what meaning is left for the prefix and the term as a whole? Does it still refer to anticipation ormerely to a constant adjustment to events? And what is the exact reality of this time called ‘real’–does
it encompass the quantification of its unfolding? This kind of reality would only account for what is
happening now and what we grasp from this particular irruption of time. The future would thus be
reduced to the actualisation of its imminence and to the digital capture of analmost-already-happening-here-and-now. In other words, ‘what is real is what unfolds in real time ’
(Hui Kyong Chun, 2011 , p. 96).
Predicting in real time sounds contradictory. Even computer scientists acknowledge the ambiguity
of the term and the fact that ‘a predictive model cannot be built in “real time ”in its true sense ’
(Sangireddy, 2015 ) because it is not possible to predict the here-and-now of what is still becoming.
The expression highlights a confusion between thought and action –a collision between the future
and the present. The reality of this time appears to be intrinsic to its conjuration of the future or its
‘de-futurization ’(Esposito, 2011b , p. 180). The future is only the one that has triumphed over count-
less possible others by becoming actualised, making it entirely subsumed to the present that is emer-ging while simultaneously forming the object of predictions. This ambition to ‘predict the present ’has
led researchers to forge the neologism ‘nowcasting ’to supplement the more conventional ‘forecasting ’
(Choi and Varian, 2012 ; Sanila et al. ,2017 ;W u et al. ,2020 ).
The promise of real-time prediction has been described as the new avatar of ‘presentism ’(Hartog,
2003 ) or the domination of a perpetual present. Presentism entails a way of articulating the universal
categories of past, present and future entirely subject to the reign of immediacy. It presupposes that our
temporal horizon has been invaded by an ‘increasingly inflated, hypertrophied present ’, imposing
demands of productivity, flexibility and mobility upon us all (Baschet, 2018 ). This analysis assimilates
real-time predictions to a form of alienating injunction, thrusting upon human beings the strict nor-
mativity of a life lived for the sake of permanent and vigilant adaptation (Stiegler, 2019 ). We believe
this interpretation to be a simplistic shortcut that neglects to question the conceptual tensions that lieat the heart of ‘real-time prediction ’. These tensions, we argue, crystallise a series of reconfigurations
that signal a transition towards a more complex and novel sociotechnical imaginary .74 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press