The salient features of this new imaginary are embedded in the epistemological and normative
dimensions discussed in the next sections. In summary, these include a series of reconfigurations ofthe relationships between (1) temporality and materiality ; (2) knowledge and action ; (3) subject and
object ; (4) the virtual and the possible ; and (5) the past, present and future. Before engaging with
these reconfigurations, we must discuss the emerging phenomenon of governing the future through
predictive analytics. This exercise sheds light on two forms of heterogeneity –epistemological andnor-
mative –that are intrinsic to the use of predictive analytics in governance and revelatory of tensions
that often remain concealed by virtue of the apparent immediacy of the medium.
3 Governance of the future and predictive analytics
The multiplication and increasing prevalence of predictive analysis systems, as well as the legitimacy
they are gradually acquiring, put Ulrich Beck ’s theory into question. Beck described our contemporary
world as a risk society in which catastrophic, incalculable and uninsurable risks proliferate, to the point
that incalculability moulds the transformation of society (Beck, 1992 ). His analysis shows how the
development of technology generates risks, the effects of which are unlimited in time and space,
and can affect future generations around the globe. The consequence of incalculability is that modernrisks cannot be contained, anticipated or even diverted (Sørensen, 2018 ).
However, predictive analytics and the ‘politics of temporality ’they foster (Adams et al. ,2009 ,
p. 247) postulate the calculability of all phenomena. These systems aim to establish a predictive
score (in the form of a probability or a profile) for any entity (customer, employee, patient, product,machine, etc.) in order to determine, inform or influence organisational processes. The indeterminacyand complexity of life have not defeated the urge to quantify and calculate risks and, more broadly, the
probability of events occurring. On the contrary, recent years have arguably brought a shift from a risk
society to a score society (Citron and Pasquale, 2014 ).
3.1 Epistemological heterogeneity: constructions of knowledge
The development of analytical tools such as deep-learning algorithms has made it possible to develop
‘scores ’emerging from immense datasets to identify forms of regularities, patterns or modes of behav-
iour. These tools create new modes of knowledge acquisition that enable predictions. Far from being
neutral and declarative, these predictions shape the future in very visible ways. Reverting again to the
notion of ‘real-time prediction ’, we identify further aspects particularly problematic for governance
purposes. Indeed, the notion is misleading because it suggests that ‘real time ’refers to what is
im-mediate and un- mediated . However, this belief ‘ignores the formal structure and materiality of
the technologies that make real time itself …possible ’(Thomas, 2014 , p. 290).
What we call ‘real time ’is the result of a constant technical mediation involving a structural time
lag, which is unavoidable for two reasons. First, time is required for the construction of new datasets,the potential modifications of the analytical model ’s parameters or the updating of technical infra-
structure (Thomas, 2014 ). Second, time is needed to make newly collected data intelligible and appro-
priately usable in accordance with the objectives pursued (Kaufmann et al. ,2019 ). This time lag makes
the capture of the future incomplete, imperfect and in need of constant readjustment as the datachange and the analytical tools evolve. This defeats the magical idea that the processing of information
can be concomitant with the event or phenomenon that the information purports to describe.
The mediating role of technical devices also implies that the type of knowledge obtained from pre-
dictive analytics varies according to their specificity, with consequences for the ways in which theymake the future present. The systems used in predictive policing for example rely on patterns for
the identification of future crimes (Benbouzid, 2018 ). These patterns stem from the association of spe-
cific algorithms with equally specific datasets (e.g. a cartography of areas more prone to arrests forviolent crimes). Relevance of these patterns varies according to the different algorithmic models
used, the data on which they rely and the analytical approaches applied to data collection andInternational Journal of Law in Context 75
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press