5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have problematised contemporary beliefs in the miracles of big data and the divin-
atory power of AI with reference to the implications of such beliefs for the anticipatory aspirations of
governance practices. By way of conclusion, we suggests the contours of what we understand to be the
necessary objectives of future research.
The link between access to knowledge and the ability to govern the future is inevitably determined by
our relationship to the real and our recognition of its qualities, which may vary between times and epochs,
and from culture to culture, as ‘anticipation is a regime of being in time ’(Adams et al. ,2009, p. 247).
The ways in which we describe reality or ‘the state of the world ’are critical for two reasons. The first
is to elucidate our comprehension of how societies operate and organise themselves to anticipate thefuture; the second is to reveal the cosmologies, the worldviews that lie at the heart of these descriptions
(Reith, 2004 ). Analysing modes of anticipation allows us to understand the means by which a certain
imaginary frames and represents alternative futures, links the past to the future, enables or hindersaction and naturalises specific ways of contemplating possible worlds.
6
This process is not merely of epistemological consequence for the ways in which reality is
represented through emerging means of knowledge. In a world in which life is envisaged and under-
stood in terms of pure contingency, the challenge of governing extreme complexity gains a specificontological dimension. The issue ceases to be that of ‘knowing more ’about a certain reality and
turns into delimiting ‘what is to be known ’(Chandler, 2014 , p. 50).
Awareness of the ontological dimensions of anticipatory logics deployed in governance and predictive
analytics is critical to grasp the profound meaning of any truth-claim posited by the association betweenthe two. By claiming to possess knowledge about the future, these logics necessarily imply specific modesof defining what matters, what does not and what can be legitimately regarded as constituting part of the
world. In this sense, prediction is indeed a ‘project of world making ’(Andersson, 2018,p .2 3 ) .
The logics of anticipation enshrined in the association between predictive analytics and governance
thus aspire to make the future present in the here and now and, in so doing, impose themselves asworld-shaping instruments, fostering specific ways of instauring people and things. ‘Instauration ’how-
ever comes at the price of ‘immunisation ’, which can occur as distantiation, detachment or complete
indifference towards forms of life that are not afforded any credit or value. Therefore, future researchon the assemblage between governance and AI must consider the fate of those forms of life that do notadapt, do not align or even actively resist dominant sociopolitical models. The risk is otherwise for the
assemblage to crystallise into an exclusive mode of protection of life aligned to and acknowledged by
these models (Schinkel, 2011 ).
As masterfully put by Jenny Andersson, the fundamental problem that we have today vis-à-vis the
future is not the passage from progress to crisis, as some believe. It is rather the challenge of managing
a potentially infinite plurality of futures and of moulding a society that is truly plural, where access to
the widest spectrum of modes of engagement in and with the world is genuinely open.
Acknowledgements. The authors wish to thank Amy Thomasson for her assistance in finalising this article.
Conflicts of Interest. None
References
Adams V, Murphy M and Clarke AE (2009) Anticipation: technoscience, life, affect, temporality. Subjectivity 28, 246 –265.
Alston P (2019a) Brief by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights as Amicus Curiae
in the Case NJCM c.s./Der Staat Der Nederlanden (SyRI) before the District Court of The Hague (Case Number: C/09/
6The link between past and future can take different forms depending on the normative logic under consideration. The
precautionary principle involves a future that manifests itself in the form of an absence (it is not yet here and we do not
know what its impact will be); with the principle of pre-emption, the future is apprehended in the form of imminence
(it is about to happen and we must act immediately before it does); finally, with the principle of preparedness, the future
is characterised by its presence (the worst is happening and we must respond appropriately).International Journal of Law in Context 85
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press