4 A new sociotechnical imaginary?
4.1 Governing through real-time predictions
The association between predictive analytics and governance strives to make the future knowable in
the present ( epistemic practices ) and shapes a programmatic way of formalising, justifying and deploy-
ing action in the here and now ( normative logics ). We argue that this convergence is shaping a new
sociotechnical imaginary –to paraphrase Jasanoff: a collectively held, institutionally stabilised and pub-
licly performed vision of a desirable future, animated by shared understandings of social life and socialorder attainable through advances in science and technology. We now interrogate its scope and limits.
This emergent vision is not quite institutionally stabilised and yet it is increasingly performed in the
public sphere. It enshrines a capricious and indomitable future that is always indeterminate, unpre-
dictable and complex, requiring permanent taming and, in some cases, total neutralisation. Wehave seen that ‘real-time ’predictions are the providential tools for the task: anticipatory techniques
allowing humans to regain a measure of control and autonomy in a contingent world. The conver-
gence between algorithmic and politico-legal logics is in this sense both the result and the vector of
the new imaginary (Jasanoff, 2015 , p. 26).
As discussed, predicting in real time is counter-intuitive. Conceptually, this expression uncovers
many contradictions and tensions inherent in current predictive practices. These tensions perform
a profound reconfiguring role that sketches the contours of the new sociotechnical imaginary .W e
identify five critical ones:
1 The idea of real-time prediction reconfigures the relations between temporality and materiality ,
the (im)mediate and the mediated. The sparkling velocity of big data and the immediacy of real
time render technology invisible and distract from the materiality of predictive analytics.
Through a process of ‘blackboxing ’(Kallinikos, 2002 )o r ‘camouflage ’(Dubey and de
Jouvancourt, 2018 ), the apparently immediate result obliterates the mediating role of technology
(Verbeek, 2016 ) and all the material work and significant time involved in algorithmic model-
ling, data cleansing, system testing, etc.
2 The idea of real-time prediction blurs the relations between knowledge and action because it
implies that following the digital traces of a phenomenon in real time is tantamount to actingon the phenomenon itself. The time of observation and the time of action merge into an
epistemic trap, prompting people to believe that knowledge about a phenomenon or behaviour
provides normative guidance on how to act in its face. Big data generates a different type of‘knowledge ’than ordinary science. Based on correlations, it is ‘more akin to the translation or
interpretation of signs rather than …understanding chains of causation ’(Chandler, 2015 ,
p. 836). Can the performativity of a score or profile justify action without adequate understand-
ing of the multiplicity of causes behind a phenomenon?
3 The idea of real-time prediction questions the distinction between subject and object , and more
specifically between a predicting subject and a knowable object. These predictions do not operate
in accordance with modernist rationality because they follow an oracular logic of self-referential
and self-fulfilling circularities, where the observer is located inside the world under observationand subject to its principles. This requires taking into consideration the consequences that theactions of the observer and the acts of observing and predicting themselves have on events.
The self-fulfilling nature of predictions is of course not new and has been discussed in socio-
logical literature for decades (Merton, 1948 ). It is the fact that predictions seemingly occur in
‘real time ’that exacerbates these tendencies, which are indeed inherent to the very idea of
predicting.
4 The idea of real-time prediction blurs the distinction between the virtual and the possible . As real
time points to ‘real world ’events, real-time predictions only relate to what is possibly happening
as it has already happened. By identifying correlations from past regularities, this kind of pre-
diction reduces the real to the possible and overlooks the virtual dimension of life and itsInternational Journal of Law in Context 81
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press