SPECIAL ISSUE ARTICLE
Predictive analytics and governance: a new
sociotechnical imaginary for uncertain futures
Christophe Lazaro1and Marco Rizzi2*
1UCLouvain, Belgium and2UWA Law School, Australia
*Corresponding author. E-mail: marco.rizzi@uwa.edu.au (pfortes@stanfordalumni.org andrestrepo-amariles@hec.fr )
Abstract
In an era of global sanitary, economic and ecological crisis, beliefs in the predictive power of artificialintelligence (AI) progressively penetrate the legal and political spheres, in search of new ways to anticipateand govern the future. In this context, it is critical to understand the idiosyncratic nature of the interplaybetween governance and algorithmic logics of prediction. This contribution discusses how the associationbetween governance and AI makes the future knowable in the present and shapes a programmatic way offormalising, justifying and deploying action in the here and now. We focus on three principles of insti-tutional mobilisation in the face of uncertainty and indeterminacy: precaution, pre-emption and prepared-ness, each of which is affected by the use of AI relying on so-called ‘real-time predictions ’. Drawing from
risk theory and Science and Technology Studies, we argue that the current convergence between AI andgovernance is shaping a new sociotechnical imaginary, promoting a distinctive conception of life and ofthe future in the age of the Anthropocene.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; governance; predictive analytics; STS; AI and law; uncertainty
1 Introduction
Contemporary algorithmic devices are establishing themselves as essential methods for the optimisa-
tion of decision-making processes and anticipating risks. Whether based on conventional statistical
modelling systems or artificial intelligence (AI) and machine-learning algorithms, these systems fosterthe belief in the possibility of anticipating the future and reducing the complexity of life. They seem-ingly do so by providing reliable projections of future unfoldings. Arguably, their functional capacities
reveal a striking feature of our age: an obsession with prediction and anticipation of the future.
Innovations in the field of AI are spreading from the body to the world, permeating many aspects
of contemporary human life (Adams et al. ,2009 ). These include health, communication, education,
economic activities and beyond, and arguably allow both the private and public sectors to optimise
decision-making. In this paper, we are not so much concerned with dissecting a particular sector,
but rather preoccupied with teasing out some overarching themes inherent in the use of these tech-nologies in decision-making.
Technologies such as predictive modelling, machine learning and data mining facilitate the analysis
of past and present data to make predictions about the future. In this paper, we use the term ‘predictive
analytics ’to refer to these technologies (Finlay, 2014 ). Modern discourse on predictive analytics,
whether in the fields of journalism, politics, hard sciences or humanities, often resorts to a semanticsofmagic ordivination , identifying algorithms as the oracles of our contemporary societies: ‘The mod-
ern oracles of our networked digital age are Big Data and data analytics …. They provide a targeted
look into the crystal ball ’(Romeike and Eicher, 2016 , p. 168; Baker and Gourley, 2015 ; Timms, 2017 ).
© The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution, and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.International Journal of Law in Context (2023), 19,7 0–90
doi:10.1017/S1744552322000477
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press