multiple potentialities. Giles Deleuze has discussed that the virtual is not opposed or alternative
to the real. Virtual is what exists potentially and can materialise through actualisation. Thus, thevirtual differs from the possible in that it is not predetermined and is therefore unpredictable and
responds to an open multiplicity of variables from which one or more forms of actualisations
may emerge (Deleuze, 2013 ).
5 The idea of real-time prediction reconfigures the links between the past, the present and the
future . Because these predictions rely exclusively on past regularities, the future made present
in the here and now is impoverished and reduced to a mere repetition of the possible, of
what has already happened at least once. In this sense, predictive analytics end up ‘reducing
the future to the past, or, more precisely, to a past anticipation of the future ’(Hui Kyong
Chun, 2011 , p. 92). Additionally, predictions are no longer made with a view to anticipating
today what could happen in the future: they are made to anticipate right now what immediately
comes next. The temporal unit radically changes with real-time predictions –it shrinks and
therefore modifies the notions of short-, medium- and long-term.
These reconfiguring tensions are moulding the transition towards the new imaginary, which appears
eminently characterised by the ‘necessity of continuous adaptation to the world in its emergence ’
(Chandler, 2016 , p. 410). However, this way of envisioning the future has important limitations, par-
ticularly given its role in inspiring normative logics of action.
4.2 Pluralising the future
The first limitation of the emerging imaginary relates to the issue of epistemological heterogeneity and
requires questioning the place occupied by predictive analytics among other anticipatory techniques. Ifgovernance practices yearn to address a purely contingent life, to what extent can or should they relyon data-driven science and quantified future visions? The question involves the hierarchical place of
‘algorithmic governance ’vis-à-vis radically different modes of anticipatory knowledge such as fore-
sight (Cazes, 1986 ), imagination (Engélibert, 2019 ) or performance (Anderson, 2010b ). As the epis-
temological authority of quantified knowledge gains momentum in the era of big data, the risk is amove towards a future monopolised by data-driven science with reduced normative options. This is
problematic because reliance on a multiplicity of anticipatory techniques (Aykut et al. ,2019 ) is essen-
tial for alternative ‘visions of desirable futures ’to be contested, negotiated or reconciled by different
actors. Maintaining plurality is critical to preserve an ‘ecology of futures ’(Michael, 2017 ) within
which policy-makers, lawyers, experts, stakeholders and citizens can navigate and make decisions to
face the adversities of a contingent life.
The analysis of the normative logics of action above is revealing of the need for this plurality. Let us
take preparedness as an example. The very idea of this logic of action is to accept the inevitability of the
unknown, and prepare for its aftermath. But this necessarily requires a measure of imagination as a
mode of anticipation. Where the operation of the logic is subsumed within the crushing limitations
of correlative patterns identified in existing datasets –even where these are updated in real time –
the normative force of the logic changes in nature. When deploying preparatory action becomes inex-tricably tied to a predictive score, the logic arguably ceases to be one of preparedness and becomes one
ofadjustment. A risk inherent to allowing a data-driven monopoly of anticipation is therefore an invo-
lution of normative logics of action projected towards unknown futures into a data-directed adjust-ment to emerging presents –the continuous adaptation Chandler refers to. This prompts us to
raise a strong caveat against the hegemony of quantification in governance, and argue instead for
decision-making processes that rely on a diversity of ‘arts and technologies of imagining the actionable
future ’(de Goede and Randalls, 2009 , p. 860). The inability of predictive scores to imagine beyond set
patterns and therefore capture the unexpected is well exemplified by the failure of the ‘hundreds of AI
tools ’developed to ‘catch ’COVID-19 (Heaven, 2021 ).82 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press