We increasingly expect AI to solve the world ’s biggest challenges: treating chronic diseases, predict-
ing pandemic and epidemic outbreaks, reducing fatality rates in traffic accidents, fighting climatechange and fostering sustainable development (European Commission, 2020b ). Beliefs in predictive
analytics thus progressively penetrate the legal and political spheres. In this contribution, our main
objective is to reflect on contemporary beliefs in the divinatory power of digital technologies(Lazaro, 2018 ) in the broad domain of governance.
Taking these ‘apparently irrational beliefs ’seriously (Sperber, 1982 ) requires understanding how
the association between governance and AI makes the future knowable in the present ( epistemic prac-
tices) (Cetina, 1999 ), shaping a programmatic way of formalising, justifying and deploying action in
the here and now ( normative logics ). The contemporary debate surrounding AI is dominated by
the analysis of risks and human rights impacts of algorithmic systems (such as the violation of privacy,
problems of discrimination or lack of transparency) (Council of Europe, 2020 ; European Commission,
2019 ). The literature on the risks inherent to biases and the implications of AI for individual consent is
growing alongside awareness of the complexity of the challenges posed by the technology for protec-tion of individual rights (Andreotta et al. ,2021 ). In this paper, we take a complementary approach. We
are conducting a review of a large body of literature spanning a number fields and drawing together
what we understand to be constitutive threads of a complex tapestry depicting the impact of predictiveanalytics on governance.
We acknowledge that tackling ‘governance ’as a theme means casting the net very wide. However,
an overarching theme of governance, in whatever form or setting, is its preoccupation with providing
direction and exercising control over entities. As such, we suggest that governance is particularlyinvested in shaping the future. It is important here to distinguish between prediction and anticipation,the former being but one modality of the latter. For example, law, a key instrument of governance, can
be described as a discrete mode of anticipation (Ost, 1999 ).
1Law does not predict but, through a var-
iety of rules, is a vector of anticipation and serves as a guide. It operates as a cognitive and pragmaticresource as well as a constraint. This supports the co-ordination of human actors between themselvesand with the world. It is thus essential to grasp the idiosyncratic nature of the progressive convergence
between governance (particularly legal) and algorithmic anticipatory logics in order to move beyond a
risk-based approach and appreciate in full the impact of the use of predictive analytics on the govern-ance of ‘what is not and may never happen ’(Massumi, 2007 ).
A growing body of literature has emerged in recent years to examine the nuts and bolts of ‘algo-
rithmic governance ’(Cantero Gamito and Ebers, 2021 ; Danaher et al. ,2017 ; Gritsenko and Wood,
2022 ; Kalpokas, 2019 )o r ‘algorithmic regulation ’(Yeung, 2018 ). These are identified as analytical con-
structs developed in scholarship to unpack ‘the role of algorithms as a mode of social coordination and
control ’in concrete contexts of application (Ulbricht and Yeung, 2021 , p. 18). In an ideal dialogue
with this literature, we come at the topic from a different angle. Drawing from Science and
Technology Studies (STS) (Cole and Bertenthal, 2017 ), we argue that the current convergence between
algorithmic technology and governance is shaping a new sociotechnical imaginary , promoting a dis-
tinctive conception of the future in the age of the Anthropocene. Sheila Jasanoff defines sociotechnical
imaginaries as follows: ‘collectively held, institutionally stabilized, and publicly performed visions of
desirable futures, animated by shared understandings of forms of social life and social order attainablethrough, and supportive of, advances in science and technology ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 25).
1An argument can be made that such overlap exists between governance and law that the distinction, conceptually, is
minimal. This is particularly true where one accepts the conclusions of Bruno Latour who refers to law as an ambivalent
phenomenon, both institutional and pragmatic: law as an institution (legislation, regulation, governance) and law as a
practice (‘law in action ’, adjudication) (Gutwirth, 2013 ; Latour, 2009 ). However, we will not be making these arguments
here and will maintain the analytical distinction whereby law is an instrument of governance. A parallel suggests that ‘law
in action ’, beyond its technical adjudication, embraces the broader spectrum of its ‘life’beyond the black letter of legal
rules (Friedman et al. ,1995 ). Again, we cannot engage with the complexity of this strand of socio-legal scholarship here,
but we acknowledge its potential relevance to our arguments.International Journal of Law in Context 71
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press