explained by the infinite nature of its intrinsic risks. For instance, risks tend to exceed the limits of the
insurable in two directions: the infinitely small (e.g. biological, natural, health risks related to food con-sumption) and the infinitely large (e.g. major technological risks or technological disasters) (Ewald,
1993 ).
Second, life is conceptualised according to the principle of included middle . This aspect creates a
major problem: the entanglement or ‘heterogenesis of the bad within the good ’(Anderson, 2010a ,
p. 781), which deviates from the law of non-contradiction. The causes of a disaster are presumed
to incubate within life itself, requiring intervention before (or as) the catastrophic process incubates
and certainly before it exceeds the threshold of catastrophe. Brian Massumi gives an insightful accountof how life and its underlying threats are conceived of today: ‘[t]his is the figure of today ’s threat: the
suddenly irrupting, locally self-organising, systemically self-amplifying threat of large-scale disruption.
This form of threat is not only indiscriminate, coming anywhere, as out of nowhere, at any time, it is
also indiscriminable ’(Massumi, 2009 , p. 154).
Finally, if life is contingent, the future remains open as disasters are themselves emerging phenom-
ena (Christen and Franklin, 2002 ). The effects or impacts of disasters change and evolve as they cir-
culate. This idea implies that one can take advantage of a crisis to invest and earn money. For example,
Michael Lewis has produced a masterful account of the large profits made by certain market players inthe lead-up to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –2008 in his compelling book, The Big Short (Lewis,
2011 ). The uncertainty characterising life is therefore both a promise and a threat to be simultaneously
neutralised and nurtured (Amin, 2013 ). Anticipatory actions based on predictive analytics emerge in a
situation in which the very contingency of life generates the occurrence of a threat/opportunity, dan-ger/profit.
These aspects of ‘life as pure contingency ’are particularly noticeable, for example, in the unfolding
of the COVID-19 crisis. The phenomenon is complex not only because of its global scale, but also
because of the participation of an intricate network of human and non-human actors, including publichealth responses, asymptomatic virus holders, vaccine discovery and access, and viral mutations. Thecauses of disaster incubate indiscriminately within life in ways that render certain social and/or cul-
tural lifestyles problematic. Yet, despite the dramatic consequences of the COVID-19 crisis, the future
remains open. The effects of the pandemic hint at new opportunities in environmental issues as lock-downs appear to have positively affected the environment. Carbon emissions have reduced due todrops in traffic, power usage and industrial production (Le Quéré et al. ,2020 ). Similarly, the challenges
posed by the so-called Delta variant of the original SARS-CoV-2 virus are raising awareness about the
importance of adequate ventilation systems in closed indoor shared spaces (WHO, 2021 ).
In a world permeated by contingency, real-time prediction becomes the tool that allows a fresh
injection of control and autonomy (Misuraca et al. ,2012 ). Indeed, despite today ’s perception of life
as contingent and indeterminate, humans must still engage with it. The yearning for a recovery of con-
trol is apparent in the discourse of institutions and experts:
‘Today a growing number of societal challenges (such as climate change, natural disasters, urban
planning and pandemics) are not only extremely complex, but also interrelated. Data represents akey raw material to deal with such challenges. The huge amount of data produced every day canreveal real-time information that is critical to understanding patterns of human behaviour and
activities. ’(European Commission, 2020a , p. 15)
In a report for the Council of Europe, Karen Yeung points out that there is an intimate link between
living in a complex world and the potential value of AI in helping us to govern it. However, she stresses
the future challenges that lie ahead for computer science research in this respect:
‘The challenge of devising solutions that will enable us reliably to predict, model and take action
to prevent unwanted and potentially catastrophic outcomes arising from the interaction betweenInternational Journal of Law in Context 73
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press