In this regard, a report drafted by a group of foresight experts and addressed to the European
Commission in 2015 rightly insists on the need for a ‘co-production of knowledge ’in a context of rad-
ical uncertainty:
‘In an era of big data, some are optimistic that real-time data mining combined with continued
increases in computational power and speed will enable more reliable predictive modelling.However, being able to run the modelling process faster and deliver more detail does not guar-
antee better outcomes. Achieving this requires the worlds of theory and practice to be effectively
bridged in a co-production of knowledge. In the foresight philosophy of non-deterministic, stillemerging and open multiple futures, this bridging needs to be done in a way that effectively grap-ples with problematic situations or enables the management of unprecedented large-scale transi-
tions in the context of unpredictability and uncertainties. ’(Wendeling, 2015 , p. 31)
Crucially, a combination of diverse anticipatory techniques would have the ability to balance out one
of the intrinsic weaknesses of predictive analytics –their conservative or reactionary nature. Emerging
as it is from correlative patterns in past data, the future deduced from predictive analytics is one that
makes it impossible to apprehend the new, the abnormal or the spontaneous: a future that ignores thevirtual and reduces itself to the possible (Deleuze, 2013 ). This inevitable characteristic leads us to
reflect upon the second major limitation of the new sociotechnical imaginary : the uncertain fate of
forms or modes of life that do not conform to dominant the sociopolitical model. Indeed, visions
of a desirable future are ‘animated by shared understandings of forms of social life and social
order ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 4). This raises three questions: (1) Which conceptions of (social)
life and (social) order are involved in the new imaginary? (ii) Are they truly shared and by whom?
(iii) Which normativity is associated with these conceptions or, in other words, how do they valorise
(or not) certain forms of life –particularly ‘non-conforming ’ones?
Answering these questions requires a firm grasp of the constructivist nature of predictive practices.
Indeed, these practices can only claim to possess knowledge about the future because they inherently
imply specific ways of defining what counts as the real world, along with its various constituents
(Holbraad, 2013 ). In this sense, predictive practices can be described as ‘demiurgic ’(De Boeck and
Devisch, 1994 ) as they shape the world by bringing about the presence of the future in the here
and now. This demiurgic power makes people and things exist in a certain way: it is a process of ‘insti-
tution ’(Castoriadis, 1975 )o r ‘instauration ’of persons and things –a process that allows existence to
gain reality (Lapoujade, 2017 , p. 73; Souriau, 1939 ).
In the face of their intrinsic link to the possible , which drastically limits their ability to address nov-
elty or abnormality, the process of instauration performed by predictive analytics opens itself to ques-
tions, particularly with regard to the way algorithmic governance contributes to forging and valorising
certain forms of life (human or non-human) to the detriment of others. Indeed, consubstantial to anyrecognition or instauration of some form of life is a reflex of immunisation towards others, deemed
expendable because of their difference or abnormality. This type of reflex generates a form of ‘immu-
nopolitics ’(Esposito, 2008 ) that translates into indifference, discrimination or even alienation:
‘we can get a sense of how anticipatory action (re)distributes the relationship that lives within and
outside liberal democracies have to disaster. To protect, save and care for certain forms of life is to
potentially abandon, dispossess and destroy others.
’(Anderson, 2010a , p. 791)
Large-scale manifestations of this process of immunisation are surfacing in a multitude of domains.
Two recent books, both evocatively titled The Uncounted (Cobham, 2020 ; Davis, 2020 ), develop the
theme of underrepresentation of marginalised groups in datasets spanning economic welfare, demo-
graphics and public health (with a particular focus on the fight against HIV/AIDS). A further exampleis the progressive emergence of a ‘digital welfare state ’in which social protection and assistance are
data-driven and digital technologies are used for diverse purposes, including ‘to automate, predict,International Journal of Law in Context 83
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press