identify, surveil, detect, target and punish ’(Alston, 2019b , p. 4; Madden et al. ,2017 ). The recent Dutch
case involving the system SyRI (System Risk Indication) is very instructive in this regard as it is one ofthe first examples of successful litigation against the governmental use of a digital tool in the context of
welfare provision ( de Rechtspraak ,2020 ; Gantchev, 2019 ).
Although the exact technology used in SyRI has not been publicly released, this automated system
allows the Dutch central and local governments to identify risks of social security fraud. Processingdata from a range of datasets relating to education, credit-worthiness, health insurance, welfare ben-
efits, etc., SyRI provides an opaque risk-assessment modelling to identify whether individuals are
worthy of investigation for potential fraud and unlawful claims under (and/or non-compliancewith) legislation.
Since its adoption in 2014, SyRI has been under scrutiny by several non-governmental organisa-
tions and other interest groups, which filed a lawsuit in 2018. This was due to serious concerns
about the specific targeting of people from low socio-economic backgrounds and other vulnerablegroups such as immigrants and ethnic or religious minorities. It is now apparent that SyRI was dis-proportionately focusing on ‘difficult neighbourhoods ’, further undermining their reputation and
that of their inhabitants (Leijten, 2020 ; Vervloesem, 2020 ). The use of SyRI raises critical issues
both in terms of procedural fairness and human rights –be it the right to privacy or the right to social
security. Philip Alston, the UN the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, submit-ted a brief as Amicus Curiae in the case, in which he makes several remarks about the potential det-
rimental impact of the use of systems like SyRI:
‘The use of digital tools to pursue welfare fraud is …not a neutral development, but part of a
partisan political trend. In this environment, welfare recipients, especially those who receive non-
contributory assistance designed to assist the poorest in society, are regularly depicted as second-class citizens intent on defrauding the state and the community. In such an atmosphere …digital
tools are being mobilized to target disproportionately those groups that are already more vulner-
able and less able to protect their social rights. ’(Alston, 2019a ,p .7 )
In February 2020, the District Court of The Hague held that the SyRI legislation violated Article 8 of
the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), which protects the right to private and family
life. The court ’s reasoning focused chiefly on the issue of privacy and on the proportionality of SyRI ’s
interference with private life. Surprisingly, the issue of discrimination and the stigmatisation of thepoor and recipients of social benefits, put forward by the plaintiffs and discussed by Alston, received
little attention. Yet, this dimension is crucial as SyRI had been demonstrably used to disproportion-
ately target groups of already vulnerable individuals, with serious impact on their rights and no dueprocess. The case is all the more interesting as it reveals how predictive analytics can cause socialunfairness beyond the sensitive categories explicitly identified and protected by the law (Timan and
Grommé, 2020 ). This is troublesome, particularly in the current ‘move to predicting risk instead of
the ex post enforcement of rules violations ’(Alston, 2019b , p. 19) –a move that animates the increas-
ing reliance on predictive analytics in the context of governance practices inspired by the normativelogic of actions analysed above.
These reflexes of immunisation, which exclude certain groups or forms of life deemed intrinsically
suspect or pernicious, are symptomatic of ‘the inequality of the value of lives ’(Fassin, 2018 , p. 32) in
the digital age. Thus, as governance and algorithmic logics keep converging, a fundamental questionremains open: how to avoid entrenching indifference for forms of life neglected by dominant socio-
political models –in other words, how to develop ‘novel and less exclusive cosmologies ’
(Chateauraynaud and Debaz, 2019 , p. 132). Any positive answer will require safeguarding a plurality
of anticipatory techniques as a necessary premise for alternative ‘visions of desirable futures ’to
emerge.84 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press