Neyrat, 2009 ).4In Europe, the use of pre-emptive logic in the context of predictive justice has been
problematised with a particular focus on the threat to individual rights (such as privacy, or theGDPR protection against fully automated decision-making) (Jansen, 2018 ; Lynskey, 2019 ; Williams
and Kind, 2019 ). Less attention has been dedicated to the broader collective implications of accepting
‘clairvoyance ’as a method of governance. When the logic shifts away from prevention in its traditional
sense to embrace a pre-emptive turn, ensuing measures equally change in nature. The focus movesfrom causes to intervene ‘on the information and physical environment of individuals ’to prevent cer-
tain things or actions from being actualised or even possible (Rouvroy and Stiegler, 2015 , p. 125).
The key tenet of this mode of governance is the connection between traditional approaches to risk
assessment, based on a risk-utility calculus, and the notion of ‘clairvoyance ’, provided by predictive
analytics, which refutes the ontological uncertainty of future events in favour of a more reassuring
form of artificially designed determinism.
Finally, the logic of preparedness is engaged at a different point in the timeline, when a particular
event is either unfolding or producing its impact on life. Much like precaution, the logic of prepared-ness is designed to be applied to ‘epistemic situations ’in which threats are neither calculable nor con-
trollable. Unlike precaution however, preparedness does not prescribe the avoidance of a threatening
event. Rather, it ‘assumes that the occurrence of the event may not be avoidable and so generates
knowledge about its potential consequences ’(Lakoff, 2017 , p. 19).
The logic of preparedness and that of precaution represent the two ends of the same paradox. The
worst case scenario is perceived as something to be avoided at all costs while, at the same time, it is
understood as fundamentally unavoidable. In this sense, the two logics are ‘increasingly joined ’to
inspire ‘operational criteria of response ’(Aradau and Van Munster, 2008 , p. 30).
Preparedness engages simultaneously speculative and reactive dimensions. The aim is to be
prepared for the worst as if its devastating consequences were already present. To make a disaster
fictitiously occur in the here and now requires an artificial projection into a state of emergency to for-mulate potential responses to the crisis (imaginatively) at hand. In this sense, preparatory logics tendto rely upon resilience (Zebrowski, 2013 ), as well as crisis management planning and the protection of
vital infrastructures for society (Collier and Lakoff, 2015 ). Specifically, they require taking into account
the various phases of initial rescue operations (e.g. medical triage, evacuations, provision of food andwater supplies), as well as initial actions to be taken in the immediate aftermath of the event generatingthe crisis to minimise its consequences.
The use of predictive analytics in the context of preparedness and crisis management is increasingly
common, whether for the purpose of monitoring epidemics (Jayalakshmi and Anuradha, 2017 ; Raza,
2020 ; Zeng et al. ,2021 ) or mitigating the impacts of a humanitarian crisis (Raymond and Al Achkar,
2016 ) or natural catastrophe (Yu et al. ,2018 ). In these contexts, AI systems are supposed to provide
and help maintain high levels of ‘situational awareness ’, which in turn are necessary to ensure
adequate response to the emergency (Mehrotra et al. ,2013 ).
Preparing for the worst entails the capacity to respond adequately once the worst materialises.
Thus, preparedness also engages the response phase in the aftermath of a crisis, which necessitates
the deployment of appropriate reactions constantly alive to mutating circumstances. In this very spe-
cific context, the expression ‘
real-time prediction ’carries understandable value and meaning, as algo-
rithmic devices are able to inform reactions ‘live’while a disastrous event is unfolding:
‘Big Data analysis in real time can identify which areas need the most urgent attention from the
crisis administrators. With the use of the GIS and GPS systems, Big Data analysis can assist the
right guidance to the public to avoid or move away from the hazardous situation. Furthermore,
analysis from prior crisis could help identify the most effective strategy for responding to futuredisasters. ’(Dontas and Dontas, 2015 , p. 480)
4In criminal law, the pre-emptive logic triggers a threefold phenomenon: (1) the shift from the category of act to that of
intention; (2) the emergence of linguistic avatars of terrorism (such as ‘dangerousness ’) as predisposition to crime; and (3) the
adoption of laws acting on these predispositions.International Journal of Law in Context 79
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press