Given the characteristics of predictive analytics, it is unsurprising that their deployment in the context
of preparedness has followed increasing levels of securitisation of potential threats, and health threatsin particular. A progressive expansion of the scope of biosecurity governance and regulations, both
globally and at the European level, has been recently highlighted (Dijkstra and De Ruijter, 2017 ;
Roberts, 2019 ). The availability of modern algorithmic devices is exacerbating the levels of permanent
surveillance and data collection practices that the logic of preparedness is inherently capable of gen-erating, as it is dependent on them. With the rise of predictive analytics, the logic of preparedness,
originally conceived to ready societies for the unknown, paradoxically entrenches pre-existing experi-
ences as the sole source of preparatory inspiration, thereby limiting the range of action.
While we cannot exclude the possibility that there may be more, precaution ,pre-emption and
preparedness constitute three major logics of action that p redictive analytics can serve. It is possible
and necessary to sepa rate these logics from an analytical standpoint, yet it is equally crucial to
appreciate that they can be juxtaposed or used in conjunction in the course of attempts to appre-hend complex phenomena. These principles can operate in pairs. For example, precautionary andpreparatory logic can operate in tandem in the face of emerging health threats.
5Similarly, it is con-
ceivable that matters of public order may prompt aut horities to combine pre-emptive with prepara-
tory actions. It is also possible to observe a simultaneous deployment of all three logics of action bypublic authorities as attested by the European policies for the collection and use of Passenger NameRecords (PNR) data in the context of anti-terrorism and trans-border criminal laws (European
Commission, 2011 ).
In an early working paper on the topic, the European Commission explicitly refers to three poten-
tial uses of PNR data: ‘reactive ’,‘in real time ’and ‘proactive ’. The paper insists on the necessity for
combining different logics of action in the use of the data:
‘The combined pro-active and real-time use of PNR data thus enable law enforcement authorities
to address the threat of serious crime and terrorism from a different perspective than through the
processing of other categories of personal data: as explained further below, the processing of per-sonal data available to law enforcement authorities through existing and planned EU-level mea-sures such as the Directive on Advance Passenger Information, the Schengen Information System
(SIS) and the second-generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) do not enable law
enforcement authorities to identify “unknown ”suspects in the way that the analysis of PNR
data does. ’(European Commission, 2011 , p. 12)
PNR data can be used reactively in the context of criminal investigations for the purpose of disen-
tangling networks after a crime has been committed –thus falling within the logic of preparedness.
It is equally crucial to use PNR data in real time upon arrival or departure of identified passengers
to observe or arrest individuals before a crime is committed, because it is about to be or is in the
course of being committed –therefore encompassing both the precautionary and preparatory
logics. Finally, the Commission ’s working paper underlines the specific utility of using PNR data
by reference to predetermined evaluative criteria in order to identify individuals without criminal
records. PNR data can then be used pro-actively to further develop analytical benchmarks and
evaluative criteria for assessing passengers prior to their arrival or departure –thus following a pre-
emptive logic.
The complex discussion of epistemic andnormative heterogeneity developed in this section prompts
us to interrogate, in the final part of the paper, the significance of this modern conjunction between
predictive analytics and governance practices from a broader societal perspective.
5E.g. the successful (to date) public health countermeasures enacted by the governments of Australia and New Zealand to
face the COVID-19 pandemic, while initially inspired by a logic of preparedness, have become increasingly informed by a
logic of precaution –if not pre-emption with blanket border closures.80 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press