the assumption, inherent in current European (but arguably global) policy discourse, that complexity
necessarily requires new ways of governing based on predictive analytics ’performances.
3.2 Normative heterogeneity: logics of action
Once a score is calculated or a pattern identified, a spectral reality takes shape. Made present in the
here and now through the analysis of past data, the uncertain future becomes almost palpable and vis-ible. Anticipation of the future is a form of ‘generative truth ’that requires a transition from knowledge
to action and eventually imposes itself as a ‘moral imperative, a will to anticipate ’or an ‘injunction ’of
sorts (Adams et al. ,2009 , p. 254; Andersson, 2018 , p. 30).
The authority of predictive practices –whether in the form of machine-learning algorithms or
ancestral divinatory rites –is thus not only epistemic (Vernant et al. ,1974 , p. 10). It is also normative
as it both requires and justifies the deployment of certain logics of action in the here and now.
Alongside the strictly predictive function, providing legitimate grounds for decision-making is integralto the role of predictive practices. In this respect, digital signals have replaced divine signs. Governanceis done by numbers (Supiot, 2015 ), but numbers have the same function as the omens of the past: to
immunise decision-making against failure. Of course, the quantification of risk does not always pre-
vent bad outcomes and cannot provide a guarantee or insurance against an uncertain future. Butregardless of success or failure (Chandler, 2016 ), it serves as a justification for action. Although it can-
not make the future really foreseeable or the world really controllable, it can provide the means to act
as if it did.
It has been observed that ‘the unknowability of complex life itself comes to constitute the rationality
of its governance ’(Chandler, 2014 , p. 58), which also ends up taking very complex detours. AI can
serve different logics of anticipatory action, prompting diverse initiatives for the prevention, compen-
sation, preparation or adaptation to the emergence of a specific future. An examination of the plurality
of logics of action leads to the identification of more or less coherent ways of justifying and carryingout political or legal interventions in the present. Crucially, these are not necessarily aimed at neutra-lising the future before it occurs. Taking into account this normative heterogeneity enriches an analysis
too often limited to an indictment of the inhibiting pre-emptive powers of ‘algorithmic governmen-
tality ’(Rouvroy and Stiegler, 2015 ).
The institutional governance of complex life is performed through a number of normative princi-
ples that pursue different logics of action and require different interventions in the here and now.
These are revelatory of different ways of anticipating uncertain futures. From an analytical standpoint,
AI systems can support at least three distinct logics of action: (1) precaution; (2) pre-emption; and(3) preparedness (Anderson, 2010a ).
The logic of precaution involves situations in which the risk or threat has been identified and
demands action before the damage becomes irreversible. The precautionary logic is probably the
best known because it has been established as a legal principle over the course of the past decadesat both the national and international levels. In February 2000, the European Commission outlinedthe essential characteristics of the principle (now enshrined in Art. 191 TFEU):
‘Whether or not to invoke the precautionary principle is a decision exercised where scientific
information is insufficient, inconclusive, or uncertain and where there are indications that thepossible effects on the environment, or human, animal or plant health may be potentially dan-
gerous and inconsistent with the chosen level of protection. ’(European Commission, 2000 ,p .7 )
At the heart of the precautionary principle is the idea that, in the face of uncertainty, the occurrence of
a potentially catastrophic event and its impact on different forms of life must be prevented. The impos-
sibility of determining the exact probability or severity of a potentially catastrophic event should not
prompt decision-makers to refrain from taking preventative action. Recourse to the precautionaryprinciple therefore presupposes a particular ‘epistemic situation ’, which is one of uncertainty
(Guillaume, 2012 , p. 494): the impact of a situation on the environment or human health may beInternational Journal of Law in Context 77
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press