12 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
incremental variants of the meta-learning problem is however
an under-explored topic (e.g. Nagabandi et al. [2019] touches
on this topic).
On the other hand, meta-learning can be seen as part of
the solution for the continual learning problem. In principle
continual learning is ill-deﬁned. Remembering a potentially
inﬁnite set of skills is unfeasible within a ﬁnite model.
While continual learning usually focuses on 0-shot transfer
[Goodfellow et al., 2014, Parisi et al., 2018, Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017], or how well the agent remembers a previously seen
task without any adaptation, this might be the wrong measure.
A relaxation of this approach, e.g. explored by Kaplanis
et al. [2018], would be to measure how fast one recovers
performance, which converts continual learning into a meta-
learning problem. The compression of all seen tasks becomes
the meta-learning algorithm that the agent needs to infer and
that can be exploited to recover the solution of the task.
However the tasks are not seen necessarily in an i.i.d. fashion.
So while the mechanism outlined in this work could describe
such a solution to a continual learning problem, it is unclear
how to approach the learning problem in practice.
F . Conclusions
Reinforcement learning algorithms based on probabilistic
models promise to address many of the shortcomings—in par-
ticular, the sample-inefﬁciency—of model-free reinforcement
learning approaches. However, the implementation of such
systems is very challenging and, more often than not, depends
on domain expertise, i.e. human knowledge, hand-crafted in
the form of probabilistic models that are either tractable but too
simple to be useful, or outright intractable. Such an approach
does not scale.
Memory-based meta-learning offers a conceptually simple
alternative for the construction of agents implicitly based
on probabilistic models that leverages data and large-scale
computation. In essence, meta-learning transforms the hard
problem of probabilistic inference into a curve ﬁtting problem.
Here we have provided three meta-learning templates: one for
building predictors, one for Thompson samplers, and one for
Bayes-optimal agents respectively. In all of them, the key idea
is to precondition a slow-learning system by exposing it to
a distribution over trajectories drawn from a broad class of
tasks, so that the meta-learned system ends up implementing
a general and fast sequential strategy—that is, a strategy with
the right inductive biases.
We have also shown why this approach works and how
the meta-learned strategies are implemented. Basically, the
resulting strategies are near-optimal by construction because
meta-learning directly trains on a Monte-Carlo approximation
of the expected cost over possible hypotheses. The sequential
data drawn during this Monte-Carlo approximation is implic-
itly Bayes-ﬁltered, and the Bayesian updates are amortized by
the meta-learned strategy. Moreover, we have shown that the
adaptation strategy is implemented as a state machine in the
agent’s memory dynamics, which is driven by the data the
agent experiences. A given memory state then represents the
agent’s information state, and, more precisely, the sufﬁcientstatistics for predicting its future interactions. The structure of
the transition graph encodes the symmetries in the task distri-
bution: paths that have the same initial and ﬁnal information
state are indistinguishable, and thus equivalent for the purposes
of modulating the future behavior of the agent.
Finally, we note that meta-learning also converts complex
probabilistic inference problems into regression problems in
one-shot settings, when meta-learning is applied without mem-
ory (e.g. Orhan and Ma 2017). A key distinction of the
sequential setting with memory is that meta-learning also
produces an update rule.
Our hope is that readers will ﬁnd these insights useful,
and that they will use the ideas presented here as a con-
ceptual starting point for the development of more advanced
algorithms and theoretical investigations. There are many
remaining challenges for the future, such as understanding task
structure, dealing with out-of-distribution generalization, and
continual learning (to mention some). Some of these can be
addressed through tweaking the basic meta-learning training
process and through designing hypothesis classes with special
properties.
More generally though, memory-based meta-learning illus-
trates a more powerful claim: a slow learning system, given
enough data and computation, can not only learn a model over
its environment, but an entire reasoning procedure . In a sense,
this suggests that rationality principles are not necessarily pre-
existent, but rather emerge over time as a consequence of
the situatedness of the system and its interaction with the
environment.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Shakir Mohamed for his very
thoughtful feedback on the manuscript.
Changes
V1.0: (08/05/2019) Original version.
V1.1: (18/07/2019) Added a new reference; corrected error
in Figure 3; added acknowledgements.
REFERENCES
Felix Abramovich and Ya’acov Ritov. Statistical theory: a
concise introduction . CRC Press, 2013.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez,
Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, Brendan
Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn
by gradient descent by gradient descent. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3981–3989,
2016.
Jonathan Baxter. Theoretical models of learning to learn. In
Learning to learn , pages 71–94. Springer, 1998.
Jonathan Baxter. A model of inductive bias learning. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 12:149–198, 2000.
Richard Bellman. The theory of dynamic programming.
Technical report, RAND Corp Santa Monica CA, 1954.
Yoshua Bengio, Samy Bengio, Jocelyn Cloutier, and Jan
Gecsei. Learning a synaptic learning rule. pages II–A969,
1991.