DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1 1
Meta-learning of Sequential Strategies
Pedro A. Ortega, Jane X. Wang, Mark Rowland, Tim Genewein, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Razvan Pascanu,
Nicolas Heess, Joel Veness, Alex Pritzel, Pablo Sprechmann, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Tom McGrath, Kevin
Miller, Mohammad Azar, Ian Osband, Neil Rabinowitz, András György, Silvia Chiappa, Simon Osindero,
Yee Whye Teh, Hado van Hasselt, Nando de Freitas, Matthew Botvinick, and Shane Legg
DeepMind
Abstract —In this report we review memory-based meta-
learning as a tool for building sample-efﬁcient strategies that
learn from past experience to adapt to any task within a target
class. Our goal is to equip the reader with the conceptual
foundations of this tool for building new, scalable agents that
operate on broad domains. To do so, we present basic algorithmic
templates for building near-optimal predictors and reinforcement
learners which behave as if they had a probabilistic model that
allowed them to efﬁciently exploit task structure. Furthermore,
we recast memory-based meta-learning within a Bayesian frame-
work, showing that the meta-learned strategies are near-optimal
because they amortize Bayes-ﬁltered data, where the adaptation
is implemented in the memory dynamics as a state-machine
of sufﬁcient statistics. Essentially, memory-based meta-learning
translates the hard problem of probabilistic sequential inference
into a regression problem.
Index Terms —meta-learning, generality, sample-efﬁciency,
memory, sufﬁcient statistics, Bayesian statistics, Thompson sam-
pling, Bayes-optimality.
I. I NTRODUCTION
How do we build agents that perform well over a wide
range of tasks? Achieving this generality (or universality) is
considered by many research agendas to be one of the core
challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [Solomonoff, 1964,
Gottfredson, 1997, Hernandez-Orallo, 2000, Hutter, 2004].
Generality is at the heart of IQ tests [Spearman, 1904, Raven,
1936, Urbina, 2011] and the measure of intelligence suggested
by Legg and Hutter [2007].
Meta-learning is a practical machine learning approach to
building general AI systems such as classiﬁers, predictors, and
agents. Broadly speaking, meta-learning aims to produce ﬂex-
ible, data-efﬁcient learning systems through the acquisition of
inductive biases from data [Bengio et al., 1991, Schmidhuber
et al., 1996, Thrun and Pratt, 1998]. In contrast to systems
that build in such biases by design, in meta-learning they
are acquired by training on a distribution over tasks . For
example, an agent trained to ﬁnd rewards in one maze will
simply learn the solution to that maze, but an agent trained on
mazes drawn from a broad class will learn a general-purpose
strategy for exploring new mazes [Wang et al., 2016, Duan
et al., 2016]. Systems trained in this way are able to absorb
structure in the task distribution that allows them to adapt
efﬁciently and generalize to new tasks, effectively leveraging
past experience to speed up new learning. Therefore, a meta-
learner can be thought of as a primary learning system that
progressively improves the learning of a secondary system[Bengio et al., 1991, Schmidhuber et al., 1996, Thrun and
Pratt, 1998, Hochreiter et al., 2001].
This method has been shown to be remarkably effective in
practice, especially in combination with deep learning archi-
tectures. Recent years have brought a wealth of approaches
centered on meta-learning different aspects of the learn-
ing process, such as learning the optimizer [Andrychowicz
et al., 2016, Li and Malik, 2016, Ravi and Larochelle, 2016,
Wichrowska et al., 2017, Chen et al., 2018b], the metric space
[Vinyals et al., 2016, Snell et al., 2017], the initial network
parameters [Finn et al., 2017, Nichol and Schulman, 2018],
the learning targets [Xu et al., 2018], conditional distributions
[Wang et al., 2017, Garnelo et al., 2018, Gordon et al., 2018,
Zintgraf et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2018a], or even the entire
learning procedure using a memory-based architecture such as
a recurrent neural network [Santoro et al., 2016, Wang et al.,
2016, Duan et al., 2016, Denil et al., 2016, Mishra et al., 2018].
Some approaches have also taken advantage of modularity as
an inductive bias to learn modules to be re-used in transfer
tasks [Reed and De Freitas, 2015].
In this report we focus on this last class of memory-
based meta-learning methods , which aim to ﬁnd sequential
strategies that learn from experience. Speciﬁcally, we aim for
a theoretical understanding of such meta-learning methods by
recasting them within a Bayesian framework. Our goal is to
provide a basic algorithmic template to which various meta-
learning procedures conform, showing that learned strategies
are capable of performing near-optimally. We hope that this
deeper conceptual understanding will provide the foundations
for new, scalable models.
The signiﬁcance of memory-based meta-learning meth-
ods rests in their ability to build—in a scalable and data-
driven way—systems that behave as if they had a proba-
bilistic model of the future. Agents with probabilistic models
possess inductive biases that allow them to quickly draw
structured inferences based on experience. However, building
these agents is very challenging: typically, constructing them
involves specifying both the probabilistic models and their
inference procedures either by hand or through probabilistic
programming.
In contrast, meta-learning offers a simple alternative: to
precondition a system with training samples in order to ﬁx
the right inductive biases necessary at test time. The key
insight is that the meta-training process generates training
samples that are implicitly ﬁltered according to Bayes rule,
i.e. the samples are drawn directly from the posterior pre-arXiv:1905.03030v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jul 2019