META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 11
Table I
EXAMPLE SEGMENTATION OF AN INPUT SEQUENCE IN SPONTANEOUS META -LEARNING .
Input:x1x2x3x4x5x6x7x8x9x10
Agent State: m1mm3mm5m6mm8m7m
Generator State: z1z2z3z4z5z6z7z8z9z10
Trajectory: (na) (1)(2)(3)
Derived Input: (na) y(1)
1y(1)
2y(2)
1y(2)
2y(2)
3y(3)
1y(3)
2y(3)
3
Derived Parameter: (na) (1)=z2(2)=z4 (3)=z7
Figure 6. Dynamics of spontaneous meta-learning. The (pseudorandom)
generator with states in Zproduces observations in X, which drive the
agent’s memory state-transitions in M. A loop in the memory space with
endpoints equal m2M corresponds to a trajectory generated by a latent
parameter.
D. Capacity limitations
In our analysis, we have assumed that the solution found is
the minimizer of the meta-learning objective. This is a very
strong assumption. In practice, the difﬁculty of actually ﬁnding
a near-optimal solution depends on many factors.
The ﬁrst and most important factor is of course the model
used for regression. Properties such as e.g. the inductive
biases of the model implementing the function class F, the
smoothness of the loss landscape, the optimizer, and the
memory capacity, play fundamental roles in any machine
learning method, and meta-learning is no exception.
Another important factor is the task class, including both
the space of hypotheses and the loss function. Together they
shape the complexity of the strategy to regress via meta-
learning. In particular, the invariances in the state machine
(see Section II-D) reduce the number of distinct mappings
from past experiences x<tinXto instantaneous strategies
tinthe regressor has to learn. Conversely, in the worst
case when there are no invariances, the number of distinct
mappings grows exponentially in the maximum length Tof
the trajectories.
E. Selected future challenges
a) Task structure: Meta-learning crucially relies on the
skillful design of the class of tasks. Previous work has shown
that agents can meta-learn to perform a variety of task if
the task distributions have been designed accordingly, such
as learning to identify a best option [Denil et al., 2016, Wanget al., 2016] or learning to reason causally [Dasgupta et al.,
2019]
In each case, the practitioner must ask the question: if
the meta-learned strategy should have a capability X, what
property Y must the class of tasks posses? For instance, how
should we design the generators so that we can generalize
out-of-distribution and beyond the length of the trajectories
sampled during meta-learning?
Addressing questions like these entail further questions
regarding the structure of tasks; but to date, we are not aware
of an adequate language or formalism to conceptualize this
structure rigorously. In particular, we expect to gain: a better
understanding of the dynamical structure of solutions; predict
the structure of the sufﬁcient statistics that a class of tasks
gives rise to; and compare two tasks classes and determine if
they are equivalent (or similar) in some sense.
b) Beyond expected losses: In the basic meta-learning
scheme the strategies minimize the expected loss. Minimizing
an expectation disregards the higher-order moments of the loss
distribution (e.g. variance), leading to risk-insensitive strate-
gies that are brittle under model uncertainty. Going beyond
expected losses means that we have to change our certainty-
equivalent —that is, the way we aggregate uncertain losses into
a single value [Hansen and Sargent, 2008].
Changing the certainty-equivalent changes the attitude to-
wards risk. This has important applications ranging from safety
& robustness [van den Broek et al., 2010, Ortega and Legg,
2018] to games & multi-agent tasks [McKelvey and Palfrey,
1995, 1998, Littman, 1994]. For instance, if the agent is trained
on an imperfect simulator of the real-world, we would want
the agent to explore the world cautiously.
Risk-sensitive strategies can be meta-learned by tweaking
the statistics of the generative process. For instance, by chang-
ing the prior over generators as a function of the strategy’s per-
formance, we can meta-learn strategies that are risk-sensitive.
For games, it might be necessary to simultaneously meta-train
multiple agents in order to ﬁnd the equilibrium strategies.
c) Continual learning: The continual learning problem
asks an agent to learn sequentially, incorporating skills and
knowledge in a non-disruptive way. There are strong links
between the continual learning problem and the meta-learning
problem.
On one hand, the traditional meta-learning setting assumes
a ﬁxed distribution of tasks, which can be restrictive and
unrealistic. Allowing the distribution to change over time not
only would be crucial from a practical perspective, but could
also be used as a tool to reﬁne the task distribution in order to
induce the right properties in the learned solution. Continual or