10 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
erated trajectories. When regressing a sequential strategy using
a Monte-Carlo estimation, we sample trajectories f(n)gnas20
(n)P()
x(n)
tP(xtj(n);x(n)
<t)for allt.
However, from the point of view of the system that has already
seen the past x<t, the transition xtlooks, on average, as if it
were sampled with probability
P(xtjx<t) =X
P(xtj;x<t)P(jx<t); (18)
that is, from the Bayesian posterior predictive distribution,
which in turn induces the (implicit) update of the hypothesis
P(jxt)/P(jx<t)P(xtj;x<t): (19)
Hence, (18) and (19) together show that the samples are
implicitly ﬁltered according to Bayes’ rule. It is precisely
this statistical property that is harvested through memory-
based meta-learning. As shown in Section II, meta-learning a
Bayesian sequence predictor corresponds to directly regressing
the statistics of the samples; due to this, it can be considered
the most basic form of meta-learning. In contrast, the two
sequential decision makers from Section III do not regress
the statistics directly but rather use their correspondence to a
Bayesian ﬁltration to build adaptive policies.
Conceptually, using a generative process to produce Bayes-
ﬁltered samples is an old idea. It is the rationale driving many
practical implementations of Bayesian models [Bishop, 2016],
and one of the key ideas in Monte-Carlo methods for Bayes-
optimal planning [Silver and Veness, 2010, Guez et al., 2012].
B. Sample complexity of strategies
Current model-free RL algorithms such as deep RL algo-
rithms (e.g. DQN [Mnih et al., 2013] or A3C [Mnih et al.,
2016]) are known to be sample inefﬁcient. The sample com-
plexity can potentially be improved by using a suitable model-
based approach with strong inductive biases. Full probabilistic
model-based approaches (i.e. those that do not work with
expectation models) can rely on hand-crafted probabilistic
models that possess little structure (e.g. Dirichlet priors over
state transitions) or have intractable (exact) posterior distribu-
tions. This can make such approaches unwieldy in practice.
More commonly, traditional approaches have used expec-
tation models [Sutton et al., 2012, Schmidhuber, 1990], or
deterministic abstract models [Watter et al., 2015, Silver et al.,
2016]. However, so far there has been limited success scaling
probabilistic modeling to improve sample efﬁciency in the
context of deep reinforcement learning.
Meta-learning addresses this problem in a conceptually
straightforward manner. It automates the synthesis of near-
optimal algorithms, by searching in algorithm space (or au-
tomata space) in order to ﬁnd a new reinforcement learning
algorithm that is tailored to a given class of tasks, exploiting
20For sequential-decision making problems, we assume that the policy
improvement steps have already converged. In this case, the actions are drawn
from the target distribution for meta-learning, and we can safely ignore the
distinction between actions and observations.the structure and using the desired inductive biases. The meta-
learned algorithms minimize the sample complexity at test time
because they directly minimize the expected loss averaged over
all generators. In the examples we have seen, meta-learning
ﬁnds sequential algorithms, which when deployed perform
near-optimally, minimizing the sample complexity. The ﬂip
side is that meta-learning can be very expensive at meta-
training time due to the slow convergence of the Monte-Carlo
approximation and the very large amount of data required by
current popular neural architectures during the meta-training
phase.
C. Spontaneous meta-learning
Meta-learning can also occur spontaneously in online re-
gression when the capacity of the agent is bounded and the
data is produced by a single generator . Unfortunately, the
downside is that we cannot easily control what will be meta-
learned. In particular, spontaneous meta-learning could lead to
undesirable emergent properties, which is considered an open
research problem in AI safety [Ortega et al., 2018]. To see
how meta-learning happens, consider the sequential prediction
case. All we need is to show how the conditions for meta-
learning occur naturally; that is, by identifying the Monte-
Carlo samples and their latent parameters.
LetMandZbe the agent’s and the generator’s set of
internal states respectively, and let Xbe the set of observa-
tions. Assume that the dynamics are deterministic (stochastic
dynamics can be modeled using pseudo-random transitions)
and implemented by functions f;g;h , so that the sequence of
observations x1;x2;:::2X , agent states m1;m2;:::2M ,
and generator states z1;z2;:::2Z are given by
xt=h(zt) (observations)
mt+1=f(xt;mt) (agent states)
zt+1=g(zt); (generator states)
(with arbitrary initial values z0,m0) as illustrated in Figure 6.
Furthermore, assume that MandZareﬁnite .21Then, for a
sufﬁciently long sequence there must exist a state m2M
that is visited inﬁnitely often when given an inﬁnite stream
of observations. We can use mto segment the sequence
of observations into (variable-length) trajectories (1);(2);:::
which we can identify as Monte-Carlo samples from a class of
generators as illustrated by the example in Table I. The n-th
trajectory(n)is deﬁned by the ﬁrst substring delimited by
then-th and (n+1)-th occurrence of m, and deﬁne y(n)
t2X
as thet-th observation of the n-th trajectory, e.g. y(2)
1=x5
because(2)=x5x6x7. Finally, the task parameter (n)of the
n-th trajectory is the state of the generator at the beginning of
the sequence.
Given this identiﬁcation, an online learning algorithm that
updatesfbased on a sufﬁciently large window of the past will
effectively perform batch updates based on a set of trajectories
sampled by different “generators”, thereby performing meta-
learning.
21This assumption can be relaxed to compact metric spaces using tools
from dynamical systems theory that are beyond the scope of this report.