probability P(t1,t2,...,tN)to the whole sequence by modeling
the probability of token tkgiven the history (t1,t2,...,tk−1):
P(t1,t2,...,tN) =N/productdisplay
k=1P(tk|t1,t2,...,tk−1). (1)
It is trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood:
N/summationdisplay
k=1−logP(t1,t2,...,tk−1;θt,θrnn,θs), (2)
where the parameters to be optimized are θt,θrnn, andθs.θtis
a look-up table that maps each token into a vector of ﬁxed di-
mensionality. θrnnis a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) used
to summarize the sequence history up to the current time step .
θsis a Softmax layer appended at the output of each RNN time
step for estimating probability distribution over the toke ns. Lan-
guage modeling is a general task that requires the understan ding
of many aspects in language in order to perform well.
Following most of the neural LMs in the literature, we use
an RNN [24] for modeling the temporal information within an
acoustic sequence. For speech data, each token tkcorresponds
to a frame rather than a word or character token, hence we do
not need the look-up table θtas we do in LMs and directly feed
each frame into the RNN θrnn. Since there does not exist a ﬁnite
set of target tokens (such as the vocabulary set as in text), w e
choose to replace the Softmax layer with a regression layer θr.
In other words, the RNN output at each time step attempts to
directly ﬁt the target frame with a linear mapping. The learn able
parameters in APCs are θrnnandθr.
Given the history (t1,t2,...,tk−1), an LM aims to max-
imize the probability of the next token to be the tkin the
data. However, for APCs, exploiting the local smoothness of
the speech signal might be sufﬁcient to predict the next fram e.
To encourage APCs to infer more global structures rather tha n
the local information in the signals, we ask the model to pre-
dict a frame nsteps ahead of the current one. In other words,
given an utterance represented as a sequence of acoustic fea ture
vectors(x1,x2,...,xT), the RNN processes each sequence el-
ementxtone at a time and outputs a prediction yt, wherext
andythave the same dimensionality. The model is optimized
by minimizing the L1 loss (as is done when predicting spec-
tral frames in some speech synthesis models [25, 26].) be-
tween the input sequence (x1,x2,...,xT)and the predicted se-
quence(y1,y2,...,yT):
T−n/summationdisplay
i=1|xi+n−yi|. (3)
2.2. Contrastive Predictive Coding
Instead of learning to predict future frames like APCs, Con-
trastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [23] aims to learn represe n-
tations that separates the target future frame xi+nand ran-
domly sampled negative frames {˜x}, given a context hi=
(x1,x2,...,xi).
Speciﬁcally, CPC consists of three modules: a frame en-
coderEfrm, a uni-directional RNN Ectx, and a scoring func-
tionf. A sequence of frames is ﬁrst encoded to a sequence
of frame representations zi=Efrm(xi)using the frame en-
coder. The encoded sequence is then passed to the recurrent
context encoder to obtain a sequence of context representa-
tions(c1,c2,...,cT), whereciis a ﬁxed-dimensional represen-
tation computed from Ectx(z1,z2,...,zi). The scoring functionassigns a positive scalar to a pair of frame and context, form u-
lated asf(x,h) = exp/parenleftbig
zTWc/parenrightbig
, wherezis the frame repre-
sentation of x, andcis the context representation of h.
Suppose the target frame is nsteps away. Given a con-
texthi, the target future frame xi+n, and a collection of neg-
ative frames ˜X, CPC jointly optimizes the three modules by
minimizing a contrastive loss:
Ln(hi,xi+n,˜X) = logf(xi+n,hi)/summationtext
x∈˜X∪{xi+n}f(x,hi).(4)
As shown in [23], minimizing this loss will result in f(x,h)es-
timating the density ratio pn(x|h)/q(x), wherepndenotes the
conditional distribution of xatnsteps ahead of the given con-
texth, andqis the proposal distribution where negative samples
are drawn from. In other words, the choice of the number of
steps ahead and the proposal distribution would both affect the
estimated target density ratio, and therefore would change what
is learned in the representations zandc. For example, using
a proposal distribution that draws samples from the same se-
quence as the target frame would encourage the model to learn
the phonetic content but not the speaker information, becau se
the latter do not help distinguishing a target frame from neg a-
tive ones. We will study such differences in our experiments .
Both CPC and the proposed APCs consider the sequen-
tial structures of speech, and predict information about fu ture
frames. However, the two models differ signiﬁcantly in the t ype
of information the corresponding loss function enforces th em to
capture. While CPC representations are encouraged to focus on
information that is most discriminative between the target and
negative frames, APCs have to encode information sufﬁcient
for predicting the target frame, and are allowed to only disc ard
information that is common across the train dataset.
3. Experiments
In this section, we empirically demonstrate the effectiven ess
of the learned representations from the proposed APC model.
Since phone and speaker information are two of the most impor -
tant characteristics that differentiate one speech uttera nce from
another, we choose to use phone classiﬁcation and speaker ve r-
iﬁcation to examine how much phone and speaker information
are captured by the representations.
3.1. Datasets
We use the LibriSpeech corpus [27] for training the feature e x-
tractors (all APC and CPC models). Speciﬁcally, the 360-hou r
subset, which contains 921 speakers in total, is used. We use
80-dimensional log Mel spectrograms (normalized to zero me an
and unit variance per speaker) as input features.
An ideal feature extractor should extract representations
that generalize to datasets of different domains. To examin e the
robustness to shift in domains, rather than on the LibriSpee ch
test set, we conduct phone classiﬁcation and speaker veriﬁc a-
tion on the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) [28] and TIMIT cor-
pora. For phone classiﬁcation, we follow the standard split of
WSJ, use 90% of si284 for training, use the rest of the 10%
for development, and report numbers on dev93 . The phone
alignments are generated with a speaker adapted GMM-HMM
model. For speaker veriﬁcation, we follow the standard spli t of
TIMIT, use the training set for training the universal backg round
model, the i-vector extractor [29], a linear discriminant a naly-
sis (LDA) model. We follow the standard practice of speaker
veriﬁcation and only consider female-female and male-male