arXiv:1904.03240v2  [cs.CL]  19 Jun 2019An Unsupervised Autoregressive Model for Speech Represent ation Learning
Yu-An Chung, Wei-Ning Hsu, Hao Tang, James Glass
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{andyyuan,wnhsu,haotang,glass }@mit.edu
Abstract
This paper proposes a novel unsupervised autoregressive ne ural
model for learning generic speech representations. In cont rast
to other speech representation learning methods that aim to re-
move noise or speaker variabilities, ours is designed to pre serve
information for a wide range of downstream tasks. In addi-
tion, the proposed model does not require any phonetic or wor d
boundary labels, allowing the model to beneﬁt from large qua n-
tities of unlabeled data. Speech representations learned b y our
model signiﬁcantly improve performance on both phone clas-
siﬁcation and speaker veriﬁcation over the surface feature s and
other supervised and unsupervised approaches. Further ana lysis
shows that different levels of speech information are captu red
by our model at different layers. In particular, the lower la y-
ers tend to be more discriminative for speakers, while the up per
layers provide more phonetic content.
Index Terms : speech representation learning, unsupervised
learning
1. Introduction
Speech signals encompass a rich set of acoustic and linguis-
tic properties, ranging from the individual lexical units, such
as phonemes and words, to the characteristics of the speaker s,
their intent, or even their mental status. However, these hi gh-
level properties of speech are poorly captured by the surfac e
features, such as the amplitudes of a wave signal, log Mel spe c-
trograms, or Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients. The goal o f
speech representation learning is to ﬁnd a transformation f rom
the surface features that makes high-level properties of sp eech
more accessible to downstream tasks.
In this work, we propose an autoregressive model for learn-
ing speech representations that can be transferred to diffe rent
tasks across different datasets. Our model is able to retain much
information from the surface features, allowing a wide rang e of
tasks across different datasets to beneﬁt from the learned r epre-
sentations, while also being unsupervised and able to lever age
large quantities of unlabeled data. As a ﬁrst step, we focus o n
learning general speech representations from log Mel spect ro-
grams, but it is straightforward to extend our approach to th e
amplitudes of the wave signals.
We use linear separability (or separability with a shallow
network) to deﬁne the accessibility of information for the d own-
stream tasks. Others [1] have argued that there are many nui-
sance factors that might affect the performance of linear cl assi-
ﬁers, and have proposed to use a contrastive loss for evaluat ion.
However, there has been evidence [2] and theories [3] suppor t-
ing the idea that low contrastive loss implies the existence of a
linear classiﬁer with low error. In other words, we aim to lea rn
speech representations that allow linear classiﬁers to per form
well on many downstream tasks.When the downstream tasks are known, supervised learn-
ing, speciﬁcally multitask learning [4], is the most succes sful
approach for learning specialized representations of thos e par-
ticular tasks. In general, however, when a transformation i s
trained against a certain set of tasks, information indepen dent
of the tasks (such as noise or speaker variability, dependin g on
the tasks) tends to be discarded after training [5]. We risk d is-
carding useful information for other unseen tasks when lear ning
representations in a supervised fashion. Instead of having tar-
geted tasks in advance, we focus on learning representation s
for a wide range of, potentially unknown, tasks. Due to the
required generality, it is necessary to retain in the repres enta-
tions as much information about the original signal as possi ble.
Two commonly used loss functions, i.e., the autoencoding an d
autoregressive loss functions, satisfy this criterion. Ho wever,
when no additional constraints are imposed, there is a trivi al
solution, the identity mapping, for the autoencoding loss f unc-
tion. This makes the autoregressive loss more appealing, be -
cause no additional techniques, such as denoising [6], are r e-
quired to avoid the trivial solution as for the autoencoding loss.
The autoregressive approach also does not require other typ es of
linguistic constraints, such as phonetic or word boundarie s [7].
The autoregressive loss belongs to a large family of self-
supervised loss functions [8, 9, 10]. There also exists some
work on unsupervised speech representation learning [11, 1 2,
13, 14, 15, 16]. However, none of the studies are able to show
the transferability of the learned representations across differ-
ent datasets. Our work is largely motivated by the recent suc -
cess in transfer learning from large-scale pre-trained lan guage
models [17, 18, 19, 20], and we aim to learn general speech
representations that can be transferred to different tasks across
different datasets.
2. Models
We propose a novel autoregressive architecture, which we
call Autoregressive Predictive Coding (APC), for unsuperv ised
speech representation learning. Predictive coding on wave sam-
ples [21] has a long and inﬂuential history in speech process ing,
and its recent neural version [22] and variants, such as Con-
trastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [23], have also been used t o
learn speech representation [11]. In contrast to these stud ies,
our work mainly focus on predicting the spectrum of a future
frame rather than a wave sample. We will brieﬂy review CPC
here and compare extensively with it in Section 3.
2.1. Autoregressive Predictive Coding
The methodology of the proposed APC model is largely in-
spired by language models (LMs) for text, which are typ-
ically a probability distribution over sequences of Nto-
kens(t1,t2,...,tN). Given such a sequence, an LM assigns a