pairs in the 50-speaker development set. We note that speake r
veriﬁcation on TIMIT is not common, and we mainly use it to
check if the representations contain speaker information.
3.2. Implementations
We model our APCs with a multi-layer unidirectional
LSTM [30] network with residual connections [31] between
two consecutive layers as is done in [32], and the dimensiona lity
of each layer is 512. For CPC, we follow the implementation fo r
the context encoder and the scoring function in [23], but cha nge
the acoustic feature xfrom a window of 400 samples (25ms) to
a 80-dimensional vector of Mel spectra computed from that se g-
ment, and replace the 5-layer strided Convolutional Neural Net-
work with a 3-layer, 512-dim fully-connected neural networ k
with ReLU activations for the frame encoder. Such modiﬁca-
tion aims for a fairer comparison between APC and CPC mod-
els in terms of their training objectives, while eliminatin g the
source of variation due to the choice of acoustic features. A ll
APC and CPC models (except cpc-ctx-exhaust , which we
will describe more below) are trained for 100 epochs using th e
Adam optimizer [33] with a batch size of 32 and an initial lear n-
ing rate of 10−3.
Note that the proposed approach is unsupervised, and we do
not and should not tune hyperparameters according to the dow n-
stream tasks. The goal of hyperparameter tuning is to show ho w
the hyperparameters affect what is learned in the speech rep re-
sentations. Recall that we deﬁne the accessibility of categ orical
information as the linear separability among classes. For p hone
classiﬁcation, we simply use a linear classiﬁer to predict t he
phoneme classes for each frame. The frame error rates indica te
how much phonetic content is contained in the speech repre-
sentations. Similarly, for speaker veriﬁcation, we train a n LDA
model on top of the speech representations.
3.3. Phone Classiﬁcation
Table 1 compares APCs with a series of CPC models that use
different training variants. Phone error rates (PER) are re ported,
and each of the ﬁrst four rows corresponds to a CPC variant.
We usecpc-n9all to denote a CPC model that draws 9 neg-
ative samples from utterances within the same minibatch, an d
cpc-n9same to denote a CPC model that draws 9 negative
samples from the same utterance. For both cpc-n9all and
cpc-n9same , we take the outputs of the frame encoder (i.e.,
the outputs of the 3-layer fully-connected neural networks ) as
the extracted features and feed them to the linear classiﬁer .
The training approach of cpc-ctx-n9same is the same as
cpc-n9same , except that the RNN outputs are taken as the ex-
tracted features instead of the frame encoder outputs. We us e
ctx, short for context, to indicate such difference. The ﬁnal
CPC variant we try is cpc-ctx-exhaust , which follows the
exact same training procedure in [23] that combines contras tive
losses for all steps k≤nwith equal weights for training (i.e.,/summationtextn
k=1Ln), uses all non-target samples in a minibatch as nega-
tive samples, and are trained with mini-batches of 8 utteran ces
that are randomly chuncked to 128 frames each. For APCs, the
outputs of the last RNN layer are taken as the extracted featu res.
All models in Table 1 consist of one RNN layer, and the effect
of predicting different time steps ahead is also investigat ed.
A comparison of models from the CPC-family. From Ta-
ble 1, we observe that cpc-n9same outperforms cpc-n9all
across all time steps we try. This is an expected outcome, sin ce
forcpc-n9all , the negative samples are drawn from differ-Table 1: Comparing APCs with a series of CPC models on
phone classiﬁcation. PERs are reported.
Method#(step)
2 5 10 20
cpc-n9all 51.3 48.8 50.8 54.6
cpc-n9same 47.5 48.2 50.0 53.0
cpc-ctx-n9same 42.1 46.1 48.8 53.8
cpc-ctx-exhaust 42.9 43.1 45.6 49.1
apc (proposed) 36.5 35.6 35.4 37.7
ent utterances within a minibatch that could possibly be ut-
tered by different speakers, and thus cpc-n9all is not required
to really capture phonetic content to differentiate the pos itive
and negative samples. In contrast, cpc-n9same draws nega-
tive samples from the same utterance, and in such case, speak er
information is identical for each sample and cpc-n9same is
forced to learn other non-trivial features such as phone inf or-
mation so as to differentiate positive and negative samples . In
addition, we ﬁnd that representations extracted from RNN co n-
tain more phonetic content than those extracted from the fra me
encoder, as cpc-ctx-n9same often outperforms cpc-n9same
especially when the number of steps to the target is small. By
using all non-target samples as negative samples from the mi ni-
batch,cpc-ctx-exhaust further lowers the PER, suggesting
that richer phonetic content is learned in the representati ons.
Comparing CPC with APC. Our APCs, as shown in the last
row in Table 1, signiﬁcantly outperform all CPC models in
spite of its much simpler architecture and training approac h.
These results demonstrate that more phonetic content is imm e-
diately accessible from a linear classiﬁer in the represent ations
extracted by APCs compared to CPC models.
There are other aspects of APCs worth investigating. In Ta-
ble 2, we present the phone classiﬁcation results of using de eper
RNNs for APCs and with more target time steps. For all APC
models, we take the outputs of the last RNN layer as the ex-
tracted features. Three supervised baselines, a linear cla ssiﬁer,
a 1-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP), and a 3-layer MLP, a re
implemented, taking the surface features , i.e., spectrograms, as
input features. For MLPs, each layer consist of 512 units wit h
ReLU activations. These three baselines are meant to help us
understand how accessible the phonetic content is from the s ur-
face features, even under some amount of nonlinear transfor -
mations. We also include the best number of CPC models from
Table 1 to bridge the two tables.
Surface features with non-linear phone classiﬁer. From Ta-
ble 2, we observe that incorporating non-linearity in the ph one
classiﬁer does improve PER1. When using a 3-layer MLP as the
classiﬁer, the surface features are transformed into highe r-level
representations that are more linearly separable than the b est
CPC features. However, we can see there is still a signiﬁcant
gap between the transformed spectrogram representations w ith
features extracted by APC models.
A comparison of APC models. Overall, we ﬁnd that deeper
APC models produce better representations especially for s mall
#(steps). There also exists a sweet spot when we vary the
amount of time steps to the target for APC models to predict—
1The best performing supervised 3-layer LSTM with minimal lo oka-
head on this particular task can achieve 16.3 [34].