can be utilized to  improve intelligent resource management, automatic network slicing, and smart 
service provisioning.    
 
III. A RTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  TECHNIQUES  FOR 6G N ETWORKS  
In this section, we will elaborate how the AI techniques grant preliminary intelligence for 6G 
networks in terms of AI-empowered  mobile e dge computing , intelligent mobility and handover 
management, and smart spectrum management .  
 
A. AI -Empowered  Mobile E dge Computing  
Mobile e dge computing  (MEC ) will be an important enabling technology  for the emerging 6G 
networks, where MEC  can provide  computin g, manage ment  and analytics facilities inside RAN or 
SDN in close proximity to various devices.  In MEC  networks, the decision making optimization, 
knowledge discovery  and pattern learning are sophisticated due to the multi -dimensional, 
randomly uncertain, and dynamic characteristics. Hence, traditional algorithm s (e.g., Lagrangian 
duality ) may face the limitation in such complex networks. AI techniques can extract valuable 
information from collecte d data, learning and supporting different functions for opti mization, 
prediction, and decision in MEC  [12]. Fig. 3 shows the framewor k of AI-empowered  mobile e dge 
computing , which consists of central cloud computing and edge computing.  
In edge computing  server s, due to the limite d capability, lightweigh t AI algorithms can be 
utilized to provide smart applications for edge scenarios (e.g., transportation and agriculture), as 
shown in Fig. 3(b) . For example, RL -based edge computing resource management  is a model -free 
scheme  which does not need historical knowledge  and it can be used to learn the environmen t 
dynamics and make suitable control decisions in real -time [13]. In the RL framework, at each step, 
after obtaining the state ( e.g., device mobility, requirement dynamics,  and resource condition ) by 
intera cting with environments,  the possible resource management solutions (e.g., energy 
management, resource allocation, and task scheduling ) are contained int o the set of possible