On the one hand, it is costly to transmit or store the massive raw data in dense networks. Hence, 
it is necessary to reduce data dimension of the raw data, filter abnormal data, and finally achieve 
a more reasonable dataset. AI -based data mining, such  as PCA and ISOMAP are two common AI 
algorithms which can help 6G networks to transform higher -dimensional data into a lower -
dimensional subspace [7], which dramatically decreases the computing time, storage space and 
model complexity. For example, the mas sive collected channel information, traffic flows, images 
and videos from sensors, devices or social media are high -dimensional data, which can be 
compressed into a small set of useful variables of the raw data by using PCA or ISOMAP. In 
addition, the coll ected data from physical environments also exist abn ormal data (e.g., interference , 
incomplete  and useless data), which can be filtered by utilizing PCA or ISOMAP.  
On the other hand, data analytics  is responsible for intelligently analyzing the collected data to  
discover useful information  and form valuable knowledge.  In 6G networks, massive data are 
collected from physical environment, cyber world, and social network  which contain valuable  
information and meaningful features. D ata analytics  has brought us an excellent opportunity to 
understand  the essential characteristics of wireless networks , and achieve  more clear and in -depth 
knowledge of the behavior of 6G networks , finally v aluable patterns or rules can be discovered as 
knowledge  to provide  suitable solutions for resource management, protocol adaptation, 
architecture slicing, cloud computing, signal processing, and so on . For instance, based on the  
discovered  knowledge, ISAGUN is able to efficiently understand the mobility patterns of UAVs 
in the sky, establish the channel path loss model of satellite –ground link,  and predict the device 
behavior  in ground networks.  
 
C. Intelligent Control  Layer 
Brieﬂy,  intelligent control layer mainly consists of learning , optimization , and decision -making , 
where this layer utilizes the appropriate knowledge from lower  layers  to enable massive agents 
(e.g., devices  and BSs) to smartly learn, optimize  and choose  the most suitable actions ( e.g., power 
control, spectrum access, routing management, and network association), with dual functions to