It is worth noticing that high accurate sensing, real -time sensing and robust sensing are of great 
interest, since 6G networks need to support ultrahigh reliability and ultralow latency 
communication services.  In addition, dynamic 6G networks lead to spectrum characteristic 
uncertainty, which entails great difficulty in robust and accurate sensing. AI techniques can realize 
accurate, real -time and robust s pectrum sensing, where fuzzy SVM and nonparallel hyperplane 
SVM are robust to the environment uncertainties, CNN based cooperative sensing can improve 
sensing accuracy with low complexity, the combination of K-means clustering and SVM is capable 
of achievi ng real -time sensing by training low -dimensional input samples, and Bayesian learning 
can address large -scale heterogeneous sensing problems by tac kling heterogeneous data fusion .  
For example, in 6G networks, spectrum sensing is an important technique to improve the 
spectrum usage efficiency and address spectrum scarcity problems.  However, spectrum sensing in 
large -scale 6G network s is very challenging since a massive number of devices aim to sense  
spectrum simultaneously , and the massive spectrum usage de tections lead to high -dimensional 
search problems. In this case, AI technologies can be applied to identify the spectrum 
characteristics, and intelligently establish suitable training models to sense spectrum working 
status . In detail, AI-enabled learning models  (e.g., SVM  and DNN)  detect the spectrum working 
status by categorizing each feature vector ( spectrum ) into either of the two classes, namely, the 
“spectrum idle class” and “ spectrum buy class”, and adaptively update the leaning models based 
on dynam ic environments.  
 
B. Data Mining and Analytics Layer 
This layer is a core task that aims to process and analyze the massive amounts of raw data 
generated from the huge number of devices in 6G networks, and achieve semantic derivation and 
knowledge discovery . The massive collected data from physical environment s may be 
heterogeneous, nonlinear , and hi gh dimensional, so data mining and analytics  can be applied in 
6G networks  to address  the challenges of processing the massive amount  of data, as well as to 
analyze  the collected data towards knowledge discovery.