self-healing, which is capable of quickly optimizing network parameters and architectures to 
achieve intelligent softwarization, cloudization, virtualization, and slicing.  
     Decision -making  is an important cognitive task that enables massive agents to  intelligently  
reason, plan, and choice the most suitable decisions to meet the high -quality service requirements. 
In decision -making , each agent that simultaneously attempts to obtain the new knowledge of other 
machines (called “exploration”) and select the global actions with the highest benefit based on 
existing knowledge (called “exploitation”). The objective of decision -making is common in 6G 
networks, e.g., selecting the optimal precoding variables in mmWave or THz  transceiver  systems, 
choosing the suitable routing strategy for dynamic ISAGUN,  and selecting the flexible spectrum 
management framework for massive multi -access scenario , all these  decision -making  issues can 
be effectively achieved by using AI techniques (e.g., MDP, game theory, RL , and optimization 
theory ).   
    
D. Smart Application  Layer  
   The main responsibilities  of this layer are delivering application specific  services to the human 
beings according to  their colorful requirements, as well as evaluat ing the provisioned services 
before feedbacking the evaluation results to the intelligence process . Intelligent programming and 
management can be achieved by the impe tus of AI to support more various high-level smart 
applications, such as automated services, smart city, smart industry, smart transportation, smart 
grid and smart health , and handle global management relevant to all smart type applications.  All 
the activi ties of smart devices, terminals and infrastructures  in 6G networks are also managed by 
the smart application layer through the AI techniques to realize network self -organization ability.  
    Another objective of this layer is to evaluate the service performance, where lots of 
considerations and factors can be involved, such as QoS, QoE, quality of collected data, and quality 
of learned knowledge. At the same time, the cost dimension metric in terms of resource efficiency 
is also r equired to be taken into account, such as spectrum utilization efficiency, computational 
efficiency, energy efficiency and storage efficiency. All the above mentioned evaluation metrics