Unsupervised Learning:  The task of unsupervised learning is to discover hidden patterns as 
well as extract the useful features from unlabeled data, and it is generally d ivided into clustering 
and dimension reduction. Clustering seeks to group a set of samples into different clusters 
according to their similarities, and it mainly includes K -means clustering and hierarchical 
clustering algorithms. Dimension reduction transf orms a high -dimensional data space into a low -
dimensional space without losing much useful information. Principal component analysis (PCA) 
and isometric mapping (ISOMAP) are two classic dimension reduction algorithms.  
   Reinforcement Learning (RL):  In RL, each agent learns to map situations to actions and makes 
suitable decisions on what the actions to take through interacting with the environment, so as to 
maximize a long term reward. Classic RL algorithms include Markov decision process (MDP), Q -
learning, policy learning, actor critic (AC), DRL and multi -armed bandit (MRB).  
    Deep Learning:  Deep learning is an AI function that realizes the working of the human brain 
in understanding the data representations and creating patterns based on artificial neural networks. 
It consists of multiple layers of neurons, and the learning model can be supe rvised, semi -
supervised and unsupervised. Classic deep learning algorithms include deep neural network 
(DNN), convolutional neural network (CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN) and  long short -
term memory (LSTM).  
 
A. Intelligent  Sensing  Layer  
    Generally , sensing and detection  are the most primitive tasks in 6G network s, where 6G 
network s tend  to intelligently sense and detect the data from physical environments via enormous 
devices (e.g., cameras, sensors, vehicles, drones and smartphones) or crowds of human beings.  AI-
enabled  sensing and detecting are capable of intelligently collecting  the large amounts of dynamic, 
diverse and scalable data by directly interf acing the physical environment , mainly including radio -
frequency  utilization  identification, environment monitoring , spectrum sensing, intrusion 
detection, interference detection , and so on .