for encouraging convergence speed, reducing complex  computations , and improve training 
accuracy .  
     Robustness , Scalability , and Flexibility of L earning Frameworks : As we mentioned above, 
6G networks (e.g., vehicular networks and UAV -enabled networks) exhibit high dynamics in some 
facets, such as BSs associations, wireless channels, network topologies , and mobility dynamics. 
In particular, devices or terminals who join or leave networks may have different QoS and QoE 
requirements. All these mentioned un certainties in dynamic networks call for ongoing updates of 
parameters of AI learning algorithms . Great  robustness,  scalability and flexibility of learning 
frameworks are crucial aspects for supporting the potential unbounded number of interacting 
entities  and providing high-quality  services in real-world dynamic networks . Thus, how to design  
robust, scalable , and flexible learning frameworks for 6G networks is still an open issue .   
     Hardware Development:  The corresponding hardware development is very challenging  when 
designing 6G networks. On the one hand, hardware components have high energy consumption 
and expensive cost when they work at mmWave and THz bands. On the other hand, some 
devices/terminals have limited storage and computing energy. Despit e benefits  of AI learning 
algorithms in terms of learning and recognition ability, they usually require high  computational 
complexity, power consumption , and sufficient computing resource. Hence, collaboration among 
hardware components and AI learning algorithms need to be advocated, which needs significant 
research efforts on it. It is worth noticing that graphics processing  unit (GPU ) is suitable for 
learning computation as it can effectively handle matrix computations , and transfer learning -
enabled i ntelligent communications that can adapt to different  hardware constraints by transferring 
one learning framework to other hardware  components .  
     Energy M anagement:  In 6G networks, some devices located on the ground can be charged by  
power stations, but undersea, air , and space  infrastructures as well as some sensors cannot be 
connected to power stations. Moreover,  6G networks also need to ﬂexibly connect the massive 
number of smart low -power devices. In this case, advanced energy management schemes become 
very critical in 6G networks. AI techniques have ability to help th ese infrastructures and device s