and then apply  the discovered knowledge to optimize network performance  for 6G. Hence, i n this 
article , an AI -enabled intelligent architecture for 6G networks is presented  to realize smart 
resource management , automatic network  adjustment and intelligent service provisioning  with a 
high level  of intelligence , where the architecture consists of four layers: sensing layer, data mining 
and analytics layer, control  layer and application  layer . The proposed architecture is capable of 
intelligently extracting valuable information from  massive data, learning and supporting different 
functions for self-configuration, self -optimization, and self -healing in 6G networks , in order 
to tackle optimized physical layer design, complicated decision making, network management and 
resource optimization tasks . Based on AI-enabled intelligent 6G  networks,  we introduce  the 
application s of AI techniques in the context of AI-empowered mobile edge computing, intelligent 
mobility and handover management, and smart spectrum management . After that, we discuss 
important future research directions for AI-enabled 6G intelligent networks. Finally, we conclude 
this article.  
 
II. AI-ENABLED  INTELLIGENT  6G N ETWORKS  
The development of 6G network s will be large -scale, multi -layer ed, high complex, dynamic, and 
heterogeneous . In addition, 6G network s need  to support  seamless connectivit y and guarantee 
diverse QoS requirements of the huge number of devices, as well as  process large amount of data 
generated from physical environments. AI techniques with powerful analysis ability, learning 
ability, optimizing ability and intelligent recognition ability, which can be employed into 6G 
network s to intelligently carry out performance optimization, knowledge discovery, sophisticated 
learning, structure organization and complicated decisi on making. With the help of AI, we present 
an AI-enabled intelligent architecture for 6G networks which is mainly divided into four layers : 
intelligent sensing  layer, data mining and analytics layer, intelligent control  layer and smart 
application  layer, as shown in Fig. 2 .