Published in: IEEE Network 
 
( Volume: 34, Issue: 6, November/December 2020)
Artif icial Intelligence -Enabled Intelligent 6G 
Networks 
Helin Yang , Student Member, IEEE , Arokiaswami Alphones , Senior Member, IEEE , Zehui Xiong, 
Dusit Niyato, Fell ow, IEEE , Jun Zhao, Member , IEEE , and Kaishun W u, Senior Member, IEEE 
Abstract 
    Wit h the ra pid developme nt of smar t termina ls and infrastructure s, as well a s diversified 
applications (e.g., virtual and augmented reality, remote surgery and holographic projection) with 
colorful requirements, current networks (e.g., 4G and upcoming 5G networks) may not be able to 
completely  meet  quickly  rising  traffic  demands.  Accordingly,  efforts  from  both industry  and 
academia have  already been put to the research on 6G networks. Recently, artificial intelligence 
(AI) has been utilized as a new paradigm for the design and optimization of 6G networks with  a 
high level  of intelligence.  Therefore,  this article  proposes  an AI-enabled  intelligent  architecture 
for 6G networks to realize knowledge discovery, smart resource management, automatic network 
adjustment and intelligent service provisioning, where the architecture is divided into four layers: 
intelligent  sensing  layer,  data mining  and analytics  layer,  intelligent  control  layer  and smart 
a
pplication layer. We then review and discuss the applications of AI techniques for 6G networks 
and elaborate how to employ the AI techniques to efficiently and effectively optimize the network 
performance, including AI-empowered mobile edge computing, intelligent mobility and handover 
management, and smart spectrum management. Moreover, we highlight important future research 
directions and potential solutions for AI-enabled intelligent 6G networks, including computation 
efficiency, algorithms robustness, hardware development and energy management. 
H. Yang and A. Alphones are with the Schoo l of Electrica l and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapor e 639798 (e-mail: hyang013@e.ntu.edu.sg, ealphones@ntu.edu.sg). 
Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and J. Zhao ar e with th e Schoo l of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapor e 639798 (e-mail: zxiong002@e.ntu.edu.sg, dniyato@ntu.edu.sg, junzhao@ntu.edu.sg). 
K.
 Wu is with th e Colleg e of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, 
Chin a (e-mai l: wu@szu.edu.cn). https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000195