layer, hidden or training layer and output layer , as shown in Fig. 5 (b), where the  framework first 
modules input massive spectrum datasets in different radio contexts  [15]. It then trains the hidden 
layers by comprehensively analyzing the characteristics of current or previous spectrum utilization 
information and discovers meaningful spectrum usage characteristics . Finally, the most suitable 
spectrum management  strategies  are provided in  the output layer in real -time to support massive 
connectivities for devices .  
 The learning  framework also constrains an offline training model that the trained models, past 
experience and developed rules can be stored to smoothly realize online spectrum management  
decisions. With the help of AI technique s, different spectrum bands  can be smartly utilized for 
different types of traffic transmissions for satisfyin g colorful service requirements, such as visible 
light and THz bands can  be exploited for high -capacity transmissions with large bandwidth, while 
low-frequency bands can be assigned to broadcast short messages for satellite –ground 
transmissions .  
 
IV. F UTURE  RESEARCH  DIRECTIONS  
AI can optimize the network performance based on its powerful learning ability and strong 
reasoning ability. In this section, we outline some future research topics and potential solutions for 
AI-enabled  intelligent  6G networks.  
     Computation Efficiency and Accuracy : In 6G networks, the massive amounts of collected 
data and complex network architectures pose challenges for AI-enabled learning and training 
process. In addition, the limited computing resources may be insufficient to process massive high -
dimensional data to meet  the training accuracy rate. Furthermore, deep learning generally has high 
computational complexity, which is  prohibitively expensive. Hence, how to design efficient AI 
learning schemes to improve both the computation efficiency and accuracy pose a significant 
research challenge . Recently, residual networks, graphics processing, feature matching , and offline 
training are being considered as promising methods with  high performance computing facilities