(UAVs), airships, and balloons associated with  flying base stations (BSs) to support flexible 
and reliable wireless connectivity for remote areas or urgent events . 
 Ground -network tier is the main solution for supporting diverse services for a massive 
number of devices. In order to satisfy various  services , this layer mainly exploits low -
frequency, microwave, mmWave , visible light and Terahertz  (THz) bands for 6G networks . 
 Underwater -network tier aims to provide underwater communication connectivity, 
observation and monitoring services for broad -sea and deep -sea activities.   
According to the former evolution rules of networks, initial 6G  network s will be mainly 
supported by the existing 5G  infrastructure s, such as the architectures of SDN, NFV and network 
slicing (NS).  However, compared with 5G networks, 6G networks require t o support the  above 
mentioned  stringent requirements (e.g., ultrahigh data rates, ultralow latency, ultrahigh reliability, 
and seamless  connectivity ). At the same time, the development of 6G networks  (ISATUN)  has 
large dimension, high complex ity, dynamicity  and heterogeneity characteristics. All the above 
mentioned  issues call for a  new architecture that is flexible, adaptive, agile and intelligent. 
Artificial intelligence (AI)  [7], [9], with strong learning ability, powerful reasoning ability and 
intelligent recognition ability, allows the architecture of 6G network s to learn and adapt  itself to 
support diverse services accordingly without human intervention. In [5], AI-enabled techniques 
were applied to achieve network intelligentization , closed -loop optimization  and intelligent 
wireless communication  for 6G networks . Kato et al.  [8] used deep learning to optimize the 
performance of Space -Air-Ground Integrated networks, and show ed how to employ deep learning 
to select mo st suitable paths for satellite networks. Furthermore, deep reinforcement learning 
(DRL)  was adopted to preserve reliable wireless connectivity for UAVs -enabled networks by 
learning the environment dynamics  [10], and simulation demonstrated that DRL significantly 
outperform s conventional method s. Hence, it is promising to adopt  AI to 6G networks to optimize 
the network architecture and improve the network performance.  
Although  the references [5], [7] and [8]  applied AI to enable intelligent wireless networks, they 
did not investigate how to systematically  sense data  from environments , analyze  collected data ,