central cloud server may receive massive data from edge computing  server s and the data need to 
be trained to automatically extract fea tures and discove r knowledg e. In this case, deep learning 
can be adopted to trai n computationa l models to achieve service recognition, traff ic and behavior 
prediction, security detection, and so on.  Moreover, in complex and dynamic MEC networks, the 
mapping between resource management decisions and the effect on the physical environments is 
not easy to be analytically defined. DRL can be adopted to search the optimal resource 
management policy under high-dimensional observation spaces . Experience replay is also adopted 
in DRL  to utilize the historical knowledge to improve learning efficiency and accuracy , allowing 
the MEC to support high -quality services for edge devices . 
 
B. Intelligent Mobility  and Handover Management  
    Mobility and handover management are probably two most challenging issues of 6G networks, 
since 6G networks will be high dynamic, multi -layer , and large -dimensional , leading to frequent 
handovers . AI techniques can be adopted to intelligently achieve mobil ity prediction and  optimal 
handover solutions to guarantee communication connectivity [8], [10].      
For example, UAVs communications will be integrated into 6G networks, and the high -speed 
mobility of UAVs may lead to frequent handovers . In addition, the  diverse service requirements 
in terms of high data rate, high reliability  and low latency  increase  the difficulty in processing 
efficient handover. At the same time, the high mobility of devices and UAVs results in 
uncertainties of their locations. One of AI technologies, namely, DRL  (DRL combines DL with 
RL to learn itself from experience ), is capable of solving complex decision -making tasks, which 
learns to optimiz e the handover strategies in real -time by exhibiting dynamic temporal mobilit y 
behavi ors of devices or UAVs  in an online manner, while minimizing  the transmission  latency  and 
guaranteeing reliable wireless connectivity  [10]. Fig. 4 shows the context of intelligent mobility 
and handover management  based on DRL  for UAV -enabled networks, where each UAV can be 
regarded as a learning agent to learn management policy by interacting w ith its environments. 
Each agent senses the environment states (e.g., link quality, current location, and velocity) and