support  diverse services for social networks. Such function is realized by applying AI techniques 
in 6G networks, where each agent is equipped with an intelligent brain (learning model) to 
automatically  learn to  make decisions by itself .  
     Learning is the process of utilizing or modifying existing knowledge  and experience to improve 
the behavior of each device or service center, so that 6G networks can intelligently realize optimal 
network slicing, end -to-end PHY design, edge computing, resource management , heterogeneous 
network design and so on  according to diﬀerent requir ements of applications. Intelligence is the 
important characteristic of 6G networks, where  the combination of AI and 6G networks can learn 
to achieve self -configuration, self -optimization, self -organization and self -healing, finally 
increasing the feasibil ity level. For instance, post -massive multiple -input multiple -output (PM-
MIMO) will be employed in 6G networks to support hundreds or thousands of transmit/receive 
antennas with mmWave or THz transmissions  [4]. How to achieve optimal energy -efficient 
beamforming variables and mitigate RF nonlinearities is challenging. An RNN -based solution has 
the ability to capture the nonlinearities of RF components, where RNN learns the nonlinearities of 
power amplifier arrays and optimizes minimal transmitted power  levels at transmitters  [11].  
The task of optimization is to run a deterministic and rule -based network with parameter 
optimization based on global objectives ( e.g., QoS, QoE, connectivity,  and coverage). Traditional 
optimization algorithms (e.g., Lagrang ian duality and gradient methods) have heavy mathematical 
models which may not be suitable for 6G networks, since 6G networks  will be significantly 
dynamic and complex. In AI -enabled intelligent 6G networks, network parameters and 
architectures can be optimized  through AI techniques instead of traditional tedious computation. 
AI techniques provide the best opportunity to train auto -learning models to realize network 
optimization for 6G wireless networks, allowing providers or operators to optimize the netwo rk 
parameters, resources or architectures to better adapt services for devices , finally make 6G 
networks become intelligent, agile, and able to adapt themselves. For instance, deep learning can 
enable SDN/NFV  into an intelligent network architecture with f ast learning, quick adaptation and