Information 2020 ,11, 243 10 of 21
of features in the new population will remain the same. Here the GA chooses the best combination of
feature-set from the N /2 individuals through uniform crossover method.
Mutation: The GA performs mutation to diversify the population and to prevent premature
convergence. The GA ﬂips the value of the attributes of the input individual and returns the
new individual. In this experiment, the probability of each attribute to be ﬂipped is set to 0.05.
The introduction of a very low mutation probability helps the GA to increase the search ability over
the individuals to form a diverse population of individual features-sets. It also prevents the drastic
drop in the local minimum on the GA feature selection.
Final decision and termination: If 10 generations have been processed, the GA will select the
individual with the highest predictive feature-set selection, and then terminate. Alternatively, the GA
will continue to the “ﬁtness value assignment” phase to produce the next generation until the GA
makes a ﬁnal decision on the highest predictive feature-set selection before the termination.
In our experiment, we identiﬁed a set of 70 unique features using the GA on the training dataset.
Additionally, we obtained a set of 66 unique features by using the GA on the testing dataset (with the
label removed). Finally, we prepared the feature sets of 99 features as the union of the training
(70 features) and testing (66 features) subsets. Figure 5 represents the set of 99 features that we obtained
by applying the GA.
Information  2020 , 11, 243 10 of 21 
 introduction of a very low mutation probability help s the GA to increase the search ability over the 
individuals to form a diverse population of individual  features-sets. It also prevents the drastic drop 
in the local minimum on the GA feature selection.  
Final decision and termination: If 10 generations have been processed, the GA will select the 
individual with the highest predictive feature-set se lection, and then terminate. Alternatively, the GA 
will continue to the “fitness value assignment” ph ase to produce the next generation until the GA 
makes a final decision on the highest predictive feature-set selection before the termination.  
In our experiment, we identified a set of 70 unique  features using the GA on  the training dataset. 
Additionally, we obtained a set of 66 unique feat ures by using the GA on the testing dataset (with 
the label removed). Finally, we prepared the feature sets of 99 features as the union of the training 
(70 features) and testing (66 features) subsets. Figure 5 represents the set of 99 features that we 
obtained by applying the GA. 
 
Figure 5. Features set after applying the GA. 
We observed that most of the features selected by the GA are from service or flag categories. 
This is hardly surprising, as most of the features  are of these two types. Protocol type is also a 
significant feature type. The GA selects most of the unique features which can predict an attack type, 
so most of the features in the optimal features set are from service, protocol_t ype, and flag categories. 
Some of the other features besides service, protocol_type, and flag are also unique with having a large amount of potential value, so the GA selects them too.  
Step 3: LSTM-RNN Model Construction 
To build the  LSTM-RNN model, first we selected hype r-parameters and optimizers for both 
binary and multi-class classification. We determin ed the following hyper-parameters: batch size, the 
number of epochs, learning rate, dropout, and activation function.  
a. Batch size is the number of training records in one forward and one backward pass. 
b. An epoch means one forward and one backward pass of all the training examples.  
c. Learning rate is the proportion of the weights th at are updated during the training of the LSTM-
RNN model. It can be chosen from the range [0.0–1.0]. 
Figure 5. Features set after applying the GA.
We observed that most of the features selected by the GA are from service or ﬂag categories. This is
hardly surprising, as most of the features are of these two types. Protocol type is also a signiﬁcant
feature type. The GA selects most of the unique features which can predict an attack type, so most of
the features in the optimal features set are from service, protocol_type, and ﬂag categories. Some of the
other features besides service, protocol_type, and ﬂag are also unique with having a large amount of
potential value, so the GA selects them too.
Step 3: LSTM-RNN Model Construction