Information 2020 ,11, 243 8 of 21
4.1. LSTM-RNN Classiﬁer with GA Architecture
Figure 3 shows the following steps performed for classifying network attacks using the LSTM-RNN
classiﬁer along with the GA.
Information  2020 , 11, 243 8 of 21 
 4.1. LSTM-RNN Classifier with GA Architecture  
Figure 3 shows the following steps performed fo r classifying network attacks using the LSTM-
RNN classifier along with the GA.  
 
Figure 3. Flow-chart of the LSTM-RNN classifier with GA. 
Step 1: Data Preprocessing 
Numericalization: Our training and testing datasets include 38 numeric features and three non-
numeric features. We must make al l the features numeric to apply them the model, so we converted 
the non-numeric features, protocol-t ype, service, and flag, into numerals. There were three values in 
the protocol type, 70 values in service and 11 values  in flag features. In tr ansforming all non-numeric 
features, we mapped 41 features into 122 (= 38 + 3 + 70 + 11) features [15].  
To transform the categorical features into binary features, we first transformed the features into 
integers using LabelEncoder, a scikit-learn package. Then the integers were passed to One-Hot-Encoder to transform them into binary features. Th e One-Hot-Encoder is a matrix of integers, which 
represent different sub-categories of categorical feat ures. The output is a sparse matrix. Each column 
of the output matrix corresponds to one possible valu e of one feature. The values of the input features 
have the range [0, n]. 
Normalization: Some features in the feature space, such  as duration, src_by tes, and dst_bytes, 
have a very large difference between the maximu m and minimum values. We applied a logarithmic 
scaling method to map to the range [0,1][15].  
Normalization is not required for every dataset, but a dataset like NSL-KDD, where the features 
have different ranges of values, will require normalizing the values. Normalization changes the 
values of a dataset to a common scale. If the featur es do not have a similar range of values, then the 
gradient descents may take too long to converge. By normalizing, we can assure that the gradient 
descents can converge more quickly. An added benefi t is that normalizing data can also increase the 
accuracy of a classifier. 
Step 2: Feature Selection 
Feature selection from the dataset is the process of finding the most relevant feature-set for the 
future predictive model implementation. This te chnique was used to identify and remove the 
Figure 3. Flow-chart of the LSTM-RNN classiﬁer with GA.
Step 1: Data Preprocessing
Numericalization: Our training and testing datasets include 38 numeric features and three
non-numeric features. We must make all the features numeric to apply them the model, so we
converted the non-numeric features, protocol-type, service, and ﬂag, into numerals. There were three
values in the protocol type, 70 values in service and 11 values in ﬂag features. In transforming all
non-numeric features, we mapped 41 features into 122 ( =38+3+70+11) features [15].
To transform the categorical features into binary features, we ﬁrst transformed the features into
integers using LabelEncoder, a scikit-learn package. Then the integers were passed to One-Hot-Encoder
to transform them into binary features. The One-Hot-Encoder is a matrix of integers, which represent
dierent sub-categories of categorical features. The output is a sparse matrix. Each column of the
output matrix corresponds to one possible value of one feature. The values of the input features have
the range [0, n].
Normalization: Some features in the feature space, such as duration, src_bytes, and dst_bytes,
have a very large di erence between the maximum and minimum values. We applied a logarithmic
scaling method to map to the range [0, 1] [15].
Normalization is not required for every dataset, but a dataset like NSL-KDD, where the features
have di erent ranges of values, will require normalizing the values. Normalization changes the values
of a dataset to a common scale. If the features do not have a similar range of values, then the gradient
descents may take too long to converge. By normalizing, we can assure that the gradient descents can
converge more quickly. An added beneﬁt is that normalizing data can also increase the accuracy of
a classiﬁer.
Step 2: Feature Selection