Information 2020 ,11, 243 3 of 21
binary and multiclass classiﬁcation. The accuracy is about 93.88% for multi-class classiﬁcation and
about 99.91% for binary classiﬁcation. LSTM-RNN also provided a high TPR and a low FPR.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background on deep learning,
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and genetic algorithms
(GAs). It also describes the NSL-KDD dataset, which is used in the research. Section 3 discusses the
existing research on LSTM and RNN in NIDS, which is related to this research. Section 4 presents the
methodology of the LSTM-RNN with the GA model in detail. Section 5 presents the results of various
experiments as well as a performance comparison of several classiﬁers. In Section 6, we discuss the
results of our experiments. Finally, we provide conclusions and future work in Section 7.
2. Background
2.1. Deep Learning Architecture
Deep learning is one of the machine learning methods that implements artiﬁcial neural networks.
A deep learning network is a multi-layer neural network. Deep learning networks include deep
neural networks (DNN), convolutional neural networks (CNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN),
deep belief networks (DBN), and others. In this section, we will describe the architecture of RNN and
long short-term memory (LSTM).
2.1.1. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
RNN is a type of artiﬁcial neural network (ANN), wherein the connection between the nodes
resembles the neurons of a human brain. Neural network connections can transmit signals to other
neurons /nodes [ 24] like synapses in a biological brain. The artiﬁcial neuron then processes the received
signal and transmits it to the other connected neurons /nodes. Neurons and connections typically have
weights to adjust the learning process. The weight can vary to adjust the strength of the signal as the
signal travels from the input layers to the output layers. An ANN contains hidden layers between
the input and output layers. RNN should have at least three hidden layers. The basic architecture of
RNNs includes input units, output units, and hidden units, with the hidden units performing all the
calculations by weight adjustment to produce the outputs [ 18,25,26]. The RNN model has a one-way
ﬂow of information from the input units to the hidden units and a directional loop that compares the
error of this hidden layer to that of the previous hidden layer, and adjusts the weights between the
hidden layers. Figure 1 represents a simple RNN architecture with two hidden layers.
Information  2020 , 11, 243 3 of 21 
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background on deep 
learning, long short-term memory (LSTM) networks , recurrent neural networ ks (RNNs), and genetic 
algorithms (GAs). It also describes the NSL-KDD da taset, which is used in the research. Section 3 
discusses the existing research on LSTM and RNN in  NIDS, which is related to this research. Section 
4 presents the methodology of the LSTM-RNN with the GA model in detail. Section 5 presents the 
results of various experiments as well as a performa nce comparison of several classifiers. In Section 
6, we discuss the results of our experiments. Fina lly, we provide conclusions and future work in 
Section 7. 
2. Background 
2.1. Deep Learning Architecture 
Deep learning is one of the machine learning  methods that implements artificial neural 
networks. A deep learning network is a multi-layer neural network. Deep le arning networks include 
deep neural networks (DNN), co nvolutional neural networks (C NN), recurrent neural networks 
(RNN), deep belief networks (DBN), and others. In this section, we will describe the architecture of RNN and long short-term memory (LSTM). 
2.1.1. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) 
RNN is a type of artificial neural network (ANN), wherein the connection between the nodes 
resembles the neurons of a human brain. Neural ne twork connections can transmit signals to other 
neurons/nodes [24] like synapses in a biological brain. The artificial ne uron then processes the 
received signal and transmits it to the other connected neurons/nodes. Neurons and connections 
typically have weights to adjust th e learning process. The weight can vary to adjust the strength of 
the signal as the signal travels from the input la yers to the output layers. An ANN contains hidden 
layers between the input and output layers. RNN shou ld have at least three hidden layers. The basic 
architecture of RNNs includes input units, output units, and hidden units, with the hidden units 
performing all the calculations by weight adjustment to produce the outputs [18,25,26]. The RNN 
model has a one-way flow of information from the input units to the hidden units and a directional loop that compares the error of this  hidden layer to that of the prev ious hidden layer, and adjusts the 
weights between the hidden layers. Figure 1 repres ents a simple RNN architecture with two hidden 
layers. 
  
Figure 1. A simple RNN. 
Figure 1. A simple RNN.