Information 2020 ,11, 243 7 of 21
The distribution of normal and attack records available in the NSL-KDD dataset is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Normal and attack instances in the NSL-KDD dataset.
DatasetTotal No. of Instances
Instances Normal DoS Probe U2R R2L
KDDTrain + 125,973 67,343 45,927 11,656 52 995
KDDTest + 22,544 9711 7460 2421 67 2885
3. Related Work
According to Yin, Zhu, Fei, and He [ 15], an RNN-based intrusion detection system (RNN-IDS) is
very suitable for designing a classiﬁcation model with high accuracy. They performed their analysis
on the NSL-KDD datasets. The performance of RNN-IDS is superior to that of traditional machine
learning classiﬁcation methods in both binary and multi-class classiﬁcation. Researchers have also
compared the performance of RNN-IDS with some traditional machine learning algorithms such as
J48, SVM, RF, and ANN. In [ 16], the authors used the CNN-LSTM model on the KDD Cup’99 datasets
and showed that CNN-LSTM performed better than CNN-GRU and CNN-RNN. In [ 21], the authors
used the LSTM-RNN model on the KDD Cup’99 datasets. They performed several experiments to
ﬁnd the optimum hyper-parameter values, such as those of learning rate and hidden layer size and
analyzed the impacts of the hidden layer size and learning rate on the performance of the classiﬁer.
In [19], Staudemeyer stated that the LSTM-RNN model is able to learn all attack classes hidden in the
KDD Cup’99 training dataset. They tested the model on all features and on extracted minimal feature
sets, respectively. The DT and backward elimination process were used to extract the minimal features
from the original datasets. They showed the performance of the model by calculating the ROC curve
and corresponding AUC value. In each of the projects [18–21], LSTM performed excellently.
We used the feature selection concept from [ 19] but using the GA on the NSL-KDD datasets.
We performed several experiments to set up the hyper-parameter value. Then we examined the
performance of the LSTM-RNN network on all features and on extracted optimal feature sets,
respectively. We also analyzed the performances of SVM and RF classiﬁers on both the original features
set and the optimal features set. SVM and RF are the two traditional machine learning approaches
most often used to verify the performances of classiﬁers. All the research e orts mentioned in this
section have SVM and RF classiﬁers as the common baselines for comparing their performances with
those of proposed classiﬁers. Thus, we applied them to scale the accuracy of the LSTM-RNN classiﬁer.
4. LSTM-RNN NIDS with a Genetic Algorithm
This section describes the LSTM-RNN NIDS with the feature-selection GA. The RNN is the basic
model, and a LSTM network is used to achieve a high detection rate.
In this research, the training dataset was used to train the classiﬁer, and the testing dataset was then
used to measure the accuracy of the classiﬁer. Two types of classiﬁcations were conducted: binary and
multi-class. Normal and anomaly are the two classes in binary classiﬁcation, whereas normal, denial of
service (DoS), probe, user-to root (U2R), and remote-to-local (R2L) are the ﬁve categories detected
using multi-class classiﬁcation.
The classiﬁcation metrics considered in this research are accuracy, precision, recall, f-score,
true positive rate, and false-positive rate. The confusion matrix was calculated to show the records of
true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative records achieved in each model.
The LSTM-RNN models were designed with 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 neurons in the hidden
layers. Python 3.7 with the scikit-learn, TensorFlow, and Keras packages was used to develop the
programs along with other Python open-source libraries.