JOIN | Volume 5 No. 1 | Jun e 2020: 45-52  
 
 47 
 appropriate and chosen to find the optimal solution in solving the inflation rate problem based on the Consumer 
Price Index data in Indonesia. Figure 2 shows the stages of the Genetic algorithm.  
The first stage in genetic algorithms is the initialization of individuals, namely creating individuals 
with a random array of genes (chromosomes). This chromosome represents the solution to the problem. The 
next stage is reproduction in the form of a crossover and mutation process to produce new individuals in the 
population. Each chromosome has fitness, the greater the fitness value the better for the chromosome to be a 
solution. Evaluation is a step to calc ulate this fitness value.  The final stage is sel ection, which involves  choosing 
individuals from the population set and offspring. The best individuals as a result of selection are kept alive in 
the next generation [4], [18], [19] . 
 
2.3.1 Population Initialization  
In general, for the case of prediction using genetic algorithms, there is the main process, namely the 
search for optimal historical data patterns using the regression method [20]. This process aim ed to find a pattern 
that most closely  characteri zes the  historical data of the inflation rate in Indonesia. Multiple linear regression 
(MLR) was used in this study, aiming to find a pattern that most closely  characteri ze the historical inflation 
rates in Indonesia, which  was represented in the form of linear functions as in equation (2). The initialization 
process using this function w as used to build a prediction model using training data.  
 
𝑌=𝜃0+𝜃1𝑥1+𝜃2𝑥2+𝜃3𝑥3+...+𝜃𝑛𝑥𝑛 
 (2) 
 
where : 
• 𝑌   : Prediction of the Consumer Price Index on month B  
• 𝑥1 … 𝑥𝑛  : Consumer Price Index in months B 1 to B n 
• 𝜃0 … 𝜃𝑛 : Representation of each gene on a chromosome with random values  
 
2.3.2 Chromosome Representation  
Chromosome representations use real numbers that are set randomly from 0 to 1. Representation of 
real numbers is suitable for use because they can represent predictive functions built to predict the inflation 
rate in this study.  
Table 1. Chromosome Representation  
𝜃0 𝜃1 𝜃2 𝜃3 𝜃4 
0.8531  0.4113  0.2690  0.9638  0.2079  
 
Table 1 shows that the number of genes on the chromosome can be flexible according to the user's 
input. This allows many patterns to be compared with each other to get the best chromosome pattern from the 
entire set of experiments to predict the inflation rate. For example , if we wish  to predict the fifth month, the 
number of genes will be  5. 
 
 
  
Figure 2. The flowchart of genetic algorithm.