JOIN (Jurnal Online Informatika)  
Volume 5 No.1 | June 2020: 45-52 
DOI:  10.15575/join.v5i1.532  p-ISSN : 2527 -1682  
e-ISSN : 2527 -9165  
 
 45 
 
Prediction of Indonesian Inflation Rate Using Regression Model 
Based on Genetic Algorithms  
 
Faisal Dharma Adhinata1, Shabrina2, Astrid Noviana3, M. Tahir4, Nirwana Hendrastuty5, Wahyono6* 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5Master Program in Computer Science, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia  
6Department of Computer Science and Electronics, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia  
 
 
Article Info   ABSTRACT  
Article history:  
Received  Sep 3, 2019  
Revised May 17, 2020  
Accepted Jun e 28, 2020  
  Inflation occurs when there is a general and continuous increase in the price 
of goods or services in a country. This study aims to predict future inflation 
levels to aid the government in formulating future economic policies. The 
method  used involves studying historical Consumer Price Index (CPI) data 
and applying a genetic algorithm -based regression model. The research has 
found that regression methods are frequently used to solve prediction 
problems, and the problem of finding the opti mal prediction mode l can be 
addressed using genetic algorithms. The model is trained and evaluated using 
real CPI data obtained from the Indonesian Central Bank. Based on the 
experiment, it was proved that the proposed model is effective in predicting 
the inflation rate, as it achieved a Mean Squared Error (MSE) value of 
0.1099. Understanding these predictions is crucial for maintaining economic 
stability and planning.  Keyword s: 
Inflation Level  
Prediction  
Regression  
Genetic Algorithm  
Mean Squared Error   
Corresponding Author:  
Wahyono,  
Department of Computer Science and Electronics , 
Universitas Gadjah Mada , 
Sekip Utara Bulaksumur , Yogyakarta , Indonesia  
Email: wahyo@ugm.ac.id  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Developed countries have a strong economy , stability and equitable economic growth. The Indonesian 
state, through Bank Indonesia,  focuse s on the goal of maintaining rupiah stability. One of the main indicators 
of currency stability is through goods and services reflected through the development of the inflation rate [1]. 
Inflation can be an indicator in describing the general trends of price developments. One indicator that 
is often used to measure inflation is the Consumer Price Index  (CPI) . Changes in the CPI over time represent 
the rate of increase or decrease  in inflation of goods and services [2], [3] . Inflation has a positive and negative 
impact on the Indonesian economy . A decline in inflation will have a positive effect on driving the economy 
better. Conversely, when an increase in inflation  happens, it  will cause the economy to deteriorate resulting in 
higher prices . Uncontrolled inflation will cause  the decline of the Indonesian economy. Therefore, predictions 
of future inflation rates are very necessary for the government to formulate  economic policies in the future.  
Prediction of inflation rates can be done by studying historical CPI data. This method is often known 
as the time-series data prediction method. Prediction is defined as the forecasting process of a variable (event) 
in the future based on previous variable data. One prediction method uses the regression method. The regression 
method is a measurement method based on th e relationship between one variable and many other variables. 
Regression methods have often been used, such as research using historical data regression methods , to predict 
stock prices  [4], [5] , goods stock  [6], [7] , and gold prices (using multiple linear regression ) [8], [9] . 
The problem of finding the optimal prediction model can be seen as an optimization problem. Genetic 
algorithms are generally  used to deal with the optimization problems. “Genetic Algorithm ” is a solution -search 
algorithm with a system that adopts a natural selection process, in which there is a group of individuals in a 
population represent ing a set of solutions that will later experience natural selection. Some studies that use  
genetic algorithms includ e produc ing the best coefficients that can produce stock prediction prices that are 
close to the original price  [4]. Then research genetic algorithms successfully predict currency exchange rates  
[10], [11] .