Learning Fairness in Multi-Agent Systems
Jiechuan Jiang
Peking University
jiechuan.jiang@pku.edu.cnZongqing Lu
Peking University
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Fairness is essential for human society, contributing to stability and productivity.
Similarly, fairness is also the key for many multi-agent systems. Taking fairness
into multi-agent learning could help multi-agent systems become both efﬁcient
and stable. However, learning efﬁciency and fairness simultaneously is a complex,
multi-objective, joint-policy optimization. To tackle these difﬁculties, we propose
FEN, a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning model. We ﬁrst decompose
fairness for each agent and propose fair-efﬁcient reward that each agent learns its
own policy to optimize. To avoid multi-objective conﬂict, we design a hierarchy
consisting of a controller and several sub-policies, where the controller maximizes
the fair-efﬁcient reward by switching among the sub-policies that provides diverse
behaviors to interact with the environment. FEN can be trained in a fully decentral-
ized way, making it easy to be deployed in real-world applications. Empirically,
we show that FEN easily learns both fairness and efﬁciency and signiﬁcantly
outperforms baselines in a variety of multi-agent scenarios.
1 Introduction
Fairness is essential for human society, contributing to stability and productivity. Similarly, fairness
is also the key for many multi-agent systems, e.g., routing [ 1], trafﬁc light control [ 2], and cloud
computing [ 3]. More speciﬁcally, in routing, link bandwidth needs to be fairly allocated to packets to
achieve load balance; in trafﬁc light control, resources provided by infrastructure needs to be fairly
shared by vehicles; in cloud computing, resource allocation of virtual machines has to be fair to
optimize proﬁt.
Many game-theoretic methods [ 4,5,6] have been proposed for fair division in multi-agent systems,
which mainly focus on proportional fairness and envy-freeness. Most of them are in static settings,
while some [ 7,8,9] consider the dynamic environment. Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning
(RL) has been successfully applied to multi-agent sequential decision-making, such as [ 10,11,12,
13,14,15,16]. However, most of them try to maximize the reward of each individual agent or the
shared reward among agents, without taking fairness into account. Only a few methods consider
fairness, but are handcrafted for different applications [ 17,18,19], which all require domain-speciﬁc
knowledge and cannot be generalized. Some methods [ 20,21,22] aim to encourage cooperation in
social dilemmas but cannot guarantee fairness.
Taking fairness into multi-agent learning could help multi-agent systems become both efﬁcient and
stable. However, learning efﬁciency (system performance) and fairness simultaneously is a complex,
multi-objective, joint-policy optimization. To tackle these difﬁculties, we propose a novel hierarchical
RL model, FEN, to enable agents to easily and effectively learn both efﬁciency and fairness. First,
we decompose fairness for each agent and propose fair-efﬁcient reward that each agent learns its own
policy to optimize it. We prove that agents achieve Pareto efﬁciency and fairness is guaranteed in
inﬁnite-horizon sequential decision-making if all agents maximize their own fair-efﬁcient reward
Corresponding author
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.