and learn the optimal policies. However, the conﬂicting nature between fairness and efﬁciency
makes it hard for a single policy to learn effectively. To overcome this, we then design a hierarchy,
which consists a controller and several sub-policies. The controller maximizes the fair-efﬁcient
reward by switching among the sub-policies which directly interact with the environment. One of the
sub-policies is designated to maximize the environmental reward, and other sub-policies are guided
by information-theoretic reward to explore diverse possible behaviors for fairness. Additionally,
average consensus, which is included in the fair-efﬁcient reward, coordinates the policies of agents in
fully decentralized multi-agent learning. By saying fully decentralized, we emphasize that there is no
centralized controller, agents exchange information locally, and they learn and execute based on only
local information.
We evaluate FEN in three classic scenarios, i.e., job scheduling, the Mathew effect, and manufacturing
plant. It is empirically demonstrated that FEN obtains both fairness and efﬁciency and signiﬁcantly
outperforms existing methods. By ablation studies, we conﬁrm the hierarchy indeed helps agents to
learn more easily. Beneﬁted from distributed average consensus, FEN can learn and execute in a fully
decentralized way, making it easy to be deployed in real-world applications.
2 Related Work
Fairness. There are many existing works on fair division in multi-agent systems. Most of them
focus on static settings [ 4,5,6], where the information of entire resources and agents are known and
ﬁxed, while some of them work on dynamic settings [ 7,8,9], where resource availability and agents
are changing. For multi-agent sequential decision-making, a regularized maximin fairness policy is
proposed [ 8] to maximize the worst performance of agents while considering the overall performance,
and the policy is computed by linear programming or game-theoretic approach. However, none of
these works are learning approach. Some multi-agent RL methods [ 17,18,19] have been proposed
and handcrafted for resource allocation in speciﬁc applications, such as resource allocation on multi-
core systems[ 17], sharing network resources among UA Vs[ 18], and balancing various resources in
complex logistics networks[ 19]. However, all these methods require domain-speciﬁc knowledge
and thus cannot be generalized. Some methods [ 20,21,22] are proposed to improve cooperation
in social dilemmas. In [ 20], the reward is shaped for two-player Stag Hunt games, which could
be agents’ average reward in its multi-player version. In [ 20], one agent’s reward is set to be the
weighted average reward of two agents in two-player Stag Hunt games to induce prosociality. By
extending the inequity aversion model, a shaped reward is designed in [ 21] to model agent’s envy
and guilt. A reward network is proposed in [ 22] to generate intrinsic reward for each agent, which
is evolved based on the group’s collective reward. Although cooperation in social dilemmas helps
improve agents’ sum reward, it does not necessarily mean the fairness is guaranteed.
The Matthew effect, summarized as the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, can be witnessed in
many aspects of human society [ 23], as well as in multi-agent systems, such as preferential attachment
in networking [ 24,25] and mining process in blockchain systems [ 26]. The Matthew effect causes
inequality in society and also performance bottleneck in multi-agent systems. Learning fairness could
avoid the Matthew effect and help systems become stable and efﬁcient.
Multi-Agent RL. Many multi-agent RL models have been recently proposed, such as [ 10,11,12,13,
14,15,16], but all of them only consider efﬁciency. CommNet [ 11] and ATOC [ 13] use continuous
communication for multi-agent cooperation. Opponent modeling [ 27,28] learns to reason about
other agents’ behaviors or minds for better cooperation or competition. MADDPG [ 10] is designed
for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In these models, each agent only focuses on
optimizing its own local reward. Thus, more capable agents will obtain more rewards and fairness
is not considered. VDN [ 14], QMIX [ 15], and COMA [ 16] are designed for the scenario where all
agents jointly maximize a shared reward. The shared reward is not directly related to fairness. Even
if the shared reward is deﬁned as the sum of local rewards of all agents, we can easily see that higher
reward sum does not mean fairer.
Hierarchical RL. To solve more complex tasks with sparse rewards or long time horizons and to
speed up the learning process, hierarchical RL trains multiple levels of policies. The higher level
policies give goals or options to the lower level policies and only the lowest level applies actions to
the environment. So, the higher levels are able to plan over a longer time horizon or a more complex
task. Learning a decomposition of complex tasks into sub-goals are considered in [ 29,30,31], while
2