Figure 5: The Matthew effect
Figure 5 shows the performance of FENand the baselines in terms of social welfare (total ghosts
consumed by all the pac-men), CV , and min and max income (consumed ghosts) among pac-men,
episodes to converge. The detailed results are available in Appendix. Random pac-men take random
actions and their CV shows the inherent unfairness of this scenario. Min pac-men cannot learn
reasonable policies, because min is always closed to 0.Min+Avgis only a little fairer than Avg
since the effect of min is very weak. Independent causes the Matthew effect as indicated by the
min (close to 0) and max (more than 200) income, where pac-man with initial larger size becomes
larger and larger and ghosts are mostly consumed by these larger pac-men. Inequity Aversion is
slightly fairer than Independent but lower social welfare.
Although Independent has the largest pac-man which consumes ghosts faster than others, this does
not necessarily mean they together consume ghosts fast. FENis not only fairer than the baselines
but also has the highest social welfare, even higher than Independent .FENpac-men have similar
sizes and consume more ghosts than the baselines. This demonstrates FENis capable of tackling the
Matthew effect and helps social welfare increase. FEN w/o Hierarchy focuses more on fairness,
neglecting the efﬁciency as in the scenario of job scheduling. Moreover, learning without hierarchy is
much slower than FENin this scenario, as illustrated in Figure 6. FEN w/o Hierarchy takes about
6000 episodes, while FENtakes only about 300episodes, conﬁrming that the hierarchy indeed speeds
up the training.
Figure 6: Learning curves of FEN,FEN w/
Gossip , and FEN w/o Hierarchy in the
Matthew effect.Does distributed average consensus affect the perfor-
mance of FEN?Instead of using the centrally computed
average utility, we employ the gossip algorithm to es-
timate the average utility, where each agent only ex-
changes information with the agents in its observation.
As shown in Figure 5, FEN w/ Gossip performs equiv-
alently to FENwith only slight variation on each perfor-
mance metric. The learning curve of FEN w/ Gossip
is also similar to FEN, as illustrated in Figure 6. These
conﬁrm that FENcan be trained in a fully decentralized
way.
Do sub-policies really learn something useful? To an-
swer this question, after the training of FEN, we keep the
learned weights and1and replace other sub-policies
with a random sub-policy. Once the controller chooses
other sub-policies instead of 1, the agent will perform
random actions. In this FEN w/ random sub-policy , the min income become lower than FENand
CV becomes higher, because the random sub-policy cannot provide fairness behavior the controller
requests. To investigate the difference of learned sub-policies and random sub-policy, we ﬁx the three
ghosts as a triangle at the center of the ﬁeld and visualize the distribution of an agent’s positions
under each sub-policy, as illustrated in Figure 7. It is clear that the learned sub-policies keep away
from the three ghosts for fairness and their distributions are distinct, concentrated at different corners,
verifying the effect of the information-theoretic reward.
4.3 Manufacturing Plant
In this scenario of manufacturing plant, we investigate whether agents with different needs can learn
to share different types of resources and increase the production in a manufacturing plant. In a 88
8