Entanglement transitions from restricted Boltzmann machines
Raimel Medina,1Romain Vasseur,2and Maksym Serbyn1
1IST Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
2Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
(Dated: July 20, 2021)
The search for novel entangled phases of matter has lead to the recent discovery of a new class of
\entanglement transitions", exemplied by random tensor networks and monitored quantum circuits.
Most known examples can be understood as some classical ordering transitions in an underlying
statistical mechanics model, where entanglement maps onto the free energy cost of inserting a
domain wall. In this paper, we study the possibility of entanglement transitions driven by physics
beyond such statistical mechanics mappings. Motivated by recent applications of neural network-
inspired variational Ans atze, we investigate under what conditions on the variational parameters
these Ans atze can capture an entanglement transition. We study the entanglement scaling of short-
range restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) quantum states with random phases. For uncorrelated
random phases, we analytically demonstrate the absence of an entanglement transition and reveal
subtle nite size eects in nite size numerical simulations. Introducing phases with correlations
decaying as 1 =rin real space, we observe three regions with a dierent scaling of entanglement
entropy depending on the exponent . We study the nature of the transition between these regions,
nding numerical evidence for critical behavior. Our work establishes the presence of long-range
correlated phases in RBM-based wave functions as a required ingredient for entanglement transitions.
I. INTRODUCTION
The past decade has seen growing interest in identify-
ing new phases of entangled, out-of-equilibrium quantum
matter. A suciently generic, isolated quantum system
is expected to approach thermal equilibrium under its
unitary dynamics, and develop an extensive amount of
entanglement entropy [1{3]. The eigenstates of such sys-
tems feature entanglement entropy scaling as a volume
law. On the other hand, the presence of disorder or a
quasiperiodic potential is capable of drastically chang-
ing the dynamical properties of the system, leading to
many-body localization (MBL). MBL systems represent
a dierent dynamical phase of matter characterized by
area-law entangled eigenstates. The existence of distinct
dynamical phases characterized by qualitatively dierent
scaling of entanglement entropy naturally raises the ques-
tion of the nature of the so-called MBL phase transition
separating the ergodic and MBL phases. While the MBL
transition received signicant attention [4, 5], it was later
realized to be a particular example of an entanglement
transition , which separates phases with dierent entan-
glement scalings.
Beyond MBL, examples of an entanglement transi-
tion are provided by measurement-induced entanglement
transitions in random unitary circuits under random lo-
cal measurements [6{38], random tensor networks [32,
39{42], Jastrow-Gutzwiller wavefunctions [43, 44] and
Rokshar-Kivelson [45] (RK) inspired wave functions [46].
While all these phase transitions (except MBL) feature
dierent tuning parameters and phenomenology, they of-
ten can be mapped onto classical ordering (spontaneous
symmetry-breaking) phase transitions. For instance, the
measurement-induced transition, resulting from a com-
petition between local random unitary dynamics and the
rate of local projective measurements at random points inspace and time, was shown [9, 10] to be related to a clas-
sical ordering transition in a replicated two-dimensional
statistical model. Changing the measurement rate tunes
the eective temperature of the classical model, driving
it from an ordered phase at small measurement rate (cor-
responding to volume-law entanglement) to a disordered
phase at large measurement frequency (area-law). Simi-
lar entanglement transitions and mappings also were re-
ported in random tensor networks [39, 40].
A dierent approach to entanglement transitions was
considered in [46]. There, the authors considered a vari-
ational Ansatz state inspired by the Rokhsar-Kivelson
wave function [45], in which the weights for the cong-
urations are chosen from the Gibbs weights of a classi-
cal spin-glass model. Since states with positive weights
can only sustain an area-law worth of entanglement [47],
an additional random sign structure was also considered.
The entanglement transition in this scenario was proven
to be related to the geometric localization of the wave
function due to the classical spin glass transition.
Thus, on the one hand, both random tensor net-
works and measurement-induced entanglement transi-
tions can be understood as an ordering transition in a
two-dimensional statistical mechanical model, with the
transition being induced by changing the tensor network
bond dimension or the measurement rate. On the other
hand, the transition observed in the RK-inspired wave
function is closely related to a spin glass transition in
an all-to-all spin-glass model. This motivates the ques-
tion if entanglement transitions can be driven by physics
beyond classical ordering transitions. The MBL transi-
tion as mentioned above could be one example of this.
However, investigating the MBL transition is particu-
larly challenging, see [5] and references therein for recent
progress.
In this work, we focus on the variational wave func-