DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 7
in Leaderboard 2.0. Our approach is similar to PDM-Closed [19], a rule-based
planner for nuPlan [7]. PDM-Lite uses the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) [84]
to obtain a target speed based on the leading vehicle, pedestrian, stop sign or
trafficlight.Unlikethe16proposalsfromwhichoneisselectedviaacomplexcost
function in PDM-Closed, we use only two proposals and a simpler cost function
basedontheTransFuser++expert[36],givingalight-weightplannersuitablefor
scalable QA generation. PDM-Lite obtains an improved DS of 44% on the official
CARLA validation routes. More details can be found in the supplementary.
DriveLM-CARLA QA Generation. For collecting the DriveLM-CARLA
dataset, we set up a series of routes in urban, residential, and rural areas and
execute PDM-Lite on these routes. During this process, we collect the neces-
sary sensor data, sample keyframes, generate relevant QAs based on privileged
information about objects and the scene, and organize the logical relationships
to connect this series of QAs into a graph. We generate data and labels at
4 FPS and extract keyframes based on changes in the decision of the expert
(e.g. when the expert changes from acceleration to braking). The rule-based
annotation pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. During data collection, we extract
privileged information from the simulator about the status of the static and dy-
namic objects in the scene as well as the triggered rules of the expert. We use
all 38 scenarios except for InterurbanAdvancedActorFlow, MergerIntoSlowTraf-
fic, and VehicleTurningRoute to create questions and answers with hand-crafted
sentence templates based on the information we extract from the simulator.
The exact questions with their graph structure can be found in the supplemen-
tary. Our annotation process has the advantage of straightforward scalability
since we only need to define route and scenario settings in CARLA and the
subsequent steps can be executed automatically. Including 1.6M QAs (with a
straightforward scaling recipe), our DriveLM-CARLA stands out as the largest
driving-language benchmark in terms of total textual content among existing
benchmarks as shown in Table 1.
2.3 DriveLM-Metrics
To evaluate GVQA, the DriveLM-Metrics consist of three components for eval-
uating motion M, behavior B, and P1−3. For measuring the performance of the
motion stage, we use standard metrics from the nuScenes and Waymo bench-
marks: average and final displacement error, ( ADE, FDE ), and the collision
rateon the predicted trajectory, following UniAD [32]. We evaluate behavior
predictions by the classification accuracy , along with a breakdown of the
overall accuracy into its steering and speed components. Finally, we measure the
P1−3performance using two metrics. SPICE [2] is a prevailing metric used in
VQAandimagecaptioning,whichcalculatesthestructuresimilarityofpredicted
texts with ground truth while ignoring the semantic meanings. Simultaneously,
we employ GPT Score to measure the semantic alignment of answers and com-
plement the SPICE metric. Specifically, the question, the ground truth answer,
the predicted answer, and a prompt asking for a numerical score of the answer