DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 39
D DriveLM-Metrics
In this section, we offer a detailed introduction to DriveLM-Metrics. DriveLM-
Metricscanbebroadlycategorizedintothreeparts: P1−3VQAMetrics,Behavior
Task Metrics, and Motion Task Metrics.
D.1 P1−3VQA Metrics
We assess the performance of P1−3using common VQA metrics, and we intro-
duce the GPT score for a more semantically comprehensive evaluation of our
QA results. Additionally, given the graph structure of our QA, we propose the
Completeness score to provide a thorough assessment.
BLEU[64] measures the similarity between a generated text and one or more
reference texts. It operates by comparing n-grams in the generated text to those
in the reference texts, with higher precision indicating a better match. However,
theBLEU scoreexhibitsinsensitivitytosemanticnuances andvariations inword
order.
ROUGE_L [52] calculates scores with the longest common sub-sequence of the
model outputs and the reference answers. Similar to the BLEU metric, ROUGE
is used to assess the level of matching between generated results and standard
references, with the key difference being that ROUGE is based on recall.
METEOR [45] takes into account precision, recall, stemming, synonymy, stem-
ming, and word order. It establishes alignment between model outputs and refer-
ences, computes the 1-gram matching between them, and then applies penalties
based on chunk blocks, providing a more nuanced evaluation.
CIDEr [86] combines elements from BLEU and vector space models. The un-
derlying concept involves treating each sentence as a document, calculating its
n-gram TF-IDF vector, and using cosine similarity to measure the semantic con-
sistency between candidate and reference sentences. CIDEr captures matches
between n-grams of different lengths and differentiates the importance of vari-
ous n-grams through TF-IDF weighting.
SPICE [2] first parses the text into a syntactic dependency tree using Proba-
bilistic Context-Free Grammar [38], then maps the dependency tree into a scene
graph in a rule-based manner. The scene graph describes the objects, attributes,
and their relationship in the original text, and the SPICE score is computed as
the F-score of the generated scene graphs from prediction and ground truth.
GPT Score is a metric provided by ChatGPT. Traditional metrics mainly as-
sess word-level performance and may not capture semantic nuances, potentially
yielding unexpected evaluation outcomes. Leveraging ChatGPT’s robust rea-
soning capabilities, we employ it to gauge prediction quality and derive a more
rational score. ChatGPT is prompted to assign a numerical score between 0 and