DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 41
D.3 Motion Task Metrics
Formeasuringtheperformanceofthemotionstage,weusestandardmetricsfrom
the nuScenes and Waymo benchmarks: average and final displacement error,
(ADE, FDE), and the collision rate of the predicted trajectory.
ADEstands for Average Displacement Error, indicating the average L2 dis-
tance between the predicted trajectory and the ground truth trajectory over all
predicted horizons. It is the average of the errors at 1st, 2ndand 3rdsecond.
FDEstands for Final Displacement Error, which measures the Euclidean dis-
tance between the predicted endpoint and the true endpoint at the last predicted
step (the 3rdsecond).
Collision Rate accounts for the ratio of how many test frames the predicted
trajectory collides with objects in over all test frames. The number reported in
Table 2 of the main paper is the average of the collision rate at 1st, 2ndand 3rd
second.
Note that the calculation of ADE,FDEandCollision Rate follows the
setting used in UniAD [32] but not ST-P3 [31]. For example, in terms of the
FDE and the collision rate at 3rdsecond, the UniAD setting will consider the
error/collision rate at only this timestep, while the ST-P3 setting will consider
the error/collision rate as an average over 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3 seconds. For more
details, please refer to the UniAD repo discussion. Additionally, please note that
errors reported on the full nuScenes validation dataset (in prior work) is not
directly comparable to results reported on the DriveLM-nuScenes val split, a
challenging subset of this consisting of only keyframes with intention changes.
E DriveLM-Agent
In this section, we introduce the details of DriveLM-Agent, including the graph
prompting scheme and the trajectory tokenization process.
E.1 Prompting with Context
In terms of the implementation, the content of context differs during the train-
ing and inference of DriveLM-Agent, following the teacher-forcing setting [44,82]
generally adopted in recurrent networks. During training, for each edge e∈Ein
the frame, we pick the child QA. The child questions in the edges are appended
with the ground truth parent QA as the context. All QA pairs are used dur-
ing training, including those without context. The objective used is next token
prediction, the standard approach for language modeling. During inference, the
model is applied interactively in multiple rounds to get the required context
predictions as inputs for each child question. Specifically, the model is prompted
with the five stages of questions in the sequential order of P1, P2, P3, B, M. In
this order, the model can only infer the questions in the succeeding stages after
getting the predicted answer from the preceding stages.