DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 9
Note that the size and structure of the graph during inference is a design
choice of the algorithm, which can be adapted based on the task or available
compute budget. We use this property to train on all available QAs, but perform
inferenceonspecificsubgraphs,wherethequestionsaresampledusingheuristics.
For more details, please refer to the supplementary material.
Context Aggregation through Behavior. Driving encompasses a wide array
ofpotentialsituationsthatrequireanappropriateresponse.However,despitethe
diversity of these circumstances, it is interesting to note that almost all events
involve decisions that can be discretized into a set of behaviors. For example,
applying the brakes appropriately may address various situations such as a red
light signal, a stop sign, or the presence of an object ahead of the vehicle. The
focus of our behavior stage is to generate such a behavior: a statement in natural
language that articulates the vehicle’s intended movement. As described in Sec-
tion 2.1, this description effectively serves as a reflective step wherein the model
summarizes all crucial information from the graph. Thus, we propose to use all
possible sources of context for predicting behavior, i.e., all the QAs in P1−3. We
empirically observe that this design is crucial for driving with VLMs.
3.2 Trajectory Tokenization for Motion
Since it is non-trivial to output fine-grained numerical results using general
VLMs, RT-2 [108] handles robotic actions based on a specialized trajectory
tokenization module. We use this approach to enable DriveLM-Agent to take
as input the image and behavior description and output trajectories. Specifi-
cally, we divide the coordinates of waypoints into 256 bins empirically based on
statistics of train set trajectories. We re-define tokens in the BLIP-2 language
tokenizer, establishing tokens for each bin, and fine-tune the VLM on the rede-
fined vocabulary. For simplicity, we use the same VLM architecture (BLIP-2) to
perform this task, but with independent LoRA weights and trained on a dataset
consisting of only the QAs for this motion stage. Thus, it is possible to perform
this functionality using a lightweight LLM [68] or driving-specific architecture
that accepts a command as an input [31,99].
4 Experiments
In this section, we present our experimental results that aim to address the
following research questions: (1) How can VLMs be effectively repurposed for
end-to-end autonomous driving? (2) Can VLMs for driving generalize when
evaluated with unseen sensor setups? (3) What is the effect of each question
in perception, prediction and planning on the final behavior decision? (4) How
well do VLMs perform perception, prediction, and planning via GVQA? Exper-
iments about more VLMs on DriveLM-nuScenes and generalization to unseen
objects on DriveLM-CARLA are included in the supplementary material.
Setup.We now briefly overview the key implementation details for the two
settings used in our experiments (additional details are provided in the supple-