10 C. Sima et al.
mentary material). All fine-tuning is implemented with LoRA [30]. On DriveLM-
nuScenes, we finetune BLIP-2 on the trainsplit for 10 epochs. We use a batch
size of 2 for each GPU, and the entire training process spans approximately 7
hours with 8 V100 GPUs. We train BLIP-2 on the keyframes of the trainsplit
of DriveLM-CARLA for 6 epochs. This takes 6 hours on 4 A100 GPUs.
4.1 VLMs for End-to-End Driving
In our first experiment, we aim to assess the ability of VLMs to perform open-
loop planning on DriveLM-nuScenes. In particular, we investigate the impact of
the context provided to the behavior and motion stages. Given sensor data (and
in the case of VLM methods, a text input), the model is required to predict
the ego-vehicle future trajectory in the form of waypoints. Though open-loop
planning suffers from a mismatched data distribution [50], we try to alleviate
this by evaluating on only the key frames annotated in DriveLM-nuScenes.
Baselines. As a reference for the task’s difficulty, we provide a simple Com-
mand Mean baseline. Each frame in nuScenes is associated with one of 3 com-
mands, ‘turn left’, ‘turn right’, or ‘go straight’. We output the mean of all tra-
jectories in the training set whose command matches the current test frame
command. Further, we compare our approach to the current state-of-the-art on
nuScenes, UniAD [32]. Besides its original setting which requires video inputs,
we train a single-frame version (‘ UniAD-Single ’) for a fair comparison. Fi-
nally,BLIP-RT-2 denotes BLIP-2 [47] fine-tuned on DriveLM-Data with the
trajectory tokenization scheme described in Section 3.2 for only the motion task.
This acts as an indicator for the performance when using an identical network
architecture as DriveLM-Agent, but no context inputs or VQA training data.
DriveLM-Agent. We consider 3 variants of DriveLM-Agent incorporating our
proposed changes in steps: (1) a 2-stage version that predicts behavior and then
motion (as described in Section 2.1), but without any P1−3context for behavior
prediction (‘None’); (2) a ‘Chain’ version that builds the P1−3graph, but only
passes the final node ( P3) to the behavior stage; (3) the full model (‘Graph’)
that uses all QAs from P1−3as context for B.
Results. We show results for the above methods in Table 2. Among the base-
lines, BLIP-RT-2 is unable to match UniAD-Single (though both perform well
relative to Command Mean). This shows that the single-stage approach without
any reasoning is unable to compete with the prior state-of-the-art on nuScenes.
However, the proposed DriveLM-Agent, which predicts behavior as an interme-
diate step for motion, provides a significant boost in performance, surpassing
UniAD-Single. This indicates that with the appropriate prompting, VLMs can
be surprisingly competitive for end-to-end driving. Interestingly, in the exper-
imental settings that do not involve generalization, the Chain and Graph ver-
sions of DriveLM-Agent do not provide any further advantage over no context.
Further, single-frame VLMs fall short compared to the privileged video-based
UniAD model, indicating that VLMs with video inputs may be necessary for
this task. We provide video-input VLM result in the supplementary material.