DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 3
soning [5,21,93,95,103,108]. Importantly, even though they reason in multiple
separate steps, VLMs are end-to-end differentiable architectures, a characteristic
that is highly desirable for autonomous driving [10].
Recent work towards enabling the application of VLMs to AD systems falls
into two categories: scene-level or single object-level Visual Question Answering
(VQA). Scene-level VQA refers to the task of describing the driving behavior by
oneortwosupportingreasons, e.g.,“Thecarismovingintotherightlanebecause
it is safe to do so.” [41,42]. Single object-level VQA formulates the understanding
of the ego vehicle’s response to a single object by a chain of QAs in the form
of “what-which-where-how-why”, e.g., “The ego vehicle stops because there is a
pedestrian in a white shirt crossing the intersection in front of the ego vehicle
and it does not want to crash into the pedestrian.” [56,67,71]. Unfortunately,
neither of these paradigms provides a suitable proxy task to mimic the P1−3
reasoning process in humans, who consider multiple objects and reason about
each in multiple steps. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a new task, along
with corresponding datasets and a baseline model architecture (Fig. 1).
Task. Graph Visual Question Answering (GVQA) involves formulating
P1−3reasoning as a series of question-answer pairs (QAs) in a directed graph.
Its key difference to the aforementioned VQA tasks for AD is the availability
of logical dependencies between QAs which can be used to guide the answer-
ing process. GVQA also encompasses questions regarding behavior and motion
planning, with dedicated metrics (details in Section 2).
Datasets. DriveLM-nuScenes andDriveLM-CARLA consist of annotated
QAs, arranged in a graph, linking images with driving behavior through logical
reasoning.Incomparisontoexistingbenchmarks,theyprovidesignificantlymore
text annotations per frame (Table 1 and Fig. 2). Furthermore, as an integral
component of DriveLM-CARLA, we build PDM-Lite [4], the first working rule-
based expert algorithm for CARLA Leaderboard 2.0. We pair these training
datasets with challenging test data for evaluating zero-shot generalization.
Baseline.DriveLM-Agent employs a trajectory tokenizer that can be applied
to any general VLM [47,54,65,106], coupled with a graph prompting scheme that
models logical dependencies as context inputs for VLMs. The result is a simple
methodology to effectively repurpose VLMs for end-to-end AD (Section 3).
Our experiments provide encouraging results. We find that GVQA on Driv-
eLM is a challenging task, where current methods obtain moderate scores and
better modeling of logical dependencies is likely necessary to achieve strong
QA performance. Even so, DriveLM-Agent already performs competitively to
state-of-the-art driving-specific models [32] when tested in the open-loop plan-
ning setting, despite its task-agnostic architecture. Furthermore, employing a
graph structure improves zero-shot generalization, enabling DriveLM-Agent to
correctly handle unseen deployment on Waymo data [77] after training only
on nuScenes [6] data. Finally, with a question-wise analysis we find that the
QA pairs from the prediction and planning stages help the final driving decision
most. From these results, we believe that improving GVQA holds great potential
towards building autonomous driving agents with strong generalization.