24 C. Sima et al.
Q6.What is the trade-off between long inference time and generalization?
LLMs have become orders of magnitude faster in the last years as they are
a general topic of broad interest, e.g. [100]. Similarly, recent works show BLIP-2
can be run 40% faster while maintaining performance [74]. Furthermore, most
AD research begins with systems that are not real-time, which are later opti-
mized by practitioners. We admit that runtime efficiency is a limitation of Driv-
eLM but we hope that the rapid progress in orthogonal research can alleviate
this issue, which is out of the scope of our project.
Q7.Why is VQA more suited than alternative techniques to train internet-
scale models (such as generative modeling) for the downstream application of
autonomous driving?
Both perception and planning in driving require reasoning and involve zero-
shot generalization. VLMs potentially have the reasoning ability inherited from
LLMs, making VQA a promising direction for bringing the benefits of web-scale
training to autonomous driving.
Q8.Do today’s VLMs understand and reason about the visual world as well as
LLMs understand text-based worlds?
Thisisnotknownbutdeservestobeexplored.VLMsapproachtheproblemof
generalization in a data-driven way, which has been proved successful repeatedly
on other tasks.
Q9.Why does the proposed graph reasoning scheme not provide very strong
improvements in VQA?
It is possible that the simple prompting scheme, relatively small base VLMs,
or insufficiently strong logical dependencies in the dataset (or a combination of
these factors) contribute to the lack of major improvements. DriveLM-CARLA
provides a platform to carefully study these factors and inform the annotation
of future datasets for GVQA.
Q10.What questions should be asked when collecting DriveLM?
Determining the right questions is a critical aspect of the DriveLM system.
We are unable to recommend a detailed protocol for this in our work, which
is a pioneering study for driving with VLMs. This relies on domain expertise,
which we aim to address in future work. See Table 3 in the main paper for a
question-wise analysis of our chosen protocol.
Q11.Is generalization in automobiles an oversold topic?
Driving scenarios predominantly consist of vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists.
However, real-world AD is a safety-critical application that must handle the long
tail of rare objects to avoid accidents in commercial deployment [18]. Further-
more, generalization to novel objects is an active and growing research field as
shown in [48,105]. While it is true that most of the objects in autonomous driv-
ing are limited, the tiny percentage of rare objects are in fact the main existing