14 C. Sima et al.
73,81,89,91,94,102,104]. Specifically, GPT-Driver [57] and LLM-Driver [11]
encode the perceived scene state into prompts, relying on LLMs to formulate
reasonable plans. DriveGPT4 [102] projects raw sensor data into tokens and uti-
lizes LLMs for end-to-end prediction of control signals and explanations. Despite
these preliminary attempts, there is untapped potential in addressing generaliza-
tion in AD through LLMs. Our work combines VLMs with training over graph-
structured QAs from DriveLM. This enables us to show benefits on zero-shot
end-to-end planning, which was not demonstrated by these concurrent studies.
6 Discussion
Table 5: Compared to UniAD-Single,
DriveLM-Agent has fewer trainable pa-
rameters but a higher inference cost.
Method #Params #Trainable FLOPs FPS
UniAD-Single 131.9M 58.8M 1.7T 1.8
DriveLM-Agent 3.955B 12.9M 24.2T0.16EventhoughDriveLMexhibitspromis-
ing generalization, there are concern-
ing limitations of this work.
– Efficiency Constraints. Inherit-
ing the drawbacks of LLMs, our
baseline model suffers from long
inference times, especially as we
require multiple rounds of predictions based on the graph structure (roughly
10×slower than UniAD, as shown in Table 5). The core problem lies in the
slow throughput of the current model ( 8.5 tokens/s in DriveLM-Agent),
which may impact practical usage. However, LLMs have become orders of
magnitude faster [74,100] in the last months as this is a general topic of
broad interest. We believe that the rapid progress in orthogonal research
can alleviate this issue.
– Driving-specific Inputs. DriveLM-Agent directly applies the VLM’s vi-
sion module, taking a low-resolution front-view image as input. Driving-
specific sensors such as LiDAR cannot be processed as well. This results in a
lack of temporal information and 360-degree scene understanding. Extend-
ing DriveLM-Agent to images from multiple views is straightforward as the
graph formulation allows various input frames for different nodes. We leave
it for future work to explore options for multi-modal and multi-frame inputs.
– Closed-loop Planning. Our approach is currently evaluated under an
open-loop scheme. In this setting, incorporating the ego vehicle’s status as
input can significantly enhance the metrics, but its effectiveness may not
translate well to the real world, and hence we only consider methods that
do not do so. Extending our work to a closed-loop setting with an affordable
budget in training time and computational cost is a promising direction to
explore. With the usage of CARLA we provide a promising foundation for
more research in the direction of closed-loop planning with VLMs.
Conclusion. We show how VLMs can be leveraged as end-to-end autonomous
driving agents with improved generalization over task-specific driving stacks.
For this we propose the task of Graph VQA together with new datasets and
metrics. Equipped with these tools, we build a baseline approach that has a
simple architecture and obtains promising results.