42 C. Sima et al.
Fig.12: Detailed architecture of DriveLM-Agent. An inverse mapping is de-
signed to embed the real-world ego-vehicle trajectory into the token space of blip-2-
flan-t5-xl.
E.2 Trajectory Tokenization Details
To generate action sequences ( i.e., ego future trajectories) directly with the
language model we use for building the graph, we adopt the method of RT-
2 [108]. This process entails the discretization and tokenization of the continuous
trajectory.
Initially, we analyze the distribution of the future trajectories within the
nuScenes dataset. To effectively convert the continuous (x, y)coordinate space
into a discrete set of actions, we partition each coordinate axis into 256 discrete
intervals. This granularity ensures a sufficient level of detail while maintaining
a manageable number of tokens for the language model.
Each discretized bin corresponds to a unique token within the vocabulary of
the language model. We extract the token identifiers (IDs) for numeric tokens
within the vocabulary. To ensure coherence and preserve the ability to express
numerical values, we omit single-digit tokens from this mapping process. Out of
the remaining numeric tokens, a subset of 256 token IDs is selected to repre-
sent the trajectory data. In addition to these, we introduce two special tokens
designated for marking the start and end of a trajectory sequence – the start-
of-trajectory (SOT) token and the end-of-trajectory (EOT) token, respectively.
Thistokenizationschemeenablesustoencodecomplextrajectoryinformationas
a sequence of tokens that a language model can process. Using this mapped vo-
cabulary, the language model can generate predicted future trajectory sequences
by outputting a series of tokens, which are then translated back into the coor-
dinate space.
F Experiments
Inthissection,weintroducethedetailsofexperiments,includingimplementation
details of each subsection in Section 4 in the main paper, more metrics on the
VQA part, more ablation and comparison on computational complexity.