6 C. Sima et al.
Bsp∈ {fast 2,fast 1,moderate ,slow 1,slow 2},
Bst∈ {left 2,left 1,straight ,right1,right2},
where the number in the subscript indicates the intensity. The combination of
the speed and steering categories for a trajectory form its behavior category
asB= (Bsp, Bst). While we use a simple definition of Bas a starting point
for research on driving with VLMs, we note that our formulation supports the
incorporation of more abstract behaviors such as a lane changes or overtaking.
2.2 DriveLM-Data
In order to provide comprehensive and accurate QAs with the graph structure
defined in Section 2.1, we introduce DriveLM-nuScenes and DriveLM-CARLA.
Since there are significant disparities between nuScenes and CARLA, the collec-
tion methods and statistics of these datasets differ.
DriveLM-nuScenes. We divide the annotation process into three steps: select-
ing key frames from video clips, choosing key objects within these key frames,
and subsequently annotating the frame-level P1−3QAs for these key objects.
A portion of the Perception QAs are generated from the nuScenes [6] and
OpenLane-V2 [87] ground truth, while the remaining QAs are manually an-
notated. The question templates for the manual annotations were designed by 5
domain experts accounting for how humans make driving decisions. Annotators
are prompted with all question templates for each frame, encouraged to answer
all questions, but provided a skip option to account for possible incompatibil-
ity. As we manually annotate the vast majority of data in DriveLM-nuScenes,
quality is particularly crucial for this portion. When annotating, we conduct
multiple rounds of rigorous quality checks. In each round, we categorize the
data into different batches and inspect ten percent of the data in each batch.
If the qualification rate of manually annotated data in this ten percent does
not meet expectations, we request the annotators to re-label all data in the
batch. In Fig. 2, we showcase an example of the QA annotation pipeline, where
all questions undergo quality checks according to our standards. As a result,
DriveLM-nuScenes stands out from previously proposed datasets with its larger
scale, greater comprehensiveness, and more complex structure (See Table 1).
These QAs cover various aspects of the driving process, ranging from percep-
tion and prediction to planning, providing a comprehensive understanding of
autonomous driving scenarios (details in the supplementary material).
DriveLM-CARLAExpert. WecollectdatausingCARLA0.9.14intheLeader-
board 2.0 framework [22]. Leaderboard 2.0 contains a large set of new driving
scenarios compared to its predecessor, Leaderboard 1.0. However, as of now,
there is no existing method to collect training data at scale in Leaderboard
2.0. For example, the privileged rule-based expert used by TransFuser++ [36],
a state-of-the-art method in Leaderboard 1.0, obtains a Driving Score (DS) of
only 2% on the 8+ kilometer long official validation routes of Leaderboard 2.0.
We build a new expert algorithm, PDM-Lite, that can handle the new challenges