DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 25
barrier to the commercialization of AD, making generalization an important
feature.
Q12.Why not use video inputs?
It has been observed that in AD multi-frame inputs do not always lead to
improved performance due to causal confusion [96], motivating the use of single
frames in several prior works [37,99]. However, we agree that in the long term,
multi-frame models are desirable. As a proof of concept, we provide the results
for one (adapted from LLaMA-Adapter-V2 [26]) in Table 13. Multi-frame inputs
give a slight improvement.
Q13.What is the technical novelty in this paper?
The young field of driving with language still lacks a standardized dataset,
taskandevaluationframework.Ourpaperfillsthisgap.Webelievethattheseare
as valuable as proposing a new method. Therefore, we do not make any claims
regarding algorithmic novelty, intentionally constructing simple baselines. Our
technical novelty lies in the formulation of the task and preparation of data
suitable for adapting general VLMs to the driving application, which we show
to have promising results even in combination with existing models.
B DriveLM-nuScenes
In this section, we introduce the details of DriveLM-nuScenes, including the
dataset composition, collection methodology, and statistics.
B.1 Dataset Composition
DriveLM-nuScenes comprises a training set of 4072 frames and a valida-
tion set of 799 frames , consisting of scene-level descriptions and frame-level
QA accompanied by 2D bounding boxes within multi-view images from the
nuScenes dataset. The scene-level description delineates the behavior of the ego
vehicle throughout the entire video clip. The frame-level QA encompasses three
distinct categories: perception, prediction, and planning.
– Perception involves queries related to the thorough examination of the
entire frame. Apart from several questions in this question set that are man-
ually annotated, we design prompts to generate questions about the obser-
vational facets of objects within the scene, leveraging ground truth from
nuScenes [6] and OpenLane-V2 [87].
– Prediction encompasses a series of inquiries regarding the projection of the
forthcoming state of key objects and the ego vehicle in the current frame,
and the underlying reasoning process behind the prediction. Because the
predictions are intricate and challenging, we manually annotate the answers.