12 C. Sima et al.
utility of GVQA towards interactive driving systems. Further, on Waymo, we
seemeaningfulpredictionandplanninganswersdespitetheimperfectperception.
For more visualizations, please see the supplementary material.
4.3 Question-wise Analysis in DriveLM-nuScenes
Next, we analyze the effect of each type of QA pair on the behavior performance
by adding them as context. First, a set of representative QA pairs are selected in
each stage. We then train BLIP-2 on different combinations of sets of QA pairs,
and those QA pairs are added as the context for the behavior question (Table 3).
Representative Questions at each stage. We select different sets of repre-
sentative QA pairs in each stage as follows:
•P1−1: What are the important objects in the current scene?
•P1−2: What is the moving status of object X?
•P1−3: What is the visual description of object X?
•P2−1: What is the future state of object X?
•P2−2: Would object Xbe in the moving direction of the ego vehicle?
•P2−3: What object should the ego vehicle notice first / second / third when the ego
vehicle is getting to the next possible location?
•P3−1: What actions could the ego vehicle take based on the observation of object X?
•P3−2: What actions taken by the ego vehicle can lead to a collision with object X?
•P3−3: In this scenario, what are safe actions to take for the ego vehicle?
The reasons for such a selection are 1)statistically they make up about 60%
of the total QA pairs in the three stages. 2)subjectively they represent the most
information needed for human to drive. A coarser stage-wise analysis is provided
in the supplementary material for further investigation.
Results. Our results are shown in Table 3. We observe that training with QA
pairs from prediction and planning stage ( ID4-9) improves the performance
from training with perception QA pairs only ( ID1-3). Adding QA pairs from the
planning stage ( ID7-9) does not significantly boost the performance compared
to their previous stages ( ID4-6). The reason could be that other vehicles’ future
status contains all the necessary information to make the behavior decision.
4.4 Performance for P1−3via GVQA
In our final experiment, we establish baseline results for the P1−3stages of
GVQA, studying the impact of context. We use two VLMs, the off-the-shelf
BLIP-2 [47] (not fine-tuned on DriveLM), and the proposed DriveLM-Agent.
Baselines. We consider the lower bound of no context (‘None’), which corre-
spondstotrainingandevaluationwiththesamesettingasstandardVQA(image
and question in, answer out). As an upper bound for each architecture, we per-
form GVQA but input the ground truth (‘GT’) context to the model at test
time instead of its own prior predictions.
Results. OurresultsaresummarizedinTable4.ItcanbeobservedthatDriveLM-
nuScenes is more challenging for both models, as indicated by the lower scores on