2 C. Sima et al.
boost generalization and enable interactivity with human users. While
recent approaches adapt VLMs to driving via single-round visual ques-
tion answering (VQA), human drivers reason about decisions in multiple
steps. Starting from the localization of key objects, humans estimate ob-
ject interactions before taking actions. The key insight is that with our
proposed task, Graph VQA, where we model graph-structured reason-
ing through perception, prediction and planning question-answer pairs,
we obtain a suitable proxy task to mimic the human reasoning pro-
cess. We instantiate datasets (DriveLM-Data) built upon nuScenes and
CARLA, and propose a VLM-based baseline approach (DriveLM-Agent)
for jointly performing Graph VQA and end-to-end driving. The experi-
mentsdemonstratethatGraphVQAprovidesasimple,principledframe-
work for reasoning about a driving scene, and DriveLM-Data provides a
challenging benchmark for this task. Our DriveLM-Agent baseline per-
forms end-to-end autonomous driving competitively in comparison to
state-of-the-art driving-specific architectures. Notably, its benefits are
pronounced when it is evaluated zero-shot on unseen sensor configura-
tions. Our question-wise ablation study shows that the performance gain
comes from the rich annotation of prediction and planning QA pairs in
the graph structure. All data, models and an official evaluation server
are available at https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/DriveLM.
Keywords: Vision Language Model ·End-to-end Autonomous Driving
1 Introduction
CurrentAutonomousDriving(AD)stacksarestilllackingcrucialcapabilities[10,
15]. One key requirement is generalization, which involves the ability to handle
unseen scenarios or unfamiliar sensor configurations. A secondary requirement
pertains to the interaction of these models with humans, highlighted for example
by EU regulations that mandate explainability in deployment [3]. Furthermore,
unlike today’s AD models, humans do not navigate based on geometrically pre-
cise bird’s-eye view (BEV) representations [17,32,46]. Instead, humans implicitly
perform object-centric perception, prediction, and planning (which we refer to
asP1−3): a rough identification and localization of key objects, followed by rea-
soning about their possible movement and aggregation of this information into
a driving action [60,76].
Simultaneously, another field has been forging ahead: Vision-Language Mod-
els (VLMs) [47,54,90,106]. These models have several strengths. First, they hold
a base understanding of the world from internet-scale data that could potentially
facilitate generalization for planning in AD. In fact, this sort of generalization
has already been achieved by VLMs for simpler robotics tasks [23,108]. Sec-
ond, the use of language representations as an input and output offers a plat-
form for human-friendly interaction with these models, unlike bounding boxes
or trajectories that are more common to current methods [19,31,49,70]. Fi-
nally, VLMs are able to make decisions in multiple steps linked by logical rea-