DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 43
F.1 Implementation Details
Here we explain the implementation details for the training and validation set-
tings used in our experiments of each of each subsections in Section 4 in the
main paper.
Fine-tuning Details. We configure the learning rate as 0.0001, no learning-
rate scheduler, random seed as 1234, and other settings following the default
LoRA [30] configuration. For the BLIP-2 model, we use a maximal sequence
length of 400, and other hyperparameters remain the same as the official BLIP-
2 implementation.
Implementation Details for Experiment in Section 4.1 & 4.3 & 4.4.
During training, we utilize all QAs as input per frame, with a subset of them
having contexts (questions from P2,3,B, and M). The contexts are extracted
fromgroundtruth,followingtheteacher-forcingsetting[44,82]generallyadopted
in recurrent networks. As for inference, due to the variant complexity of the sce-
narios, the count of P1−3QA per frame is highly imbalanced across the dataset,
with a variance of over 260 on DriveLM-nuScenes. To balance the impact of
this, we compute the GVQA Scores on only a subset of QA associated with
each frame. To extract the QA subset, we design a set of QA patterns for each
stage based on the questions generally associated with that stage. We ensure
that for all our validation frames, each stage has at least one question matched
with the designed pattern. In this process, except for the questions in stage P1,
all questions in other stages have context from the previous stage’s QA, where
the answers are derived from the prediction in the preceding steps. Two specific
graph structure examples can be found in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14.
Implementation Details for Experiment in Section 4.2. The model is
trained in the same scheme as in Section 4.1 & 4.3 & 4.4, and the training
set is the DriveLM-nuScenes train split. During the inference, as there are no
annotation on the Waymo (not even questions), we devise the question in a
rule-based manner. Specifically, we re-use the general-purpose questions in the
perception stage from DriveLM-nuScenes for Waymo as the starting questions.
Then we try to find if there is any objects in the answer that is matched in the
DriveLM-nuScenes annotation, such as “pedestrians”, “cars”, “trucks” and so on.
Then, we generate the questions based on those matched objects automatically,
which serve as the following questions in the prediction and the planning stages.
A specific graph structure example can be found in Fig. 15.
Implementation Details for Experiment in Section F.2. For the general-
ization experiment in Section F.2 we add two new questions to the graph: (1) Is
there a person in the scene? and (2) if the answer to the first question is yes we
askWhat should the vehicle do based on the pedestrian that is crossing the road?
if the answer is no we ask What should the ego vehicle do? . The answer to the
second question gets concatenated to the context of the final behavior question.
Three examples can be found in Fig. 16.