DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 23
A Motivating Questions
Q1.In what situations could we expect planning with VLMs to outperform con-
ventional end-to-end autonomous driving?
One of the key challenges of autonomous driving is to generalize to the long-
tail of scenarios, that are rarely encountered but have critical importance. Con-
sidering the large-scale pre-training of VLMs, their acquired knowledge of the
world, and the reasoning ability of the LLM, it is anticipated that planning with
VLMs will work better in situations that are novel or unseen in the context of
driving scenarios but encountered during pre-training in unrelated contexts.
Q2.Why adapt general VLMs to driving rather than adding language inputs to
driving-specific models?
General VLMs benefit from billion-scale pre-training data for vision-language
tasks extracted from the internet, which can be adapted to the driving domain
through fine-tuning on small autonomous driving datasets like DriveLM. Con-
versely,driving-specificmodelsareonlypre-trainedonsmallautonomousdriving
datasets, and adding language inputs to these with data from outside the self-
driving domain is non-trivial. Combining the advantages of VLMs and driving-
specific models is however an interesting direction to explore.
Q3.Can open-loop evaluation of planning provide meaningful results?
When performing open-loop evaluation, providing the ego history as an input
totheplanningmodulepreventsfaircomparisons,asthissignalaloneissufficient
for achieving low errors on existing benchmarks. DriveLM alleviates this issue by
evaluatingkeyframes,wheretheintentionoftheegovehiclechanges,andtheego
history is not strongly indicative of the future behavior or motion. Additionally,
we consider baselines in our analysis that do not input the ego history to the
planning module. Finally, we introduce DriveLM-CARLA as a means to show
closed-loop planning results in the future.
Q4.Why are there currently no closed-loop planning results on CARLA?
Running 4B parameter models at 20 FPS as required by CARLA needs more
engineering effort. This could be solved by using distillation, quantization, and
caching techniques in LLM inference. Another approach would be to execute
only the final motion stage of DriveLM-Agent at 20 FPS, while the other GVQA
stages are executed at a lower frame rate.
Q5.Is DriveLM-Agent efficient enough to be applicable to real-world autonomous
driving?
We comment on the runtime of DriveLM-Agent in Table 5 in the main paper.
Without any optimization, the approach is around 1 order of magnitude slower
thanUniAD.However,withtheoptimizationsproposedforclosed-loopresultson
CARLA (see Q4), practical applications of VLMs in driving should be possible.