26 C. Sima et al.
– Planning contains questions related to planning subsequent actions of the
ego vehicle in the current frame. As “Planning” is the same challenging as
“prediction”, we design the prompt for the reasoning process and manually
annotate the answers to the questions.
For the key objects referred to in the QA, we encode them as c tagsin the
format < c,CAM,x,y>, where cis the identifier, CAMindicates the camera
where the object’s center point is situated, and x,yrepresent the horizontal
and vertical coordinates of the 2D bounding box in the respective camera’s
coordinate system. We also provide a dictionary in each key frame, recording
more basic information about the key objects such as the size of the bounding
box, the category, the moving state, and the visual description. The overview of
data organization forms is shown in Fig. 5.
After the ego vehicle turned right at the intersection, it proceeded along the main road, eventually coming to a halt and patiently waiting alongside the black vehicle.Scene-levelDescriptionPerception:Q: What are the important objects in the current scene?A: There is a moving car to the front left of the ego car/…The ids of these objects are <c1,CAM_FRONT_LEFT,873.4,665.1>/…
 One of the key frames.Frame-levelQAPrediction:Q: Would <c3,CAM_FRONT,838.3,609.2> be in the moving direction of the ego vehicle?A: Yes.                    Q: Based on the observations of <c2,CAM_BACK,854.2,571.7>,what are possible actions to be taken by <c3,CAM_FRONT,838.3,609.2>?What is the reason?                   A: The action is to do nothing, the reason is that there is no safety issue.Planning:Q: What are safe actions to take for the ego vehicle?A: Brake gently to a stop.
Fig.5:OverallCompositionofDriveLM-nuScenes .Thedatasetcomprisesscene-
leveldescriptionsandframe-levelQA,whichcanbedividedintothreeparts: Perception ,
Prediction , and Planning . Objects are encoded using c tags, which contain identifiers,
camera affiliations, and center coordinates of its 2D bounding box in the corresponding
camera frame.
B.2 Collection Methodology
During the annotation process, we employ individuals with driving experience
for the labeling task. We provide annotators with the stitched results from the
six cameras of nuScenes as source data. As shown in Fig. 6 (left), we divide
the annotation process into three steps: selecting key frames from video clips,
choosing key objects within these key frames, and subsequently annotating the
frame-level QAs in the key frames. Following this, we conduct multiple rounds
of quality checks to ensure the data reliability and perform post-processing pro-
cedures on the qualified data as shown in Fig. 6 (right). The specific details of
this pipeline will be introduced below.
Key Frame Selection. In this process, we ask annotators to review the en-
tire video clip to pinpoint key frames rich in scene information and potentially
indicative of future state changes. Simultaneously, annotators are instructed to