38 C. Sima et al.
town, while Town 13 is reserved for evaluation. Each town covers an area of 10
x 10 square kilometers, encompassing varied environments such as rural, res-
idential, and urban landscapes to replicate real-world driving conditions. The
CARLA team provides a total of 90 training routes, spanning 780.6 kilometers,
and 20 evaluation routes, measuring 247.6 kilometers. Every route incorporates
multiple driving scenarios. We segmented these routes into shorter segments,
approximately 150 meters in length and filter routes that start and end at the
same position. The traffic manager within Leaderboard 2.0 initializes random
background traffic around the ego vehicle comprised exclusively of ’car’ enti-
ties. To enrich the dataset with greater diversity, we introduce additional vehicle
classes including ’trucks’, ’vans’, ’bicycles’, and ’motorcycles’. Moreover, we im-
plemented randomized weather configurations for each training and evaluation
route to mimic realistic driving conditions. However, night-time settings were
excluded from our study due to the inadequate illumination in certain map re-
gions. Low-light conditions significantly impede the correctness of the automatic
labeling process since it is hard to obtain information about the visibility of
certain objects in the image.
Data collection. We execute the expert on each of the routes and gather a
comprehensive set of sensor data. The sensor data includes: (1) RGB image ,
(2)LiDAR point cloud , (3)semantic segmentation images , (4)depth maps , (5)
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) semantic segmentation . While DriveLM-Agent leverages
only RGB images, retraining TransFuser++ needs the additional data for the
auxiliary tasks. In addition, we extract privileged information from the simulator
about the status of the static and dynamic objects in the scene, as follows:
–Ego vehicle: 3D bounding box, speed, brake, id
–Other vehicles: 3D bounding box, number of lidar points inside BB, distance
to ego, speed, steer, throttle, brake, id, color, vehicle type, number of wheels,
traffic light state, lane information (i.e., on which road and lane is the vehicle
driving), vehicle in junction or not, distance to next junction, next high-level
command
–Pedestrians: 3D bounding box, number of lidar points inside BB, gender,
age, distance to ego, speed, id, lane information
–Traffic lights: 3D bounding box, distance to ego, state, affects ego vehicle
–Stop signs: 3D bounding box, distance to ego, affects ego vehicle
–Static cars (parked cars): 3D bounding box, lane information
–Landmarks (e.g., speed signs): 3D bounding box, distance to ego, id, text,
value
–Weather: weather parameters
Language labels. Based on the information we extract from the simulator we
createquestionsandanswerswithhand-craftedsentencetemplates.Formorelin-
guistic diversity andto prevent overfitting tothose sentence structures thosesen-
tences could be further augmented with current state-of-the-art language models
like GPT-4. However, in this work, we use a version of the dataset that is not
augmented.