DriveLM: Driving with Graph Visual Question Answering 35
Stop signs Traffic lightsRoad layout
Vehicles
Is there a stop sign 
in the scene?
What should the ego 
vehicle do based on the 
stop sign/ traffic light?Is there a traffic 
light in the scene?
What is the state 
of the traffic light?Is the ego vehicle 
close to a junction?
How many lanes are 
there in the same/ 
opposite direction?
What lane markings 
are to the left/ right 
of the ego vehicle?On which lane is the 
ego vehicle driving?
In which direction 
can the ego vehicle 
change lanes?What is the current 
speed limit ?
Where on the road is 
the vehicle located?
Where is the vehicle 
potentially going?
Is the vehicle potentially 
crossing path with the 
ego vehicle?What is the moving 
status of the vehicle?
for each 
vehicle
Does the ego vehicle 
need to stop? WhyIs there a vehicle right in 
front of the ego vehicle?
What should the ego 
vehicle do based on the 
vehicle in front?What lanes are 
important to watch 
out for?
Fig.10: Detailed flow of CARLA graph. We show the full graph of DriveLM-
CARLA. The graph consists of questions and answers about the road layout, traffic
lights, stop signs, and vehicles.
IDM Target Speed. We generate a target speed proposal using the Intelligent
Driver Model [85]. Specifically, while the original IDM selects only one vehicle
as a leading actor, we instead iteratively apply it to all vehicles, pedestrians,
non-green traffic lights, and stop signs intersecting the path ahead of the ego
vehicle. Once the leading actors are selected, we determine a target speed for
each actor using the parameters summarized in Table 8. We use the minimum
speed value obtained as the final target speed proposal for that timestep.
Simulation. We simulate the trajectory with the proposed target speed for 2s
at 20Hz by alternatively applying the longitudinal controller (described in the
following) and a kinematic bicycle model. Thereby, the proposal is converted
into an actual expected sequence of ego-vehicle bounding boxes in closed-loop.
Scoring. Having forecasted the bounding boxes for all actors, we can now check
for bounding box intersections between the simulated ego vehicle and other vehi-
cles. We score the ego vehicle’s motion accordingly: if we detect an intersection
with a non-leading and non-rear-end vehicle, we reject the IDM target speed
proposal, and instead set the target speed to zero.
Controllers. Controlling the vehicle requires three values: steer, throttle, and
brake. The steering value can be directly estimated from the ego vehicle’s lo-
cation, velocity, and path. We use a lateral PID controller for doing so, similar