embedding+FC+ReLUattention scores+queries
phonemes or text. . .. . .
. . .. . .
x Nphoneme encoder
spectrogram encoder decoder
attention
input spectrogram
predicted spectrogram
per-frame FC+ReLUx Nx Nphoneme durationsσ
keysqueriesvaluesConv+ReLU. . .. . .
Linear
Positional encodingFigure 1: The duration extraction network. The encoders and
the decoder use gated residual blocks (see Fig. 2). Convolutions
in the spectrogram encoder and decoder are causal as the model
predicts the next frame based on past ones (cf. Section 3.1).
convolutions (over past frames only [ 11]) are used and the skip
connection accumulates the ﬁnal output.
Attention: We use dot-product attention [ 8], with phoneme
encoder output as keys, phoneme encoder outputs summed with
phoneme embeddings as values (similar to Deep V oice 3 [ 2]),
and spectrogram encoder output as queries. The keys and queries
are preconditioned via positional encoding [ 8] and an identical
linear layer to bias the attention towards monotonicity [ 2, cf. Sec-
tion 4.2]. The attention scores are weighted averages of the value
vectors according to how much the values match a given query.
This way, the model learns to select phonemes relevant for pre-
diction of the next spectrogram frame.
Decoder: On the input, the decoder sums attention scores with
encoder outputs for better gradient ﬂow. The sum is then trans-
formed by several gated residual blocks with progressively more
dilated causal convolutions and several convolutional layers with
ReLU activation to get the correct number of channels, and
ﬁnally passed through a sigmoid prediction layer.
Training: Target spectrograms are shifted one position to the
left on the input and the model is forced to predict the next spec-
trogram frame based on input phonemes and previous frames.
Unlike Tacotron 2 [ 1], the network does not keep any hidden
states and we can compute predictions for all time steps in paral-
lel. To be able to use the sigmoid activation in the ﬁnal layer, we
rescale the logarithmic mel spectrograms into the [0, 1] interval.
We minimize the sum of mean absolute error (MAE) be-
tween the target and predicted spectrograms and guided attention
loss[3], which is used to aid monotonic alignments. The guided
+FCConv1D + T anh
Conv1D +
Sigmoid. FCResidual
Skip+Figure 2: A gated residual block. “. ” and “+” represent element-
wise multiplication and addition, respectively.
attention loss for the attention matrix A2RNTis calculated
as:
GuidedAtt (A) =1
NTNX
n=1TX
t=1An,tWn,t (1)
where Wn,t= 1 – exp –(n/N–t/T)2
2g2is the penalty matrix, Nis the
number of phonemes and Tis the number of spectrogram frames.
The parameter gcontrols the loss contribution of matrix elements
An,tas we move further away from the diagonal.
Data augmentation: To improve robustness to error propa-
gation, we employ three data augmentations on the input spec-
trograms: (1) We add a small amount of Gaussian noise to
each spectrogram pixel. (2) We simulate the model outputs by
feeding the input spectrogram through the network without gra-
dient update in parallel mode (not sequentially). The resulting
spectrogram is slightly degraded compared to the ground-truth
spectrogram. We repeat this process multiple times to get an
approximation of a sequentially generated spectrogram. We
could simply generate the degraded spectrogram sequentially,
but using the parallel mode several times is still faster than se-
quential generation. Moreover, in early stages of training, the
model is virtually unable to sequentially generate more than just
a few frames correctly. We observe that this method improves
the robustness of sequential generation drastically and the model
is able to generate long sentences well with just minor mistakes.
(3) We further degrade the input spectrograms by randomly re-
placing several frames with random frames. This is done to
encourage the model to use temporally more distant frames. Oth-
erwise, the model tends to overﬁt to the newest frame on the
input and ignores older information, which makes it less stable.
Inference/duration extraction: Similarly to [ 2,3], we apply
location masking of the attention positions to avoid phoneme
skipping and enforce monotonic alignment. However, we run
the inference in teacher-forcing mode – we feed the model with
ground-truth frames to avoid error propagation and extract more
reliable alignments. The resulting attention matrix is used to
extract the duration of each phoneme by calculating the index
of the most likely phoneme at each timestep and counting the
number of occurrences of each index across time.
3.2. Student network – Spectrogram synthesis
The student model uses spectrograms with alignments predicted
by the teacher model. Given input phonemes, it is trained to
ﬁrst predict individual phoneme durations and then, based on
the durations, the full mel spectrogram (see Fig. 3). The model
consists of a phoneme encoder, duration predictor and a decoder.
All three modules consist of progressively dilated residual convo-
lutional blocks, each of which contains a 1D convolution, ReLU
activation and temporal batch normalization. A residual connec-
tion is applied for better gradient ﬂow. The phoneme encodings