SpeedySpeech: Efﬁcient Neural Speech Synthesis
Jan Vainer, Ondˇ rej Dušek
Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Prague, Czechia
vainerjan@gmail.com, odusek@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
While recent neural sequence-to-sequence models have greatly
improved the quality of speech synthesis, there has not been a sys-
tem capable of fast training, fast inference and high-quality audio
synthesis at the same time. We propose a student-teacher net-
work capable of high-quality faster-than-real-time spectrogram
synthesis, with low requirements on computational resources
and fast training time. We show that self-attention layers are not
necessary for generation of high quality audio. We utilize simple
convolutional blocks with residual connections in both student
and teacher networks and use only a single attention layer in the
teacher model. Coupled with a MelGAN vocoder, our model’s
voice quality was rated signiﬁcantly higher than Tacotron 2. Our
model can be efﬁciently trained on a single GPU and can run in
real time even on a CPU. We provide both our source code and
audio samples in our GitHub repository.1
Index Terms : speech synthesis, efﬁciency, scalability, spectro-
gram synthesis, real-time speech synthesis
1. Introduction
Recent neural text-to-speech (TTS) systems based on the
sequence-to-sequence approach, such as Tacotron 2 [ 1], brought
considerable quality improvements, but require relatively large
amounts of training data and computational resources to train
and operate. Several works attempt to reduce the computational
burden in various ways [ 2,3,4,5], but there is still a tradeoff
between fast training times, fast inference, and output quality.
In this paper, we address the training efﬁciency of TTS sys-
tems as well as the inference speed and hardware requirements
while sustaining good quality of synthesized audio. We propose
a fully convolutional, non-sequential approach to speech synthe-
sis consisting of a teacher and a student network, similarly to
FastSpeech [ 5]. The teacher network is an autoregressive convo-
lutional network [ 2,3] which is used to extract correct alignments
between phonemes and corresponding audio frames. The student
network is a non-autoregressive, fully convolutional network [ 5]
which encodes input phonemes, predicts the duration (number
of audio frames needed) for each one, then decodes a mel-scale
spectrogram based on phoneme encodings and durations. We
combine our student network with a pretrained MelGAN vocoder
[6] to achieve fast and high-quality spectrogram inversion.
Our model can be trained on the LJ Speech data [ 7] in under
40 hours on a single 8GB GPU and generates high-quality audio
samples faster than real-time on both GPU and CPU.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) We simplify the teacher-
student architecture of FastSpeech [ 5] and provide a fast and
stable training procedure. We use a simpler, smaller and faster-
to-train convolutional teacher model with a single attention layer
instead of Transformer [ 8] used in FastSpeech. (2) We show that
self-attention layers [ 8] in the student network are not needed
for high-quality speech synthesis. (3) We describe a simple data
1https://github.com/janvainer/speedyspeechaugmentation technique that can be used early in the training to
make the teacher network robust to sequential error propagation.
(4) We show that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms strong
baselines while keeping speedy training and inference.
2. Related Work
TTS systems such as Deep V oice 3 [ 2] and DCTTS [ 3] try to
speed up training by utilizing convolutional networks inside an
encoder-decoder architecture similar to Tacotron 2 [ 1]. The
model trains fast, but requires sequential inference, which is rel-
atively slow with convolutional networks. WaveRNN [ 4] applies
various hardware optimizations and model pruning to achieve
sequential inference speedup. However, training is sequential
and therefore slow. To avoid sequential inference altogether,
FastSpeech [ 5] adapts a Transformer-like architecture [ 8] along
with the idea of fertilities. It can synthesize spectrogram frames
quickly in parallel, but requires training of many attention layers,
which can be difﬁcult and time-consuming. Approaches such
as Parallel WaveNet [ 9] and ClariNet [ 10] provide fast infer-
ence, but require signiﬁcant computational resources to train the
teacher models.
3. Our Model
Our model uses phonemes as input and logarithmically scaled
mel spectrograms as output. We ﬁrst discuss the teacher network
used to align phonemes to spectrogram frames, then the student
network which uses this alignment as additional supervision
when training to synthesize spectrograms.
3.1. Teacher network – Duration extraction
The teacher network for extracting phoneme durations from data
is based on Deep V oice 3 [ 2] and DCTTS [ 3]. It has four main
parts – phoneme encoder, spectrogram encoder, attention and
decoder (see Fig. 1). It is trained to predict the next spectrogram
frame given input phonemes (including punctuation) and past
frames; it uses attention to keep track of the phoneme it is gener-
ating. The attention values are then used to align phonemes with
spectrogram frames and extract phoneme durations.
Phoneme encoder: The phoneme encoder starts with embed-
ding and a fully connected layer with ReLU activation. Then,
several gated residual blocks [ 11, see Fig. 2] with progressively
more dilated non-causal convolutions are used. The blocks’ skip
connection sums outputs from all layers for the encoder output.
Instead of highway blocks used in DCTTS [ 3], we use these
simple convolutional residual blocks derived from WaveNet [ 11]
without observing any signiﬁcant performance drop.
Spectrogram encoder: The spectrogram encoder provides
contextual encoding of spectrogram frames that takes past frames
into account. First, a fully connected layer and ReLU are applied
to each frame of the input spectrogram. Then, several gated
residual blocks with progressively more dilated gated causalarXiv:2008.03802v1  [eess.AS]  9 Aug 2020