Embedding + FC + ReLUExpansion
. . .
. . .. . .Phoneme Encoder
Decoder
Positional encoding+
Mel spectrogramlinearconvolution + linear31 2 2Durationprediction
copy
k times
phonemesx N1D convolutionReLUBatch normalizationresidualx N1D convolutionReLUBatch normalizationresidual
x N1D convolutionReLUBatch normalizationresidualFigure 3: The spectrogram synthesis model. The duration predic-
tor predicts a phoneme’s duration (number of frames) based on
its encoding. The encoding is copied for the predicted number
of times on the decoder input (cf. Section 3.2).
generated by the encoder are fed to the duration predictor, which
predicts the duration of each phoneme in a logarithmic domain
using a ﬁnal convolution and a linear layer.
Phoneme encoding vectors are expanded according to the
predicted duration on the decoder input so that the size of the
decoder input matches the desired size of the output spectro-
gram. Similarly to FastSpeech [ 5], we add positional encoding
[8] to the phoneme encoding vectors, but we reset the encoding
for each phoneme. We hypothesize that it is more beneﬁcial
for the network to distinguish the frame location in the context
of a single phoneme instead of the whole sentence. The de-
coder converts the expanded phoneme encodings with positional
embeddings into individual frames of a mel spectrogram.
Our student model is inspired by FastSpeech [ 5], but we
replace attention with residual convolutional blocks and use
temporal batch normalization instead of layer normalization.
Training: We use the sum of MAE and structural similarity
index (SSIM) [ 12] losses for logarithmic mel spectrogram value
regression and Huber loss [13, p. 349] for logarithmic duration
prediction. We use the ground-truth durations extracted with the
teacher model during training for the phoneme encoding expan-
sion. We found it beneﬁcial to normalize the target logarithmic
mel spectrograms to have zero mean and unit variance. Unlike
FastSpeech [ 5], we detach gradient ﬂow from the duration pre-
dictor to the encoder; this increased performance of spectrogram
prediction and reduced overﬁtting of the duration predictor.
4. Experimental Setup
Here we describe our dataset and training process, including our
preliminary experiments that led to selecting model parameters.
4.1. Dataset
We train our model on the publicly available LJ Speech dataset
[7], which consists of 13,100 recordings and corresponding tran-
scripts of a single professional female speaker reading from
several English texts. Numbers and monetary units in the tran-
scription are expanded into full words. We reserve the last 100
utterances for evaluation, the rest is used for training.We phonemize the transcripts with the g2p python package,2
and use phonemic transcription as the input to both our teacher
and student network. We transform linear spectrograms to mel
scale and a log transformation is applied on the amplitudes.
4.2. Teacher network parameters
We settled on using 10 residual blocks for both encoders and
14 residual blocks for the decoder. We used kernel size 3 and
dilation rates 1, 3, 9, 27, 1, 3, 9, 27 for the ﬁrst 8 blocks, with
dilation 1 for the remaining ones. We used 40 channels for the
skip connections and 80 channels for the gates.
We used the Adam optimizer [ 14] with default parameters
and gradient clipping at 1. We tried different learning rates and
schedules and settled on 0.002 base rate with inverse square root
decay with a 30-epoch warmup (Noam scheduler) [ 8], which
provided the best tradeoff in terms of stability and speed.
We found that attention learning is considerably faster when
guided attention loss [ 3] and especially attention preconditioning
with positional encoding [ 2] are applied – both measures aim
at near monotonic attention. Plain attention takes around 100
epochs of training to become near-monotonic; with the guided
attention loss, this comes down to 50 epochs. Attention precon-
ditioning assumes monotonic attention from the very beginning.
We further tried to improve attention robustness by applying
dropout [15], but this did not bring any improvements.
4.3. Student network parameters
The student model is generally very sensitive to the teacher net-
work’s duration extraction accuracy; without accurate phoneme
durations, it will not converge. We experimented with inverse
square root decay and reduce-on-plateau [ 16] schedules and set-
tled for the latter and a base learning rate 0.002. Adam optimizer
with default parameters and gradient clipping was used.
We observed that the network depth and dilation factor must
be high enough to span more than a single phoneme. This is
caused by segments of identical vectors on the decoder input
– phoneme encodings are copied multiple times to compensate
for the length mismatch of the input phoneme sequence and the
output spectrogram. Applying a short convolution on a sequence
consisting of homogeneous segments will then result in another
sequence of largely homogeneous segments. Therefore, we used
26 encoder blocks with dilations repeating the pattern 1, 1, 2, 2,
4, 4, three duration predictor blocks with dilations 4, 3, 1 and 34
decoder blocks with dilations repeating the pattern 1, 1, 2, 2, 4,
4, 8, 8. We used 128 channels in all convolutional layers.
We use batch normalization [ 17], i.e., per-channel normal-
ization across all time steps and items in a batch, as we found it
to alleviate the vanishing gradient problem and speed up training.
We also tried layer normalization [ 18], channel normalization
without considering the batch dimension, or dropout applied
after normalization, but none of this brought any further beneﬁts.
We compared our decoder to a variant trained without using
the SSIM loss. This produced blurrier spectrograms, but the
difference in audio quality was not noticeable. Higher-quality
vocoding might make this issue visible.
We compared our local position encodings in the decoder to
global position encodings and no position encoding. We found
that local encodings only bring very small beneﬁts in terms of L1
and SSIM loss, but still decided to use them in the ﬁnal model.
2https://github.com/Kyubyong/g2p