domains. For instance large dataset such as ImageNet
or the lung cancer dataset LUNA16 rely on human
annotations. Moreover, recommender systems heavily
rely on input of human usage behavior to adapt to
speciﬁc preferences (e.g. [12]) and robotic applications
are trained by human examples [40].
4.2. Learning Paradigm
Augmentation: In general, hybrid intelligence
systems allow three different forms of augmentation:
human ,machine , and hybrid augmentation. The
augmentation of human intelligence is focused on
typically applications that enable humans to solve tasks
through the predictions of an algorithm such as in
ﬁnancial forecasting or solving complex problems [48].
Contrary, most research in the ﬁeld of machine learning
focuses on leveraging human input for training to
augment machines for solving tasks that they cannot yet
solve alone [7]. Finally, more recent work identiﬁed
the great potential for simultaneously augmenting both
at the same time through hybrid augmentation [49, 50]
or the example of Alpha Go that started by learning
from human game moves (i.e. machine augmentation)
and ﬁnally offered hybrid augmentation by inventing
creative moves that taught even mature players novel
strategies [6, 51].
Machine Learning Paradigm: The machine
learning paradigm that is applied in hybrid intelligence
systems can be categorized into four relevant subﬁelds:
supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised , and
reinforcement learning [52]. In supervised learning , the
goal is to learn a function that maps the input data x to a
certain output data y, given a labeled set of input-output
pairs. In unsupervised learning , such output y does
not exist and the learner tries to identify pattern in
the input data x [16]. Further forms of learning
such as reinforcement learning or semi-supervised
learning can be subsumed under those two paradigms.
Semi-supervised learning describes a combination of
both paradigms, which uses both a small set of labeled
and a large set of unlabeled data to solve a certain
task [53]. Finally, reinforcement learning . An agent
interacts with an environment thereby learning to solve
a problem through receiving rewards and punishment
for a certain action [5, 6].
Human Learning Paradigm: Humans have a
mental model of their environment, which gets updated
through events. This update is done by ﬁnding an
explanation for the event [50, 49, 10]. Human learning
can therefore can be achieved from experience and
comparison with previous experiences [54, 44] and from
description and explanations [55].4.3. Human-AI Interaction
Machine Teaching: deﬁnes how humans provide
input. First, humans can demonstrate actions that
the machine learns to imitate [40]. Second, humans
can annotate data for training a model for instance
through crowdsourcing [56, 57]. We designate that as
alabeling . Third, human intelligence can be used to
actively identify a misspeciﬁcation of the learner and
debug the model, which we deﬁne as troubleshooting
[58, 24]. Moreover, human teaching can take the form of
veriﬁcation whereby humans verify or falsify machine
output [59].
Teaching Interaction: The input provided through
human teaching, can be both explicit and implicit .
While explicit teaching leverages active input of the
user such as for instance labeling tasks such as image
or text annotation [60], implicit teaching learns from
observing the actions of the user and thus adapts to their
demands. For instance, Microsoft uses contextual bandit
algorithms to suggest users certain content, using the
actions of the user as implicit teaching interaction.
Expertise Requirements: Hybrid intelligence
systems can have certain requirements for the expertise
of humans that provides input for systems. While
by now both most research and practical applications
focus on human input from an ML expert [61, 62,
63, 24], thus, requiring deep expertise in the ﬁeld of
AI. Moreover, end users can provide the system with
input for product recommendations and e-commerce or
input from human non-experts accessed through crowd
work platforms [64, 58, 65]. More recent endeavors,
however, focus on the integration of domain experts
in hybrid intelligence architectures that leverage the
profound understanding of the semantics of a problem
domain to teach a machine, while not requiring any ML
expertise [22, 66, 67].
Amount of Human Input: The amount of human
input can vary between those of individual humans
and aggregated input from several humans. Individual
human input is for instance applied in recommender
systems for individualization or due to cost efﬁciency
reasons [60]. On the other hand, collective human
input combines the input of several individual humans
by leveraging mechanisms of human computation (e.g.
[68, 66, 67]). This approach allows to reduce errors
and biases of individual humans and the aggregation of
heterogeneous knowledge [45, 69, 65].
Aggregation: When human input is aggregated
from a collective of individual humans, different
aggregation mechanisms can be leveraged to maximize
the quality of teaching. First, unweighted methods
can be used that use averaging or majority voting to