for the division of labor between humans and
machines in the next years, or probably decades, is
hybrid intelligence . This concept aims at using the
complementary strengths of human intelligence and
AI to behave more intelligently than each of the two
could be in separation (e.g. [7]). The basic rational
is to try to combine the complementary strengths of
heterogeneous intelligences (i.e., human and artiﬁcial
agents) into a socio-technological ensemble. We
envision hybrid intelligence systems, which are deﬁned
as systems that have the ability to accomplish complex
goals by combining human and artiﬁcial intelligence to
collectively achieve superior results than each of the
could have done in separation and continuously improve
by learning from each other.
Collectively: means that tasks are performed
collectively. This means that the activities conducted by
each part are dependent, however, are not necessarily
always aligned to achieve a common goal (e.g. teaching
an AI adversarial tasks such as playing games).
Superior results: deﬁnes that the system achieves a
performance that none of the involved actors could have
achieved in a certain task without the other. The goal is,
therefore, to make the outcome (e.g. a prediction) both
more efﬁcient and effective on the level of the whole
socio-technical system by achieving goals that could not
have been achieved before.
Continuous learning: describes that over time
this socio-technological system improves both as a
whole and each single component (i.e. humans and
machines) learn through experience from each other,
thus improving performance in a certain task. The
performance of such systems can be thus not only
measured by the superior outcome of the whole system
but also by the learning of the human and machine
agents that are parts of the socio-technical system.
The idea of hybrid intelligence systems is thus
that socio-technical ensembles and its human and AI
parts can co-evolve to improve over time. The central
questions are, therefore, which and how certain design
decisions should be made for implementing such hybrid
systems rather than focusing.
3. Methodology
3.1. Taxonomy Development Method
For developing our proposed taxonomy, we followed
the methodological procedures of Nickerson et al. [13].
In general, a taxonomy is deﬁned as a “fundamental
mechanism for organizing knowledge” and the term
is considered as a synonym to “classiﬁcation”
and “typology” [13]. The method follows aniterative process consisting of the following steps: 1)
deﬁning a meta-characteristic; 2) determining stopping
conditions; 3) selecting an empirical-to-conceptual or
conceptual-to-empirical approach; and 4) iteratively
following this approach, until the stopping conditions
are met (see Figure 3).
Figure 2. Taxonomy development method [13].
The process of the taxonomy development starts
with deﬁning a set of meta-characteristic. This step
limits the odds of naive empiricism where a large
number of characteristics are deﬁned in search for
random pattern, and reﬂects the expected application
of the taxonomy [13]. For this purpose, we deﬁne
those meta-characteristic as generic design dimensions
that are required for developing hybrid intelligence
systems. Based on our classiﬁcation from literature, we
choose four dimensions: task characteristics, learning
paradigm, human-AI interaction, and AI-human
interaction. In the second step, we selected both
objective and subjective conditions to conclude the
iterative process. The following conditions, adapted
from Nickerson et al. [13], were selected:
We applied the following objective conditions : 1)
All papers from the sample of the literature review and
empirical cases are examined. 2) Then, at least one
object is classiﬁed under every characteristic of every
dimension. 3) While performing the last iteration, no
new dimension or characteristics are added. 4) We
treated every dimension as unique. 5) Lastly, every
characteristic is unique within its dimension.
The following subjective conditions
were considered: conciseness, robustness,
comprehensiveness, extensibility, explanatory, and
information availability. We included no unnecessary
dimension or characteristic (conciseness), whereas
there are enough dimensions and characteristics
to differentiate (robustness). At this point, all
design decisions can be classiﬁed in the taxonomy
(comprehensiveness), while still allowing for new