aggregate results (e.g. [60]). Additionally, aggregation
can be achieved by modeling the context of teaching
through algorithmic approach such as expectation
maximization, graphical models, entropy minimization,
or discriminative training. Therefore, the aggregation
can be human dependent focusing on the characteristics
of a the individual human [70, 71, 72], or human-task
dependent adjusting to the teaching task [73, 72, 74].
Incentives: Humans need to be incentivized to
provide input in hybrid intelligence systems. Incentives
can be monetary rewards such in the case of crowd work
on platforms (e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk), intrinsic
rewards such as intellectual exchange in citizen science
[75], fun in games with a purpose [76] learning [77].
Another incentive for human input is customization ,
which allows to increase individualized service quality
for users that provide a higher amount of input to the
learner [12, 78].
4.4. AI-Human Interaction
This sub-dimension describes the machine part of
the Interaction, the AI-human interaction. At ﬁrst,
which query strategy the algorithm used to learn.
Second, we describe the feedback of the machine to
humans. Third, we carry out a short explanation
of interpretability to show the inﬂuence for hybrid
intelligence.
Query Strategy: Ofﬂine query strategies require the
human to ﬁnish her task completely before her actions
are applied as input to the AI (e.g. [79, 80]). Handling
a typical labeling task the human would ﬁrst need to go
through all the data and label each instance. Afterwards
the labeled Data is fed to an machine learning algorithm
to train a model. In contrast, online query strategies
let the human complete subtasks whose are directly fed
to an algorithm, so that teaching and learning can be
executed almost simultaneously [64, 58, 72]. Another
possibility is the use of active learning query strategies
[81, 23]. In this case, the human is queried by the
machine when more input to give an accurate prediction
is required.
Machine Feedback: Those four categories describe
the feedback that humans receive from the machine.
First, humans can get direct suggestions from the
machine, which makes explicit recommendations to the
user on how to act. For instance recommender systems
such as Netﬂix or Spotify provide such suggestions
for users. Furthermore, systems can make suggestions
for describing images [58]. Predictions as machine
feedback can support humans e.g. to detect lies
[45], predict worker behaviors [72], or classify images.
Thereby, this form of feedback provides a probabilisticvalue of a certain outcome (e.g. probability of
some data x belonging to a certain class y). The
third form of machine feedback is clustering data.
Thereby, machines compare data points and put them
in an order for instance to prioritize items [82], or
organize data among identiﬁed pattern. Furthermore,
another possibility of machine feedback is optimization .
Machines enhance humans for instance in making more
consistent decisions by optimizing their strategy [83].
Interpretability : For AI-Human interaction in
hybrid intelligence systems interpretability is crucial
to prevent biases (e.g. racism), achieve reliability and
robustness, ensure causality of the learning, debugging
the learner if necessary and for creating trust especially
in the context of AI safety [11]. Interpretability in
hybrid intelligence systems can be achieved through
algorithm transparency , that allows to open the black
box of an algorithm itself, global model interpretability
that focuses on the general interpretability of a machine
learning model, and local prediction interpretability that
tries to make more complex models interpretable for a
single prediction [84, 11].
5. Discussion
Our proposed taxonomy for hybrid intelligence
systems extracts interdisciplinary knowledge on
human-in-the-loop mechanisms in ML and proposes
initial descriptive design knowledge for the development
of such systems that might guide developers. Our
ﬁndings reveal the manifold applications, mechanisms,
and beneﬁts of hybrid systems that might probably
become of increasing interest in real-world applications
in the future. In particular, our taxonomy of design
knowledge offers insights on how to leverage the
advantages of combining human and machine
intelligence. For instance, this allows to integrate
deep domain insights into machine learning algorithms,
continuously adapt a learner to dynamic problems,
and enhance trust through interpretability and human
control. Vice versa, this approach offers the advantage
of improving humans in solving problems by offering
feedback on how the task was conducted or the
performance of a human during that task and machine
feedback to augment human intelligence. Moreover,
we assume that the design of such systems might allow
to move beyond sole efﬁciency of solving tasks to
combined socio-technical ensembles that can achieve
superior results that could no man or machine have
achieved so far. Promising ﬁelds for such systems are in
the ﬁeld of medicine, science, innovation and creativity.