Table 1. Empirical evidence from business applications of hybrid intelligence systems.
Application Domain Reference
Teachable Machine Image Recognition [26]
Cindicator Asset Management [27]
vencortex Startup Financing [28]
Cobi Conference Sheduling [29]
Stitch Fix Fashion [30]
Alpha Go Games [31]
Custom Decision Service General [32]
TOTAL 7
dimensions and characteristics to be subsequently
added (extensible). Furthermore, the information is
valuable for guiding hybrid intelligence systems design
decisions (explanatory) and is typically available or
easily interpretable (information availability).
We conducted a total of three iterations so far. The
ﬁrst iteration used a conceptual-to-empirical approach,
where we used extant theoretical knowledge from
literature in various ﬁelds such as computer science,
HCI, information systems, and neuro science to
guide the initial dimensions and characteristics of
the taxonomy. Based on the identiﬁed dimensions
ofhybrid intelligence systems, we sampled seven
real-world applications that make use of human
and AI combinations. The second iteration used
the empirical-to conceptual approach focuses on
creating characteristics and dimensions based on the
identiﬁcation of common characteristics from a sample
of AI applications in practice. The third iteration then
used the conceptual-to-empirical approach, based on
an extended literature review including newly identiﬁed
search termini.
3.2. Data Sources and Sample
Literature review: For conducting our literature
review, we followed the methodological procedures
of [33, 34]. The literature search was conducted
from April to June 2018. A prior informal literature
search revealed keywords for the database searches
resulting in the search string (”hybrid intelligence” OR
”human-in-the-loop” OR ”interactive machine learning”
OR ”machine teaching” OR ”machine learning AND
crowdsourcing” OR ”human supervision” OR ”human
understandable machine learning” OR ”human concept
learning”). During this initial phase we decided
to exclude research on knowledge-base systems such
as expert systems or decision support systems in IS
[35, 25], as the studies either do not focus on the
continuous learning of the knowledge repository or do
not use machine learning techniques at all. Moreover,the purpose of this study is to identify and classify
relevant (socio-) technical design knowledge for hybrid
intelligence systems, which is also not included in
those studies. The database search was constrained to
title, abstract, keywords and not limited to a certain
publication. Databases include AISeL, IEEE Xplore,
ACM DL, AAAI DL, and arXiv to identify relevant
interdisciplinary literature from the ﬁelds of IS, HCI,
bio-informatics, and computer science. The search
resulted in a total of 2505 hits. Titles, abstracts
and keywords were screened for potential ﬁt to the
purpose of our study. Screening was conducted by three
researchers independently and resulted in 85 articles that
were reviewed in detail so far. A backward and forward
search ensured the extensiveness of our results. Table 1
lists the number of search results after the review phases.
Empirical cases: To extend our ﬁndings
from literature and provide empirical evidence
(cf. Table 1) from recent (business) applications of
hybrid intelligence systems, we include an initial set
of seven empirical applications that was analyzed for
enhancing our taxonomy.
4. Taxonomy of Design Knowledge on
hybrid intelligence Systems
Our taxonomy of hybrid intelligence systems
is organized along the four meta-dimensions task
characteristics, learning paradigm, human-AI
interaction , and AI-human interaction . Moreover,
we identiﬁed 16 sub-dimensions and a total of 50
categories for the proposed taxonomy. For organizing
the dimensions of the taxonomy we followed a
hierarchical approach following the sequence of the
design decisions that are necessary to develop such
systems.
4.1. Task Characteristics
The goal of hybrid intelligence is to create
superior results through a collaboration between humans