The Future of Human-AI Collaboration: A Taxonomy of Design Knowledge
for Hybrid Intelligence Systems
Dominik Dellermann
vencortex
dominik.dellermann@vencortex.comAdrian Calma
vencortex
adrian.calma@vencortex.comNikolaus Lipusch
Kassel University
lipusch@uni-kassel.de
Thorsten Weber
Kassel University
weber@uni-kassel.deSascha Weigel
Kassel University
weigel@uni-kassel.dePhilipp Ebel
University of St. Gallen
ebel@unisg.ch
Abstract
Recent technological advances, especially in
the ﬁeld of machine learning, provide astonishing
progress on the road towards artiﬁcial general
intelligence. However, tasks in current real-world
business applications cannot yet be solved by machines
alone. We, therefore, identify the need for developing
socio-technological ensembles of humans and machines.
Such systems possess the ability to accomplish complex
goals by combining human and artiﬁcial intelligence to
collectively achieve superior results and continuously
improve by learning from each other. Thus, the need for
structured design knowledge for those systems arises.
Following a taxonomy development method, this article
provides three main contributions: First, we present
a structured overview of interdisciplinary research on
the role of humans in the machine learning pipeline.
Second, we envision hybrid intelligence systems and
conceptualize the relevant dimensions for system design
for the ﬁrst time. Finally, we offer useful guidance for
system developers during the implementation of such
applications.
1. Introduction
Recent technological advances especially in the ﬁeld
of deep learning provide astonishing progress on the
road towards artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) [1, 2].
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) are progressively achieving
(super-) human level performance in various tasks
such as autonomous driving [3], cancer detection [4],
or playing complex games [5, 6]. Therefore, more
and more business applications that are based on AI
technologies arise. Both research and practice are
wondering when AI will be able to solve complex tasks
in real-world business applications apart from laboratory
settings in research. However, those advances providea rather one-sided picture on AI, denying the fact that
although AI is capable to solve certain tasks with quite
impressive performance, AGI is far away from being
achieved. There are lots of problems that machines
can not yet solve alone [7], such as applying expertise
to decision making, planning, or creative tasks just to
name a few. In particular, machine learning systems
in the wild have major difﬁculties with being adaptive
to dynamic environments and self adjusting [8], lack
of what humans call common sense. This makes
them highly vulnerable for adversarial examples [9].
Moreover, AGI needs massive amounts of training data
compared to humans, who can learn from only few
examples [10], and fails to work with certain data types
(e.g. soft data). Nevertheless, a lack of control of the
learning process might lead to unintended consequences
(e.g. racism biases) and limit interpretability, which
is crucial for critical domains such as medicine [11].
Therefore, humans are still required at various positions
in the loop of the machine learning process. While
lot of work has been done in creating training sets
with human labelers, more recent research point towards
end user involvement [12] and teaching of such
machines [5], thus, combining humans and machines
inhybrid intelligence systems. The main idea of
hybrid intelligence systems is, thus, that socio-technical
ensembles and its human and AI parts can co-evolve
to improve over time. Therefore, the following
central questions are arise: Which and how should
certain design decisions be made for implementing such
systems? The purpose of this paper is to point towards
such hybrid intelligence systems. Thereby, we aim at
conceptualizing the idea of hybrid intelligence systems
and provide an initial taxonomy of design knowledge
for developing such socio-technical ensembles. By
following a taxonomy development method [13], we
reviewed various literature in interdisciplinary ﬁelds
and combine those ﬁndings with empirical examination
of practical business applications in the context of