and machines. The central component that drives
design decisions for hybrid intelligence systems is the
task, that humans and machines solve collaboratively.
Task characteristics focus on how the task itself is
carried out [36]. In context of hybrid intelligence
systems, we identify the following four important tasks
characteristics.
Type of Task: The task to be solved is the ﬁrst
dimension that has to be deﬁned for developing hybrid
intelligence systems. In this context, we identiﬁed
four generic categories of tasks: recognition, prediction,
reasoning andaction. First, recognition deﬁnes tasks
that recognize for instance objects [17], images [37],
or natural language [38]. On an application level such
tasks are used for autonomous driving (e.g. [3]) or
smart assistants such as Alexa, Siri or Duplex. Second,
prediction tasks aim at predicting future events based on
previous data such as stock prices or market dynamics
[39]. The third type of task, reasoning , focuses on
understanding data by for instance inductively building
(mental) models of a certain phenomenon and therefore
make it possible to solve complex problems with
small amount of data [10]. Finally, action tasks are
characterized as such that require an agent (human or
machine) to conduct a certain kind of action [40].
Goals: The two involved agents, the human and
the AI, may have a common ”goal” like solving a
problem through the combination of the knowledge and
abilities of both. An example for such common goals
are recommender systems (e.g. Netﬂix [41]), which
learn a user’s decision model to offer suggestions. In
other contexts, the agents goals also be adversarial . For
instance, in settings where AIs tzry to beat human in
games such as IBMs Watson in the game of Jeopardy!
[42]. In many other cases the goal of the human and the
AI may also be independent for example when humans
train image classiﬁers without being involved in the end
solution.
Shared Data Representation: The shared data
representation is what is the data that is shown to
both the human and the machine before executing
their tasks. The data can be represented in different
levels of granularity and abstraction to create a shared
understanding between humans and machines [22, 43].
Features describe phenomenas in different kinds of
dimensions like height and weight of a human being.
Instances are examples of a phenomena which are
speciﬁed by features. Concepts on the other hand are
multiple instances that belong to one common theme,
e.g. pictures of different humans. Schemas ﬁnally
illustrate relations between different concepts [44].
Timing in Machine Learning Pipeline: The last
sub-dimension describes the timing in the machine
Figure 3. Taxonomy of hybrid intelligence design.
learning pipeline that focuses on hybrid intelligence.
For this dimension we identiﬁed three characteristics:
feature engineering ,parameter tuning , and training .
First, feature engineering allows the integration of
domain knowledge in machine learning models. While
more recent advances make it possible to fully
automatically (i.e. machine only) learn features through
deep learning, human input can be combined for
creating and enlarging features such in the case of
artist identiﬁcation on images and quality classiﬁcation
of Wikipedia articles (e.g. [45]). Second, parameter
tuning is applied to optimize models. Here machine
learning experts typically use their deep understanding
of statistical models to tune hyper-parameters or select
models. Such human only parameter tuning can be
augmented with approaches such as AutoML [18] or
neural architecture search [46, 47] automate the design
of machine learning models,thus, making it much more
accessible for non-experts. Finally, human input is
crucial for training machine learning models in many