hybrid intelligence . The contribution of this paper
is threefold. First, we provide a structured overview
of interdisciplinary research on the role of humans in
the machine learning pipeline. Second, we offer an
initial conceptualization of the term hybrid intelligence
systems and relevant dimensions for system design.
Third, we intend to provide useful guidance for
system developers during the implementation of hybrid
intelligence systems in real-world applications. Towards
this end, we propose an initial taxonomy of hybrid
intelligence systems.
2. Related Work
2.1. Machine Learning and AI
The subﬁeld of intelligence that relates to machines
is called artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). By this term
we mean systems that perform ”[] activities that
we associate with human thinking, activities such as
decision-making, problem solving, learning []” [14].
Although, various deﬁnitions exist for AI, this term
generally covers the idea of creating machines that can
accomplish complex goals. This includes facets such as
natural language processing, perceiving objects, storing
of knowledge and applying it for solving problems, and
machine learning to adapt to new circumstances and act
in its environment [15].
Figure 1. Machine learning and AI.
A subset of techniques that is required to achieve AI
ismachine learning (ML) . Mitchell [16] deﬁnes this as:
“A computer program is said to learn from experience
E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance
measure P , if its performance at tasks in T, as measured
by P , improves with experience E. ”
A popular approach that drives current progress in
both paradigms is deep learning [9]. Deep-learning
constitutes a representation-learning method that
includes multiple levels of representation, obtained
by combining simpler but non-linear models. Each
of those models transforms the representation of one
level (starting with the input data) into a representation
at more abstract level [17]. Deep learning is a special
machine learning technique.
Finally, human-in-the-loop learning describes
machine learning approaches (both deep and other)that use the human in some part of the pipeline.
Such approaches are in contrast to research on most
knowledge-base systems in IS that use rather static
knowledge repositories. We will focus on this in the
following chapter.
2.2. The Role of Humans-in-the-Loop of
Machine Learning
Although, the terms of AI and machine learning
give the impression that humans become to some extent
obsolete, the machine learning pipeline still requires lot
of human interaction such as for feature engineering,
parameter tuning, or training. While deep learning
has decreased the effort for manual feature engineering
and some automation approaches (e.g. AutoML [18])
support human experts in tuning models, the human
is still heavily in the loop for sense-making and
training. For instance, unsupervised learning requires
humans to make sense of clusters that are identiﬁed
as patterns in data to create knowledge [19]. More
obviously, human input is required to train models
in supervised machine learning approaches, especially
for creating training data, debug models, or train
algorithms such as in reinforcement learning [5]. This
is especially relevant when divergences of real-life and
machine learning problem formulations emerge. This
is for instance the case when static (ofﬂine) training
datasets are not perfectly representative of realist and
dynamic environments [20]. Moreover, human input
is crucial when models need to learn from human
preferences (e.g. recommender systems) and adapt to
users or when security concerns require both control and
interpretability of the learning process and the output
[11]. Therefore, more recent research has focused on
interactive forms of learning (e.g. [21, 12] and machine
teaching (e.g. [22]). Those approaches make active
use of human input (e.g. active learning [23]) and thus
learn from human intelligence. This allows machines to
learn tasks that they can not yet achieve alone [7], adapt
to environmental dynamics, and deal with unknown
situations [24].
2.3. Hybrid Intelligence
Rather then using the human just in certain parts
and time during the process of creating machine
learning models, applications that are able to deal
with real-world problems require a continuously
collaborating socio-technological ensemble integrating
humans and machines, which is contrast to previous
research on decision support and expert systems [21,
25].
Therefore, we argue that the most likely paradigm