Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2020) , pages 6018–6024
Marseille, 11–16 May 2020
c
European Language Resources Association (ELRA), licensed under CC-BY-NC
6018Sign Language Recognition with Transformer Networks
Mathieu De Coster1, Mieke Van Herreweghe2, Joni Dambre1
1IDLab-AIRO – Ghent University - imec,2Ghent University
1Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 126, Ghent, Belgium,2Blandijnberg 2, Ghent, Belgium
fmathieu.decoster, mieke.vanherreweghe, joni.dambre g@ugent.be
Abstract
Sign languages are complex languages. Research into them is ongoing, supported by large video corpora of which only small parts are
annotated. Sign language recognition can be used to speed up the annotation process of these corpora, in order to aid research into sign
languages and sign language recognition. Previous research has approached sign language recognition in various ways, using feature
extraction techniques or end-to-end deep learning. In this work, we apply a combination of feature extraction using OpenPose for human
keypoint estimation and end-to-end feature learning with Convolutional Neural Networks. The proven multi-head attention mechanism
used in transformers is applied to recognize isolated signs in the Flemish Sign Language corpus. Our proposed method signiﬁcantly
outperforms the previous state of the art of sign language recognition on the Flemish Sign Language corpus: we obtain an accuracy of
74.7% on a vocabulary of 100 classes. Our results will be implemented as a suggestion system for sign language corpus annotation.
Keywords: sign language recognition, deep learning, corpus annotation
1. Introduction
Sign language recognition (SLR) is a complex problem.
Sign languages are, after all, complex visual languages.
Generally, one can say that sign languages have ﬁve
parameters. A sign is distinguished by hand shape,
hand orientation, movement, location, and non-manual
components such as mouth shape and eyebrow shape.
However, these parameters do not necessarily fully identify
signs: two signs can have the same execution but different
meaning. Furthermore, identical signs are often executed
differently based on several factors, such as age, gender, the
dominant hand, and dialects. Additionally, there is a high
degree of co-articulation in sign languages: both hands can
produce different signs at the same time.
SLR is typically tackled using machine learning
approaches. Deep learning in particular has proven
to be very powerful for tasks such as image classiﬁcation
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and neural translation (Vaswani et
al., 2017). Deep learning algorithms require large datasets
in order to learn meaningful representations that generalize
well to unseen data, especially for complex problems such
as SLR. While large video corpora are available for several
sign languages, they consist mostly of unlabeled data.
Labeling the sign language corpora is a time-consuming
process that requires the annotator to know sign language
and its speciﬁc phonetic and phonological properties. As a
consequence, the portion of a video corpus that is labeled
grows only slowly.
Larger datasets exist (Chai et al., 2014; Huang et al.,
2018; Vaezi Joze and Koller, 2019), but several consist
of recordings of persons performing signs in repetition
(Ronchetti et al., 2016; Ko et al., 2018). These datasets
are often not representative of real world sign language, as
they contain artiﬁcial repetitions of isolated signs (Bragg
et al., 2019). Because the accuracy - the measure that is
most commonly used to assess the performance of sign
classiﬁcation systems - is saturated on such datasets when
using deep learning methods (Konstantinidis et al., 2018;Ko et al., 2018), it is more challenging and interesting to
perform SLR on real sign language data. This also paves
the way for sign language translation in the future.
The question can be posed if a deep learning system
can be used to speed up the annotation process of sign
language corpora, in order to obtain more labeled data.
This could for example be done by creating a suggestion
system for corpus annotators, that provides a list of likely
glosses given a selected video fragment of a sign. In
this work, we use a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
network as a baseline. We then present and compare three
methods based on the transformer network architecture,
that consistently outperform this baseline. The methods
will be applied in the creation of the proposed suggestion
system.
2. Related Work
Three sub-domains can be distinguished within SLR:
isolated SLR, also known as sign classiﬁcation, continuous
SLR, and sign language translation. In isolated SLR, each
sample corresponds to a single sign. In continuous SLR,
samples contain one or more signs, and the task is to
locate and recognize the signs. Sign language translation is
translation from sequences of signs to sentences in a written
language, such as English. In this work, we focus on
isolated SLR speciﬁcally, but give an overview of methods
used for SLR in general, because methods can be applied
to several sub-domains.
The success of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) in
automatic speech recognition motivated their use by
SLR researchers (V ogler and Metaxas, 1997; Starner et
al., 1998; Bauer and Kraiss, 2001). In recent years,
however, the domain has largely moved towards deep
learning, because of its performance in related domains (in
particular computer vision and again, speech recognition).
Spatio-temporal models such as 3D Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have been used for continuous SLR
(Pigou et al., 2017; Jing et al., 2019). Hybrid architectures
which combine spatial models (2D CNNs) with temporal