6022
Figure 4: An example of a case where OpenPose fails. The
keypoints of the left hand (green) are noisy and at incorrect
locations. Meanwhile, the RGB frame is of reasonable
quality and shows the hand in the correct position.
We notice a large difference in accuracy values between the
PoseLSTM and PTN on the one hand and the other methods
on the other hand. This indicates that OpenPose features
on their own are not signiﬁcantly powerful, as it is possible
to learn better features directly from the data. We suspect
that there is too much motion blur in the available data for
OpenPose to detect keypoints with sufﬁcient accuracy, and
that information is therefore lost that is still present in the
RGB data (e.g., keypoints are completely missed while the
RGB data still gives a hint of what could be the correct
hand shape). We present a failure case in ﬁgure 4, which
clearly shows how OpenPose extraction may reduce the
quality of the input features. A possible remedy for this
problem would be to ﬁne-tune OpenPose while training the
network for the SLR task, rather than using it as a ﬁxed
feature extractor. This is beyond the scope of this work and
left for future research.
We notice a smaller difference between the VTN and MTN
than between the PTN and VTN. We suspect that the
2D CNN in the networks is already capable of extracting
most of the relevant information by itself. However the
increase in accuracy suggests that the OpenPose keypoints
add information which can be useful for discriminating
between classes.
5.2. Error Analysis
We now look at the confusion matrix of the MTN network
(ﬁgure 5), more speciﬁcally at two pairs of signs. The
largest confusion (38% misclassiﬁed) occurs between the
signs for “BRIEF” (letter) and “ENVELOPPE” (envelope).
This is a minimal pair in VGT: the signs differ only in
a single parameter, in this case mouthing. A possible
improvement for future work is to add side-channels to
the neural network that predict the sign parameters. This
is similar to the works of Cooper et al. (2012) and
Koller et al. (2016a). The second largest confusion (36%
misclassiﬁed) is between two variants of the sign “V AN”
(of). The ﬁrst variant is the general use of the preposition,
while the second variant more speciﬁcally refers to the
ﬁrst person (“my”). These are similar in the signing of
the dominant hand, but distinct in the non-dominant hand
(which is why they are not grouped in a single class).
Distinguishing between these two variants may be possible
Figure 5: Normalized confusion matrix for the MTN. The
two largest confusions have been indicated in red and green.
with context, which is absent in the domain of isolated
SLR. A continuous SLR model might be able to reduce the
confusion.
5.3. Impact of Dataset Size
Pigou et al. (2016) use an older version of the Corpus
VGT with only 12599 labeled samples and obtains top-
1, top-3 and top-5 accuracy values of 39.3%, 60.3% and
69.9% respectively. The top-10 accuracy is not explicitly
reported. In this work, we use an updated version with
18730 labeled samples. In order to compare both works,
we investigate the impact of this dataset update. To do
this, we measure the absolute increase in top- naccuracy
for each of the methods. The average absolute increases in
top-1, top-3, top-5 and top-10 accuracy are 9.31%, 8.33%,
7.83% and 6.89% respectively. It is clear from these results
that increasing the dataset size has a large impact on the
accuracy on unseen data.
We now show that further increases in dataset size will
likely lead to further improvements in accuracy. Figure
6 shows a learning curve for the MTN. The validation
accuracy curve has not yet converged, which indicates that
more data, or more data augmentation, would lead to better
performance. In fact, the curve suggests that the vocabulary
size will be able to be increased, as isolated SLR will be a
solved problem for vocabularies of 100 glosses with double
the amount of labeled data. This illustrates the importance
of speeding up corpus annotation for SLR.
6. Conclusion
This work presents four network architectures for SLR:
three based on transformer networks and one based on
LSTMs. Pigou et al. (2016) used end-to-end deep
learning to extract features from video data and classify
signs based on these features. Initial results in this work