6019models (LSTMs or HMMs) also yield good results for
continuous SLR (Koller et al., 2016b; Koller et al., 2017; Ye
et al., 2018) and sign language translation (Cihan Camgoz
et al., 2018).
Previous work has attempted to classify isolated signs
in sign language corpora using learned features and 2D
CNNs (Pigou et al., 2014; Pigou et al., 2016). However,
sign language corpus datasets are small for the problem
complexity, and cross-domain learning is required to obtain
adequate accuracy values. Even then, there is room for
improvement. Recently, OpenPose was introduced as an
open-source human pose estimation system (Cao et al.,
2017). OpenPose extracts relevant information for sign
language (i.e., position of important body parts) and can
be used as a feature extractor (Konstantinidis et al., 2018;
Ko et al., 2018). This is quite similar to the approach
taken by researchers before such generic pose estimation
systems were available (Ong and Bowden, 2004; Charles et
al., 2014). Currently, OpenPose is the only full-body pose
estimation technique and is therefore an obvious choice for
SLR, which relies not only on hand shape, location and
orientation, but also on non-manual components such as
mouth shape. Other pose estimation techniques exist, but
only recognize, for example, body keypoints (Fang et al.,
2017) or hand keypoints (Mueller et al., 2018).
3. Deep Learning Background
SLR is a spatio-temporal problem. Methods from computer
vision and natural language processing are typically applied
to tackle it.
3.1. Convolutional Neural Networks
The most popular computer vision algorithm in deep
learning is the CNN. Krizhevsky et al. (2012) showed
that CNNs can outperform engineered feature extractors.
Since then, they have been ubiquitous in image and video
recognition tasks.
3.2. Attention and Transformers
Transformer networks, introduced by Vaswani et al.
(2017), obtain state of the art performance for many natural
language processing tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et
al., 2019). These networks consist of repeated multi-head
attention blocks and point-wise feed-forward layers.
A query, key and value matrix are constructed from the
input features through trainable linear transformations:
Q=XWQ;
K=XWK;
V=XWV;
whereWQ,WKandWVare trainable weight matrices.
Then, scaled dot-product attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
is applied. For this, the query and key matrices are used
to calculate an attention weight matrix, which is multiplied
with the value matrix to obtain the attended output O. This
is computed as
O=softmaxQK>
pde
V: (1)The denominator, with dethe dimensionality of the input
features, is used to scale the dot products such that the
softmax is not saturated for large embeddings (Vaswani et
al., 2017).
Multi-head attention applies attention several times in
parallel on sub-regions of the input space. Every attention
calculation is performed in a so-called attention head. Each
of thenhheads looks at a subset of the original input: for
X2RTN(T: sequence length, N: number of features),
Qh,KhandVhare elements of RTdein headh, with
de=N=nh.
The outputs of all heads in a layer are concatenated,
normalized using layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016), and
processed by a residual point-wise feed-forward network as
input for the next layer. Transformers typically consist of
several of these layers. An illustrated example of a multi-
head attention layer is shown in ﬁgure 1.
3.3. Video Transformer Networks
Recently, CNNs and transformers have been combined
to perform action recognition on videos (Kozlov et al.,
2019). Speciﬁcally, they use a 2D CNN which learns
vector representations in latent space from input frames
as a feature extractor. The extracted features are used as
input to a network consisting of 4 stacked 8-head attention
layers. The trainable weight matrices are initialized using
the Glorot normal distribution (Glorot and Bengio, 2010).
The network outputs predictions per frame. These are
averaged across time to obtain the ﬁnal clip prediction.
Kozlov et al. (2019) call their network architecture the
Video Transformer Network (VTN). They note that VTNs
do not lead to optimal performance in action recognition,
which is currently obtained using 3D CNNs (e.g., the
network by Tran et al. (2018) for the Sports-1M dataset
(Karpathy et al., 2014)). However, because of the lower
number of parameters, VTNs require less computation time
and are less prone to overﬁtting than 3D CNNs. The latter
is particularly important for sign language datasets which
are typically smaller than action recognition datasets.
4. Experiments
4.1. Data
As the goal of this work is to present an annotation tool for
sign language corpora, we use such a corpus as dataset to
train and evaluate our models. In particular, we evaluate
our method on the Flemish sign language (VGT) corpus
(Van Herreweghe et al., 2015).
The Corpus VGT consists of 140 hours of video data. Each
video has a spatial resolution of 960 by 540 pixels and
a temporal resolution of 50 frames per second (FPS). We
consider 100 classes, corresponding to 104 glosses. Some
classes correspond to two glosses rather than one because
they are visually indistinguishable. If two data classes are
visually very similar but have distinct labels, the neural
network will be confused. For an annotation suggestion
tool, both glosses are valid suggestions: they can simply
both be shown at the same time. In total, we obtain 18730
samples from 67 native signers.