6020
Figure 1: A multi-head attention layer with 2 heads.
Figure 2: The network architectures of the different
methods. The classiﬁers (on the right) obtain their input
features from one or more feature extractors (on the left).
“P” represents OpenPose and “I” represents a 2D CNN.
4.2. Methodology
We explore four methods for isolated SLR. Each method is
based on a combination of one or more feature extractors
and a classiﬁer. The feature extractor is either OpenPose
(Cao et al., 2017) or a 2D CNN pre-trained on ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) that is ﬁne-tuned on sign language data
during the classiﬁcation task. The classiﬁer architecture is
either an LSTM, or a deep multi-head attention network
like the one shown in ﬁgure 1. An overview of the four
methods is shown in ﬁgure 2. We train and evaluate the
methods on the same dataset, but tune hyperparameters
individually in order to obtain optimal performance for
each of the methods. We apply each method to the problem
of isolated sign language recognition and compare how
they perform. They are described in detail in the next
sections.
We split the data into a train, validation and test set.
The training set consists of 70% of the original dataset,
the validation set of 10% and the test set of 20%. This
yields 13077 training samples, 3743 test samples, and 1910
Figure 3: An example of the output of the pre-processing
and data augmentation pipeline used for OpenPose
keypoints. On the left: the original keypoints. On the right:
the transformed keypoints.
validation samples. The neural networks are trained on the
training set, tuned on the validation set, and evaluated on
the test set.
We use random temporal cropping to select 16 frames as a
form of temporal data augmentation for all four methods.
If a sample is longer than 16 frames, a random start index
is chosen, and 16 consecutive frames are used as input to
the network. If a sample is shorter than 16 frames, it is
padded by looping the sample. Finally, if the sample length
is exactly 16 frames, the sample is used in its entirety as
input to the network. We ﬁnd that this performs similarly
to using zero-padded variable length sequences and the
shorter sequence length reduces computation time during
training. At inference time, the entire clip is evaluated using
a sliding window approach: non-overlapping sequences are
chosen from each sample, and the accuracy is averaged
across these windows of all samples.
All neural networks are trained and evaluated using
PyTorch 1.3 (Paszke et al., 2017) on two Nvidia GeForce
GTX 1080 Ti GPUs.
4.2.1. PoseLSTM
As a ﬁrst experiment, we consider using LSTM networks
with OpenPose features as a baseline to be able to evaluate
the impact of multi-head attention on the accuracy of the
neural network.
We use OpenPose as a ﬁxed feature extractor. For every
frame, OpenPose extracts 137 keypoints. 25 keypoints
represent the body pose, 70 are facial keypoints, and there
are 21 keypoints per hand representing the hand pose.