Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 6 of 29
by the robot always have the same value. This approach can be used for collision-avoidance
path planning, in which metrics such as the path length in a 2D plane are minimized. Non-
uniform cost maps can be used to assign different values of cost to different accessible
areas. It can be useful to, for example, deﬁne the energetic performance of the robot at each
location. Moreover, the cost can be also deﬁned according to a direction vector. This means
that the robot will experience different values of cost depending on its heading. In this case,
the cost is categorized as anisotropic [31], whereas in the contrary case the cost is isotropic .
Furthermore, the steering manoeuvre of the robot can also have different values of cost
according to its locomotion. Finally, it is worth noting that the environment can be fully
known, partially known or even fully unknown, requiring for the latter two a planning
strategy that is capable of replanning when this knowledge is updated.
2.2.2. Robot–Surface Interaction Modeling
A ground mobile robot interacts with the surface beneath it to propel itself. To perform
this function, there are many different locomotion actuators, such as wheels, tracks, legs
and even omnidirectional wheels. Figure 3 depicts three real examples of ground mobile
robots using different conﬁgurations of actuators. These actuators, together with the
joints linking them to the robot body, determine the kinematic structure and the dynamic
behavior of the robot. In other words, they determine the locomotion conﬁguration of
the robot. Zhang et al. [20] summarize some kinematic and dynamic models of different
well-known conﬁgurations: Differential drive [32] (see Koguma robot [ 33] in Figure 3a as
an example and the depiction of the model in Figure 4a), Ackermann steering [34] (see
Figure 4b,d), Skid steering [35] (see Figure 4c) and Omnidirectional [36]. Some of them entail
constraints relevant to path planning, such as the minimum turning radius of robots with
Front Ackermann steering [37] (see Figure 4b) or the high energy consumption of Skid-steering
robots in turning manoeuvres [ 38]. Moreover, another model exists, called Crabbing (see
Figure 4e). It allows a robot to drive in a direction different to the one it is facing, due to
having steering joints on top of all wheels [ 39]. Furthermore, some kinematic conﬁgurations
allow the robot to perform the Point Turn manoeuvre, which makes them rotate without
translating. It is worth mentioning the existence of articulated robots that are capable of
reconﬁguring themselves to obtain some kind of beneﬁt and perform multiple types of
locomotion (see SherpaTT in Figure 3c as an example of this). For instance, articulated
robots with tracks can actively control their stability while driving on rough terrains [40,41] .
Others use a wheel-on-legs conﬁguration to execute a locomotion mode called Wheel-
walking [42,43]. This mode is designed to overcome soft terrains in which a robot could get
stuck. In a similar way, Push-pull locomotion imitates the motion of a caterpillar to increase
traction in this kind of terrain [ 44–46]. Path planning algorithms acknowledging this
reconﬁguration capability are a must-have for this kind of robot, as they can ﬁnd paths that
take advantage of their high adaptability. In the case of global planning, Rohmer et al. [47]
used a Graph Search algorithm, Dijkstra, to ﬁrst produce a path and later, via simulation
tools, evaluate which locomotion mode is better to drive each of its parts. We, the authors of
this review publication, proposed the use of a PDE Solving method to consider the multiple
locomotion modes at the time of planning using an isotropic cost function [ 48,49]. To the
authors’ knowledge there are not many existing Local Planning approaches addressing
the kinodynamic constraints of robots with multiple locomotion modes. Reid et al. [50]
proposed the use of a Sampling-Based algorithm, the Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) , to tackle
the motion planning of a reconﬁgurable hybrid robot with wheeled-legs.
The robot’s locomotion will adapt better or worse depending on the terrain features,
which were brieﬂy mentioned before. These features may be related to either the mor-
phology (shape) or the composition of the terrain. One of them is the terrain inclination
or slope [ 51]. The slope has an inﬂuence on the Roll and Pitch orientation angles of the
robot, which is important to consider to preserve stability [ 41,52,53]. Moreover, it can also
inﬂuence the energetic performance of the robot according to its direction. This dependency
on direction is due to the effect of gravity, making the robot consume different amounts of