Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 8 of 29
(d)
 (e)
 (f)
Figure 4. Locomotion models used for wheeled ground mobile robots along with path planners: Differential drive ( a), Front
Ackermann ( b), Skid-steering ( c), Full Ackermann ( d), Crabbing ( e) and Point Turn ( f).
3. Reactive-Computing-Based Path Planning Algorithms
This category encompasses path planning algorithms where the environment, usually a
map distinguishing between obstacle and non-obstacle regions, only indicates the location
and shape of the existing obstacles. Reactive Computing algorithms are usually employed as
local path planners (covering the surroundings of the robot and with dynamic replanning)
due to their capability to quickly handle new information (e.g., in the form of newly discov-
ered obstacles), which often comes from the limited onboard sensors. As local planners, these
algorithms usually plan the next immediate path or manoeuvre to avoid nearby obstacles
while following a global plan made by another algorithm. However these algorithms may
calculate local minima paths, or even cause the robot to get stuck, so special care must be
taken. There are two subcategories of Reactive Computing algorithms: Reactive Manoeuvre
methods, where the presence of obstacles determines the immediate next manoeuvre of the
robot, and Local Optimization methods, where an existing path is modified according to the
presence of obstacles.
3.1. Reactive Manoeuvre
The algorithms presented here rely on deﬁning how the robot reacts at each instant
to the presence of obstacles. This reaction can be deﬁned according to a formulation that
addresses the location of existing obstacles. A common feature of the different formula-
tion approaches is the low computational requirements needed to produce the reaction,
usually in the form of a steering or velocity command. Since this formulation lacks global
information, these techniques are commonly used as Local Planners . The formulation in
question may be based on the use of ﬁelds to tackle the location of obstacles, the detection
of obstacle boundaries to circumvent them, or the production of a velocity command after
evaluating the available free space or the speed of moving obstacles.
The use of ﬁeld methods include the Artiﬁcial Potential Fields (APF) and the Vector
Field Histogram (VFH) algorithms. In APF, the motion of a robot can result from the
sum of virtual forces that external elements such as obstacles create. In this way, the robot
gets further from these obstacles and avoids colliding with them, as the forces from them
are repulsive [ 75]. An attractive force created by the target position makes the robot
go towards it. This can be seen in the picture displayed in Figure 5a. Ge and Cui [76]
presented an application of APF in environments containing dynamic obstacles. However,
the main drawback of this strategy is that it is prone to causing the robot to get stuck in
local minimum points. For this reason, further research works were oriented to overcome
this issue. This was the main target of the work by Vadakkepat et al. [77]. They combined
APF with genetic methods ( Evolutionary algorithms) to overcome this situation. This
combination was also used to plan the motion of a simulated 6-wheel rover [ 78]. Another
hybrid version includes the use of PSO algorithms [ 79]. Triharminto et al. [80] proposed
a non-hybrid solution, consisting of adding a repulsive potential ﬁeld around the rover.
However, it has not yet been tested with U-shaped obstacles. Other works solve this