Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 20 of 29
Planning as an alternative to Reactive Manoeuvre methods. C-Space Search algorithms make
use of samples to represent the different conﬁgurations of the robot. These samples can
be provided beforehand in the form of a graph or they can be dynamically created. Graph
Search algorithms are suitable for global path planning considering advanced graphs such
as visibility graphs or space-lattice graphs, at the expense of investing time into building
them (something that is admissible for ofﬂine planning). Nevertheless, it scales poorly
with problems of high dimensions, which justiﬁes the use of Sampling-based algorithms
instead. Sampling-based algorithms have also proved useful for this kind of manoeuvre and
problems with a high number of dimensions. Optimal Control algorithms are outstanding
for obtaining globally optimal results. PDE-Solving -based algorithms depend heavily on
the formulated PDE, which can be based on isotropic or anisotropic cost functions and can
work with a map model in the form of a grid. Global Optimization algorithms have to start
with an already-deﬁned path an adapt it according to the robot’s locomotion restrictions.
PDE Solving algorithms are adequate for the off-line computation of long traverses given
low-uncertain static scenarios, as they provide optimal paths without relying on replanning.
Finally, it is important to note that all these planners rely on the available information
describing the environment and the robot. This information must be modeled as accurately
as possible to improve the results of the path planner.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.R.S.-I. and C.J.P .-d.-P .; methodology, J.R.S.-I.; investi-
gation, J.R.S.-I.; writing—original draft preparation, J.R.S.-I.; writing—review and editing, J.R.S.-I.
and C.J.P .-d.-P .; supervision, C.J.P .-d.-P . and A.G.-C.; project administration, C.J.P .-d.-P . and A.G.-C.;
funding acquisition, C.J.P .-d.-P . and A.G.-C. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the H2020 European project: Autonomous decision-making
in very long traverses, under grant agreement: 821988, and the Andalusian regional government,
Spain, under grant reference P18-RT-991.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Mickael Laine, from the University of Tohoku, and Flo-
rian Cordes, from DFKI, for giving us permission to reproduce the images shown in Figure 3a,c
respectively. We would like to thank M.A. Annemarie Popp, from DFKI, for taking the photo image
in Figure 3c.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ACO Ant Colony Optimizer
AIT* Adaptively Informed Tree
APF Artiﬁcial Potential Fields
ABIT* Advanced Batch Informed Trees
BIT* Batch Informed Trees
D* Dynamic A*
DEM Digital Elevation Map
DL Deep Learning
DP Dynamic Programming
DPP Dynamic Programming Principle
DWA Dynamic Window Approach
FIM Fast Iterative Method
FMM Fast Marching Method
FMT* Fast Marching Tree
FMS Fast Marching Square