Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 5 of 29
of resolution, at the expense of possibly obtaining worse paths [ 24]. Other forms of Cell
Decomposition are the Navigation meshes and Circle-based waypoint graphs , as explained by
Nash and Koenig [11]. The other form of representation of the environment is, as mentioned,
accomplished using roadmaps. A roadmap is a graph built upon nodes connected by edges.
Each node represents a possible state of the robot, whereas each edge indicates how to reach
that state from another. Examples of roadmaps include Voronoi graphs [ 25] (see Figure 2e),
Visibility graphs [ 26] and State-Lattice graphs (see Figure 2f). The latter consist of making
the edges based upon motion primitives, so the resulting path is ensured to be feasible
given the robot mobility constraints, especially when using Graph Search algorithms, as in
the work of Likhachev and Ferguson [27], Bergman et al. [28].
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
(d)
 (e)
 (f)
Figure 2. Different types of environment cell decomposition ( a–d) and roadmap graphs ( e–f). (a) Tessellations using squares.
(b) Tessellations using triangles. ( c) Tessellations using hexagons. ( d) Irregular grid. ( e) Voronoi roadmap. ( f) State
lattice graph.
The cells or the nodes from these graphs can store information regarding the surface
at their location, in the form of static or dynamic elements [ 10]. This can be, for instance,
elevation information. A Digital Elevation Map (DEM) is a grid of which the nodes have
associated with each of them a value of elevation. Elevation maps can be also represented
by polygons, but regular grid maps are preferred [29]. Shape-related features, such as the
slope or the surface roughness, can be extracted using convolution matrices [ 30]. The size
of the kernel and the DEM resolution will determine what kind of features are extracted.
Moreover, this resolution deﬁnes the level of detail of the elements contained in the map.
As shown in Figure 2d, this resolution can be non-uniform or multiple. The size of the grid
can be chosen according to the scale at which the planning is performed: Local in the case
of covering the immediate surroundings of the robot (more or less the reachable distance of
the on-board sensors) and Global if the area is bigger than that, usually using information
from external sources such as satellites or drones.
With regards to how the cost is deﬁned over the planner workspace, there are different
ways. First of all, we understand cost as the metric that the robot accumulates by moving.
The objective of the path planner is to minimize this accumulation by producing the optimal
path. The cost in question can be uniform, in the sense that the regions that can be accessed