Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 17 of 29
Another Sampling-Based algorithm, named the Fast Marching Tree (FMT*) algorithm,
was created to reduce the convergence rate of both RRT and PRM. It takes features from
not only the two of them but also an Optimal Control algorithm called FMM, which is
detailed below. The main objective of FMT* is to ﬁnd paths, avoiding obstacles, in problems
involving a high number of degrees of freedom. One example of this is the motion planning
of an articulated vehicle presented by Reid et al. [50]. Ichter et al. [199] propose the use of
Group Marching Tree (GMT*), a similar algorithm to FMT* but which focuses on speeding
up computation via parallelization using GPUs. Finally, it is worth mentioning there
are path planning algorithms that combine the Dynamic Sampling approach with Model
Predictive Control (MPC) techniques to account for kinodynamic constraints [57,200,201].
6. Optimal-Control-Based Path Planning Algorithms
The baseline of Control Approach based algorithms is the creation of a control function
that takes the robot from an initial state in the C-Space to the destination. As the name sug-
gests, here the path planning problem is addressed using an optimal control approach [ 202].
The main difference with Soft Computation methods is that there are no conﬁgurable param-
eters; the problem here must be fully enclosed. Here, there are two different subcategories.
In the ﬁrst of them, PDE Solving , algorithms solve a Partial Derivative Equation (PDE) on a
grid, based on the Dynamic Programming Principle (DPP) [ 203]. The second subcategory,
Numerical Optimization , encompasses algorithms that in general optimize a pre-existing
path given the kino-dynamic restrictions of the robot to make it feasible.
6.1. PDE-Solving-Based
The optimal control approach is based here on the Dynamic Programming Principle
through the resolution of the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation [ 204] using a grid. Since it
is a partial derivative equation (PDE), this sub-category is named PDE Solving . It can be seen
as finding the numerical solution to the problem of calculating the propagation of a wave
over a grid. A value of the wave arrival time is assigned to each of the grid nodes. The way
the wave propagates will depend on how the HJB equation is formulated, including the cost
function. The main drawback of this kind of algorithm is that it generally cannot deal with
constraints in the form of discontinuities.
A particular case of the HJB equation is the Eikonal equation. This is not only static but
also considers the cost function and only returns a scalar value according to the position
on the map. This means the wave propagates on a node with a rate that depends only
on the assigned scalar value. In this way, the characteristic directions are coincident with
the gradient of the Total Cost function, and hence the path can be retrieved simply using a
Gradient Descent method. A whole family of methods have been proposed over the years to
compute the solution to this problem-formulation with low computational requirements,
and hence they are named Fast methods [ 18]. One of the most well-known is the Fast
Marching Method (FMM), introduced by Sethian [205] . This algorithm follows the same
strategy as Dijkstra to visit the nodes of a grid. Unlike Dijkstra, FMM assigns the value
of an amount of cost to each node by solving the Eikonal algorithm. The resulting path
is smooth, continuous and optimal. Chiang et al. [206] compared this algorithm with
A* and demonstrated how, as the path is not restricted by the grid, FMM gets shorter
paths. There are many existing works using FMM for path planning [ 207–210]. Some of
its variants, most of them reducing the computational power requirements of FMM, are
introduced in the review by Gómez et al. [18], along with other Eikonal solvers. They are
Binary FMM, Fibonacci FMM, Simpliﬁed FMM and Untidy FMM. The cost values used by
theEikonal determine the rate of propagation of the computed wave. Petres et al. [24]
demonstrated how the gradient of these cost values affects the curvature radius of the
resulting path. Their work also introduced the idea of Heuristic Fast Marching (FM*) and
also compares this with other Graph Search algorithms. For smooth obstacle avoidance, Fast
Marching Square (FMS) [ 74] computes FMM twice, being the ﬁrst to create a repulsive ﬁeld
surrounding obstacles. Figure 11a depicts how the path smoothly gets further from the