Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 2 of 29
and surveys on path planning do not offer a comprehensive overview of the majority of
existing path planning solutions. This is the main motivation for writing this review paper:
it describes in detail different path planning categories and, for each of them, introduces
relevant representative references found in the literature, focusing on those algorithms
aimed at robots that move on top of surfaces (ground, water, etc.). This paper is organized
as follows. Section 2 presents the method proposed in this paper to classify the existing
path planning algorithms. It also makes clear, following this method, the fact that previous
works have important omissions. Moreover, this section also provides an analysis of the
methods used to address the environment and locomotion information. The next sections
each deal with one of the categories of this classiﬁcation: Reactive Computing (Section 3),
Soft Computing (Section 4), C-Space Search (Section 5) and Optimal Control (Section 6). Finally,
Section 7 summarizes the contents of this paper and presents a discussion about the path
planning algorithms contained in the aforementioned categories.
2. Path Planning Algorithms
Figure 1 depicts the four mentioned categories of path planning, splitting each of them
into two subcategories. This classification rests on the principles and fundamental mechanisms
used to construct and return a path. A more detailed insight into these categories and why this
classification is arranged in this way is provided in the next subsection. A second subsection
presents the different approaches taken in modelling the environment and the robot–terrain
interaction. We considered it necessary to add this as for many algorithms, especially those in
theC-Space Search category , it is necessary to construct these models beforehand.
Path 
PlanningReactive 
ComputingLocal 
OptimizationReactive 
Manoeuvre
Soft 
ComputingArtificial 
Intelligence
Evolutionary 
ComputationC-Space 
Search
Sampling 
BasedGraph SearchOptimal 
Control
PDE SolvingGlobal 
Optimization
Figure 1. Schematic showing the proposed classiﬁcation of existing path planning approaches. There
are four main categories, each of them containing two subcategories. Two adjacent subcategories from
different categories have features in common. The schematic also indicates how some subcategories
are more inclined towards either Global Planning orLocal Planning .
2.1. General Classiﬁcation
The proposed classification considers how path planning algorithms function. In many
past reviews, two kinds of distinction were made: according to whether the environment
is dynamic or not; Online and Offline path planners. respectively [ 3]; and the size of the
environment, whether Local orGlobal . Usually, Online is associated with Local and Offline
with Global . The main issue with this is that there are algorithms that can be considered in