Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 13 of 29
of neural networks, Zou et al. [146] presented a brief survey on this kind of algorithm
for applications at the beginning of the 2000s. Engedy and Horváth [147] presented a
path planner using neural networks for mobile robots that must avoid static and dynamic
obstacles. Zhang et al. [148] used this kind of technique to find the shortest path in maze
scenarios. This approach has also been used together with genetic algorithms [149,150].
Other works in the literature combine fuzzy logic and neural networks [ 151–154].
There have been different approaches to this. For instance, Mohanty and Parhi [155]
use many of these systems for autonomous navigation. Further insights and a more
extensive surveys on related hybrid methods are provided in Mac et al. [8]. Furthermore,
the use of Reinforcement Learning (RL) has also been studied to control the motion of a
robot [ 156,157]. Faust et al. [158] combined RL with the Probabilistic Roadmap Method
(PRM), which is one of the algorithms detailed next. For more information about planning
algorithms based on RL, refer to the work of Sun et al. [21].
5. C-Space-Search-Based Path Planning Algorithms
Algorithms in this category consider the working space of the path planner as the
space of all states or conﬁgurations reachable by the robot. For this reason, most of the
works in this category refer to this working space as the C-Space . The main idea behind
these algorithms is to use a discrete set of samples that are part of this C-Space . In other
words, the C-Space is discretized. This set of samples includes the initial and the goal states,
or at least samples relatively close to them. In this way, these algorithms execute a search
operation, visiting samples from this set. At a certain point, the algorithm will ﬁnd and
return a certain subset of samples connecting the initial and goal states representing the
resulting path. In other words, the waypoints forming the paths correspond, each of them,
to a sample from the C-Space. This implies that the generated path heavily depends on
how these samples are scattered, how they are connected and how are they visited. In fact,
due to this dependency, in some approaches post-processing is done to smooth the shape
of the resulting path.
The C-Space Search category is subdivided into two groups of algorithms according to
how they discretize the C-Space .Graph Search algorithms do this using a pre-existing graph
(such as one of those depicted in Figure 2). Each of the nodes from this graph represents a
C-Space sample and is connected to other nearby nodes, i.e., its neighbors. With regards
toSampling-Based algorithms, they focus on the creation and/or modiﬁcation of samples
within the C-Space in an iterative way. They can keep working, even after ﬁnding a feasible
path, to ﬁnd better ones.
5.1. Graph Search
As mentioned, the C-Space can be discretized in the form of a graph. Graph Search
algorithms fully or partially visit this graph until they find a path connecting the initial and
goal states. The first algorithms made in this category return paths of which the waypoints are
placed on top of neighboring samples. In other words, the connections between consecutive
waypoints of the path are coincident with the graph edges. Figure 8a depicts a schematic
showing how in the first case the shape of the path is determined by these edges. This
review, therefore, categorizes the Graph Search algorithms generating this kind of path as
Edge-restricted . These paths consequently depend on how the graph is structured. As seen
in Section 2.2.1 there are various graph structures in the form of Cell Decomposition and
Roadmaps . Another kind of Graph Search algorithm, Any-angle , were created to solve this issue
with the restriction to the graph edges. The reason this name is used is that paths produced
byEdge-restricted planners only use certain values of orientation. For example, in an eight-
neighborhood regular grid, as in the case shown in Figure 8a, Edge-restricted paths can only
have orientations with 0, 45,90,135 and 180 degrees. Any-angle algorithms produce
paths that are not restricted to these orientations as their waypoints do not necessarily have
to be placed in neighboring nodes. Figure 8b depicts an example of this.