Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 18 of 29
obstacle thanks to the higher values of cost near it (darker colors). Liu and Bucknall [211]
used FMS, along with a modiﬁcation of the cost around the initial position, to consider
the initial orientation of the vehicle. Researchers have also aimed to propose incremental
versions of FMM, such as E* [212–214].
GOAL
(a)
GOAL (b)
Figure 11. PDE-Solving -based algorithms can calculate a continuous and smooth path in non-uniform cost maps. The cost
assigned to each cell can be a scalar value or isotropic ( a) or in the form of a vector, i.e., anisotropic ( b).
To work with more general expressions of the Hamilton–Jacobi-0Bellman (HJB) equa-
tion, other kinds of methods must be used. FMM produces sub-optimal results if used
with direction-dependent (anisotropic) costs [ 215]. This kind of cost implies that the wave
propagates differently depending on its direction relative to how a vectorial cost is as-
signed to the node. There are particular situations in which FMM produces accurate results
under a certain level of anisotropy, such as having a cost function formulated in such a
way thatit varies mostly in the directions parallel to the reference axes [ 24,216]. This is
the case depicted in Figure 11b . Sethian and Vladimirsky [215] proposed the use of an
algorithm called the Ordered Upwind Method (OUM) to deal with the static HJB equation,
the convergence rate of which was demonstrated by Shum et al. [217] . Its main drawback
is the increase in computational cost it entails, proportional to the anisotropy existing in
the scenario. Shum et al. [31] used HJB for anisotropic path planning, considering energy
minimization and stability, and considering the direction and magnitude of slopes. The Fast
Sweeping Method (FSM) has also been demonstrated to work with general static HJB equa-
tions [ 218]. It works by visiting all nodes on a grid, following certain directions repeatedly,
which means that it demands a high number of iterations. Takei and Tsai [37] used FSM to
formulate the HJB equation to comply with turning radius constraints. For the Eikonal case,
Bak et al. [219] introduced an improvement to FSM to speed up its computation when the
cost varies too much, and Detrixhe et al. [220] introduced a parallel version. Jeong and
Whitaker [221] proposed an algorithm named the Fast Iterative Method (FIM) to solve the
Eikonal equation on parallel architectures as well.
6.2. Global Optimization
This subcategory contains path planning algorithms that optimize an existing prelim-
inary feasible path. Unlike Local Optimization methods, introduced in Section 3.1, Global
Optimization methods make the resulting path globally optimal in exchange for investing
more of a computational load. The approach presented by Ratliff et al. [222] , for instance,
uses Sampling-Based methods such as RRT or PRM as a ﬁrst step. The second step consists
of using gradient optimization techniques to approximate the optimal solution from this
feasible path. Van Den Berg et al. [223] also started with a trajectory computed using
RRT, to later apply jt to an optimization process based on Differential Dynamic Program-