Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 19 of 29
ming (DP). Plonski et al. [70] used DP to calculate a path in a solar map that dynamically
changes, considering that the robot harvests solar energy. Ajanovi´ c et al. [224] combined
DP with Model Predictive Control (MPC) to calculate energy-minimizing paths. Other
techniques include the bang-bang approach [ 225] and Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) [ 226]. Finally, a remarkable approach was proposed by Kogan and Murray [227] ,
who used nonlinear optimization to plan time-optimal paths with a length between 20 and
70 m.
7. Summary and Conclusions
Table 3 summarizes the main features of each path planning category according to
the classification system proposed in this paper (see Figure 1). It analyzes whether the
algorithms require a preliminary model of the environment, whether they are deterministic
(i.e., they always provide the same solution given the same initial conditions), whether
they can tackle dynamic environments and replan, whether they are optimal and if they
are complete (i.e., they always return a path if it is feasible). Given the scope of the final
path planning application, some algorithms will be more suitable than others. Moreover,
the reach of the planner and the replanning capability, i.e., the capability to deal with
updates in the environment information, will determine if an algorithm is more suitable for
local planning or global planning. Local planning usually requires fast online computation
and this reactivity behavior is required to plan new paths in the presence of environmental
data changes. Global planning can even be computed offline and aims to generate paths for
long traverses, having a static initial environment available.
Table 3. Overview of characteristics of the presented path planning algorithms.
Category Sub-CategoryPreliminary
Map ModelDeterministic Replanning Optimality Completeness
Reactive
ComputingReactive
ManoeuvreNo [7] Yes Yes Sub-optimal Not ensured
Local
OptimizationDepends on planner
used in ﬁrst stepYes Yes Sub-optimal Not ensured
Soft
ComputingEvolutionary Only ACO No Yes [3] HeuristicDepends (e.g., GA
no; PSO, yes) [20]
Artiﬁcial
IntelligenceDepends No Yes Heuristic Not ensured
C-Space
SearchGraph Search Yes [7,11] Yes [7] Only incrementalGlobal restricted
to graphYes
Sampling-Based No No [7] Yes Asymptotical Probabilistic
Optimal
ControlPDE Solving Yes Yes Very rare [212–214] Globally optimal Yes
Global
OptimizationDepend on planner
used in ﬁrst stepYes Yes [3] Globally optimal No [20]
Reactive-Computing -based algorithms seem suitable for local obstacle avoidance path
planning as they are easy and cheap to implement. Furthermore, Reactive Manoeuvre
methods are a good option for scenarios with high uncertainty or when using a robot with
very limited sensing options. Local Optimization allows one to even consider kinodynamic
constraints with TEB, although they do not ensure completeness. Special attention must be
given to both subcategories, in order to avoid falling into a local minimum. Soft Computing
algorithms produce a path using multiple conﬁgurable operators, which can be inspired
by nature or can be based on fuzzy rules and/or neural networks. They are suitable for
problems involving a large number of variables or problems that are difﬁcult to model,
such as in highly dynamic environments. With scenarios containing moving elements,
in long-range (global path planning) scenarios, the use of Evolutionary methods is adequate.
The latest Artiﬁcial Intelligence methods, including the DL and RL methods, still need to be
further studied to obtain solid conclusions, as also remarked by Sun et al. [21].Artiﬁcial
Intelligence methods based on Fuzzy rules or neural networks can be used for fast Local