Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 10 of 29
Square (FMS). Wilkie et al. [92] considered the Front-ackermann (see Figure 4b) locomotion
model for cars. Chakravarthy and Ghose [93] proposed using a Collision-cone algorithm,
similar to Velocity Obstacles but considering obstacles with arbitrary shapes. Qu et al. [94]
introduced its use along with car models (with Front-ackermann conﬁgurations, as seen in
Figure 4b). Finally, the Dynamic Window Approach (DWA) is an algorithm that searches
in the velocity space for a velocity command to follow a collision-free circular trajectory,
delimited by admissible speed values and a time window [ 95]. This solution may not
be the globally optimal one, but rather a locally optimal one [ 4]. DWA can be used even
for robots navigating at high speeds [ 96]. Feng et al. [97] propose an improved version
that reduces its complexity by reducing the velocity space to search. Other approaches
use this algorithm for energy-minimization path planning [ 98,99]. Although commonly
used as a local planner, Zhang et al. [5]have proposed its use at a global scale as a global
path planner.
3.2. Local Optimization
These algorithms usually start from a pre-existing path and modify it according to
the existing obstacles. Here it is prioritized to keep computational use to the minimum
at the expense of losing optimality or even completeness. There are different options to
modify the path, ranging from the selection of velocity proﬁles within a velocity space to
the stretching and elongation of the path under the effect of artiﬁcial forces.
The use of Elastic Bands in path planning was proposed by Quinlan and Khatib [100] .
This method deforms an existing collision-free path according to the obstacles, stretching
(see Figure 6b) or elongating it. From a set of points in this path, a set of overlapping
subregions, called Bubbles, is created. These Bubbles cover collision-free areas and their
size is bounded by the distance to obstacles. This entails that smaller and more numerous
Bubbles are present in the portions of the path closer to obstacles. It can be used in dynamic
environments, although large changes may lead to the failure of the method [ 100]. Moreover,
it has also been adapted to non-holonomic vehicles by complying with curvature constraints
Khatib et al. [101] and using Bezier curves [ 102]. An extension to Elastic Bands includes time
constraints and is named Timed Elastic Bands (TEB). This extended version addresses the
kinodynamic constraints of the robot [103].
4. Soft-Computing-Based Path Planning Algorithms
This kind of algorithm does not intend to find the exact optimal solution, but rather
to approximate it, tolerating a certain range of imprecision. In general, these algorithms
require the tuning of certain parameters by the user in order to work properly according
to the characteristics of the environment. They can deal even with dynamic environments
and are adequate for problems involving a large number of variables and high degrees of
freedom [ 8]. However, in general they demand a high number of computational resources.
This review follows the classification proposed by Mirjalili and Dong [104] , which distin-
guishes between Evolutionary ,Fuzzy control and Machine learning methods. The first one uses
techniques inspired by biology and nature: they start with a system formed by individuals
that changes over time, i.e., evolves. Fuzzy control and Machine learning methods are here
part of a subcategory named Artificial Intelligence . They use fuzzy rules and neural networks,
respectively, to produce controllers. These controllers are very useful for navigating through
initially unknown scenarios and in general produce paths according to the obstacles the
robot detects on its way. To sum up, Soft Computing algorithms allow the tuning of a series
of repetitive elements, either nature-based individuals, fuzzy rules or artificial neurons,
to generate a path.
4.1. Evolutionary Computation
Evolutionary algorithms are also known as Meta-heuristic or Nature-inspired [ 105].
These algorithms generate a path that results from the evolution of a population. This
population is made up of intelligent individuals whose actions are modelled after behaviors