Sensors 2021 ,21, 7898 9 of 29
issue by creating custom escape paths whenever it is detected that the robot is on a
local minimum point [ 81]. Furthermore, Bayat et al. [82] present a solution inspired by
electrostatic potential ﬁelds in which, instead of using a sum of virtual forces, a so-called
scalar potential ﬁeld guides the robot. VFH, proposed by Borenstein et al. [83], creates a
polar histogram to evaluate the density of obstacles around the robot, selecting the steering
angle with the lowest density of obstacles. Some improvements to VFH were introduced
years later [84,85].
GOAL
(a)
Robot
VelocityGOAL (b)
Figure 5. Graphical representations of concepts used in Artiﬁcial Potential Field ( a) and Velocity Obstacle ( b) algorithms.
(a) Potential ﬁelds acting on a robot. ( b) Collision cone considering a moving obstacle.
The Bug algorithms, Bug1 and Bug2, make the robot circumvent any obstacle found on
its way until it reaches the goal [ 86]. The main difference between them is that Bug1 makes
the robot drive the full boundary of any obstacle (see Figure 6a), whereas Bug2 can drive it
only partially [ 19]. They despise optimality in favour of easiness in the implementation and
very minimal computation. They can be used on robots equipped only with sensors that just
detect obstacles in their immediate vicinity. In this way, these robots either drive towards the
goal or drive along the boundaries of obstacles they find. The works of Buniyamin et al. [87]
and Campbell et al. [19]refer to some variants that improve this kind of algorithm, in general
reducing the distance the robot drives. Xu et al. [88] uses the Bug algorithm considering
turning radius constraints, producing paths with smooth turns.
GOAL
(a)
GOAL (b)
Figure 6. Graphical representations of concepts used in the Bug algorithm ( a) and Elastic Bands ( b) algorithm with Bubble
bounds. ( a) Path after using the Bug1 algorithm. ( b) Path after experiencing stretching.
The following approaches are focused on producing a velocity command for the
robot. Velocity Obstacles methods calculate a safe trajectory considering the velocity
vectors of both the robotic agent and any other moving obstacle [ 89,90]. This calculation
evaluates a cone of collision such as the one shown in Figure 5b. Chen et al. [91] used
Velocity Obstacles in an hybrid fashion with another algorithms called Fast Marching