4 Yuhui Yuan, Xiaokang Chen, Xilin Chen, Jingdong Wang
(a) ASPP
 (b) OCR
Fig. 2: Illustrating the multi-scale context with the ASPP as an example
and the OCR context for the pixel marked with n. (a) ASPP: The context is
a set of sparsely sampled pixels marked with n,n. The pixels with dierent colors
correspond to dierent dilation rates. Those pixels are distributed in both the object
region and the background region. (b) Our OCR: The context is expected to be a set of
pixels lying in the object (marked with color blue). The image is chosen from ADE20K.
context [46], these works consider the relation (or similarity) between the pixels,
which is based on the self-attention scheme [64,61], and perform a weighted
aggregation with the similarities as the weights.
Double Attention and its related work [8,75,9,40,38,74,35,26] and ACFNet [75]
group the pixels into a set of regions, and then augment the pixel representations
by aggregating the region representations with the consideration of their context
relations predicted by using the pixel representation.
Our approach is a relational context approach and is related to Double Atten-
tion and ACFNet. The dierences lie in the region formation and the pixel-region
relation computation. Our approach learns the regions with the supervision of
the ground-truth segmentation. In contrast, the regions in previous approaches
except ACFNet are formed unsupervisedly. On the other hand, the relation be-
tween a pixel and a region is computed by considering both the pixel and region
representations, while the relation in previous works is only computed from the
pixel representation.
Coarse-to-ne segmentation. Various coarse-to-ne segmentation schemes
have been developed [17,20,34,59,28,33,85] to gradually rene the segmentation
maps from coarse to ne. For example, [34] regards the coarse segmentation map
as an additional representation and combines it with the original image or other
representations for computing a ne segmentation map.
Our approach in some sense can also be regarded as a coarse-to-ne scheme.
The dierence lies in that we use the coarse segmentation map for generating
a contextual representation instead of directly used as an extra representation.
We compare our approach with the conventional coarse-to-ne schemes in the
supplementary material.
Region-wise segmentation. There exist many region-wise segmentation meth-
ods [1,2,23,22,65,50,2,60] that organize the pixels into a set of regions (usually
super-pixels), and then classify each region to get the image segmentation result.
Our approach does not classify each region for segmentation and instead uses