Segmentation Transformer: Object-Contextual
Representations for Semantic Segmentation?
Yuhui Yuan1;2;3, Xiaokang Chen3, Xilin Chen1;2, and Jingdong Wang3
1Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3Microsoft Research Asia
fyuhui.yuan, v-xiaokc, jingdw g@microsoft.com, xlchen@ict.ac.cn
Abstract. In this paper, we study the context aggregation problem in
semantic segmentation. Motivated by that the label of a pixel is the
category of the object that the pixel belongs to, we present a simple
yet eective approach, object-contextual representations, characteriz-
ing a pixel by exploiting the representation of the corresponding ob-
ject class. First, we learn object regions under the supervision of the
ground-truth segmentation. Second, we compute the object region rep-
resentation by aggregating the representations of the pixels lying in
the object region. Last, we compute the relation between each pixel
and each object region, and augment the representation of each pixel
with the object-contextual representation which is a weighted aggre-
gation of all the object region representations. We empirically demon-
strate our method achieves competitive performance on various bench-
marks: Cityscapes, ADE20K, LIP, PASCAL-Context and COCO-Stu.
Our submission \HRNet + OCR + SegFix" achieves the 1stplace on the
Cityscapes leaderboard by the ECCV 2020 submission deadline. Code is
available at: https://git.io/openseg and https://git.io/HRNet.OCR.
We rephrase the object-contextual representation scheme using the
Transformer encoder-decoder framework. The rst two steps, object re-
gion learning and object region representation computation, are inte-
grated as the cross-attention module in the decoder: the linear projec-
tions used to classify the pixels, i.e., generate the object regions, are
category queries, and the object region representations are the cross-
attention outputs. The last step is the cross-attention module we add to
the encoder, where the keys and values are the decoder output and the
queries are the representations at each position. The details are presented
in Section 3.3.
Keywords: Segmentation Transformer; Semantic Segmentation; Con-
text Aggregation
?The OCR (Object-Contextual Representation) approach is equivalent to the Trans-
former encoder-decode scheme. We rephrase the OCR approach using the Trans-
former language.arXiv:1909.11065v6  [cs.CV]  30 Apr 2021