6 Yuhui Yuan, Xiaokang Chen, Xilin Chen, Jingdong Wang
whereIrefers to the set of pixels in the image, wisis the relation between xi
andxs, and may be predicted only from xior computed from xiandxs.()
and() are two dierent transform functions as done in self-attention [61]. The
global context scheme [46] is a special case of relational context with wis=1
jIj.
3.2 Formulation
The class label lifor pixelpiis essentially the label of the object that pixel pilies
in. Motivated by this, we present an object-contextual representation approach,
characterizing each pixel by exploiting the corresponding object representation.
The proposed object-contextual representation scheme (1) structurizes all the
pixels in image IintoKsoft object regions, (2) represents each object region as fk
by aggregating the representations of all the pixels in the kth object region, and
(3) augments the representation for each pixel by aggregating the Kobject region
representations with consideration of its relations with all the object regions:
yi=(KX
k=1wik(fk)); (3)
where fkis the representation of the kth object region, wikis the relation between
theith pixel and the kth object region. () and() are transformation functions.
Soft object regions. We partition the image IintoKsoft object regions
fM1;M2;:::;MKg. Each object region Mkcorresponds to the class k, and
is represented by a 2D map (or coarse segmentation map), where each entry
indicates the degree that the corresponding pixel belongs to the class k.
We compute the Kobject regions from an intermediate representation output
from a backbone (e.g., ResNet or HRNet). During training, we learn the object
region generator under the supervision from the ground-truth segmentation using
the cross-entropy loss.
Object region representations. We aggregate the representations of all the
pixels weighted by their degrees belonging to the kth object region, forming the
kth object region representation:
fk=X
i2I~mkixi: (4)
Here, xiis the representation of pixel pi. ~mkiis the normalized degree for pixel
pibelonging to the kth object region. We use spatial softmax to normalize each
object region Mk.
Object contextual representations. We compute the relation between each
pixel and each object region as below:
wik=e(xi;fk)
PK
j=1e(xi;fj): (5)
Here,(x;f) =(x)> (f) is the unnormalized relation function, () and ()
are two transformation functions implemented by 1 1 conv!BN!ReLU.
This is inspired by self-attention [61] for a better relation estimation.