10 Yuhui Yuan, Xiaokang Chen, Xilin Chen, Jingdong Wang
Stage 3 is for predicting coarse segmentation (object regions). The other repre-
sentation from Stage 4 goes through a 3 3 convolution (512 output channels),
and then is fed into the OCR module. For HRNet-W48, we only use the nal
representation as the input to the OCR module.
OCR module. We implement the above formulation of our approach as the
OCR module, as illustrated in Fig. 3. We use a linear function (a 1 1 convolu-
tion) to predict the coarse segmentation (soft object region) supervised with a
pixel-wise cross-entropy loss. All the transform functions,  (); (); (); ();andg(),
are implemented as 1 1 conv!BN!ReLU, and the rst three output 256
channels and the last two output 512 channels. We predict the nal segmenta-
tion from the nal representation using a linear function and we also apply a
pixel-wise cross-entropy loss on the nal segmentation prediction.
3.5 Empirical Analysis
We conduct the empirical analysis experiments using the dilated ResNet-101 as
the backbone on Cityscapes val.
Object region supervision. We study the in
uence of the object region su-
pervision. We modify our approach through removing the supervision (i.e., loss)
on the soft object regions (within the pink dashed box in Fig. 3), and adding
another auxiliary loss in the stage-3 of ResNet-101. We keep all the other set-
tings the same and report the results in the left-most 2 columns of Table 1.
We can see that the supervision for forming the object regions is crucial for the
performance.
Pixel-region relations. We compare our approach with other two mechanisms
that do not use the region representation for estimating the pixel-region relations:
(i) Double-Attention [8] uses the pixel representation to predict the relation;
(ii) ACFNet [75] directly uses one intermediate segmentation map to indicate
the relations. We use DA scheme and ACF scheme to represent the above two
mechanisms. We implement both methods by ourselves and only use the dilated
ResNet-101 as the backbone without using multi-scale contexts (the results of
ACFNet is improved by using ASPP [75])
Table 1: In
uence of object region supervision and pixel-region relation
estimation scheme. We can nd both the object region supervision and our pixel-
region relation scheme are important for the performance.
Object region supervision Pixel-region relations
w/o supervision w/ supervision DA scheme ACF scheme Ours
77:31% 79:58% 79:01% 78:02% 79:58%
The comparison in Table 1 shows that our approach gets superior perfor-
mance. The reason is that we exploit the pixel representation as well as the
region representation for computing the relations. The region representation is