information such that IfOcan be successful. One IfOmethod
developed to address this problem learns a correspondence
between the embodiments using autoencoders in a supervised
fashion [Gupta et al. , 2018 ]. The autoencoder is trained in
such a way that the encoded representations are invariant wi th
respect to the embodiment features. Another method learns
the correspondence in an unsupervised fashion with a small
amount of human supervision [Sermanet et al. , 2018 ].
Viewpoint Difference
Another perceptual challenge that might arise in IfOapplica-
tions comes when demonstrations are not recorded in a con-
trolled environment. For instance, video background may
be cluttered, or there may be mismatch in the point of view
present in the demonstration video and that with which the
agent sees itself. One IfOapproach that attempts to ad-
dress this issue learns a context translation model to trans -
late an observation by predicting it in the target context
[Liuet al. , 2018 ]. The translation is learned using data that
consists of images of the target context and the source con-
text, and the task is to translate the frame from the source co n-
text to the that of the target. Another approach uses a classi -
ﬁer to distinguish between the data that comes from differen t
viewpoints and attempts to maximize the domain confusion in
an adversarial setting during the training [Stadie et al. , 2017 ].
Consequently, the extracted features can be invariant with re-
spect to the viewpoint.
3.2 Control
Another main component of IfOis control, i.e., the approach
used to learn the imitation policy, typically under the assu mp-
tion that the agent has access to clean state demonstration d ata
{st}. Since the action labels are not available, this is a very
challenging problem, and many approaches have been dis-
cussed in the literature. We organize IfOcontrol algorithms
in the literature into two general groups: (1)model-based al-
gorithms, and (2)model-free algorithms. In the following,
we discuss the features of each group and present relevant
example algorithms from the literature.
Model-based
Model-based approaches to IfOare characterized by the fact
that they learn some type of dynamics model during the imi-
tation process. The learned models themselves can be either
(1)inverse dynamics models, or (2)forward dynamics model.
Inverse Dynamics Models An inverse dynamics model is
a mapping from state-transitions {(st,st+1)}to actions {at}
[Hanna and Stone, 2017 ]. One algorithm that learns and uses
this kind of model for IfOis that of Nair et al. [2017 ]. Given
a single video demonstration, the goal of the proposed algo-
rithm is to allow the imitator to reproduce the observed be-
havior directly. To do so, the algorithm ﬁrst allows the agen t
to interact with the environment using an exploratory polic y
to collect data {(st,at,st+1)}. Then, the collected data is
used to learn a pixel-level inverse dynamics model which is a
mapping from observation transition, {(ot,ot+1)}, to actions,
{at}. Finally, the algorithm computes the actions for the im-
itator to take by applying the inverse dynamics model to the
video demonstration. Another algorithm of this type, rein-
forced inverse dynamics modeling [Pavse et al. , 2019 ], afterlearning the inverse dynamics model, uses a sparse reward
function to further optimize the model. Then it executes the
actions in the environment. It is shown that in most of the ex-
periments the resulting behavior outperforms the expert. C rit-
ically, these methods make the assumption that each observa -
tion transition is reachable through the application of a si ngle
action. Pathak et al. [2018 ]attempt to remove this assump-
tion by allowing the agent to execute multiple actions until it
gets close enough to the next demonstrated frame. Then this
process is repeated for the next frame, and so on. All of the
algorithms mentioned above attempt to exactly reproduce sin-
gledemonstrations. The authors [Torabi et al. , 2018 ], on the
other hand, have proposed an algorithm, behavioral cloning
from observation ( BCO ), that is instead concerned with learn-
ing generalized imitation policies using multiple demonst ra-
tions. The approach also learns an inverse dynamics model
using an exploratory policy, and then uses that model to infe r
the actions from the demonstrations. Then, however, since
the states and actions of the demonstrator are available, a r eg-
ular imitation learning algorithm (behavioral cloning) is used
to learn the task. In another work, Guo et al. [2019 ]pro-
posed a hybrid algorithm that assumes that the agent also has
access to both visual demonstrations and reward informatio n
as in the RLproblem. A method similar to BCO is formu-
lated for imitating the demonstrations, and a gradient-bas ed
RLapproach is used to take advantage of the additional re-
ward signal. The ﬁnal imitation policy is learned by min-
imizing a linear combination of the behavioral cloning loss
and the RLloss.
Forward Dynamics Models A forward dynamics model
is a mapping from state-action pairs, {(st,at)}, to the next
states,{st+1}. One IfOapproach that learns and uses this
type of dynamics model is called imitating latent policies
from observation ( ILPO )[Edwards et al. , 2019 ].ILPO cre-
ates an initial hypothesis for the imitation policy by learn ing
a latent policy π(z|st)that estimates the probability of la-
tent (unreal) action zgiven the current state st. Since actual
actions are not needed, this process can be done ofﬂine with-
out any interaction with the environment. In order to learn
the latent policy, they use a latent forward dynamics model
which predicts st+1and a prior over zgivenst. Then they
use a limited number of environment interactions to learn an
action-remapping network that associates the latent actio ns
with their corresponding correct actions. Since most of the
process happens ofﬂine, the algorithm is efﬁcient with rega rds
to the number of interactions needed.
Model-free
The other broad category of IfOcontrol approaches is that
of model-free algorithms. Model-free techniques attempt t o
learn the imitation policy without any sort of model-learni ng
step. Within this category, there are two fundamentally-
different types of algorithms: (1) adversarial methods, an d
(2) reward-engineering methods.
Adversarial Methods Adversarial approaches to IfOare
inspired by the generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL ) algorithm described in Section 2.2. Motivated by
this work, Merel et al. [2017 ]proposed an IfOalgorithm