arXiv:1905.13566v2  [cs.RO]  19 Jun 2019InProceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on A rtiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2019),
Macao, China, August 2019
Recent Advances in Imitation Learning from Observation
Faraz Torabi1,Garrett Warnell2and Peter Stone1
1The University of Texas at Austin
2Army Research Laboratory
{faraztrb, pstone }@cs.utexas.edu, garrett.a.warnell.civ@mail.mil
Abstract
Imitation learning is the process by which one
agent tries to learn how to perform a certain task us-
ing information generated by another, often more-
expert agent performing that same task. Con-
ventionally, the imitator has access to both state
andaction information generated by an expert per-
forming the task (e.g., the expert may provide a
kinesthetic demonstration of object placement us-
ing a robotic arm). However, requiring the ac-
tion information prevents imitation learning from
a large number of existing valuable learning re-
sources such as online videos of humans perform-
ing tasks. To overcome this issue, the speciﬁc
problem of imitation from observation (IfO) has re-
cently garnered a great deal of attention, in which
the imitator only has access to the state information
(e.g., video frames) generated by the expert. In this
paper, we provide a literature review of methods
developed for IfO, and then point out some open
research problems and potential future work.
1 Introduction
Imitation learning [Schaal, 1997; Argall et al. , 2009;
Osaet al. , 2018 ]is a problem in machine learning that
autonomous agents face when attempting to learn tasks from
another, more-expert agent. The expert provides demonstra -
tions of task execution, from which the imitator attempts
to mimic the expert’s behavior. Conventionally, methods
developed in this framework require the demonstration
information to include not only the expert’s states (e.g.,
robot joint angles), but also its actions (e.g., robot torque
commands). For instance, a human expert might provide
a demonstration of an object-manipulation task to a robot
by manually moving the robot’s arms in the correct way,
during which the robot can record both its joint angles and
also the joint torques induced by the human demonstrator.
Unfortunately, requiring demonstration action informati on
prevents imitating agents from using a large number of
existing valuable demonstration resources such as online
videos of humans performing a wide variety of tasks. These
resources provide state information (i.e., video frames)only—the actions executed by the demonstrator are not
available.
In order to take advantage of these valuable resources, the
more-speciﬁc problem of imitation learning from observa-
tion(IfO) must be considered. The IfOproblem arises when
an autonomous agent attempts to learn how to perform tasks
by observing state-only demonstrations generated by an ex-
pert. Compared to the typical imitation learning paradigm
described above, IfOis a more natural way to consider learn-
ing from an expert, and exhibits more similarity with the way
many biological agents appear to approach imitation. For ex -
ample, humans often learn how to do new tasks by observing
other humans performing those tasks without ever having ex-
plicit knowledge of the exact low-level actions (e.g., musc le
commands) that the demonstrator used.
Considering the problem of imitation learning using
state-only demonstrations is not new [Ijspeert et al. , 2002;
Bentivegna et al. , 2002 ]. However, with recent advances in
deep learning and visual recognition, researchers now have
much better tools than before with which to approach the
problem, especially with respect to using raw visual obser-
vations. These advances have resulted in a litany of new im-
itation from observation techniques in the literature, whi ch
can be categorized in several fundamentally-different way s.
In this paper, we offer an organization of recent IfOresearch
and then consider open research problems and potential fu-
ture work.
2 Background
In this section, we ﬁrst describe Markov decision processes
(MDP s), which constitute the foundation of all the algorithms
presented in this paper. We then provide background on con-
ventional imitation learning, including the problem setti ng
and a number of algorithms developed for that problem.
2.1 Markov Decision Processes
We consider artiﬁcial learning agents operating in the fram e-
work of Markov decision processes ( MDP s). An MDP can
be described as a 6-tuple M={S,A,P,r,γ}, whereS
andAare state and action spaces, P(st+1|st,at)is a func-
tion which represents the probability of an agent transitio n-
ing from state stat timettost+1at timet+ 1 by taking
actionat,r:S × A → R is a function that represents the
reward feedback that the agent receives after taking a speci ﬁc