loss is used to train a neural network that is used to gen-
erate a task-speciﬁc state encoding at each time step. This
loss function brings states that occur in a small time-windo w
closer together in the embedding space and pushes others far -
ther apart. The engineered reward function is then deﬁned as
the Euclidean distance between the embedded demonstration
and the embedded agent’s state at each time step, and an im-
itation policy is learned using RLtechniques. Dwibedi et al.
[2018 ]claims that, since TCN uses single frames to learn the
embedding function, it is difﬁcult for TCN to encode mo-
tion cues or the velocities of objects. Therefore, they ex-
tend TCN to the multi-frame setting by learning an embed-
ding function that uses multiple frames as the input, and the y
show that it results in better imitation. Another approach o f
this type is developed by Goo and Niekum [2019 ]in which
the algorithm uses a formulation similar to shufﬂe-and-lea rn
[Misra et al. , 2016 ]to train a classiﬁer that learns the order
of frames in the demonstration. The manually-speciﬁed re-
ward function is then deﬁned as the progress toward the task
goal based on the learned classiﬁer. Aytar et al. [2018 ]also
take a similar approach, learning an embedding function for
the video frames based on the demonstration. They use the
closeness between the imitator’s embedded states and some
checkpoint embedded features as the reward function. In an-
other work, Gupta et al. [2018 ]consider settings in which
the demonstrator and the imitator have different state spac es.
First, they train an autoencoder that maps states into an inv ari-
ant feature space where corresponding states have the same
features. Then, they deﬁne the reward as the Euclidean dis-
tance of the expert and imitator state features in the invari ant
space at each time step. Finally, they learn the imitation po l-
icy using this reward function with an RLalgorithm. Liu et al.
[2018 ]also uses the same reward function to solve the task
however in a setting where the expert demonstrations and the
imitator’s viewpoints are different.
4 Conclusion and Future Directions
In this paper, we reviewed recent advances in imitation lear n-
ing from observation ( IfO) and, for the ﬁrst time, provided
an organization of the research that is being conducted in th is
ﬁeld. In this section, we provide some directions for future
work.
4.1 Perception
Adversarial training techniques have led to several recent
and exciting advances in the computer vision commu-
nity. One such advance is in the area of pose estimation
[Caoet al. , 2017; Wang et al. , 2019 ], which enables detec-
tion of the position and orientation of the objects in a clut-
tered video through keypoint detection—such keypoint info r-
mation may also prove useful in IfO. While there has been
a small amount of effort to incorporate these advances in
IfO[Peng et al. , 2018b ], there is still much to investigate.
Another recent advancement in computer vision is in the
area of visual domain adaptation [Wang and Deng, 2018 ],
which is concerned with transferring learned knowledge to
different visual contexts. For instance, the recent succes s of
CycleGAN [Zhuet al. , 2017 ]suggests that modiﬁed adver-sarial techniques may be applicable to IfOproblems that re-
quire solutions to embodiment mismatch, though it remains
to be seen if such approaches will truly lead to advances in
IfO.
4.2 Application on Physical Robots
Very few of the IfO algorithms discussed have actu-
ally been successfully tested on physical robots, such as
[Sermanet et al. , 2018; Liu et al. , 2018 ]. That is, most dis-
cuss results only in simulated domains. For instance, while
adversarial methods currently provide state-of-the-art p er-
formance for a number of baseline experimental IfOprob-
lems, these methods exhibit high sample complexity and have
therefore only been applied to relatively simple simulatio n
tasks. Thus, an open problem in IfOis that of ﬁnding ways to
adapt these techniques such that they can be used in scenario s
for which high sample complexity is prohibitive, i.e., task s in
robotics.
4.3 Integration
The papers reviewed in this survey are exclusively con-
cerned with the IfOproblem, i.e., ﬁnding imitation poli-
cies from state-only demonstrations. However, to achieve
the overall goal of developing fully-intelligent agents, a lgo-
rithms that have been developed for other learning paradigm s
(e.g., RL) should be integrated with these techniques. While
there is some previous work that considers a combination
of imitation learning and RL[Zhuet al. , 2018 ]orIfOand
RL[Guo et al. , 2019 ], there is still much to investigate.
Acknowledgments
This work has taken place in the Learning Agents Research
Group (LARG) at the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. LARG research is supported
in part by grants from the National Science Foundation (IIS-
1637736, IIS-1651089, IIS-1724157), the Ofﬁce of Naval
Research (N00014-18-2243), Future of Life Institute (RFP2 -
000), Army Research Lab, DARPA, Intel, Raytheon, and
Lockheed Martin. Peter Stone serves on the Board of Direc-
tors of Cogitai, Inc. The terms of this arrangement have been
reviewed and approved by the University of Texas at Austin
in accordance with its policy on objectivity in research.
References
[Abbeel and Ng, 2004 ]Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng.
Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learn-
ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
page 1. ACM, 2004.
[Argall et al. , 2009 ]Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova,
Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot
learning from demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous
Systems , 57(5):469–483, 2009.
[Aytar et al. , 2018 ]Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Bud-
den, Thomas Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando de Freitas.
Playing hard exploration games by watching youtube. In
NeurIPS , pages 2935–2945, 2018.