action at a given state, and γis a discount factor. We de-
note byo∈ O visual observations, i.e., an image at time tis
denoted by ot. Typically, these visual observations can only
provide partial state information. s, on the other hand, consti-
tutes the full proprioceptive state of the agent, and theref ore
is considered to provide complete state information. In the
context of the notation established above, the goal of rein-
forcement learning ( RL)[Sutton and Barto, 1998 ]is to learn
policiesπ:S × A → [0,1]—used to select actions at each
state—that exhibit some notion of optimality with respect t o
the reward function.
2.2 Imitation Learning
In imitation learning ( IL), agents do not receive task reward
feedback r. Instead, they have access to expert demonstra-
tions of the task and, from these demonstrations, attempt to
learn policies πthat produce behaviors similar to that present
in the demonstration. Conventionally, these demonstratio ns
are composed of the state and action sequences experienced
by the demonstrator, i.e., expert demonstration trajector ies
are of the form τe={(st,at)}. Broadly speaking, research in
imitation learning area can be split into two main categorie s:
(1)behavioral cloning ( BC), and (2)inverse reinforcement
learning ( IRL).
Behavioral Cloning
Behavioral cloning [Bain and Sommut, 1999;
Ross et al. , 2011; Daftry et al. , 2016 ]is a class of imi-
tation learning algorithms where, given τe, supervised
learning is used to learn an imitating policy. BChas been
used in a variety of the applications. For instance, it has
recently been used in the context of autonomous driving
[Bojarski et al. , 2016 ]and in the context of autonomous con-
trol of aerial vehicles [Giusti et al. , 2016 ].BCis powerful in
the sense that it requires only demonstration data to direct ly
learn an imitation policy and does not require any further
interaction between the agent and the environment. However ,
BCapproaches can be rather brittle due to the well-known
covariate shift problem [Ross and Bagnell, 2010 ].
Inverse Reinforcement Learning
The other major category of ILapproaches is composed
of techniques based on inverse reinforcement learning
[Russell, 1998; Ng et al. , 2000 ]. Instead of directly learn-
ing a mapping from states to actions using the demon-
stration data, IRL-based techniques iteratively alternate be-
tween using the demonstration to infer a hidden reward
function and using RLwith the inferred reward function
to learn an imitating policy. IRL-based techniques have
been used for a variety of tasks such as maneuvering a
helicopter [Abbeel and Ng, 2004 ]and object manipulation
[Finn et al. , 2016 ]. Using RLto optimize the policy given the
inferred reward function requires the agent to interact wit h its
environment, which can be costly from a time and safety per-
spective. Moreover, the IRLstep typically requires the agent
to solve an MDP in the inner loop of iterative reward opti-
mization [Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al. , 2008 ], which
can be extremely costly from a computational perspective.
However, recently, a number of methods have been devel-
oped which do not make this requirement [Finn et al. , 2016;Ho and Ermon, 2016; Fu et al. , 2018 ]. One of these ap-
proaches is called generative adversarial imitation from o b-
servation ( GAIL )[Ho and Ermon, 2016 ], which uses an ar-
chitecture similar to generative adversarial networks ( GAN s)
[Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ], and the associated algorithm can
be thought of as trying to induce an imitator state-action oc -
cupancy measure that is similar to that of the demonstrator.
3 Imitation Learning from Observation
We now turn to the problem that is the focus of this sur-
vey, i.e., that of imitation learning from observation ( IfO),
in which the agent has access to state-only demonstrations
(visual observations) of an expert performing a task, i.e.,
τe={ot}. As in IL, the goal of the IfOproblem is to learn an
imitation policy πthat results in the imitator exhibiting sim-
ilar behavior to the expert. Broadly speaking, there are two
major components of the IfOproblem: (1)perception, and (2)
control.
3.1 Perception
Because IfO depends on observations of a more expert
agent, processing these observations perceptually is ex-
tremely important. In the existing IfOliterature, multi-
ple approaches have been used for this part of the prob-
lem. One approach to the perception problem is to
record the expert’s movements using sensors placed di-
rectly on the expert agent [Ijspeert et al. , 2001 ]. Us-
ing this style of perception, previous work has studied
techniques that can allow humanoid or anthropomorphic
robots to mimic human motions, e.g., arm-reaching move-
ments [Ijspeert et al. , 2002; Bentivegna et al. , 2002 ], biped
locomotion [Nakanishi et al. , 2004 ], and human gestures
[Calinon and Billard, 2007 ]. A more recent approach is
that of motion capture [Field et al. , 2009 ], which typi-
cally uses visual markers on the demonstrator to in-
fer movement. IfOtechniques built upon this approach
have been used for a variety of tasks, including loco-
motion, acrobatics, and martial arts [Peng et al. , 2018a;
Merel et al. , 2017; Setapen et al. , 2010 ]. The methods dis-
cussed above often require costly instrumentation and pre-
processing [Holden et al. , 2016 ]. Moreover, one of the goals
ofIfOis to enable task imitation from available, passive re-
sources such as YouTube videos, for which these methods are
not helpful.
Recently, however, convolutional neural networks and ad-
vances in visual recognition have provided promising tools to
work towards visual imitation where the expert demonstra-
tion consists of raw video information (e.g., pixel color va l-
ues). Even with such tools, the imitating agent is still face d
with a number of challenges: (1)embodiment mismatch, and
(2)viewpoint difference.
Embodiment Mismatch
One challenge that might arise is if the demonstrating agent
has a different embodiment from that of the imitator. For
example, the video could be of a human performing a task,
but the goal may be to train a robot to do the same. Since
humans and robots do not look exactly alike (and may look
quite different), the challenge is in how to interpret the vi sual