IfOControl Algorithms
Model-based Model-free
Inverse Model Forward Model Adversarial Methods Reward-Engineering
Figure 1: A diagrammatic representation of categorization of the IfOcontrol algorithm. The algorithms can be categorized into t wo
groups: (1) model-based algorithms in which the algorithms may use either a forward dynamics model [Edwards et al. , 2019 ]or an in-
verse dynamics model [Torabi et al. , 2018; Nair et al. , 2017 ]. (2) Model-free algorithms, which itself can be categorize d to adversar-
ial methods [Torabi et al. , 2019c; Merel et al. , 2017; Stadie et al. , 2017 ]and reward engineering [Sermanet et al. , 2018; Gupta et al. , 2018;
Liuet al. , 2018 ].
that assumes access to proprioceptive state-only demonstr a-
tions{st}and uses a GAN -like architecture in which the
imitation policy is interpreted as the generator. The imita -
tion policy is executed in the environment to collect data,
{(si
t,ai
t)}, and single states are fed into the discriminator,
which is trained to differentiate between the data that come s
from the imitator and data that comes from the demonstrator.
The output value of the discriminator is then used as a re-
ward to update the imitation policy using RL. Another algo-
rithm, called OptionGAN [Henderson et al. , 2018 ], uses the
same algorithm combined with option learning to enable the
agent to decompose policies for cases in which the demon-
strations contain trajectories result from a diverse set of un-
derlying reward functions rather than a single one. In both
of the algorithms discussed above, the underlying goal is to
achieve imitation policies that generate a state distribut ion
similar to the expert. However, two agents having similar
state distributions does not necessarily mean that they wil l
exhibit similar behaviors. For instance, in a ring-like en-
vironment, two agents that move with the same speed but
different directions (i.e., one clockwise and one counter-
clockwise) would result in each exhibiting the same state
distribution even though their behaviors are opposite one a n-
other. To resolve this issue, the authors [Torabi et al. , 2019c;
Torabi et al. , 2019b ]proposed an algorithm similar to those
above, but with the difference that the discriminator consi d-
ers state transitions ,{(st,st+1)}, as the input instead of sin-
gle states. This paper also tested the proposed algorithm on
the cases that the imitator has only access to visual demon-
strations{ot}, and showed that using multiple video frames
instead of single frames resulted in good imitation policie s
for the demonstrated tasks. In this paper, the authors consi der
policies to be a mapping from observations {ot}to actions
{at}. In follow up work [Torabi et al. , 2019d ], motivated by
the fact that agents often have access to their own internal
states (i.e., proprioception ), proposed a modiﬁed version of
this algorithm for the case of visual imitation that leverag es
this information in the policy learning process by consider -
ing a multi-layer perceptron (instead of convolutional neu -
ral networks) as the policy which maps internal states sto
actionsa. Then it uses the observation oas the input of
the discriminator. By changing the architecture of the pol-
icy and leveraging the proprioceptive features, the author s
showed that the performance improves signiﬁcantly and the
algorithm is much more sample efﬁcient. In another follow
up work [Torabi et al. , 2019a ], the authors modiﬁed the algo-rithm to make it more sample efﬁcient in order to be able to
execute it directly on physical robots. To do so, the algorit hm
was adapted in a way that linear quadratic regulators ( LQR )
[Tassa et al. , 2012 ]could be used for the policy training step.
The algorithm is tested on a robotic arm which has resulted
in reasonable performnce. Zolna et al. [2018 ]has built on
this work, and proposed an approach to adapt the algorithm
to cases in which the imitator and the expert have different
action spaces. Instead of using consecutive states as the in -
put of the discriminator, they use pairs of states with rando m
time gaps, and show that this change helps improve imitation
performance. Another adversarial IfOapproach developed
by Stadie et al. [2017 ]considers cases in which the imita-
tor and demonstrator have different viewpoints. To overcom e
this challenge, a new classiﬁer is introduced that uses the o ut-
put of early layers in the discriminator as input, and attemp ts
to distinguish between the data coming from different view-
points. Then they train early layers of the discriminator an d
the classiﬁer in such a way as to maximize the viewpoint con-
fusion. The intuition is to ensure that the early layers of th e
discriminator are invariant to viewpoint. Finally, Sun et al.
[2019 ]have also developed an adversarial IfOapproach in
which, from a given start state, a policy for each time-step o f
the horizon is learned by solving a minimax game. The min-
imax game learns a policy that matches the state distributio n
of the next state given the policies of the previous time step s.
Reward Engineering Another class of model-free ap-
proaches developed for IfOcontrol are those that utilize re-
ward engineering. Here, reward engineering means that,
based on the expert demonstrations, a manually-designed
reward function is used to ﬁnd imitation policies via RL.
Importantly, the designed reward functions are not neces-
sarily the ones that the demonstrator used to produce the
demonstrations—rather, they are simply estimates inferre d
from the demonstration data. One such method, developed
by Kimura et al. [2018 ], ﬁrst trains a predictor that pre-
dicts the demonstrator’s next state given the current state .
The manually-designed reward function is then deﬁned as
the Euclidean distance of the actual next state and the one
that the approximator returns. An imitation policy is learn ed
viaRLusing the designed reward function. Another reward-
engineering approach is that of time-contrastive networks
(TCN )[Sermanet et al. , 2018 ].TCN considers settings in
which demonstrations are generated by human experts per-
forming tasks and the agent is a robot with arms. A triplet