Introduction to the K -Means Clustering Algorithm Based 
on the Elbow Method 
Mengyao Cui 
Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, Shandong, China 
178742173@qq.com 
Keywords:  K-means clustering, Elbow method 
Abstract:  The K -means clustering algorithm is a commonly used algorithm in the financial 
field, and it is also an unsupervised learning algorithm. It is characterized as an easy and 
simple algorithm and is widely used in t he fields such as machine learning and stock 
trading. However, the K -means algorithm also has certain shortcomings. The k value is 
difficult to determine, and the initial center of the cluster is difficult to find. This article introduces the idea of K- means algorithm, using the elbow method to find the most suitable 
k value. 
1. Introduction 
2. Clustering Algorithms  
Clustering is a data mining technique that divides a data set into multiple different categories by 
calculating the similarity between data
】 【1. There is a high degree of similarity within each cluster of 
data classified by the clustering algorithm , and the similarity between different clusters of data is 
relatively large . Clustering algorithms usually include hierarchical me thods, density- based methods , 
and partitioning methods . K-means algorithm is a widely used clustering method and is also the 
method used in this article. 
3. K- Means Clustering  
3.1 General Principle  
k-means clustering is abbreviated as K -means , which is an unsupervised learning model】 【2. 
Unsupervised learning models are used for data sets that have never been labeled or classified . It 
records the same points in the data set and responds accordingly to these same points in each data 
point. 
The model is a centroid -based algorithm or a distance -based algorithm , and we calculate the 
distance to assign points to each cluster . First take a K value , and then divide the data into K 
categories, so that the similarity of the data in the same category is higher , which is convenient for 
distinguishing. 
Accounting, Auditing and Finance (2020) 1: 5-8 
Clausius Scientific Press, Canada
DOI: 10.23977/accaf.2020.010102 
ISSN 2616-3136
5