3.2 Euclidean Distance  
Usually , the index to measure the similarity between data is Euclidean distance. Euclidean 
distance is the distance between two points in two -dimensional and three- dimensional space. 
 Two -dimensional formula: 
2
2 12
2 1 ) ( ) ( dy y x x− + − = 
 Three -dimensional formula: 
2
2 12
2 12
2 1 ) ( ) ( ) d z z y y x x− + − + − = （  
 It can also be generalized to n-dimensional space: 
∑− =2
2 1) ( di ix x  
where i=1 , 2, .., n; i1x represents the i -th dimensional coordinate of the first point ; i2x 
represents the i -th dimensional coordinate of the second point. 
The n -dimensional Euclidean space is a set of points, and each point of it can be represented as 
(x(1),  x(2),...x(n)),  where x (i)(i=1, 2. ..n) is a real number , called the i -th coordinate of x, the 
distance between two points x and y=(y(1), y(2)... y(n)) d(x,y ) is defined as the above formula. 
The smaller the Euclidean distance between data, the higher the similarity between them . At the 
same time, there are only K centroids at the beginning, and each cluster is associated with a centroid , 
and data points close to the centroid will be classified as a cluster for classification . 
3.3 The Main Goal and Steps of K -Means 
The main goal of the K -Means algorithm is to minimize the sum of the distances between the 
points and their respective cluster centroids , and cluster  them in an iterative manner . The steps are 
as follows】 【3: 
First, select K objects as the center of the initial cluster according to our research objective. 
Calculate the Euclidean distance between the data and the cluster center , and divide the data with 
close distance into one category】 【4. 
 
Second, recalculate the cluster centers of the newly divided clusters , and re -divide the clusters in 
the previous way according to the new cluster centers. 
 
Third , iterati ve operation in this way until the cluster center no longer changes , then the 
algorithm can be stopped. 
There are three types of criteria for stopping the algorithm : first, the centroid of the newly 
formed cluster remains unchanged , second , the points rema in in the same cluster , and the third 
reaches the maximum number of iterations. If the centroid of the newly formed cluster has not 
changed, we can stop the algorithm . Even after multiple iterations , if all clusters have the same 
centroid , then the algorithm has not learned any new patterns , and training can be stopped at this 
time. Another sign of explicitly stopping training is that even after training the algorithm multiple 
iterations , if these points are still in the same cluster , the training process should be stopped at this 
time. Finally , if the maximum number of iterations is reached , we can stop training . Suppose we set 
the number of iterations to 200. Before stopping, the process will repeat 200 iterations . 
6