4. Elbow Method 
To make the centroid of this algorithm no longer change , it must pay attention to the choice of K 
value, but there is a shortcoming, which is related to the choice of the initial K points . To solve this 
problem, the performance of the algorithm is calculated for d ifferent numbers of centroids . When 
evaluating, as long as convergence occurs, the distance between the centroid of each cluster and the 
data point can be calculated . Then add up all the calculated distances as a performance indicator . As 
the number of cluster centroids increases, the size of the objective function will decrease . In order to 
select the best K , the elbow method is usually used. 
The elbow method is suitable for relatively small k values . The elbow method calculates the 
squared difference of different k values . As the k value increases, the average distortion degree 
becomes smaller . The number of samples contained in each category decreases, and the samples are 
closer to the center of gravity . As the k value increases, the position where the improvement effect 
of the distortion degree decreases the most is the k value corresponding to the elbow. 
Here we introduce a variable, WCSS (Within -Cluster Sum -of-Squares ), which measures the 
variance within each cluster . The better the clustering , the lower the overall WCSS . 
For example , at first, the value of K is defined as 1 , and the value of WCSS is higher at this time . 
Then the value of k is equal to 2, and the calculated WCSS value is lower than when k is equal to 1. 
When k is equal to 3, the value of WCSS also decreases. But when we choose k to be equal to 4, the 
drop in WCSS value is small and not obvious . The WCSS will equate to zero because ever y single 
point has its own cluster . It has its own centroid and that centroid is going to be exactly where that 
point is so the distance between the point and centroid is going to be zero. 
 Elbow Method Formula for WCSS : 
2
3
3 Cluster in  2
2
2 Cluster in  2
1
1 Cluster in  ) , distance ) , distance ) , distance
i i iC P C P C P WCSSi
Pi
Pi
P（ （ （ ∑ ∑ ∑ + + =  
We use the following figure as an example . When k is equal to 3, it is an inflection point of this 
curve, which can be regarded as the “elbow” of this curve . It determines the k value , that is , the 
optimal number of clusters in this example is three .】 【5 
 
Fig.1 An Example of Wcss 
5. Conclusion 
Although this algorithm is well developed now , it still faces challenges in the future and has a lot 
of room for improvement . At the same time, we can apply this algorithm to many fields and 
accomplish many practical tasks. For example , we can apply the K -mean algorithm to stock trading. 
When investing on the U .S. stocks, we can use data science techniques to narrow the search scope 
and group sim ilar stocks using K -means clustering algorithm . We know that the purpose of the 
7