3 Graph Neural Networks 29
popular GNN methods and their expressive powers, to the scalability, interpretabil-
ity, and robustness of GNNs. Next, we will discuss various frontier research which
are built on GNNs, including graph classiﬁcation, link prediction, graph generation
and transformation, graph matching, graph structure learning, dynamic GNNs, het-
erogeneous GNNs, AutoML of GNNs and self-supervised GNNs. Based on them,
we further summarize the basic procedures which exploit full use of various GNNs
for a large number of applications. Finally, we provide the organization of our GNN
book and summarize the roadmap of the various research topics of GNNs.
3.2 Graph Neural Networks: Overview
In this section, we summarize the development of graph neural networks along three
important dimensions: (1) Foundations of GNNs; (2) Frontiers of GNNs; (3) GNN-
based applications. We will ﬁrst discuss the important research areas under the ﬁrst
two dimensions for GNNs and brieﬂy illustrate the current progress and challenges
for each research sub-domain. Then we will provide a general summarization on
how to exploit the power of GNNs for a rich variety of applications.
3.2.1 Graph Neural Networks: Foundations
Conceptually, we can categorize the fundamental learning tasks of GNNs into ﬁve
different directions: i) Graph Neural Networks Methods; ii) Theoretical understand-
ing of Graph Neural Networks; iii) Scalability of Graph Neural Networks; iv) In-
terpretability of Graph Neural Networks; and v) Adversarial robustness of Graph
Neural Networks. We will discuss these fundamental aspects of GNNs one by one
in this subsection.
Graph Neural Network Methods. Graph Neural Networks are speciﬁcally de-
signed neural architectures operated on graph-structure data. The goal of GNNs is
to iteratively update the node representations by aggregating the representations of
node neighbors and their own representation in the previous iteration. There are
a variety of graph neural networks proposed in the literature (Kipf and Welling,
2017a; Petar et al, 2018; Hamilton et al, 2017b; Gilmer et al, 2017; Xu et al, 2019d;
Velickovic et al, 2019; Kipf and Welling, 2016), which can be further categorized
into supervised GNNs and unsupervised GNNs. Once the node representations are
learnt, a fundamental task on graphs is node classiﬁcation that tries to classify the
nodes into a few predeﬁned classes. Despite the huge successes that various GNNs
have achieved, a severe issue on training deep graph neural networks has been ob-
served to yield inferior results, namely, over-smoothing problem (Li et al, 2018b),
where all the nodes have similar representations. Many recent works have been pro-
posed with different remedies to overcome this over-smoothing issue.