30 Lingfei Wu, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, Liang Zhao and Le Song
Theoretical understanding of Graph Neural Networks. Rapid algorithmic devel-
opments of GNNs have aroused a signiﬁcant amount of interests in theoretical anal-
ysis on the expressive power of GNNs. In particular, much efforts have been made
in order to characterize the expressive power of GNNs when compared with the tra-
ditional graph algorithms (e.g. graph kernel-based methods) and how to build more
powerful GNNs so as to overcome several limitations in GNNs. Speciﬁcally, Xu
et al (2019d) showed that current GNN methods are able to achieve the expressive
power of the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman test (Weisfeiler and Leman., 1968),
a widely used method in traditional graph kernel community (Shervashidze et al,
2011b). Much recent research has further proposed a series of design strategies in
order to further reach beyond the expressive power of the Weisfeiler-Lehman test by
including attaching random attributes, distance attributes, and utilizing higher-order
structures.
Scalability of Graph Neural Networks. The increasing popularity of GNNs have
attracted many attempts to apply various GNN methods on real-world applications,
where the graph sizes are often about having one hundred million nodes and one
billion edges. Unfortunately, most of the GNN methods cannot directly be applied
on these large-scale graph-structured data due to large memory requirements (Hu
et al, 2020b). Speciﬁcally, this is because the majority of GNNs are required to
store the whole adjacent matrices and the intermediate feature matrices in the mem-
ory, rendering the signiﬁcant challenges for both computer memory consumption
and computational costs. In order to address these issues, many recent works have
been proposed with various sampling strategies such as node-wise sampling (Hamil-
ton et al, 2017b; Chen et al, 2018d), layer-wise sampling (Chen and Bansal, 2018;
Huang et al, 2018), and graph-wise sampling (Chiang et al, 2019; Zeng et al, 2020a).
Interpretability of Graph Neural Networks. Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence are
becoming increasingly popular in providing interpretable results on machine learn-
ing process, especially due to the black-box issue of deep learning techniques. As a
result, there is a surge of interests in improving the interpretability of GNNs. Gener-
ally speaking, explanation results on GNNs could be important nodes, important
edges, or important features of nodes or edges. Technically, white-box approxi-
mation based methods (Baldassarre and Azizpour, 2019; Sanchez-Lengeling et al,
2020) utilize the information inside the model inlucidng gradients, intermediate fea-
tures, and model parameters to provide the explanation. In contrast, the black-box
approximation based methods (Huang et al, 2020c; Zhang et al, 2020a; Vu and Thai,
2020) abandon the utilization of internal information of complex models but instead
leverage the intrinsically interpretable simple models (e.g. linear regression and de-
cision trees) to ﬁt the complex models. However, most of the existing works are
time-consuming, which rendering the difﬁculty in coping with large-scale graph.
To this end, many recent efforts have been made in order to develop more efﬁcient
approaches without compromising the explanation accuracy.
Adversarial robustness of Graph Neural Networks. Trustworthy machine learn-
ing has recently attracted a signiﬁcant amount of attention since the existing studies
have shown that deep learning models could be deliberately fooled, evaded, misled,
and stolen (Goodfellow et al, 2015). Consequently, a line of research has exten-