3 Graph Neural Networks 35
gard words, sentences, paragraphs, or documents as nodes and establish edges by
word co-occurrence, location, or text similarities. Syntactic graphs (or trees) empha-
size the syntactical dependencies between words in a sentence, such as dependency
graph and constituency graph. Knowledge graphs (KGs) are graphs of data intended
to accumulate and convey knowledge of the real world. Hybrid graphs contain mul-
tiple types of nodes and edges to integrate heterogeneous information. In the task of
program analysis, the formulation over graph representations of programs includes
syntax trees, control ﬂow, data ﬂow, program dependence, and call graphs, each pro-
viding different views of a program. At a high level, programs can be thought as a
set of heterogeneous entities that are related through various kinds of relations. This
view directly maps a program to a heterogeneous directed graph, with each entity
being represented as a node and each relationship of type represented as an edge.
3.2.3.2 Graph Representation Learning
After getting the graph expression of the input data, the next step is applying
GNNs for learning the graph representations. Some works directly utilize the typical
GNNs, such as GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2017a), GAT (Petar et al, 2018), GGNN
(Li et al, 2016a) and GraphSage (Hamilton et al, 2017b), which can be generalized
to different application tasks. While some special tasks needs an additional design
on the GNN architecture to better handle the speciﬁc problem. For example, in the
task of recommender systems, PinSage (Ying et al, 2018a) is proposed which takes
the top-k counted nodes of a node as its receptive ﬁeld and utilizes weighted ag-
gregation for aggregation. PinSage can be scalable to the web-scale recommender
systems with millions of users and items. KGCN (Wang et al, 2019d) aims to en-
hance the item representation by performing aggregations among its corresponding
entity neighborhood in a knowledge graph. KGAT (Wang et al, 2019j) shares a gen-
erally similar idea with KGCN except for incorporating an auxiliary loss for knowl-
edge graph reconstruction. For instance, in the NLP task of KB-alignment, Xu et al
(2019e) formulated it as a graph matching problem, and proposed a graph attention-
based approach. It ﬁrst matches all entities in two KGs, and then jointly models the
local matching information to derive a graph-level matching vector. The detailed
GNN techniques for each application can be found in the following chapters of this
book.
3.2.4 Graph Neural Networks: Organization
The high-level organization of the book is demonstrated in Figure 1.3. The book is
organized into four parts to best accommodate a variety of readers. Part I introduces
basic concepts; Part II discusses the most established methods; Part III presents the
most typical frontiers, and Part IV describes advances of methods and applications