3 Graph Neural Networks 31
sively studied the robustness of models in domains like computer vision and natural
language processing, which has also inﬂuenced similar research on the robustness
of GNNs. Technically, the standard approach (via adversarial examples) for study-
ing the robustness of GNNs is to construct a small change of the input graph data
and then to observe if it leads to a large change of the prediction results (i.e. node
classiﬁcation accuracy). There are a growing number of research works toward ei-
ther adversarial attacks (Dai et al, 2018a; Wang and Gong, 2019; Wu et al, 2019b;
Z¨ugner et al, 2018; Z ¨ugner et al, 2020) or adversarial training (Xu et al, 2019c; Feng
et al, 2019b; Chen et al, 2020i; Jin and Zhang, 2019). Many recent efforts have been
made to provide both theoretical guarantees and new algorithmic developments in
adversarial training and certiﬁed robustness.
3.2.2 Graph Neural Networks: Frontiers
Built on these aforementioned fundamental techniques of GNNs, there are various
fast-growing recent research developments in coping with a variety of graph-related
research problems. In this section, we will comprehensively introduce these research
frontiers that are either long-standing graph learning problems with new GNN solu-
tions or recently emerging learning problems with GNNs.
Graph Neural Networks: Graph Classiﬁcation and Link Prediction. Since each
layer in GNN models only produce the node-level representations, graph pooling
layers are needed to further compute graph-level representation based on node-level
representations. The graph-level representation, which summarizes the key charac-
teristics of input graph-structure, is the critical component for the graph classiﬁca-
tion. Depending on the learning techniques of graph pooling layers, these methods
can be generally categorized into four groups: simple ﬂat-pooling (Duvenaud et al,
2015a; Mesquita et al, 2020), attention-based pooling (Lee et al, 2019d; Huang et al,
2019d), cluster-based pooling (Ying et al, 2018c), and other type of pooling (Zhang
et al, 2018f; Bianchi et al, 2020; Morris et al, 2020b). Beside graph classiﬁcation,
another long-standing graph learning problem is link prediction task, which aims to
predict missing or future links between any pair of nodes. Since GNNs can jointly
learn from both graph structure and side information (e.g. node and edge features),
it has shown great advantages over other conventional graph learning methods for
link prediction. Regarding the learning types of link prediction, node-based methods
(Kipf and Welling, 2016) and subgraph-based methods (Zhang and Chen, 2018a,
2020) are two popular groups of GNN based methods.
Graph Neural Networks: Graph Generation and Graph Transformation. Graph
generation problem that builds probabilistic models over graphs is a classical re-
search problem that lies at the intersection between the probability theory and the
graph theory. Recent years have seen an increasing amount of interest in develop-
ing deep graph generative models that are built on modern deep learning on graphs
techniques like GNNs. These deep models have proven to be a more successful ap-
proach in capturing the complex dependencies within the graph data and generating