3 Graph Neural Networks 33
ular graph type in real applications is heterogeneous graphs that consist of different
types of graph nodes and edges. To fully exploit this information in heterogeneous
graphs, different GNNs for homogeneous graphs are not applicable. As a result, a
new line of research has been devoted to developing various heterogeneous graph
neural networks including message passing based methods (Wang et al, 2019l; Fu
et al, 2020; Hong et al, 2020b), encoder-decoder based methods (Tu et al, 2018;
Zhang et al, 2019b), and adversarial based methods (Wang et al, 2018a; Hu et al,
2018a).
Graph Neural Networks: AutoML and Self-supervised Learning. Automated ma-
chine learning (AutoML) has recently drawn a signiﬁcant amount of attention in
both research and industrial communities, the goal of which is coping with the
huge challenge of time-consuming manual tuning process, especially for compli-
cated deep learning models. This wave of the research in AutoML also inﬂuences
the research efforts in automatically identifying an optimized GNN model architec-
ture and training hyperparameters. Most of the existing research focuses on either
architecture search space (Gao et al, 2020b; Zhou et al, 2019a) or training hyperpa-
rameter search space (You et al, 2020a; Shi et al, 2020). Another important research
direction of GNNs is to address the limitation of most of deep learning models
that requires large amount of annotated data. As a result, self-supervised learning
has been proposed which aims to design and leverage domain-speciﬁc pretext tasks
on unlabeled data to pretrain a GNN model. In order to study the power of serf-
supervised leanring in GNNs, there are quite a few works that systemmatically de-
sign and compare different self-supervised pretext tasks in GNNs (Hu et al, 2020c;
Jin et al, 2020d; You et al, 2020c).
3.2.3 Graph Neural Networks: Applications
Due to the power of GNNs to model various data with complex structures, GNNs
have been widely applied into many applications and domains, such as modern rec-
ommender systems, computer vision (CV), natural language processing (NLP), pro-
gram analysis, software mining, bioinformatics, anomaly detection, and urban intel-
ligence. Though GNNs are utilized to solve different tasks for different applications,
they all consist of two important steps, namely graph construction and graph repre-
sentation learning. Graph construction aims to ﬁrst transform or represent the input
data as graph-structured data. Based on the graphs, graph representation learning
utilizes GNNs to learn the node or graph embeddings for the downstream tasks.
In the following, we brieﬂy introduce the techniques of these two steps regarding
different applications.