36 Lingfei Wu, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, Liang Zhao and Le Song
that tend to be important and promising for future research. Next, we brieﬂy elabo-
rate on each chapter.
•Part I: Introduction . These chapters provide the general introduction from the
representation learning for different data types, to the graph representation
learning. In addition, it introduces the basic ideas and typical variants of graph
neural networks for the graph representation learning.
•Part II: Foundations . These chapters describe the foundations of the graph neu-
ral networks by introducing the properties of graph neural networks as well as
several fundamental problems in this line. Speciﬁcally, this part introduces the
fundamental problems in graphs: node classiﬁcation, the expressive power of
graph neural networks, the interpretability and scalability issues of graph neu-
ral network, and the adversarial robustness of the graph neural networks.
•Part III: Frontiers . In these chapters, some frontier or advanced problems in
the domain of graph neural networks are proposed. Speciﬁcally, there are in-
troductions about the techniques in graph classiﬁcation, link prediction, graph
generation, graph transformation, graph matching, graph structure learning. In
addition, there are also introductions of several variants of GNNs for different
types of graphs, such as GNNs for dynamic graphs, heterogeneous graphs. We
also introduce the AutoML and self-supervised learning for GNNs.
•Part IV: Broad and Emerging Applications . These chapters introduce the broad
and emerging applications with GNNs. Speciﬁcally, these GNNs-based applica-
tions covers modern recommender systems, tasks in computer vision and NLP,
program analysis, software mining, biomedical knowledge graph mining for
drug design, protein function prediction and interaction, anomaly detection, and
urban intelligence.
3.3 Summary
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been emerging rapidly to deal with the graph-
structured data, which cannot be directly modeled by the conventional deep learning
techniques that are designed for Euclidean data such as images and text. A wide
range of applications can be naturally or best represented with graph structure and
have been successfully handled by various graph neural networks.
In this chapter, we have systematically introduced the development and overview
of GNNs, including the introduction of its foundations, frontiers, and applications.
Speciﬁcally, we provide the fundamental aspects of GNNs ranging from the existing
typical GNN methods and their expressive powers, to the scalability, interpretability
and robustness of GNNs. These aspects motivate the research on better understand-
ing and utilization of GNNs. Built on GNNs, recent research developments have
seen a surge of interests in coping with graph-related research problems, which
we called frontiers of GNNs. We have discussed various frontier research built on
GNNs, ranging from graph classiﬁcation and link prediction, to graph generation,