28 Lingfei Wu, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, Liang Zhao and Le Song
3.1 Graph Neural Networks: An Introduction
Deep Learning has become one of the most dominant approaches in Artiﬁcial In-
telligence research today. Conventional deep learning techniques, such as recurrent
neural networks (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997) and convolutional neural networks
(Krizhevsky et al, 2012) have achieved huge successes on Euclidean data such as
images, or sequence data such as text and signals. However, in a rich variety of scien-
tiﬁc ﬁelds, many important real-world objects and problems can be naturally or best
expressed along with a complex structure, e.g., graph or manifold structure, such
as social networks, recommendation systems, drug discovery and program analy-
sis. On the one hand, these graph-structured data can encode complicated pairwise
relationships for learning more informative representations; On the other hand, the
structural and semantic information in original data (images or sequential texts)
can be exploited to incorporate domain-speciﬁc knowledge for capturing more ﬁne-
grained relationships among the data.
In recent years, deep learning on graphs has experienced a burgeoning inter-
est from the research community (Cui et al, 2018; Wu et al, 2019e; Zhang et al,
2020e). Among them, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is the most successful learn-
ing framework in coping with various tasks across a large number of application do-
mains. Newly proposed neural network architectures on graph-structured data (Kipf
and Welling, 2017a; Petar et al, 2018; Hamilton et al, 2017b) have achieved remark-
able performance in some well-known domains such as social networks and bioin-
formatics. They have also inﬁltrated other ﬁelds of scientiﬁc research, including
recommendation systems (Wang et al, 2019j), computer vision (Yang et al, 2019g),
natural language processing (Chen et al, 2020o), program analysis (Allamanis et al,
2018b), software mining (LeClair et al, 2020), drug discovery (Ma et al, 2018),
anomaly detection (Markovitz et al, 2020), and urban intelligence (Yu et al, 2018a).
Despite these successes that existing research has achieved, GNNs still face many
challenges when they are used to model highly-structured data that is time-evolving,
multi-relational, and multi-modal. It is also very difﬁcult to model mapping between
graphs and other highly structured data, such as sequences, trees, and graphs. One
challenge with graph-structured data is that it does not show as much spatial locality
and structure as image or text data does. Thus, graph-structured data is not naturally
suitable for highly regularized neural structures such as convolutional and recurrent
neural networks.
More importantly, new application domains for GNNs that emerge from real-
world problems introduce signiﬁcantly challenges for GNNs. Graphs provide a pow-
erful abstraction that can be used to encode arbitrary data types such as multidi-
mensional data. For example, similarity graphs, kernel matrices, and collaborative
ﬁltering matrices can also be viewed as special cases of graph structures. Therefore,
a successful modeling process of graphs is likely to subsume many applications that
are often used in conjunction with specialized and hand-crafted methods.
In this chapter, we will systematically organize the existing research of GNNs
along three axes: foundations of GNNs, frontiers of GNNs, and GNN based applica-
tions. First of all, we will introduce the fundamental aspects of GNNs ranging from