34 Lingfei Wu, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, Liang Zhao and Le Song
3.2.3.1 Graph Construction
Graph construction is important in capturing the dependency among the objects in
the input data. Given the various formats of input data, different applications have
different graph construction techniques, while some tasks need to pre-deﬁne the
semantic meaning of nodes and edges to fully express the structural information of
the input data.
Input Data with Explicit Graph Structures. Some applications naturally have
the structure inside the data without pre-deﬁned nodes and the edges/relationships
among them. For example, the user-item interactions in a recommender systems nat-
urally form a graph where user-item preference is regarded as the edges between the
nodes of user and item. In the task of drug design, a molecule is also naturally rep-
resented as a graph, where each node denotes an atom and an edge denotes a bond
that connects two atoms. In the task of protein function prediction and interaction,
the graph can also easily ﬁt into a protein, where each amino-acid refers to a node
and each edge refers to the interaction among amino-acids.
Some graphs are constructed with the node and edge attributes. For example, in
dealing with the transportation in the urban intelligence, the trafﬁc networks can be
formalized as an undirected graph to predict the trafﬁc state. Speciﬁcally, the nodes
are the trafﬁc sensing locations, e.g., sensor stations, road segments, and the edges
are the intersections or road segments connecting those trafﬁc sensing locations.
Some urban trafﬁc network can be modeled as a directed graph with attributes to
predict the trafﬁc speed, where the nodes are the road segments, and the edges are
the intersections. Road segment width, length, and direction are the attributes of the
nodes, and the type of intersection, and whether there are trafﬁc lights, toll gates are
the attributes of edges.
Input Data with Implicit Graph Structures. For many tasks that do not naturally
involve a structured data, graph construction becomes very challenging. It is impor-
tant to choose the best representation so that the nodes and edges can capture all the
important things. For example, in computer vision (CV) tasks, there are three kinds
of graph construction. The ﬁrst is to split the image or the frame of the video into
regular grids, and each grid serves as a vertex of the visual graph. The second way
is to ﬁrst get the preprocessed structures which can be directly borrowed for vertex
representation, such as the formulation of scene graphs. The last one is about utiliz-
ing semantic information to represent visual vertexes, such as assigning pixels with
similar features to the same vertex. The edges in the visual images can capture two
kinds of information. One is spatial information. For example, for static methods,
generating scene graphs (Xu et al, 2017a) and human skeletons (Jain et al, 2016a) is
natural to choose edges between nodes in the visual graph to represent their location
connection. Another is temporal information. For example, to represent the video,
the model not only builds spatial relations in a frame but also captures temporal
connections among adjacent frames.
In the natural language processing (NLP) tasks, the graph construction from
the text data can be categorized into ﬁve categories: text graphs, syntactic graphs,
semantic graphs, knowledge graphs, and hybrid graphs. Text graphs normally re-