needed for the corresponding learning task. This is the net-
works ’core capability, which is commonly known as deep
learning. Simple ANNs (e.g., shallow autoencoders) and oth-
er ML algorithms (e.g., decision trees) can be subsumed underthe term shallow machine learning since they do not provide
such functionalities. As there is still no exact demarcation
between the two concepts in literature (see also
Schmidhuber 2015 ), we use a dashed line in Fig. 1.W h i l e
some shallow ML algorithms are considered inherently inter-
pretable by humans and, thus, white boxes, the decision mak-
ing of most advanced ML algorithms is per se untraceable
unless explained otherwise and, thus, constitutes a black box.
DL is particularly useful in domains with large and high-
dimensional data, which is why deep neural networks outper-form shallow ML algorithms for most applications in whichtext, image, video, speech, and audio data needs to be proc-
essed (LeCun et al. 2015 ). However, for low-dimensional data
input, especially in cases of limited training data availability,
shallow ML can still produce superior results (Zhang and Ling
2018 ), which even tend to be better interpretable than those
generated by deep neural networks (Rudin 2019 ). Further,
while DL performance can be superhuman, problems that re-quire strong AI capabilities such as literal understanding and
intentionality still cannot be solved as pointedly outlined inSearle ( 1980 )'s Chinese room argument.
Process of analytical model building
In this section, we provide a framework on the process ofanalytical model building for explicit programming, shallow
ML, and DL as they constitute three distinct concepts to buildan analytical model. Due to their importance for electronic
markets, we focus the subsequent discussion on the related
aspects of data input, feature extraction, model building, andmodel assessment of shallow ML and DL (cf. Figure 2). With
explicit programming, feature extraction and model buildingare performed manually by a human when handcrafting rulesto specify the analytical model.
Data input
Electronic markets have different stakeholder touchpoints,
such as websites, apps, and social media platforms. Apart
from common numerical data, they generate a vast amountof versatile data, in particular unstructured and non-cross-
sectional data such as time series, image, and text. This data
can be exploited for analytical model building towards betterdecision support or business automation purposes. However,
extracting patterns and relationships by hand would exceed
the cognitive capacity of human operators, which is whyalgorithmic support is indispensable when dealing with large
and high-dimensional data.
Time series data implies a sequential dependency and pat-
terns over time that need to be detected to form forecasts, oftenresulting in regression problems or trend classification tasks.
Typical examples involve forecasting financial markets orpredicting process behavior (Heinrich et al. 2021 ). Image data
is often encountered in the context of object recognition orobject counting with fields of application ranging from cropdetection for yield prediction to autonomous driving
(Grigorescu et al. 2020 ). Text data is present when analyzing
large volumes of documents such as corporate e-mails or so-
cial media posts. Example applications are sentiment analysis
or machine-based translation and summarization of docu-
ments (Young et al. 2018 ).
Recent advancements in DL allow for processing data of
different types in combination, often referred to as cross-modal learning. This is useful in applications where contentis subject to multiple forms of representation, such as e-
commerce websites where product information is commonlyrepresented by images, brief descriptions, and other comple-mentary text metadata. Once such cross-modal representa-
tions are learned, they can be used, for example, to improve
retrieval and recommendation tasks or to detect misinforma-
tion and fraud (Bastan et al. 2020 ).
Feature extraction
An important step for the automated identification of patterns
and relationships from large data assets is the extraction of
features that can be exploited for model building. In general,
a feature describes a property derived from the raw data inputwith the purpose of providing a suitable representation. Thus,
feature extraction aims to preserve discriminatory information
and separate factors of variation relevant to the overall learn-ing task (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ). For example, when classi-
fying the helpfulness of customer reviews of an online-shop,useful feature candidates could be the choice of words, thelength of the review, and the syntactical properties of the text.
Shallow ML heavily relies on such well-defined features,
and therefore its performance is dependent on a successfulextraction process. Multiple fe ature extraction techniques
have emerged over time that are applicable to different typesof data. For example, when analyzing time-series data, it is
common to apply techniques to extract time-domain features
(e.g., mean, range, skewness) and frequency-domain features(e.g., frequency bands) (Goyal and Pabla 2015 ); for image
analysis, suitable approaches include histograms of orientedgradients (HOG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005 ), scale-invariant fea-
ture transform (SIFT) (Lowe 2004 ), and the Viola-Jones
method (Viola and Jones 2001 ); and in NLP, it is common
to use term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF)688 C. Janiesch et al.