Depending on the learning task, the field offers various
classes of ML algorithms , each of them coming in multiple
specifications and variants, including regressions models,
instance-based algorithms, decision trees, Bayesian methods,
and ANNs.
The family of artificial neural networks is of particular
interest since their flexible structure allows them to be modi-fied for a wide variety of contexts across all three types of ML.
Inspired by the principle of information processing in biolog-ical systems, ANNs consist of mathematical representations of
connected processing units called artificial neurons. Like syn-
apses in a brain, each connection between neurons transmitssignals whose strength can be amplified or attenuated by a
weight that is continuously adjusted during the learning pro-
cess. Signals are only processed by subsequent neurons if acertain threshold is exceeded as determined by an activation
function. Typically, neurons are organized into networks with
different layers. An input layer usually receives the data input(e.g., product images of an online shop), and an output layerproduces the ultimate result (e.g., categorization of products).
In between, there are zero or more hidden layers that are re-
sponsible for learning a non-linear mapping between input
and output (Bishop 2006 ;G o o d f e l l o we ta l . 2016 ). The num-
ber of layers and neurons, among other property choices, such
as learning rate or activation function, cannot be learned by
the learning algorithm. They constitute a model ’s
hyperparameters and must be set manually or determined by
an optimization routine.
Deep neural networks typically consist of more than one
hidden layer, organized in deeply nested network architec-tures. Furthermore, they usually contain advanced neurons
in contrast to simple ANNs. That is, they may use advanced
operations (e.g., convolutions) or multiple activations in oneneuron rather than using a simple activation function. These
characteristics allow deep neural networks to be fed with raw
input data and automatically discover a representation that isArtificial neural networks
Deep neural networkse.g., support vector machine, decision tree, k-nearest neighbors, … 
e.g., shallow autoencoders, …
e.g., convolutional neural networks, 
recurrent neural networks, …Deep
learningShallow
machin e
learning
Machine
learningMachine learning algorithms Fig. 1 Venn diagram of machine
learning concepts and classes
(inspired by Goodfellow et al.
2016 ,p .9 )
Table 1 Overview of types of machine learning
Type Description
Supervised learning Supervised learning requires a training dataset that covers examples for the input as well as labeled answers or target values for the
output. An example could be the prediction of active users subscribed to a market platform in a month ’s time as output
(considered as the target variable or yvariable) based on different input characteristics, such as the number of sold products or
positive user reviews (often referred to as input features or xvariables). The pairs of input and output data in the training set are
then used to calibrate the open parameters of the ML model. Once the model has been successfully trained, it can be used to
predict the target variable ygiven new or unseen data points of the input features x. Regarding the type of supervised learning,
we can further distinguish between regression problems, where a numeric value is predicted (e.g., number of users), andclassification problems, where the prediction result is a categorical class affiliation such as “lookers ”or“buyers ”.
Unsupervised
learningUnsupervised learning takes place when the learning system is supposed to detect patterns without any pre-existing labels or
specifications. Thus, training data only consists of variables xwith the goal of finding structural information of interest, such as
groups of elements that share common properties (known as clustering) or data representations that are projected from ahigh-dimensional space into a lower one (known as dimensionality reduction) (Bishop 2006 ). A prominent example of
unsupervised learning in electronic markets is applying clustering techniques to group customers or markets into segments for
the purpose of a more target-group specific communication.
Reinforcement
learningIn areinforcement learning system, instead of providing input and output pairs, we describe the current state of the system, specify
a goal, provide a list of allowable actions and their environmental constraints for their outcomes, and let the ML model
experience the process of achieving the goal by itself using the principle of trial and error to maximize a reward. Reinforcementlearning models have been applied with great success in closed world environments such as games (Silver et al. 2018 ), but they
are also relevant for multi-agent systems such as electronic markets (Peters et al. 2013 ).687 Machine learning and deep learning