knowledge into a machine-accessible form and allows to de-
velop intelligent systems more efficiently.
During the last decades, the field of ML has brought forth a
variety of remarkable advancements in sophisticated learningalgorithms and efficient pre-processing techniques. One of
these advancements was the evolution of artificial neural net-works (ANNs) towards increasingly deep neural network ar-
chitectures with improved learning capabilities summarized as
deep learning (DL) (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ; LeCun et al.
2015 ). For specific applications in closed environments, DL
already shows superhuman performance by excelling humancapabilities (Madani et al. 2018 ; Silver et al. 2018 ). However,
such benefits also come at a price as there are several chal-
lenges to overcome for successfully implementing analytical
models in real business settings. These include the suitablechoice from manifold implementation options, bias and drift
in data, the mitigation of black-box properties, and the reuse of
preconfigured models (as a service).
Beyond its hyped appearance, scholars, as well as profes-
sionals, require a solid understanding of the underlying con-cepts, processes as well as challenges for implementing suchtechnology. Against this background, the goal of this article is
to convey a fundamental understanding of ML and DL in the
context of electronic markets. In this way, the community can
benefit from these technological achievements –be it for the
purpose of examining large and high-dimensional data assets
collected in digital ecosystems or for the sake of designing
novel intelligent systems for electronic markets. Following
recent advances in the field, this article focuses on analyticalmodel building and challenges of implementing intelligent
systems based on ML and DL. As we examine the field from
a technical perspective, we do not elaborate on the relatedissues of AI technology adoption, policy, and impact on orga-
nizational culture (for further implications cf. e.g. Stone et al.
2016 ).
In the next section, we provide a conceptual distinction
between relevant terms and concepts. Subsequently, we shedlight on the process of automated analytical model buildingby highlighting the particularities of ML and DL. Then, we
proceed to discuss several induced challenges when
implementing intelligent systems within organizations orelectronic markets. In doing so, we highlight environmental
factors of implementation and application rather than view-
ing the engineered system itself as the only unit of observa-tion. We summarize the article with a brief conclusion.
Conceptual distinction
To provide a fundamental understanding of the field, it isnecessary to distinguish several relevant terms and concepts
from each other. For this purpose, we first present basic foun-
dations of AI, before we distinguish i) machine learningalgorithms, ii) artificial neural networks, and iii) deep neural
networks. The hierarchical relationship between those terms is
summarized in Venn diagram of Fig. 1.
Broadly defined, AI comprises any technique that enables
computers to mimic human behavior and reproduce or excelover human decision-making to solve complex tasks inde-pendently or with minimal human intervention (Russell and
Norvig 2021). As such, it is concerned with a variety of
central problems, including knowledge representation, rea-
soning, learning, planning, perception, and communication,
and refers to a variety of tools and methods (e.g., case-based
reasoning, rule-based systems, genetic algorithms, fuzzymodels, multi-agent systems) (Chen et al. 2008 ). Early AI
research focused primarily on hard-coded statements in for-mal languages, which a computer can then automaticallyreason about based on logical inference rules. This is also
known as the knowledge base approach (Goodfellow et al.
2016 ). However, the paradigm faces several limitations as
humans generally struggle to explicate all their tacit knowl-
edge that is required to perform complex tasks (Brynjolfsson
and McAfee 2017 ).
Machine learning overcomes such limitations. Generally
speaking, ML means that a computer program ’s performance
improves with experience with respect to some class of tasks
and performance measures (Jordan and Mitchell 2015 ). As
such, it aims at automating the task of analytical model build-
ing to perform cognitive tasks like object detection or natural
language translation. This is achieved by applying algorithms
that iteratively learn from problem-specific training data,which allows computers to find hidden insights and complex
patterns without explicitly being programmed (Bishop 2006 ).
Especially in tasks related to high-dimensional data such as
classification, regression, and clustering, ML shows good ap-
plicability. By learning from previous computations and
extracting regularities from massive databases, it can help toproduce reliable and repeatable decisions. For this reason, ML
algorithms have been successfully applied in many areas, such
as fraud detection, credit scoring, next-best offer analysis,speech and image recognition, or natural language processing
(NLP).
Based on the given problem and the available data, we can
distinguish three types of ML: supervised learning, unsuper-vised learning, and reinforcement learning. While many ap-
plications in electronic markets use supervised learning(Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2017 ), for example, to forecast
stock markets (Jayanth Balaji et al. 2018 ), to understand cus-
tomer perceptions (Ramaswamy and DeClerck 2018 ), to ana-
lyze customer needs (Kühl et al. 2020 ), or to search products
(Bastan et al. 2020 ), there are implementations of all types, for
example, market-making with reinforcement learning(Spooner et al. 2018 ) or unsupervised market segmentation
using customer reviews (Ahani et al. 2019 ). See Table 1for
an overview of all three types.686 C. Janiesch et al.