FUNDAMENTALS
Machine learning and deep learning
Christian Janiesch1&Patrick Zschech2&Kai Heinrich3
Received: 7 October 2020 / Accepted: 19 March 2021
#The Author(s) 2021, corrected publication 2021
Abstract
Today, intelligent systems that offer artificial intelligence capabilities often rely on machine learning. Machine learning describes
the capacity of systems to learn from problem-specific training data to automate the process of analytical model building and
solve associated tasks. Deep learning is a machine learning concept based on artificial neural networks. For many applications,
deep learning models outperform shallow machine learning models and traditional data analysis approaches. In this article, we
summarize the fundamentals of machine learning and deep learning to generate a broader understanding of the methodical
underpinning of current intelligent systems. In particular, we provide a conceptual distinction between relevant terms and
concepts, explain the process of automated analytical model building through machine learning and deep learning, and discuss
the challenges that arise when implementing such intelligent systems in the field of electronic markets and networked business.
These naturally go beyond technological aspects and highlight issues in human-machine interaction and artificial intelligence
servitization.
Keywords Machine learning .Deep learning .Artificial intelligence .Artificial neural networks .Analytical model building
JEL classification C6.C8.M15 .O3
Introduction
It is considered easier to explain to a child the nature of what
constitutes a sports car as opposed to a normal car by showing
him or her examples, rather than trying to formulate explicit
rules that define a sports car.
Similarly, instead of codifying knowledge into computers,
machine learning (ML) seeks to automatically learnmeaningful relationships and patterns from examples and ob-
servations (Bishop 2006 ). Advances in ML have enabled the
recent rise of intelligent systems with human-like cognitive
capacity that penetrate our business and personal life and
shape the networked interactions on electronic markets in ev-
ery conceivable way, with companies augmenting decision-
making for productivity, engagement, and employee retention
(Shrestha et al. 2021 ), trainable assistant systems adapting to
individual user preferences (Fischer et al. 2020 ), and trading
agents shaking traditional finance trading markets (Jayanth
Balaji et al. 2018 ).
The capacity of such systems for advanced problem solv-
ing, generally termed artificial intelligence (AI), is based on
analytical models that generate predictions, rules, answers,
recommendations, or similar outcomes. First attempts to build
analytical models relied on explicitly programming known
relationships, procedures, and decision logic into intelligent
systems through handcrafted rules (e.g., expert systems for
medical diagnoses) (Russell and Norvig 2021 ). Fueled by
the practicability of new programming frameworks, data
availability, and the broad access to necessary computing
power, analytical models are nowadays increasingly built
using what is generally referred to as ML (Brynjolfsson and
McAfee 2017 ; Goodfellow et al. 2016 ). ML relieves the hu-
man of the burden to explicate and formalize his or herResponsible Editor: Fabio Lobato
*Christian Janiesch
christian.janiesch@uni-wuerzburg.de
Patrick Zschech
patrick.zschech@fau.de
Kai Heinrich
kai.heinrich@ovgu.de
1Faculty of Business Management & Economics, University of
Würzburg, Sanderring 2, 97070 Würzburg, Germany
2Institute of Information Systems, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Lange Gasse 20, 90403 Nürnberg, Germany
3Faculty of Economics and Management,
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2,
39106 Magdeburg, Germanyhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-021-00475-2
/ Published online: 8 April 2021Electronic Markets (2021) 31:685–695