vectors (Salton and Buckley 1988 ), part-of-speech (POS) tag-
ging, and word shape features (Wu et al. 2018 ). Manual fea-
ture design is a tedious task as it usually requires a lot of
domain expertise within an application-specific engineering
process. For this reason, it is considered time-consuming, la-
bor-intensive, and inflexible.
Deep neural networks overcome this limitation of
handcrafted feature engineering. Their advanced architecturegives them the capability of automated feature learning toextract discriminative feature representations with minimal
human effort. For this reason, DL better copes with large-
scale, noisy, and unstructured data. The process of featurelearning generally proceeds in a hierarchical manner, with
high-level abstract features being assembled by simpler ones.
Nevertheless, depending on the type of data and the choice ofDL architecture, there are different mechanisms of feature
learning in conjunction with the step of model building.
Model building
During automated model building, the input is used by a learn-
ing algorithm to identify patterns and relationships that arerelevant for the respective learning task. As described above,
shallow ML requires well-designed features for this task. On
this basis, each family of learning algorithms applies differentmechanisms for analytical model building. For example,
when building a classification model, decision tree algorithms
exploit the features space by incrementally splitting data re-cords into increasingly homogenous partitions following a
hierarchical, tree-like structure. A support vector machine
(SVM) seeks to construct a discriminatory hyperplane be-tween data points of different classes where the input data is
often projected into a higher-dimensional feature space for
better separability. These examples demonstrate that thereare different ways of analytical model building, each of them
with individual advantages and disadvantages depending on
the input data and the derived features (Kotsiantis et al. 2006 ).By contrast, DL can directly operate on high-dimensional
raw input data to perform the task of model building with its
capability of automated feature learning. Therefore, DL archi-
tectures are often organized as end-to-end systems combining
both aspects in one pipeline. However, DL can also be applied
only for extracting a feature representation, which is subse-quently fed into other learning subsystems to exploit the
strengths of competing ML algorithms, such as decision trees
or SVMs.
Various DL architectures have emerged over time (Leijnen
and van Veen 2020 ; Pouyanfar et al. 2019 ; Young et al. 2018 ).
Although basically every architecture can be used for everytask, some architectures are more suited for specific data such
as time series or images. Architectural variants are mostly
characterized by the types of layers, neural units, and connec-tions they use. Table 2summarizes the five groups of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural net-works (RNNs), distributed representations, autoencoders, andgenerative adversarial neural networks (GANs). They provide
promising applications in the field of electronic markets.
Model assessment
For the assessment of a model ’s quality, multiple aspects have
to be taken into account, such as performance, computationalresources, and interpretability. Performance-based metrics
evaluate how well a model satisfies the objective specifiedby the learning task. In the area of supervised learning, there
are well-established guidelines for this purpose. Here, it is
common practice to use k-fold cross-validation to prevent a
model from overfitting and determine its performance on out-of-sample data that was not included in the training samples.Cross-validation provides the opportunity to compare the re-
liability of ML models by providing multiple out-of-sample
data instances that enable comparative statistical testing(García and Herrera 2008 ). Regression models are evaluated
by measuring estimation errors such as the root mean squareerror (RMSE) or the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE),Input
Input
InputHandcrafted model building Output
OutputExplicit 
programming
Shallow
machine
learning
Deep
learningHandcrafted
feature engineeringAutomated
model building
Feature learning + automated model building OutputData input Feature extraction Model building Model assessmen t Fig. 2 Process of analytical
model building (inspired by
Goodfellow et al. 2016 ,p .1 0 )689 Machine learning and deep learning