over time ”(Gama et al. 2014 ). That is, ML models for intel-
ligent systems may not produce satisfactory results, when his-
torical data does not describe the present situation adequatelyanymore, for example due to new competitors entering a mar-
ket, new production capabilities becoming available, or un-
precedented governmental restrictions. Drift does not have tobe sudden but can be incremental, gradual, or reoccurring
(Gama et al. 2014 ) and thus hard to detect. While techniques
for automated learning exist that involve using trusted data
windows and concept descriptions (Widmer and Kubat
1996 ), automated strategies for discovering and solving
business-related problems are a challenge (Pentland et al.
2020 ).
For applications in electronic markets, considering bias is
of high importance as most data points will have human pointsof contact. These can be as obvious as social media posts or as
disguised as omitted variables. Further, poisoning attacks dur-
ing model retraining can be used to purposefully insert devi-ating patterns. This entails that training data needs to be care-
fully reviewed for such human prejudgments. Applications
based on this data should be understood as inherently biasedrather than as impartial AI. This implies that researchers need
to review their datasets and make public any biases they are
aware of. Again, it is unrealistic to assume that all bias effects
can be explicated in large datasets with high-dimensional data.
Nevertheless, to better understand and trust an ML model, it isimportant to detect and highlight those effects that have or
may have an impact on predictions. Lastly, as constant drift
can be assumed in any real-world electronic market, a trainedmodel is never finished. Companies must put strategies in
place to identify, track, and counter concept drift that impacts
the quality of their intelligent system ’s decisions. Currently,
manual checks and periodic model retraining prevail.
Unpredictability of predictions and the need
for explainability
The complexity of DL models and some shallow ML models
such as random forest and SVMs, often referred to as of black-box nature, makes it nearly impossible to predict how they
will perform in a specific context (Adadi and Berrada 2018 ).
This also entails that users may not be able to review and
understand the recommendations of intelligent systems based
on these models. Moreover, this makes it very difficult to
prepare for adversarial attacks, which trick and break DLmodels (Heinrich et al. 2020 ). They can be a threat to high-
stake applications, for example, in terms of perturbations ofstreet signs for autonomous driving (Eykholt et al. 2018 ).
Thus, it may become necessary to explain the decision of a
black-box model also to ease organizational adoption. Not
only do humans prefer simple explanations to trust and adopta model, but the requirement of explainability may even be
enforced by law (Miller 2019 ).
The field of explainable AI (XAI) deals with the augmen-
tation of existing DL models to produce explanations for out-put predictions. For image data, this involves highlighting
areas of the input image that are responsible for generating aspecific output decision (Adadi and Berrada 2018).
Concerning time series data, methods have been developedto highlight the particular important time steps influencing aforecast (Assaf and Schumann 2019 ). A similar approach can
be used for highlighting words in a text that lead to specificclassification outputs.
Thus, applications in electronic markets with different crit-
icality and human interaction requirements should be de-signed or augmented distinctively to address the respectiveconcerns. Researchers must review the applications in partic-
ular of DL models for their criticality and accountability.
Possibly, they must choose an explainable white-box modelover a more accurate black-box model (Rudin 2019 )o rc o n -
sider XAI augmentations to make the model ’s predictions
more accessible to its users (Adadi and Berrada 2018 ).
Resource limitations and transfer learning
Lastly, building and training comprehensive analyticalmodels with shallow ML or DL is costly and requires largedatasets to avoid a cold star t. Fortunately, models do not
always have to be trained from scratch. The concept oftransfer learning allows models that are trained on generaldatasets (e.g., large-scale image datasets) to be specialized
for specific tasks by using a considerably smaller dataset
that is problem-specific (Pouyanfar et al. 2019). However,
using pre-trained models from foreign sources can pose a
risk as the models can be subject to biases and adversarial
attacks, as introduced above. For example, pre-trainedmodels may not properly reflect certain environmental
constraints or contain backdoor s by inserting classification
triggers, for example, to misclassify medical images
(Wang et al. 2020). Governmental interventions to redirect
or suppress predictions are conceivable as well. Hence, inhigh-stake situations, the re use of publicly available ana-
lytical models may not be an option. Nevertheless, transfer
learning offers a feasible option for small and medium-
sized enterprises to deploy intelligent systems or enables
large companies to repurpose t heir own general analytical
models for specific applications.
In the context of transfer learning, new markets and
ecosystems of AI as a service (AIaaS) are already emerg-
ing. Such marketplaces, for example by Microsoft orAmazon Web Services, offer cloud AI applications, AI
platforms, and AI infrastructure. In addition to cloud-
based benefits for deployments, they also enable transfer692 C. Janiesch et al.