whereas classification models are assessed by calculating dif-
ferent ratios of correctly and incorrectly predicted instances,such as accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score. Furthermore,
it is common to apply cost-sensitive measures such as averagecost per predicted observation, which is helpful in situationswhere prediction errors are associated with asymmetric cost
structures (Shmueli and Koppius 2011 ). That is the case, for
example, when analyzing transactions in financial markets,and the costs of failing to detect a fraudulent transaction are
remarkably higher than the costs of incorrectly classifying anon-fraudulent transaction.
To identify a suitable prediction model for a specific task, it
is reasonable to compare alternative models of varying com-plexities, that is, considering competing model classes as well
as alternative variants of the same model class. As introduced
above, a model ’s complexity can be characterized by severalTable 2 Overview of deep learning architectures
Architecture Description
Convolutional neural network
(CNN)CNNs are mainly applied for tasks related to computer vision and speech recognition. They are able to address tasks
involving datasets with spatial relationships, where the columns and rows are not interchangeable (e.g., image
data). Their network architecture comprises a series of stages that allow hierarchical feature learning asdetermined by the respective modeling task. For example, when considering object recognition in images, the
first few layers of the network are responsible for extracting basic features in the form of edges and corners.
These are then incrementally aggregated into more complex features in the last few layers resembling the actualobjects of interest, such as animals, houses, or cars. Subsequently, the auto-generated features are used forprediction purposes to recognize objects of interest in new images (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ).
Recurrent neural network (RNN) RNNs are designed explicitly for sequential data structures such as time-series data, event sequences, and natural
language. Their architecture offers internal feedback loops and therefore enables sequential pattern learning tomodel time dependencies by forming a memory. Simple RNN architectures are problematic since they suffer
from vanishing gradients, resulting in little or no influence of early memories. More sophisticated architectures,
such as long short-term memory (LSTM) networks with advanced attention mechanisms, attend to this problem.RNNs are typically applied for time series forecasting, predicting process behavior (Heinrich et al. 2021 ), and
NLP tasks such as sequence transduction and neural machine translation (LeCun et al. 2015 ).
Distributed representation Distributed representations play an essential role in feature learning and language modeling in NLP tasks, where
language entities such as words, phrases, and sentences are projected into numerical representations within aunified semantic space in the form of embeddings. Word embeddings, for example, encode discrete words intodense feature vectors with low dimensionality. Thus, in contrast to classic text representation models, such as
one-hot encodings and bag-of-words (BoW), word embeddings overcome the problem of sparse encodings
while preserving semantic relationships between words. This means that words, which occur in similar contextsin a corpus, are also closely positioned to each other in the vector space. On this basis, advanced language models
can be developed to perform challenging downstream tasks, such as question-answering, sentiment analysis, and
named entity recognition (Liu et al. 2020 ). Distributed representations are often applied in combination with
RNNs to perform tasks with sequential dependencies.
Autoencoder Autoencoders work similarly to word embeddings since they provide a dense feature representation of the input
data. However, they are not limited to natural language data but can be applied to any type of input. Sucharchitectures usually consist of an encoding stage where the input is compressed into a low-dimensional rep-resentation and a decoding stage in which the network tries to reconstruct the original input from the learned
features. In this way, the network is forced to keep meaningful information in the latent representation while
disregarding irrelevant noise (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ). Autoencoders are commonly applied for unsupervised
feature learning and dimensionality reduction in combination with other subsequent learning systems. However,due to their capability of quantifying reconstruction errors, which are assumed to be significantly higher for
anomalous samples than for regular instances, they can also be applied for detecting anomalies, such as fraud-
ulent activities in financial markets (Paula et al. 2016 ).
Generative adversarial neural
network (GAN)Generative adversarial neural networks belong to the family of generative models that aim at learning a probability
distribution over a set of training data so that the network can randomly generate new data samples with somevariation. For this purpose, GANs consist of two competing sub-networks. The first network is a generatornetwork that captures the distribution of the input and generates new examples. The second network is adiscriminator network trying to distinguish real examples from artificially generated ones. Both networks are
trained together in a non-cooperative zero-sum game where one network ’s gain is another one ’s loss until the
discriminator can no longer distinguish between both types of samples. On this basis, GANs are likely to
revolutionize domains in which continuously new content or novel product configurations are created (e.g., thecomposition of art and music, design of fashion), or where content is converted from one representation to
another (e.g., text to image for product descriptions) (Pan et al. 2019 ). At the same time, however, such ap-
proaches also pose severe threats with societal implications when abusing them for malicious purposes. In
particular, the generation of “deepfake ”content in the form of abusive speeches and misleading news to
manipulate public opinions or distort financial markets is concerning (Westerlund 2019 ).690 C. Janiesch et al.