properties such as the type of learning mechanisms (e.g., shal-
low ML vs. DL), the number and type of manually generated
or self-extracted features, and the number of trainable param-eters (e.g., network weights in ANNs). Simpler models usual-
ly do not tend to be flexible enough to capture (non-linear)
regularities and patterns that are relevant for the learning task.Overly complex models, on the other hand, entail a higher risk
of overfitting. Furthermore, their reasoning is more difficult to
interpret (cf. next section), and they are likely to be computa-tionally more expensive. Computational costs are expressed
by memory requirements and the inference time to execute a
model on new data. These criteria are particularly importantwhen assessing deep neural networks, where several million
model parameters may be processed and stored, which places
special demands on hardware resources. Consequently, it iscrucial for business settings with limited resources (such as
environments that heavily rely on mobile devices) to not only
select a model at the sweet spot between underfitting andoverfitting. They should also to evaluate a model ’sc o m p l e x i t y
concerning further trade-off relationships, such as accuracyvs. memory usage and speed (Heinrich et al. 2019 ).
Challenges for intelligent systems based
on machine learning and deep learning
Electronic markets are at the dawn of a technology-induced
shift towards data-driven insights provided by intelligent sys-
tems (Selz 2020 ). Already today, shallow ML and DL are
used to build analytical models for them, and further diffusion
is foreseeable. For any real-world application, intelligent sys-
tems do not only face the task of model building, system
specification, and implementation. They are prone to several
issues rooted in how ML and DL operate, which constitute
challenges relevant to the Information Systems community.They do require not only technical knowledge but also involve
human and business aspects that go beyond the system ’sc o n -
finements to consider the circumstances and the ecosystem of
application.
Managing the triangle of architecture,
hyperparameters, and training data
When building shallow ML and DL models for intelligent
systems, there are nearly endless options for algorithms or
architectures, hyperparameters, and training data (Duin1994 ; Heinrich et al. 2021 ). At the same time, there is a lack
of established guidelines on how a model should be built for aspecific problem to ensure not only performance and cost-efficiency but also its robustness and privacy. Moreover, as
outlined above, there are often several trade-off relations to be
considered in business environments with limited resources,such as prediction quality vs. computational costs. Therefore,
the task of analytical model building is the most crucial since it
also determines the business success of an intelligent system.For example, a model that can perform at 99.9% accuracy but
takes too long to put out a classification decision is rendered
useless and is equal to a 0%-accuracy model in the context oftime-critical applications su ch as proactive monitoring or
quality assurance in smart factories. Further, differentimplementations can only be accurately compared when vary-ing only one of the three edges of the triangle at a time and
reporting the same metrics. Ultimately, one should consider
the necessary skills, available tool support, and the requiredimplementation effort to develop and modify a particular DL
architecture (Wanner et al. 2020 ).
Thus, applications with excellent accuracy achieved in a
laboratory setting or on a different dataset may not translateinto business success when applied in a real-world environ-
ment in electronic markets as other factors may outweigh theML model ’s theoretical achievements. This implies that re-
searchers should be aware of the situational characteristics ofa models' real-world application to develop an efficacious in-telligent system. It is needless to say that researchers cannot
know all factors a priori, but they should familiarize them-
selves with the fact that there are several architectural options
with different baseline variants, which suit different scenarios,
each with their characteristic properties. Furthermore, multiplemetrics such as accuracy and F1 score should be reviewed on
consistent benchmarking data across models before making achoice for a model.
Awareness of bias and drift in data
In terms of automated analytical model building, one needs to
be aware of (cognitive) biases that are introduced into any
shallow ML or DL model by using human-generated data.These biases will be heavily adopted by the model (Fuchs
2018 ; Howard et al. 2017 ). That is, the models will exhibit
the same (human-)induced tendencies that are present in the
data or even amplify them. A cognitive bias is an illogical
inference or belief that ind ividuals adopt due to flawed
reporting of facts or due to f lawed decision heuristics
(Haselton et al. 2015 ). While data-introduced bias is not a
particularly new concept, it is amplified in the context of
ML and DL if training data has not been properly selected
or pre-processed, has class imbalances, or when inferences
are not reviewed responsibl y. Striking examples include
Amazon ’s AI recruiting software that showed discrimination
against women or Google ’s Vision AI that produced starkly
different image labels based on skin color.
Further, the validity of recommendations based on data is
prone to concept drift, which describes a scenario, where “the
relation between the input data and the target variable changes691 Machine learning and deep learning