0:75 0:8 0:85 0:9 0:95 10:450:50:55
Performance (Combined)Performance (Novice) Doubt Rule
Discrepancy Rule
Both Rules
Fig. 8: Performance of various instances of the doubt rule, dis-
crepancy rule, and combined EnsembleDAgger decision rules on
the HalfCheetah domain. Consistent markers indicate the instances
of the doubt and discrepancy ruled in an instance of the Ensem-
bleDAgger decision rule.
presenting their mean and standard errors.
We test the doubt rule and the discrepancy rule using
values of:
= [0:02;0:05;0:1;0:2;0:5]
= [0:2;0:5;1:0;2:0;5:0];
and the full EnsembleDAgger decision rule at (;) =
[(0:2;0:02);(0:5;0:05);(1:0;0:1);(2:0;0:2);(5:0;0:5)]:
Though we sample (;)only on a line in the positive
quadrant of R2, this ratio between andis chosen so
the two rules are approximately equally responsible for
preventing the novice action in the ﬁrst training epoch.
The performance of the various decision rules for the
parameters stated are shown in Figure 8 in the form of
Pareto frontiers (since varying the hyperparameter trades-
off between performance of the combined system and of the
lone novice). We see that the doubt rule Pareto dominates the
discrepancy rule, as the rule’s frontier achieves better novice
performance for the same compromise on the combined
system’s performance.
The fact that the doubt rule Pareto dominates the dis-
crepancy rule in terms of performance is consistent with
the trends observed in the inverted pendulum experiment–the
doubt rule constrains the novice to act only when the state
is familiar. Consequently, the perturbation from an expert
action caused by choosing the novice’s action is unlikely
to compromise the score of the overall trajectory, though it
will likely carry the system into marginally more unfamiliar
territory, thereby allowing the novice to learn a more robust
policy. The doubt rule, however, allows an arbitrarily large
perturbation in sufﬁciently familiar states, and thereby can
still lead to unsafe states. There exist settings of and
that can make the EnsembleDAgger decision rule safe
in all states, bounding the maximum perturbation from the
expert action even in very familiar states. We only sample
values ofandalong a line in R2, and hence do not
ﬁnd that points along this line show strict improvement over
the independent decision rules in all cases, but see slight
improvement in novice performance over the doubt rule forthe case of (;) = (0:5;0:05). Additionally, we ﬁnd the
EnsembleDAgger decision to be strictly more conservative
than either of the component decision rules and thus always
improves the combined system performance, as expected.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we presented an extension to the DAgger
algorithm that considers the safety of the novice-expert
system that provides the trajectories from which the novice
learns. To avoid requiring precise knowledge of safety, we
assume the risk of a state to be inversely related to the size
of the perturbation to an expert’s action that it can accept
without compromising safety. We therefore use a model-free
proxy for safety by making a key assumption that the risk of
a given state correlates with our familiarity with the state in
the datasetD. We expect this assumption to hold in domains
where the expert is designed to maintain a margin of safety.
Our algorithm replaces a weighted coin-ﬂip that decides
whether the novice acts in the VanillaDAgger decision rule.
To act, the novice proposes an action that is bounded in its
deviation from the expert’s choice of action, as proposed by
SafeDAgger* [11], but also must exhibit low variance in its
choice.
In our experiments, we compared these two conditions
independently, calling the ﬁrst the discrepancy rule and
the second the doubt rule. We found that the doubt rule
effectively constrains the novice to act only in states it is
familiar with, i.e. states that are within some neighborhood
of states labeled in D, while the discrepancy rule haphazardly
allows the novice to act in states where there is chance
agreement between their actions. Since the domain satisﬁes
the assumptions regarding risk that are made, we ﬁnd that
the doubt rule is superior to the discrepancy rule in both
its ability to have the novice rapidly attain expert-level
control, as well as preventing the novice from carrying the
combined expert-novice system into severly compromising
states. Though the doubt rule alone is shown to be superior
to the discrepancy rule alone, there exist hyperaparameter
settings in which the conjunction of the rules is better than
either individually.
Future work includes investigating methods for relaxing
our risk assumptions, in particular the conﬂation of safety
and familiarity. There exist environments with ‘bottleneck’
states in which the expert must frequently travel close to
unsafe states to achieve its goal. Additionally, we have not
provided a method for choosing the hyperparameters and
, and thus intend to develop heuristic strategies that can
safely discover the most suitable setting of these parameters.
A recent work has already demonstrated a method for doing
so on real vehicles [15].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by SAIC
Innovation Center, a subsidiary of SAIC Motors. The authors
would like to acknowledge the useful feedback of Apoorva
Sharma and Michael Kelly.
7