EnsembleDAgger: A Bayesian Approach
to Safe Imitation Learning
Kunal Menda,1Katherine Driggs-Campbell,2and Mykel J. Kochenderfer1
Abstract — Although imitation learning is often used in
robotics, the approach frequently suffers from data mismatch
and compounding errors. DAgger is an iterative algorithm that
addresses these issues by aggregating training data from both
the expert and novice policies, but does not consider the impact
of safety. We present a probabilistic extension to DAgger, which
attempts to quantify the conﬁdence of the novice policy as a
proxy for safety. Our method, EnsembleDAgger, approximates
a Gaussian Process using an ensemble of neural networks.
Using the variance as a measure of conﬁdence, we compute
a decision rule that captures how much we doubt the novice,
thus determining when it is safe to allow the novice to act. With
this approach, we aim to maximize the novice’s share of actions,
while constraining the probability of failure. We demonstrate
improved safety and learning performance compared to other
DAgger variants and classic imitation learning on an inverted
pendulum and in the MuJoCo HalfCheetah environment.
I. I NTRODUCTION
To be truly intelligent, robotic systems must have the
ability to learn by exploring their environment and state space
in a safe way [1]. One method to guide exploration is to
learn from expert demonstrations [2], [3], [4]. In contrast
to reinforcement learning, where an explicit reward func-
tion must be deﬁned, imitation learning guides exploration
through expert supervision, allowing a robot to effectively
learn from direct experience [5]. However, such supervised
approaches are often suboptimal or fail when the policy that
is being trained (referred to as the novice policy) encounters
situations that are not adequately represented in the dataset
provided by the expert [6], [7]. While failures may be
insigniﬁcant in simulation, safe learning is important when
acting in the real world [1].
There are several methods for guided policy search in
imitation learning settings [8]. One example is DAgger,
which improves the training dataset by aggregating new
data from both the expert and novice policies [7]. DAgger
has many desirable properties, including online functionality
and theoretical guarantees. This approach, however, does not
guarantee safety. Recent work extended DAgger to address
some inherent drawbacks [9], [10]. In particular, SafeDAgger
augments DAgger with a decision rule policy to provide safe
exploration while minimizing queries to the expert [11].
The shared goal of these methods is to efﬁciently train
the novice to control the system while minimizing expert
intervention. These algorithms assume that by allowing the
novice to act, the system will likely deviate from the expert
trajectory set and sample a new state. There is a chance,
1Kunal Menda and Mykel J. Kochenderfer are at Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA fkmenda,mykelg@stanford.edu
2Katherine Driggs-Campbell is at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, IL 61820, USA krdc@illinois.eduhowever, that the state visited is unsafe, or is a failure state.
If the expert acts instead, we assume that the system will
move along a safe trajectory, which is likely through states
similar to those previously observed. The goal of this paper
is to present an algorithm that maximizes the novice’s share
of actions, while constraining the probability of failure.
Ideally, the proximity to a failure state (measured as an l2-
distance or likelihood of encountering the state under some
operating condition) is known, and a safety envelope can be
computed to guarantee safety [12]. In the case of model-free
learning, such guarantees are much more difﬁcult to make. If
we consider the novice action to be a perturbed form of the
expert action, then we hypothesize that for many systems,
the magnitude of permissible perturbation to expert actions
is related to the distance from unsafe regions. Further, in a
model-free case where expert demonstrations are available,
we hypothesize that there is an inverse relationship between
a state’s similarity to those in expert trajectories and allowed
perturbations. We visualize this intuition in Figure 1. In the
left panel, we see that the maximum permissible deviation
from an expert action should be low as the system approaches
a wall, which is considered a dangerous state. In such
settings, experts will likely prefer trajectories that maintain
some margin of distance from unsafe states. Assuming this
to be the case, it follows that in unfamiliar states, the system
is likely at higher risk of entering failure states, and thus it
is safer to allow the expert to act. While in familiar regions,
it is permissible for the novice to act with large deviation
from expert action.
This paper extends DAgger to a probabilistic domain, and
aims to minimize expert intevention while constraining the
likelihood of failure. While SafeDAgger uses the discrepancy
between the expert and the novice to determine safety, we
measure doubt by quantifying the uncertainty or conﬁdence
of the novice policy. To quantify doubt, we use an ensemble
of neural networks to estimate the variance of the novice
action in a particular state, which we show can effectively
approximate Gaussian Processes (GPs), even in complex,
high-dimensional spaces [13].
We demonstrate how our method out-performs existing
DAgger variants in an imitation learning setting. This paper
makes two key contributions: (1) we present EnsembleDAg-
ger, a Bayesian extension to DAgger, which introduces a
probabilistic notion of safety to minimize expert interven-
tion while constraining the probability of failure; and (2)
we demonstrate the utility of this approach with improved
performance and safety in an imitation learning case study
on an inverted pendulum and demonstrate the scalability of
the approach on the MuJoCo HalfCheetah domain.
1arXiv:1807.08364v3  [cs.LG]  19 Jul 2019