where we have used Danskin’s theorem (Bertsekas, 1999) to ignore gradients of πthrough
ν∗
π. Hence, if the dual function νis optimized, the gradient of the oﬀ-policy objective
JD,f(ν,π)isexactlythe on-policy policy gradient, with Q-value function given by ν∗
π.
To characterize this Q-value function, note that from (11),ν∗
πis aQ-value function with
respect to augmented reward ˜r(s,a) :=r(s,a)−α·x∗
π(s,a). Recalling the expression for
x∗
πin (16) and the fact that the derivatives f/primeandf/prime
∗are inverses of each other, we have,
˜r(s,a) =r(s,a)−α·f/prime(wπ/D(s,a)). This derivation leads to our second theorem:
Theorem 2 If the dual function νis optimized, the gradient of the oﬀ-policy objective
JD,f(π,ν)with respect to πis the regularized on-policy policy gradient:
∂
∂πminνJD,f(π,ν) =E(s,a)∼dπ/bracketleftBig˜Qπ(s,a)∇logπ(a|s)/bracketrightBig
, (18)
where, ˜Qπ(s,a)is theQ-value function of πwith respect to rewards ˜r(s,a) :=r(s,a)−α·
f/prime(wπ/D(s,a)).
Remark We note that Theorem 2 also holds when using the more sophisticated objective
in (15), since the optimal ζ∗
πis equal towπ/D, regardless of π.
3.3 Connection to Actor-Critic
The relationship between the proposed oﬀ-policy objective and the classic policy gradient
becomes more profound when we consider the form of the objective under speciﬁc choices
of convex function f. If we take f(x) =1
2x2, thenf∗(x) =1
2x2and the proposed objective
is reminiscent of actor-critic:
maxπmin
ν:S×A→RJD,f(π,ν) := (1−γ)Es0∼µ0,a0∼π(s0)[ν(s0,a0)]+1
2α·E(s,a)∼dD[((Bπν−ν)(s,a))2].
The second term alone is an instantiation of the oﬀ-policy critic objective in actor-critic.
However, in actor-critic, the use of an oﬀ-policy objective for the critic is diﬃcult to
theoretically motivate. Moreover, in practice, critic and actor learning can both suﬀer from
the mismatch between the oﬀ-policy distribution dDand the on-policy dπ. By contrast,
our derivations show that the introduction of the ﬁrst term to the objective transforms
the oﬀ-policy actor-critic algorithm to an on-policy actor-critic, without any explicit use
of importance weights. Moreover, while standard actor-critic has two separate objectives
for value and policy, our proposed objective is a single, uniﬁed objective. Both the policy
and value functions are trained with respect to the same oﬀ-policy objective.
4 A Lagrangian View of AlgaeDICE
We now show how AlgaeDICE can be alternatively derived from the Lagrangian of a linear
programming (LP) formulation of the Qπ-function. Please refer to Appendix A for details.
7