is learned using a separate and distinct objective. In contrast, our proposed AlgaeDICE
uses a single, uniﬁed objective for both policy and value learning.
Lastly, there are a number of works which (like ours) perform policy gradient on oﬀ-policy
data via distribution correction. The key diﬀerentiator is in how the distribution corrections
are computed. One common method is to re-weight oﬀ-policy samples by considering
eligibility traces (Precup et al., 2000; Geist and Scherrer, 2014), i.e., compute weights
by taking the product of per-action importance weights over a trajectory. Thus, these
methods can suﬀer from high variance as the length of trajectory increases, known as the
“curse of horizon” (Liu et al., 2018). A more recent work (Liu et al., 2019) attempts to
weight updates by estimated state-action distribution corrections. This is more in line with
our proposed AlgaeDICE, which implicitly estimates these quantities. One key diﬀerence
is that this previous work explicitly estimates these corrections, which results in a bi-level
optimization, as opposed to our more appealing uniﬁed objective. It is also important to
note that both eligibility trace methods and the technique outlined in Liu et al. (2019)
require knowledge of the behavior policy. In contrast, AlgaeDICE is a behavior-agnostic
oﬀ-policy policy gradient method, which may be more relevant in practice. Compared to
existing behavior-agnostic oﬀ-policy estimators (Nachum et al., 2019b; Zhang et al., 2020),
this work considers the substantially more challenging problem of policy optimization.
6 Experiments
We present empirical evaluations of AlgaeDICE, ﬁrst in a tabular setting using the Four
Rooms domain (Sutton et al., 1999) and then on a suite of continuous control benchmarks
using MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) and OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016).
6.1 Four Rooms
We begin by considering the tabular setting given by the Four Rooms environment (Sutton
et al., 1999), in which an agent must navigate to a target location within a gridworld. In
this tabular setting, we evaluate Primal AlgaeDICE (Equations 12 and 13) with f(x) =1
2x2.
This way, for any π, the dual value function νmay be solved exactly using standard matrix
operations. Thus, we train πby iteratively solving for νvia matrix operations and then
taking a gradient step for π. We collect an oﬀ-policy dataset by running a uniformly
random policy for 500 trajectories, where each trajectory is initalized at a random state
and is of length 10. This dataset is kept ﬁxed, placing us in the completely oﬄine regime.
We useα= 0.01andγ= 0.97.
Graphical depictions of learned policies πand dual value functions νare presented in
Figure 1, where each plot shows πandνduring the ﬁrst, fourth, seventh, and tenth
iterations of training. The opacity of each square is determined by the Bellman residuals
ofνat that state. Recall that the Bellman residuals of the optimal ν∗
πare the density
11