provides both (regularized) Q-values and the desired state-action corrections wπ/Das
primal and dual variables simultaneously.
5 Related Work
Algorithmically, our proposed method follows a Lagrangian primal-dual view of the LP
characterization of the Q-function, which leads to a saddle-point problem. Several recent
works (e.g., Chen and Wang, 2016; Wang, 2017; Dai et al., 2018a,b; Chen et al., 2018; Lee
and He, 2018) also considered saddle-point formulations for policy improvement, derived
from fundamentally diﬀerent perspectives. In particular, Dai et al. (2018a) exploit a saddle-
point formulation for the multi-step (path) conditions on the consistency between optimal
value function and policy. Other works (Chen and Wang, 2016; Wang, 2017; Dai et al.,
2018b; Chen et al., 2018) consider the (augmented) Lagrangian of the LP characterization
of Bellman optimality for the optimal V-function, which is slightly diﬀerent from the LP
characterization with respect to the optimal Q-function we consider. Although slight,
the diﬀerence between the V- andQ-LPs is crucial to enable behavior-agnostic policy
optimization in AlgaeDICE. If one were to follow derivations similar to AlgaeDICE but
for theV-function LP, some form of explicit importance weighting (and thus knowledge of
the behavior policy) would be required, as in recent work on oﬀ-policy estimation (Tang
et al., 2019; Uehara and Jiang, 2019). We further note that the application of a regularizer
on the dual variable to yield Primal AlgaeDICE is key to transforming the Lagrangian
optimization over values and state-action occupancies — typical in these previous works —
to an optimization over values and policies, which is more common in practice and can
help generalization (e.g., Swaminathan and Joachims, 2015).
The regularization we employ is inspired by previous uses of regularization in RL. Adding
regularization to MDPs (Neu et al., 2017; Geist et al., 2019) has been investigated for
many diﬀerent purposes in the literature, including exploration (de Farias and Van Roy,
2000; Haarnoja et al., 2017, 2018), smoothing (Dai et al., 2018b), avoiding premature
convergence (Nachum et al., 2017a), ensuring tractability (Todorov, 2006), and mitigating
observation noise (Rubin et al., 2012; Fox et al., 2016). We note that the regularization
employed by AlgaeDICE as a divergence over state-action densities is markedly diﬀerent
from these previous works, which mostly regularize only the actiondistributions of a policy
conditioned on state. An approach more similar to ours is given by Belousov and Peters
(2017), which regularizes the max-return objective using an f-divergence over state-action
densities. Their derivations are similar in spirit to ours, using the method of Lagrange
multipliers, but their result is distinct in a number of key characteristics. First, their
objective (analogous to ours in (12)) includes not only policy and values but also a number
of additional functions, complicating any practical implementation. Second, their results
are restricted to conservative regularization ( α>0), whereas our ﬁndings extend to both
exploratory regularization and unregularized objectives ( α≤0). Third, the algorithm
proposed by Belousov and Peters (2017) follows a bi-level optimization, in which the policy
10