on-policy access to the environment; i.e., during the learning process agents may collect
new experience from the environment using policies they choose, and these interactions are
eﬀectively unlimited. By contrast, in many real-world applications of RL, interaction with
the environment is costly, if not impossible, hence experience collection during learning
is limited, necessitating the use of oﬀ-policy RL methods, i.e., algorithms which are able
to learn from logged experience collected by potentially multiple and possibly unknown
behavior policies.
The oﬀ-policy nature of many practical applications presents a signiﬁcant challenge for RL
algorithms. The traditional max-return objective is in the form of an on-policy expectation,
and thus, policy gradient methods (Sutton et al., 2000; Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000) require
samples from the on-policy distribution to estimate the gradient of this objective. The most
straightforward way to reconcile policy gradient with oﬀ-policy settings is via importance
weighting (Precup et al., 2000). However, this approach is prone to high variance and
instability without appropriate damping (Munos et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Gruslys
et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017). The more common approach to the oﬀ-policy problem
is to simply ignore it, which is exactly what has been proposed by many existing oﬀ-policy
policy gradient methods (Degris et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2014). These algorithms simply
compute the gradients of the max-return objective with respect to samples from the oﬀ-
policy data, ignoring distribution shift in the samples. The justiﬁcation for this approach
is that the maximum return policy will be optimal regardless of the sampling distribution
of states. However, such a justiﬁcation is unsound in function approximation settings,
where models have limited expressiveness, with potentially disastrous consequences on
optimization and convergence (e.g., Lu et al., 2018).
Value-based methods provide an alternative that may be more promising for the oﬀ-policy
setting. In these methods, a value function is learned either as a criticto a learned policy
(as in actor-critic) or as the maximum return value function itself (as in Q-learning).
This approach is based on dynamic programming in tabular settings, which is inherently
oﬀ-policy and independent of any underlying data distribution. Nevertheless, when using
function approximation, the objective is traditionally expressed as an expectation over
single-step Bellman errors , which re-raises the question, “What should the expectation
be?” Some theoretical work suggests that the ideal expectation is in fact the on-policy
expectation (Sutton et al., 2000; Silver et al., 2014; Nachum et al., 2018). In practice, this
problem is usually ignored, with the same justiﬁcation as that made for oﬀ-policy policy
gradient methods. It is telling that actor-critic or Q-learning algorithms advertised as
oﬀ-policy still require large amounts of online interaction with the environment (Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Hessel et al., 2018).
In this work, we present an ALgorithm for policy Gradient from Arbitrary Experience via
DICE(AlgaeDICE)1as an alternative to policy gradient and value-based methods. We
1DICE is an abbreviation for distribution correction estimation and is taken from the DualDICE
work (Nachum et al., 2019b) on oﬀ-policy policy evaluation. Although our current work notably focuses
on policy optimization as opposed to evaluation and only implicitly estimates the distribution corrections,
our derivations are nevertheless partly inspired by this previous work.
2