start with the dualformulation of the max-return objective, which is expressed in terms of
normalized state-action occupancies rather than a policy or value function. Traditionally,
this objective is considered unattractive, since access to the occupancies either requires
an on-policy expectation (similar to policy gradient methods) or learning a function
approximator to satisfy single-step constraints (similar to value-based methods). We
demonstrate how these problems can be remedied by adding a controllable regularizer
and applying a carefully chosen change of variables, obtaining a joint objective over a
policy and an auxiliary dual function (that can be interpreted as a critic). Crucially, this
objective relies only on access to samples from an arbitrary oﬀ-policy data distribution,
collected by potentially multiple and possibly unknown behavior policies (under some
mild conditions). Unlike traditional actor-critic methods, which use a separate objective
for actor and critic, this formulation trains the policy (actor) and dual function (critic)
to optimize the sameobjective. Further illuminating the connection to policy gradient
methods, we show that if the dual function is optimized, the gradient of the proposed
objective with respect to the policy parameters is exactlythe on-policy policy gradient.
This way, our approach naturally avoids issues of distribution mismatch without any
explicit use of importance weights. We continue to provide an alternative derivation of
the same results, based on a primal-dual form of the return-maximizing RL problem, and
notably this perspective extends the previous results to both undiscounted γ= 1settings
and unregularized max-return objectives. Finally, we provide empirical evidence that
AlgaeDICE can perform well on benchmark RL tasks.
2 Background
We consider the RL problem presented as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman,
1994), which is speciﬁed by a tuple M=/angbracketleftS,A,r,T,µ 0/angbracketrightconsisting of a state space, an
action space, a reward function, a transition probability function, and an initial state
distribution. A policy πinteracts with the environment by starting at an initial state
s0∼µ0, and iteratively producing a sequence of distributions π(·|st)overA, at steps
t= 0,1,..., from which actions atare sampled and successively applied to the environment.
At each step, the environment produces a scalar reward rt=r(st,at)and a next state
st+1∼T(st,at). In RL, one wishes to learn a return-maximizing policy:
maxπJP(π) := (1−γ)Es0∼µ0,a0∼π(s0)[Qπ(s0,a0)], (1)
whereQπdescribes the future rewards accumulated by πfrom any state-action pair (s,a),
Qπ(s,a) =E/bracketleftBig∞/summationdisplay
t=0γtr(st,at)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingles0=s,a0=a,st∼T(st−1,at−1),at∼π(st)fort≥1/bracketrightBig
,(2)
and0≤γ < 1is adiscount factor. This objective may be equivalently written in its
dualform (Puterman, 1994; Wang et al., 2008) in terms of the policy’s normalized state
visitation distribution as
maxπJD(π) :=E(s,a)∼dπ[r(s,a)], (3)
3