Figure 1: We provide a pictoral representation of learned policies πand dual variables ν
during training of AlgaeDICE on the Four Rooms domain (Sutton et al., 1999). The agent
is initialized at the state denoted by an orange square and receives zero reward everywhere
except at the target state, denoted by a green square. We use a ﬁxed oﬄine experience data
distribution that is near-uniform. The progression of learned πandνduring training is
shown from left to right. The policy πis presented via arrows for each action at each square,
with the opacity of the arrow determined by the probability π(a|s). The dual variables
νare presented via their Bellman residuals: the opacity of each square is determined by
the sum of the Bellman residuals at that state/summationtext
a(Bπν−ν)(s,a). Recall that for any π,
the Bellman residuals of the optimal ν∗
πshould satisfy (Bπν∗
π−ν∗
π)(s,a) =wπ/D(s,a). As
expected, we see that in the beginning of training the residuals are high near the initial
state, while towards the end of training the residuals show the preferred trajectories of the
near-optimal policy.
ratioswπ/D. We see that this is reﬂected in the learned ν. At the beginning of training,
the residuals are high around the initial state. As training progresses, there is a clear path
(or paths) of high-residual states going from initial to target state. Thus we see that ν
learns to properly correct for distribution shifts in the oﬀ-policy experience distributions.
The algorithm successfully learns to optimize a policy using these corrected gradients, as
shown by the arrows denoting preferred actions of the learned policy.
We further provide quantitative results in Figure 2. We plot the average per-step reward
of AlgaeDICE compared to actor-critic in both online and oﬄine settings. As a point
of comparison, the behavior policy used to collect data for the oﬄine setting achieves
average reward of 0.03. Although all the variants are able to signiﬁcantly improve upon
this baseline, we see that AlgaeDICE performance is only negligibly aﬀected by the type of
dataset, while performance of actor-critic degrades in the oﬄine regime. See Appendix B
for experimental details.
6.2 Continuous Control
We now present results of AlgaeDICE on a set of continuous control benchmarks using
MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) and OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). We evaluate
the performance of Primal AlgaeDICE with f(x) =1
2x2. Our empirical objective is thus
12