of the most important and popular tasks of computer vision. The common deep learning
models can be utilized for any computer vision task includes Convolution Neural Network(CNN), Deep Belief Networks (DBN), Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBM), Restricted
Boltzmann Machines (RBM), and Stacked Autoencoders [ 71].
1.2 Object classification and localization
Image Classification is a task of classifying an image or an object in an image into one of the
predefined categories. This problem is generally solved with the help of supervised machinelearning or deep learning algorithms wherein the model is trained on a large labelled dataset.Some of the commonly used machine learning models for this task includes ANN, SVM,
Decision trees, and KNN [ 66]. However, on the deep learning side, CNNs and its architectural
successors and variants dominate other deep models for classifying images and related works.
Apart from well-defined machine learning and deep learning models, one can also witness theusage of other approaches such as Fuzzy logic and Genetic algorithms for the aforementionedtasks [ 19].
Object Localization is the task of determining position of an object or multiple objects in an
image/frame with the help of a rectangular box around an object, commonly known as abounding box. However, Image segmentation is the process of partitioning an image into
multiple segments wherein a segment may contain a complete object or a part of an object.
Image segmentation is commonly utilized to locate objects, lines, and curves viz. boundariesof an object or segment in an image. Generally, pixels in a segment possess a set of commoncharacteristics such as intensity, texture, etc. The main motive behind image segmentation is topresent the image into a meaningful representation. Moreover, Object detection can beconsidered as a combination of classification, localization, and segmentation. It is the task ofcorrectly classifying and efficiently localizing single or multiple objects in an image, generallywith the help of supervised algorithms given a sufficiently large labelled training set. Figure 1
presents the clear understanding of classification, localization, and segmentation for single andmultiple objects in an image in the context of object detection.
1.3 Challenges in object detection
Applications of object detection have a broad range covering autonomous driving, detectingaerial objects, text detection, surveillance, rescue operations, robotics, facing detection, pedes-trian detection, visual search engine, computation of object of interest, brand detection, and
many more [ 1,58]. The major challenges in the object detection includes; (i) The occupancy of
Fig. 1 Classification, Localization, and Segmentation in Single and Multiple Objects image [ 13]9245 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275