5 Summarization and future research directions
Object Detection comprises the fundamental tasks such as object classification, localization,
and segmentation. Object detection and related tasks are classified in two categories viz. single
stage and two stages. In this paper, we explored two stage object detectors viz. RCNN, Fast-RCNN, and Faster-RCNN along with their important applications. We majorly reviewedsingle stage object detectors especially YOLOs, their architectural advancements, underlyingpretrained CNN architectures, and loss function in details. We presented different aspects andoptimizations carried out in the successive versions of YOLOs along with all the underlyingconcepts. Moreover, we presented the challenges and motivations behind the specific reviewof single stage object detectors. YOLOs are performing significantly better in comparison with
their counterpart two stage object detectors in terms of detection accuracy and inference time.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review covering single stage object detectors
especially YOLOs. The following tables provide the summarization of the entire paper in
terms of comparative illustrations, results, and applications. Table 3summarizes the differ-
ences between single- and two-stage object detectors. Single stage object detectors are mainlydesigned for real time object detection; however, they are lagging in the performance metricsto the two stage object detectors. Moreover, YOLOs make comparatively fewer errors in theidentification of the background, quick boost in the performance is observed, if YOLOs are
utilized for background detection in the two stage object detection algorithms. The combina-
tion of YOLO and Fast-RCNN outperform to the each of these standalone architecture onPascal VOC dataset.
Table 4summarizes the comparative analysis among the different version of YOLOs.
Darknets were majorly adopted for the implementation of YOLOs. Each successor has comeup with some type of optimizations over its predecessor, as described in the previous section.With the help of multi scale training, YOLO-v2 offers better detection on varying sized objectswith an easy trade-off between the model performance and model inferences. A unified
method is presented using the joint training for detection and classification as well. YOLO-
v3 is better detector, fast, and accurate, necked by feature pyramid network. YOLO-v4 is also
Table 3 Comparison of Two-stage (R-CNN & Successors) and Single-stage detectors (YOLOs)
Features R-CNN and its successors YOLO and its successors
Region proposals Region proposals (or ROI) are generated
using Selective search algorithmRegion proposals are generated by a
single convolutional network.
Feature extraction
(Backbone
network)The backbone network is a heavyweight
and time consuming.The backbone network is a lightweight
and faster feature extractor.
Number of stages
and their roleFirst stage extracts region proposals.
Second stage extracts feature vectors,thereafter detections.A single stage network predicts the
bounding boxes offsets, confidencescore and class conditional probabilities
Speed and accuracy Higher accuracy and low speed. Faster detection and accuracy nearer to
two stage object detectors.
Computational cost They require powerful resources for
computation and are computationally
expensive.Not necessary for powerful resources for
computation and are less expensive.
Performance They are efficient for detecting smaller
and larger objects.They have mostly shown poor performance
for detecting smaller objects and have beenefficient for larger objects.9269 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275