and a bounding box offset. Faster R-CNN [ 57] is a successor of Fast R-CNN and it was
released in early 2016. It has 2 modules; 1) First is a CNN i.e., Region proposal network which
is responsible for generating region proposals. It takes a single image as an input and outputs
the bounding boxes and object confidence scores, 2) During training, RPN is trained on
ImageNet then regional proposals are used for detection and training separately, finally Fast R-CNN is fine-tuned with unique dense layers. In the experimentational setup for objectdetection on Pascal VOC 2007, Fast-RCNN and Faster-RCNN are 25 and 250 times fasterrespectively compared to traditional RCNN with almost similar mAP of around 66. Figure 5
illustrates these two stage object detectors and an incremental improvement in the architecture.
Other than the aforementioned two stage object detectors, several other instances are also
quite popular. As the scope of the review is limited to single stage object detectors specially
YOLOs, we are not including other two stage object detectors in detail here. However, Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN) [ 42] is one of the important two stage object detectors, tried to
overcome few of the aforementioned challenges successfully by extracting features at multiplescales of an image in the object detection process.
2.2 Applications of R-CNN and successors
There are numerous applications wherein two-phase object detectors are employed and
achieved benchmarking results. We shall not cover the entire corpus; however, we list some
of them in Table 2, to demonstrate the broad spectrum of two stage object detectors. RCNN
and its successors have been frequently used for tracking the objects from a drone-mountedcamera. Real time object detection and tracking is implemented and benchmarking results areobtained using embedded hardware such as Jetson TX/AGX Xavier and Intel Neural ComputeStick wherein RCNN is employed on the embedded hardware for object detection [ 26]. A
novel OCR system is developed, named as Rosetta, wherein faster-RCNN is utilized fordetecting the text characters from millions of Facebook images, however, fully convolutional
CNN is employed for generating the lexicon free transcription of each word [6 ]. A group of
researchers from Google developed an application using computer vision, machine learning,
and Google ’s Knowledge Graph called as Google Lens [ 22] wherein a region proposal
network (RPN) is utilized to detect the character level bounding boxes for text recognition.
By looking at the performance metrics shown in Table 2, we can observe the two objective
functions viz. Reduction in the processing or inference time and Improvements in the perfor-
mance metrics. As per the characteristics of the fast or faster CNN, reduced inference time isobserved by applying these architectures in comparison with its shallow counterpart RCNN.
Frames per second (fps) is one of the major metrics on which processing or inference speed is
evaluated.
3 Convolutional neural networks and Pretrained models
Traditional machine learning algorithms completely rely on the handcrafted features extractionfollowed by feature selection for performing any prediction or classification tasks. Usually,
these algorithms spend a huge amount of time in choosing the best method for feature
extraction. In order to overcome these drawbacks, researchers, industrialists, and academiciansare actively working in deep learning. Commonly used deep learning techniques/modelsinclude deep neural networks, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural9251 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275