Smaller filters result in fewer parameters and are capable of identifying smaller objects
more effectively. The authors proposed this architecture in two flavors viz. VGG19 and
VGG16, consisting of 19 and 16 layers in the deep neural networks respectively [ 64]. In
several configurations, 1 × 1 convolution is introduced that is considered as depth wise downsampling [ 60]. With increase in depth of network by series of convolutions, pooling layers and
fully connected layers, it has resulted in 138 M parameters approximately [ 31]. Figure 8shows
the generic schematic of VGG architecture.
3.2 Network in network
Min Lin and his contributors didn ’t follow the traditional approaches for extracting the
features/information. Just like convolutional filters slide throughout the image, in the samefashion, a multilayer perceptron convolution ( mlpconv ) slides pixel-wise through the entire
image and extracts the features, as demonstrated in Fig. 9. Here three layers of mlpconv are
stacked followed by a Global Average Pooling (GAP) layer [ 12]. The underlying working of
the GAP layer is presented in Fig. 10. If we have an image of dimension (H × W × D) then
after applying global average pooling, we get (1 × 1 × D) tensor. It has resulted in a decreasein number of parameters, so as the model complexity [ 39]. The average of all the pixel values
in each channel is the overall result of the GAP operation. This technique also helps in
dimensionality reduction. Additionally, SoftMax is used as an activation function in the last
layer and (1 × 1) convolution filters are placed in a multilayer perceptron after convolutionallayer resulting in dimensionality reduction [ 23].
3.3 GoogLeNet
C. Szegedy et al. invoked completely new architecture that introduces multiple filters in thearchitecture in an elegant manner. An image of any resolution can be fed into this network that
was considered as one of the major bottlenecks for earlier models. It has two convolutional
Fig. 8 VGG architecture [ 50]9256 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275