single stage object detectors as it works on highly probable regions only for the object
detection.
However, with the advent of You Only Look Once (YOLO) and its successors, attempts are
being heavily appreciated for solving this task in one shot/stage wherein localization problemis formulated as a regression problem with the help of deep neural networks. YOLO is not thefirst algorithm that uses Single Shot Detector (SSD) for object detection. There are numerousother algorithms that have been introduced in recent past such as Single Shot Detector (SSD)[43], Deconvolution Single Shot Detector (DSSD) [ 16], RetinaNet [ 41], M2Det [86],
RefineDet++ [ 85], are based on single stage object detection. Two stage detectors are complex
and powerful and therefore they generally outperform single stage detectors. YOLO can beseen as giving a tough fight to not only two staged detectors but previous single staged
detectors also in terms of accuracy and inference time. It is considered as one of the most
common choices in production only because of its simple architectural design, low complex-ity, and easy implementation. Figure 2shows the generic schematic architecture of single stage
object detectors wherein it generates all the bounding boxes along with the class probabilitiesby considering all the spatial regions in one shot.
1.5 Evolution of Object Detectors & Related Works
Well known machine learning approaches for object detection include Viola-Jones objectdetection framework [ 70] and Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG). The former frame-
work was primarily introduced for face detection. The algorithm had three main stages viz.Integral image ,Adaboost classifier ,a n d Classifier Cascade . However, HOG was introduced
by Robert K. McConnell of Wayland Research Inc. in 1986. Firstly, the image is divided intosmaller regions known as cells. A HOG is then calculated for each pixel in the cell and thecombination of all the histograms is known as a descriptor. These descriptors are fed asfeatures in traditional classifiers. Dalal and Triggs utilized SVM as a classifier for classifying
an object based on these features [ 34]. Overfeat was another object detector introduced in 2013
that leverages the advantages of spatial convolutional network features. Figure 3illustrates the
year wise evolution of various important algorithms for object detection. Keeping the model ’s
complexity high and huge resources consumption by two stage object detectors in mind,
researchers concentrate on single stage object detectors and in particular YOLO algorithms,shall be covered in detail in the next section.
Deep learning is not only performing well in object detection but in other fields also. Deep
learning is offering various models to efficiently handle the healthcare related data. Since the
Fig. 2 Generic architecture of single stage object detectors [ 29]9247 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275