Convolution with anchor boxes The fully connected layer is removed from the base version
as it was predicting the bounding box coordinates directly, moreover, convolutional layers
were responsible for capturing the features. Hand-picked priors are utilized by employing
Faster RCNN for predicting the bounding boxes instead of identifying the bounding box
coordinates directly. Further, offset prediction makes the model simpler and fast learnable. Anapproximate increase of 7% in recall is observed by the usage of convolution with anchor
boxes, however, 0.3% reduction in mAP is also noticed.
Dimension clusters Unlike hand-picked anchor boxes in YOLO, the anchor boxes using k-
means clustering are extracted. Better shaped anchor boxes may provide quick start and offersimproved model training and performance.
Direct location prediction YOLO had two issues, firstly, handpicked dimension priors which
was addressed by use of k-means clustering and secondly, model instability at the time ofbounding box prediction. Random initialization is considered as the biggest hurdles inpredicting genuine offsets. Instead, we predict the location coordinates relative to the grid-cell locations. This added feature increased the mAP by 5%.
Fine-grained features YOLO predicts larger objects easily with a 13 × 13 feature map.
However, if the image has smaller objects, it fails to recognize effectively. Using the idea ofskip connections in ResNet, as shown in the Fig. 20, higher resolution features are concatenat-
ed with the lower resolution features in consecutive channels. The reshaping is performed i.e.,26 × 26 × 512 features map is converted into 13 × 13 × 2048 features map thenconcatenated it with the model hence predicted output size is 13 × 13 × 1024. The resultanttensor shape would be 13 × 13 × 3072 for which filters were applied. Adding a passthroughlayer has increased mAP by 1%.
Multi-scale training After exclusion of fully connected layers, YOLO (v2) can now operate
on any dimension ranging from 320 × 320 to 608 × 608. The model randomly chooses thenew dimension which is multiple of 32 for every 10 epochs. This gives the flexibility to themodel to predict on various dimensions.
4.3 YOLO (v3)
The base version of YOLO didn ’t have a solution for localization errors and second version
failed in detecting the smaller sized objects. The third version of YOLO tries to overcome
Fig. 20 Skip connections in the
ResNet Module [ 25]9266 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275