previous versions. The model aimed to produce an object detector for production systems.
Authors segregated the problem statement and approaches into several segments then theyhave proposed a variety of methodologies which can best fit the available resources. Firstly, an
input image is provided of dimension H×W,w h e r e Hrepresents height and Wrepresents
width. Secondly, a series of convolutions which extracts features through powerful networks
like VGG16, Darknet53, ResNet50, and other variants which they termed as backbone .
Thirdly, a neck which can be utilized to extract features at different scales such as Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN), Path Aggregation Network (PAN), and other variants which is thecomposition of connections between bottom-up and top-down pathways. Finally, the predic-tion of anchor boxes using single-stage detectors like YOLO which have dense layers or usingtwo-stage detectors like Faster R-CNN which have sparse predictions act as a head.
On the architectural side, the authors have compared CSPResNeXt50, CSPDarknet53, and
EfficientNetB3 for construction of YOLO (v4) architecture. CSPDarknet53, a network with 29convolution layers with 3 × 3 filters and approximately 27.6 million parameters, is chosen asbackbone that outperformed the remaining architectures wherein CSP stands for Cross-stage
partial connections. CSPNets help in rich gradient combination with minimal computation cost[73], as illustrated in Fig. 22.
The ImageNet pretrained model for classification with the underlying dataset as COCO for
experimentation is utilized [ 73]. Authors used Spatial Pyramid Pooling (SPP) which was also
used by RCNN. Here, a CNN followed by fully connected layers has a restriction over inputand output volume. However, this version ensures handling of any input irrespective of thedimension without resizing or reshaping it. SPP is placed between a CNN and fully connectedlayer which maps any input size to fixed size output. This gives an option to detect objects ofan image of varied size, moreover, genetic algorithm is applied for hyperparameters tuning. Inaddition, Path Aggregation Network (PAN) is preferred over Feature Pyramid Network (FPN)where PAN is a bottom-up path augmentation that uses Adaptive feature pooling which workssimilar to FPN.
Fig. 22 CSPNet vs DenseNet architecture utilized in YOLO-v4 [ 73].aCSPNet bDenseNet9268 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275