an object in an image has an inherent variation such as objects in an image may occupy
majority of the pixels i.e., 70% to 80%, or very few pixels i.e., 10% or even less, (ii)Processing of low-resolution visual contents, (iii) Handling varied sized multiple objects in
an image, (iv) Availability of labelled data, and (v) Handling overlapping objects in visual
content.
Most of the object detectors based on machine learning and deep learning algorithms fail to
address commonly faced challenges, are summarized as follows:
&Multi-scale training : Most object detectors are trained for a specific resolution of input.
These detectors generally underperform for inputs having different scales or resolutions.
&Foreground-Background class imbalance : Imbalance or disproportion among the in-
stances of different categories can majorly affects the model performance.
&Detection of relatively smaller objects: All the object detection algorithms will tend to
perform well on larger objects if the model is trained on larger objects. However, thesemodels show poor performance on comparatively smaller sized objects.
&Necessity of large datasets and computational power: Object detection algorithms in
deep learning need larger datasets for computation, labor intensive approaches for anno-tations, and powerful computational resources for processing [ 45]. Due to the exponential
increase of generated data from various sources, it has become a tedious and labor-
intensive task to annotate each and every object in the visual contents [ 45,73,80].
&Smaller sized datasets: Though deep learning models outperform traditional machine
learning approaches by a great margin, they demonstrate poor performance while evalu-
ating on the datasets with fewer instances.
&Inaccurate localization during predictions: Bounding boxes are the approximations of
the ground-truth. Generally, background pixels are also included during predictions, thisaffects the accuracy of the algorithm. Mostly, localization errors are either due to occu-pancy of background in the predictions and detecting similar objects [ 45].
1.4 Stages in object detection
In supervised machine learning, there are two types of problems; (i) Regression and (ii)Classification. However, image classification is no different from the traditional classificationproblem. The next task after classifying the object in an image is to localize it, if required. Arectangular box, commonly known as a bounding box is determined around an object with the
help of the deep neural networks. This object detection problem generally performs the
features extraction followed by the classification and/or localization, known as two-stageobject detectors if implemented in two stages. First stage generates Regions of Interest (RoI)using Region Proposal Network (RPN), however, the second stage is responsible forpredicting the objects and bounding boxes for the proposed regions. First stage mainlyresponsible for selecting plausible region proposals by applying various techniques such asnegative proposal sampling. The popular models in this category include Region basedconvolutional neural networks (RCNN), Fast RCNN, and Faster RCNN. Single stage object
detectors enjoying the simpler architecture, specially designed for the object detection in single
stage by considering all the region proposals. These detectors output the bounding boxes andclass specific probabilities for the underlying objects by considering all the spatial sizes of animage in one shot. Though, two stage object detectors perform better in comparison with9246 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275