inception of Covid-19 outbreak, different sources such as X-ray, CT, and MRI are being
heavily utilized for the possible infection due to virus. The role and applicability of various
deep models for the detection of Covid-19 infection are summarized in [ 4]. Among all the deep
learning models, CNN has gained huge popularity in the feature extraction from visual inputs.As an example, CNN based hand recognition system has achieved 100% training and testingaccuracy while applying crow search algo rithm (CSA) for searching the optimal
hyperparameters [ 18]. A machine learning model is developed for the tomato disease dataset
classification wherein PCA based whale optimization is utilized for the efficient features ’
selection [ 17]. The extracted features are then fed into another deep model for further
classification of tomato disease. Binary classification of malwares on image datasets usingCNN is implemented in [ 69]. The proposed solution outperforms the state-of-the-arts
pretrained CNNs in the course of malware detection and classification using visual inputs.
1.6 Popular dataset and characteristics
MicroSoft Common Objects in COntext (MSCOCO) dataset is one of the standards and mostpopular datasets in computer vision tasks. This dataset was pr imarily designed for
experimenting image/object classification, detection, and instance segmentation tasks usingML/DL based approaches. This dataset comes with fewer categories; however, it comprisesmore instances in each category. Specifically, it includes 91 different categories of objects likeperson ,dog,train, and other commonly encountered objects. In addition to the large number
of instances in each category, it also observes multiple instances with different characteristicsper image [ 40]. Pascal Visual Object Classes (Pascal VOC) [ 14] is another benchmarking
dataset for visual object classification, segmentation, and detection. The dataset communityhas constantly been contributing every year starting with 4 classes in 2005 to 20 classes in
2007, making it competitive with recent advancements. The various classes of Pascal VOC are
presented in Table 1. Approximately, 11,530 images are comprised in the training dataset
which contains 27,540 Region of Interests (RoI) and 6929 segmentations.
Over the recent years, the commonly used metric for evaluation in Object detection is
Average Precision (AP), can be defined as the average detection precision under variousrecalls and evaluated in a class-specific manner. In order to compare the performance of all thecategories of objects, an average of all the object categories i.e., mean Average Precision(mAP) is used as a final metric for evaluation in the object detection and related fields.
Fig. 3 Year wise evolution of object detection algorithms9248 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275