class specific score ( css) for each bounding box of all the grid cells. This class specific score
encodes both the probability of the class appearing in that box and how well the predicted box
fits the object.
Generally, these bounding boxes differ in size, considering different shapes for capturing
the different objects, known as anchor boxes . An object in the image should be detected by a
bounding box such that the center of the object should reside in that bounding box. However,there may be a possibility of residing centers of multiple objects in the same bounding box.Authors utilized a different term of anchor boxes to represent the bounding boxes correspond-ing to a single grid cell. Anchor boxes are just a set of several standard bounding boxes,selected after analyzing the dataset and underlying objects in the dataset. These chosen anchorboxes should represent most of the classes/categories by considering different combinations of
width and height such as square, vertical or horizontal rectangle, etc. to accommodate the
aspect ratio and scale of all the objects present in the dataset.
Adjacent grid cells may also predict the same object i.e., predicting the overlapping
bounding boxes for the same object. So, there would be multiple predictions because neigh-boring grid cells may assume the object center falls inside it. Figure 15ademonstrates the
multiple bounding boxes prediction for an object however high and low overlapping betweenthe predicted box and the ground truth is presented in Fig. 15band Fig. 15crespectively. We
need to resolve this issue of detection of the same object by multiple grid cells or by multiple
bounding boxes of the same grid cell.
Now, each bounding box of all the grids will be associated with a class specific score, box
coordinates, and a classification output category. We will be having a total S
2×Bpredicted
boxes, moreover, boxes will be discarded having a class score lesser than some predefined
threshold. Usually, this threshold is taken as 0.5 in most of the object detection algorithms, butit may vary depending upon the dataset and its characteristics. The reason for a low score maybe either due to the low probability of containing an object in that grid or low probability ofany particular class category that maximizes the class score.
After discarding bounding boxes with the help of some threshold, we are left with a smaller
quantity of bounding boxes but this count is also very high. The second criteria for discardingthe less relevant bounding boxes is known as non max suppression which is further based
upon the IoU. The effect of non max suppression is presented in Fig. 16.
Non max suppression internally uses an important concept of Intersection over Union (IoU)
which can be computed for two boxes, as illustrated with the help of Fig. 17. First, we select
the box having the maximum class score. All other bounding boxes overlapped with thechosen box will be discarded having IoU is greater than some predefined threshold. We repeat
Fig. 15 Multiple bounding boxes and their overlapping with the ground truth ( a) Multiple bounding boxes ( b)
high overlapping ( c) low overlapping9261 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275