illustration between two stage and single stage object detectors, among different versions
of YOLOs, applications based on two stage detectors, and different versions of YOLOsalong with the future research directions.
Keywords Object detection .Convolutional neural networks .YOLO .Deep learning .Computer
vision
1 Introduction
Object detection is an important field in the domain of computer vision. Various machine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models are employed for the performance enhancement
in the process of object detection and related tasks. In the earlier time, two stage objectdetectors were quite popular and effective. With the recent development in single stage objectdetection and underlying algorithms, they have become significantly better in comparison withmost of the two stage object detectors. Moreover, with the advent of YOLOs, variousapplications have utilized YOLOs for object detection and recognition in various contextand performed tremendously well in comparison with their counterparts two stage detectors.This motivates us to write a specific review on YOLO and their architectural successors by
presenting their design details, optimizations proposed in the successors, tough competition to
two stage object detectors, etc. This section presents the brief introduction of deep learning andcomputer vision, object detection and related terminologies, challenges, stages and their role inthe implementation of any object detection algorithm, brief evolution of various objectdetection algorithms, popular datasets utilized, and the major contributions of the review.
1.1 Deep learning and computer vision
Deep Learning (DL) was introduced in the early 2000s after Support vector machines (SVM),Multilayer perceptron (MLP), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and other shallower neuralnetworks became popular. Many researchers termed it as a subset of Machine learning (ML)which is considered as a subset of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in turn. During its inceptionperiod, deep learning didn ’t draw much attention due to scalability and several other influential
factors such as demand of huge compute power. After 2006, it has changed its gear andbecame popular as compared to its contemporary ML algorithms because of two main reasons:(i) Availability of abundance of data for processing and (ii) Availability of high-end compu-
tational resources. The success stories of deep learning in various domains includes weather
forecasting [ 80], stock market prediction [ 53], speech recognition [ 59], object detection [ 37],
character recognition [ 83], intrusion detection [ 32], automatic landslide detection [ 48], time
series prediction [ 8], text classification [ 33], gene expression [ 51], micro-blogs [ 82], biological
data handling [ 38], unstructured text data mining with fault classification [ 75], video process-
ing such as caption generation [ 78], and many more.
Computer vision is a predominant and versatile field in the current era and lots of research
is being carried out by various researchers in this field. Computer vision instructs machines to
understand, grasp, and analyze a high-level understanding of visual contents. Its subfields
include scene or object recognition, object detection, video tracking, object segmentation, poseand motion estimation, scene modeling, and image restoration [ 49]. In this review, we focus on
the object detection and its relevant subfields such as object localization and segmentation, one9244 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275