coordinates. Large localization error and lower recall in comparison with two stage object
detectors may be considered as the two significant drawbacks of this version of YOLO.
A variant of YOLO with lesser model complexity known as Fast YOLO is proposed for
faster detection of objects. It has 9 convolutional layers with comparatively lesser filters in
those layers. Another variant of YOLO, known as Yolo-lite is proposed, specifically designed
for real time object detection on a standard non-GPU system [ 27]. Authors demonstrate the
capability of shallower networks in the object detection without any explicit need of theaccelerators. Moreover, they also demonstrate that the presence of batch normalization limitsthe performance of shallow neural networks in the course of object detection.
4.1.1 Loss function
The sum squared error is used throughout the loss function which is presented using Eq. 6.A s
we can notice, there are total five terms in the underlying equation wherein notations can bedefined as follows:
(x
i,yi) is the ground truth center of the bounding box,
(bxi,byi)is the predicted center of the bounding box,
(wi,hi) is the width and height respectively of the ground truth bounding box,
(bwi,bhi)is the width and height respectively of the predicted bounding box.
The first two terms are related to errors correspond to the differences in positioning ofpredicted bounding boxes and the ground truth bounding boxes. The deviations have a greaterimpact on IoU in case of smaller bounding boxes as compared to larger bounding boxes. Toaddress this problem, square root of the width and height of the bounding box is considered
instead of width and height directly in the loss function. Third term refers to the prediction
difference in the confidence score when the object is present in the corresponding bounding
box. In first three terms, 1
obj
ijis an indicator function, which represents ithgrid responsible for
predicting the jthbounding box. It will be 1 if the cell contains the object, 0 otherwise. It may
happen that ground truth may contain the object in a particular grid cell but the model wrongly
predicts there ’s no object. Apart from considering the loss when the grid cell contains the
object, they also aimed to reduce the loss when there ’s no object in the grid cell. It may happen
that ground truth may not contain the object in a particular grid cell but the model wrongly
Fig. 18 YOLO architecture for object detection and localization [ 56]9263 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275