Object detection using YOLO: challenges, architectural
successors, datasets and applications
Tausif Diwan1&G. Anirudh2&Jitendra V. Tembhurne1
Abstract
Object detection is one of the predominant and challenging problems in computer vision.
Over the decade, with the expeditious evolution of deep learning, researchers have
extensively experimented and contributed in the performance enhancement of object
detection and related tasks such as object classification, localization, and segmentation
using underlying deep models. Broadly, object detectors are classified into two categories
viz. two stage and single stage object detectors. Two stage detectors mainly focus on
selective region proposals strategy via complex architecture; however, single stage
detectors focus on all the spatial region proposals for the possible detection of objects
via relatively simpler architecture in one shot. Performance of any object detector is
evaluated through detection accuracy and inference time. Generally, the detection accu-
racy of two stage detectors outperforms single stage object detectors. However, the
inference time of single stage detectors is better compared to its counterparts. Moreover,
with the advent of YOLO (You Only Look Once) and its architectural successors, the
detection accuracy is improving significantly and sometime it is better than two stage
detectors. YOLOs are adopted in various applications majorly due to their faster infer-
ences rather than considering detection accuracy. As an example, detection accuracies are
63.4 and 70 for YOLO and Fast-RCNN respectively, however, inference time is around
300 times faster in case of YOLO. In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of
single stage object detectors specially YOLOs, regression formulation, their architecture
advancements, and performance statistics. Moreover, we summarize the comparativehttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-13644-y
*Tausif Diwan
tdiwan@iiitn.ac.in
G. Anirudh
ganirudhani90@gmail.com
Jitendra V. Tembhurne
jtembhurne@iiitn.ac.in
1Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Information Technology,
Nagpur, India
2Department of Data science and analytics, Central University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan, IndiaMultimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275
Received:27January2021/Revised:14March2022/Accepted:2August2022
#The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022Published online: 8 August 2022/