1.7 Importance of the review
Most of the reviews and surveys cover the two stage object detection algorithms. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first review that covers the single stage object detection usingspecially YOLOs. Herein, we present an extensive review on single stage object detectionalgorithms based on underlying architectures, regression formulation, pros and cons, compar-ative and incremental approach in this category, popular datasets, results obtained, and futurescope. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
a. Presenting the challenges and role of stages in the object detection process.
b. Brief explanation over two stage object detectors along with their applications.c. Necessity of single stage object detectors and detailed review of YOLOs in terms of
incremental architectural aspects, proposed optimization techniques, significance of lossfunction, and YOLOs based applications.
d. Comparative illustration between two stage and single stage object detectors, among
different version of YOLOs in term of performance and results along with the futureresearch direction in single stage object detectors.
1.8 Organization of the Paper
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2briefly covers some of the popular two
stage object detectors such as RCNN, Fast-RCNN, and Faster-RCNN along with the applica-tions of these two stage object detectors. Section 3summarizes the architectural aspects of
CNN along with several pretrained models such as VGG, Network in Network, ResNet, and
GoogleLeNet, utilized in the different versions of YOLOs. Section 4presents the detailed
description of regression formulation, design concepts of YOLO, its architectural successors,
and various applications based on different versions of YOLOs. Lastly, we summarize thepaper by presenting comparative illustration between two stage and single stage objectdetector, comparative illustration among different version of YOLOs along with their statis-tical results and performance. This section also presents the future research directions in objectdetections at last. However, the detailed flow of the paper is illustrated using Fig. 4.
2 Two stage object detection
Recent object detection algorithms can be categorized broadly into two types viz. Two stage
object detectors and Single stage object detectors . In the former one, the first stage isTable 1 PASCAL VOC classes
[14] Vehicles Household Animals Others
Aeroplane Bottle Bird Person
Bicycle Chair Cat
Boat Dining Table Cow
Bus Potted Plant Dog
Car Sofa Horse
Motorbike TV/Monitor Sheep
Train9249 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275