responsible for generating Regions of Interest (RoI) using Region Proposal Network (RPN),
however, the second stage is responsible for predicting the objects and bounding boxes for theproposed regions. We explore some popular two stage object detectors along with their usageand applicability in various domains in this section.
2.1 R-CNN and successors
In the first stage of region proposal, few key algorithms such as Deformable Parts Models(DPM) [ 15] and OverFeat [ 61] utilized sliding window technique wherein a fixed-sized
window slides through entire image and outputs the region proposals after passing throughthe classifier. The process is repeated with increasing window size. R-CNN and its successorsuse selective search algorithm to extract region proposals. R-CNN is a region basedconvolutional neural network object detection algorithm proposed by Ross Girshick [ 21].
They divided the solution in three modules: 1) Region proposals are generated using a
selective search algorithm, 2) Each region proposal is passed through the architecture having
five convolutional layers followed by two dense layers, generating a feature vector of size4096, and 3) Third module has independent linear classifiers pre-trained for each class. Afeature vector is passed through these linear classifiers obtaining class specific scores. Lastly,non-max suppression is applied on all the scores to obtain the best fit.
Fast R-CNN [ 20] achieves a significant improvement in the model training time and
inference time. Moreover, it also observes an increase in the performance matrix of the objectdetection i.e., mAP. Single stage object detection is realized with the help of multi-task loss
function wherein all the networks ’layers can be updated in the model training without any
specific requirement of disk storage for caching the features. It takes the entire image and
object proposals as an input. The entire image is fed into the network to generate a feature mapfrom which features vector is generated by RoI for each object proposal. Each feature vector isfed into a fully connected layer with a SoftMax activation function to output class probabilities
Fig. 4 Organization of the Review9250 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275