dimensional inputs such as images, it is almost impractical to connect all neurons in a given
layer to all neurons in the previous layer. Instead, we connect each neuron to only a part of theprevious layer.
Coming to the architectural design of CNNs, convolutional, pooling, and Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) collectively act as a basic transformation unit converting an input volume to anoutput volume. The spatial extent in the convolution operation is a hyperparameter known as areceptive-field orfilter-size .Filter-size that convolves over the input plays an important role in
extracting useful features information. Other hyperparameters such as depth ,stride ,a n d zero-
padding decide the size of the output volume [ 3]. Similar to the regular neural networks, a dot
product is performed between the weights ( w) and the spatial input ( x) and any non-linear
activation function ( f) is applied after adding the bias term ( b). The convolution operation for
textual and visual input can be expressed using Eqs. 1and2respectively.
y
l
i¼fb iþ∑d−1
j¼0wiþj/C2xiþj !
ð1Þ
ylij¼fb ijþ∑d1−1
k¼0∑d2−1
l¼0wiþkðÞ jþlðÞ/C2xiþkðÞ jþlðÞ !
ð2Þ
where yl
iis the output of the ithneuron in layer l.dis the filter-size in textual input and d1,d2are
thefilter-width andfilter-height respectively in visual input.
Pooling is generally applied to an output of the conv-layer and this layer performs a down
sampling along the spatial dimensions and is useful in extracting the dominating features.
There are several types of pooling such as max-pooling, average-pooling, and sum-pooling[68], and each is chosen depending on the application requirements. As an example, features
such as negation, whether it is in a textual or visual segment, must have the highest score in theconvolution operation so that it can dominate other scores in a max-pooling operation. Maxpooling operation for a 1-D input can be expressed using Eq. 3. It can be extended similarly for
higher dimensions also. Other pooling can also be computed in a similar fashion. Generally,conv-layer and fully connected layer have ReLU as an activation function. ReLU is a simple
non-linear activation function expressed using Eq. 4. The general form of a CNN model can be
represented as several consecutive convolutional layers followed by an optional pooling layer,
shown using Eq. 5and presented in Fig. 6. This architecture is stacked several times until the
important features are captured completely within an acceptable spatial limit. Theseconvolutional layers are followed by several fully connected layers and then SoftMax isapplied for probability estimation. Figure 7shows the schematic representation of the three
fundamental layers used in CNN i.e., convolution, max-pool, and ReLU activation.
y
l
i¼max yl−1
i−jyl−1
iþj/C16/C17
ð3Þ
fxðÞ¼max 0 ;xðÞ ð4Þ9254 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2023) 82:9243–9275