3 Experiments
Hyperparameters: To keep our experiments as simple as possible, our hyperparameters are
kept ﬁxed across all the experiments and methods (TIM-GD and TIM-ADM) . The conditional
entropy weight and the cross-entropy weights in Objective (3) are both set to 0:1. The temperature
parameterin the classiﬁer is set to 15. In our TIM-GD method, we use the ADAM optimizer with
the recommended parameters [ 20], and run 1000 iterations for each task. For TIM-ADM, we run 150
iterations.
Base-training procedure: The feature extractors are trained following the same simple base-training
procedure as in [ 51] and using standard networks (ResNet-18 and WRN28-10), for all the experiments.
Speciﬁcally, they are trained using the standard cross-entropy loss on the base classes, with label
smoothing. The label-smoothing parameter is set to 0.1. We emphasize that base training does not
involve any meta-learning or episodic training strategy. The models are trained for 90 epochs, with
the learning rate initialized to 0.1, and divided by 10 at epochs 45 and 66. Batch size is set to 256 for
ResNet-18, and to 128 for WRN28-10. During training, all the images are resized to 8484, and we
used the same data augmentation procedure as in [ 51], which includes random cropping, color jitter
and random horizontal ﬂipping.
Datasets: We resort to 3 few-shot learning datasets to benchmark the proposed models. As standard
few-shot benchmarks, we use the mini -Imagenet [45] dataset, with 100 classes split as in [ 35], the
Caltech-UCSD Birds 200 [47] (CUB) dataset, with 200 classes, split following [ 5], and ﬁnally the
larger tiered -Imagenet dataset, with 608 classes split as in [36].
3.1 Comparison to state-of-the-art
We ﬁrst evaluate our methods TIM-GD and TIM-ADM on the widely adopted mini-ImageNet,
tiered -ImageNet and CUB benchmark datasets, in the most common 1-shot 5-way and 5-shot 5-way
scenarios, with 15 query shots for each class. Results are reported in Table 1, and are averaged
over 10,000 episodes, following [ 46]. We can observe that both TIM-GD and TIM-ADM yield
state-of-the-art performances, consistently across all standard datasets, scenarios and backbones,
improving over both transductive and inductive methods, by signiﬁcant margins.
3.2 Impact of domain-shift
Chen et al. [ 5] recently showed that the performance of most meta-learning methods may drop
drastically when a domain-shift exists between the base training data and test data. Surprisingly, the
simplest discriminative baseline exhibited the best performance in this case. Therefore, we evaluate
our methods in this challenging scenario. To this end, we simulate a domain shift by training the
feature encoder on mini-Imagenet while evaluating the methods on CUB , similarly to the setting
introduced in [ 5]. TIM-GD and TIM-ADM beat previous methods by signiﬁcant margins in the
domain-shift scenario, consistently with our results in the standard few-shot benchmarks, thereby
demonstrating an increased potential of applicability to real-world situations.
3.3 Pushing the meta-testing stage
Most few-shot papers only evaluate their method in the usual 5-way scenario. Nevertheless, [ 5]
showed that meta-learning methods could be beaten by their discriminative baseline when more
ways were introduced in each task. Therefore, we also provide results of our method in the more
challenging 10-way and 20-way scenarios on mini-ImageNet. These results, which are presented in
Table 3, show that TIM-GD outperforms other methods by signiﬁcant margins, in both settings.
3.4 Ablation study
Inﬂuence of each term: We now assess the impact of each term7in our loss in Eq. (3) on the ﬁnal
performance of our methods. The results are reported in Table 4. We observe that integrating the
three terms in our loss consistently outperforms any other conﬁguration. Interestingly, removing
7TheWandqupdates of TIM-ADM associated to each conﬁguration can be found in the supplementary
material.
6