155:26 A. Madsen et al.
Criticisms. A growing concern in the field of probing methods is that given a sufficiently high-
dimensionalembedding,complexprobe,andlargeauxiliarydataset,theprobecanlearneverything
from anything. If this concern is valid, it would mean that the probing methods do not provide
functionally-groundedexplanations [13].
Recent work attempts to overcome this concern by developing baselines. Zhang and Bowman
[137] suggest learning a probe from an untrained model, as a baseline. In that article, they find
probescanindeedachievehighaccuracyfromanuntrainedmodelunlesstheauxiliarydatasetsize
is decreased dramatically. Similarly, Hewitt and Liang [ 49] use randomized datasets as a baseline,
calledacontroltask.Forexample,forPOStheyassignarandomPOS-tagtoeachword,following
the same empirical distribution of the non-randomized dataset. They find that equally high accu-
racycanbe achievedontherandomized datasetunlesstheprobeis made extraordinarilysmall.
Information-TheoreticProbing. ThesolutionspresentedbyZhangandBowman[ 137]andHewitt
and Liang [ 49] are useful. However, limiting the probe and dataset size could make it impossible
tofind complexhiddenstructuresin theembeddings.
Voita and Titov [ 123] attempt to overcome the criticism by a more principled approach, using
information theory. More specifically, they measure the required complexity of the probe as a
communicationeffort,called MinimumDescriptionLength (MDL),andcomparetheMDLwith
acontroltasksimilartoHewittandLiang[ 49].Theyfind,similartoHewittandLiang[ 49],thatthe
probesachievesimilaraccuracyontheprobedatasetasonthecontroltask.However,thecontrol
task is much harder to communicate (the MDL is higher), indicating that the probe is much more
complex,comparedto trainingon theprobedataset.
14.3 Discussion
Groundedness. Considering the vast amount of research on linguistic information explanations,
wefinditworryingthatthereisnotmoreworkonevaluatingiftheseexplanationsareactuallyuse-
ful, in terms of the human-groundedness andfunctionally-groundedness . Without such evaluation,
it is difficult to ensure that the field of linguistic information explanations moves in a productive
direction.
Future work. Considering the groundedness issues inlinguistic information explanations, we ad-
vocate for more focus on groundedness . Voita and Titov [ 123] provide a great solution to how the
functionally-groundedness issuescanbeovercome.However,thefieldstilllacksindependentstudy
onhuman-groundedness andfunctionally-groundedness .
15 RULES
Ruleexplanations attempt to explain the model by a simple set of rules, therefore they are an
example of globalexplanations .
Reducinghighlycomplexmodelslikeneuralnetworkstoasimplesetofrulesislikelyimpossible.
Therefore, methods that attempt this simplify the objectivity by only explaining one particular
aspectofthemodel.
Due to the challenges of producing rules, there is little research attempting it. We will present
CompositionalExplanations ofNeurons [80]a n dSEAR[96].
15.1 Semantically Equivalent Adversaries Rules (SEAR)
SEARis an extension of the Semantically Equivalent Adversaries (SEA) method [ 96], where
theydevelopedasamplingalgorithmforfindingadversarialexamples.Hence,therule-generation
objective is simplified, as only rules that describe what breaks the model needs to be generated.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.