Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:13
Fig. 6. Fictive result showing the influential examples ˜x, in relation to the input example x, showing both
exampleswithpositiveandnegativeinfluence. Δisthesimilarityscore,thescaleandrangemaydependon
the specific method. Note, it is possible tomeasure theinfluence of an example on itself.This can be useful
toidentifymislabled observations,as such observations willbe importantfor their ownprediction.
The central idea in influence functions , is to estimate the effect on the loss L, of removing the
observation ˜ xfrom the dataset. The most influential examples are those where the loss changes
the most. Let ˜θbe the model parameters if ˜ xhad not been included in the training dataset, then
theloss differencecanbeestimatedusing
L(y,x;˜θ)−L(y,x;θ)≈1
n∇θL(y,x;θ)/latticetopH−1
θ∇θL(˜y,˜x;θ). (7)
Importantly, the Hessian Hθneeds to be positive-definite, which can only be guaranteed for
convexmodels.TheauthorsKohandLiang[ 61]avoidthisissue,byaddingadiagonaltotheHes-
sian,untilitispositive-definite.Additionally,theysolvethecomputationalissueofcomputingan
inverse Hessian, by formulating Equation ( 7) as an inverse Hessian-vector product. Such formu-
lation can be approximated in O(np)time, where nis the number of observations and pis the
number of parameters, hence a computational complexity identical to one training epoch. Note
however, that the inverse Hessian-vector product needs to be computed for every explained test
observation x.
One limitation of influence functions is that computing the influence functions is not always
numerically stable [ 136], because Equation ( 7) uses the gradient ∇θL(˜y,˜x;θ)which is optimized
to becloseto zero.
Koh and Liang [ 61] looked at support-vector-machines, which are known to be convex, and
convolutionalneuralnetworkswhicharegenerallynon-convex.Hanetal.[ 47]thenextendedthe
analysis of influence functions to BERT [ 36]. This is a crucial step, as BERT may be much further
from convexity thanCNNs,thuscausethe influencefunctions tobe less functionally-grounded .
Han et al. [ 47] validates for functionally-groundedness by removing the 10% most influential
training examples from the dataset and then retrain the model. The results show a significant de-
creaseinthemodel’sperformanceonthetestsplit,comparedtoremovingthe10%leastinfluential
examples and 10%randomexamples, validatingthattheinfluentialexamples are important.
Additionally,KohandLiang[ 61]measures functionally-groundedness bysetting10%oftraining
observationstoawronglabel. Influencefunctions isthenusedtoselectafractionofthedataset,for
which labels are corrected.The metric is then how many mislabeled observationswere identified
andtheperformancedifference.Theideabeing,wronglylabeledobservationsshouldaffecttheloss
more than correctly labeled observations, hence influence functions will tend to find wrongly la-
beledobservations.Hanetal.[ 47]performasimilarexperiment,butinsteadremovesobservations
based on importance and then measures the performance difference. Both experiments validates
thatinfluencefunctions arefunctionally-grounded .
Performanceconsiderations. Acriticismofinfluencefunctionshasbeenthatitiscomputationally
expensive. Although ∇θL(y,x;θ)/latticetopH−1
θcan be cached for each test example, it is still too compu-
tationally intensive for real-time inspection of the model. Additionally, having to compute the
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.