Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:29
Measuring Interpretability. How interpretability is measured varies significantly. Throughout
this article, we have briefly documented how each method measures interpretability. A gen-
eral observation is that each method article often introduces its own measures of functionally-
groundedness orhuman-groundedness . Even when established standards exist, such as the word
intrusion test [26], they get modified. This trend reduces comparability and risks invalidating the
measureitself.
It is important to recognize that measuring interpretability is, in some cases, inherently diffi-
cult.Forexample,inthecaseofmeasuringthe functionally-groundedness ofinputfeature explana-
tions, it is inherently impossible to provide gold labels for what is a correct explanation, because
if humans could provide gold labels we would not need the explanation in the first place. This
fundamentallyleavesonlyproxymeasuresandaxiomsof functionally-groundedness .However,this
doesnot mean highlyprincipledproxy measurescan notbedeveloped[ 51].
For this reason, we are encouraging researchers and reviewers to value principled articles on
measuring interpretability. Even if those measures do not become established standards, a ded-
icated focus on measuring interpretability is a necessity for the integrity of the interpretability
field.
Class explanations. There is a large number of articles on explanation methods. However, class
explanations remain an underrepresentedmiddle groundbetween localandglobalexplanations .
Thespecificcommunicationapproachchosenshouldreflectitsapplication,andforthisreason,
no explanation type can be said to be superior. However, it’s important to recognize that local
explanations can only provide anecdotal evidence and global explanations can be too abstract to
ground what is explained. As such class explanations have their value, as they are not specific
enoughtobeanecdotal.Simultaneously,theyaregroundedintheclasstheyexplain,makingthem
easier to reason about. For this reason, we would encourage that class explanation to gain equal
representationin interpretabilityresearch.
Sequence-to-sequence explanations. In this survey, we frequently comment on if a explanation
method can be applied to sequence-to-class models or sequence-to-sequence models. Most meth-
ods are primarily made for sequence-to-class models, and the few that apply to sequence-to-
sequencemodels areoften notdirectlymade for thatpurpose.
We suspect a reason for primarily explaining sequence-to-class models, is that sequence-to-
sequence explanations may depend on interactive visualization to a greater extent [ 72,111,117],
whichisharderto implementand writeaboutin typicalmachinelearningvenues.
Regardless, sequence-to-sequencemodels are widely used in real-life applications,for example
in machine translation. We therefore advocate for developing more explanations for sequence-to-
sequence models, or at the very least include an evaluation on a sequence-to-sequence model in
articlesthatprovidemethodsthatcanoperateon bothtypesofmodels.
Combining post-hoc with intrinsic methods. Post-hoc andintrinsicmethods are in literature, in-
cludingthisarticle,representedas distinct.However,thereareimportantmiddle grounds.
As mentioned in the introduction, most intrinsicmethods are not purely intrinsic. They often
haveanintermediaterepresentation,whichcanbeintrinsicallyinterpretable.However,producing
this representation is often done with a black-box model. For this reason, post-hocexplanations
are neededif theentiremodelis tobeunderstood.
Beyond this direction, there are works where the training objective and procedure helps to
providebetter post-hocexplanations.Thissurveybrieflyarguesthatthe KernelSHAP methodexists
in this middle ground, as it depends on input-masking being part of the training procedure. In
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.