Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:27
Fig.13. Hypotheticalexampleshowingruleswhichcommonlybreakthemodel.Theflip-ratedescribeshow
oftentheserulesbreakthemodel. xrepresentstheoriginalsentenceand ˜xrepresentsanadversarialexample.
Additionally, because SEARuses anadversarial examples explanation, it only applies to sequence-
to-classmodels.
Ribeiroetal.[ 96]proposerulesbysimplyobservingindividualwordchangesfoundbythe SEA
method discussed earlier, and then compute statistics on the bi-grams of the changed word and
thePartofSpeechoftheadjacentword,Figure 13showsexamplesofthis.Iftheproposedrulehas
a high success-rate (called filp-rate), in terms of providing a semantically equivalent adversarial
sample,it isconsideredarule.
The authors validate this approach by asking experts to produce rules, and then compare the
success-rate of human-generated rules and SEAR-generated rules. They find that the rules gener-
atedbySEARhavea highersuccess-rate.
15.2 Discussion
Future work. As mentioned, there is little work on ruleexplanations. While this is definetly
due to the inherent challenge, it is not too hard to imagine something like the Anchormethod be
modified towards global explanation ,in whichcaseit would bea ruleexplanation.
Groundedness. Becausethecategoryof ruleexplanationscanbeverydiverse, groundedness eval-
uation would likely depend on the specificexplanation method. However, generally, functionally-
groundedness canbemeasuredbyassertingiftheruleholdstruebyevaluatingitonthedatasetand
compare with the model response. Additionally, human-groundedness can be evaluated by asking
humansto predictthemodel’s outputorchoosethebettermodel.
16 LIMITATIONS
While it is the goal of this survey to provide an overview and categorization of current post-hoc
interpretability for neural NLP models, we also recognize that the field is too vast to include all
works in this survey. To decide what works to include, the overall has been to focus on diver-
sity in terms of communication approach and information used. Essentially, to make Table 1as
comprehensiveaspossible.
Communication approaches like input features andlinguistic information have a particularly
largeamountofliterature,whichwedidnotdiscuss,asthatwouldoutweighothercommunication
approaches.Forthesetwoapproaches,we focuson highlightingtheprogressionof thefield.
Beyond thisoverarchinglimitation, thefollowingtwo limitationsare worthdiscussing.
Quantitative comparisons. Ideally, this survey would include quantitative comparisons of the
methods. However, there currently does not exist an unified and principled benchmark yet.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.