Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:7
4 MEASURESOF INTERPRETABILITY
Becauseinterpretabilityisbydefinitionaboutexplainingthemodeltohumans[ 37,78],andthese
explanationsareoftenqualitative,itisnotclearhowtoquantitativelyevaluateandcompareinter-
pretabilitymethods.Thisambiguityhasleadtomuchdiscussion.Mostnotableisthe intrinsically
interpretable method Attention, where different measures of interpretability have been published
resultinginconflictingfindings[ 54,104,129].
In general, there is no consensus on how to measure interpretability. However, validation is
still paramount. As such, this section attempts to cover the general categories, themes, and meth-
ods that have been proposed. Additionally, each method section, starting from input features ,i n
Section6,willbrieflycoverhow theauthorschoosetoevaluate theirmethod.
To describe the evaluation strategies, we use the terminology defined by Doshi-Velez and Kim
[37],whichseparatestheevaluationofinterpretabilityintothreecategories, functionally-grounded ,
human-grounded ,andapplication-grounded .Thiscategorizationreflectstheneedtohaveexplana-
tions that are useful to humans ( human-grounded ) and accurately reflect the model ( functionally-
grounded ).
Application-grounded. evaluation is when the interpretability method is evaluated in the envi-
ronmentitwillbedeployed.Forexample,doestheexplanationsresultinhighersurvival-ratesina
medicalsetting,ahigher-gradesinahomework-hintsystem,orabettermodelinalabel-correction
setting [37,132]. Importantly, this evaluation should include the baseline where the explanations
are providedbyhumans.
Due to the application-specific and time-consuming nature of this approach, application-
grounded evaluation is rarely done in NLP interpretability research. Instead, more synthetic and
generalevaluationsetupscanbeused,whichiswhat functionally-grounded andhuman-grounded
evaluationisabout.Thesecategorieseachprovideanimportantbutdifferentaspectforvalidating
interpretabilityand shouldthereforebe usedincombination.
Human-grounded. evaluation checks if the explanations are useful to humans. Unlike
application-grounded , the task is often simpler and the task itself can be evaluated immediately.
Additionally, expert humans are often not required [ 37]. In other literature, this is known as
simulatability [68]a n dcomprehensibility [97].
Although, human-grounded evaluation is much more efficient than application-grounded eval-
uation, the human aspect still takes time. An unfortunate but common approach is therefore to
replace the human with a simulated user. This is unfortunate as providing explanations that are
informative to humans is a non-trivial task, and often involves interdisciplinary knowledge from
thehuman-computer interaction (HCI) and social science fields. Replacing a human with a
simulated user,thereforeleads toover-optimisticresults.
Miller [78] provides an excellent overview on what effective explanation is from the social sci-
enceperspective,andcriticizescurrentworksbysaying“mostworkinexplainableartificialintel-
ligence usesonly theresearchers’intuitionof whatconstitutesa “good” explanation”.
It is therefore critical that interpretability methods are human-grounded . These are common
strategiestomeasure human-grounded ,usedbothin NLP andotherfields:
•Humans haveto choosethebestmodelbasedon an explanation[ 94].
•Humans haveto predictthemodel’sbehavioron newdata [ 92].
•Humanshavetoidentifyanoutlierexamplecalledanintruder[ 26].Whileitcanbeusedon
otherfields,it ismost common in NLPwhereit isusedwith vocabulary explanations[ 84].
Functionally-grounded. evaluation checks how well the explanation reflects the model. This is
more commonly knownas faithfulness [39,53,94,129] orsometimes fidelity[97].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.