Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:23
Fig.11. Visualizationof SP-LIME inahypotheticalsetting.Thematrixshowshoweachselectedobservation
represents the different modes of the model. The left-side shows two out of the four selected example and
their LIMEexplanation.
trained on a curated dataset. Ribeiro et al. [ 94]t h e nc o m p a r e SP-LIME with a random baseline,
which simply selects random observations. From this experiment, they find that 89% of humans
can select the best classifier using SP-LIME, whereas only 75% can select the best classifier based
on therandombaseline.
13.2 Discussion
Groundedness. Thefunctionally-groundedness ofensemble explanationsisverymuchdependent
onthefunctionally-groundedness ofthelocalexplanation .Itisthereforediffculttoimagineageneral
evaluation approach for ensemble explanations. However, even for local explanations with estab-
lishedvalidation functionally-groundedness doesnotcomeforfree,asalsotheselectionalgorithm
also needsto bevalidated.
Futurework. Asmentionedthereisnotmuchworkusing ensemble explanations.Thisisbecause
when non-tabular data is used, it is more challenging to compare the selected explanations to
ensure they represent different modes. Even SP-LIME[94] which does apply to NLP tasks, uses a
BoW representation as a tabular proxy. Additionally, we can imagine that ensemble explanations
are hardtoscale,asdatasetsincreasesand models getmore complexwithmore modes.
That being said, we would be curious to see more work in this category. For example, an
ensemble explanation which used a influential example method to show the overall most relevant
observations.
14 LINGUISTIC INFORMATION
To validate that a natural language model does something reasonable, a popular approach is to
attempt to align the model with the large body of linguistic theory that has been developed
for hundreds of years. Because these methods summarize the model, they are a case of a global
explanation .
Methods in this category either probe by strategically modifying the input to observe the
model’sreactionorshowalignmentbetweenalatentrepresentationandsomelinguisticrepresen-
tation. The former is called behavioral probes orbehavioral analysis , the latter is called structural
probesorstructuralanalysis .Whichtypeofmodelsthesestrategiesappliestodependsonthespe-
cificmethod.However,ingeneral, behavioralprobes appliesprimarilytosequence-to-classmodels
andstructuralprobes appliesto bothsequence-to-classand sequence-to-sequencemodels.
One especially noteworthy subcategory of Structural Probes isBERTology , which specifically
focusesonexplainingtheBERT-likemodels[ 20,36,70].BERT’spopularityandeffectivenesshave
resultedincountlessarticlesinthiscategory[ 28,30,76,98,116],hencethename BERTology .Some
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.