155:2 A. Madsen etal.
Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 37] argue, among others [ 68], that these ethical and safety issues stem
from an “incompleteness in the problem formalization”. While these issues can be partially pre-
vented with robustness and fairness metrics, it is often not possible to consider all failure modes.
Therefore, quality assessment should also be done through model explanations. Furthermore,
when models do fail in critical applications, explanations must be provided to facilitate the ac-
countability process. Providing these explanations is often a core motivation for interpretability.
InSection 2we provideadditionalmotivatingfactors.
Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 37]d e fi n einterpretability as the “ability to explain or to present in un-
derstandabletermstoahuman”.However,whatconstitutesasan“understandable”explanationis
an interdisciplinary question. An important work from social science by Miller [ 78], argues that
effective explanations must be selective in the sense one must select “one or two causes from a
sometimes infinite number of causes”. Such observation necessitates organizing interpretability
methodsbyhowand whattheyselectivelycommunicate.
ThissurveypresentssuchanorganizationinTable 1,whereeachrowrepresentsacommunica-
tion approach. For example, the first row describes input feature explanations that communicate
what tokens are most relevant for a prediction. In general, each row is ordered by how abstract
the communication approach is, although this is an approximation. Organizing by the method of
communicationis discussedfurtherin Section 1.1.
Each interpretability method uses different kinds of information to produce its explanation, in
Table1thisisindicatedbythecolumns.1Thecolumnsareorderedbyanincreasinglevelofinfor-
mation.Again, thisis aninexact rankingbutservesasa usefultooltocontrastthemethods.
Table1frames the overall structure of this survey. Where each method section from 6to15
covers a row of Table 1. However, first we cover motivation (Section 2), how to validate inter-
pretability (Section 4), and a motivating example (Section 3). The method sections can be read
somewhatindependentlybutwill referbacktothesegeneraltopics.
In contrast to other surveys and tutorials on interpretability methods [ 14,15,17,25,35,79,
113,119,125] which only discusses the most popular approaches (usually 3 among input features ,
adversarialexamples ,influentialexamples ,projection ,andlinguisticinformation ),thissurveyoffers
a more diverse overview of communication approaches. We hope this leads to more questioning
about how we communicate. Additionally, we consistently comment on how each method is vali-
dated(groundedness ),an importantdiscussionwefind is oftenmissing.
Finally, the survey limits itself to post-hocinterpretability methods. These are methods that
providetheirexplanationafteramodelistrainedandareoftenmodel-agnostic.Thisisincontrast
tointrinsicmethods, where the model architecture itself helps to provide the explanation. These
termsaredescribedfurtherin Section 1.2.
1.1 Organizing byMethodofCommunication
As a categorization of communication strategies, it’s standard in the interpretability literature
to distinguish between methods that explain a single observation, called local explanations ,a n d
methods that explain the entire model called global explanations [2,17,24,27,37,79]. In this
survey, we also consider an additional category of methods that explains an entire output-class,
whichwe call classexplanations .
1Black-box :themethodonlyevaluatesthemodel. Dataset:themethodhasaccesstoalltrainingandvalidationobservations.
Gradient:thegradientofthemodeliscomputed. Embeddings :themethodusesthewordembeddingmatrix. White-box :the
method knows everything about the model, such as all weights and alloperations. However,the method is not specific to
a particular architecture. Model specific : the method is specific to the architecture. Note, neural model in NLP are usually
differentiabilityand haveanembeddingmatrix.We, therefore,do not consider these properties constraints.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.