Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:5
However, post-hocmethods are often criticized for providing false explanations, and it has
been questioned if it is reasonable to expect models, that were not designed to be explained, to
beexplainedanyway[ 100].Thisisavalidconcern,howeverproducing intrinsicmethodsisoften
very task-dependent and therefore a difficult process that is rarely done in the industry [ 17].
Post-hocmethodsareoftenmuchmoreadaptableandtheirimpactcanthereforebemuchgreaterif
theycanprovideaccurateexplanations.Thequestionofhowtovalidateexplanationsistherefore
veryimportantandiscoveredindetailinSection 4.Furthermore,wepayspecialattentiontohow
eachmethodis validatedin theliteraturethroughoutthesurvey.
Comparing. BothIntrinsicandpost-hocmethods have their merits, but often provide different
valuesintermsof accountability .Finally,post-hocmethodscanoftenbeappliedalsoto intrinsically
interpretable models. Observing a correlation between methods from these two categories can
thereforeprovidevalidation of bothmethods[ 54].
2 MOTIVATIONS FOR INTERPRETABILITY
The need for interpretability comes primarily from an “incompleteness in the problem formaliza-
tion” [37], meaning if the model was constrained and optimized to prevent all possible ethical
issues,interpretabilitywouldbemuchlessrelevant.However,becauseperfectoptimizationisun-
likely,hence safetyandethicsarestrongmotivations forinterpretability.
Additionally, when models misbehave there is a need for explanations, to hold people or com-
panies accountable, hence accountability is often a core motivation for interpretability. Finally,
explanations are often useful, or sometimes necessary, for gaining scientific understanding about
models. This section aims at elaborating on what exactly is understood by these terms and how
interpretabilitycan addressthem.
Ethics,in the context of interpretability, is about ensuring that the model’s behavior is aligned
with common ethical and moral values. Because there does not exist an exact measure for this
desideratum, this is ultimately something that should be judged qualitatively by humans, for ex-
ample by an ethicsreview committee ,whowillinspectthemodelexplanations.
Forsomeethicalconcerns,suchasdiscrimination,itmaybepossibletomeasureandsatisfythis
ethicalconcernviafairnessmetricsanddebiasingtechniques[ 42].However,thisoftenrequiresa
finite list of protected attributes [ 50], and such a list will likely be incomplete, hence the need for
a qualitativeassessment[ 37,68].
Safety,isaboutensuringthemodelperformswithinexpectationsindeployment.Asitisnearly
impossible to truly test the model, in the end-to-end context that it will be deployed, ensur-
ingsafetydoes to some extent involve qualitative assessment [ 37]. Lipton [ 68]f r a m e st h i sa s
trust, and suggests one interpretation of this is “that we feel comfortable relinquishing control
to it”.
While all types of interpretability can help with safety, in particular, adversarial examples and
counterfactuals are useful, as they evaluate the model on data outside the test distribution. Lip-
ton [68] frames this in the broader context of transferability , which is the model’s robustness to
adversarialattacksanddistributionalshifts.
Accountability, relates to explaining the model when it does fail in production. The “right to
explanation”,regardingthelogicinvolvedinthemodel’sprediction,isincreasinglybeingadopted,
most notably in the EU via its GDPR legislation. However, also the US and UK have expressed
supportforsuchregulation[ 38].Additionally,industriessuchasbanking,arealreadyrequiredto
audit theirmodels [ 17].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.