Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:A Survey 155:15
TracInTracIn is then a relaxation of this idealized version. Rather than using a direct loss dif-
ference, gradients are used. Rather than assuming stochastic gradient descent (or similar), mini-
batches can be used. Rather than checking every time step, checkpoints collected during training
can beused.
TracIn(˜x,x)=1
b/summationdisplay
t∈Cηt∇θtL(y,x,θt)·∇θtL(˜y,˜x,θt), (11)
whereCischeckpoints, bis batch-size,and ηtislearning-rate.
Note,thattheEquation( 11)formulationisstillbasedonplaingradientdescent.However,Pruthi
et al. [88] instruct how to adapt this to most learning algorithms (AdaGrad, Adam, Newton, and
so on).
As afunctionally-grounded evaluation, Pruthi et al. [ 88] repeat the label-correction experiment
ofinfluence functions andRepresenter Point Selection , and find that their method can better se-
lect mislabeled observations. Note that this was evaluated on CIFAR-10 and MNIST. Unfortu-
nately,Pruthietal.[ 88]doesnotdoanyevaluationonNLPtasks,buttheydoanecdotallyshowit
workson an NLPapplication.
8.4 Discussion
Groundedness. Influential example explanations, is one of the few categories with a non-trival
but appropriate functionally-grounded metric, namely the label-correction experiment, which is
used somewhat consistently across articles. Unfortunately, this experiment has not been used on
NLP tasks,and in generalvery little functionally-grounded validation hasbeendone in NLP.
Additionally,thelabel-correctionexperimentissomewhatlimited,asitevaluatestheinfluence
of a training observation on itself. This is not how a Influential examples explanation would be
used in most applications, for example, dataset artifact discovery. We, therefore, suggest future
work alsoincludetheexperiment fromGuoet al.[ 45] whichusesinformationremoval.
Future work. A natural question, when asking what training observations are influential is to
alsowhatpartofthemareimportant. Influencefunctions cananswerthis,althoughatanincreased
computational cost. However, TracIncan not. For sequential outputs, it is interesting to also be
able to select parts of the output and ask what influenced this. Both of these questions, are be-
coming increasingly relevant with large-scale language models, where there is a large interest in
understandingwhatcauseda particulargeneration.
9 COUNTERFACTUALS
Counterfactual explanations are essentially answering the question “how would the input need to
change for the prediction to be different?”. Furthermore, these counterfactual examples should be
a minimal-edit from the original example and fluent. However, all of these properties can also be
said ofadversarial explanations , and indeed some works confuse these terms. The critical differ-
ence is that adversarial examples should have the same gold label as the original example, while
counterfactual examples should have a different gold label (often opposite) as the original exam-
ple [99]. Because Counterfactual explanations are defined by the output class they are limited to
sequence-to-classmodels.
Another common confusion is with counterfactual datasets , also known as Contrast Sets .T h e s e
datasets are used in robustness research and could consist of counterfactual examples .H o w e v e r ,
these datasets are generated without using a model [ 41,58], and can therefore not be used to
explain themodel. ContrastSets arehowever importantfor ensuringa robustmodel.
Insocialsciences, counterfactualexplanations areconsideredhighlyusefulforaperson’sability
to understand causal connections. Miller [ 78] explains that “why” questions are often answered
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.