155:18 A. Madsen et al.
Fig. 8. Hypothetical explanations from using CAGEtoproducerationalizations for theprediction.
They find that rationalization explanations provide nearly identical explanations as reasoning
explanations (those where the answer is not known by the explanation model). The method is
validated to be human-grounded , by tasking humans to use the explanation to predict the model
behavior,again they findidenticalperformance.
Itisquestionableif CAGEisfunctionally-grounded ,asitsonlyconnectiontotheexplainedmodel
is during inference, where the answeris produced by the explained model. Because there are no
other connections to the explained model, there is little reason to think the GPT explainer-model
can reflect the models behavior. If the humans who provided explanations had specialist insight
intothemodel,thenanargumentcouldbemadefor CAGEtobefunctionally-grounded .Ho w e v er ,
asthehumanswereMechanicalTurkworkers,thisis unlikely.
10.2 Discussion
Groundedness. Thissub-field of natural natural language explanationshas received criticismin
NLP for not evaluating functionally-grounded [48]. This issue is even more problematic because
the annotated explanations are provided by humans who have no insights into the model’s be-
havior[128].Theexplanationmodelthereforejustlearnsabouthumans’thoughtprocessesrather
thanthemodel’slogicalprocess.ThisissueissomewhatuniquetotheNLPliteratureandisbetter
treatedin otherfields[ 6].
Future work. Most work on natural natural language explanations uses intrinsicmethods, un-
der the motivation that forcing the model to “reason about itself” will make it more accurate.
Unfortunately, this hypothesis has received criticism because the little post-hocwork there exist,
show that this is not the case. Additionally, there are theoretical arguments for why this would
notbethecase[ 55].
11 CONCEPTS
Aconceptexplanation attemptstoexplainthemodel,intermsofanabstractionoftheinput,called
aconcept. A classical example in computer vision, is to explain how the concept of stripes affects
the classification of a zebra. Understanding this relationship is important, as a computer vision
model could classify a zebra based on a horse-like shape and a Savana background. Such relation
may yield ahigh accuracyscorebutis logically wrong.
The term conceptis much more common in computer vision [ 44,59,80] than in NLP. Instead,
thesubjectisoftenframedmoreconcretelyasbias-detection,inNLP.Forexample,Vigetal.[ 122]
usestheconceptofoccupation-wordslike nurse,andrelatesittotheclassificationofthewords he
andshe.
Regardless of the field, in both NLP and CV, only a single class or small subset of classes are
analyzed. For this reason, concept explanation belong in its own category of class explanations .
However,in thefuture,we will likelyseemore typesof class explanations .
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.8,Article 155.Publicationdate:December2022.