DCGAN LSGAN WGAN WGAN -GP E-GAN (ours)
Baseline ( G: DCGAN, D: DCGAN)
G: DCGAN,   D: 2-Conv -1-FC LeakyReLU 
G: No BN and a constant number of filters ,   D: DCGAN
No normalization in either Gand D
Figure 6: Experiments to test architecture robustness. Dierent GAN architectures corresponding to dierent
training challenges and trained with ve dierent GAN methods.
improves the stability at convergence.
4.4 LSUN and Architecture Robustness
The architecture robustness is another advantage of E-GAN. To demonstrate the training stability of our
method, we train dierent network architectures on the LSUN bedroom dataset [ 36] and compare with several
existing works. In addition to the baseline DCGAN architecture, we choose three additional architectures
corresponding to dierent training challenges: (1) limiting the recognition capability of the discriminator D,
i.e., 2-Conv-1-FC LeakyReLU discriminator; (2) limiting the expression capability of the generator G,i.e.,
no batchnorm and a constant number of lters in the generator; (3) reducing the network capability of the
generator and discriminator together, i.e., remove the BN in both the generator Gand discriminator D. For
each architecture, we test ve dierent methods: DCGAN, LSGAN, standard WGAN (with weight clipping),
WGAN-GP (with gradient penalty) ,and our E-GAN. For each method, we used the default congurations
recommended in the respective studies (these methods are summarized in [ 12]) and train each model for
200K iterations. As shown in Fig. 6, E-GAN generates reasonable results even when other methods are failed.
Furthermore, based on the DCGAN architecture, we train E-GAN to generate 128 128 bedroom images4
(Fig. 5). Observing generated images, we demonstrate that E-GAN can be trained to generate diversity and
high-quality images from the target data distribution.
4We remove batchnorm layers in the generator. The detailed architecture and more generated images are reported in the
Supplementary Material.
10