Figure 7: Generated human face images on the 128 128 CelebA dataset.
4.5 CelebA and Space Continuity
Since humans excel at identifying facial 
aws, generating high-quality human face images is challenging.
Similar to generating bedrooms, we employ the same architectures to generate 128 128 RGB human face
images (Fig. 7). In addition, given a well-trained generator, we evaluate the performance of the embedding
in the latent space of noisy vectors z. In Fig. 8, we rst select pairs of generated faces and record their
corresponding latent vectors z1andz2. The two images in one pair have dierent attributes, such as gender,
expression, hairstyle, and age. Then, we generate novel samples by linear interpolating between these pairs
(i.e., corresponding noisy vectors). We nd that these generated samples can seamlessly change between
these semantically meaningful face attributes. This experiment demonstrates that generator training does
not merely memorize training samples but learns a meaningful projection from latent noisy space to face
images. Meanwhile, it also shows that the generator trained by E-GAN does not suer from mode collapse,
and shows great space continuity.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we present an evolutionary GAN framework (E-GAN) for training deep generative models. To
reduce training diculties and improve generative performance, we devise an evolutionary algorithm to evolve
a population of generators to adapt to the dynamic environment ( i.e., the discriminator D). In contrast to
conventional GANs, the evolutionary paradigm allows the proposed E-GAN to overcome the limitations of
individual adversarial objectives and preserve the best ospring after each iteration. Experiments show that
E-GAN improves the training stability of GAN models and achieves convincing performance in several image
generation tasks. Future works will focus on further exploring the relationship between the environment ( i.e.,
discriminator) and evolutionary population ( i.e., generators) and further improving generative performance.
References
[1]M. Arjovsky and L. Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial networks.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017.
11