Noise 𝓏Generator 𝐺
Discriminator 𝐷
Generator 𝐺𝜃Discriminator 𝐷𝐺𝜃1𝐺𝜃2
𝐺𝜃3…
𝐺𝜃𝑖𝐺𝜃𝑗𝐺𝜃𝑘…
ℱ𝑖>ℱ𝑗>⋯>ℱ𝑘EvaluationReal/
FakeReal/
Fake
𝑃data(𝑥)
(a) Original GAN (b) E -GANNoise 𝓏Figure 1: (a) The original GAN framework. A generator Gand a discriminator Dplay a two-player adversarial
game. The updating gradients of the generator Gare received from the adaptive objective, which depends
on discriminator D. (b) The proposed E-GAN framework. A population of generators fGgevolves in a
dynamic environment, the discriminator D. Each evolutionary step consists of three sub-stages: variation,
evaluation, and selection. The best ospring are kept.
discriminator-generator balance. More recently, Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [ 2] and its variant WGAN-
GP [12] were proposed to minimize the Wasserstein-1 distance between the generated and data distributions.
Since the Wasserstein-1 distance is continuous everywhere and dierentiable almost everywhere under only
minimal assumptions [ 2], these two methods convincingly reduce training instability. However, to measure
the Wasserstein-1 distance between the generated distribution and the data distribution, they are asked to
enforce the Lipschitz constraint on the discriminator ( akacritic), which may restrict critic capability and
result in some optimization diculties [12].
2.2 Evolutionary Algorithms
Over the last twenty years, evolutionary algorithms have achieved considerable success across a wide range of
computational tasks including modeling, optimization and design [ 7,5]. Inspired by natural evolution, the
essence of an evolutionary algorithm is to equate possible solutions to individuals in a population, produce
ospring through variations, and select appropriate solutions according to tness [6].
Recently, evolutionary algorithms have been introduced to solve deep learning problems. To minimize
human participation in designing deep algorithms and automatically discover such congurations, there have
been many attempts to optimize deep learning hyper-parameters and design deep network architectures
through an evolutionary search [35, 20, 25]. Evolutionary algorithms have also demonstrated their capacity
to optimize deep neural networks [ 15,34]. Moreover, [ 27] proposed a novel evolutionary strategy as an
alternative to the popular MDP-based reinforcement learning (RL) techniques, achieving strong performance
on RL benchmarks. Last but not least, an evolutionary algorithm was proposed to compress deep learning
models by automatically eliminating redundant convolution lters [33].
3 Method
In this section, we rst review the GAN formulation. Then, we introduce the proposed E-GAN algorithm. By
illustrating E-GAN's mutations and evaluation mechanism, we further discuss the advantage of the proposed
framework. Finally, we conclude with the entire E-GAN training process.
3