Figure 5: Generated samples on 128 128 LSUN bedrooms.
We rst compare the proposed evolutionary adversarial training framework with one using an individual
adversarial objective ( i.e., conventional GANs). We train each method 50K iterations and report the KDE plots
in Fig. 3. The results show that all of the individual adversarial objectives suer from mode collapse to a greater
or lesser degree. However, by combining dierent objectives in our evolution framework, model performance
is largely improved and can accurately t the target distributions. This further demonstrates, during the
evolutionary procedure, the proposed evaluation mechanism can recognize well-performing updatings ( i.e.,
ospring), and promote the population to a better evolutionary direction.
4.3 CIFAR-10 and Inception Score
When evaluating a GAN model, sample quality and convergence speed are two important criteria. We train
dierent GANs on CIFAR-10 and plot inception scores [ 26] over the course of training (Fig. 4-left, middle).
The same network architecture based on DCGAN is used in all methods.
As shown in Fig. 4-left, E-GAN can get higher inception score with less training steps. Meanwhile,
E-GAN also shows comparable stability when it goes to convergence. By comparison, conventional GANs
expose their dierent limitations, such as instability at convergence (GAN-Heuristic), slow convergence
(GAN-Least square) and invalid (GAN-minimax). As mentioned above, dierent objectives aim to measure
the distance between the generated and data distributions under dierent metrics which have dierent pros
and cons. Here, utilizing the evolutionary framework, E-GAN not only overcomes the limitations of these
individual adversarial objectives, but it also outperforms other GANs (the WGAN and its improved variation
WGAN-GP). Furthermore, although E-GAN takes more time for each iteration, it achieves comparable
convergence speed in terms of wall-clock time (Fig. 4-middle).
During training E-GAN, we recorded the selected objective in each evolutionary step (Fig. 4-right). At
the beginning of training, the heuristic mutation and the least-square mutation are selected more frequently
than the minimax mutation. It may due to the fact that the minimax mutation is hard to provide eective
gradients ( i.e., vanishing gradient) when the discriminator can easily recognize generated samples. Along
with the generator approaching convergence (after 20K steps), ever more minimax mutations are employed,
yet the number of selected heuristic mutations is falling. As aforementioned, the minus JSDs of the heuristic
mutation may tend to push the generated distribution away from data distribution and lead to training
instability. However, in E-GAN, beyond the heuristic mutation, we have other options of mutation, which
9