Evolutionary Generative Adversarial Networks
Chaoyue Wangy, Chang Xuz, Xin Yao?, Dacheng Taoz
yCentre for Articial Intelligence, School of Software,
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
zUBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of IT, FEIT,
The University of Sydney, Australia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
?School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, U.K.
chaoyue.wang@student.uts.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
x.yao@cs.bham.ac.uk, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) have been eective for learning generative models for real-world
data. However, existing GANs (GAN and its variants) tend to suer from training problems such as
instability and mode collapse. In this paper, we propose a novel GAN framework called evolutionary
generative adversarial networks (E-GAN) for stable GAN training and improved generative performance.
Unlike existing GANs, which employ a pre-dened adversarial objective function alternately training a
generator and a discriminator, we utilize dierent adversarial training objectives as mutation operations
and evolve a population of generators to adapt to the environment (i.e., the discriminator). We also
utilize an evaluation mechanism to measure the quality and diversity of generated samples, such that only
well-performing generator(s) are preserved and used for further training. In this way, E-GAN overcomes
the limitations of an individual adversarial training objective and always preserves the best ospring,
contributing to progress in and the success of GANs. Experiments on several datasets demonstrate that
E-GAN achieves convincing generative performance and reduces the training problems inherent in existing
GANs.
1 Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) [ 11] are one of the main groups of methods used to learn generative
models from complicated real-world data. As well as using a generator to synthesize semantically meaningful
data from standard signal distributions, GANs (GAN and its variants) train a discriminator to distinguish
realsamples in the training dataset from fake samples synthesized by the generator. As the confronter, the
generator aims to deceive the discriminator by producing ever more realistic samples. The training procedure
continues until the generator wins the adversarial game; that is, the discriminator cannot make a better
decision than randomly guessing whether a particular sample is fake or real. GANs have recently been
successfully applied to image generation [ 4,22,9,37], image editing [ 13,31,40,32], video prediction[ 29,8,30],
and many other tasks [38, 28, 17].
Although GANs already produce visually appealing samples in various applications, they are often dicult
to train. If the data distribution and the generated distribution do not substantially overlap (usually at
the beginning of training), the generator gradients can point to more or less random directions or even
result in the vanishing gradient issue. GANs also suer from mode collapse, i.e., the generator assigns all its
probability mass to a small region in the space [ 3]. In addition, appropriate hyper-parameters ( e.g., learning
rate and updating steps) and network architectures are critical congurations in GANs. Unsuitable settings
1arXiv:1803.00657v1  [cs.LG]  1 Mar 2018