ARTICLE OPEN
Prostate cancer therapy personalization via multi-modal deep
learning on randomized phase III clinical trials
Andre Esteva1✉, Jean Feng2, Douwe van der Wal1, Shih-Cheng Huang3, Jeffry P . Simko4, Sandy DeVries5, Emmalyn Chen1,
Edward M. Schaeffer6, Todd M. Morgan7, Yilun Sun8, Amirata Ghorbani9, Nikhil Naik9, Dhruv Nathawani9, Richard Socher9,
Jeff M. Michalski10, Mack Roach III4, Thomas M. Pisansky11, Jedidiah M. Monson12, Farah Naz13, James Wallace14, Michelle J. Ferguson15,
Jean-Paul Bahary16, James Zou3, Matthew Lungren3, Serena Yeung3, Ashley E. Ross6, NRG Prostate Cancer AI Consortium*,
Howard M. Sandler17, Phuoc T. Tran18, Daniel E. Spratt19, Stephanie Pugh20, Felix Y. Feng4,34and Osama Mohamad4,34
Prostate cancer is the most frequent cancer in men and a leading cause of cancer death. Determining a patient ’s optimal therapy is
a challenge, where oncologists must select a therapy with the highest likelihood of success and the lowest likelihood of toxicity.International standards for prognostication rely on non-speci ﬁc and semi-quantitative tools, commonly leading to over- and under-
treatment. Tissue-based molecular biomarkers have attempted to address this, but most have limited validation in prospective
randomized trials and expensive processing costs, posing substantial barriers to widespread adoption. There remains a signi ﬁcant
need for accurate and scalable tools to support therapy personalization. Here we demonstrate prostate cancer therapypersonalization by predicting long-term, clinically relevant outcomes using a multimodal deep learning architecture and train
models using clinical data and digital histopathology from prostate biopsies. We train and validate models using ﬁve phase III
randomized trials conducted across hundreds of clinical centers. Histopathological data was available for 5654 of 7764 randomizedpatients (71%) with a median follow-up of 11.4 years. Compared to the most common risk-strati ﬁcation tool —risk groups
developed by the National Cancer Center Network (NCCN) —our models have superior discriminatory performance across all
endpoints, ranging from 9.2% to 14.6% relative improvement in a held-out validation set. This arti ﬁcial intelligence-based tool
improves prognostication over standard tools and allows oncologists to computationally predict the likeliest outcomes of speci ﬁc
patients to determine optimal treatment. Out ﬁtted with digital scanners and internet access, any clinic could offer such capabilities,
enabling global access to therapy personalization.
npj Digital Medicine (2022)5:71 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00613-w
INTRODUCTION
In 2020, 1,414,259 new cases and 375,304 deaths from prostate
cancer occurred worldwide
1. While prostate cancer is often
indolent and treatment can be curative, prostate cancer repre-
sents the leading global cause of cancer-associated disability dueto the negative effects of over- and under-treatment, and is a
leading cause of cancer death in men
2,3. Determining the optimal
course of therapy for an individual patient is dif ﬁcult, and involves
considering their overall health, the characteristics of their cancer,
the side effect pro ﬁles of many possible treatments, outcomes
data from clinical trials involving patient groups with similar
diagnoses, and the prognostication of their expected future
outcomes. This challenge is compounded by the lack of readilyaccessible prognostic tools to better risk-stratify patients.
One of the most common systems used to risk-stratify patients
worldwide is the National Comprehensive Cancer Network(NCCN), or D ’Amico, risk groups developed in the late 1990s. This
system is based on digital rectal examination of the prostate,
serum prostate-speci ﬁc antigen (PSA) level, and tumor biopsy
grade assessed by histopathology. This three-tier system forms the
basis of treatment recommendations used for localized prostate
cancer throughout the world
4, but has repeatedly been shown to
have suboptimal prognostic and discriminatory performance5.
This in part is due to the subjective and non-speci ﬁc nature of the
core variables in these models. For instance, Gleason grading6was
developed in the 1960s and has suboptimal interobserver
reproducibility even amongst expert urologic pathologists7,8.
Although newer clinicopathologic risk-strati ﬁcation systems have
been created, three variables remain at their core —Gleason score,
T-stage, and PSA9.
More recently, tissue-based genomic biomarkers10have
demonstrated superior prognostic performance. However, nearly
1Artera, Inc, Mountain View, CA, USA.2Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.3Department of Biomedical
Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.4Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.5NRG Oncology
Biospecimen Bank, San Francisco, CA, USA.6Department of Urology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.7Division of Urologic Oncology, University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.8Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
9Salesforce Research, San Francisco, CA, USA.10Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.11Department of Radiation
Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.12Department of Radiation Oncology, cCare, Fresno, CA, USA.13Department of Radiation Oncology, Horizon Health Network-Saint
John Regional Hospital, Saint John JB E2L 4L2 CA, Canada.14Department of Hematology and Oncology, Ingalls Memorial Hospital, Harvey, IL, USA.15Department of Radiation
Oncology, Allan Blair Cancer Centre, Regina SK S4T 7T1 CA, Canada.16Department of Radiation Oncology, CHUM - Centre Hospitalier de l ’Universite de Montreal, Montreal QC
H2X 3E4 CA, Canada.17Department of Radiation Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.18Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.19Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.20NRG
Oncology Statistics and Data Management Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.34These authors contributed equally: Felix Y. Feng, Osama Mohamad. *A list of authors and their
afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.✉email: aesteva@artera.aiwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
1234567890():,;