relevant outcomes. The MMAI model consistently outperforms the
NCCN model across all tested outcomes in the intended use
validation set (i.e., pretreatment tissue only). However, further
work will be required to evaluate the clinical utility of this model,
including identifying actionable information from de ﬁned patient
risk groups and calibration with contemporary data, and omitting
posttreatment tissue. Importantly, interpretability of the features
used by the model to predict prognosis should be investigated,
and will be the subject of future work.
By creating a deep learning architecture that simultaneously
ingests multiple data types, including histopathology image data
of variable sizes as well as clinical data, we built a deep learning
system capable of inferring long-term patient outcomes that
substantially outperforms established clinical models. This study
leverages robust and large-scale clinical data from ﬁve prospec-
tive, randomized, multinational phase III trials with up to 20 years
of patient follow-up for 5,654 patients across a varied population,
enrolled at hundreds of different diverse medical centers.
Validation of these prognostic classi ﬁers on a large amount of
clinical trials data —in the intended use population —uniquely
positions these tools as aids to therapeutic decision-making.
Barriers to the adoption of urine-, blood-, and tissue-based
molecular assays include their invariably high costs, the collection
and consumption of biospecimen samples, and long turnaround
times. In contrast, AI tools lack these limitations, substantially
lowering their barrier to large-scale adoption. Moreover, the
growing adoption of digital histopathology will support the global
distribution of AI-based prognostic and predictive testing. This will
enable broad access to therapy personalization and enable AIalgorithms to continue improving by learning from diverse
multinational data.
METHODS
Dataset preparation
In collaboration with NRG Oncology, we obtained access to full patient-
level baseline clinical data, digitized histopathology slides of pretreatmentand posttreatment prostate tissue, and longitudinal outcomes from ﬁve
landmark, large-scale, prospective, randomized, multinational clinical trialscontaining 5654 patients, 16,204 histopathology slides, and >10 years ofmedian follow-up: NRG/RTOG-9202, 9408, 9413, 9910, and 0126 (Table 1).
Patients in these trials were randomized across various combinations ofexternal radiotherapy (RT) with or without different durations of androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). The slides were digitized over a period of 1 year
by NRG Oncology using a Leica Biosystems Aperio AT2 digital pathology
scanner at a resolution of 20x. The histopathology images were manuallyreviewed for quality and clarity. Six baseline clinical variables that werecollected across all trials (combined Gleason score, Gleason primary,Gleason secondary, T-stage, baseline PSA, age), along with the digitalhistopathology images, were used for model training and validation. Thepatients from ﬁve trials were split into training (80%) and validation (20%)
datasets, and there was no patient overlap among splits. To ensure thatthe test set captured a clinically relevant and representative subset ofpatients, the ﬁnal test set was selected such that the NCCN risk group ’s
5-year distant metastasis AUC performance was between 0.7 and 0.75, as
observed in the literature
33,34. Institutional Review Board approval was
obtained from NRG Oncology (IRB00000781) and informed consent waswaived because this study was performed with anonymized data.
Image pipeline
All tissue from digitized slides were segmented into a single image quilt ofsize 200 by 200 patches for each patient prior to model training. A simplegrid was then laid over the image quilt to obtain contiguous and adjacentpatches of size 256 × 256 pixels. We used a ResNet-50 model
35, together
with the MoCo-v2 training protocol36(parameters: learning rate =0.03
with a cosine learning rate schedule for 200 epochs, moco-t =0.2,
multilayer perceptron head, batch size of 256, the default MoCo-v2parameters for augmentation), to train the self-supervised learning modelused in the system architecture of Fig. 1b. For the validation results shown
in Fig. 3a, we used images of patients with a Gleason primary ≥4t opre-train a corresponding self-supervised learning model to effectively
learn relevant histomorphologic features. Once self-supervised pre-trainingwas complete, we fed in all patches with usable tissue (See tissuesegmentation section) to the self-supervised pretrained ResNet-50 model
to generate an image feature vector for each patch. These image feature
vectors were averaged to produce a 128-dimensional image feature foreach patient.
Fusion pipeline
To leverage information from both modalities (image and clinical features),
we used a joint fusion approach. The tabular clinical data were all
considered as numerical variables, and a CatBoost26model that took in a
concatenation of numerical clinical variables and image features as inputwas used for model prediction and to output a risk score (parameters:learning rate 0.003, depth 5, L2 leaf regularization 10, 2000 iterations).
Tissue segmentation
After the slides were cut into 256 × 256 pixel patches, we developed anartifact classi ﬁer by training a ResNet-18 to classify whether a patch
showed usable tissue, or whether it showed whitespace or artifacts. Theartifact classi ﬁer was trained for 25 epochs, optimized using stochastic
gradient descent with a learning rate of 0.001. The learning rate wasreduced by 10% every 7 epochs. We manually annotated 3661 patches
(tissue vs. not tissue) and trained this classi ﬁer on 3366 of them, achieving
a validation accuracy of 97.6% on the remaining patches. This artifactclassi ﬁer was then used to segment tissue sections and ﬁlter out low-
quality images during image feature generation.
Model performance metrics (AUC)
For each model and each outcome, we estimated the time-dependentreceiver operating characteristic curve, accounting for competing eventsand censoring, using the R-package timeROC
37. The area under this curve
deﬁnes the model ’s performance. Each time-dependent curve was
constructed by evaluating the sensitivities and speci ﬁcities based on the
disease statuses ﬁxed at time tand the model predictions determined by
sweeping through a threshold c. Methods detailed in Blanche et al. were
used to compute pointwise 95% con ﬁdence intervals (1.96 × standard
error) for AUCs and two-sided p-values for comparing AUCs of two models
(e.g., MMAI vs. NCCN)37.
NCCN risk groups
Three variables —clinical T-stage, Gleason score, and baseline PSA —were
used to group patients into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups. The
risk groups were de ﬁned as follows: low risk (cT1 –cT2a, Gleason score ≤6,
and PSA <10 ng/mL), intermediate risk (cT2b –cT2c, Gleason score 7, and/or
PSA 10 –20 ng/mL), and high risk ( ≥cT3a or Gleason score 8 –10 or PSA
>20 ng/mL)9.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature ResearchReporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data published in this article will be publicly available six months from
publication, through requests made to NRG Oncology at APC@nrgoncology.org.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The multimodal AI architecture was developed using PyTorch Python library ( https://
pytorch.org/ ). In addition, scikit-learn, NumPy, statsmodels, pandas, Matplotlib, and
MoCo-v2 have been used for computation and plotting (available under: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/ ,https://numpy.org/ ,https://www.statsmodels.org/ ,https://pandas.
pydata.org/ ,https://matplotlib.org/ ,a n d https://github.com/facebookresearch/moco ).
The trained model used in this study has not yet undergone regulatory review andcannot be made available at this time. Interested researchers can contact A.E.
(aesteva@artera.ai) for questions on its status and access.
Received: 5 January 2022; Accepted: 19 May 2022;
Published online: 08 June 2022
A. Esteva et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2022) 71 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital