DISCUSSION
Prior work prognosticating outcomes from histopathology slides
typically leverages extensive region-level pathologist annotationson slides (e.g., to train AI models to predict Gleason grading
19,29,30,
or to prognosticate short-term outcomes18). In contrast, our
technique learns from patient-level clinical data and unannotated
histopathology slides and can prognosticate long-term outcomes.Moreover, the self-supervised learning of the image model allowsit to learn from new image data without the need for additionalannotations. When deploying machine learning (ML) models in anew domain (e.g., a new scanner or a new clinic) including datafrom that domain during training can help improve generalizationand performance. This system also lowers the barrier forphysicians to begin using this tool and for clinics to easily
continue sharing histopathology image data to obtain prognostic
information and aid their treatment decisions. This lower barrierfor usage is a valuable advantage when deploying the system innew locations and attempting to adapt to their inherent biases —a
challenge previously observed in medical AI deployment
31.I n
addition, this tool focuses on supporting the oncologist in makingtreatment decisions and provides complementary information tothe diagnostic and histopathology information identi ﬁed by a
pathologist.
Self-supervised learning
25is a method recently popularized in
the ML community for learning from datasets without annota-tions. Typical ML setups leverage supervised learning, in whichdatasets are composed of data points (e.g., images) and data
labels (e.g., object classes). In contrast, during self-supervised
learning, synthetic data labels are extracted from the original data,
and used to train generic feature representations which can beused for downstream tasks. Here we ﬁnd that momentum
contrast
32—a technique that takes the set of image patches,
generates augmented copies of each patch, then trains a model to
predict whether any two augmented copies come from the sameoriginal patch —is effective at learning features from digital
pathology slides. The structural setup is shown in Fig. 1b, with
further details in the Methods. One challenge with real-worldmedical datasets is the sheer volume of image data available and
potential class imbalance (tissue vs. no tissue) that is a result of
how histopathology slides are created. To overcome this andguide the self-supervised learning process towards patch regions
that are likely to be more clinically useful, we only use images
from patients with a Gleason primary ≥4. Future work could
investigate further whether other training techniques such astransfer learning are effective, and whether training or ﬁne-tuning
models end-to-end using patient-level information improves ﬁnal
performance.
When new models are introduced, an understanding of how to
use them in routine clinical care is critical to the adoption of suchtools. In this study, we focus on the unique AI architecture used to
develop the prognostic models trained on data from thousands of
patients with accurate, long-term follow-up data and clinically
Fig. 3 Comparison of the multimodal deep learning system to NCCN risk groups across trials and outcomes. a Performance results
reporting on the area under the curve (AUC) of time-dependent receiver operator characteristics of the MMAI (blue bars) vs. NCCN (gray bars)models, include 95% con ﬁdence intervals and two-sided p-values. Comparisons were made across 5-year and 10-year time points on the
following binary outcomes: distant metastasis (DM), biochemical failure (BF), prostate cancer-speci ﬁc survival (PCSS), and overall survival (OS).
bSummary table of the relative improvement of the MMAI model over the NCCN model across the various outcomes and broken down by
performance on the data from each trial in the validation set. Relative improvement is given by (AUC
MMAI−AUC NCCN )/AUC NCCN .cAblation
study showing model performance when trained on a sequentially decreasing set of data inputs, including the pathology images only (path),pathology images +NCCN variables (path +NCCN), and pathology images +NCCN variables +age+Gleason primary +Gleason secondary
(path+NCCN+3).d–hPerformance comparison on the individual clinical trial subsets of the validation set —together, these ﬁve comprise
the entire validation set shown in ( a).A. Esteva et al.
5
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 71