all of these tests lack validation in prospective randomized clinical
trials in the intended use population, and there has been little to
no adoption outside of the United States due to costs, laboratory
requirements, and processing time11. Importantly, prognostic
models developed on cohort study data and not on randomizedclinical trials are subject to selection biases from treatment
decisions made in the clinic, and often have less accurate clinical
and long-term outcome data. As such, there remains a seriousunmet clinical need for improved and more accessible tools topersonalize therapy for prostate cancer
12.
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has demonstrated remarkable cap-
abilities across a number of use-cases in medicine, ranging fromphysician-level diagnostics
13to work ﬂow optimization14, and has
the potential to support cancer therapy.15,16As clinical adoption of
digital histopathology continues17, AI can be implemented more
broadly in the care of cancer patients. Advances and progress inthe use of AI for histopathology-based prognostics have alreadybegun, for instance by predicting short-term patient outcomes
18
or by improving the accuracy of Gleason-based cancer grading on
postoperative surgical samples19. Whereas standard risk-
strati ﬁcation tools are ﬁxed and based on few variables, AI can
learn from large amounts of minimally processed data acrossvarious modalities. In contrast to genomic biomarkers, AI systemsleveraging digitized images are lower-cost and massively scalable.In addition, these tools can incrementally improve over timethrough continued learning to optimize test performance andhealth care value.
In this study, we demonstrate that a multimodal AI (MMAI)
system can be used to address an unmet need for accessible andscalable prognostication in localized prostate cancer. This MMAIsystem has the potential to be a generalizable digital AI biomarkerfor global adoption. Herein, we train and validate prognosticbiomarkers in localized prostate cancer using ﬁve NRG Oncology
phase III randomized clinical trials by leveraging multimodal deep
learning on digital histopathology and clinical data
20–24.B y
utilizing data from large clinical trials with long-term follow-upand treatment information that is standardized and less subject tobias, our model learns from and is trained on some of the mostaccurate clinical and outcome data available.
RESULTS
We created a unique MMAI architecture that ingests both tabular
clinical and image data, and trains with self-supervised learning toleverage the substantial amount of data available. We trained and
validated six distinct models on a dataset of 16,204 histopathologyslides (~16 TB of image data) and clinical data from 5,654 patientsto predict six binary outcomes varying by endpoints and
timeframes (5- and 10-year distant metastasis, 5- and 10-year
biochemical failure, 10-year prostate cancer-speci ﬁc survival, and
10-year overall survival). Notably, accurate prediction of distantmetastasis at 5 and 10 years is particularly important foridentifying patients who may have more aggressive disease andrequire additional treatment. We measured the performance of
these models with the area under the time-dependent receiver
operator characteristic curve (AUC) of sensitivity and speci ﬁcity,
based on censored events accounting for competing risks, and theNCCN risk groups served as our baseline comparator. Prior tomodel development, data from all ﬁve clinical trials were split into
training (80%) and validation (20%). The MMAI model consistently
outperformed the NCCN risk groups across all tested outcomes
when comparing the performance results for the validation set.
Developing the MMAI architecture
For each patient, the MMAI model took as input clinical variables
—including the NCCN variables (combined Gleason score, clinical
T-stage, baseline PSA), as well as age, Gleason primary, andGleason secondary —and digitized histopathology slides (median
of 2 slides). Joint learning across both data streams is complex andinvolves building two separate machine learning pipelines —one
for learning feature embeddings from the pathologic image data
(Image pipeline) and the other to jointly learn from both clinicaland image data to output risk scores for an outcome of interest(Fusion pipeline, see Fig. 1a). We standardized the image features
across the trials for consistency.
Effective learning of relevant features from a variable number of
digitized histopathology slides involves both image standardiza-tion and self-supervised pre-training. For each patient, wesegmented out all the tissue sections in their biopsy slides, andcombined them into a single large image, called an image quilt, ofaﬁxed width and height across all patients (Supplementary Fig. 1).
We then overlaid a grid over the image quilt which cut it into
patches of size 256 × 256 pixels across its RGB channels. These
patches were then used to train a self-supervised learning model
25
to learn histomorphological features useful for downstream AItasks (Fig. 1b). Once trained, the self-supervised learning model
took the patches of an image quilt and output a 128-dimensionalvector representation for each patch. Concatenating all vectors in
Fig. 1 Multimodal deep learning system and dataset. a The multimodal architecture is composed of two parts: a tower stack to parse a
variable number of digital histopathology slides and another tower stack to merge the resultant features and predict binary outcomes. bThe
training of the self-supervised model of the image tower stack.
A. Esteva et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2022) 71 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;