Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2022, corrected publication 2023
NRG PROSTATE CANCER AI CONSORTIUM
Felix Y. Feng4,34, Howard M. Sandler17, Michael Kucharczyk21, Luis Souhami22, Leslie Ballas23, Christopher A. Peters24, Sandy Liu25,
Alexander G. Balogh26, Pamela D. Randolph-Jackson27, David L. Schwartz28, Michael R. Girvigian29, Naoyuki G. Saito30, Adam Raben31,
Rachel A. Rabinovitch32and Khalil Katato33
21Department of Radiation Oncology, Accrual-Nova Scotia Cancer Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 1V7, Canada.22Department of Oncology, The Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Centre (MUHC), Montreal QC H4A 3J1 CA, Canada.23Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.24Department
of Radiation Oncology, Northeast Radiation Oncology Centers (NROC), Dunmore, PA, USA.25Department of Medical Oncology, UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
26Department of Radiation Oncology, Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Calgary AB T2N 4N2 CA, Canada.27Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington Cancer Institute, Washington,
DC, USA.28Department of Radiation Oncology, Veteran Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System-Brooklyn Campus, Brooklyn, NY, USA.29Department of Radiation Oncology,
Kaiser Permanente Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.30Department of Radiation Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
31Department of Radiation Oncology, Christiana Care Health System-Christiana Hospital, Newark, DE, USA.32Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Hospital, Aurora, CO, USA.33Department of Medical Oncology, Hurley Medical Center, Flint, MI, USA., corrected publication 2023
A. Esteva et al.
8
npj Digital Medicine (2022) 71 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital