What is Human-Centered about Human-Centered AI? A Map of the Research Landscape CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
points out that while spelling words is well supported, choosing the 
right word in the context, in the larger “unit of action” of making 
sentences is not. What is required is not explanations, but good 
interaction design informed by HCI. He argues HCI can help to 
create “abstractions that cohere both the user and the application(s) 
in ways that lets them work hand in hand” [121]. This is similar to 
Blackwell’s [39] call for improved conceptual constructs that can 
be used to account for a new designed relationship between user 
intentions and inferred models. 
Vaccaro et al. [290] argue that designing for contestability in 
systems can assist in “surfacing values, aligning system design and 
use with context, and building legitimacy”. For example, people 
should be able to submit their own scenario, see how the AI per-
forms, argue their case, and decide the merits of the system. That is, 
interacting with AI should acknowledge and embrace human rea-
soning styles, which are also made on the basis of incomplete and 
selective data [39]. Interaction design of AI can fnd ways to high-
light potential ethical questions, consequences, and accountability 
through provocations in the design. 
Research in this middle ground of Interaction with AI demands 
multidisciplinary skilled teams that draw together technical, design 
and human-centered researchers, which is perhaps why it has been 
slower to emerge but has great potential and is in ascendance. 
At the far left of the horizontal axis (AI led -> Human values 
led) we see AI led research that seeks to emulate or replace human 
capabilities, simulating human processes such as vision, or human-
decision making. This is largely technical research that does not 
engage in considerations of human agency. It is called human-
centered because humans are the subject of AI research, but many 
may feel this is a misnomer. Although inspired by humans, it does 
not necessarily consider their agency, but we argue it should in 
future. In broad brush strokes, moving from left bottom fanning 
out to the right and the top, we might consider research as being 
on people, for people, and/or with people. 
Within the quadrant of research called Explainable and Inter-
pretable AI, explainable AI is largely technical research that seeks 
to represent and explain AI decision making processes for people, 
with varying degrees of human inclusion in understanding how to 
best represent explanations for people. Interpretable AI research, 
which focuses on ensuring human interpretability of AI decisions 
and explanations, is shown further along the human values led 
horizontal axis. The corpus of interpretable AI work found in our 
survey was much larger than the corpus of explainable AI work, 
probably because interpretable AI tends to have a more human-
centered focus, whereas much explainable AI work would not in-
clude human-centered keywords or make human-centered claims 
to identify itself for inclusion in this review. Thus, only a subset 
of the large feld of explainable AI, (that which identifes itself as 
human-centered), is captured here and shown on the map. 
Human-AI Teaming inhabits the upper left area of the map, rep-
resenting approaches that seek to complement the computational 
power of AI with human skills and judgment. Human-AI Teaming is 
an evolution in some respects of human-in-the-loop methods (also 
shown) and early forms of interactive AI. The research tends to 
be context specifc, hence it is placed in the upper part of the map. 
Human-in-the-loop approaches and early interactive AI tend to be framed as AI problems, with people assisting the AI through label-
ing data, correcting erroneous classifcations, and evaluating and 
tuning the model. Human-machine or Human-AI Teaming methods 
seek greater synergies beyond putting the human-in-the-loop, with 
humans guiding machines/AI by problem framing, questioning, 
labeling, information seeking, dialogue and mitigating against ma-
chine failures such as data bias, model complexity, rare cases, and 
exceptions. Machines/AI in turn can facilitate human exploration 
and critical thinking about large-scale data and mitigate against 
human failings such as bias, limited attention fatigue and afect. 
Designing efective human-AI teaming demands both attention to 
context, human concerns, human skills, and interaction design, as 
well as AI techniques. High levels of human control and high levels 
of automation can complement each other. The extent to which 
the contextual and human aspects are included determines how far 
towards the top and middle of the diagram a human-AI/machine 
teaming project would sit. 
It is worth clarifying that the purpose of human-AI teaming is to 
make the best use of both human and AI capabilities, rather than 
the human simply being called upon to do what the AI cannot yet 
manage in an AI led project i.e., step 4 in the 5 levels of vehicle 
autonomy [232]. For example, step 4 in the quest for vehicle auton-
omy involves a driver monitoring an autonomous vehicle to take 
over if it fails. However, humans are notably bad at monitoring 
monotonous processes in which they play no active part, and their 
bodies are not primed to attend and react in the way they would if 
they were themselves driving. As such, the solely AI-led framing 
of many autonomous vehicle projects fails to embrace human com-
petencies and agency from the outset, and thus few were identifed 
in our review. Human-AI teaming projects aim to make the best 
of both human and AI capabilities, enabling both humans and the 
AI system to learn and develop. They consider what should and 
should not be automated. The more a project balances these human 
and AI capabilities, the further from the left and more towards the 
middle they sit on the map. Marres [ 185] identifes as problematic 
that engineers often create their own space in the world to work 
on technical problems, constraining the role of humans and the 
“interactional frame”, which then limits exploration of alternative 
futures. Such approaches fall of the far left of the map. 
Human-Centered Design research is shown in the lower right area 
of the map, refecting its human values led and design led focus. It 
researches how AI can be designed to align with human needs and 
aspirations. People may be involved as informants, participants, or 
partners in research. Informed by the felds of participatory design 
and co-design [271], projects include those who will potentially 
be impacted by design in the design process. This is done from 
both a moral and pragmatic standpoint. From a moral standpoint, 
those who will be impacted should be consulted. From a pragmatic 
standpoint, they are experts in their own lives, able to ofer detailed 
contextual insights and directions as to what is needed. Many par-
ticipatory design methods such as excursions (visiting functioning 
system installations), scenarios, future workshops and games have 
been applied to understand what AI ofers as well as to imagine AI 
as part of their future activities [41]. 
To date, speculative design and interaction design with AI are less 
well represented in human-centered design research, in part due to 
the struggle that interaction designers face in working with AI as