What is Human-Centered about Human-Centered AI? A Map of 
the Research Landscape 
Tara Capel 
Queensland University of Technology 
t.capel@qut.edu.au
ABSTRACT 
The application of Artifcial Intelligence (AI) across a wide range of 
domains comes with both high expectations of its benefts and dire 
predictions of misuse. While AI systems have largely been driven by 
a technology-centered design approach, the potential societal conse-
quences of AI have mobilized both HCI and AI researchers towards 
researching human-centered artifcial intelligence (HCAI). How-
ever, there remains considerable ambiguity about what it means 
to frame, design and evaluate HCAI. This paper presents a critical 
review of the large corpus of peer-reviewed literature emerging 
on HCAI in order to characterize what the community is defning 
as HCAI. Our review contributes an overview and map of HCAI 
research based on work that explicitly mentions the terms ‘human-
centered artifcial intelligence’ or ‘human-centered machine learn-
ing’ or their variations, and suggests future challenges and research 
directions. The map reveals the breadth of research happening in 
HCAI, established clusters and the emerging areas of Interaction
with AI and Ethical AI. The paper contributes a new defnition
of HCAI, and calls for greater collaboration between AI and HCI 
research, and new HCAI constructs. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
•Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction
(HCI); HCI theory, concepts and models.
KEYWORDS 
human-centered artifcial intelligence, human-centered machine 
learning, artifcial intelligence, machine learning, critical review 
ACM Reference Format: 
Tara Capel and Margot Brereton. 2023. What is Human-Centered about 
Human-Centered AI? A Map of the Research Landscape. In Proceedings of
the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23), 
April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 22 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580959 
1 INTRODUCTION 
As AI systems become more widespread, concerns grow about 
their embedded values, the goodness of their decisions, whom they 
beneft and whom they disadvantage [290]. Widely deployed in Margot Brereton 
Queensland University of Technology 
m.brereton@qut.edu.au
everyday applications such as spam fltering, text prediction, credit 
card fraud detection, credit scoring, search engines, news trends, 
market segmentation and advertising, insurance, loan qualifcation, 
and so on, they make decisions with social consequences, often 
on our personal and trace data that we generate every day [48]. 
Concerns arise from the inscrutability of the models used, embedded 
bias (particularly against minority groups) due to the historic data 
available and algorithmic choices, privacy issues, out-of-control 
machines, human rights challenges, and illusions of meaning that 
can be generated [48, 269]. There are also environmental costs due 
to the massive amounts of processing and the research opportunity 
cost of focusing on generating understanding from copious amounts 
of scraped data over alternative approaches [29, 269] – for example, 
the eforts invested into large language models could be utilized to 
revitalize smaller languages. 
The term human-centered AI is increasing in use, motivating 
a sense that AI is to serve the people and in response to growing 
concerns about AI’s potential to exploit and mislead. But ‘human-
centered AI’ means many diferent things to diferent people. The 
human might be the subject of AI algorithmic study, the user of 
AI products, an agent in the design of the AI system itself and so 
on. Alternatively, HCAI might be invoked as an aspirational term, 
much like ‘sustainable mining’ in the resources sector or ‘trusted 
autonomy’, with considerable debate as to how and whether it can 
be achieved. 
While there is clearly much at stake, there are already various 
and broad defnitions of what it means to frame, design, and evalu-
ate HCAI. As such, this review looks at the large corpus of literature 
emerging on HCAI to develop an understanding of what the com-
munity is defning as HCAI. We present and discuss the results of a 
critical review of peer-reviewed conference and journal articles that 
have been published up until July 2022. Our review included papers 
that explicitly used the term ‘human-centered artifcial intelligence’ 
or ‘human-centered machine learning’ or their variations. Our aim 
is to provide an overview of the current state of HCAI, explore 
the claim to human-centeredness within these works, and investi-
gate how human-centeredness afects the interaction between the 
human and the AI and its resulting impacts. Our intention is to 
create a map overview of the feld to assist researchers to locate 
and diferentiate their work, to identify gaps and opportunities in 
research and to assist beginning researchers to understand the nu-
ances in the term HCAI. This paper is intended as an initial step in 
mapping the landscape of HCAI research. We advocate for further 
exploration in this space to include work that relates to the topic 
of HCAI but does not explicitly mention the term. 
We begin this paper with a historical overview of the term HCAI 
as it has been introduced in seminal works in the feld. We then 
describe the method of our critical review of papers. This led us to