CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tara Capel and Margot Brereton 
Figure 2: Ethical AI research has sprouted examining many 
aspects of power, bias, agency, transparency, governance, and 
morality. 
a design material [314, 315]. However, exciting work is emerging 
in speculative design [30] and in contestable AI [131]. Interaction 
design is investigating how people interact with AI systems, asking 
how the AI is represented in the user interface [224], and beginning 
to ask how people can compose AI for themselves. 
Ethical AI as shown in Figure 2 represents an agglomeration of 
research to understand values embedded in AI projects, issues of 
ethics, fairness, and power. Succinctly provocative, Kalluri [147] 
states “Don’t ask if artifcial intelligence is good or fair, ask how it 
shifts power – Those who could be exploited by AI should be shap-
ing its projects”. Ethical AI projects seek to understand and reveal 
the contextual details of how AI is made and how it impacts people. 
It advocates for and demonstrates transparent processes in the con-
struction of AI models – documenting how data is gathered, what 
it comprises, who is represented within it, assumptions and mecha-
nisms behind models, how they represent diferent user groups and 
perform in relation to those groups etc., thus revealing the implicit 
values and decisions made. It also advocates for consideration of 
how resources are deployed. e.g., the extent to which resources are 
deployed to generate language models for dominant languages ver-
sus endangered languages, where the low number of speakers and 
materials on which algorithms can be trained demands novel HCAI 
approaches. With its focus on the human experience of AI, situated 
in the real world, Ethical AI is both human values led and deeply 
contextual, thus it inhabits the top right area of the map. Much of 
this research points to the need for more innovative and considered 
design work. Posthuman and more than human approaches to AI 
are also seen in this space. 
5.3 Refections on the Landscape 
There is signifcant breadth in what is considered by the community 
to be human-centered AI, from AI led to human values led research, 
and from design focused to contextually focused research. Despite 
all the human-centered design and ethical AI research represented 
here, it is extremely common at the AI led end of research (beyond 
HCAI research mapped here) to ignore human agency and user in-
volvement altogether, or to only consider human user involvement 
to evaluate a fnal system already conceived by technologists. The 
notion of early investigation into contexts and use with potential users and those impacted to frame studies is alien to many who pro-
duce AI, even though AI is being embedded in domains as diverse 
as agriculture, manufacturing, transportation, government, fnance, 
security, law enforcement and healthcare. Corporate technical AI 
researchers and engineers hold a great deal of power when design-
ing systems that are becoming more central to our lives, embedding 
their own values into the design of algorithms. Ethical AI projects 
seek to examine and reveal these values. 
A critique might similarly be levelled at HCI that while AI is 
altering the basis of computing, HCI has not paid enough attention 
to learning how new AI systems work and their consequences and 
possibilities for new interaction design [121]. It is important to look 
at both the system’s and the user’s point of view [41, 121]. The way 
in which users and their use context and AI are both intertwined 
and decoupled to best efect is the core topic of HCAI. 
Within the feld of human-centered AI research, the greatest chal-
lenge and opportunity is to engage greater collaboration across the 
spectrum of research, engaging technical, design, human-centered 
and critical ethical research, to amplify and accelerate endeavors to 
create exemplar processes and systems. This is no small challenge 
as it demands conversations from many diferent perspectives and 
viewpoints within HCAI. Researchers need to be willing to learn 
and understand the language and methods of other areas, as well 
as the values and motivations that underlie research in that area. 
AI led research is dominated by the language and values of 
inferential statistics and a mindset to eke out value from big data 
and algorithms to apply to unique and often personal problems and 
situations at diferent places and times, sometimes in high stakes 
and dynamic situations. The detailed context of application is less 
of a focus. In contrast, human-centered research pays attention to 
personal and social experience and context and how people use, 
appropriate and experience technologies in context. It is undeniable 
that AI and HCI need each other and that HCAI research can beneft 
from stronger collaborations across felds and eforts to understand 
each other’s work and values. Such collaborations can yield new 
conceptual constructs that account for human relations with AI, 
guide coherent interface design [121], and refect new designed 
relationships between user intentions and inferred models [39]. 
Beyond this, HCAI research can seek to reach out to infuence 
the broader AI research and business communities and domain 
stakeholders. Domain experts can highlight considerations around 
values and potential consequences that may not be obvious to AI 
designers, giving them greater infuence. Given the multiplicity of 
interests, varieties of users, business interests and domain interests 
at play in any situation, this is no small challenge, but worth noting 
in closing commentary on this landscape. 
5.4 A Defnition of HCAI that Refects the 
Research Landscape and Agenda 
Returning to the early defnitions of HCAI in section 2.5, we ofer 
a revised defnition that refects the research landscape; it empha-
sizes the importance of ethics and the ability to interact with AI 
to understand, guide and contest it. Early defnitions emphasize 
the betterment of humans but leave open who decides what is 
good for humans and who benefts. Incorporating ethics into the