CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tara Capel and Margot Brereton 
but did not address human-centeredness in the research described, 
hence they were rejected during this second review round. Other 
reasons papers were rejected at this point included papers where 
HCAI was raised as a challenge and where the main contribution 
was a review. These review papers difered from the review con-
tributed within this paper in that they tended to analyze a specifc 
area of HCAI or HCML. For example, enhancing trust in machine 
learning models, or HCAI in autonomous ship systems or health-
care. In the end, the remaining 257 papers were read in full and 
built the basis for the map and analysis we present in this paper. 
The aim of this project was to understand what is meant when 
people use the term Human-Centered AI or Human-Centered ML. 
As such, we engaged with work that explicitly used the terms 
‘human-centered artifcial intelligence’ or ‘human-centered ma-
chine learning’ or their variations. We acknowledge that there are 
many papers which relate to the topic of HCAI and HCML that 
do not explicitly mention either term and that these will therefore 
have been missed from our analysis. This work is intended as an 
initial step in mapping the landscape of HCAI and HCML research 
and we advocate for further exploration in this space. 
3.2 Analysis 
Our analysis aims to understand the claim to human-centeredness 
in the research articles and how this claim to human-centeredness 
relates to the interaction with AI. Both authors conducted the initial 
fve steps of thematic analysis [42], this included familiarization, 
initial coding, theme search, theme review, naming and defnition. 
This involved reading through each of the papers of the fnal corpus 
with an aim to understand the human-centered nature or claim to 
human-centeredness of each. We then coded and thematized each 
paper based on that understanding of what their human-centered 
approach was. Some papers did not need to be read in detail as the 
approach to human-centeredness was apparent, whereas others 
required a more extended treatment. We met regularly to discuss pa-
pers and requested a second read of papers if there was uncertainty. 
We utilized a Miro board in order to write notes, code and theme 
each paper, which meant the naming process was done visually 
and iteratively, with both authors discussing where on the map the 
papers belonged. 
A third, independent reviewer, was also engaged in complete 
coding capturing anything of relevance to the research question, 
"what is human-centered about human-centered AI?”. This activity 
resulted in the explicit representation of the codes directly mapping 
research papers’ content to provisional sub-themes, for example 
human rights mapped to papers that explore the issues of trust, 
privacy, racial discrimination etc. In the last phase only the two 
authors were involved in the conceptualization of the visual the-
matic HCAI map to derive the overarching themes of ‘Ethical AI’, 
‘Human Teaming with AI’, ‘Explainable and Interpretable AI’, and 
‘Human-Centered Approach to Designing and Evaluating AI’. It is 
important to note that some papers cover more than one quadrant 
which was captured through the Miro board with papers duplicated 
across themes tagged as such. Of the 257 fnal papers, 65 were 
double counted and 5 were triple counted. 
While the workshops proposals were not included within the 
fnal corpus or included on the HCAI map, they were used to help guide our analysis in terms of validating the overarching themes 
of interest to human-centered AI and ML research that stemmed 
from our thematic analysis. The initial CHI workshop on ‘Human-
Centered Machine Learning’ intended to gather the community 
around the topic in 2016, identifying key research questions in 
the application of human-centered approaches of machine learning 
[110]. These were concerned with the role of the human in machine 
learning systems, usability challenges, how to design and evaluate 
machine learning systems with a human-centered approach, how 
human-centered machine learning is applied in various domains, 
how it could support creative work, and how domains such as big 
data analytics could be democratized. This was then followed up 
with a workshop in 2019 with the aim to further explore emerging 
areas and recent advancements in human-centered machine learn-
ing in order to articulate an updated agenda for human-centered 
research in machine learning [225]. 
Since the 2016 CHI workshop, there have been further related 
workshops that addressed the broad research area of HCAI and 
HCML [198, 199], as well as more focused areas such as explainable 
and interpretable AI [8, 86, 90, 94, 108, 115], humans teaming with 
AI [21, 77, 92, 124, 141, 227, 320], human-centered approaches for 
designing and evaluating AI [12, 204, 285], and ethical issues per-
taining to AI and ML [13, 20, 22, 27, 50, 107, 113, 118, 176, 226, 243]. 
There are also workshops that have brought together two or more 
areas including ‘Co-Designing AI Futures’, which addressed both 
design and ethics of AI and ML [172], and ‘Generative AI and 
HCI’ [200] and ‘Human-AI Co-Creation with Generative Models’ 
[307]which addressed both humans teaming with AI and human-
centered approaches for designing and evaluating AI.
We note here that Braun and Clarke’s [42] refexive thematic 
analysis approach rejects the idea of themes ’emerging’ from data. 
Rather, it is the researchers’ active process that generates and con-
ceptualizes them. We acknowledge that the thematic analysis and 
mapping is our interpretation of the claims to human-centered AI 
laid out in the literature. 
While thematic analysis seeks to generate themes and sub-
themes that describe the data, it does not have a tradition of at-
tempting to lay the themes out on a map, by determining axes 
in order to visually separate out and relate the themes, although 
visual depictions of relations are sometimes presented. Since our re-
search question is to describe a feld, it makes sense to try to depict 
that feld visually. Thus, we continued our iterative and inductive 
process toward considering what axes would help to spatially visu-
alize the feld of research, using the method of Sanders [249]. After 
describing the themes that constitute our fndings below, at the 
beginning of the discussion, we elaborate on how we chose axes to 
visualize the feld. 
4 WHAT IS HUMAN-CENTERED AI? 
Through our analysis and mapping, we found four major areas 
of research under the umbrella of HCAI. These are Explainable 
and Interpretable AI, Human-Centered Approaches to Design and 
Evaluate AI, Humans Teaming with AI, and Ethical AI. These are 
depicted on the map in Figure 1. A ffth newer area emerging in 
the center of the map is Interaction with AI, which we return to in 
the discussion. The four major research areas are described below.