What is Human-Centered about Human-Centered AI? A Map of the Research Landscape CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
with these objectives, Xu [313] proposed an initial HCAI framework 
that includes three main components: “1) ethically aligned design, 
which creates AI solutions that avoid discrimination, maintain fair-
ness and justice, and do not replace humans; 2) technology that fully 
refects human intelligence, which further enhances AI technology 
to refect the depth characterized by human intelligence; and 3) 
human factors design to ensure that AI solutions are explainable, 
comprehensible, useful, and usable”. The overarching aim of Xu’s 
[313] framework is to “promote a comprehensive approach, ulti-
mately providing people with safe, efcient, healthy and satisfying 
HCAI solutions”. 
HCAI has also been argued by Shneiderman [269] to be focused 
on “amplifying, augmenting and enhancing human performance in 
ways that make systems reliable, safe and trustworthy”. Shneider-
man [269] proposes his own HCAI framework aimed at encouraging 
designers and researchers to question and consider the nature of 
both automation and autonomy: “1) design for high levels of human 
control and high levels of computer automation so as to increase 
human performance, 2) understand the situations in which full 
human control or full computer control are necessary, and 3) avoid 
the dangers of excessive human control or excessive computer con-
trol”. Shneiderman’s [266] defnition of HCAI also emphasizes user 
experience design by placing the human at the center of design 
thinking, where “researchers and developers for HCAI systems 
focus on measuring human performance and satisfaction, valuing 
customer and consumer needs and ensuring meaningful human 
control”. However, by examining the locus and distribution of con-
trol, and how AI could be used in increasing human performance, 
one could argue that Shneiderman’s perspective on HCAI stems 
from a more engineering systems approach. A design-centered 
approach might be more tentative about the role of AI, further 
consider what constitutes good performance, and examine multiple 
ways of creatively using AI to enhance efectiveness, exploration 
and creativity. As an example, in the context of radiology, it might 
seem obvious that good performance constitutes a high percentage 
likelihood of a correct identifcation of a pathology, but there are 
important considerations around the implications of an incorrect 
diagnosis, false positives and negatives, the long-term deskilling 
of radiologists, healthcare costs, etc. Overall, the best performance 
may involve many diverging factors and how to achieve that will 
be arguable. 
Xu’s [313] approach to HCAI is more focused on the role that HCI 
professionals should play in its design. Xu [313] advocates for those 
within HCI to take a leading role by providing explainable, compre-
hensible, useful and usable AI, and encourages them to proactively 
participate in AI research and design in order to integrate meth-
ods between these two felds, increase their infuence, and gain 
AI knowledge. However, when Yang et al. [314] investigated how 
UX designers could efectively work with machine learning, they 
discovered that designers found it more efective to work in collab-
oration with data scientists, rather than become machine learning 
experts themselves [314]. Shneiderman [266–269] advocates for 
HCAI systems to be designed through user-centered participatory 
design methods which engage a diverse range of stakeholders. The 
design of HCAI systems has been approached through various 
methods, including participatory design, focus groups, interviews, 
usability studies and observations [11, 190, 279, 303]. There is also work reporting that the design of the interaction with the AI itself is 
HCAI, in that the interface accompanying the AI is human-centered 
as it is explainable and interpretable by humans [5, 7, 16, 31] or that 
a human is engaged when the AI needs assistance or supervision 
[1, 25, 34, 37]. 
This also raises questions about what it means to evaluate HCAI 
with some researchers evaluating it based on human performance 
and satisfaction [266–269], how often the human needs to intervene 
[5], or how well AI designed through a human-centered design 
approach performs in particular contexts [26]. 
There remains ambiguity around HCAI with various and broad 
defnitions of what it means to frame, design and evaluate HCAI. As 
such, this review looks at the large corpus of literature emerging on 
HCAI in order to develop an understanding of what the community 
is defning as HCAI. 
3 THE REVIEW APPROACH 
There is a large corpus of literature emerging on human-centered AI 
within a wide range of disciplines. The focus of this critical review 
was to understand the claim to human-centeredness in these works 
and how this claim to human-centeredness relates to the interaction 
with AI. 
3.1 Search and Selection Process and Results 
This review looks at the felds of Human-Centered Artifcial Intel-
ligence (HCAI) and Human-Centered Machine Learning (HCML). 
As such, we have chosen to include papers that explicitly self-
identify as engaging with and contributing to human-centered AI 
and human-centered ML. We conducted a search in the Association 
for Computing Machinery (ACM) Digital Library, IEEE Explore, 
ScienceDirect, Springer Link and Scopus. The search included any 
result that was published any time up until July 1 2022, that either 
used the term “Human-Centered AI”, “Human-Centered Artifcial 
Intelligence”, “Human-Centred AI”, “Human-Centred Artifcial In-
telligence”, “Human-Centered ML”, “Human-Centered Machine 
Learning”, “Human-Centred ML”, or “Human-Centred Machine 
Learning”, using the “OR” logic operator. 
This resulted in a total of 2,357 initial items. We then read all 
abstracts to establish if the paper ft within the focus of our critical 
review and applied two criteria for keeping a paper in this initial 
review round: 1) that our key terms appeared in the title, keywords 
or main text of the article, and 2) that the papers were peer reviewed 
full papers. Reasons for rejecting a paper included: 
• Where the key terms searched for were found outside of 
the title, abstract or main text of the article. For example, if 
the authors were associated with a Human-Centered Artif-
cial Intelligence institute or lab, but the paper itself did not 
include any of the above keywords. 
• Papers that were not peer-reviewed full papers. For example, 
extended abstracts, workshop proposals, pre-prints, posters, 
book chapters, Ph.D. dissertations, and theses. 
• Papers not written in English. 
This brought the publication total to 431. These papers were read 
with a focus on how they related to our critical review in terms 
of their claim to human-centeredness. For example, some papers 
broadly advocated for HCAI as part of their planned future work