CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tara Capel and Margot Brereton 
and non-discrimination threaded throughout many of the above 
topics. Big challenges relate to fair resource deployment, ethical 
and transparent data use, and morality of time critical AI systems 
deployed in the wild. Inscrutability of models from massive data 
are a concern, being hard to check for embedded biases, risking 
cementing in historical, sexist, and racist perspectives. They may 
be used to create illusions of meaning and misinformation [29]. 
AI tends to be developed for the Global North, to meet corporate 
business goals, which may sideline some issues and populations 
and leave them vulnerable to misapplications of AI. 
5 DISCUSSION 
5.1 The Mapping 
The literature review found signifcant breadth in what is consid-
ered by the community to be human-centered AI, from research led 
by a strong technical focus to human values focused research, and 
from design focused research to deeply contextual investigations 
of use. 
We presented the research on a map, as maps are useful for 
showing the complexity and change in the research landscape. The 
underlying landscape of the map only changes as major forces afect 
it [249], such as the emergence of new research areas, large shifts in 
technology, or new societal movements. The research map shows 
the dominant areas of research in HCAI to date. 
We debated and refected as we iterated potential dimensions of 
the map, seeking to fnd and name axes of the HCAI research space 
in a way that would “bring clarity and light to the landscape” [249]. 
There were diferent candidates for axes on which to distribute the 
major research areas. One obvious one, chosen as the horizontal 
axis, refected the extent to which the research focus is on under-
standing and foregrounding human values and concerns themselves 
(human values led) versus the research focus foregrounding the AI 
or algorithmic techniques themselves in service of AI products that 
are more accountable, intelligible, and scrutable (AI led). The middle 
ground refects research that seeks to bring together in some deeper 
way both human values and AI development. The horizontal axis is 
thus a primary diferentiator; however, we debated other potential 
axes. Other axis candidates included generalizability vs specifcity 
of the AI model; ‘agency’ vs ‘Agency,’ the small ‘a’ refecting in-
dividual agency, choice, and awareness in the moment of use, the 
large ‘A’ refecting agency over time due to a broader and deeper 
consideration of factors impacting groups and societies. Another 
potentially revealing scale ran from individual use through to group, 
organizational and societal impact. Another potential diferentiator 
was contextual richness – the extent to which context of use is 
foregrounded in all its specifcity, which tends to be revealing of 
the kinds of reductions and choices made in AI design. 
We found the clearest way to map out the space of the research 
was to add a second vertical dimension refecting the spectrum of 
whether AI was under design or situated in use. This axis allows 
expression of whether AI is being studied in use in society to reveal 
its faws, limitations, and challenges, or whether it is being designed. 
AI designed in the lab would be represented at the lower end of the 
axis whereas AI being ‘designed in use,’ informed by much fuller 
consideration of context of use and intertwined with consultations 
with users, inhabits the middle of the axis. Design-after-design [88], the notion of how users appropriate and alter fnished designs to 
their own ends also inhabits this middle area of the axis. The top of 
the vertical axis refects AI being studied in use, to inform design, 
policy, advocacy, or lawmaking or to critique design from a use 
standpoint, but where the focus is understanding use rather than 
design itself. Thus, the vertical axis represents the extent to which 
research is embedded in use or under design, and the center is an 
interesting place inhabited by design work that is enmeshed within 
rich contexts. 
Naturally, not all research is described neatly by one label or fts 
on only one area of the map, however the map was the clearest way 
that we found to convey the landscape of research. We underscore 
that higher dimensional maps are possible. For example, our pre-
ferred third axis candidate would be generality versus specifcity 
of the AI model. Specifc models are easier to check, more likely to 
involve humans-in-the-loop of labelling, training, testing, verifying 
etc., and the scope of model use is narrower. General models, such 
as dominant language models, potentially have much greater appli-
cability to mimic humans, create deepfakes, and to be applied far 
from their intended contexts of use or their data sources. While any 
combination of axes and further dimensions are possible, we chose 
two axes that seemed to best reveal human-centered concerns. 
5.2 How the Major Research Areas Inhabit the 
Map 
The four major research areas making up the quadrants of the 
map are (I) Explainable and Interpretable AI, (ii) Human-Centered 
Design Methods, (iii) Human-AI Teaming, and a large agglomera-
tion of research areas that emerged as distinct in our review but 
together make up what we call (iv) Ethical AI. Finally, emerging 
in the middle is a research area we refer to as Interaction with AI, 
which encompasses designing contestable AI systems. 
We begin with the emergent middle area of Interaction with 
AI. This research explicitly addresses the need to understand how 
people will interact with inferred models in embodied and situated 
contexts. Although there is some overlap with Human-AI Teaming 
approaches (including interactive AI and HITL), Human-AI Teaming 
approaches tend to defne the context in which human input is 
sought to closely align with the original system intentions. In a 
departure, Interaction with AI research investigates how people are 
using AI systems creatively, how they can contest AI systems, and 
how AI system use in the wild can inform design, in ways hitherto 
unimagined by the AI creators. Given the growth of artifcial general 
intelligence, with applications that, for example, generate text and 
images in response to text requests, with little understanding of 
the user’s context of use, this area is likely to grow quickly. 
Research into AI use in situated and embodied contexts can un-
cover how to restore agency to users [39] that may overtly seem to 
have been lost to AI models derived from digital “data contexts”. Re-
search can work out all the questions people ask and workarounds 
that they make to accommodate the AI model and determine proto-
cols for how AI should be used in the world. Research can uncover 
user needs in order to inform AI design, and workplace training, to 
ensure informed use of systems with embedded AI. 
Another goal for research in Interaction with AI is better in-
teraction. Harper’s [121] discussion of text autocorrect systems