CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Tara Capel and Margot Brereton 
map the evolving feld of HCAI in its current state as we interpreted 
it from the literature. Maps help to see the relationships between 
the various approaches, methods, and tools [249]. 
2 HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF AI AND HCAI 
The defnitions of both AI and HCAI are varied and evolving in part 
due to the technical evolution of AI techniques and the correspond-
ing evolution of HCI. Defned broadly, “AI comprises any technique 
that enables computers to mimic human behavior and reproduce 
or excel over human decision-making to solve complex tasks inde-
pendently or with minimal human intervention” [140, 237]. 
2.1 Early Knowledge-Based AI, Debates about 
Context, and the Emergence of a Situated HCI Paradigm 
Early AI techniques employed in the 1980s relied on a knowledge-
based approach in which computers could automatically reason 
upon knowledge statements and logical inference rules coded into 
formal languages [39, 112]. However, the paradigm was limited by 
the difculty of explicating knowledge in detail, especially tacit 
knowledge [46]. HCI scholars have argued this is because human 
reasoning is embodied, situated, in a social context and involves 
actions, often improvised, in the world, the complexity of which 
formal models cannot replicate [39, 84, 281]. Moreover, context 
itself is rarely delineable, stable and separable from activity so that 
it can be readily defned as a form of information to be encoded, the 
dominant positivist view. An alternative, phenomenological view 
prevalent in HCI research is that context arises from activities, is a 
relational property that holds between objects and activities, with 
the scope of relevant contextual features defned dynamically [85]. 
This latter view refects a shift in HCI research towards a more 
situated paradigm [ 122], asking how machines can be designed as 
efective resources for human situated action, rather than trying to 
automate human reasoning. However, new techniques in machine 
learning (ML) have revolutionized AI. 
2.2 Machine Learning, Increasing Computing Power and Data Availability, and Humans-in-the-Loop 
Rather than codifying and programming knowledge into computers, 
machine learning “seeks to automatically learn meaningful relation-
ships and patterns from examples and observations” [140], thereby 
automating the task of analytic model building through inferential 
statistics [38]. Machine learning has been fueled by new program-
ming frameworks, access to the needed computing power, and data 
availability. By learning from previous examples and extracting 
regularities from massive (high-dimensional) datasets, machine 
learning can help to produce reliable and repeatable classifcations 
to inform decisions [140]. 
In terms of human involvement, supervised learning requires 
human efort to label datasets to train algorithms to make the right 
predictions. In forms of human-in-the-loop and interactive machine 
learning [97], humans may be involved in classifying training, test-
ing, tuning/correcting, and validating machine learning algorithms. 
By contrast, in unsupervised learning, algorithms are not given any labels and fnd structure in the input and memorize data in their 
own ways, by creating features in multiple layers of an artifcial 
neural network [112]. 
2.3 Deep Learning and Human Interpretability 
“Deep learning” [112] uses highly scalable algorithms to build mod-
els which are more complex and difcult for machine learning 
algorithms (like linear regression, logistic regression, decision trees 
etc.) to model. Using large, unstructured data, such as recorded 
voice, images, and text, it ofers powerful applications such as voice 
recognition, autonomous vehicle operation and text generation. 
However, it is difcult to know why the underlying artifcial neural 
network constitutes itself in the way that it does, what features of 
data it thinks are important, and the basis for its decisions, since 
there is no clear mapping to parameters which have a physical 
meaning or interpretation. Hence, the black box nature of deep 
learning raises concerns of accuracy and bias. 
2.4 The “Contextualized Human” 
By operating over vast quantities of data, collected from the real 
world, video data and from social contexts such as social media, 
machine learning and deep learning have access to much richer 
contexts than early forms of symbolic AI, and the computing power 
and statistical techniques to derive meaning from it. Due to digitally 
recorded aspects of context in massive and rich datasets, human rea-
soning, interaction and language can be mimicked and simulated. 
As Blackwell [39] notes, this “reduces the contextualized human to a 
machine-like source of interaction data. Rather than cognition that 
is not situated, our new concern should be interaction that is not 
humane”. Blackwell [39] argues the need for “humane interaction”, 
identifying concerns ranging from authorship, fair attribution, re-
ward, self-determination and control. Its richness notwithstanding, 
context gleaned from sensor data, video, social media etc. is still 
highly selective, reduced and diferent from the social and embod-
ied perceptions of people in the real world. Thus, Blackwell [39] 
further argues the need for improved conceptual constructs that 
can be used to account for a new designed relationship between 
user intentions and inferred models. 
2.5 From AI to HCAI research 
While AI research has sought to replicate and replace human per-
formance, or simulate and emulate humans and their behavior (e.g., 
conversational agents, humanoid robots etc.), its increased sophis-
tication has fueled an interest in HCAI, which takes aspects of the 
human user/partner/operator, their values and agency into account. 
In response to this shift towards HCAI, international bodies such 
as the European Union have started to address the implications of 
AI within society, advocating for the creation of human-centered AI. 
Stanford University, UC Berkeley and MIT have established HCAI 
research institutes, advocating for AI that is humanistic and ethical, 
and that does not replace humans, but rather enhances them [266– 
269, 313]. For example, Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI 
advocates for three overarching objectives that HCAI research and 
design should follow: “to technically refect the depth characterized 
by human intelligence; to improve human capabilities rather than 
replace them; and to focus on AI’s impact on humans” [313]. In line