What is Human-Centered about Human-Centered AI? A Map of the Research Landscape CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany 
and/or undermined by AI. They found that values such as truth, 
impartiality and originality were important to journalists, and that 
those values should be embodied in systems designed for them. 
4.4.2 Contextual Morality. The concept of contextual morality 
builds on the work exploring the intersection between AI and hu-
man values by recognizing that values difer between people and 
considers the efect of context on user expectations and behavior 
[229, 292]. Within the review, these considerations are applied to 
autonomous decision-making systems, such as autonomous vehi-
cles [229], investigating ongoing social concerns around the ethical 
nature of the decisions autonomous systems may make within 
evolving contexts such as accidents, for example whether an ac-
tion prioritizes the life of the driver, third party vehicle, passenger, 
pedestrian etc. 
4.4.3 Trustworthy and Transparent AI.. As AI systems permeate 
a broader range of application domains and work in collaboration 
with humans, there are important considerations for both trust-
worthy and transparent AI. One essential element is disclosing 
how system data was gathered and how the algorithms and models 
were designed from that data [126]. AI systems can also behave in 
unexpected and inconsistent ways, which can impact the trustwor-
thiness of the system to the user, therefore it is also important for AI 
systems to explain their outputs in a way that is both understand-
able and interpretable to the user [47, 80, 133, 294]. Transparent 
AI also encourages data scientists to refect on their positionality 
in context with other stakeholders, as well as the models that also 
embody a perspective, so that their decisions can be less biased 
and more transparent [ 52]. The relationship between trustworthy 
and transparent AI remains inconsistent. While transparency is 
important for building trust in AI, it does not always make a system 
more trustworthy, particularly in instances where the system is 
incorrect, or the explanation does not align with expectations. 
4.4.4 Methods of Documenting Algorithms, Models, and Data Ori-
gins. Transparency can be achieved through data or model cards, 
documentation of the data and who is represented within it, as 
well as how the model was made, assumptions that were made, 
how the model behaves in relation to diverse groups of people, 
and how well the model performs in relation to those groups 
[45, 55, 68, 105, 191, 222]. The focus on efective documentation 
of data among Ethical AI researchers arises from the impact that 
data quality has on AI models, and the problem that in AI research, 
“Everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work” [240]. 
4.4.5 Human Perceptions and Judgements about AI.. Research that 
investigated human perceptions and judgements about AI had a par-
ticular focus on trust and acceptance of AI systems, both from the 
perspective of data scientists and non-experts. This work explored 
how AI can be designed, built, and implemented in a way that is 
explainable, interpretable, and transparent so it leads to a greater 
sense of trust and acceptance of AI [87, 152, 166, 180, 264, 304]. 
4.4.6 Roles, Responsibilities, and Capabilities of AI.. Research into 
human roles and responsibilities when using AI systems is helping 
to create methods and frameworks to determine the capabilities 
people need in an AI-infused world, and what or who is accountable 
for the behavior and outcome of an AI system [9, 73, 183]. This work supports trustworthy and transparent AI and is needed to ensure 
uptake of AI systems. Medical felds such as radiology and radiation 
therapy have started to introduce AI education to clinicians, and are 
concerned with workforce training, user interaction, explainability 
and critical reasoning, protocols for data sharing for clinical use, 
and quality assurance. 
4.4.7 Autonomy and Human Agency. Autonomy and human 
agency consider how AI systems can support or hinder human 
autonomy [161], for example consenting to your data being used 
in training systems. Work within this theme also addressed the 
impacts on loss of autonomy [212], including demotivating people, 
damaging mental health, undermining interpersonal relationships, 
and reducing self-efcacy. 
4.4.8 Machine Ethics. Machine ethics is concerned with the way in 
which machines are imbued with ethical considerations, how these 
ethical considerations adapt over time, and the consequences of 
those ethical considerations for how the machine behaves towards 
other machines and humans. It endeavors to create AI that is guided 
by ethical principles both from a top-down approach where the 
machine applies a set of pre-defned ethical considerations as well 
as a bottom-up approach where it can learn new considerations 
[57]. 
4.4.9 Inclusion of Humans in Building AI to Mitigate Ethical Issues. 
Work in this area argues for the inclusion of humans in building 
AI as a potential means of mitigating ethical issues [168, 234]. Of 
importance are those who will be impacted by the deployment of 
an AI system, particularly in the development of requirements for 
AI to be ethical [234]. 
4.4.10 Legal vs Ethical. Ethical AI is not limited to what is permis-
sible by law and often goes beyond legal requirements. Work in this 
area considers the interplay between ethical and legal approaches 
to AI, particularly around the regulation of AI [182], and advocates 
for the progression of legal frameworks in the construction of AI 
to keep up with ethical implications [54]. 
4.4.11 Bias and Fairness. Work within bias and fairness explores 
the implications of bias in AI systems and how AI can reinforce 
societal bias through data and algorithms, with a goal to create 
AI systems that are fairer and more accurate [40, 258]. This work 
also looks beyond bias towards investigating power diferentials to 
explore the root causes of bias beyond data and algorithms [188]. 
4.4.12 Human Rights. Human rights HCI research explores the 
impacts of AI on people’s human rights, particularly people’s right 
to privacy in contexts such as health and surveillance, and the im-
pacts of biased data and algorithms within contexts where privacy 
is paramount [70, 210, 265]. 
4.4.13 Posthumanism. Posthumanism addresses the human 
supremacist rhetoric in discussions around AI ethics and policy, 
which privileges human interest over others (such as endangered 
species, forests etc.) as a matter of public policy. Work in this area 
that engages with HCAI explores the blurry dichotomy between 
humans and machine agents [94]. 
4.4.14 Challenges for Ethical AI.. Our analysis revealed considera-
tions of trust, transparency, autonomy, agency, privacy, morality