Theorem 4. Fix a state distribution ρ, a state-action distribution ν, and a comparator policy π∗.
We consider the NPG method (33)with the step sizes satisfying η0≥1−γ
γD∗
0andηk+1≥1
γηk.
Suppose that Assumptions 7,8and9hold. Then we have for all k≥0,
E/bracketleftBig
Vρ(π(k))/bracketrightBig
−Vρ(π∗)≤/parenleftbigg
1−1
ϑρ/parenrightbiggk2
1−γ+√Cν(ϑρ+1)
1−γ/parenleftbig√ǫstat+√ǫapprox/parenrightbig
.
Compared to Theorem 3, our convergence guarantees for Q-NPG and NPG have the same
convergence rate and error ﬂoor, and the same type of assumpt ions.
Now we compare Theorem 4with Theorem 29 in Agarwal et al. [2021] for the NPG analysis.
The main diﬀerences are similar to those for Q-NPG as summari zed right after Theorem 1: Their
convergence rate is sublinear while ours is linear; they ass ume uniformly bounded φs,aandw(k)
while we require bounded concentrability coeﬃcient Cνdue to diﬀerent proof techniques; they use
diminishing step sizes and we use geometrically increasing ones. Moreover, Theorem 4requires
bounded approximation error, which is a stronger assumptio n than the bounded transfer error used
by their Theorem 29, but we do not need the assumption on bound ed relative condition number.
We note that the bounded relative condition number required byAgarwal et al. [2021, Theo-
rem 29] must hold for the covariance matrix of ¯φ(k)
s,afor allk≥0because the centered feature maps
¯φ(k)
s,adepends on the iterates θ(k). This is in contrast to our Assumption 3, where we use a single
ﬁxed covariance matrix for Q-NPG that is independent to the i terates, as deﬁned in ( 24).
In addition, the inequalities in ( 36) only involve half of the state-action visitation distribu tions
listed in ( 30), i.e., the ﬁrst and the fourth terms. From ( 31), the upper bound of Cνis obtained
only through ( 6), which is a property of ˜dπitself for all policy π∈∆(A)S. Thus, Cνin (36)
can share the same upper bound in ( 31) independent to the use of the algorithm Q-NPG or NPG.
Consequently, our concentrability coeﬃcient assumption i s weaker than Assumption 2 in Cayci et al.
[2021] which studies the linear convergence of NPG with entropy re gularization for the log-linear
policy class. The reason is that the bound on Cνin (31) does not depend on the policies throughout
the iterations thanks to the use of ˜d(k)instead of ¯d(k)(see Remark 1as well). See also Section 5.2
for a thorough discussion on the concentrability coeﬃcient Cν.
Similar to Theorem 2, we also obtain a sublinear rate for NPG while using an uncons trained
constant step size.
Theorem 5. Fix a state distribution ρ, an state-action distribution νand an optimal policy π∗. We
consider the NPG method (33)with any constant step size ηk=η >0. Suppose that Assumptions 7,
8and9hold. Then we have for all k≥0,
1
kk−1/summationdisplay
t=0E/bracketleftBig
Vρ(π(t))/bracketrightBig
−Vρ(π∗)≤1
(1−γ)k/parenleftbiggD∗
0
η+2ϑρ/parenrightbigg
+√Cν(ϑρ+1)
1−γ/parenleftbig√ǫstat+√ǫapprox/parenrightbig
.
Compared to Theorem 2, again here we require π∗to be an optimal policy for the same reason
as indicated in Footnote 2. Furthermore our sublinear convergence guarantees for bot h Q-NPG and
NPG are the same. Compared to Theorem 29 in Agarwal et al. [2021], the main diﬀerences are also
similar to those for Q-NPG as summarized right after Theorem 2: our convergence rate improves
fromO(1/√
k)toO(1/k); they use a diminishing step size of order O(1/√
k)while we can take any
constant step size we want.
15