Equation ( 21) provides the lower bound1
1−γforϑρ. Such lower bound can be achieved when the
target state distribution ρsatisﬁes that ρ=dπ∗(ρ)whereπ∗is an optimal policy. The advantage
of this case is that, not only it implies the best linear conve rgence rate, more importantly, the
fast linear convergence rate is known to be γ. So we know the convergence rate explicitly without
any estimation, even though the optimal policy or the policy iterates are unknown before training.
Hence, we know when to stop running the algorithm. Lan[2022] only considers the case when
ρ=dπ∗(ρ)and we are able to recover the same linear convergence rate γin their result.
Furthermore, the convergence performance Vρ(π(k))−Vρ(π∗)depends on the target state distri-
butionρ. If the optimal policy π∗is independent to the target state distribution ρwhich is usually
the case in RL problems, then we are always allowed to ﬁx ρ=dπ∗(ρ)for the analysis without
knowing ρandπ∗and derive this best linear convergence performance with ra teγ, because we use
the initial state-action distribution νin training which is independent to ρ.
Finally, from ( 21), ifd(k)converges to d∗, thenϑkconverges to 1. This might imply superlinear
convergence results as Section 4.3 in Xiao[2022]. In this case, the notion of the distribution mismatch
coeﬃcients ϑρno longer exists for the superlinear convergence analysis. In other words, it is no
longer concerned.
Concentrability coeﬃcients Cν.The issue of having (potentially large) concentrability co ef-
ﬁcients is unavoidable in all the fast linear convergence an alysis of the inexact NPG that we are
aware of, including even the tabular setting (e.g., Lan[2022] and Xiao[2022]) and the log-linear
policy setting ( Cayci et al. [2021],Chen and Theja Maguluri [2022] and ours).
First, in the fast linear convergence analysis of inexact NP G, the concentrability coeﬃcients
appear from the errors, including the statistical error and the approximation error. Thus, one way
to avoid having the concentrability coeﬃcients appear is to consider the exact NPG in the tabular
setting (See Theorem 10 in Xiao[2022]). Because the tabular setting makes no approximation error
and the exact NPG makes no statistical error. We consider the inexact NPG with the log-linear
policy. Consequently, we have the concentrability coeﬃcie nts multiplied by both the statistical error
ǫstatand the approximation error ( ǫbiasin Assumption 2orǫapprox in Assumption 5and8).
To remove the concentrability coeﬃcients, one has to make st rong assumptions on the errors
with the L∞supremum norm. In the tabular setting, Lan[2022] and Xiao[2022] assume that
∝ba∇dbl/hatwideQ(π)−Q(π)∝ba∇dbl∞≤ǫstat. The cons of such strong assumption requires high sample com plexity and
is explained in details in Section 6.1below. In the log-linear policy setting, Chen and Theja Maguluri
[2022] assume that∝ba∇dblQs(θ(k))−Φw(k)
⋆∝ba∇dbl∞≤ǫbiasfor the approximation error, which is a very strong
assumption in the function approximation regime. Due to the supremum norm, ǫbiasis unlikely
to be small, especially for large action spaces. Under this s trong assumption, Lan[2022],Xiao
[2022] and Chen and Theja Maguluri [2022] are able to eliminate the concentrability coeﬃcients.
To avoid assuming such strong assumptions, Cayci et al. [2021] and our paper consider the expected
L2errors in the log-linear policy setting, which are much weak er assumptions, especially much more
reasonable for the approximation error ǫbiascompared to the one in Chen and Theja Maguluri [2022].
The tradeoﬀ is that, the concentrability coeﬃcients can not be eliminated in this case both in Cayci
et al. [2021] and our results.
Furthermore, as mentioned right after Theorem 4, under the expected error assumptions (As-
sumption 7and8), our concentrability coeﬃcient Cνis better presented than the one in Assumption
2 inCayci et al. [2021] in the sense that it is independent to the policies througho ut the iterations
thanks to the use of ˜d(k)instead of ¯d(k)(which is mentioned in Remark 1as well) and is controllable
18