are aware of the concurrent work of Alfano and Rebeschini [2022]. They only analyze the Q-NPG
method and achieve similar linear convergence results as ou r Theorem 1. In particular, their result
in Theorem 4.7 has a better concentrability coeﬃcient compa red to our Theorem 1. However, their
Assumption 4.6 assumes that the relative condition number u pper bounds a time-varying ratio
which depends on the iterates, while our Assumption 3is independent to the iterates, as deﬁned
in (25). Furthermore, they only consider the case when the initial state distribution is the same
as the target state distribution, while our analysis genera lizes with any target state distribution,
which is extensively discussed on the distribution mismatc h coeﬃcients in Section 5.2. See Table 1
a complete overview of NPG in the function approximation reg ime.
Fast linear convergence of other policy gradient methods. Diﬀerent to the PMD analysis
approach, by leveraging a gradient dominance property [ Polyak ,1963,Łojasiewicz ,1963], fast linear
convergence results have also been established for the PG me thods under diﬀerent settings, such as
the linear quadratic control problems [ Fazel et al. ,2018] and the exact PG method with softmax
tabular policy and entropy regularization [ Mei et al. ,2020,Yuan et al. ,2022]. Such gradient
domination property is widely explored by Bhandari and Russo [2019] to identify more general
structural MDP settings. Linear convergence of PG can also b e obtained through exact line search
[Bhandari and Russo ,2021, Theorem 1 (a)] or by exploiting non-uniform smoothness [ Mei et al. ,
2021].
Alternatively, by considering a general strongly-concave utility function of the state-action oc-
cupancy measure and by exploiting the hidden convexity of th e problem, Zhang et al. [2020] also
achieve the linear convergence of a variational PG method. W hen the object is relaxed to a general
concave utility function, Zhang et al. [2021] still achieve the linear convergence by leveraging the
hidden convexity of the problem and by adding variance reduc tion to the PG method.
7 Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, for both NPG and Q-NPG methods applied for the l og-linear policy, we establish the
linear convergence results with non-adaptive geometrical ly increasing step sizes and the sublinear
convergence results with arbitrary large constant step siz es. Our work is the ﬁrst step of showing
that the policy mirror descent proof techniques used in Xiao[2022] can be extended in function
approximation regime.
The main focus of this paper was the theoretical analysis of N PG method. The results we have
obtained open up several experimental questions related to parameter settings for NPG and Q-NPG.
We leave such questions as an important future work to furthe r support our theoretical ﬁndings.
An interesting application from our work is to investigate t he sample complexity of natural
actor-critic with our PMD analysis. Indeed, our paper obtai nsw(k)by a regression solver. One
can also use temporal diﬀerence (TD) learning (e.g., Cayci et al. [2021],Chen and Theja Maguluri
[2022],Telgarsky [2022]) with Markovian sampling to achieve similar O(1/ǫ2)sample complexity
result. The performance analysis of TD learning will be expr essed for ǫstat, which directly imply
the total sample complexity results through our theorems.
One natural question is whether we can extend our analysis to the general policy classes. Here we
provide one possible way. It can be extended by using a simila r compatible function approximation
22