[Schulman et al. ,2015,Lillicrap et al. ,2016,Mnih et al. ,2016,Schulman et al. ,2017,Haarnoja
et al.,2018,Tomar et al. ,2022].
Motivated by the success of NPG in practice, there is now a con certed eﬀort to develop conver-
gence theories for the NPG method. Neu et al. [2017] provide the ﬁrst interpretation of NPG as a
mirror descent (MD) method [ Nemirovski and Yudin ,1983,Beck and Teboulle ,2003]. By leveraging
diﬀerent techniques for analyzing MD, it has been establish ed that NPG converges to the global
optimum in the tabular case [ Agarwal et al. ,2021,Khodadadian et al. ,2021b ,Xiao,2022] and some
more general settings [ Shani et al. ,2020,Vaswani et al. ,2022,Grudzien et al. ,2022,Chen and
Theja Maguluri ,2022]. In order to get a fast linear convergence rate for NPG, seve ral recent works
consider the regularized NPG methods, such as the entropy-r egularized NPG [ Cen et al. ,2021] and
other convex regularized NPG methods [ Lan,2022,Zhan et al. ,2021]. By designing appropriate
step sizes, Khodadadian et al. [2021b ] and Xiao[2022] obtain linear convergence of NPG without
regularization (See Section 6for a thorough review. In particular, Table 1provides a complete
overview of our results.). However, all these linear conver gence results are limited in the tabular
setting (direct parametrization). It remains unclear whet her this same linear convergence rate can
be established in the function approximation regime.
In this paper we provide an aﬃrmative answer to this question for the log-linear policy class.
Our approach is based on the framework of compatible function approximation [Sutton et al. ,2000,
Kakade ,2001], which was extensively developed by Agarwal et al. [2021]. Using this framework,
variants of NPG with log-linear policies can be written as po licy mirror descent (PMD) methods
with inexact evaluations of the advantage function or Q-fun ction (giving rise to NPG or Q-NPG
respectively). Then by extending a recent analysis of PMD [ Xiao,2022], we obtain a non-asymptotic
linear convergence of both NPG and Q-NPG with log-linear pol icies. A distinctive feature of this
approach is the use of a simple, non-adaptive geometrically increasing step size, without resorting
to entropy or other (strongly) convex regularization.
1.1 Outline and Contributions
In Section 2we review the fundamentals of Markov decision processes (MD P), and describe the log-
linear policy class and the general NPG method. In Section 3we explain the compatible function
approximation framework and show that both NPG and Q-NPG can be expressed as inexact versions
of the PMD method.
Our main contributions start from Section 4, which contains our results on Q-NPG. We present
convergence results of Q-NPG in two diﬀerent settings: one a ssuming bounded transfer error and
a relative condition number (Section 4.1) and the other assuming bounded approximation error
(Section 4.2). In both cases, we obtain linear convergence up to an error ﬂ oor towards the global
optima. The extensions of the analysis of PMD [ Xiao,2022] are highly nontrivial and require quite
diﬀerent techniques (see Section 6.1for more details). Compared with the sublinear convergence
results of Agarwal et al. [2021], we do not need a projection step nor the assumption of bound ed
feature maps. However, our results depends on some distribu tion mismatch coeﬃcients and has
larger error ﬂoors. In Section 4.3, by further assuming that the feature maps are bounded and
have a non-singular covariance matrix, we obtain an ˜O(1/ǫ2)sample complexity for Q-NPG with
log-linear policies. In particular, our sample complexity analysis also ﬁxes errors of previous work.
In Section 5, we analyze the NPG method under the assumption of bounded ap proximation
error, and show that it also enjoys linear convergence up to a n error ﬂoor as well as an ˜O(1/ǫ2)
sample complexity. As a by product of our analysis, we also ob tain sublinear anO(1/k)convergence
3