Grid Search, Random Search, Genetic Algorithm: A Big Comparison for NAS
Model params Evaluating
Conv cells Dense cells Size Accuracy % Score
10 1 0.49M 85.7 0.62
4 3 2.75M 83.6 0.72
6 1 0.73M 83.5 0.6
Table 3: Results of Genetic Algorithm | Top 3 models
Regarding hyperparameter optimization, it's dicult to say which of the above algo-
rithms will show the best results. If a model and search space is not too large then the grid
search or random search may be a good choice to do that. But if a model has too many
layers and large search space, then the evolutionary algorithm may be the best choice.
5.1 Summary
Grid search is a brute force algorithm. This makes a complete search for a given subset of the
hyperparameter space. If the search space is too large, do not choose this algorithm. That
is, we will train and test every possible combination of network parameters we provided.
The random search maybe a little faster, but it does not guarantee us the best results.
Finally, if our search space is large then the best choice is the evolutionary algorithm.
It also takes a long time to run, but we can control it over the number of generations and
length of the population. Each individual represents a solution in the search space for a
given problem. Each individual is coded as a nite length vector of components. These
variable components are analogous to genes. Thus a chromosome (individual) is composed
of several genes (variable components).
When there are too many parameters for optimization, the genetic algorithm performs
faster than others. Choose this one and the evolution will do all for you.
References
Han Cai, Jiacheng Yang, Weinan Zhang, Song Han, and Yong Yu. Path-level network
transformation for ecient architecture search. CoRR , abs/1806.02639, 2018. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1806.02639 .
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A
survey, 2018.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks, 2014.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition, 2015a.
9