Grid Search, Random Search, Genetic Algorithm: A Big Comparison for NAS
hyperparameters of every layer (e.g., kernel size and lters for a convolutional layer).
In this paper, we use the next approach:
1) Dene our basic architecture, as illustrated in Figure 2.
2) Build a new architecture by adding the convolutional and dense cells (Figure 3) to
the basic architecture. A dense cell is just a fully-connected layer with ReLU activation.
The choice of the search space determines the diculty of the optimization problem:
even for the case of the search space based on a single cell with xed architecture, the
optimization problem remains dicult (Elsken et al. (2018)) and relatively high-dimensional
(since more complex models tend to perform better, resulting in more design choices).
3. Search strategy
Grid Search. The traditional method of hyperparameters optimization is a grid search,
which simply makes a complete search over a given subset of the hyperparameters space
of the training algorithm (Figure 4). Because the machine learning algorithm parameter
space may include spaces with real or unlimited values for some parameters, it is possible
that we need to specify a boundary to apply a grid search. Grid search suers from high
dimensional spaces, but often can easily be parallelized, since the hyperparameter values
that the algorithm works with are usually independent of each other.
Random Search. It overrides the complete selection of all combinations by their random
selection. This can be easily applied to discrete cases, but the method can be generalized
to continuous and mixed spaces. Random search can outperform a grid search, especially
if only a small number of hyperparameters aect the performance of the machine learning
algorithm.
Genetic Algorithm. The genetic algorithm is an evolutionary search algorithm used to
solve optimization and modeling problems by sequentially selecting, combining, and varying
parameters using mechanisms that resemble biological evolution. Genetic algorithms simu-
late the process of natural selection which means those species who can adapt to changes
in their environment can survive and reproduce and go to the next generation.
Each generation consist of a population of individuals and each individual represents a
point in search space and possible solution. Each individual is represented as a string of
character/integer/
oat/bits. This string is analogous to the chromosome.
The genetic algorithm begins with a randomly generated population of chromosomes.
Then, it makes a selection process and recombination, based on each chromosome tness
(score). Parent genetic materials are recombined to generate child chromosomes produc-
ing the next generation. This process is iterated until some stopping criterion is reached
(Loussaief and Abdelkrim (2018)).
4. Experiments and Results
Dataset. In our experiments we use the CIFAR-10 dataset with data preprocessing and
augmentation procedures. This dataset consists of 50,000 training images and 10,000 test
images. We rst preprocess the data by mean and standart deviation normalization. Ad-
3