Grid Search, Random Search, Genetic Algorithm: A Big Comparison for NAS
Grid Search, Random Search, Genetic Algorithm: A Big
Comparison for NAS
Petro Liashchynskyi p.liashchynskyi@st.tneu.edu.ua
Department of Computer Engineering
Ternopil National Economic University
Ternopil, 46003, Ukraine
Pavlo Liashchynskyi
Department of Computer Engineering
Ternopil National Economic University
Ternopil, 46003, Ukraine
Abstract
In this paper, we compare the three most popular algorithms for hyperparameter opti-
mization ( Grid Search, Random Search, and Genetic Algorithm ) and attempt to use them
for neural architecture search (NAS). We use these algorithms for building a convolutional
neural network (search architecture). Experimental results on CIFAR-10 dataset further
demonstrate the performance dierence between compared algorithms. The comparison re-
sults are based on the execution time of the above algorithms and accuracy of the proposed
models.
Keywords: Neural architecture search, grid search, random search, genetic algorithm,
hyperparameter optimization
1. Introduction
Over the last few years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and their varieties have seen
great results on a variety of machine learning problems and applications (Shin et al. (2016);
Krizhevsky et al. (2012); Wu (2019); Xu et al. (2014); Goodfellow et al. (2014)). However,
each of the currently known architectures is designed by human experts in machine learning
(Simonyan and Zisserman (2014); Szegedy et al. (2014); He et al. (2015a)). Today, the
number of tasks that can be solved using neural networks is growing rapidly and designing a
neural network architecture becomes a long, slow and expensive process. It's a big challenge
to design a good neural network.
Typical CNN architecture consists of several convolution, pooling, and fully-connected
layers. While designing a network architecture, an expert has to make a lot of design
choices: the number of layers of each type (convolution, pooling, dense, etc.), the ordering
of the layers, the hyperparameters for each layer, the receptive eld size, stride, padding for
a convolution layer, etc.
Many kinds of research in the eld of so-called automated machine learning (Auto-ML)
have been made (Zhong et al. (2017); Cai et al. (2018)). Zoph and Le (2016) propose a
reinforcement learning-based method for neural architecture search. Hebbal et al. (2019)
1arXiv:1912.06059v1  [cs.LG]  12 Dec 2019