Index-11 
 TinyML Applications  Enabling machine learning/AI algorithms on embedded devices will lead to innovation across industry, consumer, and military spaces. As TinyML research and development accelerate across industry and academia, the list of domains and new applications will expand fast. Adding a layer of intelligence to embedded devices will proliferate the applications in domains that significantly depend on IoT and embedded technology, including healthcare, industrial monitoring, and consumer electronics. This section discusses some of the domains where TinyML applications are expected to grow in the near future.  5.1 Healthcare TinyML has great potential to enhance various monitoring and personal health products. Wearable devices require a significant power budget for continuous sensing and streaming of a person’s physiological and activity data, which requires uninterrupted connectivity and privacy protection. Compact, pre-trained inference models on device for signal denoising, temporal analysis, and classification based on TinyML can provide a comprehensive assessment of collected personal data in real-time, effectively avoiding the continuous data streaming. The development of low-power, highly accurate, real-time inference algorithms for wearable devices will be especially crucial for more complex, data-rich physiological sensors, such as ECG, which still pose a significant challenge for today’s wearable technology. Several companies explore TinyML-type frameworks to enhance various personal health products, such as hearing aids [29]. Similar trends are expected for other personal health and well-being applications, such as vision enhancement or gait tracking. Multi-sensor data fusion and deep neural network inference on an embedded device will enable continuous monitoring and assessment of a person’s well-being and mental health, thereby enhancing the ways to treat people with various mental conditions, such as dementia, depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder.   5.2 Surveillance  Currently, TinyML focuses mostly on developing neural network algorithms for computer vision and audio processing, which are the foundation of surveillance applications. Object detection, person detection, face detection, simple activity recognition, and voice activity detection are examples of tasks that can be performed with high accuracy by running TinyML-based code on MCU-powered devices. TinyML will enable the development of new types of ubiquitous, lightweight, and low-cost surveillance, monitoring, and identification applications. It is particularly suitable for applications where a simple, classified answer is needed (such as person detected or not) as opposed to providing full contextual information.  5.3 Embedded Security Cyber-physical systems and IoT are increasingly becoming the targets of cyber-attacks. Embedded security is becoming one of the fastest-growing fields that addresses the vulnerabilities of these systems. Data analytics on edge devices is becoming crucial in distinguishing between normal and unexpected network traffic patterns, understanding the type and souce of threat, and addressing cyber-attacks. The embedded device may run pre-trained machine learning models to detect the anomalies in network traffic patterns (such as unexpected activity levels over time, suspicious