Index-5 The typical application use cases commonly assume the sporadic events (such as when the object of interest is present/not present), which further constrains the system design by requiring that the peak memory usage during the detected event does not exceed the limited SRAM memory. Peak memory usage is the maximum amount of total memory used during inference, including memory needed to store the neural network’s activation maps. To perform fast inferences, neural network activations should be preferably stored in the fast SRAM memory. If large transient activations require space beyond SRAM they can be stored in slower off-chip memory, typically causing long wait times [5].  To estimate peak memory usage, the model must be analyzed in terms of multiply-add operations per inference. Then, considering the speed of the microprocessor (typically in the range of 100–200 MHz) and the required number of inferences per second, one can calculate the limit for multiply-add operations per inference. This process is used to estimate how fast the deployed neural network model runs on a particular embedded device and how well it can support the targeted application. Another limitation of running TinyML on the microprocessor is limited battery life. To estimate battery life, the energy efficiency of the microcontroller should be considered. In general, energy efficiency depends on the machine learning algorithm’s computational cost and the processing duty cycle. There are many challenges with measuring energy consumption, as different devices can consume drastically different power, making it hard to compare them. Also, often it is hard to understand what falls under the power measurement scope, as different devices use different ways of data preprocessing or additional peripherals that impact energy consumption during the measurements. 
 Overcoming Challenges of Machine Learning on the Edge There are several approaches to overcome the challenges of limited memory and low-speed processing on embedded devices. Some of them include: Model reduction – This is an active research area where the goal is to reduce the size of the neural model to fit it to the microcontroller. Several methods are used, such as model shrinking (reducing the number of network layers), model pruning (setting the low-value weights equal to zero), or parameter quantization.   Lightweight frameworks – Several frameworks are developed by industrial companies and research institutions that provide open source tools for designing and implementing machine learning algorithms on resource-constrained devices. These frameworks include highly efficient inference libraries and workflow processes that simplify the model development and model deployment process to the embedded device. We will further discuss the techniques for model reduction and software frameworks in more details below. 3.1 Model Compression Algorithms  Neural networks were able to achieve dramatic accuracy improvements over the past couple of years, thanks to large models with millions of parameters and the availability of high computing resources. However, these models cannot be directly deployed to the embedded devices with low