Index-7 linear quantization, non-linear (log based) quantization, and k-means clustering, to even single bit quantization for binary-weight neural networks.  3.1.3 Network Compression Compression of network coefficients using lossless coding is discussed in [12], where Huffman coding is applied to quantized weights for further compression, which resulted in the reduction of 20%–30% in memory space needed for network parameter storage.  3.1.4 Knowledge Distillation Knowledge distillation is another way of extracting knowledge representation into a smaller form. Proposed in [16], it refers to the set of methods used to transfer knowledge from a “teacher” model to the much smaller “student” model. It is based on the fact that a smaller model does not have a sufficient capacity to learn all interdependencies of a large dataset so that this knowledge can be transferred from the larger model. The student model is represented as a shallow version of its parent model, and it is trained based on softmax1 output from the parent model using a penalized function. Although the knowledge distillation method produces compressed neural network models, it is limited to models with softmax output. Also, this approach still underperforms compared to other model compression methods. Knowledge distillation techniques are useful when the application involves small data sets or when it requires a significant efficiency improvement.  3.2 Model Selection: Complexity-Accuracy Trade-off The neural network model design starts with careful selection of the initial network model architecture according to the application, which is then subsequently refined during the design process to achieve required model accuracy within limited resource constraints of the embedded device [17]. For example, Table 2 shows various models used for different audio tasks, ranging from the more straightforward task, such as voice activity detection, to the more complex ones, such as speech recognition. According to the table, simple tasks can be accomplished using fully connected layers (FC) and fewer parameters. In contrast, complex tasks are accomplished using recurrent neural networks with LSTM  units and many parameters. Often, the conditions under which the model will operate after deployment need to be taken into account during the network design process. For example, a model for an audio task needs to be robust for different SNR conditions under which a network model may operate, affecting the size of the resulting model.     1 Softmax function is often used as the last activation function of a neural network to normalize the output of a network to a probability distribution over predicted output classes.