Index-8 Task Network Type Network Architecture Number of Parameters Voice activity detection [23] MLP2 60-24-11-2-FC3 5 K Keyword spotting [26] CNN4 1CL5-FCL-3-FCNL6 54 K Speaker recognition [27] CNN 1CL-3-FCNL 234 K Speaker verification [24] RNN7 2x220 GRU8 900 K Speech enhancement [24] RNN 500-1024-1024 FC 500 K Speech recognition [25] RNN 5x465 GRU 10 M Table 2 Various audio tasks and corresponding implementations using various neural network models [17]. Task complexity reflects the size of the neural network model and the number of model parameters.  Understanding of differences and trade-offs between different neural network architectures is critical for the model selection process. For example, multi-layer perception networks usually have a small footprint and are easy to train; however, they often exhibit limited performances in terms of model accuracy. Convolutional neural networks are generally easier to optimize for good performance, and they are successful in low-level feature extractions. On the other side, they often require a large number of operations to converge to a good result. They also use fixed input size data blocks, which is not the best option for processing data that involves temporal dependency, such as audio processing. Recurrent neural networks consider time and therefore perform well on tasks that involve temporal sequences, which makes them particularly suitable for audio tasks. However, the recurrent models usually contain large number of parameters, making them more challenging for  deployment on highly constrained embedded devices. 
 TinyML Frameworks Due to limited resource constraints, MCU-powered devices cannot currently support model training. Instead, the model is first trained in the cloud or on a more powerful device, and then deployed back to the embedded device. However, since it is expected that the number of deployed smart devices will increase exponentially, so will the on-device training become critical for ensuring timely updates of application and security software on embedded devices. A good overview of challenges and directions toward making on-device training possible is provided in [34]. There are three ways to deploy the model to the embedded system: coding by hand, code generation, and ML interpreters [18]. Coding by hand allows for low-level application-specific optimizations; however, it is time-consuming and impractical from the standpoint of limited ability  2 MLP – Multi-layer perception network 3 FC – Fully connected layer 4 CNN – Convolutional neural network 5 CL – Connected layer 6 FCNL – Fully connected layer with nonlinear function 7 RNN – Recurrent neural network 8 GRU – Gated recurrent unit