Index-13 
 TinyML Challenges TinyML is in a very early stage, and the research and development in this field is developing rapidly. Research in this field spans many directions, and its success will depend on the breakthroughs at the intersections of various fields, including machine learning algorithms, computer architecture, and hardware design. Along this way, there are many challenges that this technology faces, including: Hardware and software heterogeneity – Similar to IoT space, there is vast diversity in the type of hardware components and algorithms in the TinyML space, making it hard to understand the trade-offs between different TinyML implementations.  Lack of benchmarking tools – Embedded systems running TinyML-based algorithms need to be compared systematically in order to gain a deep understanding of the TinyML performance. A set of benchmarking tools and methods is required to evaluate, compare, and systematically capture various performance differences between systems. The TinyML community has recently established an organization called TinyMLPerf [28] to provide guidelines and procedures for benchmarking of TinyML systems considering various aspects, such as performance, power consumption, memory usage, and differences in hardware. An excellent overview of challenges associated with comparing different hardware platforms used for TinyML applications is provided in [18].  Adaptation and lifelong learning – In most cases, the software on MCU-powered low-power devices is rarely updated. Once programmed, these devices run the same software during their lifetime. However, as these devices collect data about new events that are not a part of the initial training dataset, the deployed inference models should evolve and reflect new conditions. The need for continuous model update poses a question of integrating new learnings into the evolving model and how to perform the actual model update, as updating the software on many remote devices may be a challenging, and sometimes impossible task. Lack of appropriate datasets – Although there are many well-known public datasets available for training machine learning models, there is still a lack of generally adopted datasets to train ultra-low-power models for embedded devices. Ideally, these datasets should reflect temporal and spatial resolution, noise level and diversity of data that corresponds to data expected from sensors attached to low-power embedded device. Having a standard set of datasets is crucial for systematic development of general practices and algorithms for embedded inference and system performance benchmarking.   Lack of widely accepted models – The widespread adoption of machine learning for the MCU-based class of embedded devices will be possible once the standard, generally accepted set of models is widely available. Similar to MobileNet [1], which became a baseline model for benchmarking different neural network models for mobile edge computing devices, a set of generally applicable TinyML-based learning models developed by the TinyML community can accelerate adoption of TinyML framework. Need for other types of machine learning models – Currently, the TinyML community is mainly focusing on the development of deep neural network models, thanks to their superior performance. However, the framework should explore other types of machine learning algorithms (such as ensemble models, SVM, decision trees, etc.) due to their lower complexity and smaller resource requirements.