Index-2 250 billion microcontrollers deployed today and  is estimated that about 40 billion microcontrollers will be deployed in the next two years [3].  However, in many cases, embedded devices do not process any collected data; instead, the data is transmitted to a remote location for storage and further processing. In some application, this can cause undesired data latency, data loss, and data privacy issues. This prompted research toward understanding the fundamental challenges in deploying machine learning algorithms to embedded devices with limited resources (in terms of processing speed, memory, energy).  Embedded devices usually collect data from various sensors (CMOS cameras, IR cameras, audio, IMU, temperature sensors, chemical sensors, accelerometers, etc.). These embedded devices are often battery-powered and run in a low power range (1 mW or less). In many cases the microprocessor on the device stays underutilized over time, since it usually performs simple processing tasks. The widespread use of embedded MCU-powered devices, their proximity to the physical sources of information through sensors, and underutilized processing capabilities make them highly suitable for the deploying lightweight inference algorithms. This trend gave rise to tiny machine learning (TinyML), which is an emerging embedded technology field that aims to deploy machine learning algorithms to resource constrained, MCU powered devices.  The TinyML community addresses the fundamental challenges of enabling sophisticated machine learning algorithms to operate under heavily constrained resources of embedded devices and performing highly accurate data understanding tasks. To picture this challenge, we refer to Figure 2 that shows the top-1 accuracy of various deep neural network models developed over the past decade. It is important to understand that these models were developed using significant processing resources available at time. The Figure 2 shows that the model accuracy increases as a function of model complexity (presented by the size of a “ball”) and computational complexity. The goal of TinyML is to find ways to adapt these deep learning algorithms for use on MCU-based embedded platforms with significantly fewer resources and to develop supporting practices that will enable easy deployment and high accuracy of deployed models. TinyML will enable innovations in various fields, such as distributed cyber-physical systems, autonomous systems, healthcare, consumer electronics,  and in the general field of artificial intelligence. However, achieving these goals calls for joint solutions from many disciplines, including but not limited to machine learning, computer architecture, signal processing, optimization, and hardware design. The development of TinyML requires collaborative effort between embedded systems community and machine learning community to bring together people with different areas of expertise to establish the directions and work on challenges of this highly