Index-12 traffic types, unknown origin/destination, etc.). Previously undiscovered attacks, for which the model does not have an existing pattern, would be discovered this way. Similarly, software-level vulnerabilities may be addressed by building a learning model to recognize code changes or file changes, which would indicate the need for additional code patching. Distributed systems may exploit novel machine learning approaches, such as federated learning [35] supported by TinyML framework, to build a general model of threat of a cyber-physical system.  Detection of device tampering and unauthorized physical access can be detected using embedded vision or audio processing based on TinyML. 5.4 Industrial Monitoring We are witnessing the rapid development of Industrial Internet practices, seen through advancements in the automation of traditional industrial segments, enhanced connectivity, and smart sensing technology. TinyML technology is well-positioned to support further enhancements of these practices. In many industrial monitoring applications, predictive data analytics can be implemented on embedded devices. TinyML can address the needs for in-place data analytics and time-critical constraints of some industrial monitoring applications. Indoor localization services for asset tracking can be designed based on using neural network models with RF signal inputs that can be periodically retrained using collected RF data for better location accuracy.  5.5 Autonomous Systems Various autonomous systems, such as robotics or autonomous cars, use edge computing to improve performance and safety. TinyML that brings edge computing tasks to small, lightweight, power constrained MCU devices can address design issues of these systems related to restricted power budget or small form factor.  5.6 Augmented/Virtual Reality AR/VR technologies are growing at a rapid rate. These technologies are built around the idea of getting closer to the user by offering enhanced user experience, through various applications from personal assistance, environment sensing, and gaming, to social interaction. The AR/VR technology has to support a much wider range of input and output modalities while considering constraints such as limited power budget, small form factor, and limited bandwidth for data streaming. Leading AR/VR companies are currently looking into using embedded computer vision and TinyML framework to address some of these issues.  5.7 Smart Spaces The goal of smart space applications is to provide services to a user through their interaction with technology that senses the user’s physical environment. The state of the environment and the user are perceived using various sensing technologies and actuators. Smart services should have a high degree of autonomy and adapt to the user’s immediate needs with minimal user intervention. TinyML technology can take part in many tasks of smart space applications while preserving the user’s privacy. For example, embedded computer vision and audio processing can be used for user identification or user activity recognition tasks, such as gesture recognition that can initiate the actions in a smart space environment (e.g., door opening/closing, turning the lights on/off, temperature adjustment).