Index-9 to share knowledge and adopt new shared methods, which may negatively affect the adoption pace of TinyML. Code generation produces the well-optimized code without the significant hand coding effort, by abstracting and automating system-level optimizations. However, each vendor uses its proprietary tools and compilers, which makes portability and comparability a challenge. Finally, ML interpreters are made for portability, as they provide the same abstract structure across different platforms. An ML interpreter is usually a part of a framework that encompasses a set of tools and software libraries for implementing machine learning algorithms on embedded devices with limited processing capabilities, including MCUs. Within a framework, an interpreter is used to call individual kernels (such as convolution, padding, etc.), which can be individually optimized for the particular platform.  The term “TinyML” is often used as a synonym for TensorFlow Lite [19], a framework developed by Google that focuses on machine learning implementation on mobile embedded devices. However, other companies and research institutions have developed several other frameworks, with the intention to promote their hardware platforms or software libraries. Some of the most popular TinyML frameworks are discussed next. It is interesting to note that these frameworks focus on neural network models only. Several other open-source tools include libraries for other machine learning algorithms, such as naïve Bayes, decision trees, and k-NN. A comprehensive list of these tools is given in [22]. 4.1 TensorFlow Lite TensorFlow Lite is an open-source deep learning framework developed by Google for inference on embedded devices [19]. This framework consists of two main tools, Converter and Interpreter. TensorFlow Converter transforms the TensorFlow code into a particular format, reduces the model’s size, and optimizes the code for minimal accuracy loss. TensorFlow Interpreter is a library that executes the code on the embedded device.  A separate port of TensorFlow Lite, called TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers, is designed to run machine learning models specifically on 32-bit microcontrollers with just a few kB of memory. It was successfully ported to many processors, including the well-known Arm Cortex-M Series and ESP32. Figure 4 illustrates the steps needed to build “wake words” application using this framework. The framework is available as an Arduino library so that it can be ported to other C++ 11 projects as an open-source library. The MCU’s constraints cause some of the limitations of TensorFlow for Microcontrollers. For example, the framework supports only a subset of TensorFlow operations, and it cannot be used for model training. The full list of currently supported devices is given in [19].