Index-6 memory. Over the past few years, significant progress has been achieved in model compression techniques. Model compression combines methods from various fields such as machine learning, signal processing, computer architecture, and optimization, aiming to reduce the model size without significantly reducing model accuracy.  Model compression includes several techniques that can be represented as an operational pipeline process, as illustrated in Figure 3, where operations are applied successively on the neural network model, resulting in reduced model size [11]. We discuss these operations in more detail next.  
 Figure 3 The pipeline processing architecture introduced in [12] for model reduction. Each block introduces a significant reduction in model size with no effect on model accuracy.  3.1.1 Model Pruning The model reduction process starts with model pruning, aiming to reduce the number of connections in the neural network model by pruning non-informative weights based on some loss function. Recent work presented in [12] describes an example of the pruning process. Model pruning starts with the regular network training, where the connections between the layers are learned, followed by the pruning of small weight connections (usually using fixed threshold value). After this, the network can be retrained to learn the final weights of the remaining sparse connections again. Many other pruning methods are proposed in the literature, such as weighs pruning based on Hessian of the loss function [13] or using the percentage of zero outputs to prune unimportant connections [14]. 3.1.2 Parameter Quantization The next step involves the network quantization process, where the network size is reduced further by reducing the number of bits needed to represent each weight. The quantization process involves deciding the number of bits needed to represent weights based on observed [min, max] range of the weight values. This is followed by deciding the best ways to allocate bits for the integer part of the weights to cover the whole quantization range, considering that some min or max values may be cut off. For example, one way of doing it is first to calculate mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ) of all weights, and then select the number of bits to allocate for the representation of the integer part so that it is possible to represent all values in the range [μ+3σ, μ−3σ] [15]. There are many other methods in the literature proposed to quantize the weights efficiently, ranging from