Index-4 In event-based applications, data analytics on the edge device can filter out invaluable data before sending out the processed information.  Energy efficiency – MCUs are inherently designed to perform extremely low-power computations, so they can operate for a long time on a small power budget. MCUs can run on batteries or other types of energy sources, such as energy harvesting.  Low cost – The expansion of IoT applications in many industrial segments was driven by the low cost and high volumes of microprocessors and supporting embedded hardware, and this trend is likely to continue. Privacy – Privacy is always a concern when personal or other highly sensitive data is handled outside of the device. This is particularly true if data is sent to the cloud, as data can be lost or stolen. Thus, data processing on the device results in better data privacy and better data protection.  Autonomy – Small embedded devices can contribute to the increased autonomy of the system they belong to, by generating independent, data-driven local decisions that can be shared only within the system. However, running machine learning on embedded 32-bit processors entails many technical challenges. We will discuss these challenges next.  2.1 Challenges of Machine Learning on Embedded Devices Running complex machine learning models, such as neural networks on highly constrained embedded hardware requires careful software and hardware co-design. The two key challenges in deploying neural networks on microcontrollers are the small memory size and the short battery life [5].  The size of the machine learning model has to be small enough to fit within the constraints of the MCU-powered device. As illustrated in Table 1, typical microcontrollers have extremely limited on-chip (SRAM) memory (192–512 KB) and flash storage (256 KB–2 MB). The entire neural network model with its weights, neural connections, and supporting code has to fit within the small flash memory. The SRAM size limits the temporary memory buffer used to store the model’s input and output activations. These constraints need to be addressed during the design of compressed models that perform in real time with high accuracy.   
Table 1 Representative devices supported by TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers. MCU Platform Processor Frequency SRAM Flash Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense [6] ARM Cortex M4 64 MHz 256 KB 1 MB ESP32 [7] Tensilica Xtensa LX6 160 MHz 512 KB 2 MB Sparkfun Edge Appolo3 Blue [8] ARM Cortex M4F 48 MHz 384 KB 1 MB ST Nucleo Boards [9]  ARM Cortex M7 216 MHZ 320 KB 1 MB Adafruit EdgeBadge [10] ATSAMD51 120 MHz 192 KB 512 KB