v Executive Summary Tiny machine learning (TinyML) has emerged over the past few years as a new technological field at the cross-section of machine learning, embedded platforms, and software that leverages the power-constrained embedded platforms to enable embedded data analytics and enhance data processing on edge. Specifically, TinyML focuses on deploying machine learning and deep neural network models to the embedded, resource-constrained devices powered by microcontrollers (MCUs), thereby offering solutions for applications with low latency and low communication bandwidth constraints. The goal of this report is to understand the technology behind the TinyML framework, and to discuss the trends and challenges that TinyML technology currently faces.  In order for TinyML to become a mature technology, advancements across various fields need to take place. Research in chip design should include improving the existing chip solutions that will lead to more power-efficient and faster computations, and the design of novel chip architectures optimized to support specific neural network algorithms. Software libraries that provide computational blocks for efficient machine learning algorithm design have to be highly optimized for faster execution, yet agnostic toward the hardware platforms. Research in novel algorithm architectures aims to develop novel model compression methods to produce lightweight and reliable machine learning models that can run on embedded devices.  Furthermore, the challenges associated with cross-domain performance optimization need to be well understood. Fitting the neural network models to the resource-constrained hardware while considering the diversity across algorithms and hardware platforms is a particularly challenging problem. Within this problem, understanding power consumption vs. processing speed trade-off and its effect on the algorithm’s accuracy is of particular interest for the TinyML community. Beside challenges associated with the heterogeneity of hardware, software, and algorithms, there are challenges related to the process of model training, continuous model update, and remote deployment of these models to embedded devices. Currently, resource-constrained embedded devices are not capable of performing model training. The model training is done using a more powerful computing device, and then the pre-trained model is deployed to the embedded devices. In some cases, the challenges may arise when the model on the remote embedded device needs to be updated in the absence of a reliable connection to the device.  Several frameworks, which provide software to build TinyML models and speed up the application deployment, are currently in the development process. The frameworks discussed in this report (TensorFlow Lite [19], ELL [20], ARM-NN [21]) primarily focus on deploying neural network models to microcontrollers. They all integrate a similar workflow. A neural network model is first converted into a common format type and then optimized internally for deployment on the particular hardware platform. These frameworks are updated regularly by TinyML developers to support new machine learning algorithms and new hardware platforms.  TinyML will lead to novel applications across industry, military, and consumer spaces. Currently, the TinyML framework mostly focuses on applications involving computer vision, audio processing, or NLP algorithms. Applications in healthcare, autonomous systems, and surveillance will be supported by the TinyML framework in the near future and can be of particular interest to MITRE sponsors. Despite the initial challenges, the expansion of TinyML technology will continue in various ways. Several companies specialized in chip design will continue the fundamental research on