the lesions would be too laborious to extract such an image-
derived parameter like lesion burden.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrate the feasibility of federated learning to
combine COVID-19 data across participating centers in a patientprivacy-protecting manner. This d ecentralized training strategy may
be a key enabler of scalable AI-ba sed technology during a pandemic
when there is no time to set up complicated data-sharing
agreements across institutio ns or even countries. The use of
federated learning has been recently shown in other ﬁelds such as
edge computing (e.g., digital devices), however, the medical imaging
scenario is more complicated and e ntails unique challenges (e.g.,
high-dimensional data, imbala nced cohort sizes) which exertsunexplored in ﬂuences on currently used federated learning techni-
ques. To our knowledge, this is a prior work to demonstrate the
feasibility and effectiveness of federated learning for COVID-19 imageanalysis, where collaborative effort is especially valuable at the timeof global crisis. Our experiment al observations have shown that
federated learning improved generalization performance over allsingle-site models and their ensemble, re ﬂecting successful decen-
tralized optimization with divers e distributions of training data.
We show in a proof-of-concept that a CNN-based federated
deep learning model can be used for accurately detecting chestCT abnormalities in COVID-19 patients. Importantly, the AI model
trained on Hong Kong cohorts showed high performance not only
on internal testing cases, but also on external, unseen, indepen-dent datasets collected from hospitals in Asia and Europe. Thescanner brands, imaging protocols, and patient populations varied
Fig. 2 ROC curves for lesion detection on the internal testing set and three external validation sets. Results of six settings are compared,
including individual-model-1, individual-model-2, individual-model-3, their model ensemble, their joint training model, and our federated
learning model. The results of AUC are presented with 95% CI.Q. Dou et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2021) 60 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital