local hospitals, the server averaged these updates with weights in
proportion to the sizes of local dataset to refurbish the global models as
with a learning rate. Such a process repeats until the global model
converges. Note that for each hospital participating federated learning, the
sample size of its local dataset is given to the central server for aggregating
the local parameters with weighted average to update the global model.
Network architecture and transfer learning
Transfer learning from the public large-scale DeepLesion19CT lesion dataset
was effective to handle the data insuf ﬁciency issue for developing the deep
learning detector with COVID-19 data in this study. The dataset is currentlythe most comprehensive open-source data for CT lesions, that includes
32,120 axial CT slices (from body parts of liver, lung, mediastinum, kidney,
pelvis, bone, abdomen, and soft tissue) from 10,594 studies of 4427 unique
patients. For network architecture of our model, we used our previously
developed improved version of RetinaNet18, a 2D CNN with medical-
domain customized design for object detection based on the original
RetinaNet backbone29. The model input consisted of three adjacent CT axial
slices. Our model was initially pretrained on the DeepLesion dataset (relying
on our previous work18), then ﬁne-tuned with internal COVID-19 training
images. In our previous work, we utilized RECIST diameters provided in
DeepLesion dataset as weak labels to generate pseudo-masks for learning
an auxiliary branch for lesion segmentation (i.e., predicting the dense masks
of lesions). This segmentation branch with associated parameters waslearned in the pre-training step, while kept frozen in the ﬁne-tuning process
without further update, as lesion segmentation annotation for our dataset
was unavailable. We found that this auxiliary segmentation branch could
still output lesion segmentation masks with acceptable quality at testing (as
shown in Fig. 5), thanks to transfer learning from a closely-related domain.
This supported that the model pretrained on various other types of lesions
in CT could capture general patterns of abnormalities, which is also applied
for the novel disease of COVID-19 to some extent.
Pre-processing, model training, and post-processing
For pre-processing, we clipped the Houns ﬁeld units (HU) for each volume
before rescaling their intensities to [ −1.0, 1.0]. From experimental
observations, we found that instance-level normalization to zero mean,
unit variance helped improve generalizability, i.e., normalizing every single
volume with its individual statistics rather than using the dataset global
statistics. After normalization, three adjacent slices were combined as the
input for CNN-based models.
In each round of federated training, every local client optimized their
model for one epoch using the individual dataset. All local clients used Adam
optimizer with hyper-parameter as learning rate of 1e −4, beta1 of 0.9, beta2
of 0.999, and epsilon of 1e −7. We applied data augmentation schemes
including random horizontal and vertical ﬂipping with 50% probability;
random clockwise rotation with amplitude ranging from −0.1 to 0.1; random
horizontal/vertical translation with −0.1 to 0.1 of input image length/width;and random shearing and scaling with variation of −0.1 to 0.1. The data
augmentations were performed with Numpy and TensorFlow libraries
through processing the data arrays. A small amount of training data was heldout at each node to determine the model convergence. If the global modelperformance on local validation data was not increased for ﬁve successive
federated rounds, we considered that the training was converged and the
federated learning was stopped. The deep convolutional networks weretrained with one NVIDIA TitanXp GPU.
For the post-processing, we used non-maximum suppression
30, a well-
established method in image processing to retain a single entity out of
overlapping entities. In our case, we adopted it to extract the bounding
boxes with the highest predicted probability from a series of overlappedbounding boxes. Speci ﬁcally, given a number of predicted bounding boxes
from an image, we remove bounding boxes with probability lower than a
threshold. With the remaining bounding boxes, we repeatedly keep thebounding box with the highest probability and discard remaining boxeswith IoU higher than 0.5 with this selected one. We also applied an existing
open-source lung segmentation AI model
31, to remove the false-positive
detections which fell outside the lung region.
Method to compute ROC curves in statistical analysis
Given an input CT volume, each axial slice was sequentially tested with the
AI models. The outputs of these detection models were a set of bounding-
box predictions (a.k.a. proposals), each of which carried a score to indicatethe probability of current prediction being a lesion. We used the predictionscore on which a threshold varied to calculate the ROC curves. For each
proposal, if its IoU (i.e., Intersection over Union) with any of the manually
labeled bounding boxes being higher than 0.5
31,32(following the de facto
setting in literature), it was identi ﬁed as a true positive result. On the other
hand, for each prediction, if its IoU with all of the labeled bounding boxes
being smaller than 0.5, it was identi ﬁed as a false-positive result. With these
true positives and false positives, we computed the sensitivity andspeci ﬁcity pairs to obtain the ROC curves.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Raw images of the public dataset are accessed at https://coronacases.org/ , and the
annotations can be obtained from https://gitee.com/junma11/COVID-19-CT-Seg-
Benchmark . Data from Hong Kong will be available after approval by the relevant
corresponding authors. Data from Shenzhen, China; Hubei, China; and Munich,Germany, contain con ﬁdential information and are not authorized to be shared
openly at this stage. Quali ﬁed researchers with reasonable requests for access of the
data should contact the relevant authors of these institutions. Any data use will berestricted to non-commercial research purposes.
Fig. 6 Automated estimation of lesion burden change for longitudinal scans of hospitalized patients. Line curve shows the change of
estimated lesion burden under different scanning dates for the two external cases collected in Hubei, China. The table shows thecorresponding symptom recorded at each scanning date. Sx =symptom; Y =Yes; N=No.Q. Dou et al.
10
npj Digital Medicine (2021) 60 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital