(CNNs)15,16, requiring dense pixel-wise labels through time-consum-
ing, labor-intensive manual annotation from experts who are scarce
during the crisis. We instead consider detecting lesion bounding
boxes, for which annotations are easier and quicker to obtain whilemaintaining clinical utility of quantifying the burden of infection.
We aimed to demonstrate the feasibility of training a deep CNN-
based AI model for automated detection of lesions from COVID-19CT images, using a privacy-preserving method which does not
require exchange of data between centers nor data to be stored
centrally. Model validations were conducted using local andexternal datasets (including one international cohort) with
comparison to expert radiologists ’interpretations. In addition,
case studies with longitudinal scans were also performed forautomated estimation of the lesion progression to support
monitoring hospitalized patients.
This study explores the potential of federated learning methods
to develop a privacy-preserving AI system for the real-world
problem of automated COVID-19 image interpretation. A CNN-based model has been successfully trained on decentralized
multicenter data to detect lesions from COVID-19 CT images, with
wide generalizability to external patients (from Germany, China,and one publicly available dataset). These attributes showed the
potential of federated learning to build generalizable, low-cost,
and scalable AI tools for image-based disease diagnosis andmanagement, both for research and clinical care.
RESULTS
Study design and participantsIn this multicenter study, the internal datasets were collected from
three local hospitals in Hong Kong, i.e., Prince Wales Hospital
(Internal-Set-1: PWH), Princess Margaret Hospital (Internal-Set-2:PMH), and Tuen Mun Hospital (Internal-Set-3: TMH). A total of 75
patients (mean age: 47.1 ± 17.5, 32 female and 43 male) with
conﬁrmed COVID-19 infection (positive RT-PCR tests) were
enrolled in this study. These retrospective CT images were
collected during the time period from 24 Jan 2020 to 16 Apr
2020. The ethical approvals were obtained in accordance with allrelevant laws and regulations for each recruiting hospital (see
details in supplementary p. 2). Waiver of informed consent was
obtained by the Ethics Commission of the designated hospitals.The regions of ground-glass opaci ﬁcation and consolidation,
which are the two main signs of COVID-19 assessed on CT
images, were manually annotated with bounding boxes (seedetailed annotation process in supplementary p. 2).
To evaluate the robustness and generalizability of our AI model
beyond local centers to wider data d istributions of imaging protocols
and patient populations, we used four datasets outside Hong Kong
for external validation: (1) External-Set-1: a publicly released COVID-19 CT dataset ( https://coronacases.org/ ) of 10 patients originally
collected by Wenzhou Medical Unive rsity, China, with a third-party
lesion annotation released by Ma et al.
17; (2) External-Set-2: a private
dataset of 35 patients (collected during 02 Feb 2020 to 30 Mar 2020)
from BioMedIA research group collected at the Klinikum rechts der
Isar, Technical University of Munich, Germany, with lesionsindependently labeled locally; (3) External-Set-3: a private dataset
of 10 patients (collected during 25 Jan 2020 to 04 Mar 2020) from
Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, China, with lesions indepen-dently labeled locally; (4) Extern al-Set-4: a private dataset with
longitudinal studies of two patien ts (collected during 23 Jan 2020 to
19 Mar 2020) from Zhijiang People ’s Hospital in Hubei, China, with
hospitalized records acquired. All these included patients had
conﬁrmed COVID-19 infection with positive RT-PCR tests. Each
participating external private center obtained individual ethicalapproval in accordance with respective relevant laws and regula-
tions. The inference codes and AI models were sent to each center
for independent held-out testing as external validations.Table 1lists the demographic variables and imaging protocols
of the recruited seven centers including three internal cohorts
from Hong Kong, and four external cohorts from Mainland China
and Germany. The real-world heterogeneous environments of CTmedical imaging in clinical practice could be re ﬂected to a certain
extent in this proof-of-concept study.
Experimental settings
An overview of our study scheme is illustrated in Fig. 1.W e
developed our CNN-based deep learning model for CT lesion
detection using the three internal datasets with federated learning.Transfer learning was used leveraging our previously developeddetection model
18on the large-scale public DeepLesion dataset19
(see details in the “Methods ”section). The network training was
conducted on the training subsets. Details of annotated CT lesiondatasets and the random subset splits are listed in Table 2. For
validation, the established models were ﬁrst evaluated on the
internal testing subsets. To further study how the AI models would
generalize to completely unseen centers and patient cohorts, weconducted external validations on the External-Set-1, External-Set-
2, and External-Set-3. In addition, to explore the potential
usefulness of AI tools for monitoring the change of lesion burdenfor hospitalized patients, we also performed external validationwith External-Set-4, using two case studies with sequential CT
scans over time. Note that the data from all four external centers
were used solely for testing purposes.
To analyze the bene ﬁt of scaling the amount of training data
through multicenter learning, we also established baseline
settings to train the models for comparisons. For each internal
site, we trained an individual model with standard single-sitetraining, obtaining three independent networks, denoted withIndividual-model-1 (trained on Internal-Set-1), Individual-model-2
(trained on Internal-Set-2), and Individual-model-3 (trained on
Internal-Set-3). In addition, we established the comparisonmethod of model ensemble of these three individual models, i.e.,
running each individual model on the testing cohorts and
merging their prediction results. We have also added a baselineof training a single joint model with all data centralized. For all
these ﬁve comparison settings, both internal and external
validations were conducted following the same evaluation
scheme as the federated learning model .
Overall, we conducted experiments representing six settings,
i.e., three single-center models, their ensemble, a joint model, and
a federated learning model. Besides the joint model, all other
ﬁve methods were free from data exchange or centralization in
the multicenter study setting, thus protecting the privacy of the
patient health data.
Statistical analysis
This study aimed to analyze the effectiveness of federated deep
learning on the task of chest CT abnormality detection for COVID-
19 with evaluating the performance of AI models trained frommulticenter data and validated on both the internal and external
testing datasets. The evaluation was conducted based on whole
CT volumes, i.e., all axial slices were processed sequentiallywithout any prior knowledge of whether lesions are present in aslice or not. The statistical analysis was conducted using Python
3.7 (see details in supplementary p. 3).
To evaluate the performance, we used the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curves
20for the lesion detection results
(detailed computation process is referred to the “Methods ”
section). We also computed AUC (i.e., area under the curve) for
each ROC curve with 95% CI computed with the DeLongapproach21. To further evaluate the accuracy of bounding-box
areas, we used the metric of mAP (i.e., mean of average precision),
which averages the detection precisions under different IoU (i.e.,Intersection over Union) rates and is a widely-employed metric forQ. Dou et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2021) 60 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;