ARTICLE OPEN
Federated deep learning for detecting COVID-19 lung
abnormalities in CT: a privacy-preserving multinational
validation study
Qi Dou1✉, Tiffany Y. So2, Meirui Jiang1, Quande Liu1, Varut Vardhanabhuti3, Georgios Kaissis4,5,6, Zeju Li4, Weixin Si7,
Heather H. C. Lee8, Kevin Yu9, Zuxin Feng10, Li Dong11, Egon Burian5, Friederike Jungmann5, Rickmer Braren5,12, Marcus Makowski5,
Bernhard Kainz4, Daniel Rueckert4,13, Ben Glocker4✉, Simon C. H. Yu2✉and Pheng Ann Heng1✉
Data privacy mechanisms are essential for rapidly scaling medical training databases to capture the heterogeneity of patient data
distributions toward robust and generalizable machine learning systems. In the current COVID-19 pandemic, a major focus ofartiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is interpreting chest CT, which can be readily used in the assessment and management of the disease. This
paper demonstrates the feasibility of a federated learning method for detecting COVID-19 related CT abnormalities with external
validation on patients from a multinational study. We recruited 132 patients from seven multinational different centers, with threeinternal hospitals from Hong Kong for training and testing, and four external, independent datasets from Mainland China and
Germany, for validating model generalizability. We also conducted case studies on longitudinal scans for automated estimation of
lesion burden for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. We explore the federated learning algorithms to develop a privacy-preserving AImodel for COVID-19 medical image diagnosis with good generalization capability on unseen multinational datasets. Federated
learning could provide an effective mechanism during pandemics to rapidly develop clinically useful AI across institutions and
countries overcoming the burden of central aggregation of large amounts of sensitive data.
npj Digital Medicine (2021)4:60 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00431-6
INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 outbreak, caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-
CoV-2, has presented a public health crisis worldwide. According to
data compiled by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering
at Johns Hopkins University
1, the global number of COVID-19 cases
exceeded 64.69 million with over 1.49 million total deaths as of 5December 2020, and the pandemic continues to spread or recuracross continents especially in low-income countries. At the peakof the pandemic in early 2020, the clinical capacities to respondwere overloaded in several countries, even with advancedhealthcare systems such as present in Italy. Moreover, existingdigital healthcare systems were rapidly overwhelmed and frontlineclinicians challenged with an unprecedented amount of emer-gency workload for data analysis in a hitherto unseen diseaseentity
2. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has the potential to provide access
to accurate, low-cost, and scalable solutions in combating
COVID-19 through automated analysis of patient data.
Multicenter collaborative research efforts have been expected
to coordinate data sources for maximizing the potential of data-
driven AI technologies3,4. To this end, both the training and
testing aspects should be considered with equal importance fordata and model sharing. For the training phase, aggregatingmultiple data sources helps improve model robustness and
generalizability, because scaling amounts of data with variousimaging protocols and diverse patient populations could help
reduce model bias
5. Enabling privacy protected data sharing
across clinical centers is advocated as an essential pathway to
promote collaborations internationally yet underexplored so far6,7.
For the testing phase, validation of AI models on multiple, unseen,independent external cohorts has to be a crucial criteria for
assessing scalable usability toward wide model sharing
8,9. Recent
study10has revealed the potential of federated learning models
for generalizability outside federation on brain tumor application.
However, there is still little evidence been reported to date on thegeneralization performance of decentrally developed AI models
for widely collected COVID-19 cohorts, especially in the setting of
multinational evaluation of heterogeneous patient cohorts.
A major focus of AI ﬁghting against COVID-19 is interpreting
radiological images, mainly chest CT which has been widely applied
for detecting lung changes to inform patient management,
assessment of severity, and monitoring of the disease
11–13.T h e
main ﬁndings of COVID-19 infection on CT scans are bilateral and
peripheral ground-glass and consolidative pulmonary opacities14.
These are currently clinically interpreted in a qualitative manner, buthaving a method that can quantitatively measure the disease
burden and changes over time will be valuable for patient
surveillance. Existing AI models to date are mostly designed for
lung lesion segmentation using convolutional neural networks
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.2Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.3Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China.4Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Imperial College London, London, UK.5Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Technical University of Munich, School of
Medicine, Munich, Germany.6OpenMined, Oxford, UK.7Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.8Department
of Diagnostic Radiology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.9Department of Radiology, Tuen Muen Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.10Department of Emergency
Medicine, Peking University ShenZhen Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.11Department of Radiology, Zhijiang People ’s Hospital, Zhijiang, Hubei, China.12German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.13AI in Medicine and Healthcare, Technical University of Munich, School of Informatics and Medicine, Munich, Germany.
✉email: qdou@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; b.glocker@imperial.ac.uk; simonyu@cuhk.edu.hk; pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hkwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;