(trained on 4146 CT slices) achieved superior performance over
the other two single-site models (trained on 958 and 660 slices)
on all three external testing sites. This revealed that larger
training databases (even from the same site) could improvemodel performance on unseen datasets. Moreover, upon merging
all three internal sites for training, despite two sites contributing
fewer cases, the test accuracy could be further improved. To
some extent, this could re ﬂect that, in addition to increased data
scale, richer data diversity associated with imaging scanners and
protocols may be equally important for reducing model bias thus
improving generalizability. In this sense, collaboration across
multiple clinical centers is an essential component to pave the
way for developing AI systems for wide-spread deployment,especially when faced with COVID-19 pandemic where multi-
national efforts are crucial.
Although this study recruited patients from seven clinical
centers from different regions, the number of patients from each
participating center was relatively small. The centers which were
heavily involved in managing the pandemic received more cases
than other hospitals, resulting in an imbalance between sites. To acertain extent, this re ﬂected the practical situation that COVID-19
patients were generally too scarce for most single sites to train
individual in-house AI models. Therefore, multicenter studies with
collaborative efforts in data combination are important and
valuable to handle the long-tail distribution of COVID-19 patients.
Our future work will further include more patients and centers in
federated learning. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that, in the
current proof-of-concept study, the relatively small numbers of
patients did not impede the development of a deep learningmodel, because the numbers of individual lesions identi ﬁed from
all CT volumes were fairly large (14,095 overall in our datasets).
The model generalized less well on the German cohort, compared
with other external cohorts. A reason may be the patient
populations coming from different demographics. In addition, thelesion annotation procedures differed between different clinical
sites causing what is known in machine learning as concept shift
where the manual annotations in this cohort were not directly
compatible with training data. For example, the training data
annotated ground-glass opaci ﬁcation and consolidation, while the
German cohort contained a few pleural effusion lesions, which are
atypically seen in COVID-19, with relatively low contrast against
normal lung tissue. We excluded 15 cases (with very mild lesions
which could hardly be seen in the lung window), 5 cases (withsevere diffuse lesions which were not suitable to be processed as a
detection task predicting lesion bounding boxes), and 1 case (withno CT ﬁnding). Supplementary Fig. 1 in the supplementary (p. 4)
shows typical images from patients excluded from German cohort.By doing this, 35 cases remained with the model obtaining AUC of
88.15% (95% CI 86.38 –89.91). If tested on all German data of 56
cases, the model obtained AUC of 77.15% (95% CI 72.84 –81.47). We
envision the CT abnormality detection tool to be used alongside thestandard visual assessment by expert radiologists. In that way, the AI
tool supports the expert by providing quantitative measurements
during clinical decision-making. At the same time, the expert in theloop acts as a safeguard against erroneous predictions such as falsepositives in non-suspicious scans. It is also worth noting that
concept shift as present in the German cohort can be avoided in
future multicenter studies that may use federated learning when allsites follow a standard operating procedure. Due to the opportu-nistic nature of this study where data from multiple sites was
included and each cohort had been collected independently, this
was not possible. Despite these limitations, we believe that ourmultinational validation con ﬁrms the potential for our approach
while highlighting the real-world challenges in such studies.
In conclusion, the CNN-based AI model trained using a privacy-
protecting federated learning approach is effective in detecting CTabnormalities in COVID-19 patients. The wide generalizability to
regional and international external cohorts, bene ﬁted from
including diverse datasets, shows the promise of AI providinglow-cost and scalable tools for lesion burden estimation tosupport clinical disease management.
METHODS
Ethical approvals obtained by internal cohorts
In this multicenter study, the internal datasets were collected from three local
hospitals in Hong Kong, i.e., Prince Wales Hospital (PWH), Princess MargaretHospital (PMH), and Tuen Mun Hospital (TMH). The ethical approvals wereobtained in accordance with all relevant laws and regulations for eachrecruiting hospital, i.e., PWH approved by the Joint Chinese University of
Hong Kong - New Territories East Cluster Clinical Research Ethics Committee,
PMH approved by the Kowloon West Cluster Research Ethics Committee,TMH approved by the New Territory West Cluster Research Ethics Committee.
Federated learning process
To protect data privacy during model training, we studied the feasibility offederated learning on three local hospitals, with each individual center
representing a node. Data sharing across the sites was not required, while
the model bene ﬁtted from the generalizability enabled by multicenter
learning with the inclusion of diverse data sources. More speci ﬁcally, such
a decentralized scheme trained individual models on local nodes and
Fig. 4 Ablation experiments on federated learning method with and without transfer learning from model pretrained on DeepLesion
dataset. Left bar chart shows the performance measured in mAP (mean Average Precision) of two different training strategies, federated
learning outperforms federated learning from scratch over all datasets. Right part visualizes the predictions from two methods. The blue,
green, and red bounding boxes denote model predictions, manual reference lesion regions, and false-positive predictions, respectively.
Transfer learning from pretrained model is helpful to reduce false-positive predictions.Q. Dou et al.
8
npj Digital Medicine (2021) 60 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital