Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
with a focus on explainable and interpretable AI. Section 4 presents evaluative AI, a new conceptual framework for
human-centred decision making, and argues that this framework aligns better the cognitive processes humans use for
decision making. It also presents a high-level research agenda for evaluative AI. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2 Background and related work
2.1 Decision making and decision support
Before we consider what makes good decision support, we consider what good decision making is. Table 1 outlines
10cardinal decision issues , deﬁned by Yates and Potworowski [2012]. These include issues such as deriving options
and making judgements, but also additional factors such as exploring consequences of actions, and who will be part of
deciding. The issues in italics are the aspects that we believe to be of most importance to explainable decision support.
While the ﬁrst three and the ﬁnal issue can be supported by tools, these are less relevant for AI research.
Table 1: The 10 ‘cardinal decision issues’ outlined by Yates and Potworowski [2012]. The issues in italics represent
those that are of most interest to explainable AI.
Cardinal issue Deﬁnition
Need Why do we need to make a decision at all?
Mode Who will decide and how will they do it?
Investment What kinds of amounts of resources will be invested in the process?
Options What are the different actions we could take to solve the need?
Possibilities What outcomes could happen if for each action, if it were taken?
Judgement Which of the outcomes would happen if we took the action?
Value How much would any stakeholder care (positively or negatively) if this outcome happened?
Trade-offs How do we trade-off the outcomes to settle on an action?
Acceptability How can be get other stakeholders to accept our decision?
Implementation Now we have decided, how can we action the decision?
We deﬁne a decision support tool (DST) as any system that supports the process of deciding. But what is a good DST?
In Table 2, we propose six criteria for good decision support. The ﬁrst ﬁve are based on the 10 cardinal issues from
Table 1 [Hoffman and Yates, 2005, Yates, 2003]. The sixth is understandable , which simply means that a good decision
support tool helps people understand how and why it works, and where it fails. This is important to calibrate trust and
ﬁnd mistakes. The broader range of research into explainability, interpretability, and transparency focuses on this.
Table 2: Criteria for good decision support, based on the 10 ‘cardinal decision issues’ [Yates and Potworowski, 2012]
Criteria Deﬁnition
Options Help to identify options, as well as help to narrow down the list of feasible or realistic options
Possibilities Help to to identify possible outcomes for each of the identiﬁed options
Judgement Help to judge which outcomes are most likely
Value Help to identify the positive and negative impacts on stakeholders for each of the identiﬁed options
Trade-offs Help to make trade-offs on the above criteria for each options
Understandable Help to understand how and why the tools works as it does, and when it fails
Note two things about the criteria in Table 2. First, a DST helps a decision maker. It does not necessarily provide the
answers for any of the criteria. Second, it goes beyond recommendations and judgements, which are typically the focus
in XAI; largely because these are considered to be some of the harder problems.
2.2 Cognitive processes for decision making
Hoffman et al. [2022] argue that, when a person is trying to determine why the system produced a particular output,
they engage in the cognitive process called abductive reasoning . Abductive reasoning is the process of forming
hypotheses and judging their likelihood for the purpose of explaining observations or facts [Peirce, 2009]. This
3