Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
Table 4: A summary of the decision support provided by different paradigms. Partial means that this provides
information for the recommended option only. Evaluative AI explicitly provides support to explore options and perform
trade-offs. XAI and cognitive forcing allow this if they support contrastive explanation. In evaluative AI, it should be
default.
Support provided
Decision support Options Possibilities Judgement Value Trade-offs Understandable
Recommendation 8 partial partial 8 8 8
XAI 8 partial partial 8 partial 4
Interpretability 8 partial partial 8 8 4
Cognitive forcing partial partial partial 8 partial 4
Evaluative AI 4 4 4 8 4 4
3.does not help determine stakeholder values;
4.does support making trade-offs; and
5.does provide understanding of the machine decision.
Table 4 compares the ﬁve approaches to explainable DSTs. Evaluative AI explicitly aims to provide support for options,
judgement, understanding, and trade-offs. The difference between cognitive forcing and evaluative AI is two-fold:
1.Cognitive processes : Evaluative AI is built on the Data/Frame model of sensemaking [Klein et al., 2007], so
supports the decision maker’s cognitive process by allowing them to explore hypotheses, rather than providing
only the information to the justiﬁes a machine recommendation.
2.Control : Evaluative AI explicitly hands control of which hypotheses are investigated and prioritised to
the decision maker, resulting a machine-in-the-loop paradigm [Green and Chen, 2019a,b], rather than a
human-in-the-loop paradigm.
For this reason, we assert that evaluative AI obtains the beneﬁts of cognitive forcing, while also giving control
to the decision maker to explore the strengths and weaknesses of any option, rather than just the strengths of the
recommendation and the weaknesses of alternatives.
4.4 Long live explainable AI!
This article proposes a pivot from recommendation-driven decision support to hypothesis-driven decision support. Does
this imply that explainable AI is dead? We do not believe so.
First, there are applications of XAI beyond decision support, such as veriﬁcation/regulation, scientiﬁc discovery,
generating insights about underlying data, etc. Further, there are applications where recommendation-driven approaches
may be the best way to improve decisions, such as making decisions at scale.
Second, for a machine to judge decisions, we will need an underlying decision-making model, meaning that existing AI
techniques such as machine learning, planning, and optimisation will be required, along with their XAI techniques.
Third, evaluative AI isexplainable AI. A lot of cognitive and social aspects of good explainability apply to hypothesis-
driven decision support. For example, the four key properties of human-to-human explanation [Miller, 2019]: (1)
explanations are contrastive; (2) explanations are selected; (3) explanations are interactive; and (4) explanations are
causal — all still apply in providing evidence and evaluating trade-offs.
Fourth, from the earlier example, it is clear that many existing tools will play a part in evaluative AI: constrastive
explanation [Miller, 2021], Weights of Evidence (WoE) [Melis et al., 2021], feature importance, case-based reasoning
techniques [Sørmo et al., 2005], etc., all generate evidence. New models of XAI are needed, but existing work lays a
solid foundation.
4.5 Challenges and Limitations
There are clear potential limitations with this approach. First, if people tend to dismiss recommendations and any
explainability information, why would they pay attention to evidence? The evaluative AI framework makes the same
assumptions as earlier work: that people care at all about what a machine has to say. A very real risk is that decision
makers will not engage with a tool that supports cognitive reasoning either. However, one argument against this is that
11