Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
3.does provide understanding of the machine decision;
4.does not help determine stakeholder values; and
5.does not support making trade-offs.
3.4 Cognitive forcing
The ﬁnal paradigm is cognitive forcing. The assumption of cognitive forcing is that forcing people to engage with the
decision cognitively can mitigate over-reliance. Gajos and Mamykina [2022] and Buçinca et al. [2021] implement
this idea using three approaches, as outlined in Section 2.3. The commonality between these three approaches is
that decisions are initially withheld from the decision maker, but explanatory information is provided, forcing the
decision maker to engage with the explanatory information. This model is depicted below in Figure 5. Withholding
recommendations ‘forces’ the decision maker to cognitively engage with the decision and therefore, to consider different
options and make trade-offs. Giving explanatory information from the start may help the decision maker to focus on
useful information.
Figure 5: A model of cognitive forcing for decision support. This assumes that by withholding the decision (for perhaps
a short period) and optionally giving an ‘explanation’, it forces people to engage, limiting over-reliance. However,
current solutions are still recommendation-driven because they ‘explain’ just the machine decision.
Comparing this to the properties that comprise good decision support outlined in Table 2, we can see the criteria that
cognitive forcing brings are that it:
1.partially helps to provide new options or to ﬁlter out unlikely options by forcing the decision maker to do so;
2.does not consider possibilities or judgements beyond one option;
3.does not help determine stakeholder values;
4.partially supports making trade-offs; and
5.does provide understanding of the machine decision.
While this is an improvement beyond the default XAI approaches, weaknesses remain. First, this approach is still an
instance of our friend Bluster, rather than our friend Prudence – it is just that Bluster pauses before stating their opinion.
Second, it does not provide helpful decision-making information for options other than the recommendation.
Next, we propose a model that builds on the strength of cognitive forcing, but on a foundation of the cognitive science
of decision making .
4 Evaluative AI: A conceptual framework of explainable decision support
In this section, we present a new conceptual framework of hypothesis-driven explainable decision support called
evaluative AI . The two primary design criteria for this are:
1.Support the properties of good decision making outlined in Section 2.3. That is, support the decision maker’s
cognitive decision making process .
2.Provide better internal locus of control [Shneiderman et al., 2016] to the decision maker about which options
to explore and when.
To do this, we propose that the vision of evaluative AI is to:
Support the decision maker to access the information they want and need to evaluate a hypoth-
esis, when they want it.
8