Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
4.does not support making trade-offs; and
5.does not provide understanding of the machine decision.
Can this still be useful? Of course! If a recommendation matches or is similar to our own judgement, it gives us
conﬁdence in our own decision, although this conﬁdence may be misplaced. Further, if a recommendation is not similar
to our own judgement, it may decrease our conﬁdence and make us reconsider, potentially helping us to make a better
decision. However, in either case, we receive no further support to help with the decision.
3.2 Giving recommendations with explanatory information
One solution to mis-calibrated trust is to provide explanatory information. This means giving justiﬁcations for decisions,
providing evidence to support the decisions, and making models simple and easy to understand (see more on this in
Section 3.3). A model of interaction between decision maker and DST is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: A model of explainable AI for decision support. This assumes that the problem of distrust can be mitigates by
giving reasons or explanations for decisions. However, empirical evidence suggests people do not pay careful attention
to the reasons/explanations.
Comparing this to the properties that comprise good decision support outlined in Table 2, we can see the criteria that
the default model of XAI bring are that it:
1.does not help to provide new options or to ﬁlter out unlikely options;
2.does not consider possibilities or judgements beyond one option;
3.does not help determine stakeholder values;
4.partially supports making trade-offs; and
5.does provide understanding of the machine decision.
So, compared to just recommendations, explainability provides understanding. Contrastive explanations [Miller, 2021]
partially support trade-offs when they answer ‘Why Ainstead of B?’, where Ais the output and Bafoil. However, this
only supports comparing each option the recommended one – it is persuasive. It does not provide support for trading off
other pairs of options. Later in Section 4 we discuss how contrastive explanations could support trade-offs better.
Can this be useful? Of course! It has the same properties as recommendations, but has the added beneﬁt that if we
agree with the recommendation, we can check that we agree for similar reasons; and if we disagree, we can check the
reasons why, potentially helping us to improve our initial decision.
3.3 Giving recommendations with an interpretable model
The third paradigm is to give recommendations using an ‘interpretable’ model. Rudin [2019] argues that for high-stakes
decisions, people should avoid using black-box models all together, and instead should use interpretable models.
Interpretable models use a small set of features with a low complexity of interaction between them.
The model of interaction with an interpretable model is same as for recommendations with explanatory information,
outlined in Figure 4. The assumption is that because the model is interpretable, it contains most of the explanatory
information that is required. However, it is difﬁcult to claim that a model being interpretable is really decision support .
The model’s options, possibilities, and trade-offs would have to be calculated by the decision maker. Assistance to
calculate these is a combination of interpretability and explainability, so overlaps with the previous section.
Comparing this to the properties that comprise good decision support outlined in Table 2, we can see the criteria that
the interpretability brings are that it:
1.does not help to provide new options or to ﬁlter out unlikely options;
2.does not consider possibilities or judgements beyond one option;
7