Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
Supporting trade-offs has gained interested in recent years under the name option awareness . Similar to the better-
known situation awareness [Endsley, 2017], option awareness is the analysis and understanding of various options and
their relative trade-offs [Pfaff et al., 2013]. Pfaff et al. [2013] show that using visual analytics to allow decision makers
to explore options increases their option awareness, resulting in more accurate and faster decisions. More recently,
Drury et al. [2022] proposed a framework in which machines consider their own option awareness to support human
decision makers. However, research into machine-assisted option awareness is still in its infancy.
4.2 Example: Diagnosis
Consider an example of a DST for diagnosing skin cancers, such as the ISIC 2018 lesion diagnosis challenge2. There
are seven possible disease categories: (1) melanoma; (2) melanocytic nevus; (3) basal cell carcinoma; (4) actinic
keratosis; (5) benign keratosis; (6) dermatoﬁbroma; and (7) vascular lesion. Given a dermoscopic image of a legion
along with some meta information, such as which area of the body the lesion is found, the task is to diagnose the most
likely category.
Figure 7: A simple prototype of a diagnostic interface using evaluative AI
Figure 7 shows a simple prototype interface for such a system. In this case, there are seven potential hypothe-
ses/diagnoses. The DST ﬁlters out those that are unlikely, leaving just three: melanoma, basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
or actinic keratsosis (AK)3, highlighted with bold text. By highlighting only likely hypothesis instead of just one
hypothesis, this could help to mitigate ﬁxation on just one option.
Hypotheses can be explored. In Figure 7, the location of the lesion (back), its colour, scarring, and that it sometimes
bleeds, is strong support for a BCC diagnosis. However, the asymmetric shape, itchiness, and recent colour change
are evidence against BCC. Other forms of evidence could be provided to the decision maker, such as ﬁnding similar
instances using case-based reasoning [Wang et al., 2019, Sørmo et al., 2005]. It is up to the decision maker to make the
ﬁnal decision, integrating their expert knowledge and the information/evidence from the DST.
4.3 Summary
Comparing model to the properties that comprise good decision support outlined in Table 2, we can see the criteria that
evaluative AI brings are that it:
1.does help to provide new options or to ﬁlter out unlikely options by forcing the decision maker to do so;
2.does help to identify possibilities and support judgement for options;
2Seehttps://challenge.isic-archive.com/landing/2018/47/ .
3It is unlikely that these three would be the case as AK is quite different from BCC and melanoma, but this makes for a good
illustrative example.
10