Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
this evaluative AI provides decision makers with better control [Vered et al., 2020], and follows a process that they
willnaturally follow , rather than recommendation-driven approaches, which somewhat disrupt the decision-making
process.
Second, it is difﬁcult to imagine evaluative AI solutions will result in lower cognitive load. A strength of the
recommendation-driven approaches is that they reduce the information that a decision maker needs to consider to just
the most relevant. Evaluative AI will likely result in designs that force more engagement with the decision, but less
preferred by decision makers [Buçinca et al., 2021]. However, following a model of abductive reasoning can still reduce
information compared to having no decision support; e.g. presenting only the most likely hypotheses; prioritising access
to the most important information, etc. Striking this balance is a challenge.
4.6 An incomplete research agenda
In this section, we present an incomplete research agenda based around the evaluative AI framework.
4.6.1 Observing events
The ﬁrst step in abductive reasoning is to observe an event. While it is difﬁcult to control the attention that a decision
maker pays to data/events, we can support this in several ways:
1.Design interfaces to make it clear what has happened, what data is being used , etc. [Hoffman et al.,
2022]. This includes allow people to explore relevant attributes of a system.
2.Highlight anomalous behaviour/events , as these are typically the events that people require to make decisions
or to understand [Miller, 2019].
4.6.2 Generating options
The ability for the machine to put forward options can help decision makers in two ways. First, it can present options
that decision makers did not consider. Second, it can speed up decision making in time-sensitive environments by
ﬁltering out some options and/or allowing options to be assessed more systematically.
Generating options can be supported in several ways beyond providing 1-2 recommendations or a ranking:
1.Provide probabilities over options: This can help the decision maker to narrow down likely options, but is
perhaps subject to over-ﬁxation (on the most likely option) in the same way that recommendations are.
2.Provide a set of likely options: This can help the decision maker to narrow down the set of hypothesis
without giving a recommendation, as in the Example in Section 4.2, reducing ﬁxation.
3.Provide uncertainty measures: The DST provides its uncertainty about its ﬁltered options (the decision
could be provided or not) to allow healthy scepticism of the model [Zhang et al., 2020].
4.Intervention : The DST does not initially narrow down options, but allows the decision maker to explore and
select their answer, and then intervenes if it disagrees above some threshold, prompting the decision maker to
consider the DST’s most likely responses.
5.Relate inputs and hypotheses: The decision maker selects a subset of inputs they believe are important and
the tool shows which hypotheses are supported or denied by that evidence.
4.6.3 Judging plausibility
Judging the plausibility of outcomes can be supported several ways by a DST
1.Explainable/interpretable AI : Provide reasoning steps that link the evidence to the hypothesis, such as rules,
decision steps, or explanations.
2.Provide evidence weights : Show how different inputs weight positive and negatives to support a decision.
3.Provide epistemic uncertainty: Show uncertainty in the form of e.g. an uncertainty measure using entropy.
4.Provide aleatoric uncertainty : Show a measure of uncertainty of the evidence itself.
5.Evidence selection: Allowing the decision maker to change evidence (inputs) and ask the DST to re-evaluate.
6.Argumentation: The decision maker identiﬁes evidence that supports (refutes) a hypothesis, and the DST
highlights: (a) other evidence that strongly refutes (supports) that hypothesis; and (b) other hypotheses that are
strongly supported (refuted) by that evidence.
12