Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
4.1 Conceptual framework
The conceptual framework for evaluative AI is shown in Figure 6. Evaluative AI does not (necessarily) provide
recommendations, but instead offers support to ﬁlter out unlikely options, generate new hypotheses, or both. The
decision maker then analyses a hypothesis, asking the DST to provide evidence for and against the hypothesis. Evidence
could also be presented contrastively: what is the evidence for/against a particular hypothesis rather than some other
hypothesis. Important,the decision maker to maintains control over which hypotheses to explore.
Figure 6: A model of Evaluative AI. This aims to explicitly align with the decision making process, keeping the decision
maker in control and aiming to have users rely on evidence instead of recommendations.
4.1.1 Options
Existing explainable AI approaches tend to provide one or sometimes two options to consider. The evaluative AI
paradigm argues that the presentation of options should be context-speciﬁc. For example, given a probabilistic
classiﬁer, a evaluative AI system could highlight options that are within a certain probability of the most likely, perhaps
withholding the probabilities themselves. Alternatively, it could use uncertainty estimates, which are known to help
decision making [Tomsett et al., 2020], and from that, determine which options to ﬁlter.
Approaches such as this help to reduce ﬁxation because there is no single recommendation. Cognitive forcing takes a
similar approach, but current cognitive forcing techniques are recommendation-driven [Gajos and Mamykina, 2022,
Buçinca et al., 2021].
4.1.2 Judgement support
All ﬁve paradigms support judgements. The evaluative AI framework puts the human at the centre of the judgement
process. In this framework, the judgement is made by the human decision maker with support from the DST, which
gives feedback (evidence for/against) of proposed hypotheses. This is supporting judgement , rather than giving
judgement . The difference is who owns control over which hypotheses to explore. In a recommendation-driven
approach, both the human and machine provide a judgement. In the evaluative AI paradigm, the human provides
judgement and the machine provides feedback.
4.1.3 Trade-off support
Contrastive explanation trades-off different outcomes. However, these explain only why non-recommended options
are ‘incorrect’. This is a ‘persuasive’ approach — it justiﬁes why the machine’s decision is correct. The evaluative AI
framework instead:
1. explains trade-offs between any two sets of options; and
2. provides evidence both for andagainst each option, irrelevant of the judged likelihood of that option.
Good decision makers assess an option by looking for evidence that supports it, but also evidence that refutes it.
For example, in a study with anaesthesiology residents, Rudolph [2003] showed that participants who ﬁxated on
an initial option did poorly, but that participants who kept an open mind on all options do not perform much better.
Instead, those who jump to an initial conclusion and test it, looking for negative evidence , make the best decisions.
Recommendation-driven approaches typically do not provide evidence against the recommendation, nor evidence
supporting other options. Evaluative AI supports both, rather than aiming to persuade that the machine is correct.
9