Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
in our thinking and gives us control over which options we discuss with them. The ability to assess the strengths and
weaknesses of judgements and decisions is key to expert decision making [Klein, 2017, Graber et al., 2012, Lambe
et al., 2016].
Despite this preference, the current model of (explainable) AI-assisted decision support gives us Bluster instead of
Prudence, right? AI-assisted decision tools are designed to tell the user what it thinks the best answer is (e.g. a
recommendation), and explain why that is considered the best answer, even when they are not conﬁdent that their
recommendation is correct. What if the user disagrees with this answer and doesn’t ﬁnd the reasons convincing? The
machine offers little else. A counterfactual explanation [Miller, 2021] allows us to ask why another option is not the
best answer; but does not provide us with reasons this alternative may well be the right answer, or even a good answer.
In short, current approaches to explainable AI, which we call recommendation-driven decision support, do little to
help us critique its answers or our own ideas.
Figure 1: Contrastive explanation vs Evaluative AI. Con-
trastive explanation paradigms are best described as a pro-
cess of persuading us to accept a machine recommendation.
They only provide evidence that supports the recommen-
dation and refutes all others. Evaluative AI proposes not
necessarily giving recommendations from machines, but
instead providing evidence for/against each option.The Bluster model of recommendation-driven decision
support leads to two related problems. First, it is hard
for people to know how much to trust recommendations
[Jacovi et al., 2021, Hoffman, 2017, Lee and See, 2004,
Sivaraman et al., 2023]. AI tools are not correct all of
the time, so we should be sceptical at least some of the
time. However, people ﬁnd it difﬁcult to correctly cali-
brate their trust in a decision aid. Research shows that
incorrect trust calibration people tend to either under-rely
on tools, meaning they have no effect on decision making,
or they over-rely on tools [Buçinca et al., 2021, Gajos and
Mamykina, 2022, Sivaraman et al., 2023], likely because
providing recommendations makes them ﬁxate on that
recommendation. Both under- and over-reliance have neg-
ative consequences [Parasuraman and Riley, 1997]. Sec-
ond, Bluster reduces our locus of control [Shneiderman
et al., 2016], because we cannot control which options
we received feedback for.
This paper argues for a paradigm shift: that the deci-
sion support tools (DSTs) should be more like Prudence,
which we call hypothesis-driven decision support, and
less like Bluster. We propose a new conceptual frame-
work for explainable decision support that has two key properties not present in the current paradigm. First, evaluative
AI tools do not provide recommendations. They either allow the decision maker to determine which options are
best or help them to narrow down to a manageable set of options [Rudolph, 2003]. This helps to mitigate ﬁxation
caused by things like automation bias. Second, instead of justifying AI recommendations, DSTs generate and present
evidence to support or refute human judgements, and explain trade-offs between any set of options, not just the machine
recommendation. This helps with trust calibration because the machine does not give recommendations, as well
as over/under-reliance because there is no recommendation to follow. We argue that the reason this Prudence-like
approach is more effective for decision support because it aligns with the cognitive decision-making process that
people use when making judgements and decisions [Klein et al., 2007, Hoffman et al., 2022, Peirce, 2009]. We call
this paradigm evaluative AI .
Figure 1 shows the difference between evaluative AI and perhaps the most common form of explainability: contrastive
explanation. Contrastive explanation is like Bluster — it gives us an answer and justiﬁes it, telling us why it is correct
and why other options are not. Evaluative AI is like Prudence — it helps us critique our own ideas. This provides a
better feedback loop – if the evidence helps use eliminate our preferred hypothesis, we start to explore others.
Evaluative AI is not intended to be used in all scenarios. It is more suitable for medium- and high-stakes decisions
when human decision makers are ultimately accountable, and low frequency decision making where the decision maker
has time to explore options.
We conclude that for decision making, the recommendation-driven paradigm of explainable AI is ‘dead’ (for some
situations), but that the evaluative AI paradigm is still a form of explainable AI, and many of the current paradigm will
play a part in this new conceptualisation; so, long live explainable AI!
Section 2 reviews related work on cognitive decision making, what makes a good decisions, and the main modes of
explainable AI. Section 3 evaluates how current decision support models align with human decision making processes,
2