EXPLAINABLE AIISDEAD, LONG LIVEEXPLAINABLE AI!
HYPOTHESIS -DRIVEN DECISION SUPPORT
A P REPRINT
Tim Miller
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
tmiller@unimelb.edu.au
March 14, 2023
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we argue for a paradigm shift from the current model of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
(XAI), which may be counter-productive to better human decision making. In early decision support
systems, we assumed that we could give people recommendations and that they would consider
them, and then follow them when required. However, research found that people often ignore
recommendations because they do not trust them; or perhaps even worse, people follow them blindly,
even when the recommendations are wrong. Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence mitigates this by
helping people to understand how and why models give certain recommendations. However, recent
research shows that people do not always engage with explainability tools enough to help improve
decision making. The assumption that people will engage with recommendations and explanations
has proven to be unfounded. We argue this is because we have failed to account for two things.
First, recommendations (and their explanations) take control from human decision makers, limiting
their agency. Second, giving recommendations and explanations does not align with the cognitive
processes employed by people making decisions. This position paper proposes a new conceptual
framework called Evaluative AI for explainable decision support. This is a machine-in-the-loop
paradigm in which decision support tools provide evidence for and against decisions made by people,
rather than provide recommendations to accept or reject. We argue that this mitigates issues of
over- and under-reliance on decision support tools, and better leverages human expertise in decision
making.
Keywords Explainable AI Cognitive Processes Abductive Reasoning Decision Support Cognitive Forcing 
Evidence Hypotheses
1 Introduction
Imagine you have two friends, Bluster and Prudence. Whenever you have a difﬁcult decision to make, you can approach
them for help. Both have shown excellent judgement on complex decisions in the past. Bluster always tells you what
they think is the right decision, even if they are not conﬁdent, and then tells you why they think that. Would that be
helpful? If your answer and reasons were the same as Bluster’s, it would give you conﬁdence. Bluster could change
your mind to an answer that you were happier with or that resulted in better outcomes. Prudence, in contrast, hardly
ever gives their opinion, especially when not conﬁdent. Prudence instead asks you what you are proposing and then
provides feedback: evidence for and against your proposed decision. If you propose alternatives, Prudence continues to
provide feedback on these, giving feedback until you reach a decision. But Prudence never gives you an answer. Would
this be more useful than Bluster’s approach? Prudence helps you to form a decision, and provides feedback on your
own options, rather than justifying their own opinion. This would help you to question your decisions, and would give
you control over which options you receive feedback for.
Reader, which would you prefer? A survey conducted during a recent talk showed that just three out of over 100 people
preferred Bluster; the remaining 100+ people preferring Prudence. Prudence helps us ﬁnd strengths and weaknessesarXiv:2302.12389v3  [cs.AI]  11 Mar 2023