Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
deductive reasoning in gastroenterology clinical diagnoses. Klein [2017] argues that experts make decisions by ﬁrst
using their intuitive problem solving ability (system 1) to generate likely options, and then use both system 1 and system
2 to assess whether their options are going to work. As such, any technique that aims to ‘override’ intuitive thinking to
prioritise structured thinking risks losing the beneﬁts of expertise and prior knowledge.
Second, a recent article from Schulze and Hertwig [2021] argues that many studies that identify biases of system 1
thinking, such as base-rate fallacies, are partly a product of the predominant mode of experimental setup: participants
receiving descriptive scenarios and being asked to give one-off judgements. Schulze and Hertwig show that, in
experiments where participants can practice a task, are involved in interactive problem solving with feedback, and can
sample information, many cognitive biases are not as prevalent. Given that many AI-assisted decision support tasks
would fall into the latter, the task and how cognitive biases affect decision making is important.
Finally, research demonstrating a lack of engagement with explanatory information runs experiments with general
participants, not expert decision makers, and the consequences of poor decisions have low stakes. The effect of system
1 thinking may differ between contexts such as the experience of the decision maker and the stakes of the decision.
In short, we argue that we should not simply treat intuition as ‘bad’ and prioritise structured thinking. DSTs should
exploit the strengths of intuition and expertise, as well as structured thinking.
3 (Explainable) AI as decision support
In this section, we provide a narrative of how we have arrived at the current status quo for decision support using explain-
able AI. We evaluate four difference approaches against the criteria of decision support identiﬁed in Table 2. The four
paradigms we discuss are: (1) giving recommendations with no explanatory information; (2) giving recommendations
with explanatory information; (3) ‘intrinsically interpretable‘ models; and (4) cognitive forcing.
3.1 Giving recommendations with no explanatory information
The idea of decision support using AI came from the use of AI as automation. Given situations in which an AI model
provides more accurate judgements/decisions than human decision makers, a simple of model of AI-assisted DSTs is
to give recommendations, which decision makers can then take into account. Recommendations can be ranked lists
of options such as in many recommender systems, but the typical model is to propose just the one recommendation
that the AI model determines is the most likely or ‘best’. The assumption here is that for situations in which DSTs can
handle many more factors simultaneously, it can provide insight when the assumptions of the underlying modelling
theory hold. This model is depicted below in Figure 3.
Figure 3: A model of giving recommendations for decision support. This assumes that decision makers will carefully
consider recommendations. However, empirical evidence suggests this is not the case.
The primary issue with this model was that, even if the DST gives better judgements/decisions than the human, people
tend to ignore this due to unwarranted distrust [Miller, 2019, Gunning and Aha, 2019, Swartout and Moore, 1993,
Jacovi et al., 2021, Hoff and Bashir, 2015, Hoffman, 2017, Sivaraman et al., 2023] or accept wrong decisions due to
unwarranted trust [Gajos and Mamykina, 2022, Buçinca et al., 2021, Parasuraman and Riley, 1997]. The inability to
scrutinise why decisions are made mean that the only information to rely upon to judge the correctness is: (1) extrinsic
information such as accuracy measures; and (2) the decision makers’ own expertise and knowledge. Given the former
does not change from decision to decision, it is unsurprising that experts rely on their own expertise and novices
over-rely on the tool [Sivaraman et al., 2023].
Comparing this to the properties that comprise good decision support outlined in Table 2, we can see why this approach
is largely inneffective. Giving only recommendations:
1.does not help to provide new options or to ﬁlter out unlikely options;
2.does not consider possibilities or judgements beyond one option;
3.does not help determine stakeholder values;
6