Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
abductive process is engaged as soon as people start interacting with a system, irrelevant of any particular explainability
or interpretability tools. As such, Hoffman et al. argue that a model of abductive reasoning is a suitable foundational
model for conceptualising explainable AI.
Figure 2: A model of abductive reasoning. When someone observes an event they do not understand, they generate
hypotheses of the cause, and then judge the plausibility of (some of) these hypotheses; potentially iterating to generate
more hypotheses as new evidence is found. Eventually, the mis-understanding is resolved, possibly to be re-visited later.
Peirce [2009] deﬁnes the process of abductive reasoning as ﬁve step process, outlined in Figure 21:
1.Observe an event or phenomenon : A person observes an event, usually one that is surprising and does not ﬁt
their current mental model. This leads to them to start searching for explanatory hypotheses.
2.Generate hypotheses : The person generates some potential reasons for why they would have observed the
event/phenomenon, which are at this point, informed guesses. The reasons are hypotheses .
3.Judge the plausibility of the hypotheses : The person searches for evidence that may support or undermine
different hypotheses, perhaps ruling out some or making some more likely. Some hypotheses are ruled out,
while others become are judged as more likely. This process may lead to new hypotheses.
4.Resolve understanding : A particular hypothesis ﬁts the new observation and previous experience of the
decision maker, so is adopted as the most likely cause of the observation. This may be a tentative resolution.
5.Extend : Revise and extend the process when new evidence is observed or considered.
This philosophical model of decision making is supported by research from cognitive science. Klein et al. [2007]
present a theory of sensemaking known as the Data/Frame Theory , built from studies with expert decision makers.
Theframe , a generalisation of a hypothesis, is a model of how something works, while the data contains observations
made and inferences that combine the observations and the frame. The data is used to adjust the frame (similar to
judging plausibility) and the frame is used to determine what new data to ﬁnd. Klein et al. shows that people make
decisions by ﬁrst using their intuition to narrow down to a set of likely options (the frames), and then go through each
option one-by-one, searching for evidence (data) to make judgements. Good decision makers search for evidence that
both supports and refutes a hypothesis. Klein et al. [2007] argue that abductive reasoning plays a central role in this
sensemaking process. We build the evaluative AI framework around the Data/Frame model.
Hoffman et al. [2022] argue that abductive reasoning is a suitable foundation for conceptualising explainable AI. In this
paper, we argue for a similar — yet orthogonal — view; speciﬁcally, explainable AI for decision making . In decision
making, the decision maker is involved in two (related) reasoning processes . First, the decision maker is trying to
make a judgement/decision about the world (e.g. a diagnosis). The observed event is something that needs explaining,
such as a medical symptom, the hypotheses are the potential causes of that observation, such as a disease, and the
judgement is about the likelihood of a particular hypotheses being true given the evidence. Second, the decision maker
is also making a judgement about the DST (e.g. whether its reasoning is sound, as proposed by Hoffman et al. [2022]).
The observed event is an output oof an AI system fgiven an input i. The hypotheses characterise which combinations
of inputs iand computations (parts of f) caused this output to occur. The process of judgement is to determine why the
system produced the output that it did. Table 3 outlines this for a medical diagnosis scenario. Decision makers need
to ‘invert’ the explainable AI process to align with the decision-making process. Hoffman et al. argue that machines
reasoning in an abductive manner align better with this process. The argument in this paper is similar, but rather than
giving abductive explanations, DSTs should be designed to explicitly support the abductive reasoning process.
2.3 Explainable/interpretable AI and decision making
As noted earlier, the initial assumption of AI-assisted DSTs is that, if we provide people with recommendations, they
will follow those recommendations when required, leading to better decisions. However, issues such as warranted and
1The ﬁnal step of extending the explanation is omitted because it simply repeats the process when new events are observed.
4