Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! A P REPRINT
Table 3: The different ways that Explainable AI and Evaluative AI align against the human abductive reasoning process,
using medical diagnosis as an example.
Human Reasoning Step Explainable AI Evaluative AI
Event to explain AI diagnosis Medical symptoms
Hypotheses AI reasoning Medical conditions
Evidence Models, explanatory information Evidence for/against hypotheses
Judgement Causes of inputs to AI diagnosis Likelihood of medical conditions
unwarranted distrust [Jacovi et al., 2021] mean that AI systems are often deployed and then largely ignored [Sivaraman
et al., 2023, Gunning and Aha, 2019]. Explainable/interpretable AI helps to mitigate the issues of unwarranted distrust
by helping people to understand why decisions are made, potentially building trust and improving decision making.
[Miller, 2019, Gunning and Aha, 2019, Mueller et al., 2019, Swartout and Moore, 1993, Miller et al., 2022].
However, recent research has shown that the recommendation-driven explainable AI and interpretable machine learning
has little effect on decision making [Gajos and Mamykina, 2022, Buçinca et al., 2021, Green and Chen, 2019a,b,
Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2021, Nourani et al., 2021], although this is not always the case [Leichtmann et al., 2022,
Madumal et al., 2020, van der Waa et al., 2021]. The two primary issues are over-reliance andunder-reliance . When
decision makers over-rely a machine, they accept its recommendations even in cases where they are wrong, caused by
unwarranted trust [Jacovi et al., 2021]. This is often attributed to automation bias , where the machine is considered
correct because it is a machine, so “must be right”. When decision makers under-rely a machine, they reject its
recommendations even in cases where the recommendations are correct, caused by unwarranted distrust [Jacovi et al.,
2021]. This is often attributed to algorithmic aversion , where machine outputs are rejected but would be accepted had
they come from a human. In either case, a poor decision can often be attributed to ﬁxation [Klein et al., 2007] on a
particular hypothesis — searching for evidence to support one hypothesis without considering others.
Some experimental studies [Chromik et al., 2021, Eiband et al., 2019, Ghai et al., 2021, Vera Liao and Varshney, 2021]
indicate that most participants do not cognitively engage with explainability tools. Participants who do engage seem to
believe that they understand explanatory information, leading to over-conﬁdence in their decisions [Chromik et al.,
2021], even when presented with explanations that contain no useful information [Eiband et al., 2019].
We have seen this in observational studies. In a study where expert board gamers used an AI-based assistant to provide
recommendations, we saw that many players did not truly engage with recommendations, and adding explanatory
information did not help, as they typically did not engage with explanatory information either. When they did, we saw
some behavioural changes, but not enough to see a statistically signiﬁcant improvement in decision making.
Similarly, in experiments on a general task with general participants, Buçinca et al. [2021] and Gajos and Mamykina
[2022] show that explainability did not mitigate over-reliance, and in some cases it increased over-reliance. They
assert that this is because participants did not pay attention to explainability information. They propose three cognitive
forcing strategies to mitigate over-reliance, such as forcing people to give a decision before seeing a recommendation.
Their results showed that cognitive forcing slightly mitigated over-reliance, compared to feature-based and uncertainty
judgements, particularly disregarding incorrect AI recommendations, but with no statistically signiﬁcant differences
in task performance. Interestingly, despite cognitive forcing functions being more effective, they were least preferred
by participants. Buçinca et al. [2021] attribute this to the phenomenon of people not wanting to exert mental energy
[Kool and Botvinick, 2018]. This indicates that Evaluative AI could prove useful by not ﬁxating people on particular
recommendations, but allowing people to assess whether evidence supports their hypotheses, rather than trying to
understand the DST’s reasoning.
These studies show that the recommendation-driven XAI does little to mitigate over- and under-reliance. This has lead
to several authors to argue that XAI research should return to the foundation of cognitive and social processes involved
in decision making [Kaur et al., 2022, Vera Liao and Varshney, 2021, Green and Chen, 2019a,b, Wang et al., 2019].
Some authors [Gajos and Mamykina, 2022, Buçinca et al., 2021, Vera Liao and Varshney, 2021] have attributed the
cause of ignoring explanatory information to the ‘failure’ of system 1 processing in dual process theory [Kahneman,
2011]. In brief, the theory is that system 1 thinking (fast, heuristic, and biased) ‘interferes’ with system 2 thinking (slow
and more accurate). The conclusion that is often, but not always drawn, is that DSTs should aim to support system 2
thinking and prevent system 1 ‘interference’.
However, we caution against the idea of prioritising system 2 thinking over system 1 thinking , for three reasons.
First, research in Naturalistic Decision Making (NDM) demonstrates that ‘system 1’ thinking, which they call
intuition , is a powerful source of problem solving that often produces better and/or faster decisions than system 2
thinking [Klein, 2015]. For example, Coderre et al. [2003] found that intuition signiﬁcantly outperformed hypothetico-
5