represents the length of the box along the horizontal (x) axis
in the image frame, and wrepresent the width of the box
along the vertical (y) axis in the image frame. We use this
convention for length and width to be consistent with 3D
boxes. One interesting possibility that can be explored using
the dataset is the prediction of 3D boxes using camera only.
We use two levels for difﬁculty ratings, similar to KITTI,
where the metrics for LEVEL 2 are cumulative and thus
include LEVEL 1. The criteria for an example to be in
a speciﬁc difﬁculty level can depend on both the human
labelers and the object statistics.
We emphasize that all LiDAR and all camera groundtruth
labels were manually created by highly experienced human
annotators using industrial-strength labeling tools. We have
performed multiple phases of label veriﬁcation to ensure a
high labeling quality.
3.4. Sensor Data
LiDAR data is encoded in this dataset as range images,
one for each LiDAR return; data for the ﬁrst two returns is
provided. The range image format is similar to the rolling
shutter camera image in that it is ﬁlled in column-by-column
from left to right. Each range image pixel corresponds to
a LiDAR return. The height and width are determined by
the resolution of the inclination and azimuth in the LiDAR
sensor frame. Each inclination for each range image row
is provided. Row 0 (the top row of the image) corresponds
to the maximum inclination. Column 0 (left most column
of the image) corresponds to the negative x-axis ( i.e.,the
backward direction). The center of the image corresponds to
the positive x-axis ( i.e.,the forward direction). An azimuth
correction is needed to make sure the center of the range
image corresponds to the positive x-axis.
Each pixel in the range image includes the following
properties. Figure 4demonstrates an example range image.
•Range: The distance between the LiDAR point and the
origin in LiDAR sensor frame.
•Intensity: A measurement indicating the return strength
of the laser pulse that generated the LiDAR point, partly
based on the reﬂectivity of the object struck by the laser
pulse.
•Elongation: The elongation of the laser pulse beyond
its nominal width. Elongation in conjunction with in-
tensity is useful for classifying spurious objects, such
as dust, fog, rain. Our experiments suggest that a highly
elongated low-intensity return is a strong indicator for
a spurious object, while low intensity alone is not a
sufﬁcient signal.
•No label zone: This ﬁeld indicates whether the LiDAR
point falls into a no label zone, i.e., an area that is
ignored for labeling.
•Vehicle pose: The pose at the time the LiDAR point is
captured.
Figure 3. Camera LiDAR synchronization accuracy in milliseconds.
The number in x-axis is in milli-seconds. The y-axis denotes the
percentage of data frames.
Figure 4. A range image example. It is cropped to only show the
front 90◦. The ﬁrst three rows are range, intensity, and elongation
from the ﬁrst LiDAR return. The last three are range, intensity, and
elongation from the second LiDAR return.
•Camera projection: We provide accurate LiDAR point
to camera image projections with rolling shutter effect
compensated. Figure 5demonstrates that LiDAR points
can be accurately mapped to image pixels via the pro-
jections.
Our cameras and LiDARs data are well-synchronized.
The synchronization accuracy is computed as
camera center time−frame start time−
camera center offset/360◦∗0.1s(4)
The camera center time is the exposure time of the image’s
center pixel. The frame start time is the start time of this
data frame. The camera center offset is the offset of the
+x axis of each camera sensor frame w.r.t. the backward
direction of the vehicle. The camera center offset is 90◦for
SIDE LEFT camera, 90◦+45◦for FRONT LEFT camera
etc. See Figure 3for the synchronization accuracy for all
the cameras. The synchronization error is bounded in [-6ms,
7ms] with 99.7% conﬁdence, [-6ms, 8ms] with 99.9995%
conﬁdence.
Camera images are JPEG compressed images. Rolling
shutter timing information is provided with each image.
Rolling shutter projection. For any given point pin the
2449