Y axes, and [−3m,3m]along the Z axis. This gives us
a512×512pixel Birds Eye View (BEV) pseudo-image.
We use the same convolutional backbone architecture as
the original paper [ 16], with the slight exception that our
Vehicle model matches our Pedestrian model in having a
stride of 1 for the ﬁrst convolutional block. This decision
means both the input and output spatial resolutions of the
models are 512×512pixels, which increases accuracy at
the cost of a more expensive model. We deﬁne anchor
sizes(l,w,h)as(4.73m,2.08m,1.77m)for vehicles and
(0.9m,0.86m,1.71m)for pedestrians. Both vehicles and
pedestrians have anchors oriented to 0andπ/2radians. To
achieve good heading prediction, we used a different rota-
tion loss formulation, using a smooth-L1 loss of the heading
residual error, wrapping the result between [−π,π]with a
huber delta δ=1
9.
In reference to the LEVEL deﬁnition in section 3.3, we
deﬁne the difﬁculty for the single frame 3D object detection
task as follows. We ﬁrst ignore all 3D labels without any
LiDAR points. Next, we assign LEVEL 2 to examples where
either the labeler annotates as hard or if the example has ≤5
LiDAR points. Finally, the rest of the examples are assigned
to LEVEL 1.
We evaluate models on the proposed 3D detection metrics
for both 7-degree-of-freedom 3D boxes and 5-degree-of-
freedom BEV boxes on the 150-scene hidden test set. For
our 3D tasks, we use 0.7 IoU for vehicles and 0.5 IoU for
pedestrians. Table 6shows detailed results;
2D Object Detection in Camera Images We use the
Faster R-CNN object detection architecture [ 21], with
ResNet-101 [ 11] as the feature extractor. We pre-trained
the model on the COCO Dataset [ 17] before ﬁne-tuning
the model on our dataset. We then run the detector on all
5 camera images, and aggregate the results for evaluation.
The resulting model achieved an AP of 63.7 at LEVEL 1
and 53.3 at LEVEL 2 on vehicles, and an AP of 55.8 at
LEVEL 1 and 52.7 at LEVEL 2 on pedestrians.
5.2. Baselines for Multi­Object Tracking
3D Tracking We provide an online 3D multi-object track-
ing baseline following the common tracking-by-detection
paradigm, leaning heavily on the above PointPillars [ 16]
models. Our method is similar in spirit to [ 22]. In this
paradigm, tracking at each timestep tconsists of running a
detector to generate detections dn
t={d1
t,d2
t,...,dn
t}with
nbeing the total number of detections, associating these
detections to our tracks tm
t={t1
t,t2
t,...,tm
t}withmbeing
the current number of tracks, and updating the state of these
trackstm
tgiven the new information from detects dn
t. Ad-
ditionally, we need to provide a birth and death process to
determine when a given track is Dead (not to be matched
with), Pending (not conﬁdent enough yet), and Live (beingreturned from the tracker).
For our baseline, we use our already trained PointPillars
[16] models from above, 1−IOU as our cost function, the
Hungarian method [ 15] as our assignment function, and a
Kalman Filter [ 13] as our state update function. We ignore
detections with lower than a 0.2 class score, and set a min-
imum threshold of 0.5 IoU for a track and a detect to be
considered a match. Our tracked state consists of a 10 pa-
rameter state tm
t={cx,cy,cz,w,l,h,α,vx,vy,vz }with a
constant velocity model. For our birth and death process, we
simply increment the score of the track with the associated
detection score if seen, decrement by a ﬁxed cost (0.3) if the
track is unmatched, and provide a ﬂoor and ceiling of the
score [0, 3]. Both vehicle and pedestrian results can be seen
in Table 7. For both vehicles and pedestrians the mismatch
percentage is quite low, indicating IoU with a Hungarian
algorithm [ 15] is a reasonable assignment method. Most of
the loss of MOTA appears to be due to misses that could
either be due to localization, recall, or box shape prediction
issues.
2D Tracking We use the visual multi-object tracking
method Tracktor [ 14] based on a Faster R-CNN object de-
tector that we pre-trained on the COCO Dataset [ 17] and
then ﬁne-tuned on our dataset. We optimized the parameters
of the Tracktor method on our dataset and set σactive= 0.4,
λactive= 0.6, andλnew= 0.3. The resulting Tracktor model
achieved a MOTA of 34.8 at LEVEL 1 and 28.3 at LEVEL 2
when tracking vehicles.
5.3. Domain Gap
The majority of the scenes in our dataset were recorded
in three distinct cities (Table 4), namely San Francisco,
Phoenix, Mountain View. We treat Phoenix and Mountain
View as one domain called Suburban (SUB) in this experi-
ment. SF and SUB have similar number of scenes per (Table
4) and different number of objects in total (Table 8). As
these two domains differ from each other in fascinating ways,
the resulting domain gap in our dataset opens up exciting re-
search avenues in the ﬁeld of domain adaptation. We studied
the effects of this domain gap by evaluating the performance
of object detectors trained on data recorded in one domain
on the training set and evaluated in another domain on the
validation set.
We used the object detectors described in Section 5.1.
We ﬁlter the training and validation datasets to only contain
frames from a speciﬁc geographic subset referred to as SF
(San Francisco), SUB (MTV + Phoenix), or ALL (all data),
and retrain and reevaluate models on the permutation of these
splits. Table 9summarizes our results. For the 3D LiDAR-
based vehicle object detector, we observed an APH reduction
of 8.0 when training on SF and evaluating on SUB compared
with training on SUB and evaluating on SUB, and an APH
2452