F FL,FR SL,SR
Size 1920x1280 1920x1280 1920x1040
HFOV ±25.2◦±25.2◦±25.2◦
Table 3. Camera Speciﬁcations for Front (F), Front-Left (FL), Front-
Right (FR), Side-Left (SL), Side-Right (SR) cameras. The image
sizes reﬂect the results of both cropping and downsampling the
original sensor data. The camera horizontal ﬁeld of view (HFOV) is
provided as an angle range in the x-axis in the x-y plane of camera
sensor frame (Figure 1).
Laser: FRONT
Laser: REAR
VehicleLaser: SIDE_LEFT
Laser: SIDE_RIGHTLaser: TOP
SIDE_LEFT
FRONT_RIGHTCameras
FRONTFRONT_LEFT
SIDE_RIGHT
x-axis
y-axis
z-axis is positive upwards
Figure 1. Sensor layout and coordinate systems.
ning mode can vary from scene to scene. All camera images
are downsampled and cropped from the raw images; Table 3
provides speciﬁcations of the camera images. See Figure 1
for the layout of sensors relevant to the dataset.
3.2. Coordinate Systems
This section describes the coordinate systems used in
the dataset. All of the coordinate systems follow the right
hand rule, and the dataset contains all information needed to
transform data between any two frames within a run segment.
TheGlobal frame is set prior to vehicle motion. It is an
East-North-Up coordinate system: Up (z) is aligned with the
gravity vector, positive upwards; East (x) points directly east
along the line of latitude; North (y) points towards the north
pole.
The Vehicle frame moves with the vehicle. Its x-axis
is positive forwards, y-axis is positive to the left, z-axis
is positive upwards. A vehicle pose is deﬁned as a 4x4
transform matrix from the vehicle frame to the global frame.
Global frame can be used as the proxy to transform between
different vehicle frames. Transform among close frames is
very accurate in this dataset.
ASensor frame is deﬁned for each sensor. It is denoted
as a 4x4 transformation matrix that maps data from sensor
frame to vehicle frame. This is also known as the ”extrinsics”
matrix.
The LiDAR sensor frame has z pointing upward. The x-y
Figure 2. LiDAR label example. Yellow = vehicle. Red = pedes-
trian. Blue = sign. Pink = cyclist.
axes depends on the LiDAR.
The camera sensor frame is placed at the center of the
lens. The x axis points down the lens barrel out of the lens.
The z axis points up. The y/z plane is parallel to the image
plane.
TheImage frame is a 2D coordinate system deﬁned for
each camera image, where +x is along the image width (i.e.
column index starting from the left), and +y is along the
image height (i.e. row index starting from the top). The
origin is the top-left corner.
The LiDAR Spherical coordinate system is based on
the Cartesian coordinate system in the LiDAR sensor frame.
A point (x, y, z) in the LiDAR Cartesian coordinate system
can be uniquely transformed to a (range, azimuth, inclina-
tion) tuple in the LiDAR Spherical coordinate system by the
following equations:
range=/radicalbig
x2+y2+z2 (1)
azimuth= atan2( y,x) (2)
inclination = atan2( z,/radicalbig
x2+y2). (3)
3.3. Ground Truth Labels
We provide high-quality ground truth annotations, both
for the LiDAR sensor readings as well as the camera images.
Separate annotations in LiDAR and camera data opens up
exciting research avenues in sensor fusion. For any label,
we deﬁne length, width, height to be the sizes along x-axis,
y-axis and z-axis respectively.
We exhaustively annotated vehicles, pedestrians, signs
and cyclists in the LiDAR sensor readings. We labeled each
object as a 7-DOF 3D upright bounding box (cx, cy, cz, l, w,
h,θ) with a unique tracking ID, where cx,cy,czrepresent
the center coordinates, l,w,hare the length, width, height,
andαdenotes the heading angle in radians of the bounding
box. Figure 2illustrates an annotated scene as an example.
In addition to the LiDAR labels, we separately exhaus-
tively annotated vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists in all cam-
era images. We annotated each object with a tightly ﬁtting
4-DOF image axis-aligned 2D bounding box which is com-
plementary to the 3D boxes and their amodal 2D projections.
The label is encoded as ( cx,cy,l,w) with a unique tracking
ID, where cxandcyrepresent the center pixel of the box, l
2448