Scalability in Perception for Autonomous Driving: Waymo Open Dataset
Pei Sun1, Henrik Kretzschmar1, Xerxes Dotiwalla1, Aur ´elien Chouard1, Vijaysai Patnaik1, Paul Tsui1,
James Guo1, Yin Zhou1, Yuning Chai1, Benjamin Caine2, Vijay Vasudevan2, Wei Han2, Jiquan Ngiam2,
Hang Zhao1, Aleksei Timofeev1, Scott Ettinger1, Maxim Krivokon1, Amy Gao1, Aditya Joshi1, Yu
Zhang∗1, Jonathon Shlens2, Zhifeng Chen2, and Dragomir Anguelov1
1Waymo LLC2Google LLC
Abstract
The research community has increasing interest in au-
tonomous driving research, despite the resource intensity
of obtaining representative real world data. Existing self-
driving datasets are limited in the scale and variation of
the environments they capture, even though generalization
within and between operating regions is crucial to the over-
all viability of the technology. In an effort to help align the
research community’s contributions with real-world self-
driving problems, we introduce a new large-scale, high
quality, diverse dataset. Our new dataset consists of 1150
scenes that each span 20 seconds, consisting of well syn-
chronized and calibrated high quality LiDAR and camera
data captured across a range of urban and suburban ge-
ographies. It is 15x more diverse than the largest cam-
era+LiDAR dataset available based on our proposed geo-
graphical coverage metric. We exhaustively annotated this
data with 2D (camera image) and 3D (LiDAR) bounding
boxes, with consistent identiﬁers across frames. Finally, we
provide strong baselines for 2D as well as 3D detection
and tracking tasks. We further study the effects of dataset
size and generalization across geographies on 3D detection
methods. Find data, code and more up-to-date information
at http://www.waymo.com/open.
1. Introduction
Autonomous driving technology is expected to enable a
wide range of applications that have the potential to save
many human lives, ranging from robotaxis to self-driving
trucks. The availability of public large-scale datasets and
benchmarks has greatly accelerated progress in machine
perception tasks, including image classiﬁcation, object de-
tection, object tracking, semantic segmentation as well as
∗Work done while at Waymo LLC.instance segmentation [ 7,17,23,10].
To further accelerate the development of autonomous
driving technology, we present the largest and most diverse
multimodal autonomous driving dataset to date, comprising
of images recorded by multiple high-resolution cameras and
sensor readings from multiple high-quality LiDAR scanners
mounted on a ﬂeet of self-driving vehicles. The geographi-
cal area captured by our dataset is substantially larger than
the area covered by any other comparable autonomous driv-
ing dataset, both in terms of absolute area coverage, and
in distribution of that coverage across geographies. Data
was recorded across a range of conditions in multiple cities,
namely San Francisco, Phoenix, and Mountain View, with
large geographic coverage within each city. We demonstrate
that the differences in these geographies lead to a pronounced
domain gap, enabling exciting research opportunities in the
ﬁeld of domain adaptation.
Our proposed dataset contains a large number of high-
quality, manually annotated 3D ground truth bounding boxes
for the LiDAR data, and 2D tightly ﬁtting bounding boxes
for the camera images. All ground truth boxes contain track
identiﬁers to support object tracking. In addition, researchers
can extract 2D amodal camera boxes from the 3D LiDAR
boxes using our provided rolling shutter aware projection
library. The multimodal ground truth facilitates research in
sensor fusion that leverages both the LiDAR and the camera
annotations. Our dataset contains around 12 million LiDAR
box annotations and around 12 million camera box annota-
tions, giving rise to around 113k LiDAR object tracks and
around 250k camera image tracks. All annotations were
created and subsequently reviewed by trained labelers using
production-level labeling tools.
We recorded all the sensor data of our dataset using an
industrial-strength sensor suite consisting of multiple high-
resolution cameras and multiple high-quality LiDAR sensors.
Furthermore, we offer synchronization between the camera
and the LiDAR readings, which offers interesting opportu-
1
2446