Figure 6. Parallelogram cover of all level 13 S2 cells touched by all ego poses in San Francisco, Mountain View, and Phoenix.
AP= 0.05after this augmentation. This avoids producing
an over-estimated AP with very sparse p/rcurve sampling.
This implementation can be easily parallelized, which makes
it more efﬁcient when evaluating on a large dataset. IoU
is used to decide true positives for vehicle, pedestrian and
cyclist. Box center distances are used to decide true positives
for sign.
4.1.2 2D Object Detection in Camera Images
In contrast to the 3D detection task, the 2D camera image
detection task restricts the input data to camera images, ex-
cluding LiDAR data. The task is to produce 2D axis-aligned
bounding boxes in the camera images based on a single cam-
era image. For this task, we consider the AP metric for the
object classes of vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists. We use
the same AP metric implementation as described in Section
4.1.1 except that 2D IoU is used for matching.
4.2. Object Tracking
Multi-Object Tracking involves accurately tracking of the
identity, location, and optionally properties (e.g. shape or
box dimensions) of objects in a scene over time.
Our dataset is organized into sequences, each 20 seconds
long with multiple sensors producing data sampled at 10Hz.
Additionally, every object in the dataset is annotated with a
unique identiﬁer that is consistent across each sequence. We
support evaluation of tracking results in both 2D image view,
and 3D vehicle centric coordinates.
To evaluate the tracking performance, we use the multiple
object tracking (MOT) metric [ 3]. This metric aims to con-
solidate several different characteristics of tracking systems –
namely the ability of the tracker to detect, localize, and track
the identities of objects over time – into a single metric toaid in direct comparison of method quality:
MOTA= 100−100/summationtext
t(mt+fpt+mmet)/summationtext
tgt(7)
MOTP= 100/summationtext
i,tdi
t/summationtext
tct. (8)
Letmt,fptandmmetrepresent the number of misses,
false positives and mismatches. Let gtbe the ground truth
count. A mismatch is counted if a ground truth target is
matched to a track and the last known assignment was not
the track. In MOTP, let di
trepresent the distance between a
detection and its corresponding ground truth match, and ct
be the number of matches found. The distance function used
to calculate di
tis1−IoUfor a matched pair of boxes. See
[3] for the full procedure.
Similar to the detection metrics implementation described
in4.1, we sample scores directly and compute an MOTA for
each score cutoff. We pick the highest MOTA among all the
score cutoffs as the ﬁnal metric.
5. Experiments
We provide baselines on our datasets based on recent
approaches for detection and tracking for vehicles and pedes-
trians. The same method can be applied to other object types
in the dataset. We use 0.7 IoU for vehicles and 0.5 IoU for
pedestrians when computing metrics for all tasks.
5.1. Baselines for Object Detection
3D LiDAR Detection To establish a 3D Object Detection
baseline, we reimplemented PointPillars [ 16], which is a
simple and efﬁcient LiDAR-based 3D detector that ﬁrst uses
a single layer PointNet [ 20] to voxelize the point cloud into
the Birds Eye View, followed by a CNN region proposal
network [ 24]. We trained the model on single frame of
sensor data with all LiDARs included.
For vehicles and pedestrians we set the voxel size to
0.33m, the grid range to [−85m,85m]along the X and
2451