5	objectives. One player is called the generator network (G), and the other is called the discriminator network (D). 1st player (G) tries to fool the 2nd player (D) by producing very natural looking real-world images from random latent vector z, and 2nd player (D) gets better in-distinguishing between real and generated data. Both the networks try to optimize themselves in the best way to accomplish the individual objectives because both have their objective functions, i.e., D wants is to maximize its cost value, and G wants to minimize its cost value is given as follows: 																				𝐿V.W=𝑉	(𝐷,𝐺)=𝔼G~[\]^]G[log	(𝐷(x)]+𝔼F~[`Flog	1−𝐷	𝐺	z																				(3)						where Equation 3 shows that there are two loss functions - log	 (D(x)	 for	the	discriminator	network	and	log	(1−D	(G(z)))	for	the	generator	 network	and two optimizers for the generator and the discriminator since they are two different networks.       Figure 4: Design of the GAN architecture [1], where the objective of the discriminator is to maximize its cost value, i.e., log (D(x) and the generator is to minimize its cost value, i.e., log (1−D (G(z))). 2.4 Glow     Glow is a flow-based generative model [11] that shows the improved performance in terms of log-likelihood as compared to earlier popular generative models, such as GAN [1] and VAE [10]. The key idea behind this multi-scale architecture is a series of flow steps such as (i) Actnorm Layer-affine transformation of the activations functions through the bias-parameter and channel-scale for normalization functions, (ii) Invertible 1 × 1 convolution-fixed permutation changed with learned 1x1 convolution whose weight matrix initialized as a random rotation matrix, and (iii) Affine Coupling Layers-coupling multiple layers for numerical stability. The critical properties of the flow-based generative models are: — Precise latent variable presumption and log-likelihood estimation: ¾ VAE infer only approximately the value of the latent. ¾ GAN has no encoder at all to infer the latent. ¾ Glow directly infers the latent and optimizes the exact log-likelihood of the data.  — Efficient inference and efficient synthesis: ¾ Autoregressive models, such as the PixelCNN [14] is inefficient on parallel hardware. ¾ Glow is efficient to parallelize.  — Valuable latent space for downstream tasks: ¾ Autoregressive models have unknown marginal distributions. ¾ In GAN, data points cannot usually directly represented in a latent space. ¾ Glow and VAE infer meaningful latent — Significant potential for memory savings: ¾ Computing gradients require a constant amount of memory. 2.5 Vector Quantized Variational AutoEncoder-2 (VQ-VAE-2)  Vector Quantized VAE-2 (VQ-VAE-2) [12] is an improved version of Vector Quantized VAE (VQ-VAE) [13] that generates a large size image. The key idea behind this simple feed-forward encoder and decoder architecture is using discrete latent space representation means that instead of thinking in pixels, it thinks more in terms of features that commonly appear in natural photos, which also makes the generation of these images up to 30 times quicker, and super-useful in case of larger images. This technique rapidly generates new diverse images with a size of approximately 1000 X 1000 pixels.  VQ-VAE-2 is a two-stage training process. Stage-I of VQ-VAE-2 first encodes the input image into two different latent maps, one for local information, and another for global details of the input image. Stage-II of  VQ-VAE-2 imposes an Autoregressive model [14] on both levels of latent space to compress the  (𝑝b(𝑧)) (𝑝d(𝐺))	(𝑝efgf	(𝑥)) Distinguishing real or fake 	Discriminator Network 	1	0	Real data samples 	Z	 Noise vector	Generator Network Z	 Noise vector	Generator data samples 	(𝑝b(𝑧)) Distinguishing real or fake 	Discriminator Network 	1	0	Real data samples 	Generator Network Z	 Noise vector	Generator data samples 	(𝑝b(𝑧)) (𝑝efgf	(𝑥)) Distinguishing real or fake 	Discriminator Network 	1	0	Real data samples 	Generator Network Z  Noise vector