11	other GAN types. Recently, Progressive Structure-Conditional GAN (PS-CGAN) [46] generates high resolution (e.g.1024 X 1024), and full-body anime characters with particular sequences of poses. 
 Figure 6: Examples of GAN generated anime characters faces. Images from [44]. 3.1.3 Image blending The blending of images together shows a dominant performance in several computer vision tasks, for example, modification of visual communication or automatic photo editing. Gaussian Poisson GAN (GP-GAN) [47] proposes an image blending method for high-resolution (HR) input images by combining CGAN [15] with traditional methods of image blending [48]. GP-GAN was the first framework that used GAN in the blending of images which have very HR. They proposed the Gaussian Poisson equation [49] to produce an HR blending image. GP-GAN fuses the information through the optimizing of [49] to produce well-blended high-resolution images, whereas preserving the HR information.  Recently, Geometrically and Color Consistent GAN (GCC-GAN) [50] combines the foreground and the background of two images seamlessly from different sources. GCC-GAN framework comprised with four sub-networks: (i) Transformation Network (TN) that generate a real-looking composite image by considering the geometric and color consistency, (ii) Refinement Network (RN) that sharps the boundary-edges of TN generated compound image, (iii) Discriminator Network (DN) that distinguishes the newly generated composite image from real image and (iv) Segmentation Network (SN) that learns to split the foreground and the background in the generated composite image.  3.1.4 Image in-painting Refilling the missing pixels of an image is known as image in-painting. It is an advance reconstruction technique in the photo and video editing applications. Exemplar GAN (Ex-GAN) [51] uses exemplar-image information as a reference image to produce a high-quality result. They assumed this extra conditional information as available at an inference of time and corresponded directly to specific characteristics of the item of importance. On the other hand, the Contextual attention model [52] undoubtedly increases the efficiency of the in-painting technique by learning feature representations to match and attend the related background patches. However, current network solutions still induce undesired artifacts and noise to the repaired regions. PGGAN [53] proposed an idea by combining the global GAN [54] with a patch-wise GAN approach [55] to design a new discriminator network. PGGAN has good results than the previous in-painting methods by aggregating local and global information. 3.1.5 Face aging  Face aging anticipates that how a person looks in the future while age regression analyzes that how a person looks in the past subject to his present face and other relevant information. Age CGAN (Age-CGAN) [56] proposed for face aging to anticipate one’s future looks and past looks, and Conditional Adversarial Autoencoder (CAAE) [57] simulates facial muscle sagging caused by aging. Similarly, Identity-Preserved CGAN (IPC-CGAN) [58] imposes an age classification term to generate photo-realistic faces and an identity-preserved term into age synthesis. Wavelet-Domain Global and Local Consistent Age GAN (Wavelet-GLCAGAN) [59] for age progression and regression. Similarly, Wavelet-GAN based face aging method [60] make sure the steadiness of features through inputting the facial feature vector along-with face image as inputs to both G and D. 3.1.6 Text-to-image synthesis Generating high-quality photo-realistic images from the text has tremendous applications in computer vision, including photo-editing, computer-aided design, and image synthesis. The Attentional GAN (AttnGAN) [61] introduced text-to-image translation model. AttnGAN is a multi-stage generation model that progressively generates LR to HR image with m-number of generators. AttnGAN consists of the attentional generative network that first draws sub-regions by applying conditions on given word