9	performance. BigGAN have some essential properties such as provides exerts control over the outputs, provides interpolation phenomena between images, which means that if there are two images, it can compute the intermediate image between them and provides the best inception score (IS), i.e., the best of earlier works had an inception score (IS) around 50, but the inception score (IS) of BigGAN technique is not less than 166, which is closer to real images which would score around 233. Extension to BigGAN proposed called Bi-Directional Big GAN (BigBiGAN) [30] improves the un-conditional image generation and representation learning capacity of the model such as increased freshet inception distance (FID) and inception score (IS) accuracy score over the baseline BigGAN [29] model for un-conditional results 2.6.10 Style-Based Generator Architecture for GAN (StyleGAN)  Although PGGAN [28] generates a high-quality image, its ability to control specific features of the generated image is minimal. To curb this issue, Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Network (StyleGAN) [31] redesigns the architecture of the generator network, makes it possible to control the image synthesis through scale-specific amendments to the styles with-out compromising the generated image quality but increases it significantly utilizing PGGAN. Infarct, StyleGAN introduced an upgraded version of PGGAN, which only focusing on the generator network to control the co-relation between input features. StyleGAN divides the input features into three types, such as (i) coarse features-pose, hair, face, shape, (ii) medium features-facial features, eyes, and (iii) fine features-color scheme. The StyleGAN is famous for its un-conventional GAN architecture such as the use of mapping network that first transforms the input latent code into inter-mediate latent code where affine transformation then produce styles that control the layers of the synthesis network through Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) [32] that scales the normalized input with style spatial statistics, and the PGGAN [28] hat has been extremely flourishing in stabilizing large-resolution GAN training. StyleGAN2 [33] comes with various improvements to image quality, efficiency, diversity, and disentanglement, and the results are incredibly improved. StyleGAN2 simply redesigns the normalization used in the generator of StyleGAN [31], which removes the artifacts such as blob-shaped artifacts that resemble water droplets. The StyleGAN2 achieves excellent results in face image synthesis and quality than StyleGAN.   2.7 Analysis of GAN variants Section 2.6 discusses different prominent versions of GAN, and now Section 2.7 provides a much-needed analysis of the GANs variants in-terms of their merits and demerits. Prior knowledge about the strengths and limitation of the model will be important before applying it successfully for a practical application.  CGAN [15] can control the generation of the image with its conditional variable applied on G and D. CGAN based models dictate the type of data generated through a applied condition, create a general framework for different application, i.e., not application specific, and potentially develop into a huge tool for providing new image datasets. DCGAN [17] is the first convolutional neural network (CNN) [16] based GAN architecture demonstrates steady training procedure and achieved great performance in superior quality sharp images generation tasks. But, on the removal the batch normalization layer (BN) [192] from DCGAN architecture, it is inferior in quality, and there is insufficient diversity in the generated images.  BEGAN [25] uses Wasserstein distance instead of JS divergence that balances both the networks (G and D) in the training, which is fast, stable, avoid overfitting, and robust to parameter changes. In addition, BEGAN method also add a new estimated convergence measure to stabilize the training and generation of human faces with highly quality.  LapGAN [18] was the main adaptation for the GAN that up-scale LR input image to HR outputs image in coarse-to-fine fashion. LAPGAN combines the conditional GAN [15] with a Laplacian pyramid representation, which can generate more photo-realistic images than original GAN [1]. Although, LapGAN performs far more better than GAN in generating photo-realistic images, however, its coarse-to fine fashion is quite complex because the generative models at each level can be totally different from other level generative models, are trained independently, i.e., each level generative model getting no updates from others which hurts its performance. EBGAN [22] demonstrates better convergence power and the capacity to produce realistic diverse images of high-resolution by preventing the generator not to produce samples fallen in a few modes through a regularizer loss term. However, fixed margin m phenomena used in EBGAN make it difficult to adapt to the changing dynamics of the discriminator and generator, which hurts the performance of the discriminator network in-reconstructing the real samples because the energy value of the generated example vary near the margin m. WGAN [23] use Wasserstein or Earth mover’s distance as an alternative to JS divergence for comparing distributions, which gives better gradients and improves the training stability through solving the training problems (i.e., the