13	Photo Editor, a user can make any adjustment on the given photo with the help of rough brush striking. Another high eminence facial characteristic editing framework referred to as Attribute GAN (AttGAN) [73] uses encoder-decoder structural design and takes the facial feature information as a component of the latent vector demonstration that is a missing-gradient in previous facial editing applications. 3.1.10 Visual saliency prediction Visual Saliency describes the region of interest in an image or video that attracts human attention. Extensive studies have been made on saliency detection to get accurate results. Saliency Prediction GAN (Sal-GAN) [74] proposed two networks based on saliency prediction strategy. Sal-GAN’s generator predicts saliency-maps from input image’s raw-pixels, and the discriminator takes the output of the first one to discriminate a saliency map into predicted or ground truth while updating the generator parameters.  Capsule-CGAN based saliency detection (Sal-CapsuleCGAN) [75] method integrates the popular capsule blocks [235] into both G and D instead of traditional U-Net-like structural design. The generator predicts saliency-maps not able to be distinguished from the real saliency maps, and the discriminator distinguishes the predictable output from the synthetic ones. The major draw-back of the mentioned salient object detection method is that they are unable to detect salient objects in a noisy scene. So lately, GAN based De-noising Saliency Prediction GAN (DSAL-GAN) [76] detects the salient object in a noisy image. DSAL-GAN comprised of two GAN, where the first GAN de-noise the noisy image, and the second GAN detects the salient object in a de-noised image. 3.1.11 Object detection Small objects detection (SOD) is a demanding task due to the small size and noisy version. The task becomes even more complicated when their appearance is invisible with other visible objects in the scene. Segmentor GAN (SeGAN) [77] detects objects by combining the object segmentation and object generation techniques. The segmentor network of SeGAN takes an image and visible regions as inputs and generates the mask of the entire occluded object. Both G and D trained in an adversarial way for the generation of an object image that has invisible regions. For SOD, Perceptual-GAN (PGAN) [78] generates ultra-resolved descriptions of small objects for better detection by narrowing the differences between small and large objects and Multi-Task GAN (MTGAN) [79] uses a super-resolution network (SRN) to up-scale the small-scale distorted image into the large-scale clear image for better detection. Recently, the GAN-based Detection of Objects (GAN-DO) [80] method learns an adversarial objective for object detection through training. GAN-DO takes the low-quality image as input for accurate object detection as compared to previous object detection methods takes a high-quality image as input. 3.1.12 3D image synthesis Advances in 3-dimensional (3D) volumetric convolution networks have led to the application of GAN to generate 3D objects. 3D-GAN [81] expands the system from 2D-GAN to 3D-GAN. Similarly; Projective GAN (Pr-GAN) [82] inferred 3D objects from multiple 2D views of an object. They used a 3D volumetric convolution network to generate 3D shapes in the generator, where they used 2D projected image as an input of discriminator to match synthesized 3D objects (fake object) with the 2D view. They also introduced a 3D-VAE-GAN as an expansion to 3D-GAN by including an image encoder network, which outputs the latent vector representation by taking a 2D image as input. Furthermore, GANs have utilized in many other 3D image generation applications such as 3D-CGAN [83] uses paired training data for the generation of 3D-samples in different and controllable rotation angles, Tree-GAN [84] for 3D point cloud generation of multi-class applications, and 3D GAN (3DGAN) [85] that produces 3D structure from a latent vector using the advances in modern convolution networks. 3.1.13 Medical applications GAN based medical image applications is a well-accepted active area of research. Segmentation GAN (SegAN) [86] proposed a medical image segmentation method where a critic network is used instead of the discriminator and the segmentor network instead of the generator. They use the critic because regular discriminator’s single value result (1 or 0) may not be sufficient for dense, pixel-level segmentation of medical images, and a fully CNN based segmentator as a generator generates segmentation label maps. Medical GAN (Med-GAN) [87] generates realistic synthetic electronic health records (EHRs) through a combination of an AE [9] and GAN [1]. Med-GAN takes EHRs dataset as input and generates high-dimensional discrete variables. Med-GAN generated EHRs play a vital role in expert medical opinion.  Furthermore, GANs have also been utilized in many other medical applications such as drug discovery GAN (Chem-GAN) [88] for the determination of internal chemical diversity of drugs, feedback GAN (FB-GAN) [89] for generating and designing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), medical image processing [90] for the measurements of brain activity (e.g., MRI, fMRI), missing teeth restorations [91], on-line