14	doctor recommendation framework (DR-GAN) [92] for finding a suitable doctor for the treatment of their health based on on-line questions and answers,  and Med-GAN [93] for medical  I2I translation.  3.1.14 Facial makeup transfer In facial makeup transfer, the facial makeup style of one face is transfer to a non-makeup face without losing the identity of the non-makeup face, and makeup removal system does the reverse. Beauty GAN (B-GAN) [94] transfers the makeup style from makeup face to non-makeup face. B-GAN contains dual input/output GAN, without any pre/post-processing steps, takes the source and reference face as inputs, and produced new after-makeup face. Paired-CycleGAN [95] introduced a makeup transfer and removal system where the first network transfers the makeup style and other doe’s inverse with the end goal that the output of their successive applications to an input photo match the input. Inspired by [94], Disentangled Makeup Transfer GAN (DMT-GAN) [96] model proposed for facial makeup transformation where the input image first decomposed into two independents parts, the makeup-style, and personal identity parts, and then two encoders-one decoder mechanism is applied (one encoder for personal identity, second encoder for makeup style, and the single decoder for the reconstruction of the original image). The discriminator in DMT-GAN is applied to make a distinction between real and generated images. 3.1.15 Facial landmark detection The objective of facial landmark detection is to identify human faces distinguishable vital points. Landmark detection has various applications like facial re-enactment, head pose estimation, face recognition, and 3D face reconstruction. Style-Aggregated Networks (SAN) [97] proposed an idea for facial landmark detection. SAN is a two-stage training process where Stage-I of SAN generator generates a pool of style-aggregated face image (mean face) to cover the significant variance in image style, and Stage-II of SAN generator take the mean and original face to exploit a different kind of useful information. Then a cascade technique was used to produce predictions of the heat map.  Another GAN based face landmark locations framework [98] uses retrieved uniform face landmarks as an attribute for SVM classifier for correct classification between real human face images and synthesized fake human face images. This method tries to determine that facial landmarks of the generated human faces different from real face due to the lack of global constraints.  3.1.16 Image super-resolution  The purpose of image super-resolution (SR) is to up-scale the images of low-resolution (LR) because images with high-resolution (HR) have better visual qualities. Super-Resolution GAN (SRGAN) [99] takes the LR input image and induces the HR output image through 4x up-scaling factors. Deep Enhanced SRGAN (ESRGAN) [100] further improves the visual quality result of SRGAN model by making three significant changes to the overall structure of SRGAN model such as the use of Residual-in-Residual Dense Block (RRDB) that has a superior learning power and easier to train, Relativistic GAN (RGAN) [203] improves the classification capacity of discriminator and enhanced perceptual loss through VGG-19 [230].  Furthermore, Super Resolution Dual-GAN (SRDGAN) [101] is proposed that learns to solve the noise before the super-resolution (SR) problem for the generation of the noise-free high-resolution images. Deep Tensor GAN (TGAN) [102] model cascades the tensor structures, i.e., a brief illustration of the input image with DCGAN [17] architecture for the generation of a high-quality large-size realistic image.   
 Figure 7: (a) Ground truth, (b) SRGAN result, and (c) ESRGAN result are shown in the figure, which shows that ESRGAN delivers better visual performance than SRGAN. Images from [100]. 
a b c