12	descriptions that are mainly related to those regions and multimodal similarity model that calculate the resemblance between the image generated and the conditioned sentence. Stacked GAN (StackGAN) [62] proposed for text-to-image translation framework by applying condition on given text descriptions via CGAN [15]. Two GAN are set consecutively in StackGAN, where Stage-I GAN produces an image of LR on the specified text information, and Stage-II GAN enhances the resolution of the generated image.  Similarly, Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN) [63] and Text ACGAN (TAC-GAN) [64] are text to image generation frameworks, where c (class label) concatenates with z (latent vector) [63], and z (latent vector) concatenates with the text embedding, not on class labels [64]. Semantic Image Synthesis GAN (SIS-GAN) [126] proposed for text-to-image manipulation by employing text descriptions as conditions. The generator in SIS-GAN follows the encoder-decoder structure where the encoder first encodes the input image into feature representation and then concatenates the feature representation with a text description. The decoder decodes the joint representations to a synthesized image. The discriminator determines whether the input image is realistic and whether the input image fits the definitions in the input text. SIS-GAN has quite distinct and useful applications, like  image manipulation system. 3.1.7 Human pose synthesis Pose transfer has many applications in computer vision; for instance, the character body in the movie-making can be manipulated/estimated into the desired pose or the generation of the training data for the human pose. Pose Guided Person Generation Networks (PG2) [65] use the pose information explicitly. Two GAN are set consecutively in PG2 where the Stage-I of PG2 is also called Pose Integration Network (PIN) generates initial pose transferred results by capturing the global formation of a person body, and the Stage-II of PG2  is also called Image Refined Network (IRN) generates sharper realistic images to bring Stage-I results closer to target image via adversarial training. Inspired by Ma et al. [65], a single-stage Deformable GAN [66] introduced to generate the human target image. Deformable GAN generates a person's image conditioned on appearance and poses information. Deformable GAN used deformable skip connections to transfer correct details, and nearest-neighbor loss to eliminate a different kind of deformation between the synthesized and the ground-truth images. 3.1.8 Stenographic applications Steganography is the collection of methods utilizes to hide the secret information, e.g., a document, an image, or a video, within non-secret information. Stenographic GAN (S-GAN) [67] and Secure SGAN (SS-GAN) [68] hide the secret information. The only difference between SGAN and SSGAN is that SSGAN is more reasonable for inserting messages with the arbitrary key compared to the SGAN, which is more reasonable for inserting messages with the same key, but when using the arbitrary key, SGAN becomes unreliable. In recent years, Stegano-GAN [69] is the most popular approach uses to hide arbitrary size binary data in images. Stegano-GAN consists with three networks: (i) an Encoder Network that takes an input image and secret message of random size generates the new steganographic image, (ii) a Decoder Network that attempts to recover the embedded data, and (iii) a Critic Network that evaluates the quality of the original input image and newly produces steganographic image. 3.1.9 Image manipulation applications      In interactive manipulation, manipulates an image according to user goals. Tasks in applications of image editing contain to alter in color property or nature. Interactive GAN (IGAN) [70] takes the user to sketch as input and produces the most similar realistic image. IGAN can automatically adjust the output while keeping users’ edits as real as promising. The Text-Adaptive GAN (TAGAN) [71] is another popular type of image manipulation application. TAGAN varies the specific visual attributes, like the color or texture of the input image, according to the applied condition on given word-text descriptions. In TAGAN, the discriminator creates word-level local discriminators according to applied word-text-description where each word-level local discriminator is attached to an explicit kind of input image visual attributes, and the generator only modify the explicit attributes of the input image according to discriminator coarse training feedback while preserving the other text-irrelevant contents, like layout and the pose of the image.  Dissection GAN [234] framework introduce a new technique to visualize the inner workings of a neural generator network and enable the users to not only edit the images, a new image can be added to existing images or existence image can be removed from existence images according to his wish without any artistic skills. Similarly, through interactive applications, users can make photo modifications as real as possible, which is one of the reasons why studying GAN that create different kinds of high-quality realistic images.  Introspective Adversarial Networks (IAN) [72] is introduced by combining VAE [10] and GAN [1]. IAN is a custom-made user photo editing application called Neural Photo Editor. In Neural