22	where	o(X)	in		Equation	27	is	the	result	of	the	MBD	[196]	operation		for	the	input	data	sample	𝑥Ö.	4.3.4 Historical averaging (HA) Historical Averaging (HA) [196] can improve the stability of GAN during training. This approach takes the average of the parameters (θ [𝑖]) in the past at a time ( ) and adds the average value to the respective cost functions of both G and D. Historical Averaging is considering during the networks parameters updates represented mathematically such as: 																																																									HA	=		||𝜃−1g𝜃𝑖||gÖ91=																																																																(28)	where the value of model parameters (θ) at the past time (𝑖) is represented by	𝜃[𝑖] in Equation 28. 4.3.5 Two time-scale update rule (TTUR)       Two time-scales rule (TTUR) approach uses different learning rates for both G and D to speed-up the process of GAN training. It creates equilibrium among the parameters of the generator and the discriminator to update the training steps in GAN [198]. In TTUR, the generator network uses a slower learning rate, and the discriminator network uses a faster learning rate to reach Nash-equilibrium status. The discriminator network trains with a learning rate of 4 times greater than the generator network. Hence, a higher learning rate eases the problem of slow learning of the regularized discriminator. They experimentally showed that different learning rates could accelerate the GAN training process. 4.3.6 Hybrid model Every generative model has its pros, and cons like VAE [10] suffer less from the mode collapse problem but generates blurry and low-quality images. However, GAN [1] generates sharper images of high quality but suffers more from mode collapse. Recently different approaches have proposed to combine VAE and GAN into one framework called hybrid modeling. The hybrid modeling approach has vast applications in different domains of computer vision like Neural Photo Editor application (IAN) [72] achieved better-customized results by combining VAE and GAN model together. Similarly, VAE-GAN [] architecture was proposed by sharing the decoder of a VAE with the generator of a GAN in order to supplement the reconstruction loss with a learned similarity metric, which is calculated in a feature space rather in a image space. VAE-GAN architecture can constantly produce sharp and realistically looking samples. Another hybrid model called transferred deep-convolutional generative adversarial network (tDCGAN) [] uses a DAE (Deep Auto-encoder) as a generator and DCGAN (Deep Convolution GAN) as  a discriminator to detect zero-day attacks in malware- zero-day attacks are those attacks which are unidentified prior to their detection. tDCGAN model first generates fake malware, and then learns to distinguish fake malware from real malware. This junction of VAEs and GANs architectures gives better outcome and could prove to attain momentous results, particularly in provisions of preventing mode collapse. 4.3.7 Self-Attention  GAN (SAGAN)       In Self-Attention GAN (SAGAN), the information from a broader feature space across image regions can create samples with a fine-detailed resolution instead of information-spread in local neighborhoods [199]. SA-GAN can generate multi-classes images by coordinating the fine details of every location with distant portions. Similarly, machine interpretation models [200] accomplish best results by completely utilizing a SA-mechanism.  The image transformer model [201] introduced for image generation with the addition of a SA-mechanism into an autoregressive model.  [202] formalized the SA-mechanism as a non-nearby activity to demonstrate the spatial-transient conditions in a video sequence.