18	4.1.1 Nash equilibrium Training of GAN may be considered as two deep neural networks, competing for one against the other in an adversarial way for the search of Nash-equilibrium, i.e., a state where neither the discriminator nor the generator can improve their cost unilaterally [191]. The generator and discriminator train themselves simultaneously [1] for Nash-equilibrium. On the contrary, when both G and D update their cost function independently without any coordination, it is hard to achieve Nash-equilibrium. Thus, GAN training becomes unstable. To stabilize the training of GAN, Nash-equilibrium is very important, which is best explains with the help of the following example:  For instance, suppose that there are two player, A and B, which manage the value x and y. Player A desires to minimize the value (xy) while B wants to maximize the value function: 																																																																																					𝑉x,y=xy																																																																							(16)			By	solving	Equation	16,	∂xV	(x,	y)	=	0	and	∂yV	(x,	y)	=	0,	we	can	determine	that	x	=	y	=	0	has	a	saddle	point	(Nash-equilibrium).	      Let’s see whether we can find the Nash-equilibrium using gradient descent optimizer. For this, we update the parameter x and y based on the gradient descent of the value function V (Equation 16) describes through the partial differential equations system:  																																																																																				∆x=	αÃ(GÄ)Ã(G)																																																																								(17)																																																																																				∆y=−αÃ(GÄ)Ã(Ä)																																																																						(18)	where  𝛼 is the learning rate. By plotting x, y, and xy against the training iterations, we realize that our solution does not converge because after every gradient update causes massive fluctuation and instability becomes poor, as shown in Figure 10. 
	Figure 10: With more iteration, the oscillation grows-up, which causes more and more, training instability. Image from [191]. 4.1.2 Internal covariate shift  Internal Covariate Shift (ICS) occurs when the input distribution of network activation differs as a consequence of updating parameters in previous layers [192]. When the input distribution of network changes, intermediate layers (hidden layers) try to learn to adapt to the new distribution. These learning parameters slow down the training of the model due to a change in learning rates. Due to the updated learning rates, the model required much longer training time to counter these shifts. The longer time automatically increases the training cost because the model reserved the resources in higher time. 4.1.3 Mode collapse  The mode collapse (MC) problem is the most crucial topic associated with GAN training, where the generator always produces an identical output. MC is a common cause of failure where a generator demonstrates low diversity amongst data or generates only specific types of real samples, which limits the usefulness of the learned GAN in many applications of computer visions and computer graphics. Mode Collapse may be of partial or complete type. Partial type of MC produces images with small diversity, and completer type (worst-case scenario) provides images of a single kind with no variety [193] [194]. 
Iterations Saddle Point