19	 Figure 11: Visual example of mode collapse problem. Image from Unrolled GAN [197]. Figure 11 shows the problem of model collapse for a 2D toy example where the top row shows the objective distribution the model should learn, and the base row shows the number of distributions the model learned during the training. As we see in Figure 11, instead of covering all possible modes at a time, the generator covers only one mode of the goal distribution. The generator then switches to a different mode as the discriminator learns to reject the generator's selected mode.      4.1.4 Vanishing gradient GAN is measured tough to train due to the vanishing gradient (VG) problem, and the generator may fail to improve in producing good quality images. VG is due to the gradients of the generator concerning weights in earlier layers of the networks becomes very small, like vanishingly small that initial layers in the network stopped to learns [193]. The discriminator (well-trained network) rejecting the generator generated samples with confidence due to VG [1]. Optimizing the generator may be hard for the reason that the discriminator is not sharing any information which harms the learning capacity of the models. 4.1.5 Lack of proper evaluation metrics  Evaluation of GAN models is an active research area regarding unstable training. Despite the GAN grand success achieved in numerous computer vision applications, it is still difficult to evaluate which method(s) is better than other methods [195] because there is no standard defined function for evaluation. Most of the papers proposed that the best GAN introduced their new evaluation techniques. Thus, there are no standard consensus parameters for fair model comparison, which hurt the GAN performance. 4.2 Analysis of GAN training obstacles Section 4.1 discusses several popular training short-comings of GAN and provides an analysis to have a better understanding of the main reasoning behind these training issues with the appropriate remedies. The literature review shows that performance of GAN [1] is severe damage due to training shortcomings such as Nash- equilibrium [191] describes a particular state where both G and  D do their best to have their best outcomes The optimization objective of GANs is to reach a Nash equilibrium stage where both the networks at the peak concerning their performance. But practically to reach this point is very difficult due to a lack of mutual communication between both the networks. Both the networks have to communicate with each other to enhance the individual performance, but when both the networks didn’t communicate with each, update their cost function independently without any coordination, it is hard to achieve Nash-equilibrium. So, the lack of mutual communication is the main hurdle to reach a Nash- equilibrium point. Many methods, such as the WGAN [23], Two Time-scale Update Rule (TTUR) [198], and Least-Squares GAN (LSGAN) [220] are considered to reach the Nash- equilibrium.  Internal covariate shift (ICS) [192] refers to the continuous change in the input distribution to the network layer during system training. ICS slow-down the training process, and the network requires longer training time to converge to global minima. The main reasoning behind ICS phenomena is the continuous change in network parameter values. The network becomes deeper due to continuous changes to the network parameters values. Different normalization techniques such as Batch Normalization (BN) [192] and Weight Normalization (WN) [211] solve this problem through layer normalization strategy.  Mode collapse (MC) [193][194] describes a situation in which a generator generates samples that have very little diversity. One of the main reasoning of MC is that both G and D get stronger and stronger with training iterations. But if one network, i.e., G or D, becomes far more influential than the other, the learning signal to the other network becomes ineffective, and the system fails to replicate the diversity in the training dataset. The other main reasoning is that the generator is not working according to its full capacity; the result is that it does not cover all possible modes of the target distribution. Different