10	vanishing gradient, and the mode collapse problems) very well. But WGAN model may still produce poor quality images and does not converge due to the use of weight clipping (i.e., weight clipping enforce a Lipschitz constraint on the critic network represents the discriminator network), which can lead to unwanted performance. In-addition, WGAN based models have limited capability to model complex functions.  InfoGAN [20] is another CGAN [15] based model makes the image generation procedure more controllable, and the outcome can be more interpreted through the induction of mutual information. However, InfoGANs are used preferably if datasets are not that complex such as ImageNet because in-case of complex dataset, it gives inferior quality results. The Progressive-Growing GAN (PGGAN) [28] grows progressively, have been extremely flourishing for improving quality, increasing stability and variation. PGGANs have additional benefits such as early layers converge quickly, only a few layers at a time to train from scratch and the training time reduce significantly. Although the performance of PGGAN is good, it is still not satisfied on mode collapse problem, i.e., the generator of PGGAN generates similar samples due to un-balance training of the both the networks (G and D). BigGAN [29], one of the current best models due to its outstanding, large scale, in-distinguishable and high-quality image generation capacity. The performance of BigGAN is outstanding in large and high-fidelity diverse image generation, however, with random sampling, the diversity of the generated image is much lower than a real image of the same size and also the model has limited data augmentation ability on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet. The StyleGAN [31] improves the ability of GAN to have reasonable control over the generated image instead of focusing on generating more realistic-looking images, but it also has some characteristic artifacts such as blob-shaped artifacts that resemble water droplets due to instance layer normalization and phase artifact due to progressive growing phenomena. 3 Applications GANs are an exceptionally amazing generative model in generating realistic-looking samples after the models have trained on some data. These advantages lead GAN to be applied in different fields of computer vision (CV) and artificial intelligence (AI). Here, we discuss various GAN applications in various domains, such as image, audio, and video. 3.1 Image domain 3.1.1 Hand-written Chinese characters generation Automatic characters generation is a difficult task even becomes more challenging such as the Chinese language has plenty of logographic characters in distinction to phonological languages of the world, such as English or French. Zi2zi framework is a CGAN based Chinese character generation model [35] directly derived and extended from the popular pix-to-pix translation model [34]. Dense-Net CycleGAN [36] generates Chinese characters that bases on unpaired training data where the source style information first encoded via the encoder, and then the extracted features move through a transfer unit. Finally, the transfer unit output through the decoder in the form of Chinese characters. Conditional Least Square GAN (LSCGAN) [37] proposed Chinese font generation model by combining a range of Chinese characters. LSCGAN generates a new Chinese character font style by fusing the existing Chinese characters font styles.  GlyphGAN [38] is a style-consistent GAN based Chinese font generation model that takes two input vectors as class character vector that is associated with the character class information and style vector that is associated with style information. GlyphGAN generates diverse font characters by keeping the same style across all characters.  Furthermore, GAN have also been utilized in many other character generation applications such as a Multi-Scale Multi-Class Conditional GAN (MCMS-CGAN) [39] for the generation of multi-class hand-written realistic text data, Handwritten GAN (HW-GAN) [40] for synthesizing hand-written stroke data, and a Semi-Supervised GAN (SS-GAN) [41] for the generation of Bangla handwritten characters. 3.1.2 Anime character generation The creation of animated characters in computer games is expensive. Cost-effective anime-character generation is possible that requires a reduced amount of artistic skills with GAN. Several efforts have already made for the generation of anime characters such as Chainer-DCGAN [42] and Illustration-Style Reproduction DCGAN [43]. However, they fail to generate high-quality results and often produce blurred anime characters. The automatic anime character with GAN [44] automatically generates anime-characters’ faces without compromising the quality. They used a Deep Regret Analytic GAN (DRAGAN) [45] as the basis of their GAN model, which enhanced stability and modeling performance as compared to