Package Knowledge Task Formulation Examples
LKT LinguisticPOS Tagging
Token LabelingPRON AUX VERB ADV ADP DET NOUN PUNCT
I ’m staying away from the stock .
Syntactic ChunkingB-NP B-VP B-PP B-NP I-NP I-NP O
Shearson works at American Express Co .
Name Entity RecognitionO O I-ORG I-ORG I-ORG O O OO
Bystumps Kent County Club had reached 108 .
Syntactic Arc Predication
Token Pair LabelingPeter and May bought a car.ROOTSubj
Conj ConjDet77 3
Syntactic Arc Classiﬁcation
Peter and May bought a car.ROOTSubj
Conj ConjObj
Det
BLIMP LinguisticIrregular FormsComparing
Sentence Scores
Expected:
S(3)>S(7)3Aaron broke the unicycle. 7Aaron broken the unicycle.
Determiner-Noun Agree. 3Rachelle had bought that chair 7Rachelle had bought that chairs .
Subject-Verb Agreement 3These casseroles disgust Kayla. 7These casseroles disgusts Kayla.
Island Effect 3Which bikes is John ﬁxing? 7Which is John ﬁxing bikes ?
Filler Gap 3Brett knew what many waiters ﬁnd. 7Brett knew thatmany waiters ﬁnd.
LAMAFactualGoogle RE Masked LM
Expected:
8w2VRoBERTanf3g;
P(3jC)>P(wjC)Albert Einstein was born in [MASK] 3:[MASK] =1879
T-REx Humphrey Cobb was a [MASK] and novelist 3:[MASK] =screenwriter
SQuAD A Turing machine handles [MASK] on a strip of tape. 3:[MASK] =symbols
Commonsense ConceptNet You can use [MASK] to bathe your dog. 3:[MASK] =shampoo
CAT CommonsenseConjunction Acceptability
Comparing
Sentence Scores
Expected:
87;
S(3)>S(7)3Jim yelled at Kevin because Jim was so upset. 7Jim yelled at Kevin andJim was so upset.
Winograd 3The ﬁsh ate the worm. The ﬁshwas hungry. 7The ﬁsh ate the worm. The worm was hungry.
Sense Making 3Money can be used for buying cars. 7Money can be used for buying stars .
SWAG3Someone unlocks the door and they go in. Someone leads the way in .
7Someone unlocks the door and they go in. Someone opens the door and walks out .
7Someone unlocks the door and they go in. Someone walks out of the driveway .
7Someone unlocks the door and they go in. Someone walks next to someone and sits on a pew.
Argument Reasoning3People can choose not to use Google, and since all other search engines re-direct to Google ,
Google is not a harmful monopoly.
7People can choose not to use Google, but since other search engines do not re-direct to Google ,
Google is not a harmful monopoly.
OLM PICS ReasoningTaxonomy ConjunctionMultiple Choice
Masked LM
Expected:87;
P(3jC)>P(7jC)A ferry and a ﬂoatplane are both a type of [MASK] . 3vehicle 7airplane 7boat
Antonym Negation It was [MASK] hot, it was really cold. 3not7really
Object Comparison The size of a airplane is usually much [MASK] than the size of a house. 7smaller 3larger
Always Never A chicken [MASK] has horns. 3never7rarely7sometimes 7often7always
Multi-Hop Composition When comparing a 23, a 38 and a 31 year old, the [MASK] is oldest. 3second 7ﬁrst7third
Table 1: Representative tasks from selected probe packages. S()scores a sentence by sequentially masking each
word in the sentence and averaging the log probabilities. Cdenotes the rest of the sentence, and P(jC )is the
conditional probability distribution over the vocabulary given C.VRoBERTa is the vocabulary of RoBERTa.
ens our observation on linguistic knowledge.
LAMA Petroni et al. (2019) introduce a behav-
ioral probing package that tests factual andcom-
monsense knowledge. Each example in LAMA
is a cloze-style question with its subject or ob-
ject masked. By predicting the masked word
with RoBERTa, we measure its ability to recover
real-world facts. We only consider the examples
whose masked words exist in the RoBERTa vocab-
ulary and measure whether RoBERTa predicts the
masked word with the highest probability.
CAT Zhou et al. (2020) introduce behavioral
commonsense probes based on a series of exist-
ing commonsense datasets. These probes measure
whether the pretraining model can give a higher
score to positive examples (sentences that align
with commonsense) than negative examples (sen-
tences that don’t). The score of each sentence is
computed by sequentially masking one word at a
time and averaging the log probabilities.
OLM PICS Talmor et al. (2019) introduce a be-havioral probe package that tests the model’s rea-
soning abilities including object comparison, taxon-
omy conjunction, and multi-hop composition. We
adopt the multiple choice masked LM setup where
the pretrained RoBERTa is required to ﬁll in the
mask by selecting words from 2–5 candidates. Dif-
ferent from other probing packages, Talmor et al.
(2019) show that pretrained LMs do not get a large
improvement over baselines on most of the prob-
ing tasks. This suggests that these reasoning tasks
present challenges for current pretrained models,
but we still include this probe package because it
offers tests with a different aim and thus different
insights into pretraining RoBERTa.
2.2 Baselines for Relative Performance
Probes are not a perfect, absolute measure of en-
coded knowledge. In particular, Hewitt and Liang
(2019) ﬁnd that probing classiﬁers can memorize
labeling decisions independently of the linguistic
knowledge of the representations. Pimentel et al.
(2020) argue that a tighter estimate of the encoded