ing type of probes.
We expect that, as new pretrained models and
new probes emerge, probing-across-time analyses
can help synthesize evidence for models’ capa-
bilities. We release our code, as well as all the
pretraining checkpoints at https://github.com/
leo-liuzy/probe-across-time to beneﬁt future
research.
2 Probing Across Time
The great success of pretrained language mod-
els has motivated researchers to characterize what
kinds of knowledge they encode. Probing seeks to
determine how much is known by the pretrained
model, so its representations are used without ﬁne-
tuning. Few or zero additional parameters are esti-
mated to target the probing task so that success on
the probing task is attributable to pretraining alone.
Past probing work has applied probing analysis af-
ter pretraining is complete and compares different
models (e.g., BERT vs. GloVe). We extend probing
to different parameter states (i.e., training check-
points) over the same model’s pretraining trajectory.
By observing how probe performance changes over
time, we hope to understand not just what the pre-
trained language model knows, but also when.
To that end, we adopt a diverse set of probes aim-
ing at different types of knowledge (§2.1) and apply
those probes at different iterates of the estimated
model across pretraining. This requires pretraining
from scratch and checkpointing intermediate pa-
rameter estimates (§2.3). Considering our compu-
tational budget, we choose RoBERTa1as our case
study because of its popularity in supporting down-
stream probes and tasks. We leave exploration of
different objectives and architectures, e.g., GPT-2
(Radford et al., 2018), as future work. We also
set up baselines as additional relative references to
stand for the best and the worst expected results
from pretraining (§2.2). See §A for implementation
details and the computational cost.
2.1 Probe Suite Construction
Belinkov et al. (2020) categorize existing probes
into two families. Structural probes train a
lightweight classiﬁer that predicts a label on top of
the model’s internal representations. Such probes
are mostly used to test linguistic knowledge like
parts of speech. Behavioral probes , on the other
1In our work, RoBERTa stands for RoBERTa-base.hand, do not rely on additional parameters or train-
ing, but use the model as it is to make predictions.
For example, if a masked language model can pre-
dict “Honolulu” for the input “Barack Obama was
born in [MASK],” we can conclude that the pre-
trained model learned Obama’s birth place.
We adopt a rich set of probing tasks from ﬁve
existing and publicly available probing packages
to systematically evaluate different types of en-
coded knowledge: LKT andBLIMPfor linguistic
knowledge, LAMA for factual and commonsense
knowledge, CAT for commonsense knowledge,
and OLM PICS for reasoning knowledge. See §A
for links to those probes. For clarity, we focus here
on four or ﬁve probing tasks from each package and
present the rest (which showed similar patterns) in
§B. See Table 1 for an overview of these probing
tasks and examples. We brieﬂy describe the goal
and our setup of these ﬁve packages as follows.
LKT Liu et al. (2019a) introduce a structural lin-
guistic probe suite for testing linguistic knowledge
and transferability ( LKT ) of contextual represen-
tations. For all tasks in LKT , we train a linear
classiﬁer model to predict the linguistic annotation
of each word in a sentence. Through the perfor-
mance of the classiﬁer, we measure how closely the
encoded information in the word representations
conforms to linguistic annotations from human ex-
perts. Following Liu et al. (2019a), we use learn-
able coefﬁcients to weigh a sum of representations
from all the transformer layers, and compute the
input vector to the classiﬁer. We measure the probe
performance by accuracy or F1on the test sets.
BLIMP Salazar et al. (2020) introduce a behav-
ioral linguistic probe suite on the benchmark of
linguistic minimal pairs ( BLIMP, Warstadt et al.,
2020). This benchmark isolates speciﬁc phenom-
ena in syntax, morphology, or semantics such as
island effects and subject-verb agreement. As seen
in Table 1, input sentence pairs differ only by a
word or a short phrase, but contrast in grammatical
acceptability. We test whether RoBERTa scores
the grammatical sentence higher than the ungram-
matical one. The score for a sentence is calcu-
lated by sequentially masking one word at a time
and averaging the log probabilities of the masked
words. Since no additional parameters or training
are involved, BLIMPprovides a complementary
perspective to LKT — if probing without training
shows the same pattern as with training, it strength-