tion is deterministic. However, this view does not
consider how they are structured in the embedding
space. These representations can only be taken ad-
vantage of if they are structured in an extractable
way. All the “knowledge” mentioned in our paper
refers to such structured and easy-to-extract infor-
mation. In our pilot study, we experimented with
MLP classiﬁers in structural probes. They achieved
much higher (almost highest in some cases) scores
than the linear classiﬁer on even the randomly-
initialized RoBERTa model. Though agreeing with
Pimentel et al. (2020)’s conclusion, MLP classiﬁers
cannot reﬂect the learning process of the targeted
knowledge and fail to explain why RoBERTa im-
proves in downstream tasks over time (Fig. 3).
7 Ethical Concerns
We estimate our carbon costs in Appendix §A. We
recognize the possibility that changes to hyperpa-
rameters might lead to different conclusions and
leave it to future work to balance the costs of such
exploration with the value of a more detailed un-
derstanding of hyperparameter impact on learning
over time. We note that the robustness of learning
patterns is partly supported by results from Zhang
et al. (2020), since they probed models trained with
different hyperparameters and observed similar lin-
guistic patterns as we did.
8 Conclusion
We have shown how probing across time reveals
when, during pretraining iterations, a masked lan-
guage model acquires various kinds of knowledge.
RoBERTa, our case study model, is shown to learn
linguistic knowledge faster than factual and com-
monsense knowledge, but struggle to learn reason-
ing abilities. We explored variation due to corpus
domain and size, and related our ﬁndings to re-
search benchmark tasks. As models evolve and
new probes emerge, we believe our probing across
time framework can serve as a general framework
to inform progress on both fronts.
Acknowledgments
In random order, we appreciate valuable discus-
sion and feedback from Noah’s ARK group at the
University of Washington, Nelson Liu at Stanford
University, Victoria Lin at Salesforce research, Roy
Schwartz at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
and the anonymous reviewers. This research is
supported in part by the Ofﬁce of Naval Researchunder grants N00014-18-1-2826 and N00014-18-
1-2670.
References
Yonatan Belinkov, Sebastian Gehrmann, and Ellie
Pavlick. 2020. Interpretability and analysis in neu-
ral NLP. In Proc. of ACL: Tutorial Abstracts .
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya
Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Han-
nah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Wen-tau Yih, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. Abductive commonsense reasoning. In
Proc. of ICLR .
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers.
Cheng-Han Chiang, Sung-Feng Huang, and Hung-yi
Lee. 2020. Pretrained language model embryology:
The birth of ALBERT. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6813–6828, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D Manning. 2019. What does BERT
look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Proc.
of BlackboxNLP .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Un-
derstanding. In Proc. of NAACL .
William B. Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Automati-
cally constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
InProc. of IWP . Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.
Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. 2019. OpenWeb-
Text corpus. http://Skylion007.github.io/
OpenWebTextCorpus .
Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasovi ´c, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t stop pretraining:
Adapt language models to domains and tasks. In
Proc. of ACL .
Yaru Hao, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Ke Xu. 2019. Visu-
alizing and understanding the effectiveness of BERT.
InProc. of EMNLP .