sense knowledge; CAT (Zhou et al., 2020)13for
commonsense knowledge; and OLM PICS (Talmor
et al., 2019)14for reasoning ability. As noted be-
fore, LKT is the only probe package that requires
additional training. All experiments in LKT are
seeded and strictly follow the hyperparameters and
training setup used in Liu et al. (2019a).
We estimate the total cost of probing: 165.54 kg
CO2e carbon footprint and 345.26 kWh energy
(Lannelongue et al., 2020).
Finetuning For convenience and reproduciblility,
we also use public package to conduct ﬁnetuning.
We use jiant15for ReCoRD and WSC; and Hug-
gingface for the rest. Due to the large amount of
training involved, we choose 14 intermediate check-
points. In addition, it is infeasible to ﬁnd optimal
hyperparamerters for each individual checkpoint;
to be as fair as we can, we use the same set of hyper-
paramters (see Table 4) for running each ﬁnetuning
task on all our checkpoints and original RoBERTa.
This might explain the sub-optimal performance
from the original RoBERTa in Fig. 3.
We estimated that ﬁntuning emits 54.98 kg CO2e
carbon footprint and consumes 121.64 kWh energy
(Lannelongue et al., 2020).
Hardware We run our probing and ﬁnetuning ex-
periments on Intel Core i9-9820X CPU @ 3.30GHz
and GTX 2080 Ti.
B Additional Probing Results
B.1 Complete Results for Learning Patterns
Here we show plots from all probing tasks we
tested. Overall, the selected graphs in Fig. 1 are
representative. See complete results of BLIMPin
Fig. 5, showing fast learning speed; CAT in Fig. 6
showing slower learning speed; and OLM PICS in
Fig. 7 shows a sign of “not learning” in many tests
and “learning” only in a few tests.
B.2 Correlation Plot
In Fig. 4, we show a plot of correlation among
all experimental results run on our replicated
RoBERTa (§3 and §5). Although successful probes
usually correlate with each other, we note that low
correlation with successful probes (e.g., linguistic
probes) doesn’t necessarily imply failure. One such
example is Ellipsis in BLIMP, which shows great
13https://github.com/XuhuiZhou/CATS
14https://github.com/alontalmor/oLMpics
15https://github.com/nyu-mll/jiantsuccess in Fig. 5, yet has low correlation with other
successful probes.
B.3 Complete Results for Varying Pretrain
Corpus Domain
In this section, we complement the domain results
from Fig. 2. Note that the average performance
shown here is calculated with all tested tasks in
each probe package, whereas Fig. 2 only includes
the same tasks as Fig. 1 for illustration purposes.
See complete results of LKT in Fig. 8 and
BLIMPin Fig. 9 showing relatively small domain
impact; LAMA in Fig. 10 shows arguably the
largest impact; CAT in Figure 11 showing notice-
able impact on some tasks; we see large variation
of the impact from the domain OLM PICS in Fig. 12.
Note again that STORIES usually gives the slowest
learning speed and worst ﬁnal performance from
teste probes.
B.4 Complete Results for Varying Pretrain
Corpus Size
In this section, we complement the corpus size
results from Fig. 2. Note that the average perfor-
mance shown here is calculated with all included
tasks in each probe package, whereas Fig. 2’s use
the same tasks as Fig. 1 for illustration purpose. See
complete results of LKT in Fig. 13; BLIMPin Fig.
14;LAMA in Fig. 15; CAT in Fig. 16; OLM PICS
in Fig. 17. To reiterate our conclusion from §4,
the biggest corpus (with more diverse inclusion of
domains) generally learns faster and results in an
ultimately better RoBERTa in all tested knowledge;
in contrast, we don’t observe this when we simply
change from downsampled English WIKIPEDIA (4
GB) to original English W IKIPEDIA (12 GB).