Probing Across Time: What Does RoBERTa Know and When?
Leo Z. Liu|Yizhong Wang|Jungo Kasai|
Hannaneh Hajishirzi|~Noah A. Smith|~
|Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
~Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
{zeyuliu2,yizhongw,jkasai,hannaneh,nasmith}@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Models of language trained on very large cor-
pora have been demonstrated useful for nat-
ural language processing. As ﬁxed artifacts,
they have become the object of intense study,
with many researchers “probing” the extent to
which they acquire and readily demonstrate
linguistic abstractions, factual and common-
sense knowledge, and reasoning abilities. Re-
cent work applied several probes to interme-
diate training stages to observe the develop-
mental process of a large-scale model (Chi-
ang et al., 2020). Following this effort, we
systematically answer a question: for vari-
ous types of knowledge a language model
learns, when during (pre)training are they ac-
quired? Using RoBERTa as a case study, we
ﬁnd: linguistic knowledge is acquired fast, sta-
bly, and robustly across domains. Facts and
commonsense are slower and more domain-
sensitive. Reasoning abilities are, in general,
not stably acquired. As new datasets, pretrain-
ing protocols, and probes emerge, we believe
that probing-across-time analyses can help re-
searchers understand the complex, intermin-
gled learning that these models undergo and
guide us toward more efﬁcient approaches that
accomplish necessary learning faster.
1 Introduction
Current NLP approaches lean heavily on language
models trained on very large corpora (Peters et al.,
2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019b; Brown et al., 2020). Many re-
searchers have sought to interpret what kinds of
knowledge are acquired during this “pretraining”
phase (Clark et al., 2019; Hao et al., 2019; Koval-
eva et al., 2019; Belinkov et al., 2020). Extend-
ing Chiang et al. (2020), we systematically con-
duct probing across the pretraining iterations, to
understand not just what is learned (as explored in
numerous past analyses of ﬁxed, already-trained
Equal contribution.models), but also when . In this work, we aim to in-
form future work on more efﬁcient pretraining (e.g.,
fewer iterations are needed to acquire some kinds
of knowledge) and on understanding dependencies
among different kinds of knowledge.
Speciﬁcally, we apply a probing across time
framework to the widely used RoBERTa masked
language model (Liu et al., 2019b). We reproduce
the pretraining of RoBERTa and apply a suite of
probes at many checkpoint iterations across pre-
training (§3). Our rich probe suite covers a di-
verse range of desirable knowledge types: linguis-
tic properties (Liu et al., 2019a), factual knowledge
(Petroni et al., 2019), and commonsense (Zhou
et al., 2020) and basic reasoning capabilities (Tal-
mor et al., 2019). Our main ﬁnding is that linguistic
information tends to be acquired fast, factual and
commonsense knowledge slower, and reasoning
abilities are largely unlearned.
We next apply probing across time to instances
of RoBERTa trained on text from varying domains
and with varying amounts of data (§4). Our exper-
iments show that the learning order and learning
patterns of different types of knowledge generally
hold regardless of the data variation. However, dif-
ferent data choices do have an impact on the learn-
ing speed and the ﬁnal performance. Our ﬁndings
suggest that the inclusion of data in more diverse
domains is more important than the quantity alone.
Finally, we compare probes across time with re-
search benchmark task performance across time
(§5). We ﬁnd that most of these benchmark tasks
(e.g., SST-2, Socher et al., 2013, and SQuAD,
Rajpurkar et al., 2016) require a relatively small
number of pretraining steps to achieve high perfor-
mance, which is similar to the fast learning patterns
shown by linguistic probes. Some other tasks that
are designed to test more complex knowledge (e.g.,
ReCoRD, Zhang et al., 2018 and WSC, Levesque
et al., 2012) beneﬁt from longer pretraining time,
aligning well with our ﬁndings for the correspond-arXiv:2104.07885v2  [cs.CL]  20 Sep 2021