knowledge can be obtained by complex probing
models. We ask whether targeted knowledge can
be easily extracted with few or zero additional pa-
rameters (i.e., ease of extraction , as suggested by
Pimentel et al., 2020). We treat the probing scores
as relative performance; and we address their con-
cerns by comparing RoBERTa with the the follow-
ing baselines:
•Random Guess randomly selects one class
label or token from the candidate pool.
•Random Vector + Linear Classiﬁer uses a
random vector to represent each type, and
trains a linear classiﬁer on the top to predict
the label with the token vector being frozen.
•GloVe + Linear Classiﬁer uses GloVe vec-
tors (Pennington et al., 2014), and trains a
linear classiﬁer on top to predict the label.
•Original RoBERTa probes the ofﬁcially re-
leased checkpoint2of RoBERTa base to see
if our checkpoints are pretrained properly and
can achieve reasonable performance.
Moreover, our probing results on different check-
points can illustrate the relative performance
change during pretraining.
2.3 Pretraining Setups
We choose base-size RoBERTa as a case study. In
order to conduct probing over time, we replicate the
RoBERTa pretraining procedure and periodically
save checkpoints for later probing. To ensure that
probe-task relevant text is uniformly distributed
over batches, the entire data is shufﬂed before every
epoch. Our training setting follows closely the one
prescribed in Liu et al. (2019b), except for the fol-
lowing differences: 1)we use the hyperparameter
setting with 1M update steps and a reduced batch
size of 256, instead of 125K steps and a batch size
of 2,048;32)we use static masking (Devlin et al.,
2019) during data processing instead of dynamic
masking to run the code on TPUs. These differ-
ences can result in slightly worse performance on
downstream tasks (Liu et al., 2019b). However,
due to the large data size, we believe it won’t sig-
niﬁcantly change the learning patterns we found in
later sections.
We save a checkpoint every 20K training steps
and more frequently during the ﬁrst 12,800 steps,
resulting in about 62 checkpoints for each pretrain-
2https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/
blob/master/examples/roberta/README.md .
3We chose a smaller batch size for more ﬁne-grained ob-
servations.ing setting.4Then we probe all these checkpoints
to estimate the knowledge encoded by the model
at different training steps.
Pretraining data The original RoBERTa was
pretrained on BOOKCORPUS (4 GB, Zhu et al.,
2015), English WIKIPEDIA (12 GB), CC-News
(76 GB, Nagel, 2016), OPENWEBTEXT(38 GB,
Gokaslan and Cohen, 2019), and STORIES (31 GB,
Trinh and Le, 2018). Since we do not have access
to their version of ﬁltered CC-N EWS, we use RE-
ALNEWS (120 GB, Zellers et al., 2019) instead,
which is similar, according to Liu et al. (2019b).
This difference in training data might partly ex-
plain the performance degradation from the orig-
inal RoBERTa. All the other corpora remain the
same. This leads to a total of 205 GB5unprocessed
text, and each training epoch makes 360,851 update
steps (3 epochs in total for the 1M update steps). In
our later controlled experiments, we sample these
corpora to compare domains and data sizes in §4.
3 Learning Patterns
In this section, we use our reproduced RoBERTa
to ask and answer, at which stage does the model
acquire each kind of knowledge? In addition to
plotting probe performance across time (i.e., pa-
rameter updates during learning; see Fig. 1), a
useful measurement is the number of updates re-
quired to reach x% of the maximum performance
achieved by our model across all iterations. We de-
note this measurement by “Learning Progress– x%”
forx2f90;95;97g; it is indicated by the bottom
horizontal bars in each probe’s plot in Fig. 1. We
consider each type of knowledge in turn. All of the
following discussion is supported by Fig. 1.
3.1 Linguistic Learning
The structural linguistic probes test how closely the
information in RoBERTa representations conforms
to annotations developed from linguistic theories.
The behavioral probes test how sensitively the lan-
guage model can respond to some detailed syntac-
tic error. In most cases, RoBERTa shows great
success in learning linguistic knowledge with high
speed and stability, and this pattern is consistent
both in the classiﬁer-based LKT and behavioral
4In a pilot study, we observed that the training and valida-
tion loss start to plateau at 50K training steps.
5We follow Liu et al. (2019b) to report data size by gi-
gabytes of the uncompressed text in this paper. Our entire
pretraining data contain 46 billion tokens after tokenization.