ject Comparison, our RoBERTa model is on par
with random guessing, and the performance on Al-
ways Never keeps decreasing overall after the ini-
tialization. Some other tests included in §B.1 also
show severe ﬂuctuation or similar patterns. How-
ever, there are still signs of learning for some tasks.
Taxonomy Conjunction shows the most promising
sign of learning, and although to a small extent,
RoBERTa also learns to do multi-hop reasoning.
Another noteworthy observation is that RoBERTa’s
performance on Antonym Negation ﬁrst increases
rapidly, and then decreases in the rest of the ﬁrst
half of training; however, it starts to increase again
toward the end. This indicates that this knowledge
is not stably stored in the model.
4 Varying the Pretraining Corpus
Our experiments on the pretraining trajectory in the
previous section demonstrate that, when acquired,
different types of knowledge are learned at different
stages. On the other hand, previous work (Raffel
et al., 2020; Gururangan et al., 2020) demonstrates
that language domain and data size are important
factors for a pretrained model’s performance in
downstream tasks. Thus, the question arises: do
our observations on the pretraining trajectory hold
regardless of the training corpus? In this section,
we ask and answer how do domains and corpus
sizes affect the learning trajectory?
Domains With the same setting as §3, we pre-
train RoBERTa with three controlled domains:
English WIKIPEDIA ,REALNEWS, and STORIES .
We downsample REALNEWS andSTORIES to be
roughly the same size as W IKIPEDIA (12 GB).
The ﬁrst row of Fig. 2 compares probing perfor-
mance across time over varying domains. On one
hand, the general learning pattern from the previ-
ous section persists regardless of the domain: lin-
guistic knowledge is acquired faster than the other
types. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that the change
in the pretraining domain affects the ﬁnal perfor-
mance of all knowledge types but to different ex-
tents. LKT is generally less affected than BLIMP,
probably due to the additional training of LKT ’s
classiﬁer on the probing data. Although the model
slowly acquires both factual and commonsense
knowledge regardless of corpus domains, factual
knowledge is much more affected by domain (in
fact, most affected among all). LAMA especially
shows very slow learning on the STORIES domain,
implying that factual knowledge might be verysparse in STORIES . The fact that the included fac-
tual tests—Google-RE, T-REx and SQuAD—are
sourced from WIKIPEDIA might explain why the
factual tests show RoBERTa trained on WIKIPEDIA
learns faster than the one trained on REALNEWS.
Though many existing works (Mostafazadeh et al.,
2016; Bhagavatula et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2020)
used story data to study commonsense, pretraining
the model on STORIES still performs worst on our
commonsesense probes (ConceptNet in LAMA
and most probes in CAT ). On the OLM PICS probes,
we keep observing large ﬂuctuation on different
domains, but do see more signs of learning on
theWIKIPEDIA andREALNEWS domains than on
STORIES . See §B.3 for more detailed plots.
Corpus Sizes To investigate the impact of cor-
pus size, we experimented on downsampled En-
glish WIKIPEDIA (4 GB), the original English
WIKIPEDIA (12 GB), and a combination of
WIKIPEDIA with downsampled REALNEWS and
downsampled S TORIES (36 GB in total).
The second row of Fig. 2 compares probing per-
formance over varying corpus sizes. In general,
the learning order and learning patterns of differ-
ent types of knowledge that we discuss in §3 still
hold for all data sizes. Comparing different data
sizes, we ﬁnd that the biggest corpus (with more di-
verse inclusion of domains) generally learns faster
and results in an ultimately better RoBERTa in all
tested knowledge. On the other hand, interestingly,
comparing the downsampled English WIKIPEDIA
(4 GB) and original English WIKIPEDIA (12 GB),
simply increasing the corpus size without changing
domains does not improve the ﬁnal probing perfor-
mance substantially in all categories. This is even
true for LAMA , which tests factual knowledge rel-
evant to WIKIPEDIA . This suggests that diversity
of data might be more important for pretraining
than quantity. See §B.4 for more detailed plots.
5 Experiments on Research Benchmarks
In §3-4, we used probes to understand the knowl-
edge learning process, but what do those observa-
tions mean to more practical scenarios where
people use pretrained RoBERTa with ﬁnetun-
ing? In this section, we provide insights into this
question by ﬁnetuning our RoBERTa checkpoints
on eight representative research benchmarks (e.g.,
SQuAD). We conjecture that these benchmarks re-
quire more intermingled knowledge, whereas prob-
ing tasks usually target one speciﬁc phenomenon or