task where dis the ambient input dimension, k(≪d)is the dimension of the representation,
andn2is the number of data from the target task. Note that this impr oves thed
n2rate of just
learning the target task without using representation lear ning. The termdk
n1Tindicates that
we can fully exploit all n1Tdata in the source tasks to learn the representation. We furt her
extend this result to handle general nonlinear representat ion function class and obtain an
˜O(C(Φ)
n1T+k
n2)risk bound on the target task, where Φis the representation function class and
C(Φ)is a certain complexity measure of Φ.
Second, we study the setting where there exists a common line arhigh-dimensional
representation for source and target tasks, and obtain an ˜O/parenleftbig¯R√
Tr(Σ)√n1T+¯R√
/bardblΣ/bardbl2√n2/parenrightbig
rate where
¯Ris a normalized nuclear norm control over linear predictors , andΣis the covariance
matrix of the raw feature. This also improves over the baseli ne rate for the case without
using representation learning. We further extend this resu lt to two-layer neural networks
with ReLU activation. Again, our results indicate that we ca n fully exploit n1Tsource data.
A technical insight coming out of our analysis is that any cap acity-controlled method
that gets low test error on the source tasks must also get low t est error on the target task
by virtue of being forced to learn a good representation. Our result on high-dimensional
representations and overparametrized neural networks sho ws that the capacity control for
representation learning does not have to be through explicit low dimensionality .
Organization. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review relat ed work in
Section 2. In Section 3, we formally describe the setting we consider. We next prese nt our
analysis in four different settings:
• Section 4presents the results for low-dimensional linear represent ation learning.
• Section 5presents the results for low-dimensional nonlinear repres entation classes,
including neural networks.
• Section 6presents the results for high-dimensional linear represen tation learning.
• Section 7presents the results for representation learning in overpa rametrized neural
networks.
Finally, we conclude in Section 8and leave most of the proofs to appendices.
2 Related Work
The idea of multitask representation learning at least date s back to Caruana (1997 ),Thrun and Pratt
(1998 ),Baxter (2000 ). Empirically, representation learning has shown its grea t power in
various domains; see Bengio et al. (2013 ) for a survey. In particular, representation learn-
ing is widely adopted for few-shot learning tasks ( Sun et al. ,2017 ,Goyal et al. ,2019 ). Rep-
resentation learning is also closely connected to meta-lea rning ( Schaul and Schmidhuber ,
3