2010 ). Recent work Raghu et al. (2019 ) empirically suggested that the effectiveness of
the popular meta-learning algorithm Model Agnostic Meta-L earning (MAML) is due to
its ability to learn a useful representation. The scheme we a nalyze in this paper is closely
related to Lee et al. (2019 ),Bertinetto et al. (2018 ) for meta-learning.
On the theoretical side, Baxter (2000 ) performed the ﬁrst theoretical analysis and gave
sample complexity bounds using covering numbers. Maurer et al. (2016 ) and follow-up
work gave analyses on the beneﬁt of representation learning for reducing the sample com-
plexity of the target task. They assumed every task is i.i.d. drawn from an underlying
distribution and can obtain an ˜O(1√
T+1√n2)rate. As pointed out in Maurer et al. (2016 ),
the1√
Tdependence is not improvable even if n1→∞ because1√
Tis the rate of concentra-
tion for the distribution over tasks.
The concurrent work of Tripuraneni et al. (2020a ) studies low-dimensional linear repre-
sentation learning and obtains a similar result as ours in th is case, but they assume isotropic
inputs for all tasks, which is a special case of our result. Fu rthermore, we also provide
results for high-dimensional linear representations, gen eral non-linear representations, and
overparametrized neural networks. Tripuraneni et al. (2020a ) also give a computationally
efﬁcient algorithm for standard Gaussian inputs and a lower bound for subspace recovery
in the low-dimensional linear setting. Subsequent work of Tripuraneni et al. (2020b ) gen-
eralizes this work from linear task-speciﬁc layers wtto nonlinear task speciﬁc layers and
bounded loss functions via proposing a new diversity assump tion.
Another recent line of theoretical work analyzed gradient- based meta-learning methods
(Denevi et al. ,2019 ,Finn et al. ,2019 ,Khodak et al. ,2019 ) and showed guarantees for con-
vex losses by using tools from online convex optimization. L astly, we remark that there are
analyses for other representation learning schemes ( Arora et al. ,2019 ,McNamara and Balcan ,
2017 ,Galanti et al. ,2016 ,Alquier et al. ,2016 ,Denevi et al. ,2018 ).
3 Notation and Setup
Notation. Let[n] ={1,2,...,n}. We use/ba∇dbl·/ba∇dblor/ba∇dbl·/ba∇dbl2to denote the ℓ2norm of a vec-
tor or the spectral norm of a matrix. Denote by /ba∇dbl·/ba∇dblFand/ba∇dbl·/ba∇dbl∗the Frobenius norm and
the nuclear norm of a matrix, respectively. Let /an}b∇acketle{t·,·/an}b∇acket∇i}htbe the Euclidean inner product be-
tween vectors or matrices. Denote by Ithe identity matrix. Let N(µ,σ2)/N(µ,Σ)be
the one-dimensional/multi-dimensional Gaussian distrib ution, and χ2(m)the chi-squared
distribution with mdegrees of freedom.
For a matrix A∈Rm×n, letσi(A)be itsi-th largest singular value. Let span(A)be
the subspace of Rmspanned by the columns of A, i.e.,span(A) ={Av|v∈Rn}.
DenotePA=A(A⊤A)†A⊤∈Rm×m, which is the projection matrix onto span(A). Here
†stands for the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse. Note that 0/√∇ecedesequalPA/√∇ecedesequalIandP2
A=PA. We
also deﬁne P⊥
A=I−PA, which is the projection matrix onto span(A)⊥, the orthogonal
complement of span(A)inRm. For a positive semideﬁnite (psd) matrix B, denote by
λmax(B)andλmin(B)its largest and smallest eigenvalues, respectively; let B1/2be the psd
4