The error of the baseline method in ﬁxed-design is
E[ER(fˆB,ˆw)]/lessorsimilarσ¯R/radicalBigg
Tr(Σ)
n2. (22)
We see that Equation ( 20) is always smaller than Equation ( 22) sincen1T≥n2. See
Appendix Dfor the proof of Theorem 7.1and the calculation of ( 22).
8 Conclusion
We gave the ﬁrst statistical analysis showing that represen tation learning can fully exploit
all data points from source tasks to enable few-shot learnin g on a target task. This type of
results were shown for both low-dimensional and high-dimen sional representation function
classes.
There are many important directions to pursue in representa tion learning and few-shot
learning. Our results in Sections 6and7indicate that explicit low dimensionality is not
necessary, and norm-based capacity control also forces the classiﬁer to learn good repre-
sentations. Further questions include whether this is a gen eral phenomenon in all deep
learning models, whether other capacity control can be appl ied, and how to optimize to
attain good representations.
Acknowledgments
SSD acknowledges support of National Science Foundation (G rant No. DMS-1638352)
and the Infosys Membership. JDL acknowledges support of the ARO under MURI Award
W911NF-11-1-0303, the Sloan Research Fellowship, and NSF C CF 2002272. WH is
supported by NSF, ONR, Simons Foundation, Schmidt Foundati on, Amazon Research,
DARPA and SRC. QL is supported by NSF #2030859 and the Computi ng Research As-
sociation for the CIFellows Project. The authors also ackno wledge the generous support
of the Institute for Advanced Study on the Theoretical Machi ne Learning program, where
SSD, WH, JDL, and QL were participants.
References
P. Alquier, T. T. Mai, and M. Pontil. Regret bounds for lifelo ng learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.08628 , 2016.
S. Arora, H. Khandeparkar, M. Khodak, O. Plevrakis, and N. Sa unshi. A theoretical anal-
ysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning . In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
15