1 Introduction
A popular scheme for few-shot learning , i.e., learning in a data-scarce environment, is
representation learning , where one ﬁrst learns a feature extractor, or representati on, e.g.,
the last layer of a convolutional neural network, from diffe rent but related source tasks,
and then uses a simple predictor (usually a linear function) on top of this representation in
the target task. The hope is that the learned representation captures the common structure
across tasks, which makes a linear predictor sufﬁcient for t he target task. If the learned
representation is good enough, it is possible that a few samp les are sufﬁcient for learning
the target task, which can be much smaller than the number of s amples required to learn
the target task from scratch.
While representation learning has achieved tremendous suc cess in a variety of applica-
tions ( Bengio et al. ,2013 ), its theoretical studies are limited. In existing theoret ical work,
the most natural algorithm is to explicitly look for the opti mal representation given source
data, which when combined with a (different) linear predict or on top for each task can
achieve the smallest cumulative training error on the sourc e tasks. Of course, it is not
guaranteed that the representation found will be useful for the target task unless one makes
some assumptions to characterize the connections between d ifferent tasks. Existing work
often imposes a probabilistic assumption about the connect ion between tasks: each task is
sampled i.i.d. from an underlying distribution. Under this assumption, Maurer et al. (2016 )
showed an ˜O(1√
T+1√n2)risk bound on the target task, where Tis the number of source
tasks,n1is the number of samples per source task, and n2is the number of samples from the
target task.1Unsatisfactorily, this bound necessarily requires the num ber of tasks Tto be
large, and it does not improve when the number of samples per s ource task, n1, increases.
Intuitively, one should expect more data to help, and theref ore an ideal bound would be
1√n1T+1√n2(or1
n1T+1
n2in the realizable case), because n1Tis the total number of training
data points from source tasks, which can be potentially pool ed to learn the representation.
Unfortunately, as pointed out by Maurer et al. (2016 ), there exists an example that sat-
isﬁes the i.i.d. task assumption for which Ω(1√
T)is unavoidable (or Ω(1
T)in the realizable
setting). This means that the i.i.d. assumption alone is not sufﬁcient if we want to take
advantage of a large amount of samples per task. Therefore, a natural question is:
What connections between tasks enable representation lear ning to utilize allsource data?
In this paper, we obtain the ﬁrst set of results that fully uti lize then1Tdata from source
tasks. We replace the i.i.d. assumption over tasks with natu ral structural conditions on the
input distributions and linear predictors. These conditio ns depict that the target task can be
in some sense “covered” by the source tasks, which will furth er give rise to the desirable
guarantees.
First, we study the setting where there exists a common well- speciﬁed low-dimensional
representation in source and target tasks, and obtain an ˜O(dk
n1T+k
n2)risk bound on the target
1We only focus on the dependence on T,n1andn2in this paragraph. Note that Maurer et al. (2016 ) only
considered n1=n2, but their approach does not give a better result even if n1> n2.
2