MUSE-VAE: Multi-Scale VAE for Environment-Aware
Long Term Trajectory Prediction
Mihee Lee
Rutgers University
ml1323@rutgers.eduSamuel S. Sohn
Rutgers University
samuel.sohn@rutgers.eduSeonghyeon Moon
Rutgers University
sm2062@cs.rutgers.edu
Sejong Yoon
The College of New Jersey
yoons@tcnj.eduMubbasir Kapadia
Rutgers University
mubbasir.kapadia@rutgers.eduVladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers University
vladimir@cs.rutgers.edu
Abstract
Accurate long-term trajectory prediction in complex
scenes, where multiple agents (e.g., pedestrians or vehi-
cles) interact with each other and the environment while at-
tempting to accomplish diverse and often unknown goals,
is a challenging stochastic forecasting problem. In this
work, we propose MUSE-VAE , a new probabilistic model-
ing framework based on a cascade of Conditional VAEs,
which tackles the long-term, uncertain trajectory prediction
task using a coarse-to-ﬁne multi-factor forecasting archi-
tecture. In its Macro stage, the model learns a joint pixel-
space representation of two key factors, the underlying en-
vironment and the agent movements, to predict the long and
short term motion goals. Conditioned on them, the Micro
stage learns a ﬁne-grained spatio-temporal representation
for the prediction of individual agent trajectories. The VAE
backbones across the two stages make it possible to nat-
urally account for the joint uncertainty at both levels of
granularity. As a result, MUSE-VAE offers diverse and si-
multaneously more accurate predictions compared to the
current state-of-the-art. We demonstrate these assertions
through a comprehensive set of experiments on nuScenes
and SDD benchmarks as well as PFSD, a new synthetic
dataset, which challenges the forecasting ability of models
on complex agent-environment interaction scenarios.
1. Introduction
Human behavior forecasting is an essential problem
studied in various research ﬁelds such as computer vi-
sion [14], computer graphics [15], robotics [10], and cog-
nitive science [44]. The fundamental problem with predict-
ing human motion is the inherent stochasticity stemming
from the fact that human beings use numerous sources of
information to make a wide variety of different decisions at
any given moment, which all impact their future movement.
(a) Intermediate Short-term goals
 (b) Full trajectories
Figure 1. (a) The predicted trajectory heatmaps are overlaid in the
semantic map. Ground Truth (GT) long-term goal (LG) and short-
term goals (SG1 and SG2) are marked with ‘x’. (b) Complete
trajectory forecasting based on the predicted LG and SG. Each
sequence of trajectories is obtained from a different pair of LG
and SG predictions.
This movement uncertainty translates beyond the motion of
the humans alone to the movement of objects controlled by
humans, such as vehicles [6].
To embrace the uncertainty, in this paper, we focus on
developing computational models, learned from data, that
can predict a realistic multi-modal distribution of the future
agent (humans, vehicles, etc.) trajectories. The models are
designed in the context of two main factors that drive this
uncertainty: the environment the agents occupy and the task
they are attempting to accomplish.
However, direct forecasting of long-term trajectories is
a challenging task. A person typically plans one’s move-
ment in a coarse-to-ﬁne fashion: with a ﬁnal destina-
tion in mind, through a sequence of intermediate goals or
way-points, the movement is executed to reach those sub-
goals [8, 34]. State-of-the-Art (SOTA) methods [25, 43, 46]
leverage this intuition to propose goal-conditioned predic-
tion model. However, despite their effectiveness compared
to traditional approaches [1,14,42], these models show lim-
ited ability to deal with complex environments [43], par-
2221