ticularly as they affect the movement [46]. This often re-
sults in physically implausible trajectory predictions that
violate agent-environment collision constraints. Moreover,
the models frequently struggle to account for the diversity
of the forecast goals and trajectories [25], which are driven
by the uncertain, multi-modal nature of the problem.
To address this, we propose MUSE-VAE : a multi-scale,
environment-aware model for long-term trajectory predic-
tion which (1) takes a stage-wise, coarse-to-ﬁne approach
to trajectory prediction by predicting both the higher-level
goals and the goal-conditioned trajectory, (2) avoids col-
lision with obstacles without loss of spatial signal which
can occur due to spatial reorganization when compressing
2D information into 1D features, and (3) learns a multi-
modal predictive distribution across the stages, thus captur-
ing the inherent uncertainty. MUSE-VAE embodies a three-
step learning strategy across a Macro-stage and Micro-
stage. The Macro-stage comprises of two steps for coarse
predictions. We ﬁrst predict the long-term goal, i.e., the
last step of the given sequence based on heatmap trajec-
tory representation. Given the long-term goal, sequential
short-term goals are predicted as shown in Fig. 1a. After
getting the goal positions in the Macro-stages, ﬁnally, our
model produces the full trajectories in the Micro-stage as
in Fig. 1b. Our main contributions are as follows: ( a) We
introduce a novel multi-scale learning strategy for CV AE-
based probabilistic models in order to make environment-
aware collision-free trajectory predictions. ( b) Unlike the
prior works, we show that one can learn trajectory distribu-
tions that can be well generalized in new scenes at test time,
giving various reasonable predictions compliant to the en-
vironment without needing extra steps for diversity. ( c) The
proposed coarse-to-ﬁne approach enables diverse and accu-
rate trajectory predictions by forecasting the heading of the
entire trajectories through goal prediction and then expand-
ing it to granular and complete predictions.
We demonstrate these contributions through experiments
on both real and synthetic dataset. With various grounded
evaluation metrics, we show that MUSE-VAE can produce
predictions similar to GT trajectories while achieving less
collision with the environment than the SOTA methods.
2. Related Work
The modeling of agent movement behavior, including in-
dividual humans, crowds, vehicles, etc., is a long-standing
problem crossing the boundaries of multi-agent and com-
puter vision communities. We focus on three relevant as-
pects: the forecasting of individual trajectories, the inter-
play between movement behavior and the environment, and
the need for modeling thet uncertainty in motion prediction.
Sequence Learning The human trajectory has a sequence
characteristic that changes in turn according to the passage
of time. In order to capture the nature of the sequential in-
formation, many prior works [1, 14, 21, 32, 33, 42] utilizeRecurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [27] such as LSTMs
and GRUs. However, RNN suffers from forgetting the past
hidden states as the recursion goes. [12, 45] tackle the tem-
poral aspects of human trajectory forecasting by adopting
Transformer Networks [41]. Transformer solves the long-
range dependency problem by processing the a sequence
as a whole with self-attention and positional encoding. Y-
net [25] solves the sequential trajectory learning problem
with only convolution layers. They represent trajectories
with multiple heatmaps, which are stacked with the seman-
tic environment map image along the channel dimension
and fed to their convolution networks as a whole. This way,
they learn temporal movements with the environment with-
out tradition sequence learning networks.
Environment Learning A decision about the trajectory
taken towards a goal depends on the surrounding environ-
ment. Many prior approaches provide environmental in-
formation to their model for realistic trajectory predictions.
[32,33,45,46] encode the environment layout and semantics
as a representation of the scene image with a convolution
network and use it to train their models along with trajec-
tory features. While these approaches can learn the scene
context surrounding the trajectory, they compress it into 1D
feature vectors after CNNs and FCs layers, which can con-
vey corrupted information in terms of spatial signals. Y-
net [25] addresses this issue by aligning the semantic map
with the trajectory heatmap spatially and processing them
as a whole. Our model attempts more meaningful environ-
mental learning without unnecessary information by focus-
ing on a limited area around the trajectory rather than the
entire scene while keeping the spatial signal by utilizing the
heatmap trajectory representation.
Multimodal Learning The trajectory of an agent (hu-
man, vehicle, etc.) is affected by a number of factors such
as the destination in mind, the surrounding environment,
nearby agents and so on, which leads to an intrinsic un-
certainty about the future behavior. Recent studies focus
on learning the distribution of the human trajectory based
on deep generative models, sidestepping the deterministic
trajectory prediction. [17, 21, 33, 40, 45] adopt Conditional
Variational AutoEncoders (CV AE) [35] and [14, 20, 32] in-
troduce Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [13] for
learning of trajectory distribution where multiple predic-
tions can be sampled. Trajectron++ [33] tackles the mul-
timodal aspect of trajectory distributions by adopting a dis-
crete latent distribution for the latent space, and Gaussian
Mixture Model as the output distribution of the decoder
in their CV AE framework. AgentFormer [45] promotes
diversity of the predictions with a pairwise distance loss
across predictions. However, this approach requires retrain-
ing whenever a different number of predictions are sought
at test time. Y-net [25] utilizes K-means clustering of pre-
dictive discrete density maps at test time to achieve diverse
2222