48192 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Science and Technology [198] proposed a binarization algorithm called LAB that directly 
considers the influence of binarization weights on loss, and uses the approximate New -
ton algorithm for the diagonal Heisen approximation to obtain the appropriate binariza-
tion weights. Another team at the school and the Tencent Artificial Intelligence Labora-
tory jointly proposed Bi-Real Net [199] to compensate for the defects of XNOR-Net. They 
introduced shortcut connection and adopted second-order function to fit activation function 
sign, achieving binarization of network weight and activation output, while maintaining 
high inference accuracy. Hu et al. [200] team at the Institute of Automation of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences proposed the BWNH method, which trains a binary weight network 
by hashing, and converts the problem of learning binary parameters into a hashing prob-
lem under inner product similarity. Diffenderfer et al. [201] proposed a method that simply 
prunes and quantizes randomly weighted full-precision neural networks to obtain a highly 
accurate BNN, and then proposed and verified the multi-prize lottery ticket hypothesis, 
that is, a sufficiently overparametrized randomly weighted network contains binary subnet-
works, which can achieve high accuracy without any training.
Many scholars are still making improvements to binary networks. Xilinx Research 
Labs [202] proposed FINN, a framework for building fast and flexible field-programmable 
gate array (FPGA) accelerators by using a flexible heterogeneous streaming architecture, 
which enables efficient mapping of BNNs to hardware. The University of California San 
Diego and Harvard University [203] proposed binary ensemble neural network (BENN) 
to improve the performance of BNN at the cost of limited efficiency. Wang et  al. [204] 
proposed a channel-wise interaction based binary convolutional neural network learning 
(CI-BCNN) method for efficient inference. Liu et al. [205] of Peking University of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics and Huawei Noah’s Ark Laboratory designed the circulant binary 
convolutional network (CBCN) based on the redesign of binary filter, and enhanced the 
expression ability of binary convolution features by rotating the binary filter from multiple 
angles. Ding et al. [206] proposed a method of using distribution loss to explicitly regular -
ize the activation flow, and developed a BNN distribution loss (BNN-DL) framework to 
systematically formulate the loss, so as to minimize the adverse effects caused by forward 
binarization and back propagation.
2.4.2  Ternary quantization
Ternary Quantization is to introduce 0 as the third threshold on the basis of binarization to 
reduce quantization error. The Han Song team of Stanford University and Tsinghua Uni-
versity proposed trained ternary quantization (TTQ) [207], a method that can reduce the 
precision of weights in neural networks to ternary values. This method improves the accu-
racy of some models on ImageNet but brings very little accuracy degradation. The Acad-
emy of Mathematics and Systems Science in Chinese Academy of Sciences [208] proposed 
a ternary weight network (TWN), which uses a weight that is different from the traditional 
1 or weight average, they convert the weight into {w, 0, + w}.
To solve the problem of significant accuracy loss caused by the existing ternary neural 
network methods based on rule-of-thumb quantization methods with simple thresholding 
operations, Li et al. [209] of Beihang University and Baidu Research proposed an order 
residual framework called ternary residual quantization (TRQ), which recursively performs 
quantization on full-precision weights for a refined reconstruction by combining the bina-
rized stem and residual parts, this method endows the quantizer with high flexibility and 
precision.