48167 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
of DNN model compression and acceleration technologies in early 2020, and deeply 
analyzed the performance, related applications, advantages and disadvantages of model 
compression technologies. However, only four types of model compression technologies 
were focused on, and due to the rapid development of model compression field, many 
latest research results were missing. The few surveys that mention both object detection 
and model compression [11] focus on the acceleration of "detection pipeline", "detector 
backbone" and "numerical computation", and only mention network pruning and quanti-
zation, and lightweight network design. Therefore, the papers related to object detection 
and model compression were collected from the top conferences and journals contained 
in class A and part of class B of computer vision recommended by China Computer 
Federation (CCF) and Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and a total of 252 
papers were obtained after removing useless documents.
In this paper, we sort out the research status in this field according to time and tech-
nology type, and provide a comprehensive review of deep learning-based object detection 
models and model compression techniques. In Section  2, six available compression strate-
gies and the research status of related teams and institutions in this field are discussed. Sec-
tion 3 compares and summarizes the compression effects of various compression strategies 
on public datasets, which also contains the performance comparison between the original 
object detection model and the lightweight model. The future research directions and appli-
cable scenarios of various model compression strategies are listed in Section  4. Finally, 
by analyzing the advantages and existing problems of each strategy, the paper is further 
concluded in Section 5.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) This paper systematically reviews six categories of compression techniques, including 
network pruning, lightweight network design, NAS, low-rank decomposition, network 
quantization, and KD methods. A total of 252 papers were collected from 247 top-tier 
conferences and journals, encompassing the latest works that were absent from previ-
ous surveys.
(2) Unlike existing surveys that primarily focus on either object detection models or model 
compression techniques, this paper specifically concentrates on both object detection 
and image classification. This targeted approach provides comprehensive data statistics 
and summaries for all methods on public datasets. For instance, in Fig.  25, we compare 
the performance of original object detection models with lightweight models on the 
VOC 2007 dataset, which has not been covered in other surveys.
(3) In addition to a simple summary based on strategy classification, this paper goes 
beyond and provides an additional analysis of the research landscape of compres-
sion techniques from the perspectives of research institutions, timeline, and publishing 
organizations. Figures  6, 7, 9, among others, present this comprehensive view, assisting 
readers in gaining a more thorough and efficient understanding of the research progress 
in this field.
2  Model compression strategies
Since 2014, methods for compressing and accelerating DNN models have gradually 
emerged. From 2014 to 2021, after eight years of research on DNN model compression 
methods, the field can be divided into the following six research directions: lightweight