48170 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
According to their different pruning approaches, network pruning methods can be 
divided into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. As shown in Fig.  4, unstructured 
pruning mainly includes unstructured weight pruning. The unstructured weight pruning 
can directly remove unimportant weights from each layer to reduce the number of model 
parameters. Structured pruning is implemented by deleting the unimportant structures con-
tained in the whole DNN, these structures include convolution kernels, channels, filters, 
layers, and so on.
2.1.1  Unstructured pruning
The principle of unstructured weight pruning is shown in Fig.  5. The unimportant weight 
edges of the given network are pruned while minimally affecting the overall structure. As 
shown in Fig.  6, since 2015, various research institutions have achieved some excellent 
research results regarding unstructured pruning methods. Their achievements are intro-
duced in turn below.
The Han Song team of Stanford University has produced many achievements in the 
field of model compression. In 2015, the Han Song team and NVIDIA team [13] jointly 
first proposed a method of pruning weights whose absolute values are less than a given 
threshold, and they then trained a sparse network to learn the remaining connection 
weight. Their model achieved a high sparsity rate at the weight level. Based on this Fig. 5  Weight pruning
Stanford University & NVIDIA :
Learning both weights and connections (NeurIPS)
2015
2016
Stanford &Tsinghua University:
Deep compression
(ICLR)2017
Stanford &Tsinghua University:
Deep gradient compression
(ICLR)Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application:OLMP(IJCAI)
Florida International University & Simon Fraser University:
Constrained optimization(EECV)
Microsoft Research :
Freque ncy-domain dynamic pruning(NeurIPS)ǃPa ckNe t (CVPR)
University of Californiaɿɿ
“Learning-com pression” algorithms(CVPR)
2018
2020
Samsung Rese arch& Harvard University:
Unstructured pruning and quantization
(CVPR)Unstructured 
PruningZhejiang University & Tencent: 
Acce lerate cnns from three dimensions(ICML)
KAIST EE: Layer-adaptive magnitude-based pruning 
(ICLR)
MIT:Pruning neural networks at initialization (ICLR)
2021
Fig. 6  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on regarding Unstructured Pruning