48200 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
decomposition was performed, and finally the model was adjusted. Microsoft Research 
[259] adopted the generalized singular value decomposition (GSVD) strategy, which 
achieved acceleration while the precision decreased slightly. The Skolkovo Institute of sci-
ence and technology [260] used Tensor-train Decomposition algorithm to decompose the 
full connection layer to achieve network parameter compression. A team of the Univer -
sity of Central Florida [261] introduced LASSO sparsity constraint on the basis of tensor 
decomposition to further sparsify the convolution kernel after preliminary decomposition.
Princeton University and the Chinese University of Hong Kong team [262] found that a 
specific form of low-rank decomposition has a closed global optimal solution. They used 
the BN method to train a deep low-rank neural network, and tensor decomposition tech-
nology to remove convolution kernel redundancy. The University of Sydney team [263] 
proposed a unified framework for feature reconstruction by combining low-rank decom-
position and sparsity. The Hikvision Research Institute [264] proposed a new low-rank 
decomposition method based on filter bank structure, which can significantly reduce redun-
dancy while maintaining most of the feature representation. The University of Electronic 
Science and Technology team [265] proposed to decompose tensor by combining CP 
decomposition and Tucker decomposition. The Purdue University team [266] used Ten-
sor-ring decomposition to decompose the weight tensor. SAIC-Cambridge added various 
low-rank constraints to the weight tensor to construct a fully parameterized CNN called 
T-Net, which has a single high-order and low-rank tensor [267]. The University of Califor -
nia [268] rebuilt the loss function by adding constraints to the tensor rank, and converted it 
into an optimization problem to achieve compression. Google Artificial Intelligence [269] 
proposed a new algorithm to convert non-circulant tensors into circulant tensors, making 
it possible for a new algorithm to implement circulant convolution on the pretrained non-
circulant model. ETH Zurich [270] combined filter pruning and tensor decomposition for 
compression.
Recent research on low-rank decomposition methods has focused on breaking through 
the limitations of traditional low-rank decomposition methods in the past. The popular 
low-rank decomposition method singular value decomposition (SVD) ignores that the rela-
tive importance or contribution of each neuron in each layer is different. When it is used 
for model compression, it is mainly applied to the fully connected layer and only retains 
the most prominent components of the decomposition matrix. Sridhar Swaminathan et al. 
[271]at Bennett University reconsidered the importance of the input–output neurons of the 
layer, sparsified the SVD matrix to keep the unimportant neurons low-rank, and verified 
the effectiveness of this compression method for image recognition models. More signifi-
cantly, existing tensor compression methods enforce a low-rank factorization structure on 
neural network weights, and have been effectively applied to the compression of some large 
neural networks, including VGG. But advanced backbone networks often used in object 
detection tasks, such as MobileNet, have taken advantage of this decomposition structure 
through depthwise separable convolutions. Pure tensor factorization becomes trivial at this 
point. A team from the University of California and Meta [272] combined low-rank ten-
sor factorization with sparse pruning to capture complementary coarse and fine structure, 
respectively, and outperform sparse pruning or low-rank tensor factorization alone. This 
study is the first to consider the combination of low-rank tensor compression with sparse 
pruning. Alternatively, this is the first study to investigate low-rank + sparse weight com-
pression for SOTA architectures that rely on efficient depthwise separable convolutions.
Low-rank decomposition is very suitable for model compression and acceleration, 
but the implementation of low-rank decomposition method is not easy and involves high