48179 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
sparse architectures. Then, they introduced a simple rescaling trick to bring the pruned 
model back into the edge of chaos (EOC) regime, making the pruned neural network easily 
trainable.
Through a large number of experiments, Le et al. [98] of VinAI Research studied ran-
dom pruning and learning rate restarting, and proposed that compared to traditional fine-
tuning, in general, learning rate restarting is an efficient way to retrain pruned networks to 
recover performance drops caused by pruning. Liu et al. [99] investigates the effectiveness 
of random pruning for sparse training. Specifically, the paper adopted several random prun-
ing methods(ERK, Uniform, Uniform +) and compare the results with non-random Prun-
ing methods(SNIP,GraSP). They are conducted on different ResNet scaling models, with 
CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet dataset under different sparsity ratios. Results show that ran-
dom pruning can be quite effective for sparse training especially on larger or wider models. 
Hu [100] of Sichuan University proposed a novel one-shot pruning quantization (OPQ) 
approach, which analytically solves the compression allocation problem with only pre-
trained weight parameters. During fine-tuning, the compression module is fixed and only 
the weight parameters are updated, without any complex iterative/manual optimization.
Tiwari et al. [101] presented ChipNet, a deterministic pruning strategy that employs a 
continuous Heaviside function and a novel crispness loss to identify a highly sparse net-
work based on an existing dense network. For problems that involve training a small model 
from the beginning or training a large model first and then pruning, Chang et al. [102] of 
the University of California conducted systematic research and analysis, and finally comes 
to the conclusion that the effect of pruning using over-parameterized model is better.
Discussion  According to whether the network structure is changed after pruning, network 
pruning can be divided into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. Unstructured 
pruning (weight pruning) does not change the original structure of the network, but the 
resulting sparse network needs to be supported by special hardware libraries or computing 
libraries. In contrast, structured pruning directly removes part of the network structure and 
is more suitable for general hardware acceleration. According to the granularity of prun-
ing, structure pruning can be further divided into neuron pruning, kernel pruning, channel 
pruning and layer pruning. Neuron pruning is based on a single neuron, which is suitable 
for any type of layer, but the pruning effect is poor. Kernel pruning is based on convolution 
kernels and is usually applied to convolutional layers; Channel pruning is an extension of 
kernel pruning, which prunes multiple channels in a convolution kernel. Layer pruning is 
one of the most extreme structured pruning techniques applicable to some deeper neural 
networks where some layers can be considered useless or redundant.
2.2  Lightweight network design
Methods that directly compress existing network models can effectively construct light-
weight network models (such approaches include network pruning, network quantization, 
low-rank decomposition and KD methods), but their performance largely depends on the 
utilized pretrained model. Without improving the network architecture, the accuracy can-
not be further improved, so lightweight network design methods have emerged. The main 
idea of lightweight network design is to reduce the number of network structure parameters 
by directly designing a more compact convolution kernel or convolution method. As illus-
trated in Fig.  8, research on lightweight network structure design methods has been boom-
ing since 2015. The number of lightweight network design papers reached its peak starting