48186 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
(IntraQ) which well retain the intra-class heterogeneity in the synthetic images and also 
was observed to perform state-of-the-art.
Discussion: lightweight network design methods are mainly divided into "lightweight 
model design based on convolution structure" and "lightweight model design based on con-
volution operation method" and "lightweight model design based on YOLO model struc-
ture". The design of lightweight models based on convolutional structures is relatively sim-
ple and easy to implement and deploy. By choosing a simplified convolutional structure, 
the model can be greatly compressed, but the feature representation ability of the model 
will be sacrificed. Although the design of lightweight model based on convolution opera-
tion method is relatively complex and the convolution operation needs to be improved, it is 
easier to balance the expression ability and compression degree of the model. However, if 
the improved convolution operation is more complex, it will affect the training efficiency of 
the model. Lightweight model design based on YOLO model structure is mainly for object 
detection tasks. This improvement is based on the most popular object detection algorithm, 
mainly to take advantage of the real-time detection ability of the YOLO model itself.
2.3  NAS
As network structures becomes increasingly complex, the artificial model compression 
technology of neural network relies on heuristic and rule-based strategy, and its trial-and-
error and time costs will be unbearable. Algorithm designers need to explore larger design 
spaces, and trade-off between model size, speed and accuracy, which is usually subopti-
mal and time-consuming. Therefore, the NAS method has been introduced in model com-
pression to reduce the time and cost of model construction. NAS is an automatic design 
method of neural network, which consists of three parts: search space, evaluation method 
and search method. As shown in Fig.  11, the principle of NAS is to first give a set of can-
didate neural network structures called search space, then use the learned search strategy 
to build the optimal neural network architecture from the search space, and then use the 
performance evaluation strategy to measure the performance, and finally obtain the optimal 
neural network architecture through feedback-based iterative learning. In the field of light-
weight model design, NAS has gradually become one of the most important research direc-
tions. As shown in Fig.  12, this paper lists the classic NAS compression methods published 
by major research institutions at the top conferences and journals in recent years. It illus-
trates be seen that the research on this method began to increase significantly since 2018. 
In this paper, a total of 34 papers on NAS for model compression are counted. At present, 
the mainstream NAS algorithm can be divided into the following aspects: reinforcement 
Fig. 11  The principle of NAS 66HHDDUUFFKKRRXXWWWWKKHHQQHHWWZZRRUUNN
VVWWUUXXFFWWXXUUHH
((YYDDOOXXDDWWHHWWKKHHQQHHWWZZRRUUNN
VVWWUUXXFFWWXXUUHH66HHDDUUFFKK
VVWWUUDDWWHHJJ\\33HHUUIIRRUUPPDDQQFFHH
HHYYDDOOXXDDWWLLRRQQVVWWUUDDWWHHJJ\\66HHDDUUFFKK
VVSSDDFFHH