48176 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
algorithm. They considered filter pruning to be an optimization question and pointed 
out that whether a filter can be pruned depends on the input of the next layer rather than 
that of the current layer, they finally pruned the filter corresponding to the layer with the 
weakest input channel data in the next layer. This method has also been one of the main 
comparative approaches in follow-up research. Tsinghua University and the Tencent AI 
Lab also used optimization problems for pruning [70], they jointly proposed a factorized 
convolutional filter (FCF) structure, and updated it with an optimization method based 
on the ADMM to obtain a compact CNN model.
To solve the global filter importance ranking (GFIR) problem, Peking University’s 
You et al. [71] proposed a global filter pruning algorithm called GateDecorator. He 
et al. [72] proposed a filter pruning method via the geometric median (FPGM), which 
compresses CNN models by pruning filters with redundancy, rather than those with 
“relatively less” importance. A team at the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Tech-
nology and Microsoft Research proposed Perforatedcnns [73], which uses different 
strategies to mask the activation values and employs adjacent values  to represent the 
masked values to remove redundancy. The Pravendra Singh team at the IIT Kanpur 
Institute [74] proposed a new filter structure called hetconv based on heterogene-
ous kernel to reduce the number of FLOPs without incurring the loss of accuracy. 
In 2021, Wang et al. [75] of UC Berkeley proposed a tied block convolution (TBC), 
which shares the same thinning filter over equal channels blocks and produces multi-
ple responses with a single filter, this approach can also be extended to group convo-
lution and fully connected layers, and can be applied to various backbone networks 
and attention modules.
Through the study of the abovementioned filter, feature map, and kernel pruning 
method, it can be seen that the main techniques used in the research on filter pruning 
methods are the sparse constraint regularization method to penalize unimportant param-
eters, and cross-layer correlation, importance ranking and other mechanisms to evaluate 
importance and remove redundancy, and finally obtaining a sparse structure. In terms of 
research purposes, some studies mainly focus on filter pruning without fine-tuning and 
retraining, and pruning in the case of limited data. Some scholars specialize in adaptive 
and dynamic pruning. Generally, filter pruning methods are relatively excellent, and the 
global dynamic pruning may be the future trend.
(3) Channel Pruning  Both filter pruning and channel pruning approaches are coarse-
grained pruning methods, and their pruning techniques are similar. However, channel prun-
ing can solve the dimensional mismatch problem caused by filter pruning. The main idea 
of channel pruning is to directly delete entire channels from the convolutional layer of a 
network. After pruning, the model can directly be trained to obtain higher compression 
ratio and a shorter computing time.
The team of Tsinghua University [76] proposed applying L1 regularization to channels 
by pushing the value of the BN scaling factor to zero to identify and delete insignificant 
convolution channels. In 2021, the team [77] also proposed a layer grouping algorithm to 
automatically find coupled channels, and derived a unified metric based on Fisher infor -
mation to evaluate the importance of a single channel and coupled channels. Ding’s team 
[78] at Tsinghua University proposed ResRep, a novel method for lossless channel pruning, 
which slims down a CNN by reducing the widths (numbers of output channels) of convo-
lutional layers.