48173 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
ranking technology to measure the importance of each neuron in the "final response layer" 
(FRL) and removing the least important neurons. TuSimple Team [29] introduced a new 
parameter-scale factor to scale the output of a specific structure to achieve data-driven and 
end-to-end pruning. The NVIDIA team [30] repeatedly deleted neurons with small scores 
by estimating the contributions of neurons to the final loss. Khakzar [31] of the Technical 
University of Munich proposed a pathway selection method based on neuron contributions, 
and a feature attribution approach, (the “pathway gradient”), that reveals the input features 
associated with features encoded in the critical pathways. Wang [32] of Northeastern Uni-
versity proposed two algorithms that exploit regularization in a new fashion, where the 
penalty factor is uniformly raised to a large level, and they finally solved the two central 
problems regarding the pruning schedule and weight importance criterion of deep neural 
pruning.
Some scholars are also researching structured weight pruning. Last year, the DiDi AI 
research team [33] proposed an automatic structured pruning framework called Auto-
Compress based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM). Similarly, 
Ma et al. [34] also used the ADMM algorithm to obtain a sparse structure called partial 
convolution (PCONV). The Alibaba Dharma Academy team [35] proposed a new prun-
ing method by using block-max weight masking (BMWM) and a density-adaptive regular 
block (DARB) by studying the inherent characteristics of irregular pruning weights.
The research on neuron pruning mainly focuses on the evaluation of neuron contribu-
tion rates and importance levels, and some studies have combined these topics with struc-
tural weight pruning. On the whole, few studies have examined neuron pruning.
(2) Filter/Feature Map/Kernel Pruning  Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) usually 
have significant redundancy between different filters and feature maps. A feature map is 
an output of the network, and a filter is a network parameter. Feature maps and filters have 
corresponding relationships. When a feature map is subtracted, the filter connected to it 
is also removed. Some differences can be found between the filter pruning method and 
the neuron pruning method. The filters pruning method prunes CNN at the filter rather 
level than in terms of a single connection (parameter) or neuron. Filter pruning is the most 
important structured pruning method. The following introduces the research situation of 
this strategy from the perspectives of technology and research purposes.
Methods based on Sparse Constraint Regularization
Filter pruning methods have emerged in large numbers since 2016. To obtain sparse 
structures, many scholars have studied network parameter regularization methods based 
on group sparsity to penalize unimportant parameters. The University of Pittsburgh [36] 
used group least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression for reg-
ularization specification to explore the sparsities of different structure levels, and the 
works in [37, 38] were similar. Yoon and Hwang [39] also studied group sparse regu-
larization, by using the correlations between the features in the examined network for 
pruning. A team at the University of Maryland and NEC Labs America [40] proposed a 
structural sparse CNN regularization and acceleration method, which can greatly reduce 
the cost of computation by removing all the filters and their connected feature maps 
in the network that have little impact on the output accuracy. A team at the Skolkovo 
Institute of Science and Technology [41] used the online balanced descent (OBD) algo-