48171 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
method, the team cooperated with Tsinghua University [14] to propose a three-stage 
pipeline-based deep compression method, which combines pruning, training quantiza-
tion and Huffman coding to reduce the storage requirements of y the examined neural 
network while maintaining the original accuracy. This paper won the best paper award 
at the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2016. To reduce 
the communication overhead, Lin et  al. [15] proposed a deep gradient compression 
(DGC) method, which only selects a part of the most "important" gradient elements in 
each iteration for sending.
The method of pruning weights by providing thresholds for each layer is called layer-
wise magnitude-based pruning (LMP). Many subsequent studies have been conducted 
based on this approach. In the past, the commonly used threshold adjustment method 
was manual operation [14]. Such strategies require much professional and expert knowl-
edge. To facilitate the use of LMP by nonprofessional users, the Anhui Province Key 
Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application [16] proposed an approach called optimiza-
tion based LMP (OLMP) to automatically adjust the pruning threshold of LMP. Con-
sequently, the threshold adjustment problem was transformed into a constrained opti-
mization problem, minimizing the size of the pruned model subject to an accuracy loss 
constraint. Similarly, other scholars have also transformed the compression problem into 
a constrained optimization problem [17– 19]. In 2021, Lee et al. [20] proposed an impor -
tance score for global pruning by studying layered sparsity, namely, the layer-adaptive 
magnitude-based pruning (LAMP) score, and their approach did not require any hyper -
parameter tuning or heavy computation.
Many scholars are still exploring other methods of judging the importance of model 
weights instead of using their magnitude as the importance evaluation metric. The teams at 
Peking University and Microsoft Research [21] proposed a dynamic pruning scheme in the 
frequency domain by using spatial correlation. Carreira-Perpinán et al. of the University of 
California [22] proposed an algorithm called learning compression. They used the quad-
ratic regularization term of a training model to periodically update the weight set and a 
Lagrange multiplier to find the most appropriate weight, not just the largest weight. Mallya 
et  al. of Microsoft Research [23] proposed an algorithm called Packnet. They packaged 
"multiple tasks" into a single network by performing iterative pruning and network retrain-
ing to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem in weight pruning. The Samsung Research 
and Harvard University teams [24] proposed a sparse quantization neural network method 
for weight representation based on fine-grained and unstructured pruning. To speed up the 
training speed and prevent the loss of accuracy caused by the fine-tuning or modification 
of the network architecture during or after training, Frankle’s team [25] at Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) proposed random initialization pruning methods, which 
are different from magnitude-based pruning after training, randomly shuffling the pruned 
weights within each layer or sampling new initial values to preserve or improve accuracy.
Through the above discussion, we know that the research on unstructured pruning 
methods performed by various scholars and research institutions has focused on how to 
choose the weights to be pruned. Threshold pruning methods ranging from LMP [14] to 
dynamic weight selection via spatial correlation [21], and the recent random initialization-
based pruning method [25] (performed to further sparsity the network) have achieved good 
results. On the whole, unstructured pruning, regardless of its structural position, has less 
impact on the overall model accuracy and can achieve a high sparsity rate. However, we 
should also pay attention to the irregular memory access caused by unstructured pruning. 
In addition, for unstructured pruning, the research of MIT Han Song team has provided 
many contributions.