48188 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
To solve the limitations of manual heuristic methods and rule-based strategies, the MIT 
Han Song team and the Google team jointly proposed the AutoML model compression 
method (AMC) [165], which uses RL to automatically learn model compression strategies 
to search the design space, achieves a higher compression ratio than other approaches and 
maintains the performance of neural network. Many other scholars have followed up on this 
AutoML research. For example, Google and the Stanford University team [158] proposed a 
method to speed up networks by using knowledge transfer with AutoML in existing tasks. In 
2019, they proposed an automatic NAS method MnasNet [137] for mobile neural network 
model design, which is takes the diversity of layers into account. Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Megvii Technology and other teams [167] 
proposed a meta-pruning network for channel pruning, which uses the idea of AutoML to 
automatically prune and adjust the appropriate network structure under different constraints.
2.3.2  NAS methods based on evolutionary algorithm
With the development of evolutionary algorithms, many scholars have applied them to the 
NAS method. Google’s team [168] used evolutionary algorithm to search neural network 
architecture automatically, and finally obtained the optimal image classification network 
architecture. In 2019, the team also used evolutionary algorithm to propose an image clas-
sifier called AmoebaNet [169], which surpassed the manual classifier for the first time. 
Carnegie Mellon University and DeepMind [170] proposed a search strategy based on evo-
lutionary algorithm by designing a hierarchical search space. To reduce the weight cou-
pling of the super network, the Megvii Research Institute used an evolutionary algorithm to 
propose a single path super network [171], which does not require fine-tuning.
2.3.3  NAS methods based on gradient
The gradient optimization algorithm is a method to obtain the optimal strategy by con-
tinuously approaching the optimal value. By using gradient descent technology, Sorbonne 
University and Crito Research Institute [172] proposed budget super networks (BSNs) to 
solve the computational cost, memory consumption and distributed computing cost prob-
lems. From 2019 to 2020, the feature balance network (FBNet) series of models [173–175] 
were proposed by UC Berkeley and Facebook, these are a series of lightweight networks 
that are completely based on NAS method. FBNet combines differentiable neural network 
search (DNAS) [176] and resource constraints, FBNetV2 adds channel and input resolution 
searches, and FBNetV3 uses accuracy prediction to perform fast NAS.
2.3.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the methods mentioned above, the Google artificial intelligence team has 
conducted many research on other methods of NAS. They used the sequential model-based 
optimization (SMBO) strategy to propose PNASNET [177]. In the same year, they and the 
MIT team used a sparsifying regularizer to calculate the costs of neurons relative to target 
resources, and proposed an automated NAS method called MorphNet [178] that iteratively 
scales neural networks. Another team at Google proposed an efficient neural architecture 
search (ENAS) [179] method by searching the optimal subgraph in large computational 
graph to learn and discover NAS.