48184 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
grouped convolutions and deep separable convolutions are currently relatively mature and 
high-performing. In addition, the combination of hardware plug-and-play proposed by 
the Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab is an attempt to combine lightweight model with hardware 
equipment. Some studies have also used combinations of channel features to design net-
work structures, and we think this method may be extended to filters, feature maps and 
other structural features. The lightweight structure method designed by Yitu that can be 
embedded into an existing network framework is once and for all, and is the focus of 
future research. In general, lightweight structural design still has development prospects, 
as it saves additional compression steps and is more efficient and faster than traditional 
approaches.
2.2.2  Lightweight model design based on convolution operation method
To reduce the number of network operations, many researchers have optimized the con-
volution operation from the perspective of the convolution operation method, which can 
mainly be divided into two types: shift convolution operations and multiplication opera-
tions. shift convolution operations include standard shift, grouped shift, active shift and 
sparse shift operations. This section introduces the current research situation regarding 
lightweight model design based on convolution operation method in turn.
In order to solve the limitation of memory movement in shift operations, the UC 
Berkeley team first proposed an end-to-end training module which combines shift 
and pointwise convolutions [138]. In the same year, another team at the school used 
this principle to build a more compact and powerful network model called ShiftNet 
[139]. In 2019, Hangzhou Hikvision Research Institute proposed fully-exploited net-
work (FE-Net) [140] based on ShiftNet, which improves the active shift layer by using 
sparse shift layer (SSL), eliminates meaningless shift operations and speeds up the 
running speed of models.
Aiming at the problems of high computational complexity and high energy consump-
tion caused by a large number of intensive multiplication operations in traditional CNNs, 
some researchers have used other operations instead of multiplication operations. The 
Pengcheng Laboratory, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab and the School of EECS of Peking 
University proposed AdderNet [141], which uses addition instead of multiplication to 
greatly reduce the computational power consumption without reducing the accuracy of 
the model. Huawei Technologies put forward Deepshift [142], which utilizes bitwise 
shifts and sign flipping to replace multiplication operations, bitwise shift operations to 
replace absolute value multiplication operations, and sign flipping to replace positive and 
negative sign operations. Alibaba Damo Academy and other institutions jointly proposed 
ShiftAddNet [143], which uses the combination of addition operation and shift operation 
instead of multiplication.
2.2.3  Lightweight model based on YOLO model structure
In actual object detection projects, the trade-off between real-time and accuracy is very 
important, and the YOLO series models v2-v5 [144–147] are some of the most advanced 
object detection methods based on DNN, which have good performance in terms of speed 
and precision. The YOLO series models often include tiny versions when they are pro-
posed. The lightweight idea of the tiny version is to greatly compress the parameters of the