48193 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
2.4.3  Cluster quantization
Some scholars have combined clustering and quantization methods to achieve compres-
sion. The National Laboratory of Patter Recognition Institute of Automation at the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences [210] proposed a quantitative CNN method, which extends 
the K-means clustering method to the volume layer, divides the weight matrix into many 
blocks, then obtains the codebook by clustering, and proposes an effective training scheme 
to suppress the multi-layer cumulative error after quantization. Subsequently, the team pro-
posed a convolution compression method called deep K-means [211], which clusters the 
weights by K-means, records K clustering centers and weight allocation indicators, and 
finally realizes shared weight compression. Shanghai Jiao Tong University [212] proposed 
level quantization, which considers two quantization methods: single-level quantization 
(SLQ) and multi-level quantization (MLQ).
2.4.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the previously described quantitative methods, many scholars have con-
ducted other research and improvement on quantization. Megvii Technology [213] pro-
posed DoReFa-Net, which quantifies the weight and activation value to 1-bit and 2-bit. 
Google Technologies has proposed a method integer-arithmetic-only (IAO) [214], which 
allows the associated network to use only integer calculations when inferring, and quanti-
fies it on already compressed networks such as MobileNet. Microsoft Research [215] pro-
posed learned quantization (LQ-nets), so that the quantizer could be jointly trained with the 
network to adaptively learn the optimal quantization bit width. The University of Sydney 
proposed a gradient-based symmetric quantization method (SYQ) [216], which designs 
binary or ternary weights and defines scaling factors with different granularities at mul-
tiple levels to estimate network weights. Wang et al. [217] proposed a two-step quantiza-
tion (TSQ), which first uses a sparse quantization method to quantify the activation value, 
and then regards the quantization weight as a nonlinear least square regression problem. 
Qin et al. [218] proposed an information retention network (IR-Net) to retain the informa-
tion of forward activation and backward gradient. Due to the discontinuity of the quan-
tization function, it is difficult to calculate the gradient. Alibaba [219] converted low-bit 
quantization into an ADMM-based optimizable objective function to solve this problem. 
Hubara et al. [220] proposed a method to train quantized neural networks (QNNs) — neu-
ral networks with extremely low precision (e.g., 1-bit) weights and activations at runtime. 
In 2021, Liu et al. [221] of the University of Texas at Austin and Google Brain considered 
the post-training quantization problem, then proposed multipoint quantization, a quantiza-
tion method that approximates a full-precision weight vector by using a linear combina-
tion of multiple low-bit numbers vectors. Kim et al. [222] of the School of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering proposed a novel quantizer, called distance aware quantizer (DAQ), 
which is mainly consists of a distance aware soft rounding (DASR) and a temperature con-
troller. The DASR approximates discrete rounding with the kernel soft argmax, allowing 
the training of quantization networks in an end-to-end manner to alleviate the gradient 
mismatch problem. The controller adaptively adjusts the temperature parameter in DASR 
according to the input, addressing the quantizer gap problem.
In the past two years, many achievements have been made in research combining quan-
tization with other compression methods. In 2019, Wang et al. [223] at MIT proposed an 
automated hardware-aware automated quantization framework (HAQ), which uses RL to