48194 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
specify specific quantization strategies according to the utilized hardware structures. In 
2020, Y-Tech and Seattle AI Lab [224] jointly proposed automatic compression, which 
automatically combines pruning and quantization according to the size of the target model. 
Quantization can also be combined with NAS methods. The Samsung Artificial Intelli-
gence Center [225] proposed a binary architecture search (BATS), which greatly reduces 
the accuracy gap between BNNs and their actual values through NAS. South Korea’s 
Gwangju Institute of Science (GIST) proposed a binary network learning architecture 
called BNAS [226], which specifically designs a search space for binary networks. Boo 
et al. [227] of Seoul National University and Hanyang University studied the use of KD 
methods to improve the performance of quantization networks, and then proposed stochas-
tic precision ensemble training for quantum DNNs (QDNNs) [228], which is a KD training 
scheme. Moreover, they also proposed cosine similarity as an essential loss function to 
effectively distill the knowledge of activation quantization in training.
Discussion  Network quantization is a technique to quantize the parameters of neural 
networks into a low-bit representation, which mainly includes binary quantization, ter -
nary quantization and cluster quantization. Binary quantization and ternary quantization 
are research hotspots in the field of quantization. In addition, some scholars have stud-
ied the combination of multiple quantizations approaches to achieve very obvious com-
pression effects, but these methods also result in serious losses of precision. Therefore, 
many researchers have studied the problems of precision recovery and gradient mismatch, 
and have also achieved good results. In general, quantization can speed up the calculation 
speed and greatly reduce the size of the examined model. The combination of it with hard-
ware equipment is also being studied by many research institutions. Quantization is a very 
important model compression method.
As shown in the table, a direct comparison of the three sub methods is shown. Binary 
quantization is suitable for scenarios that require very high computing and storage 
resources. It has low accuracy but very small computing speed and storage space. Ternary 
quantization is more accurate than binary quantization, but it requires more storage space 
and computation time. Cluster quantization is suitable for scenarios with relatively low 
computational and storage resource requirements, but requires some knowledge of cluster -
ing algorithms.
2.5  KD
KD was first proposed in 2006, who used a shallow network to simulate the output struc-
ture of a large network. The main idea of KD is to transfer the knowledge learned from 
a teacher network with a complex structure and huge parameters to a small student net-
work with a relatively simple structure. The student network can achieve similar expres-
sion ability while saving time and space costs. According to the types of knowledge to be 
transferred, KD can be divided into three categories: output transfer, feature transfer and 
relation transfer. A total of 26 papers on KD are counted in this paper. As shown in Fig.  17, 
many studies have been conducted on KD by major research institutions in recent years. In 
terms of various available strategies, the research results of major institutions are shown in 
Fig.  18. Many studies have applied KD method to compress the tasks of object detection 
and semantic segmentation. The following focuses on object detection.