48177 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Hu et al. [79] proposed a channel pruning method based on genetic algorithm. Accord-
ing to the sensitivity of each channel layer, the network model is pruned layer by layer, 
and then fine-tuned. South China University of Technology [80] introduced an additional 
recognition perception loss to help select the channels that are truly helpful for recognition, 
and jointly optimized the reconstruction error. These methods remove the unimportant 
input feature mappings of the convolution layer and prevent dimensional mismatch. The 
team [81] of the Tencent AI Lab proposed a collaborative channel pruning (CCP) method 
to use the dependency relationship between channels to determine the pruning results to 
reduce the computational overhead with negligible performance degradation.
In recent years, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has conducted excellent research on channel 
pruning methods. Zhao et al. [82] introduced a variational technique to estimate the sali-
ency distribution of the parameter channels, and removed redundant channels from the 
original model. In 2020, they cooperated with Tsinghua University and Ant Financial [83] 
to use a simple binary search strategy to determine the channel number configuration of 
a pruning model, and start training and pruning directly from any initial weight. In the 
same year, the team [84] also proposed a model that explicitly establishes channel selec-
tions with discrete weights to encourage the use of more different weights and improve the 
interpretability of the model with the help of interpretable hierarchical channel selection 
in dynamic networks. In 2021, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab worked with Xiamen University 
[85] to propose a collaborative compression (CC) scheme, which joins channel pruning 
and tensor decomposition to compress CNN models by simultaneously learning the model 
sparsity and low-rank status.
Guo et al. [87] of the University of Sydney proposed a new layer-by-layer channel prun-
ing method called channel pruning guided by classification loss and feature importance 
(CPLI), and a new strategy to suppress the influence of unimportant features, which are 
removed in the pruning stage. The team [88] also proposed multi-dimensional pruning 
(MDP), which considers multiple dimensional factors such as space, time, and channels 
for pruning. In 2021, another team including Gao et al. [89] at the University of Sydney 
considered the loss metric mismatch problem of pruning and proposed a novel channel 
pruning method for CNNs. At the same time, they introduced a corresponding episodic 
memory to update and collect sub-networks during the pruning process to solve the prob-
lem of catastrophic forgetting and the imbalanced distribution of subnetworks.
The Seoul University team [86] proposed that a model may converge to a poor local 
minimum after pruning, and channel pruning depends excessively on the absolute activa-
tion value in the corresponding channel. Therefore, they proposed a data-driven channel 
pruning algorithm using the random gradient descent method, which combines BN and a 
rectified linear unit (ReLU) for channel pruning without an additional fine-tuning process. 
Gao et al. [14] of the University of Pittsburgh proposed a discrete optimal structural prun-
ing method to obtain compact CNN with strong resolution. Joo et al. [90] of the School of 
Electrical Engineering proposed a novel channel pruning method, a linearly replaceable 
filter (LRF), suggesting that a filter that can be approximated by the linear combination of 
other filters is replaceable. Moreover, weights compensation was proposed to support the 
LRF method by effectively reducing the output difference caused by removing filters via 
direct weight modification.
To reduces the risk of pruning important channels prematurely, another team including 
Hou et al. [91] propose a novel Channel Exploration methodology (CHEX) in 2022, which 
repeatedly prune and regrow the channels throughout the training process. They tackle the 
channel pruning problem via a well known column subset selection (CSS) formulation. 
The results show that compressed ResNet-50 model on ImageNet dataset achieves 76%