48185 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
network, reduce the convolutional layer, and make the network shallow and thin. In addi-
tion to these tiny versions of the YOLO series models, many researchers have constructed 
lighter weights based on the YOLO series models. The following introduces some excel-
lent and typical lightweight models based on the YOLO model structure.
To achieve real-time object detection on laptops or mobile phones without GPUs, 
Huang et al. [148] proposed YOLO-LITE based on tiny-YOLOv2, which proved the shal-
low network has great potential in fast object detection without GPUs, and also proved 
that BN is unnecessary for shallow networks. Based on the single-stage object detection 
network architecture of the YOLO network series, researchers from the Waterloo Artifi-
cial Intelligence Institute AI Institute of the University of Waterloo and Darwin AI cre-
ated YOLO Nano [149] by using a human–machine collaborative design strategy. HIT Lab 
NZ scholars at the University of Canterbury proposed xYOLO [150] based on YOLOv3-
tiny. By using the normal convolutional layer and XNOR layer for training and recall, it 
achieved greater inference speed on desktop CPU and GPU. Researchers from CVTE put 
forward the YOLO-Fastest algorithm [151] by combining it with EfficientNet-lite, which 
is known as the strongest mobile lightweight neural network. It can be easily deployed 
on mobile devices, and its image classification effect is good and meets the requirements 
of all platforms. In addition, the original team that developed YOLOv4 proposed Scaled-
YOLOv4 to scale of YOLOv4 [147]. In 2021, Cai et al. [153] of Northeastern University 
proposed YOLObile framework, a real-time object detection on mobile devices via com-
pression-compilation co-design, and proposed a novel block-punched pruning scheme and 
GPU-CPU collaborative scheme to achieve improved computational efficiency on mobile 
devices. To deploy real-time object detection algorithms on UAV-friendly devices, Debojy -
oti B. Et al. used compressed convolutional techniques, transfer learning, backbone shrink -
age, and scale prediction to reduce the number of learnable parameters in YOLOv5model. 
It is worth noting that in addition to reducing GPU memory consumption by 34%, this 
study also reduced energy consumption by 10 watts [154].
2.2.4  Other types of approaches
Many scholars study lightweight models. The University of California, Berkeley and Nan-
jing University jointly proposed SkipNet [155], which uses a gate module to determine 
whether to perform a certain layer of calculation to reduce the model size. Google Research 
used a set of fixed scaling factors to evenly scale each dimension of the network and built a 
high-precision lightweight image classification model called EfficientNet [156]. The team 
proposed EfficientDet [157] by using a bidirectional feature pyramid network (BiFPN) and 
Box prediction net to predict the features extracted from the backbone network.
In real-world environments, it’s much common to use training data to fine-tune quan-
tized networks for dealing with the performance drop induced by quantization errors. How -
ever, when training data is unavailable due to security, privacy, or confidentiality concerns, 
a popular method is to use zero-shot quantization to addresses such problems which repre-
sents neural networks by low-bit integer without accessing any of the real data. Choi et al. 
[158] propose AIT, a simple yet powerful technique for zero-shot quantization, which uses 
a KL distance loss only without a cross-entropy loss, and manipulates gradients to guar -
antee that a certain portion of weights are properly updated after crossing the rounding 
thresholds. Moreover, learning to synthesize data has emerged as a promising direction in 
zero-shot quantization. Zhong et al. [159] propose a novel zero-shot quantization method