48174 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
rithm [12] to regard the convolution operation as a matrix multiplication calculation, 
and used the group sparsity method to achieve sparse matrix multiplication and improve 
the calculation speed of their approach. Megvii Technology and Xi’an Jiaotong Univer -
sity [42] proposed a channel selection strategy based on the LASSO and a least-squares 
reconstruction algorithm to prune filters.
Many methods based on the sparse learning (SL) framework have also been proven to 
be effective [43–47] of Université de Sherbrooke proposed an SL framework, which 
allows learned and selected filters to be pruned in a CNN while considering the neuron 
budget. A University of Amsterdam team [48] used a Bayesian algorithm to construct 
sparse structures for pruning. However, the regularization based on pruning technique 
requires a sensitivity analysis for each layer and additional computations. To solve this 
problem, a team at NVIDIA [49] proposed a global rescaling method that depends on 
the standards of all layers and does not require sensitivity estimation.
Methods based on adaptive and dynamic pruning
Many scholars have proposed some strategies to achieve adaptive and dynamic filter 
pruning. In 2017, Lin et al. of Tsinghua University [50] considered that input sam-
ples should not be treated equally because of the different computational quantities 
required by different tasks. Therefore, they proposed a runtime neural pruning (RNP) 
framework that retains all the capabilities of the original network, and adaptively con-
ducts pruning according to the input image and current feature map. In 2018, the Ding 
team of Tsinghua University proposed an auto-balanced filter pruning (AFP) method 
[51], which prunes some weak filters together with the corresponding feature maps. 
In the second year, they [52] also proposed a new momentum-based stochastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) optimization method to reduce network complexity via dynamic 
pruning. Ji Rongrong’s team of Xiamen University cooperated with Tencent Technol-
ogy and other institutions [53] to propose a global and dynamic training algorithm to 
prune non-salient filters. A team at the University of Sydney and Baidu [54] proposed 
the learning filter pruning criterion (LFPC) by considering cross-layer filter distribu-
tion diversity, this approach adaptively selects the appropriate pruning criteria for dif-
ferent functional layers.
In 2021, Wang et al. [55] of the University of Tennessee proposed a layer-adaptive 
filter pruning approach based on structural redundancy reduction, which builds a 
graph for each convolutional layer of a CNN to measure the redundancy in each 
layer. This approach prunes unimportant filters in the most redundant layer(s) 
rather than the filters with the least importance across all layers. Peking Univer -
sity and Huawei’s Noah’s Ark Lab used the relationship between different inputs 
to propose a new paradigm that dynamically removes redundant filters by embed-
ding the manifold information of all instances into the space of pruned networks 
(dubbed ManiDP) [56]. To overcome the problem that many extra hyperparameters 
and training epochs are caused by the existing filter pruning methods, Ruan [57] of 
the Chinese Academy of Sciences proposed a novel dynamic and progressive filter 
pruning scheme (DPFPS) that directly learns a structured sparsity network from 
scratch. In particular, the DPFPS specifically imposes a new structured sparsity 
inducing regularization upon the expected pruning parameters in a dynamically 
sparse manner.