48175 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Methods based on limited data and without retraining or fine-tuning
Considering that the current methods typically need to use the original data for 
retraining after pruning to compensate for the loss of accuracy, due to the data pri-
vacy problem, only a small part of the data may actually be obtained. The Sense-
Time team [58] proposed a data-driven method that uses a parameter class called 
synaptic strength to prune the connection between the input and output feature 
maps, and finally generate a nuclear-level sparse CNN. In 2020, SenseTime and 
Tsinghua University [59] jointly proposed a method for network compression when 
the number of training data is limited. Tang et al. of Nanjing University [60] pro-
posed a network pruning method based on residual blocks and limited data to solve 
the problem of pruning residual connections and small-scale datasets. The Ding 
team of Tsinghua University [61] also proposed a method to safely remove redun-
dant filters, but it is not ideal for large scale datasets because the model needs to be 
trained from scratch [62]. To solve this problem, the team further proposed approxi-
mated oracle filter pruning (AOFP) [63], which continuously searches for the least 
important filters in a binary search manner, performs pruning attempts by randomly 
masking out filters, accumulates the resulting errors, and finetunes the model via a 
multipath framework.
Most of the previous works involved "hard filter pruning", which means deleting the 
pruned filters directly. Therefore, this approach reduces the capacity of the original 
model and leads to performance degradation. In addition, after pruning the filters of the 
pretraining model, fine-tuning is needed. To solve this problem, Southern University of 
Science and Technology [64] proposed a soft filter pruning (SFP) method to acceler -
ate the DNN inference process, so that each pruned filter can be updated during the 
training process of the model with little dependence on the pretraining model. To solve 
dimensional mismatch and retraining problems, the team cooperated with the Huawei 
Noah’s Ark Lab and other institutions [65] to propose an end-to-end pruning method for 
heterogeneous redundant structures, and kernel sparsity and entropy (KSE) indicators to 
guide model compression, without iterative pruning and retraining. Lin et al. [66] also 
introduced a soft mask to learn a sparse soft mask in a label-free and end-to-end man-
ner, and used a fast iterative shrinkage and thresholding algorithm (FISTA) to quickly 
and reliably remove the corresponding structures.
Others
Some scholars have studied pruning methods that can directly specify the accuracy of 
the model after pruning. The Pravendra Singh team at the IIT Kanpur Institute [67] pro-
posed a play and prune (PP) framework consisting of an auto-balanced filter pruning 
(AFP) [51] module and a pruning rate controller (PRC) module. This method allows 
for directly specifying the desired error tolerance instead of conducting this step at the 
pruning level. Enderich [68] of Robert Bosch GmbH proposed the holistic filter pruning 
(HFP) method, which can specify accurate pruning rates for both numbers of param-
eters and multiplications, and they used the channelwise scaling factors of batch-nor -
malization (BN) layers to calculate the model size.
Luo Jianhao’s team at the National Key Software Technology Laboratory of Nanjing 
University [69] proposed a Thinet architecture based on filter pruning by using a greedy