48198 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
adaptation matrix to correct the label noise produced by the teacher network on the col-
lected unlabeled images.
Some scholars put forward "assistant" to help learning. Mirzadeh et al. [252] introduced 
multi-step distillation method, using a medium-sized network as a teacher assistant to 
improve knowledge extraction ability and reduce the gap between primary school student’ 
networks and teacher network. Tianjin University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong 
and SenseTime [253] proposed residual KD method. They used assistant to help students 
acquire more knowledge by learning the residual between teachers and students.
Discussion:The research on KD mainly includes relationship transfer and feature trans-
fer. Output Transfer constrains the output of the student model to be similar to the teacher 
model. Feature Transfer constrains the intermediate features of the student model to be 
similar to those of the teacher model. And relation Transfer constraints the category rela-
tion of the student model is similar to that of the teacher model, and this relation can be 
obtained by computing the correlation matrix. Compared with Output Transfer and Feature 
Transfer, Relation Transfer can control the similarity between the student model and the 
teacher model more fine-grained. In addition, these three distillation methods can also be 
combined, such as the combination of Output Transfer and Feature Transfer, which can bet-
ter preserve the details and features of the model. It should be noted that KD also has some 
limitations. When there is a large gap between the performance of the teacher model and 
the student model, the effect of KD will be limited. In addition, for some complex tasks, 
KD may need to be performed in multiple stages to achieve the best results. In addition, the 
combination of knowledge and relationships proposed by scholars at Zhejiang University 
is a new attempt. Some researchers used semi supervised learning mode to reduce the gap 
between students and teachers. We think that more research can be conducted in this area, 
The problem of KD without data and the wider application of KD the field of target detec-
tion instead of image classification may be future research focuses.
2.6  Low‑rank decomposition
Since most of the calculations in a CNN are convolution computations, in essence, we 
can consider convolution computations to be matrix analysis. Therefore, the compres-
sion method of low-rank decomposition was introduced. The main idea is to decompose 
the convolution kernel through matrix analysis methods such as low-rank decomposition. 
Therefore, a large convolution kernel tensor is decomposed into a small convolution ker -
nel to approximate the original weight matrix, reducing the computations and parameters 
required by the model to a certain extent. The compression method of low-rank decompo-
sition has been rising in popularity since 2013. This paper collects a total of 17 papers on 
DNN model compression via low-rank decomposition. Figure  20 shows the popularity of 
low-rank decomposition research over the past 8 years. More studies on this method were 
conducted in 2018, while fewer studies have been conducted in recent years. The process 
of low-rank decomposition for the convolution kernel is shown in Fig.  21. The research 
situations of various research institutions and teams are shown in Fig. 22.
In 2013, the University of Oxford and Facebook [254] first theoretically explained 
the feasibility of applying matrix factorization to convolution kernels, and proposed that 
the remaining values could be accurately predicted by given part of the weight value of 
each feature. In the second year, the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology [255] 
proposed the CP decomposition method to compress the convolution kernel in the con-
volutional network. With the development of low-rank decomposition methods, Facebook