48196 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
of students to learn and teach each other according to the outputs of multiple networks. To 
enable students to better understand the teacher model, Kim et al. [231] of Seoul National 
University proposed utilizing convolution operation to encode the output of the teacher 
model and decode (translate) it to students, so as to achieve better learning effect.
Borui et al. [232] of Megvii Technology Limited provide a novel viewpoint that the potential 
of output KD has actually not been fully exploited, so they reformulate the classical KD loss 
into two parts, i.e., target class knowledge distillation (TCKD) and non-target class knowledge 
distillation (NCKD). Traditional KD method naturally suppresses the effectiveness of NCKD 
and limits the flexibility to balance these two parts. Thus, they present Decoupled Knowledge 
Distillation (DKD), further decouples TCKD and NCKD enabling TCKD and NCKD to play 
their roles more efficiently and flexibly, and controls the action of both by independent hyperpa-
rameters, resulting in a significant performance gains on a range of visual tasks.
2.5.2  Feature transfer
Feature transfer uses the hidden layer features of network learning as knowledge for stu-
dents to learn. In 2015, Romero et al. [233] proposed Fitnet on the basis of Hinton, which 
trains the student network by using the hidden features obtained from the middle layer of 
the teacher network. Komodakis and Zagoruyko [234] proposed attention transfer (AT), 
which encourages student’ networks to imitate the attention and sensitivity distributions 
(gradient) of teacher’ networks for feature extraction. TuSimple [235] regards knowledge 
transfer as a domain adaptation problem, and implement knowledge transfer by matching 
the activation distribution of the feature maps of the teacher model and student model.
The Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Amazon and other institu-
tions [2] proposed an information-theoretic framework for knowledge transfer that formu-
lates knowledge transfer as maximizing the mutual information between the teacher and 
student networks. Tung et al. [236] proposed a method of maintaining similarity KD, so 
that the input sample pairs of similar (different) activations in the teacher network can pro-
duce the same (different) activations in the student network, thereby guiding the learning 
of the student network. Heo et al. [1] of Seoul National University proposed a new feature 
distillation method by designing the distillation loss as a synergy between teacher trans-
formation, student transformation, distillation feature location and distance function. The 
Computer Vision Lab of the University of Nottingham and the Samsung Artificial Intel-
ligence Center [237] proposed a new KD method based on feature statistics, which feed the 
learned statistical information back to the teacher through adaptive instance normalization 
Fig. 19  The process of KD