48189 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
The team at Google combined the depth-wise separable convolution structure and the 
inverted residual with linear bottleneck structure, using the MnasNet [137] model based on 
the SE structure to propose MobileNetV3 [136], and using complementary search technol-
ogy and NetAdapt algorithm to achieve computer vision tasks carried on the mobile phone. 
In 2021, Google cooperated with the University of Wisconsin-Madison [180] to propose an 
augmented search space family with building blocks based on regular convolutions, they 
called it Mobiledets, that NAS methods can substantially benefit from this enlarged search 
space to achieve better latency-accuracy trade-off on a variety of mobile devices.
To solve the DNAS problem of high memory consumption in a large candidate set, 
Han Song’s team at MIT proposed proxylessNAS [181], which can directly learn the 
architecture for large-scale target tasks and target hardware platforms. The University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ByteDance, and the Snap team collaborated to pro-
pose the Slimmable Neural Network [182], which dynamically adjusts the network 
width according to the device benchmark and resource constraints at runtime, and has 
good performance in object detection, instance segmentation, human key point detec-
tion and other tasks. Elsken et al. [183] team at the Center for Artificial Intelligence of 
Bosch proposed a new method based on a simple Hill-climbing process to automatically 
search for a CNN architecture with good performance. In 2021, Chen et al. [184] of the 
University of Sydney and Baidu proposed NAS with batch normalization (BN-NAS) 
to accelerate NAS, which can significantly reduce the time required by model training 
and evaluation by only training the BN parameters during the supernet training, thereby 
accelerating network convergence for NAS. Chen et al. [185] of Stony Brook University 
and Microsoft Research proposed a simple yet effective framework for efficient train-
ing of transformer supernets. Without extra fine-tuning or retraining steps, the trained 
supernet is able to produce thousands of high-quality transformers by inheriting weights 
from it directly.
Many researchers still combine NAS methods with other compression methods. In 
order to overcome the structural limitations of pruning networks, University of Tech-
nology Sydney and Baidu Research [186] proposed using NAS to directly search for 
networks with flexible channels and layer sizes. The National University of Singapore 
and UISEE Technology [187] used the search space of the partial-order hypothesis 
pruning architecture to automatically search for the structure with the best speed and 
accuracy performance. MIT’s [188] team proposed once for all (OFA), which can train 
subnetworks under different hyperparameters by combining KD, network pruning, 
and NAS algorithms to search for suitable subnetworks according to different accu-
racy requirements and resource constraints. The team of MIT and Shanghai Jiaotong 
University [189] proposed an APQ algorithm that combines NAS, pruning strategy, 
and quantization strategy for efficient deep learning-based inference on resource-con-
strained hardware. The National University of Taiwan and MIT IBM Watson Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory jointly proposed microcontroller units Net (MCUNet) [190], 
a framework that jointly designs the efficient neural architecture (TinyNAS) and the 
lightweight inference engine (TinyEngine), enabling ImageNet-scale inference on 
microcontrollers. Combining binary quantization can also achieve compression. In 
2021, Beihang University and Baidu Research [191] introduced the partial channel 
connections for memory-efficient differentiable architecture search (PC-DARTS) strat-
egy into the search of the binary network, and gradually deleted operations with lower 
probability during the search process to narrow the search space. Beihang University 
proposed a child parent search strategy, called CP-NAS [192], which uses a full-pre-
cision model (parent) to guide the search of binary model (child). Another team Yan