48183 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
(5) Others  Some lightweight networks use multiple convolutional structures for compres-
sion. Stanford University, DeepScale and UC Berkeley jointly proposed SqueezeNet [125], 
which was a relatively early and classic lightweight network that used the 1 × 1 convolu-
tion and grouped convolution methods, and then used the Fire module for parameter com-
pression. Many subsequent works produced by of the team were conducted to optimize 
and improve this model. On the basis of SqueezeNet, they proposed SqueezeNext [126] by 
directly incorporating separation convolution to achieve improved parameter compression. 
By removing global average pooling and using the design idea of YOLO as reference, they 
added ConvDet structure to predict the characteristics extracted from the backbone net-
work bounding box, and finally constructed SqueezeDet [127].
Many other scholars have also constructed lightweight structures by using channel fea-
tures. In 2018, Gao et al. [128] proposed ChannelNet with three instances of channel-wise 
convolutions: group channel-wise convolutions, depth-wise separable channel-wise con-
volutions, and the convolutional classification layer, which reduce the number of model 
parameters. Momenta and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences jointly proposed 
the squeeze-and-excitation network (SENet) [129] to obtain more channel features through 
modeling and introduced an attention mechanism between channels. The model was the 
champion of image classification task during the last ImageNet competition in 2017. In 
2021, Yu et  al. of Huazhong University of Science cooperated with Microsoft to apply 
efficient shuffle blocks to the high-resolution network HRNet [131], leading a lightweight 
network called Lite-HRNet [130]. They also introduced an efficient conditional channel 
weighting unit to replace the costly 1 × 1 convolution in shuffle blocks, and the weights 
were computed across channels and resolutions.
In recent years, a large number of models have been proposed, such as MobileNet, Shuf-
fleNet and MobileNetV2. However, these models are heavily dependent on depth-wise 
separable convolution, which lacks effective implementation in most deep learning frame-
works. Therefore, Weston University proposed an effective architecture called PeleeNet 
[132], which was constructed by conventional convolution. In 2020, Yitu and the National 
University of Singapore proposed a MobileNeXt [133] network architecture by using a 
novel SandGlass module group, which can be easily embedded into an existing network 
architecture to improve model performance.
In 2021, Zhou et al. [134] of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications intro-
duced a lightweight CNN, called residual semantic-guided attention network (RSANet). 
First, the lightweight convolutional network (LCNet) is used as backbone, and the Residual 
Semantic-guided attention feature pyramid network (RSAFPN) is used as detection head. 
In the LCNet, a constant channel module (CCM) was designed to save the memory access 
cost (MAC) and down sampling module (DSM) was designed to save the computational 
cost. In the RSAFPN, meanwhile, residual semantic-guided attention mechanism (RSAM) 
was employed to fuse the multi-scale features from LCNet to efficiently improve its detec-
tion performance. Han et al. [135] of the Chinese Academy of Sciences introduced versa-
tile filters to construct efficient CNNs, which are widely used in various visual recognition 
tasks. By studying the applicability of the anchor-free strategy on lightweight object detec-
tion models, Yu et al. [109] of Baidu proposed a new family of real-time object detectors 
named PP-PicoDet, they enhanced the backbone structure and designed the lightweight 
structure of the neck, which improved the feature extraction ability of the network, and 
then improved label assignment strategy and loss function to make training more stable and 
efficient.
Lightweight structure design based on convolutional structure is a hot research topic 
for major companies and institutions. Lightweight structures designed by using traditional