48182 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
better results and required fewer parameters due to the extreme use of feature maps. Since 
DenseNet’s internal connections still exhibit considerable redundancy, the team and Tsin-
ghua University research scholars cooperated to improve DenseNet and propose Con-
denseNet [115], which can reduce the video memory consumption and improve the speed 
of the model through using a learnable grouped convolution operation during training and 
pruning.
The Microsoft Research Institute proposed the interleaved group convolution network 
(IGCNets) [116] which was implemented by interleaved group convolutions in 2017. Inter -
leaved group convolutions make the network wider, while the network parameters and com-
putational complexity remain unchanged. In the second year, the team proposed IGCV2 
[117] on the basis of IGCV1, and performed another interleaved group convolution for the 
second group convolution in the block. In the same year, the Microsoft Research team pro-
posed IGCV3 based on the ideas of IGCV2 and a bottleneck [118] by combining low-rank 
convolution kernels and sparse convolution kernels to form dense convolution kernels, 
expanded the dimensionality of the input grouping features, reduced the dimensionality 
of output, and finally achieved compression. The core of the IGC series of networks is the 
ultimate application of grouped convolution, which decomposes conventional convolutions 
into multiple grouped convolutions and reduces the number of required parameters.
(3) Pointwise Convolution  In the past, lightweight models based on discrete or group con-
volutions structures often did not make full use of 1 × 1 convolution, examples include the 
Xception and ResNeXt models. This kind of convolution is also called pointwise convolu-
tion, and it usually brings a large number of computations. To solve this problem, Megvii 
and Tsinghua University cooperated to use the group pointwise convolution calculation 
method to propose ShuffleNetV1 [119] in 2018. They used the pointwise convolution in 
place of the group convolution operation to reduce the calculation consumption, and used 
the channel shuffling method to solve the problem that the output channel can only be con-
nected with some of the input channels. Subsequently, they proposed four guidelines for 
designing lightweight neural networks based on ShuffleNetV1. After carrying out a large 
number of experiments, they proposed ShuffleNetV2 [120] based on these four guidelines 
and improved the defects of ShuffleNetV1 by introducing channel splitting. In 2019, the 
Megvii team proposed ThunderNet [121] based on ShuffleNetV2 and Lighthead region-
based CNN (RCNN), designed context enhancement module and spatial attention module 
to integrate local and global features and enhance network feature expression ability.
The University of Washington and Allen Institute for AI proposed a lightweight network 
called the efficient spatial pyramid network (ESPNet) [122] for semantic segmentation, 
which decomposes the standard convolution into 1 × 1 pointwise convolutions and a spa-
tial pyramid of dilated convolutions. Both of themes are used to reduce the computational 
complexity of the network and resample the features of each effective receptive domain.
(4) Plug‑and‑Play  Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has been keen to research plug-and-play light-
weight network models in recent years. They proposed plug-and-play versatile filters with 
multiple channels or spatial versatile filters [123]. In 2020, the team proposed a new end-
to-side neural network architecture called GhostNet [124], which uses a plug-and-play 
Ghost module to divide the original convolutional layer into two parts. The module first 
uses fewer convolution kernels to generate a small amount intrinsic feature map, and then 
uses simple linear change operation to further efficiently generate ghost feature map.