48178 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
top1 accuracy with only 25% FLOPs of the original ResNet-50 model, outperforming pre-
vious state-of-the-art channel pruning methods.
Through the research on channel pruning methods, it can be seen that among these 
approaches, L1 regularization using the scaling factor of the BN layer, sensitivity and cou-
pling the correlations of the channels in each layer to remove redundancy are most popular. 
In addition, the Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has performed more research on channel prun-
ing methods in recent years, and they have focused on combining other methods such as 
search algorithms and tensor decomposition methods, with channel pruning methods to 
achieve further pruning effects. The proposed linear combination of other filters to achieve 
compression is a relatively novel filter pruning method in 2021. Most recently, a team 
of National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University proposes an accurate and efficient object 
detector capable of performing real-time inference under the hardware constraints of an 
edge device by leveraging structural pruning, feature distillation, and NAS [92]. Generally, 
the channel pruning methods have good compression effect and do not produce a sparse 
matrix, so special software is not required.
(4) Layer Pruning  Layer pruning method is one of the deepest pruning methods, which 
directly prunes a layer in the network. The degree of compression of layer pruning is great, 
but the accuracy is relatively lower.
In recent years, some studies have focused on layer pruning methods. Dong et al. [93] 
of Nanyang Technology University proposed a new layer-wise pruning method for DNNs. 
The parameters of each individual layer are pruned independently based on the second 
order derivatives of a layer-wise error function with respect to the corresponding param-
eters, and the original prediction performance is restored through the reconstruction error 
and a retraining process. Yang et al. [94] in MIT used the method of energy perception to 
calculate the energy consumption of each layer, preferentially pruning the layers with high 
energy consumption. In addition, to prevent incorrect pruning, the weight that resulted in 
the greatest decrease in accuracy after pruning was retained. Subsequently, the team coop-
erated with Google [95] to propose Netadapt, which also takes hardware metrics (delay, 
energy consumption, etc.) as pruning evaluation criteria, uses empirical metrics for evalu-
ation, and automatically iteratively prunes the pretraining network on a mobile platform 
until the imposed resource budget is met.
In the application of object detection, the Guangdong Key Laboratory of Modern Con-
trol Technology uses channel pruning and layer pruning to compress the YOLOv3-SPP 
garbage detection model, and the compressed model is directly deployed on the low-com-
puting edge computing device carried by the robot to automatically classify and recycle 
garbage[279].
2.1.3  Other types of approaches
In 2021, some scholars conducted research on training perspectives, Google Brain and 
DeepMind [96] proposed a method to train sparse neural networks with a fixed param-
eter count and a fixed computational cost throughout training. This approach updates the 
topology of a sparse network during training by using parameter magnitudes and infre-
quent gradient calculations, this approach requires fewer FLOPs to achieve a given level 
of accuracy. Hayou et al. [97] of University of Oxford provided a comprehensive theoreti-
cal analysis of magnitude and gradient-based pruning for the initialization and training of