48190 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
et  al. [193] of Microsoft Research used NAS to design a lightweight object tracker, 
called LightTrack, which reformulates one-shot NAS specialized for object tracking, 
and introduces an effective search space. In addition, it can run in real-time on diverse 
resource-restricted platforms.
Discussion  Many studies use NAS for model compression and acceleration. According 
to the method of solving the search problem, NAS methods are divided into reinforce-
ment learning based, evolutionary algorithms and gradient based. NAS method based 
on reinforcement learning is very common, it can find a good neural network struc-
ture, but the training time is long. Although the NAS method based on evolutionary 
algorithm is easy to fall into local optimal solution, its search time is relatively short. 
At present, some scholars have used evolutionary algorithm to search and accelerate 
the network structure, and have achieved some excellent research results in image clas-
sification. The gradient-based NAS method to find the optimal value is more novel. It 
does not need to maintain the whole population like evolutionary algorithms, which can 
effectively reduce the computational cost of search, but it is still in the development 
stage. In addition, NAS methods are often used in combination with other model com-
pression methods, which also illustrates their compatibility. The NAS method proposed 
by MIT in recent years, which can search for a special network structure by combining 
hardware performance with different precision levels and resource constraints, may be a 
hot spot for future development.
2.4  Network quantization
The main idea of network quantization is to convert floating-point operations into inte-
ger fixed-point operations, so as to compress the model size and accelerate network train-
ing. As shown in Fig.  14, Quantization model is a method that uses low-precision weights 
to approximate conventional precision (generally 32-bit floating-point) to store model 
weights. At present, INT8 quantization is mostly used in the industry. TensorRT, Tensor -
Flow, PyTorch and many other deep learning frameworks have already enabled (or are 
enabling) quantization. Academic research on quantization pays more attention to how to 
reduce the accuracy loss caused by model quantization, which can be roughly divided into 
binary quantization, ternary quantization, cluster quantization, and quantization combined 
with other compression methods. As shown in Fig.  15, this paper lists the classic network 
quantization methods published by major research institutions at the top meeting in recent 
years. In this paper, a total of 33 papers about network quantization compression model 
methods are counted. The research situation of various research institutions and teams 
regarding each aspect are shown in Fig. 16.
Fig. 14  Network Quantization
Inde xI n bits value
1 01 00.40.3
1.2 33 2
2
2 10 0.4
31 1 1.1-0.2 1
01
1 0.1
-0.6 -0.7 0 010 00 -0.6