48197 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
(on the condition of students), and allow the teacher network to reliably transmit the statis-
tical information of student’ learning through loss.
2.5.3  Relation Transfer
Relation transfer uses the relationships between the layers of network characteristics or the 
relationships of samples as knowledge for students to learn. Yim et al. [238] distilled by fit-
ting the relationships between layers of teachers and students to let students learn the pro-
cess of feature extraction from teachers. You et al. [239] integrated the knowledge of mul-
tiple teacher networks, used the information of the middle and output layers in the teacher 
network to standardize some layers in the student network, and finally trained a thin and 
deep student network. Similarly, the Google team [240] proposed the codistillation method 
to improve accuracy and speed up training.
Instance relationships can also be learned as a kind of knowledge. The National Univer -
sity of Defense Technology and Shangtang Technology [241] proposed a new distillation 
framework named correlation congruence KD (CCKD), which considers not only instance 
information but also correlation information between instances when transferring knowl-
edge. Park et al. [242] introduced a novel approach called dubbed relational KD (RKD), 
which transfers mutual relations of data examples instead. Liu et al. [243] used the trans-
formation of the distance between two samples in different layers for distillation. MIT and 
Google [244] proposed that more information can be obtained by training students to learn 
the teacher’s description of data. It is critical for ufficeent student network learning to inte-
grate both individual knowledge and relational knowledge while reserving their inherent 
correlation. Zhou et al. [245] of Zhejiang University proposed distilling the novel holistic 
knowledge based on an attributed graph constructed among instances.
2.5.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the abovementioned conventional KD methods, some special KD methods 
have been researched. Some scholars have specially studied the KD method for object 
detection task. Gupta et  al. [246] proposed a cross modal distillation method for super -
vision transfer, which transfers the knowledge learned from the RGB data set to a deep 
learning scenario. Li et al. [247] proposed using the feature map sampled by the region 
candidate frame to perform distillation, and L2 loss to reduce the differences between the 
local feature sampling results of large and small networks, to achieve certain results on 
detection tasks. The Communications & Media Research Laboratory of Korea Eletronics 
Telecommunications Research Instutue [248] also used KD method to improve the perfor -
mance of lightweight mobile network single shot multibox detector(SSD) [273] model in 
object detection. Chen et al. [249] introduced the method of combining hint learning, soft 
targets and hard targets into object detection distillation simultaneously. By giving differ -
ent weights to different loss functions, the whole network is trained, and the performance 
of multi-classification object detection network is improved. Wang et al. [250] introduced 
anchor points around the area as supervisory information to avoid the background noise 
problem during simulation. Chen et  al. [251] of Peking University and Noah’s Ark Lab 
proposed utilizing a large amount of unlabeled data in the wild to address the data-free 
KD problem, then in order to improve the performance of the student network, a data-free 
noise distillation algorithm was also proposed, which uses the student network to learn an