Page 7 of 12
 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
 
reducing the readability rate of patients with diabetes. 
Association rules reveal a connection between premises 
and conclusions; however, the reasonable and reliable 
application of information can only be achieved through 
validation by experienced medical professionals and 
through extensive causal research [92].
PCA
PCA is a widely used data-mining method that aims to 
reduce data dimensionality in an interpretable way while 
retaining most of the information present in the data 
[93, 94]. The main purpose of PCA is descriptive, as it 
requires no assumptions about data distribution and is, 
therefore, an adaptive and exploratory method. Dur -
ing the process of data analysis, the main steps of PCA 
include standardization of the original data, calculation 
of a correlation coefficient matrix, calculation of eigen -
values and eigenvectors, selection of principal compo -
nents, and calculation of the comprehensive evaluation 
value. PCA does not often appear as a separate method, 
as it is often combined with other statistical methods 
[95]. In practical clinical studies, the existence of multi -
collinearity often leads to deviation from multivariate 
analysis. A feasible solution is to construct a regression 
model by PCA, which replaces the original independ -
ent variables with each principal component as a new 
independent variable for regression analysis, with this 
most commonly seen in the analysis of dietary patterns 
in nutritional epidemiology [96]. In a study of socio -
economic status and child-developmental delays, PCA 
was used to derive a new variable (the household wealth 
index) from a series of household property reports and 
incorporate this new variable as the main analytical vari -
able into the logistic regression model [97]. Additionally, 
PCA can be combined with cluster analysis. Burgel et al. 
[98] used PCA to transform clinical data to address the 
lack of independence between existing variables used to 
explore the heterogeneity of different subtypes of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Therefore, in the study of 
subtypes and heterogeneity of clinical diseases, PCA can 
eliminate noisy variables that can potentially corrupt the 
cluster structure, thereby increasing the accuracy of the 
results of clustering analysis [98, 99].
The data‑mining process and examples of its 
application using common public databases
Open-access databases have the advantages of large vol -
umes of data, wide data coverage, rich data information, 
and a cost-efficient method of research, making them 
beneficial to medical researchers. In this chapter, we 
introduced the data-mining process and methods and 
their application in research based on examples of utiliz -
ing public databases and data-mining algorithms.The data‑mining process
Figure  1 shows a series of research concepts. The data-
mining process is divided into several steps: (1) database 
selection according to the research purpose; (2) data 
extraction and integration, including downloading the 
required data and combining data from multiple sources; 
(3) data cleaning and transformation, including removal 
of incorrect data, filling in missing data, generating new 
variables, converting data format, and ensuring data con -
sistency; (4) data mining, involving extraction of implicit 
relational patterns through traditional statistics or ML; 
(5) pattern evaluation, which focuses on the validity 
parameters and values of the relationship patterns of the 
extracted data; and (6) assessment of the results, involv -
ing translation of the extracted data-relationship model 
into comprehensible knowledge made available to the 
public.
Examples of data‑mining applied using public databases
Establishment of warning models for the early prediction 
of disease
A previous study identified sepsis as a major cause of 
death in ICU patients [100]. The authors noted that 
the predictive model developed previously used a lim -
ited number of variables, and that model performance 
required improvement. The data-mining process applied 
to address these issues was, as follows: (1) data selection 
using the MIMIC III database; (2) extraction and integra -
tion of three types of data, including multivariate features 
(demographic information and clinical biochemical indi -
cators), time series data (temperature, blood pressure, 
and heart rate), and clinical latent features (various scores 
related to disease); (3) data cleaning and transformation, 
including fixing irregular time series measurements, esti -
mating missing values, deleting outliers, and addressing 
data imbalance; (4) data mining through the use of logi -
cal regression, generation of a decision tree, application 
of the RF algorithm, an SVM, and an ensemble algorithm 
(a combination of multiple classifiers) to established the 
prediction model; (5) pattern evaluation using sensitivity, 
precision, and the area under the receiver operating char -
acteristic curve to evaluate model performance; and (6) 
evaluation of the results, in this case the potential to pre -
dicting the prognosis of patients with sepsis and whether 
the model outperformed current scoring systems.
Exploring prognostic risk factors in cancer patients
Wu et  al. [101] noted that traditional survival-analysis 
methods often ignored the influence of competitive risk 
events, such as suicide and car accident, on outcomes, 
leading to deviations and misjudgements in estimating 
the effect of risk factors. They used the SEER database, 
which offers cause-of-death data for cancer patients, and