Page 9 of 12
 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
 
between ultra-processed foods and nutritional balance; 
(5) eigenvalues, scree plots, and the interpretability of 
the principal components were reviewed to screen and 
evaluate the results; and (6) the results revealed a nega -
tive association between ultra-processed food intake 
and overall dietary quality. Their findings indicated that 
a nutritionally balanced eating pattern was character -
ized by a diet high in fibre, potassium, magnesium, and 
vitamin C intake along with low sugar and saturated fat 
consumption.
Conclusion
The use of “big data” has changed multiple aspects of 
modern life, with its use combined with data-mining 
methods capable of improving the status quo [86]. The 
aim of this study was to aid clinical researchers in under -
standing the application of data-mining technology on 
clinical big data and public medical databases to further 
their research goals in order to benefit clinicians and 
patients. The examples provided offer insight into the 
data-mining process applied for the purposes of clinical 
research. Notably, researchers have raised concerns that 
big data and data-mining methods were not a perfect fit 
for adequately replicating actual clinical conditions, with 
the results potentially capable of misleading doctors and 
patients [86]. Therefore, given the rate at which new tech -
nologies and trends progress, it is necessary to maintain a 
positive attitude concerning their potential impact while 
remaining cautious in examining the results provided by 
their application.
In the future, the healthcare system will need to uti -
lize increasingly larger volumes of big data with higher 
dimensionality. The tasks and objectives of data analysis 
will also have higher demands, including higher degrees 
of visualization, results with increased accuracy, and 
stronger real-time performance. As a result, the meth -
ods used to mine and process big data will continue to 
improve. Furthermore, to increase the formality and 
standardization of data-mining methods, it is possi -
ble that a new programming language specifically for 
this purpose will need to be developed, as well as novel 
methods capable of addressing unstructured data, such 
as graphics, audio, and text represented by handwriting. 
In terms of application, the development of data-man -
agement and disease-screening systems for large-scale 
populations, such as the military, will help determine the 
best interventions and formulation of auxiliary standards 
capable of benefitting both cost-efficiency and personnel. 
Data-mining technology can also be applied to hospital 
management in order to improve patient satisfaction, 
detect medical-insurance fraud and abuse, and reduce 
costs and losses while improving management efficiency. 
Currently, this technology is being applied for predicting patient disease, with further improvements resulting in 
the increased accuracy and speed of these predictions. 
Moreover, it is worth noting that technological devel -
opment will concomitantly require higher quality data, 
which will be a prerequisite for accurate application of 
the technology.
Finally, the ultimate goal of this study was to explain 
the methods associated with data mining and commonly 
used to process clinical big data. This review will poten -
tially promote further study and aid doctors and patients.
Abbreviations
BioLINCC: Biologic Specimen and Data Repositories Information Coordinat ‑
ing Center; CHARLS: China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study; CHNS: 
China Health and Nutrition Survey; CKB: China Kadoorie Biobank; CS: Cause ‑
specific risk; CTD: Comparative Toxicogenomics Database; eICU‑ CRD: EICU 
Collaborative Research Database; FP: Frequent pattern; GBD: Global burden of 
disease; GEO: Gene expression omnibus; HRS: Health and Retirement Study; 
ICGC : International Cancer Genome Consortium; MIMIC: Medical Informa‑
tion Mart for Intensive Care; ML: Machine learning; NHANES: National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey; PCA: Principal component analysis; PIC: 
Paediatric intensive care; RF: Random forest; SEER: Surveillance, epidemiology, 
and end results; SVM: Support vector machine; TCGA : The Cancer Genome 
Atlas; UKB: UK Biobank.
Authors’ contributions
WTW, YJL and JL designed the review. JL, AZF, TH, LL and ADX reviewed 
and criticized the original paper. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript.
Funding
This study was supported by the National Social Science Foundation of China 
(No. 16BGL183).
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1 Department of Clinical Research, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan Univer ‑
sity, Tianhe District, 613 W. Huangpu Avenue, Guangzhou 510632, Guang‑
dong, China. 2 School of Public Health, Xi’an Jiaotong University Health Science 
Center, Xi’an 710061, Shaanxi, China. 3 Department of Human Anatomy, 
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi’an Jiaotong 
University Health Science Center, Xi’an 710061, Shaanxi, China. 4 Department 
of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Tianhe District, 
613 W. Huangpu Avenue, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China. 
Received: 24 January 2020   Accepted: 3 August 2021
References
 1. Herland M, Khoshgoftaar TM, Wald R. A review of data mining using big 
data in health informatics. J Big Data. 2014;1(1):1–35.