Page 2 of 12 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
[4]. Another data-management system has been devel -
oped to assess the physical and mental health of active-
duty personnel, with this expected to yield significant 
economic benefits to the military medical system [5]. 
However, in medical research, the wide variety of clinical 
data and differences between several medical concepts in 
different classification standards results in a high degree 
of dimensionality heterogeneity, timeliness, scarcity, and 
irregularity to existing clinical data [6, 7]. Furthermore, 
new data analysis techniques have yet to be popularized 
in medical research [8]. These reasons hinder the full 
realization of the value of existing data, and the intensive 
exploration of the value of clinical data remains a chal -
lenging problem.
Computer scientists have made outstanding contri -
butions to the application of big data and introduced 
the concept of data mining to solve difficulties associ -
ated with such applications. Data mining (also known as 
knowledge discovery in databases) refers to the process of 
extracting potentially useful information and knowledge 
hidden in a large amount of incomplete, noisy, fuzzy, and 
random practical application data [9]. Unlike traditional 
research methods, several data-mining technologies mine 
information to discover knowledge based on the prem -
ise of unclear assumptions (i.e., they are directly applied 
without prior research design). The obtained informa -
tion should have previously unknown, valid, and practical 
characteristics [9]. Data-mining technology does not aim 
to replace traditional statistical analysis techniques, but it 
does seek to extend and expand statistical analysis meth -
odologies. From a practical point of view, machine learn -
ing (ML) is the main analytical method in data mining, as 
it represents a method of training models by using data 
and then using those models for predicting outcomes. 
Given the rapid progress of data-mining technology and 
its excellent performance in other industries and fields, it 
has introduced new opportunities and prospects to clini -
cal big-data research [10]. Large amounts of high qual -
ity medical data are available to researchers in the form 
of public databases, which enable more researchers to 
participate in the process of medical data mining in the 
hope that the generated results can further guide clinical 
practice.
This article provided a valuable overview to medical 
researchers interested in studying the application of data 
mining on clinical big data. To allow a clearer under -
standing of the application of data-mining technology 
on clinical big data, the second part of this paper intro -
duced the concept of public databases and summarized 
those commonly used in medical research. In the third 
part of the paper, we offered an overview of data min -
ing, including introducing an appropriate model, tasks, 
and processes, and summarized the specific methods of data mining. In the fourth and fifth parts of this paper, we 
introduced data-mining algorithms commonly used in 
clinical practice along with specific cases in order to help 
clinical researchers clearly and intuitively understand 
the application of data-mining technology on clinical 
big data. Finally, we discussed the advantages and disad -
vantages of data mining in clinical analysis and offered 
insight into possible future applications.
Overview of common public medical databases
A public database describes a data repository used for 
research and dedicated to housing data related to scien -
tific research on an open platform. Such databases col -
lect and store heterogeneous and multi-dimensional 
health, medical, scientific research in a structured form 
and characteristics of mass/multi-ownership, complex -
ity, and security. These databases cover a wide range of 
data, including those related to cancer research, disease 
burden, nutrition and health, and genetics and the envi -
ronment. Table  1 summarizes the main public medical 
databases [ 11–26]. Researchers can apply for access to 
data based on the scope of the database and the appli -
cation procedures required to perform relevant medical 
research.
Data mining: an overview
Data mining is a multidisciplinary field at the intersec -
tion of database technology, statistics, ML, and pattern 
recognition that profits from all these disciplines [27]. 
Although this approach is not yet widespread in the field 
of medical research, several studies have demonstrated 
the promise of data mining in building disease-prediction 
models, assessing patient risk, and helping physicians 
make clinical decisions [28–31].
Data‑mining models
Data-mining has two kinds of models: descriptive 
and predictive. Predictive models are used to predict 
unknown or future values of other variables of inter -
est, whereas descriptive models are often used to find 
patterns that describe data that can be interpreted by 
humans [32].
Data‑mining tasks
A model is usually implemented by a task, with the goal 
of description being to generalize patterns of potential 
associations in the data. Therefore, using a descriptive 
model usually results in a few collections with the same 
or similar attributes. Prediction mainly refers to estima -
tion of the variable value of a specific attribute based on 
the variable values of other attributes, including classifi -
cation and regression [33].