Page 4 of 12 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
of a fully-specified classifier, respectively. Briefly, the 
training set is used to train the model or determine the 
model parameters, the validation set is used to perform 
model selection, and the test set is used to verify model 
performance. In practice, data are generally divided into 
training and test sets, whereas the verification set is 
less involved. It should be emphasized that the results 
of the test set do not guarantee model correctness but 
only show that similar data can obtain similar results 
using the model. Therefore, the applicability of a model 
should be analysed in combination with specific prob -
lems in the research. Classical statistical methods, such 
as linear regression, generalized linear regression, and a 
proportional risk model, have been widely used in medi -
cal research. Notably, most of these classical statistical 
methods have certain data requirements or assumptions; 
however, in face of complicated clinical data, assump -
tions about data distribution are difficult to make. In con -
trast, some ML methods (algorithmic models) make no 
assumptions about the data and cross-verify the results; 
thus, they are likely to be favoured by clinical research -
ers [36]. For these reasons, this chapter focuses on ML 
methods that do not require assumptions about data dis -
tribution and classical statistical methods that are used in 
specific situations.
Decision tree
A decision tree is a basic classification and regression 
method that generates a result similar to the tree struc -
ture of a flowchart, where each tree node represents a 
test on an attribute, each branch represents the output 
of an attribute, each leaf node (decision node) repre -
sents a class or class distribution, and the topmost part 
of the tree is the root node [37]. The decision tree model 
is called a classification tree when used for classification 
and a regression tree when used for regression. Studies 
have demonstrated the utility of the decision tree model 
in clinical applications. In a study on the prognosis of 
breast cancer patients, a decision tree model and a clas -
sical logistic regression model were constructed, respec -
tively, with the predictive performance of the different 
models indicating that the decision tree model showed 
stronger predictive power when using real clinical data 
[38]. Similarly, the decision tree model has been applied 
to other areas of clinical medicine, including diagnosis of 
kidney stones [39], predicting the risk of sudden cardiac 
arrest [40], and exploration of the risk factors of type II 
diabetes [41]. A common feature of these studies is the 
use of a decision tree model to explore the interaction 
between variables and classify subjects into homogene -
ous categories based on their observed characteristics. 
In fact, because the decision tree accounts for the strong 
interaction between variables, it is more suitable for use with decision algorithms that follow the same structure 
[42]. In the construction of clinical prediction mod -
els and exploration of disease risk factors and patient 
prognosis, the decision tree model might offer more 
advantages and practical application value than some 
classical algorithms. Although the decision tree has many 
advantages, it recursively separates observations into 
branches to construct a tree; therefore, in terms of data 
imbalance, the precision of decision tree models needs 
improvement.
The RF method
The RF algorithm was developed as an application of an 
ensemble-learning method based on a collection of deci -
sion trees. The bootstrap method [43] is used to ran -
domly retrieve sample sets from the training set, with 
decision trees generated by the bootstrap method con -
stituting a “random forest” and predictions based on 
this derived from an ensemble average or majority vote. 
The biggest advantage of the RF method is that the ran -
dom sampling of predictor variables at each decision 
tree node decreases the correlation among the trees in 
the forest, thereby improving the precision of ensemble 
predictions [44]. Given that a single decision tree model 
might encounter the problem of overfitting [45], the ini -
tial application of RF minimizes overfitting in classifica -
tion and regression and improves predictive accuracy 
[44]. Taylor et al. [46] highlighted the potential of RF in 
correctly differentiating in-hospital mortality in patients 
experiencing sepsis after admission to the emergency 
department. Nowhere in the healthcare system is the 
need more pressing to find methods to reduce uncer -
tainty than in the fast, chaotic environment of the emer -
gency department. The authors demonstrated that the 
predictive performance of the RF method was superior 
to that of traditional emergency medicine methods and 
the methods enabled evaluation of more clinical variables 
than traditional modelling methods, which subsequently 
allowed the discovery of clinical variables not expected 
to be of predictive value or which otherwise would have 
been omitted as a rare predictor [46]. Another study 
based on the Medical Information Mart for Intensive 
Care (MIMIC) II database [47] found that RF had excel -
lent predictive power regarding intensive care unit (ICU) 
mortality [48]. These studies showed that the application 
of RF to big data stored in the hospital healthcare system 
provided a new data-driven method for predictive analy -
sis in critical care. Additionally, random survival forests 
have recently been developed to analyse survival data, 
especially right-censored survival data [49, 50], which 
can help researchers conduct survival analyses in clinical 
oncology and help develop personalized treatment regi -
mens that benefit patients [51].