Page 6 of 12 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
high dimensional data and cannot identify nonspherical 
clusters.
Hierarchical clustering The hierarchical clustering algo -
rithm decomposes a dataset hierarchically to facilitate the 
subsequent clustering [71]. Common algorithms for hier -
archical clustering include BIRCH [72], CURE [73], and 
ROCK [ 74]. The algorithm starts by treating every point 
as a cluster, with clusters grouped according to closeness. 
When further combinations result in unexpected results 
under multiple causes or only one cluster remains, the 
grouping process ends. This method has wide applicabil -
ity, and the relationship between clusters is easy to detect; 
however, the time complexity is high [75].
Clustering according to  density The density algorithm 
takes areas presenting a high degree of data density and 
defines these as belonging to the same cluster [76]. This 
method aims to find arbitrarily-shaped clusters, with the 
most representative algorithm being DBSCAN [77]. In 
practice, DBSCAN does not need to input the number of 
clusters to be partitioned and can handle clusters of vari -
ous shapes; however, the time complexity of the algorithm 
is high. Furthermore, when data density is irregular, the 
quality of the clusters decreases; thus, DBSCAN cannot 
process high dimensional data [75].
Clustering according to  a  grid Neither partition nor 
hierarchical clustering can identify clusters with non -
convex shapes. Although a dimension-based algorithm 
can accomplish this task, the time complexity is high. To 
address this problem, data-mining researchers proposed 
grid-based algorithms that changed the original data 
space into a grid structure of a certain size. A representa -
tive algorithm is STING, which divides the data space 
into several square cells according to different resolutions 
and clusters the data of different structure levels [78]. 
The main advantage of this method is its high process -
ing speed and its exclusive dependence on the number of 
units in each dimension of the quantized space.
In clinical studies, subjects tend to be actual patients. 
Although researchers adopt complex inclusion and 
exclusion criteria before determining the subjects to be 
included in the analyses, heterogeneity among differ -
ent patients cannot be avoided [79, 80]. The most com -
mon application of cluster analysis in clinical big data is 
in classifying heterogeneous mixed groups into homo -
geneous groups according to the characteristics of exist -
ing data (i.e., “subgroups” of patients or observed objects 
are identified) [81, 82]. This new information can then be 
used in the future to develop patient-oriented medical-
management strategies. Docampo et  al. [81] used hier -
archical clustering to reduce heterogeneity and identify subgroups of clinical fibromyalgia, which aided the evalu -
ation and management of fibromyalgia. Additionally, 
Guo et al. [83] used k-means clustering to divide patients 
with essential hypertension into four subgroups, which 
revealed that the potential risk of coronary heart dis -
ease differed between different subgroups. On the other 
hand, density- and grid-based clustering algorithms have 
mostly been used to process large numbers of images 
generated in basic research and clinical practice, with 
current studies focused on developing new tools to help 
clinical research and practices based on these technolo -
gies [84, 85]. Cluster analysis will continue to have exten -
sive application prospects along with the increasing 
emphasis on personalized treatment.
Association rules
Association rules discover interesting associations and 
correlations between item sets in large amounts of data. 
These rules were first proposed by Agrawal et al. [86] and 
applied to analyse customer buying habits to help retail -
ers create sales plans. Data-mining based on association 
rules identifies association rules in a two-step process: 1) 
all high frequency items in the collection are listed and 
2) frequent association rules are generated based on the 
high frequency items [87]. Therefore, before association 
rules can be obtained, sets of frequent items must be cal -
culated using certain algorithms. The Apriori algorithm 
is based on the a priori principle of finding all relevant 
adjustment items in a database transaction that meet a 
minimum set of rules and restrictions or other restric -
tions [88]. Other algorithms are mostly variants of the 
Apriori algorithm [64]. The Apriori algorithm must scan 
the entire database every time it scans the transaction; 
therefore, algorithm performance deteriorates as data -
base size increases [89], making it potentially unsuit -
able for analysing large databases. The frequent pattern 
(FP) growth algorithm was proposed to improve effi -
ciency. After the first scan, the FP algorithm compresses 
the frequency set in the database into a FP tree while 
retaining the associated information and then mines the 
conditional libraries separately [90]. Association-rule 
technology is often used in medical research to identify 
association rules between disease risk factors (i.e., explo -
ration of the joint effects of disease risk factors and com -
binations of other risk factors). For example, Li et al. [91] 
used the association-rule algorithm to identify the most 
important stroke risk factor as atrial fibrillation, followed 
by diabetes and a family history of stroke. Based on the 
same principle, association rules can also be used to 
evaluate treatment effects and other aspects. For exam -
ple, Guo et  al. [92] used the FP algorithm to generate 
association rules and evaluate individual characteristics 
and treatment effects of patients with diabetes, thereby