Page 5 of 12
 Wu  et al. Military Med Res            (2021) 8:44 
 
SVMs
The SVM is a relatively new classification or prediction 
method developed by Cortes and Vapnik and represents 
a data-driven approach that does not require assump -
tions about data distribution [52]. The core purpose of 
an SVM is to identify a separation boundary (called a 
hyperplane) to help classify cases; thus, the advantages of 
SVMs are obvious when classifying and predicting cases 
based on high dimensional data or data with a small sam -
ple size [53, 54].
In a study of drug compliance in patients with heart 
failure, researchers used an SVM to build a predictive 
model for patient compliance in order to overcome the 
problem of a large number of input variables relative to 
the number of available observations [55]. Additionally, 
the mechanisms of certain chronic and complex dis -
eases observed in clinical practice remain unclear, and 
many risk factors, including gene–gene interactions and 
gene-environment interactions, must be considered in 
the research of such diseases [55, 56]. SVMs are capa -
ble of addressing these issues. Yu et  al. [54] applied an 
SVM for predicting diabetes onset based on data from 
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES). Furthermore, these models have strong dis -
crimination ability, making SVMs a promising classifica -
tion approach for detecting individuals with chronic and 
complex diseases. However, a disadvantage of SVMs is 
that when the number of observation samples is large, 
the method becomes time- and resource-intensive, which 
is often highly inefficient.
Competitive risk model
Kaplan–Meier marginal regression and the Cox propor -
tional hazards model are widely used in survival analysis 
in clinical studies. Classical survival analysis usually con -
siders only one endpoint, such as the impact of patient 
survival time. However, in clinical medical research, mul -
tiple endpoints usually coexist, and these endpoints com -
pete with one another to generate competitive risk data 
[57]. In the case of multiple endpoint events, the use of 
a single endpoint-analysis method can lead to a biased 
estimation of the probability of endpoint events due 
to the existence of competitive risks [58]. The competi -
tive risk model is a classical statistical model based on 
the hypothesis of data distribution. Its main advantage 
is its accurate estimation of the cumulative incidence of 
outcomes for right-censored survival data with multiple 
endpoints [59]. In data analysis, the cumulative risk rate 
is estimated using the cumulative incidence function in 
single-factor analysis, and Gray’s test is used for between-
group comparisons [60].
Multifactor analysis uses the Fine-Gray and cause-
specific (CS) risk models to explore the cumulative risk rate [61]. The difference between the Fine-Gray and CS 
models is that the former is applicable to establishing a 
clinical prediction model and predicting the risk of a sin -
gle endpoint of interest [62], whereas the latter is suitable 
for answering etiological questions, where the regression 
coefficient reflects the relative effect of covariates on the 
increased incidence of the main endpoint in the target 
event-free risk set [63]. Currently, in databases with CS 
records, such as Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 
Results (SEER), competitive risk models exhibit good 
performance in exploring disease-risk factors and prog -
nosis [64]. A study of prognosis in patients with oesopha -
geal cancer from SEER showed that Cox proportional 
risk models might misestimate the effects of age and dis -
ease location on patient prognosis, whereas competitive 
risk models provide more accurate estimates of factors 
affecting patient prognosis [65]. In another study of the 
prognosis of penile cancer patients, researchers found 
that using a competitive risk model was more helpful in 
developing personalized treatment plans [66].
Unsupervised learning
In many data-analysis processes, the amount of usable 
identified data is small, and identifying data is a tedious 
process [67]. Unsupervised learning is necessary to judge 
and categorize data according to similarities, character -
istics, and correlations and has three main applications: 
data clustering, association analysis, and dimensionality 
reduction. Therefore, the unsupervised learning meth -
ods introduced in this section include clustering analysis, 
association rules, and PCA.
Clustering analysis
The classification algorithm needs to “know” informa -
tion concerning each category in advance, with all of the 
data to be classified having corresponding categories. 
When the above conditions cannot be met, cluster analy -
sis can be applied to solve the problem [68]. Clustering 
places similar objects into different categories or subsets 
through the process of static classification. Consequently, 
objects in the same subset have similar properties. Many 
kinds of clustering techniques exist. Here, we introduced 
the four most commonly used clustering techniques.
Partition clustering The core idea of this clustering 
method regards the centre of the data point as the centre 
of the cluster. The k-means method [69] is a representa -
tive example of this technique. The k-means method takes 
n observations and an integer, k, and outputs a partition 
of the n observations into k sets such that each observa -
tion belongs to the cluster with the nearest mean [70]. The 
k-means method exhibits low time complexity and high 
computing efficiency but has a poor processing effect on