Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Karl Cobbe1Oleg Klimov1Chris Hesse1Taehoon Kim1John Schulman1
Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the problem of over-
ﬁtting in deep reinforcement learning. Among
the most common benchmarks in RL, it is cus-
tomary to use the same environments for both
training and testing. This practice offers rela-
tively little insight into an agent’s ability to gen-
eralize. We address this issue by using proce-
durally generated environments to construct dis-
tinct training and test sets. Most notably, we in-
troduce a new environment called CoinRun, de-
signed as a benchmark for generalization in RL.
Using CoinRun, we ﬁnd that agents overﬁt to sur-
prisingly large training sets. We then show that
deeper convolutional architectures improve gen-
eralization, as do methods traditionally found in
supervised learning, including L2 regularization,
dropout, data augmentation and batch normaliza-
tion.
1. Introduction
Generalizing between tasks remains difﬁcult for state of the
art deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Although
trained agents can solve complex tasks, they struggle to
transfer their experience to new environments. Agents that
have mastered ten levels in a video game often fail catas-
trophically when ﬁrst encountering the eleventh. Humans
can seamlessly generalize across such similar tasks, but this
ability is largely absent in RL agents. In short, agents be-
come overly specialized to the environments encountered
during training.
That RL agents are prone to overﬁtting is widely appreci-
ated, yet the most common RL benchmarks still encourage
training and evaluating on the same set of environments.
We believe there is a need for more metrics that evalu-
ate generalization by explicitly separating training and test
environments. In the same spirit as the Sonic Benchmark
1OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Karl
Cobbe <karl@openai.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).(Nichol et al. ,2018 ), we seek to better quantify an agent’s
ability to generalize.
To begin, we train agents on CoinRun, a procedurally gen-
erated environment of our own design, and we report the
surprising extent to which overﬁtting occurs. Using this
environment, we investigate how several key algorithmic
and architectural decisions impact the generalization per-
formance of trained agents.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1.We show that the number of training environments re-
quired for good generalization is much larger than the
number used by prior work on transfer in RL.
2.We propose a generalization metric using the CoinRun
environment, and we show how this metric provides a
useful signal upon which to iterate.
3.We evaluate the impact of different convolutional ar-
chitectures and forms of regularization, ﬁnding that
these choices can signiﬁcantly improve generalization
performance.
2. Related Work
Our work is most directly inspired by the Sonic Benchmark
(Nichol et al. ,2018 ), which proposes to measure general-
ization performance by training and testing RL agents on
distinct sets of levels in the Sonic the HedgehogTMvideo
game franchise. Agents may train arbitrarily long on the
training set, but are permitted only 1 million timesteps at
test time to perform ﬁne-tuning. This benchmark was de-
signed to address the problems inherent to “training on the
test set.”
(Farebrother et al. ,2018 ) also address this problem, ac-
curately recognizing that conﬂating train and test environ-
ments has contributed to the lack of regularization in deep
RL. They propose using different game modes of Atari
2600 games to measure generalization. They turn to su-
pervised learning for inspiration, ﬁnding that both L2 reg-
ularization and dropout can help agents learn more gener-
alizable features.
(Packer et al. ,2018 ) propose a different benchmark to mea-
sure generalization using six classic environments, each of