Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Figure 1. Two levels in CoinRun. The level on the left is much easier than the level on the right.
which has been modiﬁed to expose several internal param-
eters. By training and testing on environments with differ-
ent parameter ranges, their benchmark quantiﬁes agents’
ability to interpolate and extrapolate. ( Zhang et al. ,2018a )
measure overﬁtting in continuous domains, ﬁnding that
generalization improves as the number of training seeds in-
creases. They also use randomized rewards to determine
the extent of undesirable memorization.
Other works create distinct train and test environments us-
ing procedural generation. ( Justesen et al. ,2018 ) use the
General Video Game AI (GVG-AI) framework to gener-
ate levels from several unique games. By varying difﬁ-
culty settings between train and test levels, they ﬁnd that
RL agents regularly overﬁt to a particular training distri-
bution. They further show that the ability to generalize to
human-designed levels strongly depends on the level gen-
erators used during training.
(Zhang et al. ,2018b ) conduct experiments on procedurally
generated gridworld mazes, reporting many insightful con-
clusions on the nature of overﬁtting in RL agents. They ﬁnd
that agents have a high capacity to memorize speciﬁc levels
in a given training set, and that techniques intended to miti-
gate overﬁtting in RL, including sticky actions ( Machado
et al. ,2018 ) and random starts ( Hausknecht and Stone ,
2015 ), often fail to do so.
In Section 5.4, we similarly investigate how injecting
stochasticity impacts generalization. Our work mirrors
(Zhang et al. ,2018b ) in quantifying the relationship be-
tween overﬁtting and the number of training environments,
though we additionally show how several methods, includ-
ing some more prevalent in supervised learning, can reduce
overﬁtting in our benchmark.
These works, as well as our own, highlight the growing
need for experimental protocols that directly address gen-
eralization in RL.3. Quantifying Generalization
3.1. The CoinRun Environment
We propose the CoinRun environment to evaluate the gen-
eralization performance of trained agents. The goal of each
CoinRun level is simple: collect the single coin that lies
at the end of the level. The agent controls a character that
spawns on the far left, and the coin spawns on the far right.
Several obstacles, both stationary and non-stationary, lie
between the agent and the coin. A collision with an ob-
stacle results in the agent’s immediate death. The only re-
ward in the environment is obtained by collecting the coin,
and this reward is a ﬁxed positive constant. The level ter-
minates when the agent dies, the coin is collected, or after
1000 time steps.
We designed the game CoinRun to be tractable for existing
algorithms. That is, given a sufﬁcient number of training
levels and sufﬁcient training time, our algorithms learn a
near optimal policy for allCoinRun levels. Each level is
generated deterministically from a given seed, providing
agents access to an arbitrarily large and easily quantiﬁable
supply of training data. CoinRun mimics the style of plat-
former games like Sonic, but it is much simpler. For the
purpose of evaluating generalization, this simplicity can be
highly advantageous.
Levels vary widely in difﬁculty, so the distribution of levels
naturally forms a curriculum for the agent. Two different
levels are shown in Figure 1. See Appendix Afor more de-
tails about the environment and Appendix Bfor additional
screenshots. Videos of a trained agent playing can be found
here, and environment code can be found here.
3.2. CoinRun Generalization Curves
Using the CoinRun environment, we can measure how suc-
cessfully agents generalize from a given set of training lev-