Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Figure 7. Final train and test performance in CoinRun-Platforms
after 2B timesteps, as a function of the number of training levels.
Figure 8. Final train and test performance in RandomMazes after
256M timesteps, as a function of the number of training levels.
are randomly scattered across platforms in the level. Lev-
els are a larger than in CoinRun, so the agent must actively
explore, sometimes retracing its steps. Collecting any coin
gives a reward of 1, and collecting all coins in a level gives
an additional reward of 9. Each level contains several mov-
ing monsters that the agent must avoid. The episode ends
only when all coins are collected, when time runs out, or
when the agent dies. See Appendix Bfor environment
screenshots.
As CoinRun-Platforms is a much harder game, we train
each agent for a total of 2B timesteps. Figure 7shows
that overﬁtting occurs up to around 4000 training levels.
Beyond the extent of overﬁtting, it is also surprising that
agents’ training performance increases as a function of the
number of training levels, past a certain threshold. This
is notably different from supervised learning, where train-
ing performance generally decreases as the training set be-
comes larger. We attribute this trend to the implicit cur-
riculum in the distribution of generated levels. With ad-
ditional training data, agents are more likely to learn skills
that generalize even across training levels, thereby boosting
the overall training performance.
6.2. RandomMazes
In RandomMazes, each level consists of a randomly gener-
ated square maze with dimension uniformly sampled from
3 to 25. Mazes are generated using Kruskal’s algorithm
(Kruskal ,1956 ). The environment is partially observed,
with the agent observing the 9⇥9patch of cells directly
surrounding its current location. At every cell is either a
wall, an empty space, the goal, or the agent. The episode
ends when the agent reaches the goal or when time expires
after 500 timesteps. The agent’s only actions are to move
to an empty adjacent square. If the agent reaches the goal,a constant reward is received. Figure 8reveals particularly
strong overﬁtting, with a sizeable generalization gap even
when training on 20,000 levels.
6.3. Discussion
In both CoinRun-Platforms and RandomMazes, agents
must learn to leverage recurrence and memory to optimally
navigate the environment. The need to memorize and re-
call past experience presents challenges to generalization
unlike those seen in CoinRun. It is unclear how well suited
LSTMs are to this task. We empirically observe that given
sufﬁcient data and training time, agents using LSTMs even-
tually converge to a near optimal policy. However, the rel-
atively poor generalization performance raises the question
of whether different recurrent architectures might be better
suited for generalization in these environments. This inves-
tigation is left for future work.
7. Conclusion
Our results provide insight into the challenges underlying
generalization in RL. We have observed the surprising ex-
tent to which agents can overﬁt to a ﬁxed training set. Us-
ing the procedurally generated CoinRun environment, we
can precisely quantify such overﬁtting. With this metric,
we can better evaluate key architectural and algorithmic de-
cisions. We believe that the lessons learned from this envi-
ronment will apply in more complex settings, and we hope
to use this benchmark, and others like it, to iterate towards
more generalizable agents.