Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Comparison of ✏-greedy and high en-
tropy bonus agents to baseline during
training.
(b) Final train and test performance
for agents trained with different entropy
bonuses.
(c) Final train and test performance for ✏-
greedy agents trained with different values
of✏.
Figure 5. The impact of introducing stochasticity into the environment, via epsilon-greedy action selection and an entropy bonus. Train-
ing occurs over 512M timesteps. Mean and standard deviation is shown across 3 runs.
tion selection has been used both as a means to encourage
exploration and as a theoretical safeguard against overﬁt-
ting ( Bellemare et al. ,2012 ;Mnih et al. ,2013 ). Second, we
control policy stochasticity by changing the entropy bonus
in PPO. Note that our baseline agent already uses an en-
tropy bonus of kH=.01.
We increase training time to 512M timesteps as training
now proceeds more slowly. Results are shown in Figure 5.
It is clear that an increase in either the environment’s or the
policy’s stochasticity can improve generalization. Further-
more, each method in isolation offers a similar generaliza-
tion boost. It is notable that training with increased stochas-
ticity improves generalization to a greater extent than any
of the previously mentioned regularization methods. In
general, we expect the impact of these stochastic methods
to vary substantially between environments; we would ex-
pect less of a boost in environments whose dynamics are
already highly stochastic.
5.5. Combining Regularization Methods
We brieﬂy investigate the effects of combining several of
the aforementioned techniques. Results are shown in Fig-
ure4c. We ﬁnd that combining data augmentation, batch
normalization, and L2 regularization yields slightly better
test time performance than using any one of them individ-
ually. However, the small magnitude of the effect suggests
that these regularization methods are perhaps addressing
similar underlying causes of poor generalization. Further-
more, for unknown reasons, we had little success com-
bining ✏-greedy action selection and high entropy bonuses
with other forms of regularization.6. Additional Environments
The preceding sections have revealed the high degree over-
ﬁtting present in one particular environment. We corrob-
orate these results by quantifying overﬁtting on two addi-
tional environments: a CoinRun variant called CoinRun-
Platforms and a simple maze navigation environment called
RandomMazes.
We apply the same experimental procedure described in
Section 3.2to both CoinRun-Platforms and RandomMazes,
to determine the extent of overﬁtting. We use the orig-
inal IMPALA-CNN architecture followed by an LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber ,1997 ), as memory is neces-
sary for the agent to explore optimally. These experiments
further reveal how susceptible our algorithms are to over-
ﬁtting.
Figure 6. Levels from CoinRun-Platforms (left) and Random-
Mazes (right). In RandomMazes, the agent’s observation space
is shaded in green.
6.1. CoinRun-Platforms
In CoinRun-Platforms, there are several coins that the agent
attempts to collect within the 1000 step time-limit. Coins