Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Performance of Nature-CNN and IMPALA-CNN agents dur-
ing training, on an unbounded set of training levels.
(b) Performance of Nature-CNN and IMPALA-CNN agents dur-
ing training, on a set of 500 training levels.
Figure 3. The lines and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation respectively across 3 runs.
Nature-CNN agents.
To evaluate generalization performance, one could train
agents on the unbounded level set and directly compare
learning curves. In this setting, it is impossible for an agent
to overﬁt to any subset of levels. Since every level is new,
the agent is evaluated on its ability to continually general-
ize. For this reason, performance with an unbounded train-
ing set can serve as a reasonable proxy for the more explicit
train-to-test generalization performance. Figure 3ashows
a comparison between training curves for IMPALA-CNN
and Nature-CNN, with an unbounded set of training levels.
As we can see, the IMPALA-CNN architecture is substan-
tially more sample efﬁcient.
However, it is important to note that learning faster with
an unbounded training set will not always correlate posi-
tively with better generalization performance. In particu-
lar, well chosen hyperparameters might lead to improved
training speed, but they are less likely to lead to improved
generalization. We believe that directly evaluating gener-
alization, by training on a ﬁxed set of levels, produces the
most useful metric. Figure 3bshows the performance of
different architectures when training on a ﬁxed set of 500
levels. The same training set is used across seeds.
In both settings, it is clear that the IMPALA-CNN archi-
tecture is better at generalizing across levels of CoinRun.
Given the success of the IMPALA-CNN, we experimented
with several larger architectures, ﬁnding a deeper and wider
variant of the IMPALA architecture (IMPALA-Large) that
performs even better. This architecture uses 5 residual
blocks instead of 3, with twice as many channels at eachlayer. Results with this architecture are shown in Figure 3.
It is likely that further architectural tuning could yield even
greater generalization performance. As is common in su-
pervised learning, we expect much larger networks to have
a higher capacity for generalization. In our experiments,
however, we noticed diminishing returns increasing the
network size beyond IMPALA-Large, particularly as wall
clock training time can dramatically increase. In any case,
we leave further architectural investigation to future work.
5. Evaluating Regularization
Regularization has long played an signiﬁcant role in su-
pervised learning, where generalization is a more immedi-
ate concern. Datasets always include separate training and
test sets, and there are several well established regulariza-
tion techniques for reducing the generalization gap. These
regularization techniques are less often employed in deep
RL, presumably because they offer no perceivable beneﬁts
in the absence of a generalization gap – that is, when the
training and test sets are one and the same.
Now that we are directly measuring generalization in RL,
we have reason to believe that regularization will once
again prove effective. Taking inspiration from supervised
learning, we choose to investigate the impact of L2 regular-
ization, dropout, data augmentation, and batch normaliza-
tion in the CoinRun environment.
Throughout this section we train agents on a ﬁxed set of
500 CoinRun levels, following the same experimental pro-
cedure shown in Figure 3b. We have already seen that sub-