Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 13 of 43
4.8. Resnet Models Image Recognition
In 2015, a new deep learning model known as a deep residual network (ResNet) was
introduced by researchers at Microsoft [ 1]. This model has quickly become the state-of-
the-art for image recognition tasks. These networks are now part of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [ 37]. They have been used to achieve world records in object classiﬁca-
tion and detection in many large-scale competitions such as ImageNet, ILSVRC, COCO
and PASCAL VOC. Furthermore, they also achieved competitive results on various 3D
shape estimation problems. These models are computationally expensive because they
require billions of parameters and need hundreds of millions of training images. Conse-
quently, this has led to some speculation that they will never be used outside academia or
research laboratories due to their high computation cost; however, recent developments
like adopting modern graphics processing units (GPUs) may bring down these costs signif-
icantly in the near future. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant attempt to train such models using GPUs
came from NVIDIA’s [ 38] deep learning framework CUDA [ 39] back in 2014. However,
Nvidia soon found out that there were limitations of scaling the GPU implementations
to larger Resnet architectures [ 34,40], and it was difﬁcult to provide a stable environment
for training. The researchers then turned towards software written speciﬁcally for use on
GPUs which could take advantage of newer hardware capabilities. It is anticipated that
these new frameworks will offer signiﬁcant improvements over their predecessors because
they provide an interface between multi-core CPUs and GPUs while also offering data
preprocessing functions which are necessary when working with large datasets. One such
framework is called Intel Integrated Performance Primitives Library (Intel IPP), which
offers a variety of different functions including matrix multiplication, convolutions, etc.
Thus far it has shown good performance on small and medium sized datasets but not so
much on larger ones. Furthermore, another promising library that can also take advantage
of Intel processors’ Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) technology [ 41] is Eigen and
its variants like HKLMSVD or GEMM. This library contains algorithms designed for Nu-
merical Linear Algebra that would work well with ResNets. These implementations have
shown excellent performance on both ImageNet and Cityscapes benchmarks, yet they still
remain challenging to parallelize without sacriﬁcing too much accuracy.
The time spent training image recognition models has fallen dramatically since 2010,
owing to increasing computational power and the availability of massive labeled datasets.
In 2016, Google trained a model within six days using 8 TPUs (Tensor Processing Units).
Another breakthrough was achieved by Baidu’s Sunway TaihuLight [ 42] computer, which
is based on China’s national design blueprint created in 2013 [ 43]. The three grand
challenges in fundamental science are high performance computing, brain science, and
quantum computing.
4.9. Shrinkage Network Image Recognition
Shrinkage Network Image Recognition [ 44,45] is an important tool for image recog-
nition. This method uses a deep residual learning framework to achieve state-of-the-art
performance on various image recognition tasks. The authors mention that the networks
are composed of three key components, namely depthwise convolution, max pooling and
subsampling layers.
In particular, the depthwise convolution [ 46] performs feature extraction by mapping
input images onto ﬁlter responses at different depths. Max pooling captures spatial infor-
mation by aggregating features over a ﬁxed window size across the input channels in both
spatial dimensions and selecting top k features from each window. Finally, subsampling
layers are responsible for reducing network size while maintaining its accuracy via training
the network on reduced resolution images (or upsampled or downsampled images). They
mention that using this architecture can reduce training time from hours to minutes per
epoch without affecting accuracy signiﬁcantly (or even improving it). Furthermore, they
mention that there have been some recent improvements with regard to previous versions
such as the use of LSTM units instead of RNNs [ 47,48], which can improve robustness