Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 31 of 43
A more recent study shows how batch normalization can be added after the ﬁrst three
convolutional layers. These changes provide signiﬁcant improvements in performance and
allow for even deeper models with fewer complications.
Residual networks have been applied successfully to many image recognition tasks
including image classiﬁcation. However, recent research into the capabilities of ResNets
has mainly focused on improving them for object detection tasks. A survey paper describes
some of the most common applications for Deep Residual Networks (ResNets) and their
advantages. The application of multilayer residual networks, also known as deep feedfor-
ward nets or simply deep nets, was started by Professor Geoffrey Hinton at Google in 2006.
Over time, he developed larger multilayer nets that could outperform shallow nets. His
latest work includes multi-stage architectures where subsequent layers see inputs derived
from previous ones. These types of architectures are used when one wants all the outputs
of intermediate levels to be fully connected to all input nodes at higher levels (LeCun).
Professor LeCun also gives reasons why one might want to use a feedforward net rather
than recurrent neural networks. As he argues, a sequence has no “state”, so it is easy to
forget about it. Recurrent nets must maintain their state throughout the entire sequence.
Furthermore, recurrent nets often require many times more parameters because every
single node needs to know about every other node, whereas in a feedforward net only some
of the nodes need information about other nodes. A recent paper by Nair et al. describes
the use of recurrent neural networks to identify objects in images but acknowledges that
RNNs come with a high computational cost.
The main advantage of recurrent neural networks is their ability to represent sequences
while overcoming gradient vanishing problems associated with Feedforward Nets. For
example, if one were trying to model language then RNNs would be preferred because
words follow sequentially, whereas images do not necessarily follow any sort of order.
Furthermore, since input data for recurrent nets does not need to be sequential like images
are, it makes them easier to implement during runtime (Karpathy). It is not always
necessary to build a convolutional neural network that is fully convolutional (Karpathy).
A good approach for deep learning is to stack the layers of different types of networks,
for example, ResNet and LSTM. Recurrent neural networks are difﬁcult to parallelize and
therefore can be slower than feedforward nets.
It has been proposed that researchers focus on improving the ResNet class of neural
networks since they are better suited for sequential data like images (Nair). Researchers
also have to make sure that the architecture of a deep learning model is compatible with
its speciﬁc task. This becomes increasingly important when deciding what type of layer
should be included in a given deep learning system. Deep feedforward nets (DNNs) and
deep belief networks (DBNs) have also been studied extensively for natural language
processing, computer vision, speech processing, robotics, and other machine learning tasks.
A DBN is a type of artiﬁcial neural network that tries to emulate the way in which a human
brain works. They are commonly found in the form of hierarchical Bayesian models. They
consist of an unlimited number of layers with random connections between neurons within
each layer. One limitation of these models is that the neurons within a layer are not fully
connected to each other. This leads to neurons that are not used in a certain calculation
being inactive for the duration of an iteration. These limitations can be overcome by making
connections between layers in different networks. One way to achieve this is with recurrent
neural networks. They consist of an unlimited number of layers with random connections
between neurons within each layer. One limitation of these models is that the neurons
within a layer are not fully connected to each other, which can lead to underutilized and
inactive nodes over time.
9.1. Bottleneck Residual Unit
The bottleneck residual unit [ 91], is a type of convolutional neural network (CNN)
designed speciﬁcally for image recognition. This unit consists of three layers: a 1 1
convolutional layer, a 3 3 convolutional layer, and a 1 1 convolutional layer. The 1 1