Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 5 of 43
2. What Is a Deep Residual Network?
In 2015, a deep residual network (ResNet) was proposed by the authors in [ 1] for
image recognition. It is a type of convolutional neural network (CNN) where the input
from the previous layer is added to the output of the current layer. This skip connection
makes it easier for the network to learn and results in better performance. The ResNet
architecture has been successful in a number of tasks, including image classiﬁcation, object
detection, and semantic segmentation. Additionally, since ResNets are made up of layers,
these networks can be arbitrarily deep for an arbitrary level of spatial representation. There
are various reasons for the success of the model: the large receptive ﬁelds that capture
more information about each pixel in an image; the separation between the localization and
classiﬁcation stages; the computational efﬁciency at higher levels; the efﬁcient encoding
schemes with low-complexity arithmetic operations; and there is increased accuracy as
features are extracted deeper into the network.
Despite these advantages, current ResNets are computationally very expensive. While
modern GPUs can perform over one hundred million operations per second (Giga ops),
a commonly used architecture of a fully connected layer with ten million weights takes
more than two hours to train. This is why the authors in [9] propose to replace some fully
connected layers by stochastic pooling layers and to reduce it from a 5 5 ﬁlter size to a
33 ﬁlter size.
In summary, deep residual learning for image recognition has been shown to be an
effective method for image classiﬁcation tasks. However, similar architectures have not
yet been explored for other computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation or object
detection. There are several open problems that need further exploration when doing
so, including computational efﬁciency at higher levels and training stability; adding skip
connections; network depth versus complexity; biasing nonlinearities during training;
input preprocessing issues such as batch normalization, data augmentation algorithms
for improving accuracy for underrepresented classes such as at nighttime images versus
daytime images using same classiﬁer neural network through exploiting spatio-temporal
coherence; practicality of architectures; stability while small local minima not having
signiﬁcant impact upon generalization performance since big changes happen early vs.
late in the sequence;this would allow for the concurrent tuning of different regions of
parameters instead of completely independent ones.
The major issue with traditional CNNs is that they have to learn the entire feature
map, which means that they need a huge number of parameters. This, in turn, means that
they are very expensive to train and also slow to run.
ResNets are a family of neural networks that were proposed as an improvement over
traditional CNNs. In particular, ResNets use skip connections (which I’ll describe below),
which allow them to be much smaller than traditional CNNs while still having similar
performance. Skip connections can be used in any neural network architecture, but they
are particularly useful for convolutional neural networks because they let you reuse parts
of your feature map between layers in different positions.
Here we have a simple three-layer convolutional network with two convolutional
layers followed by a pooling layer. The input is fed into layer 1, which performs its
computation and outputs a feature map (which is just an array of numbers). Layer 2 then
performs its own computation on top of layer 1’s output and produces another feature map.
This process repeats until it reaches the ﬁnal layer.
Aryo Michael and Melki Garonga in 2021 [ 10] also proposed a new residual network
with deep residual learning for image recognition, which integrates element-wise pooling
with multi-scale features. Their approach combines depthwise separable convolution and
deconvolution operations along with 2 2 and 33 convolutions to form different types
of layers. For instance, layer 2 is made up of three layers: one that performs 44convolu-
tion by padding its input images with zero; another that computes 2 2 deconvolution
(i.e., transpose of spatial average); and a third layer that performs 3 3 convolution. In
order to reduce computational costs, they replace some fully connected layers with more