Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 36 of 43
drive. That being said, for many applications, a top-1 error is more important than a top-5
error. In addition to better performance on image recognition tasks, DRN can also be used
for the unsupervised pre-training of networks and classiﬁcation tasks that require a low
false negative rate. They are trained in an end-to-end fashion by optimizing the objective
function directly, bypassing many intermediate steps found in traditional approaches.
12. Datasets for Deep Residual Learning
Deep residual learning is a powerful tool for improving the performance of machine
learning models. In this tutorial, we will discuss the various datasets that are used to train
deep residual networks.
12.1. Datasets for Deep Residual Learning
There are several datasets that have been used to train deep residual networks. The
most common ones are:
CIFAR-10 dataset [ 44,93]: This is one of the most widely used datasets for image
recognition since it contains 60,000 training images and 10,000 test images. It consists of
images belonging to 10 categories like airplanes, automobiles, birds, cats, etc. The size of
each image is 3232 pixels with pixel values ranging between 0 and 255. This is a subset
of the original CIFAR-100 dataset. It contains 60,000 32 32 color images in 10 classes. The
last two layers form the fully connected layer, which has 4096 neurons. The ﬁrst layer is a
convolutional layer with seven ﬁlters and four kernels. The dataset can be used for training
a variety of models such as deep residual networks, ResNet and DenseNet. The images
are organised into two sets: a train set and a test set. The train set contains 50,000 images
and is used to train the neural network. The test set contains 10,000 images and is used to
evaluate how well a neural network performs on new data.
12.2. ImageNet
ImageNet [ 94] is the de facto standard dataset for computer vision research that
has been used in many state-of-the-art systems over the past few years. It contains over
15 million images belonging to 1000 different categories spread across 20,000 subcategories.
The ﬁrst level of ImageNet consists of 1000 categories which have been further divided
into 10,000 subcategories, each containing 1000 images (ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge).
ImageNet dataset: This is another popular image recognition dataset containing
1 million training images and 200 k test images belonging to 1000 categories like butterﬂy,
turtle, etc. The size of each image is 216 216 pixels with pixel values in range between 0
and 255.
13. Recommendations & Challenges in Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognitions
Below are some open challenges in Deep Residual Learning for image recognition.
 The challenge of deep residual learning for image recognition is that the error signal
between the input and output of a deep neural network is not strong enough to train
the network. This can be overcome by using residual networks, which are a type of
deep learning architecture that uses an additional set of layers to compute a residual
signal in addition to the standard forward pass.
 Deep residual learning (DRL) has recently emerged as an important approach for
image recognition. It generally consists of two stages: a reconstruction stage and a
reﬁnement stage. The reconstruction stage applies an autoencoder to the input image
and reconstructs it by using a sparse code in order to preserve salient features in each
layer. In contrast, the reﬁnement stage aims to further enhance the reconstructed
image with an attention model. To apply DRL to large-scale problems, we need to
ﬁnd ways to reduce the number of parameters required by our network so that it