Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 35 of 43
it predicts properly given other inputs rather than trying to replicate what it sees in its label
input, connections should be cut off periodically so that it doesn’t try too hard to produce
similar outputs as before.
11. Evaluation Metrics for DRN
The author in [ 1] studied the performance of DRN on four image recognition tasks.
They found that DRN signiﬁcantly outperformed previous state-of-the-art methods on all
four tasks. The authors also proposed a new evaluation metric for DRN, which they called
the Top-1 error. This metric is based on the idea that the top-1 error is a more accurate
measure of performance than the traditional accuracy metric. The authors found that DRN
achieved a top-1 error of only 3.56% on the ImageNet dataset, which is signiﬁcantly lower
than the previous state-of-the-art method (4.82%). In addition, DRN achieves a top 5 error
of 9.8%, again much better than the previous state-of-the-art method (17.2%). Finally, DRN
has a mean Average Precision of 0.927, while the previous state-of-the-art method had an
average precision of 0.648 on the same datasets. These results show that DRN outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods in terms of all three metrics: Top 1 error, Top 5 error and
Mean Average Precision.
To evaluate how well their models are performing, researchers use various meth-
ods such as accuracy or precision/recall measurements. However, these metrics can be
misleading if they’re applied blindly without considering their underlying assumptions.
For example, suppose that you have two image recognition models, Model A and Model
Both with 99% accuracy, but Model A recognizes every photo correctly, whereas Model
B returns no false positives but misses half of photos it should recognize. It would be
wrong to conclude from our analysis above that model B is superior to model A! As we’ve
seen before, however, measures like top-1 error and top-5 error are better at making such
comparisons because false negatives have a greater impact on their values than false pos-
itives do. Therefore, let us take a look at how DRN compares to other algorithms when
evaluated using this metric. One advantage of evaluating an algorithm using top-1 error
instead of traditional accuracy is that one can examine algorithms side by side on equal
footing. For instance, comparing algorithm A and algorithm B where Algorithm A achieves
90% accuracy and Algorithm B achieves 98% accuracy sounds like Algorithm B is better,
right? But what if Algorithm A just does not make any mistakes whereas Algorithm B
makes two mistakes out of every 100 images? Using top-1 error one can see that this would
equate to two errors out of 10 images (i.e., 20%) instead of four errors out of 100 images
(0.01%), making the difference between them much clearer. Indeed, across all four image
recognition tasks modeled here, we ﬁnd that DRN performs much better than the com-
petition according to this new metric. On the CIFAR10 dataset, DRN achieved a top-1
error of 16.3% compared to 23.6% for Mask R-CNN (a popular deep learning architecture).
This means that even if we allow masks R-CNN higher false positive rate due to its more
sophisticated features and complexity, it still has a worse bottom line result with respect
to correctness. Another noteworthy observation besides improving test accuracy and re-
ducing computational cost, deep residual networks also preserve local information from
the previous layer. This property, combined with the ability to learn from a large set of
data, enables DRN to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on several image recognition tasks.
These improvements come mostly from training deep networks with large amounts of
data (data augmentation), which reduces overﬁtting, but deep residual networks may not
always require high amounts of data to achieve similar accuracies; depending on the task
some combinations may actually perform better than others. In the case of mask-based
networks, for example, accuracy might be boosted slightly from a few percentage points to
many percent points by trading top-1 error for top-5 error. Of course, this is a tradeoff with
consequences. Some image recognition tasks might not require a low false negative rate
and can accept false positives; others might not perform well if the accuracy is less than
97%. For example, consider a self-driving car. If it is programmed to be conservative and
not to move if there is a chance of collision with another vehicle, then the car will never