Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 28 of 43
offering additional beneﬁts like giving conﬁdence estimates for each pixel in the generated
depth map. Finally, training very deep convolutional networks’ demonstrates impressive
results but does not go into detail about why their methodology works better than other
recent approaches. Regardless, all of these papers show that deep residual learning has
great potential and deserves further research. It seems that traditional deep learning
techniques might beneﬁt from the incorporation of deep residual learning, but so far the
improvements haven’t been quantiﬁed. Furthermore, both traditional and deep residual
learning could beneﬁt from studying neuroscience. One way to understand the brain’s
remarkable cognitive abilities is to observe its operation in practice, rather than just theorize
about it. However, the sub methods are shown in Figure 9, while the details are in the
next section.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 29 of 46 
 
 
Figure 9. TDL Methods. 
The next step for research in both fields sh ould be to explore the unique opportunities 
afforded by coupling neuroscience and machine learning [75], such as designing experi-
ments that could yield new insights into human intelligence and making predictions in 
cognitive science experiments th at have never before been possible. For example, neuro-
scientists have long sought to understand how the brain creates and recognizes objects. 
Deep residual learning is a new approach that  has been shown to perform well on object 
recognition tasks, with the potential for more robust features than traditional deep learn-
ing approaches. There are two papers that explore this area: Unsupervised Categorical Image 
Segmentation Using Deep Networks  by Naiyan Wang et al. [85], and Learned Optimization of 
Image Classifiers  [86]. These papers use deep networks  for unsupervised segmentation and 
optimization, respectively. While these papers  are promising, they don’t address one of 
the major limitations of deep residual learning: lack of interpretability of the features that 
it learns. 
8.1. Residual Learning Framew ork and Residual Block Design 
Deep residual learning is a framework for training very deep neural networks. It was 
first proposed in 2015, as discussed earlier in their paper [1], Deep Residual Learning for 
Image Recognition . The key idea is to use shortcut or skip connections to allow the network 
to learn residual functions of the form F(x) + x, where F(x) is some transformation that can 
be learned by the network. Another approach called residual block design and introduced 
in 2016 by Tai et al., was also surveyed. In th is scheme, instead of implementing all layers 
as part of the input-to-hidden (or input-to-o utput) mapping function, we only implement 
certain layers on top of other layers as part  of an input-to-output mapping function. The 
downside is that it requires more memory  and computation time than DRL because we 
have to maintain all intermediate activations from one layer before feeding them into an-
other layer. In both approaches, recurrent connections are used to avoid the vanishing 
gradients problem. Training is performed using stochastic gradient descent over mini-
batches of examples with weight decay. 
  
Figure 9. TDL Methods.
The next step for research in both ﬁelds should be to explore the unique opportunities
afforded by coupling neuroscience and machine learning [ 75], such as designing experi-
ments that could yield new insights into human intelligence and making predictions in
cognitive science experiments that have never before been possible. For example, neuro-
scientists have long sought to understand how the brain creates and recognizes objects.
Deep residual learning is a new approach that has been shown to perform well on object
recognition tasks, with the potential for more robust features than traditional deep learning
approaches. There are two papers that explore this area: Unsupervised Categorical Image
Segmentation Using Deep Networks by Naiyan Wang et al. [ 85], and Learned Optimization of
Image Classiﬁers [86]. These papers use deep networks for unsupervised segmentation and
optimization, respectively. While these papers are promising, they don’t address one of
the major limitations of deep residual learning: lack of interpretability of the features that
it learns.
8.1. Residual Learning Framework and Residual Block Design
Deep residual learning is a framework for training very deep neural networks. It
was ﬁrst proposed in 2015, as discussed earlier in their paper [ 1],Deep Residual Learning
for Image Recognition . The key idea is to use shortcut or skip connections to allow the
network to learn residual functions of the form F(x) + x, where F(x) is some transformation
that can be learned by the network. Another approach called residual block design and
introduced in 2016 by Tai et al., was also surveyed. In this scheme, instead of implementing
all layers as part of the input-to-hidden (or input-to-output) mapping function, we only