Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 37 of 43
can ﬁt into memory. We also need better ways of training our network so that it can
generalize well across different images without overﬁtting on particular examples.
 Deep residual learning is a powerful technique to train deep neural networks. It has
been applied in many applications, such as image recognition, speech recognition and
natural language processing. However, the training of deep residual networks is far
from trivial.
 Handling large scale feature maps: Residual blocks are designed to learn represen-
tations of intermediate layers. Therefore, the size of feature maps needs to be large
enough to capture useful information from these layers. Traditionally these high-level
layers are trained using CNNs with small kernels (e.g., 3 3). This leads to overﬁtting
problems because of insufﬁcient capacity for generalization.
 Batch normalization: Batch normalization is an important technique for training deep
residual networks due to its stability property and improved convergence speed.
However, it is necessary to carefully design batch normalization parameters according
to network structure and data distribution characteristics so that they can achieve
good performance without overﬁtting issues.
 Training a deep residual network requires a large amount of data for training an
individual layer, which limits our ability to use these models on small datasets like
those used for object detection and semantic segmentation tasks where there may be
only one or two thousand examples per class at most (e.g., YOLO).
 The main issue is that the training of a network with large numbers of parameters
is computationally expensive, which makes it difﬁcult to train a large-scale network
using backpropagation. Some approaches have tried to address this problem by using
a smaller number of parameters, but this can lead to degraded accuracy.
 Another issue is that the spatial dimensions of images are usually much larger than
the temporal dimensions (e.g., 64 64 vs. 11). The ability to capture higher order
dependencies between pixels in an image (i.e., spatial correlations) is one of the reasons
why deep learning has been so successful for image recognition tasks, but it also makes
training more challenging because the temporal dimension may not be long enough
to capture these dependencies.
 There is no simple way to incorporate prior knowledge into deep learning models that
can signiﬁcantly improve performance on many tasks such as semantic segmentation
and object detection [20]
 Low generalization ability: The main disadvantage of deep residual networks is that
they are very sensitive to the choice of features and initializations. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to train a deep residual network with high accuracy across different datasets
or domains.
 Inability to handle noise:
 Deep residual networks are unable to handle noise well because they need some sort
of regularization to avoid overﬁtting. Moreover, they don’t have any mechanism to
learn the underlying structure of images and thus can be easily confused by small
changes such as rotation or translation (e.g., ﬂipping an image vertically).
 Difﬁculties in training:
 Training a deep residual network is more challenging than training shallow feedfor-
ward networks since it requires more parameters and can overﬁt quickly, especially if
we don’t have enough training data available.
 High computational complexity
 Poor generalization ability in small scale networks
 Difﬁculties in parameter choice
 Poor performance on multi-class problems
 Poor performance on large-scale problems
 Poor performance on low level vision problems
 Difﬁculty of incorporating prior knowledge into the network architecture
 Difﬁculty of adapting models to new tasks