Citation: Shaﬁq, M.; Gu, Z. Deep
Residual Learning for Image
Recognition: A Survey. Appl. Sci.
2022 ,12, 8972. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app12188972
Academic Editor: Giancarlo Mauri
Received: 9 August 2022
Accepted: 6 September 2022
Published: 7 September 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Review
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition: A Survey
Muhammad Shaﬁq1,* and Zhaoquan Gu2,3,*
1Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China
2Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
*Correspondence: srsshaﬁq@gmail.com (M.S.); zqgu@gzhu.edu.cn (Z.G.)
Abstract: Deep Residual Networks have recently been shown to signiﬁcantly improve the perfor-
mance of neural networks trained on ImageNet, with results beating all previous methods on this
dataset by large margins in the image classiﬁcation task. However, the meaning of these impressive
numbers and their implications for future research are not fully understood yet. In this survey,
we will try to explain what Deep Residual Networks are, how they achieve their excellent results,
and why their successful implementation in practice represents a signiﬁcant advance over existing
techniques. We also discuss some open questions related to residual learning as well as possible
applications of Deep Residual Networks beyond ImageNet. Finally, we discuss some issues that still
need to be resolved before deep residual learning can be applied on more complex problems.
Keywords: deep residual learning for image recognition; deep residual learning; image processing;
image recognition
1. Introduction
Deep residual learning is a neural network architecture that was proposed in 2015 by
He et al. [ 1] The paper Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition has been cited many
times and is one of the most inﬂuential papers in the ﬁeld of computer vision. In this survey
paper, we will survey the recent advances in deep residual learning. After discussing
what deep residual networks are, we will review their properties, including stability and
trainability. Next, we will discuss some recent applications of deep residual networks.
Finally, we will provide our thoughts on future research directions in deep residual learning
and end with open questions. This comprehensive survey looks at the current state of the
art in deep learning for image recognition and proposes a new method, called deep residual
learning, which offers signiﬁcant improvements over existing methods. The author in [ 1]
provides a detailed overview of the proposed approach and its advantages. The proposed
deep residual learning is computationally efﬁcient as it has a low parameter number and
uses simple backpropagation to reduce computation cost.
They also [ 2] suggest that there are applications other than just image recognition, such
as translation and speech recognition, which could beneﬁt from deep residual learning.
Similarly, author [ 3] presents comparisons between different models with different archi-
tectures and ﬁnds that deep residual models always outperform other models. In addition,
the author points out various challenges in applying the proposed deep residual learning.
For instance, how do we deal with saturation and dropout? How do we deal with tasks
like translation where there is less data available? The author concludes their paper by
suggesting future research directions on how these challenges can be overcome. They point
out that more details should be studied on combining deep residual learning with neural
architecture search, spatial domain convolutions, constrained adversarial loss function and
Gaussian-based generative models. Couso in 2018 in [ 2] proposes an alternative algorithm
for maximizing likelihood rather than mean square error, which is currently used. They also
suggest studying the proposed model for other computer vision tasks like face detection,
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12188972 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci