Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 25 of 43
(DIMs). The former category includes both depthwise and full connections among layers;
the latter does not use depthwise connections but instead relies on variational autoencoders
to encode images. One advantage of these approaches is that they do not require the
modiﬁcation of existing training frameworks. All they need are some modiﬁcations to the
loss function used during backpropagation.
In this survey, we will review the latest developments in DRL for image recognition,
including important architectures and training methods. We will also evaluate these
approaches on ﬁve well-known benchmark datasets: IFAR-10, MNIST, SVHN, Fashion-
MNIST and ILSVRC2012, and explore how well they generalize to unseen data. Finally, we
will examine potential applications of these technologies outside of computer vision, such as
video games or augmented reality applications. To conclude, we will summarize what we
have discussed so far and provide our thoughts about where future work should go. One
conclusion is that convolutional neural networks remain the state-of-the-art approach for
most classiﬁcation problems [ 82]. For other types of tasks, however, like object detection or
segmentation, DRL might be preferred because it can handle spatial information more easily.
A common observation is that current implementations suffer from high computational
cost when dealing with larger datasets. Furthermore, while many results already exist at
low computational cost when compared to classic machine learning approaches like logistic
regression, there remains substantial room for improvement in terms of accuracy without
compromising efﬁciency. Thus, a major area of interest is the design of new DRL algorithms
that are more efﬁcient in the context of real-world applications. Recent advances in this
direction include spectral DRL and spectral DRF, with the latter having shown promise
on small mobile devices. Another limitation of current methods is that they cannot scale
to large inputs. This limits them to working on images no larger than 256 256 pixels,
although we expect improvements in this domain soon. Nonetheless, we believe that DRL
will continue to be a very active area of research for image recognition and beyond in the
coming years.
6. Advantages of DRN over Other Models
Deep residual learning has quickly become the go-to method for image recognition
tasks. This is because deep residual learning offers a number of advantages over other
models, including:
(1) Ease of training—deep residual networks are easier to train than other models due to
their simple structure and use of short connections between layers.
(2) Better performance—deep residual networks have been shown to outperform other
models on a variety of image recognition tasks.
(3) Reduced need for data—deep residual networks can learn from smaller datasets than
other models due to their ability to learn features from data with lower
dimensional representations.
(4) Increased robustness—deep residual networks are more robust to changes in data
distribution and model parameters than other models.
(5) Lower computational requirements—deep residual networks require less computation
than other models.
(6) Applications beyond image recognition—as they are computationally cheap, deep
residual networks are being applied to a variety of different ﬁelds such as natural
language processing and audio processing. These properties make deep residual
networks an attractive choice for anyone looking to develop an image recognition
system. However, there are some disadvantages that should be considered before
choosing this technique:
(1) Higher memory requirements—while deep residual networks typically consume
less memory than other models during runtime, they generally take up more space dur-
ing the training process. (2) Slower convergence time, though not a problem for many
applications, may be a limiting property for some computer vision tasks. (3) Additional
work needed to account for gradient noise—since deep residual networks rely on back-