Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 8 of 43
4. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition
4.1. Deep Residual Learning Image Steganalysis
Image steganography is a technique that allows for the hiding of data in the image,
and this data can be only visible when the image is modiﬁed. Deep residual learning image
steganalysis is a technique that enables an attacker to ﬁnd out what information has been
moved in the image and how it has been moved. Deep residual learning image steganalysis
is a new method to detect steganography. This method is based on deep residual networks
that learn the local patch feature of images. The proposed security system is composed of
three stages: pre-processing, feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
Why is image steganalysis important? Image steganalysis is important because it can
help protect against the unauthorized use of copyrighted material, help uncover inappro-
priate content hidden within images, and uncover potential security threats. What are some
challenges in image steganalysis? The three most challenging aspects of image steganalysis
are false positives, obtaining robust features from an image to differentiate between noise
and data, and developing models that learn well from few training examples. There are
several approaches to address these challenges including active learning approaches for
extracting good features from an image; however, these approaches often involve expen-
sive human labor or resources. The false positive rate has been shown to be high enough
that many large-scale search engines don’t even bother scanning for them because they’re
not worth the cost of storage space or computing power required to weed out all those
extraneous pictures they come across while looking for matches. That’s why the creators
of TinEye, one such search engine, have suggested that machine learning researchers take
this problem more seriously. The goal was to develop techniques to detect any personal
information added covertly to an image without altering its appearance. For example,
consider an image of someone standing on the beach holding up their child. By examining
the pixels in an unaltered version of the picture, you might notice telltale signs that some
numbers had been written over their head using pixelation techniques. Detecting these
kinds of changes isn’t easy to do by hand, so if you want a computer to do it you need a
system capable of detecting very small changes made to individual pixels. Once ADRIAN
detects tiny pieces of data embedded inside a photo, it will then highlight those areas with
color differences around them and allow investigators to zoom in on precisely where there
are visible changes. Figure 5 shows the next sections.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 46 
 
4. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition 
4.1. Deep Residual Learning Image Steganalysis 
Image steganography is a technique that allo ws for the hiding of data in the image, 
and this data can be only visible when the im age is modified. Deep residual learning im-
age steganalysis is a technique that enables an attacker to find out what information has 
been moved in the image and how it has been moved. Deep residual learning image ste-
ganalysis is a new method to detect steganography. This method is based on deep residual 
networks that learn the local patch feature of  images. The proposed security system is 
composed of three stages: pre-processing , feature extraction and classification. 
Why is image steganalysis important? Image steganalysis is important because it can 
help protect against the unauthorized use of copyrighted material, help uncover inappro-priate content hidden within images, and uncover potential security threats. What are 
some challenges in image steganalysis? The three most challenging aspects of image ste-
ganalysis are false positives, ob taining robust features from an image to differentiate be-
tween noise and data, and developing models that learn well from few training examples. 
There are several approaches to address thes e challenges including active learning ap-
proaches for extracting good features from an image; however, these approaches often 
involve expensive human labor or resources. Th e false positive rate has been shown to be 
high enough that many large-scale search engines don’t even bother scanning for them 
because they’re not worth the cost of storage space or computing power required to weed 
out all those extraneous pictures they come across while looking for matches. That’s why the creators of TinEye, one such search engine, have suggested that machine learning re-
searchers take this problem more seriously. The goal was to develop techniques to detect 
any personal information added covertly to an  image without altering its appearance. For 
example, consider an image of someone standi ng on the beach holding up their child. By 
examining the pixels in an unaltered version of  the picture, you might notice telltale signs 
that some numbers had been written over their head using pixelation techniques. Detect-
ing these kinds of changes isn’t easy to do by hand, so if you want a computer to do it you 
need a system capable of detecting very small changes made to individual pixels. Once ADRIAN detects tiny pieces of data embedded in side a photo, it will then highlight those 
areas with color differences around them and allow investigators to zoom in on precisely 
where there are visible changes. Figure 5 shows the next sections. 
 
Figure 5. Next Five Topics. 
4.2. Deep Residual Learning Image  Compression 
Christian Rathgeb eta al in [15] studied th e effect of image compression on the accu-
racy of deep learning models. They found that image compression can reduce the size of 
training datasets by up to 90% without any significant loss in accuracy. This is because 
deep learning models are able to learn the re levant features from data more effectively 
than shallower models. Image compression ca n also help speed up training times and 
Figure 5. Next Five Topics.
4.2. Deep Residual Learning Image Compression
Christian Rathgeb eta al in [ 15] studied the effect of image compression on the accuracy
of deep learning models. They found that image compression can reduce the size of training
datasets by up to 90% without any signiﬁcant loss in accuracy. This is because deep learning
models are able to learn the relevant features from data more effectively than shallower
models. Image compression can also help speed up training times and reduce the amount
of memory required to store training data. They looked at different ways of compressing
images for use as inputs to convolutional neural networks (CNNs). They noted that