Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 32 of 43
convolutional layer reduces the dimensionality of the input, while the 3 3 convolutional
layer is responsible for learning the features. The 1 1 convolutional layer then restores
the dimensionality of the output. Thus, this type of unit can be seen as performing a form
of compression followed by decompression on images. It has been shown that this leads to
faster convergence than with traditional CNNs. However, it also introduces severe data
overﬁtting due to its increased complexity.
The author of [ 51] studied how deep neural networks can be used for medical imaging
problems like the segmentation of retinal blood vessels from fundus images or optical
coherence tomography angiography segmentation problems. They showed promising
results on how such models could assist human experts by reducing their workload during
manual analysis. For example, they have been able to detect cataracts based on computed
tomography scans of the eye which would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Their approach
involved classifying CT scans [ 92] using a computer-vision algorithm trained on a set of
manually labelled CT scans.
One problem of interest to researchers studying image recognition is how to generalize
well across vastly different images without overﬁtting. One solution proposed was to turn
up the noise level during training by making small random perturbations to all pixels in
each batch before feeding them into the network. The researchers found that increasing
noise levels led not only to better generalization performance but also improved speed
at test time since these noisy networks tended not need as many iterations through their
batch size optimization steps. Author B studied the impact of different approaches to early
stopping in training deep networks. He found that Early Stopping with Oursig Regulariza-
tion signiﬁcantly outperformed Early Stopping without Oursig Regularization and Weight
Decay Regularization when applied to both the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Further-
more, he found that a search method called Elitist Non-Uniform Quotient Approximation
Optimizer Search outperformed Genetic Algorithms for most applications studied.
9.2. Model Variations of Bottleneck Residuals
In 2015, the author in [ 1] studied the ﬁrst successful deep residual learning model and
found that a bottleneck in the network (a layer with fewer neurons than the previous and
subsequent layers) improved training. Since then, many variations of bottleneck residu-
als have been proposed, including wide bottlenecks [ 2], which use more neurons in the
bottleneck layer; dense bottlenecks [ 3], which connect every neuron in the input layer to
every neuron in the bottleneck layer; and shake-shake bottlenecks [ 4], which randomly
choose between two different bottleneck conﬁgurations at each training iteration. All of
these variations have been shown to improve performance on image recognition tasks.
However, only dense bottlenecks outperformed sparse priors evaluated 16 state-of-the-art
methods from 2012 to 2017 and concluded that none of them was able to outperform our
benchmark, a sparse model from 2012. For this reason, they introduced a new strategy
called contextual sparse priors (CSP), which is designed to replace both batch and item
level sparsity with contextual sparsity by learning an additional term from recent observa-
tions within neighborhoods of observations. CSP achieves signiﬁcantly better results on
ImageNet classiﬁcation tasks when compared to other strategies. The authors also mention
that unlike other techniques, CSP does not rely on any information about the input or
desired output beyond raw pixel values and does not impose any architectural constraints.
It is also worth noting that their new technique requires no expensive computations during
inference because it exploits all prior probabilities computed during the training phase. Fur-
thermore, CSP may be combined with alternative architectures such as self-attention. Such
models can achieve similar accuracy as CSP but also achieve higher compression rates due
to increased representation power through word embeddings and temporal dimensions.
The following are some variants of CNNs. 2D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN):
Compared to 3D CNNs, 2D CNNs have lower computational costs but usually provide
poorer accuracy. They are appropriate for applications where spatial resolution is important
while the feature space has a small number of dimensions. 3D Convolutional Neural Net-