Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 18 of 43
- Hybrid Forward/Backward Propagation: Running both forward and backward prop-
agation steps simultaneously but treating each layer independently.
In conclusion, despite all of the progress made thus far, there are still many challenges
ahead for deep networks to overcome before they become commonplace in society. We
expect that there will be continued innovation and improvements over time leading to better
computers, better algorithms, and ultimately better models for improving human life.
Our hope is that these survey papers provide an overview from which future re-
searchers can gain insight into approaches to tackling issues in computer vision and other
areas of machine learning. Furthermore, our goal is not simply to describe new concepts
but also to hopefully inspire a new generation of researchers who wish to continue on
with their own research endeavors. For those who wish to continue reading about Deep
Residual Learning for Image Recognition, One of the author’s main goals was to increase
understanding of the inner workings of deep neural networks, and I think that the author
did a good job in making that happen. It would be interesting to see if this approach could
be expanded for further comprehension.
4.15. Deep Residual Learning Pest Identiﬁcation
Deep residual learning is a neural network that is used to learn image representations.
It can be used for various tasks such as image classiﬁcation, object detection, and semantic
segmentation. The main advantage of deep residual learning is that it can be trained on
very large datasets and achieve good performance with little data. Similarly, Deep Residual
Learning for Image Recognition authors studied the effects of applying deep residual
learning on pest identiﬁcation [ 65]. They found that applying deep residual learning
was an effective approach to improving the accuracy rates of identifying pests in images
without sacriﬁcing too much speed. Deep residual learning allows the authors to train their
models using few iterations. There are three notable approaches for applying deep residual
training: dilated convolutions, weight sharing, and weight bias. Dilated convolutions
provide better accuracy at lower computation cost than the other two approaches, but
this technique has been shown to cause more overﬁtting when applied at a high level of
scale. Weight sharing attempts to reduce computational complexity by not replicating
weights across nodes while weight bias attempts to make computations more efﬁcient by
replacing fully connected layers with two layers: one containing just weights (which are
learned during training) and another containing input features (which are also learned
during training). For most models, these two techniques seem more suitable than dilated
convolutions because they can still achieve similar accuracies while using less computation
time. In addition, researchers have recently developed new architectures based on batch
normalization that combine the beneﬁts of both dilated convolutions and weight sharing.
One disadvantage to using deep residual learning is that there are limited options for
backpropagating errors from higher-level layers to lower-level ones. Additionally, deeper
networks tend to suffer from difﬁculty in generalizing from local examples, which results
in problems like mode collapse or overﬁtting. One way around this problem is to use batch
normalization. Researchers found that this increases the degree of freedom for computing
gradients, allowing for more accurate predictions [ 66]. The downside to this technique is
that there are multiple variations of algorithms available, so it becomes difﬁcult to know
which algorithm will work best for any given task. A survey about deep residual learning
showed that there were challenges in trying to implement the technique when real-time
inference was required, because certain parts of standard CPUs could not process the large
number of multiplications quickly enough. However, many recent research studies have
found ways around these issues through hardware optimizations and software solutions
such as library bindings. Furthermore, the authors found that deep residual learning
outperformed traditional processing for pest identiﬁcation by 1.4%. This suggests that
although there are some limitations to the technique, applying deep residual learning for
image recognition can yield signiﬁcant improvements for users looking to identify pests
in images.