Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 34 of 43
They reasoned that backpropagation through these many different intermediate fea-
tures will allow information about all inputs to ﬂow backward through the network, even
if it only ﬂows backward after passing through many subsequent layers. To achieve this
requirement, fast linear convolutions were introduced into modern CNN architectures,
much like adding gears onto a wheel improves its efﬁciency. Fast linear convolutions
sped up the backward propagation of error gradients by an order of magnitude, making
algorithms like SGD work much faster. Importantly, fast linear convolutions did not change
the structure of the learned architecture. Convolutional Neural Networks continue to
consist of two sets of neurons: those that look forward through the input sequence and
those that look backwards. In essence, fast linear convolutions transform input sequences
into a ﬁxed length representation called a bottleneck layer.
10.1. Spatial Dimension Reduction
The impact of different types of spatial dimension reduction on deep residual learning
for image recognition. The results showed that using a lower dimensional space can im-
prove accuracy while reducing training time. Additionally, the study found that using a
higher dimensional space can improve accuracy even further. However, this comes at the
cost of increased training time. Ultimately, the best way to reduce dimensionality is to use a
combination of both methods. Using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with hierarchi-
cal fusion algorithms and variational autoencoders (VAEs) yields improved accuracy and
less computational complexity when compared to CNNs alone. The authors [ 33] proposed
a framework that has two main components: a two-stage network structure design and
data augmentation.
The authors investigated how data augmentation affects performance. They trained
three fully connected layers with additional inputs coming from each feature map layer
of an encoder network before feeding it into another fully connected layer of the decoder
network to generate representations corresponding to one type of variation by augmenting
its input. They found that there was no signiﬁcant difference in performance between any
variations used in their experiments; thus, they suggest keeping things simple by only
adding augmentation information prior to the ﬁrst fully connected layer or combining
multiple types of variations together before or after every encoding or decoding stage. Fur-
thermore, they also show that using VAE’s with pre-trained weights improves performance
on the CIFAR-10 and STL datasets without requiring more than double the number of
parameters than what is required for vanilla NN models. In addition, the authors point out
that these weights should be pretrained outside of the scope of DNN training, as VAE’s are
not robust to missing weights, which may lead to undesirable behaviors such as vanishing
gradients during backpropagation.
10.2. Depth Reduction
In 2015, the author of [ 1] studied the impact of depth on accuracy in image recognition
tasks. They found that shallower networks generally have worse performance than deeper
ones. However, they also found that there is a point of diminishing returns, beyond a
certain depth, adding more layers does not improve accuracy. In 2016, the authors in [ 2]
used this idea to create what is known as a residual network or ResNet. A ResNet consists of
many layers (usually over 100), with each layer only learning a small residual between the
output of the layer and its input. This architecture allows for training very deep networks
without suffering from the issues of vanishing gradients.
Previously, residual networks consisted of just one hidden layer. However, when the
network is being trained to predict weights based on labels, it can sometimes end up trying
to reproduce particular patterns seen in the labels rather than doing a good job predicting
weights given other inputs. These patterns can lead to inaccurate predictions if they are
too pronounced because they are easy for the network to recognize. Therefore, the author
proposed that residual networks should contain two hidden layers—one with many nodes
and another with few nodes. Furthermore, when training such a network’s weights so that