Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 16 of 43
4.12. Deep Learning Architectures
In recent years, deep learning has made tremendous progress in the ﬁeld of image
recognition. The main contribution of this paper is a comprehensive survey of deep resid-
ual learning (ResNets), which is a state-of-the-art deep learning architecture for image
recognition [ 58]. The author in [ 2] studied the effect of different depths of ResNets on
the classiﬁcation accuracy [ 59,60]. They found that deeper networks are more accurate
than shallower networks. However, they also found that there is a diminishing return in
accuracy as the network depth increases. Besides deepening ResNets, researchers have
also investigated adding residual blocks to shallow models. The idea behind adding these
blocks is to take advantage of the invariance properties of convolutional neural networks
by using small images to compensate for large changes in input size and shape. These
blocks help to prevent overﬁtting and underﬁtting problems in models with few param-
eters and a large number of ﬁlters. A very simple example includes replacing just one
or two layers at the end of a shallow model with their corresponding ones from a deep
model. One such extension is called SqueezeNet [ 61], which replaces only one layer with
its corresponding layer from an entire deep CNN inception module. A further extension
comes from Google Brain called CheckerboardNet [ 62], which replaces all layers with their
counterparts from an entire deep CNN inception module. Another type of extension comes
from Microsoft Research, which consists of a series of hybrid architectures: Stacked Con-
nected Convolutional Networks, Transformer Networks, and Self-Attention Models. All
three architectures propose combining residual units with feature extraction units. Stacked
Connected Convolutional Networks stack two types of networks on top of each other: (1) a
set of regular deep networks where each level performs feature extraction; and (2) a single
dense network containing up to 10 times fewer parameters than the previous level but still
extracting features within each level. Similarly, Transformer Networks stack two types of
models: (1) full-connected recurrent encoder-decoder pairs and (2) transformer blocks that
replace groups connections between nodes while performing feature extraction. Lastly,
Self-Attention Models stack two types of models: (1) Autoregressive Encoder Decoder
Models; and (2) self-attention modules that extract features. Experiments conducted show
that the proposed architectures produce better results than those without stacking resid-
uals with extra modules. There are, however, various drawbacks associated with these
architectures. Firstly, the training process can be time consuming. Secondly, there can be
some signiﬁcant increase in computation requirements since the same operations need to
be performed repeatedly across different network layers. Finally, most of these proposals
use computationally expensive attention mechanisms which increase both memory and
computational requirements. For example, memory usage for Stacked Connected Convolu-
tional Networks goes up from mm2to mm3. Self-attention models’ computational cost per
batch prediction goes up from O(1) to O(2). Attention mechanisms can provide robustness
against adversarial examples, but it seems that it would be necessary to combine them with
additional regularization techniques.
4.13. Deep Learning System
In recent years, deep learning systems [ 63] have achieved great success in many ﬁelds,
including image recognition. One of the most successful deep learning models is the
deep residual network (ResNet), which was proposed in 2015 [ 1]. Since then, ResNets
have been widely used in various image recognition tasks and have shown state-of-the-art
performance. However, there are still some limitations that need to be addressed: they
are not computationally efﬁcient and they can be easily fooled by adversarial examples.
Recently, researchers have started to explore new methods to improve these shortcomings.
Some promising approaches include changing the activation function from ReLU to ELU
or SELU; using a memory module before each layer; using data augmentation techniques
during training; and pre-training with a large dataset followed by ﬁne tuning with a small
dataset. The paper also reviews other methods such as attention-based networks, Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks, Convolutional Neural Networks, GANs, etc. The authors