Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 14 of 43
against adversarial attacks. One other interesting point mentioned was how the researchers
used RGBD data to better understand how humans perceive color and objects. They found
that humans tend to see colors mostly in the mid-spectrum where red, green and blue
meet, so they created special networks that mimic human perception of color when training
them. Another discovery is that we ﬁnd objects more easily if they are located near edges
rather than in cluttered areas. To take advantage of this ﬁnding, their model predicts two
probabilities, one corresponding to the probability of detecting an object in the cluttered
region and another corresponding to the probability of detecting an object at the edge
regions. The ﬁnal model achieved good results on classiﬁcation tasks like labeling dogs
versus cats and types of food (bananas vs. apples).
On small datasets like CIFAR-10 [ 49], a new approach called Instance Normalization
achieves competitive results, but when applied to larger datasets like ImageNet large gains
were obtained.
4.10. Tomography Images Deep Learning and Transfer
Hao et al. in [ 50] studied the application of deep learning to tomography images
and found that the proposed method can effectively improve the recognition performance.
Similarly, deep residual learning has also been applied to image recognition tasks with
promising results. In this paper, we review the recent progress made in deep residual
learning for image recognition. We ﬁrst introduce the general framework of deep residual
learning and then discuss its application to various image recognition tasks. Finally,
we summarize the challenges and future directions of deep residual learning for image
recognition. In summary, deep residual learning has shown a promising application to
image recognition tasks with relatively strong results.
Deep residual networks are composed of two parts: (1) dense layers and (2) down-
sampling layers [ 51], which aim at restoring lost details by averaging information from
neighboring locations or different depths in the same layer. Densely connected layers form
an intermediate representation which is stored for later use. Downsampling layers help
produce more concise representations which are easier to train. There have been multiple
successes applying deep residual networks in image recognition, as shown below. One
example is image segmentation. A pre-trained deep residual network was used to build
a boundary map which was applied onto input data. The boundary map allows for the
accurate labeling of different objects in the scene while preserving intricate features like
edges and contours.
Similarly, another study used unsupervised pretraining [ 52,53] followed by super-
vised ﬁne-tuning to classify six vehicle classes (categories). The classiﬁcation accuracy
obtained using the resulting deep network is close to 99%. It should be noted that these
experiments have not yet gone beyond 10 training epochs, showing there may be room for
improvement. Despite this, deep residual learning has already demonstrated its promise in
providing increased accuracy over previous methods. For example, recent research shows
that a combined approach of fully convolutional neural networks and 3D convolutional
networks signiﬁcantly outperforms both other approaches when classifying knee joint sta-
tus from MRI scans. Similarly, it was recently shown that adding depth information leads
to improved classiﬁcation accuracies for facial expression detection, with smile detection
achieving 96% accuracy and sulk detection achieving 88% accuracy when compared to 68%
and 52% respectively without depth information. Moreover, even higher accuracies were
obtained using regularized discriminative models such as ensemble perceptrons or boost-
ing discriminative neural networks. Similarly, combining variational autoencoders with
a generative adversarial network resulted in signiﬁcant improvements for reconstructing
speech from laryngeal articulations. Lastly, it should be noted that the ﬁeld of computer
vision has beneﬁted greatly from the development of deep learning algorithms. Indeed,
deep residual networks are one of many novel techniques that have been developed and
tested over the past few years. Future studies will need to consider how best to leverage all
aspects of their model architecture (such as their number of hidden layers), how much data