Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 20 of 43
It’s also worth mentioning that when training models with many hidden layers, it can
be difﬁcult for backpropagation algorithms to ﬁnd a local optimum due to the many degrees
of freedom involved. One way around this problem is through adversarial training, where
two models compete against one another during training: one tries to maximize error while
the other tries minimize error. For example, if our ﬁrst model’s goal is to minimize error,
then our second model would try to maximize error. However, if both models’ goals were
to minimize error then this competition would not take place. Overall, there are many pros
and cons associated with deep residual learning; however, the consensus seems to be that
when given sufﬁcient amounts of data, it outperforms shallow nets. The main advantage
to deep learning is that it is good at modeling complicated nonlinear relationships and also
at discovering complex structures within data sets. Some people argue that a disadvantage
to deep learning is that the large number of parameters necessary means that there is an
increased chance of overﬁtting the training set. However, the success of deep learning
has made it a popular area of study among machine learning practitioners. Furthermore,
another criticism is that certain estimators do not perform well when applied to very high
dimensional spaces such as images. As a result, additional techniques need to be used
such as variational auto-encoders and approximate inference techniques like expectation
propagation. Lastly, although deep residual networks are known for their robustness to
missing labels, if labels are missing from either training or test datasets it is difﬁcult to
compute loss functions correctly since gradient descent relies on label gradients for updates.
Methods such as skip connections may help mitigate this problem, but further research
needs to be done in order to conﬁrm how effective these approaches really are. With that
said, deep residual learning is still a promising technology for image recognition. It will
be interesting to see what advances are made in the ﬁeld of deep residual learning as it
continues to evolve.
5.2. Image Recognition Machine Learning
Machine learning is a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence [ 69] that deals with the design and
development of algorithms that can learn from and make predictions on data. Deep learning
is a subset of machine learning that uses deep neural networks to learn from data [ 70].
In image recognition, deep residual learning has been shown to outperform traditional
methods. In this section, we will review the current state of the art in deep residual learning
for image recognition. We will cover recent progress in theoretical understanding as well as
best practices for training deep models using GPUs. We also provide code implementing
these techniques and some example applications demonstrating their performance beneﬁts
over previous work. The goal of this survey is to provide a complete overview of the
most important developments in deep residual learning for image recognition research
and put them into perspective with the broader context of related ﬁelds such as supervised
or unsupervised classiﬁcation, denoising autoencoders, generative adversarial networks
(GANs), or others. For a more comprehensive treatment of any one topic, please refer to
the relevant literature. For example, a detailed explanation of GANs and its variants. An
introduction to convolutional layers and how they are used in computer vision tasks. A
good introduction to variational inference which is critical for many deep learning problems
including deep residual networks.
The basic idea behind deep residual nets was originally introduced by [ 71], where it
was presented as an extension of L-BFGS [ 71], where instead of minimizing an error function
deﬁned on individual pixels or groups of pixels, the network’s weights are minimized
through gradient descent along parameter space via backpropagation. The intuition is
that each level of a deep network essentially consists of two parts: the ﬁrst involves the
extraction of information at multiple levels of abstraction, followed by the mapping of the
results onto each other. By building up representations at different levels of abstraction
and mapping them onto each other, one can create depth in the representation even if
there are no explicit connections between nodes at different levels. We will now explore