Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 39 of 43
Table 1. Cont.
Authors Title Publication Year Publisher
Fu, Zhiyang et al.A residual dense network assisted sparse view
reconstruction for breast computed tomographyScientiﬁc reports 2020Nature
Publishing Group
Wu et al. Deep learning based spectral CT imaging Neural Networks 2021 Elsevier
Jalali et al.ResBCDU-Net: a deep learning framework for
lung CT image segmentationSensors 2021 MDPI
Tekade et al.Lung cancer detection and classiﬁcation using
deep learning2018 fourth international conference on
computing communication control and
automation (ICCUBEA)2018 IEEE
Cui et al.LiteDepthwiseNet: A lightweight network for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcationIEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing2021 IEEE
Feng et al.Semi-supervised learning for pelvic MR image
segmentation based on multi-task residual fully
convolutional networks2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018)2018 IEEE
Li, et al.Few-shot contrastive learning for image
classiﬁcation and its application to
insulator identiﬁcationApplied Intelligence 2022 Springer
Yang, et al. Classiﬁcation of trash for recyclability status CS229 project report 2016Publisher Name
San Francisco,
CA, USA
Karar, et al.Cascaded deep learning classiﬁers for
computer-aided diagnosis of COVID-19 and
pneumonia diseases in X-ray scansComplex & Intelligent Systems 2021 Springer
Zhu, et al.A hybrid CNN–LSTM network for the
classiﬁcation of human activities based on
micro-Doppler radarIEEE Access 2020 IEEE
Rahman, et al.Efﬁcient FPGA acceleration of convolutional
neural networks using logical-3D compute array2016 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference & Exhibition (DATE)2016 IEEE
Michael, et al.Classiﬁcation model of ‘Toraja’arabica coffee
fruit ripeness levels using convolution neural
network approachILKOM Jurnal Ilmiah 2021
Al-Kharraz, et al.Automated system for chromosome karyotyping
to recognize the most common numerical
abnormalities using deep learningIEEE Access 2020 IEEE
Brachmann, et al.Visual camera re-localization from RGB and
RGB-D images using DSACIEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence2021 IEEE
Akhand, et al.Facial emotion recognition using transfer
learning in the deep CNNElectronics 2021Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing
Institute
He, et al. Deep residual learning for image recognitionProceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition2016
Couso, et al.A general framework for maximizing likelihood
under incomplete dataInternational Journal of
Approximate Reasoning2018 Elsevier
Liang, et al.A hybrid quantum–classical neural network
with deep residual learningNeural Networks 2021 Elsevier
14. Conclusions
In the past few years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used in image
recognition and other related applications, such as video processing and speech recogni-
tion. However, there are still some issues that need to be addressed before they can be
applied to more complex problems. In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey
of deep residual learning for image recognition. We ﬁrst review deep residual learning
and its applications in image recognition. We then present several successful applications
of deep residual learning, including image classiﬁcation, object detection and semantic
segmentation. Finally, we discuss some issues that still need to be resolved before deep
residual learning can be applied on more complex problems. However, to improve the
performance of the DRL below are some suggestions:
We can improve the performance of Deep Residual Learning in the following ways:
1. The ﬁrst thing that can be done to improve the deep residual learning is to add more
layers of neurons into the network.
2. The second thing that can be done is to increase the number of ﬁlters in each layer, as
this will help us get a better model for our problem.