Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 19 of 43
Deep residual learning can be implemented for image recognition in multiple different
ways. Although deep residual learning does result in considerable improvement, there are
several signiﬁcant limitations to the technique. Deep residual learning works best when
there is high resolution, large amounts of labeled datasets, and modern hardware that is
optimized for implementing deep learning. Finally, it may take a while to optimize the
dataset depending on how new the technology is. However, once all of these conditions
are met, applying deep residual learning to image recognition should yield signiﬁcant
improvements in accuracy and increase the speed of image recognition signiﬁcantly. Nev-
ertheless, more testing is needed in order to gain a clearer picture on whether or not deep
residual learning is suited for all applications that require analyzing and classifying images.
Further research should be done to determine if applying deep residual learning to other
application domains yields similar beneﬁts as seen with image recognition.
5. Image Recognition
5.1. Image Recognition Technology
Deep residual learning [ 67] is a state-of-the-art method for image recognition. It allows
us to train very deep neural networks, which in turn results in better performance on
image classiﬁcation tasks. In this survey, we will discuss the various methods used in
deep residual learning, as well as its advantages and disadvantages. We hope that this
survey will provide a helpful overview of the current state of the art in deep residual
learning. The most common form of deep residual learning uses max-pooling layers to
reduce computational complexity and increase generalization capability. A downside to
using max-pooling layers is an increase in variance across input space. To combat this
issue, researchers employ batch normalization techniques by adding biases [ 68] or standard
deviations to neurons before each pooling layer operation so that they are forced into
similar levels across space. Other forms of residual learning include WaveNet and the
recently proposed Langevin dynamics framework for neural networks with probabilistic
inputs (LDN). LDN have shown great promise by improving accuracy when compared
with traditional fully connected network architectures. Another advantage to using LDN is
that it helps model higher order correlations between input variables.
It should be noted that there has been some research on combining deep residual
learning and recurrent neural networks, but more work needs to be done in order to make
these models more accurate. In this section, seven subsections are shown in Figure 8.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 46 
 
 
Figure 8. Details of the next eight sections. 
It’s also worth mentioning that when trai ning models with ma ny hidden layers, it 
can be difficult for backpropagation algorithms to find a local optimum due to the many 
degrees of freedom involved. One way around this problem is through adversarial train-
ing, where two models compete against one an other during training: one tries to maxim-
ize error while the other tries minimize error. For example, if our first model’s goal is to 
minimize error, then our seco nd model would try to maximize error. However, if both 
models’ goals were to minimize error then this  competition would not take place. Overall, 
there are many pros and cons associated with  deep residual learning; however, the con-
sensus seems to be that when given sufficient amounts of data, it outperforms shallow nets. The main advantage to deep learning is that it is good at modeling complicated non-
linear relationships and also at discovering complex structures within data sets. Some 
people argue that a disadvantage to deep learning is that the large number of parameters 
necessary means that there is an increased chan ce of overfitting the training set. However, 
the success of deep learning has made it a popular area of study among machine learning practitioners. Furthermore, another criticism is that certain estimators do not perform well 
when applied to very high dimensional spaces such as images. As a result, additional 
techniques need to be used such as variat ional auto-encoders and approximate inference 
techniques like expectation propagation. Last ly, although deep residual networks are 
known for their robustness to missing labels, if  labels are missing from either training or 
test datasets it is difficult to compute loss functions correctly since gradient descent relies 
on label gradients for updates. Methods such as skip connections may help mitigate this 
problem, but further research needs to be do ne in order to confirm how effective these 
approaches really are. With that said, deep residual learning is still a promising technol-
ogy for image recognition. It will be interesting to see what advances are made in the field 
of deep residual learning as it continues to evolve. 
5.2. Image Recognition Machine Learning 
Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence [69] that deals with the design 
and development of algorithms that can lear n from and make predic tions on data. Deep 
learning is a subset of machine learning that uses deep neural networ ks to learn from data 
Figure 8. Details of the next eight sections.