Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 12 of 43
learned model does not perform as well as one that was trained directly on faces. Similarly,
the author in [32] proposes a new method for matching software-generated sketches with
face photographs using a very deep convolutional neural network (CNN). This method
uses two different types of networks: one network is trained on face photographs and
another network is trained on sketches. The two networks are combined into one network
by using transfer learning. Their experiments show that their method outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and generalization capability.
Shun Moriya and Chihiro Shibata [ 33] propose a novel transfer learning method for
very deep CNNs for text classiﬁcation. Our main contribution is a new evaluation method
that compares the proposed transfer learning method with two existing methods, namely
ﬁne-tuning and feature handover. They also propose a new model ensemble approach to
improve the performance of our models by using the best performing model from each
ensemble member as an additional feature. Our experiments on ﬁve public datasets show
that our approach outperforms previous methods and gives competitive results when
compared with other state-of-the-art methods.
Similarly, Afzal et al. in [ 34] present the ﬁrst investigation of how very deep Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNN) can be used to improve document image classiﬁcation.
They also study how advanced training strategies such as multi-network training and
model compression techniques can be combined with very deep CNNs to further improve
performance. Their results show that very deep CNNs are able to outperform shallow
networks, even when using a relatively small amount of training data. They also ﬁnd
that multi-network training signiﬁcantly improves performance over single-network train-
ing, especially for very deep CNNs. Finally, they demonstrate that model compression
techniques such as quantization and binarization can be combined with very deep CNNs
to achieve an additional 5% reduction in error rate with only a small loss in accuracy.
However, they should highlight that their model achieves state-of-the-art performance in
document image classiﬁcation. However, they don’t provide any quantitative results to
support this claim. They could easily add some performance metrics (e.g., F1 score) on top
of their results, and this would make the paper more convincing. The next ﬁve sections are
shown in Figure 6.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 46 
 
ResNet-like architecture with multiple residual blocks (ResNet has multiple branches), 
which may help you achieve good performance.  The problem with transfer learning is 
that it works well in the sense that it is often able to learn a useful representation from a large amount of data, but it does not necessar ily learn the best repres entation for the task 
at hand. For example, if you are trying to use transfer learning for face recognition and 
you have trained on a large number of faces, then you might find that your transfer 
learned model does not perform as well as on e that was trained directly on faces. Simi-
larly, the author in [32] proposes a new meth od for matching software-generated sketches 
with face photographs using a very deep convolutional neural network (CNN). This 
method uses two different types of networks: one network is trained on face photographs 
and another network is trained on sketches. The two networks are combined into one net-work by using transfer learning. Their expe riments show that their method outperforms 
other state-of-the-art methods in terms of  accuracy and generalization capability. 
Shun Moriya and Chihiro Shibata [33] prop ose a novel transfer learning method for 
very deep CNNs for text classification. Our ma in contribution is a new evaluation method 
that compares the proposed transfer learning method with two existing methods, namely fine-tuning and feature handover. They also propose a new model ensemble approach to 
improve the performance of ou r models by using the best performing model from each 
ensemble member as an additional feature. Ou r experiments on five public datasets show 
that our approach outperforms previous me thods and gives competitive results when 
compared with other state-of-the-art methods. 
Similarly, Afzal et al. in [34] present the first investigation of how very deep Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNN) can be used to improve document image classification. 
They also study how advanced training strategies such as multi-network training and 
model compression techniques can be combined  with very deep CNNs to further improve 
performance. Their results show that very deep CNNs are able to outperform shallow 
networks, even when using a relatively small am ount of training data. They also find that 
multi-network training significantly improves  performance over single-network training, 
especially for very deep CNNs. Finally, they demonstrate that model compression tech-niques such as quantization and binarization  can be combined with very deep CNNs to 
achieve an additional 5% reduction in error rate with only a small loss in accuracy. How-
ever, they should highlight that their model achieves state-of-the-a rt performance in doc-
ument image classification. However, they do n’t provide any quantitative results to sup-
port this claim. They could easily add some pe rformance metrics (e.g., F1 score) on top of 
their results, and this would make the paper more convincing. The next five sections are 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Next Five Topics. 
4.7. Deep Residual Networks Accelerator on FPGA 
Figure 6. Next Five Topics.
4.7. Deep Residual Networks Accelerator on FPGA
A recent survey by ImageNet found that deep residual networks (ResNets) have
become the state-of-the-art in image recognition [ 35]. However, training and deploying
these models can be prohibitively expensive. FPGAs [ 36] offer a high degree of parallelism
and energy efﬁciency, making them an attractive platform for accelerating deep neural
networks. In this paper, we will survey the literature on FPGA-based acceleration of deep
residual networks. We will discuss the challenges involved in training and deploying these
models on FPGAs, and we will survey the current state-of-the-art in FPGA-based deep
learning accelerators. Worthy of note are the paper from Hui Liao et al., which presents a
systematic comparison between CPU-based and GPU-based training of ResNets.