Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 2 of 43
segmentation, and object classiﬁcation. They conclude their research study by pointing out
limitations in proposed deep residual learning. They noted that compared to traditional
methods, the proposed deep residual learning lacks computational efﬁciency when dealing
with larger data sets and thus cannot scale up quickly enough. However, the authors point
out that this problem can be solved by clustering input data into smaller subsets so only a
subset of the total data needs to be processed during each iteration. Similarly, Feng et al.
in [4] mention that deep residual learning, like any other unsupervised learning, requires a
large amount of unlabeled data. They have done some experiments with a small amount of
labeled data but they have not been able to get satisfactory results. The authors end their
work by mentioning possible solutions: introducing few labels (which may require human
intervention) or adding a fully supervised component. They also propose to create a dataset
that contains images with predeﬁned metadata and use the metadata as supervision.
The author in [ 5] ends their study by concluding that deep residual learning for image
recognition is a promising direction in image recognition. They note that deep residual
learning for image recognition is computationally efﬁcient, more accurate and suitable for
sparse data representations. They also emphasize the fact that deep residual learning for
image recognition does not depend on complicated handcrafted features or the topographic
organization of input data. However, the detailed workﬂow of our proposed survey is
shown in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 46 
 
tasks like face detection, segmentation, and object classification. They conclude their re-
search study by pointing out limitations in proposed deep residual learning. They noted 
that compared to traditional methods, the pr oposed deep residual learning lacks compu-
tational efficiency when dealing with larger data sets and thus cannot scale up quickly 
enough. However, the authors point out that this problem can be solved by clustering 
input data into smaller subsets so only a subs et of the total data needs to be processed 
during each iteration. Similarly, Feng et al. in [4] mention that deep residual learning, like 
any other unsupervised learning, requires a large amount of unlabeled data. They have 
done some experiments with a small amount of  labeled data but they have not been able 
to get satisfactory results. The authors end their work by mentioning possible solutions: 
introducing few labels (which may require human intervention) or adding a fully super-vised component. They also propose to create a dataset that contains images with prede-
fined metadata and use the metadata as supervision. 
The author in [5] ends their study by concluding that deep residual learning for im-
age recognition is a promising direction in im age recognition. They note that deep resid-
ual learning for image recognition is computatio nally efficient, more accurate and suitable 
for sparse data representations. They also em phasize the fact that d eep residual learning 
for image recognition does not depend on co mplicated handcrafted features or the topo-
graphic organization of input data. However, the detailed wo rkflow of our proposed sur-
vey is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Detailed Flowchart. 
They conclude their paper by proposing directions for future research which include 
looking into combining deep residual learning with neural architecture search, spatial do-main convolutions, constrained adversarial loss function and Gaussian-based generative 
models. In their study they also mention the need to find a solution to minimize the neg-
ative effect of data noise in deep residual learning. Mindy yang et al. in [6] proposes to 
create a dataset that contains images with predefined metadata and use the metadata as 
supervision. They show that deep residual learning for image recognition is computation-
ally expensive because it is sensitive to hi gh dimensional data and propose to combine 
deep residual learning with artificial intell igence techniques like reinforcement learning, 
and they discuss whether or not deep residual  learning will help advance machine learn-
ing in general. 
Figure 1. Detailed Flowchart.
They conclude their paper by proposing directions for future research which include
looking into combining deep residual learning with neural architecture search, spatial
domain convolutions, constrained adversarial loss function and Gaussian-based generative
models. In their study they also mention the need to ﬁnd a solution to minimize the negative
effect of data noise in deep residual learning. Mindy yang et al. in [ 6] proposes to create a
dataset that contains images with predeﬁned metadata and use the metadata as supervision.
They show that deep residual learning for image recognition is computationally expensive
because it is sensitive to high dimensional data and propose to combine deep residual