Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 6 of 43
computationally efﬁcient ones like stochastic pooling layers. The authors in proposed a
new residual network with deep residual learning for image recognition. This is a hybrid
model that incorporates both LSTM and CNNs. They show that their proposed architecture
of outperforms.
In order to reduce computation costs, the authors in [ 11] propose replacing some
fully connected layers with more computationally efﬁcient ones like stochastic pooling
layers. They propose a new residual network with deep residual learning for image
recognition, which is a hybrid model that incorporates both LSTM and CNNs. This pro-
posed architecture outperforms the ResNet-50 benchmark in terms of top-1 and top-5
error rates for the CIFAR10 dataset with comparable computational cost to the original
ResNet-50. Furthermore, there are still a number of open problems that require more re-
search, such as parallelizing for faster execution, using learned representations for transfer
learning and sparse networks for reducing memory consumption, and using unsuper-
vised feature extraction techniques to obtain meaningful high level descriptors and visual
representations. Another idea is to use unlabeled and semi-labeled images for learning
additional task-speciﬁc image descriptors and ﬁlters. Finally, deep residual learning for
image recognition should be investigated for sequences of more than three frames in video
and scene understanding.
Thus, the proposed architecture of deep residual learning for image recognition out-
performs the ResNet-50 benchmark in terms of top-one and top-ﬁve error rates for the
CIFAR10 dataset with comparable computational costs to the original ResNet-50. Future
work should include investigations of how deep residual learning for image recognition
might function with higher level applications such as scene understanding or video pro-
cessing. This can potentially provide a strong foundation for leveraging deep residual
learning for image recognition for future tasks such as human pose estimation. For the
purposes of large-scale learning, deep residual learning for image recognition may be able
to speed up supervised learning of heterogeneous datasets where the volumes of data
and computation power available are limited. On a smaller scale, deep residual learning
for image recognition may improve real-time responsiveness in autonomous vehicles and
better respond to dynamic environments that include objects that appear, disappear, or
change position.
There is potential with these models that is untapped due to many applications being
based off of humans annotating their own photographs with different objects and labels.
The development of detectors in machine systems will need human assistance to operate
effectively. These detectors need to be trained effectively in order for them to take the place
of human labor and assist industry [ 12] at greater levels. Developments have been proposed
in methods for vision including deep residual learning for image recognition, where a
model uses both neural networks and long short term memory recurrent neural networks
(LSTMs). These proposed architectures are necessary because traditionally neural networks
have had a very limited capability when it comes to sequential information. The capabilities
for current machines are mostly found through continuous streams or fast frames, but
most action happens over extended periods of time, which does not lend itself well for
traditional algorithms used in vision models. These methods need improvement so that
systems do not fall behind those humans who will continue to develop them beyond this
point. Reserves need to be planned for the future, and this requires investments in training
and developing computers that are equipped with sophisticated sensors. If a sufﬁcient
amount of investment is made in deep residual learning for image recognition, it could
solve the problem of autonomous machines that cannot identify features in an environment.
Human operators would then only input markers for certain features that would make
machine systems more intelligent. Machine-learning models could then quickly identify
objects and text from the map given to them by humans. Humans could maintain control
until the system becomes proﬁcient enough to support its users without supervision, but
with a continuous stream of feedback from the AI system. This feedback loop for machine
systems would help reﬁne the AI’s objectives and approach to speciﬁc problems, which