Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 15 of 43
they require during training, whether they require supervision or not during training and
what kind they require during testing (for instance label noise). Furthermore, new tasks are
needed to test the limitations of deep residual learning. As mentioned earlier, deep residual
networks have been successfully applied to image recognition tasks. However, little work
has been done in applying deep residual networks to natural language processing or object
detection tasks. Similarly, further work is needed in understanding how transferable the
learned weights are from task to task and if they require some sort of reconstruction process
after being applied to a new task.
Deep residual learning is a powerful tool for applications requiring high levels of
accuracy as well as robustness against changes in the distribution of inputs during training
or testing. Deep residual networks represent a compelling alternative for dealing with
visual recognition problems where datasets are limited or costly to collect.
4.11. Hybrid Deep Learning
Hybrid Deep Learning [ 54,55] is a proven method used to build the models. It can
overcome the limitations of both traditional deep learning and reinforcement learning.
This technique has been applied in complex real-world problems with impressive results.
Hybrid Deep Learning can be used for any kind of signal processing task and it is going to
be more important for new emerging applications such as self-driving vehicles or robotics.
In recent years, hybrid deep learning architectures [ 56] have been proposed to take
advantage of the strengths of both CNNs and RNNs. The most successful hybrid models are
based on a deep residual learning (ResNet) framework proposed by He et al. [ 1]. Similarly,
Deep Residual Learning was studied in Deep Residual Learning and [ 1] explored how
ResNets can improve the performance of traditional supervised neural networks when
combined with automatic feature engineering they investigated how ResNets can improve
the performance of traditional supervised neural networks when combined with automatic
feature engineering Author in found that they could learn low level features like contours,
edges, corners and blobs just as well if not better than humans. The authors of [ 57] also
explored practical challenges associated with applying deep resnets to computer vision
problems such as working around computational limitations. In their study they also
explored practical challenges associated with applying deep resnets to computer vision
problems such as working around computational limitations. The authors concluded by
discussing future directions, where they will investigate reinforcement learning on top of
residual nets. They noted the promise of combining deep memory networks with other
machine learning techniques such as dropout, autoencoders and generative adversarial
networks to produce a powerful new generation of models. The details of the next chapter
are shown in Figure 7.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 46 
 
 
Figure 7. Next Five Topics. 
4.12. Deep Learning  Architectures 
In recent years, deep learning has made tremendous progress in the field of image 
recognition. The main contribution of this paper is a comprehensive survey of deep resid-ual learning (ResNets), which is a state-of-the-art deep learning architecture for image 
recognition [58]. The author in [2] studied the effect of different depths of ResNets on the 
classification accuracy [59,60]. They found th at deeper networks are more accurate than 
shallower networks. However, they also found that there is a diminishing return in accu-
racy as the network depth increases. Beside s deepening ResNets, researchers have also 
investigated adding residual blocks to shallow models. The idea behind adding these 
blocks is to take advantage of the invariance  properties of convolutional neural networks 
by using small images to compensate for la rge changes in input size and shape. These 
blocks help to prevent overfitting and underf itting problems in models with few param-
eters and a large number of filters. A very si mple example includes replacing just one or 
two layers at the end of a shallow model wi th their corresponding ones from a deep 
model. One such extension is called SqueezeN et [61], which replaces only one layer with 
its corresponding layer from an entire deep  CNN inception module. A further extension 
comes from Google Brain called Checkerboard Net [62], which replaces all layers with 
their counterparts from an entire deep CNN inception module. Another type of extension 
comes from Microsoft Research, which consists of  a series of hybrid architectures: Stacked 
Connected Convolutional Networks, Transformer Networks, and Self-Attention Models. 
All three architectures propose combining residual units with feature extraction units. Stacked Connected Convolutional Networks stac k two types of networks on top of each 
other: (1) a set of regular deep networks where each level performs feature extraction; and 
(2) a single dense network containing up to 10 times fewer parameters than the previous 
level but still extracting features within each level. Similarly, Transformer Networks stack 
two types of models: (1) full-connected recurrent encoder-decoder pairs and (2) trans-former blocks that replace groups connecti ons between nodes while performing feature 
extraction. Lastly, Self-Attention Models stack two types of models: (1) Autoregressive 
Encoder Decoder Models; and (2) self-attention modules that extract features. Experi-
ments conducted show that the proposed arch itectures produce better results than those 
without stacking residuals with extra modules. There are, however, various drawbacks associated with these architectures. Firstly, the training process can be time consuming. 
Secondly, there can be some significant incr ease in computation re quirements since the 
same operations need to be performed repeat edly across different network layers. Finally, 
most of these proposals use computationall y expensive attention mechanisms which in-
crease both memory and computational requ irements. For example, memory usage for 
Stacked Connected Convolutional Networks goes up from mm
2 to mm3. Self-attention 
models’ computational cost per batch prediction goes up from O(1) to O(2). Attention 
Figure 7. Next Five Topics.