Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 29 of 43
implement certain layers on top of other layers as part of an input-to-output mapping
function. The downside is that it requires more memory and computation time than DRL
because we have to maintain all intermediate activations from one layer before feeding
them into another layer. In both approaches, recurrent connections are used to avoid the
vanishing gradients problem. Training is performed using stochastic gradient descent over
mini-batches of examples with weight decay.
8.2. ResNet Architecture
Deep residual learning is a neural network architecture that allows for very deep
networks, typically tens or hundreds of layers, to be trained. This is in contrast to the
traditional approach of training shallower networks with fewer layers. The beneﬁts of
deeper networks are well-known: they can learn features at increasingly higher levels of
abstraction, which leads to better performance on a variety of tasks. However, training very
deep networks has been difﬁcult in the past due to the vanishing gradient problem, where
the gradients of the error signal tend to become very small as they are propagated back
through the network. The ResNet architecture was designed to address this issue by using
skip connections between layers which allow the gradients to ﬂow more easily through the
network. Recently, ResNets have found success in tackling some of the most challenging
problems in computer vision, such as image recognition. Similarly, deep residual learning
for image recognition (DRL) has emerged as a powerful tool that helps to tackle many
practical challenges and opens up exciting new avenues for future research. DRL for image
recognition, similarly, provides two major advantages over other approaches: DRL does
not require separate preprocessing steps before the CNN starts learning, and it performs
surprisingly well without any architectural changes.
Although it was inspired by early attempts at training very deep networks in com-
puter vision, such as CaffeNet [ 87], DRL has since found success in tackling many practical
challenges and opened up exciting new avenues for future research. Perhaps most signiﬁ-
cantly, a simple extension of the standard DRL approach (called deep residual learning) has
successfully been applied to AlexNet [ 88], GoogLeNet [ 88], VGGNet [ 89], ResNeXt [ 90],
Xception [ 46], as well as other popular image recognition models. This idea has now been
used enough times to warrant a review; there are now two entire papers dedicated just to
reviewing its history. The original application of DRL in the context of deep convolutional
neural networks dates back to LeCun et al.’s 1998 paper Gradient-based learning that was
applied to document recognition. Here, LeCun et al. proposed applying ReLU activation
functions combined with max pooling within each layer rather than across layers. This
would lead to shallow but wide convolutional neural networks capable of compressing
multiple characters into one neuron for every letter inputted into the system. At that time,
according to He et al., state-of-the art systems were about 25% accurate. Similar results
were obtained when Drubach et al. (author in studied) performed a similar experiment
with AlexNet, achieving 94% accuracy with the same set of parameters. With the help of
DRL, this network was able to exceed 98% accuracy on ImageNet, which was previously
achieved by a variant of Wide Residual Networks (WRNs). This result is particularly
noteworthy because WRNs are often thought to be superior to DRL when it comes to
neural networks with large fully-connected layers. Some other examples of successful
implementations of DRL are shown below:
Similarly, deep residual learning for image recognition has recently been applied to
building Multimodal Retrieval Models. Deep residual learning for image recognition has
recently been applied to building Multimodal Retrieval Models. This novel technique
involves a model that utilizes both pixel-wise representations of images and corresponding
captions. These captions may be obtained in either a one-shot fashion or iteratively, in
a more laborious manner, with the ultimate goal of reducing the gap between manual
annotations provided by human experts and automated annotations. For example, take the
case of captioned photos. A common technique for creating these photographs involves
having somebody write the description they imagine will accompany the photo while the