Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 17 of 43
suggest future work to explore the aforementioned topics and make recommendations
on how best to use deep residual networks for speciﬁc tasks. They also propose research
directions in developing more powerful architectures based on deep residual networks,
which may solve the problems faced by existing methods. Furthermore, in order to better
utilise all the available resources, it is necessary to create an open-source software library
which supports parallel computing. Additionally, novel datasets should be developed
because current datasets only cover a limited number of object categories. When creating
these datasets, researchers should take into account not just the pixel information but also
the metadata. Furthermore, there needs to be a way to analyse data automatically without
human involvement so that it is scalable and accurate. Lastly, future work should focus
on studying what type of neural architecture would suit speciﬁc tasks such as semantic
segmentation and pose estimation.
The main limitation of deep residual networks is that they are computationally inefﬁ-
cient and can be easily fooled by adversarial examples. There have been attempts to address
these issues such as using a memory module before each layer, using data augmentation
techniques during training, and pre-training with a large dataset followed by ﬁne tuning
with a small dataset. As for the future of deep residual networks for image recognition, it
is hard to predict where they will go next. There have been studies on trying to combine
deep residual networks with generative adversarial networks which yield encouraging
results and hope for further developments in this area. A concern with these networks is
that they are mainly trained on supervised tasks and it is not yet clear if they can be trained
for reinforcement learning. Research should also look at the connections between deep
residual networks and recurrent networks with long short-term memory units, for instance,
in constructing deeper layers. Regarding the issue of efﬁciency, there have been signiﬁcant
advances such as combining ResNets with multi-level attention networks to increase the
computational efﬁciency. The result is a huge reduction in required parameters and thus
computation time. It remains to be seen how well these networks perform in comparison
to standard models.
4.14. Deep Residual Learning Persistent Homology Analysis
Despite its great success, deep learning has been criticized [ 64] for being a black box.
In this paper, we take a step towards understanding the inner workings of deep neural net-
works by performing a persistent homology analysis of the feature representations learned
by a state-of-the-art deep residual network. These ﬁndings provide new insights into how
convolutional and fully connected layers learn to extract increasingly abstract features from
raw input data. They also have important implications for training deep networks because
they suggest that in order to maximize performance, we should train them so as to push
them deeper. Moreover, our analysis gives rise to three new models for fast-forwarding
through a sequence of images at different depths: (1) forward prediction: computing a
feature representation at one depth predicting the next depth; (2) backward propagation:
computing the representation at one depth propagating backwards up through previ-
ous layers; and (3) hybrid forward/backward propagation: running both forward and
backward propagation steps simultaneously but treating each layer independently. Our
experimental results demonstrate that these models can signiﬁcantly outperform tradi-
tional backpropagation when applied to videos, suggesting that future work may focus on
developing efﬁcient methods for training video processing tasks such as image segmen-
tation and caption generation. The ﬁnal result in this paper will be a continuation of the
discussion found in Paper 2: A comprehensive survey on deep residual learning for image
recognition concludes with two models for fast-forwarding through a sequence of images
at different depths:
- Forward Prediction: computing a feature representation at one depth and predicting
the next depth
- Backward Propagation: computing the representation at one depth propagating
backwards up through previous layers.