Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 9 of 43
arithmetic coding may provide an improvement over Huffman coding due to its ability
to avoid rounding errors. However, it may be challenging for arithmetic coding-based
methods to achieve similar results as Huffman coding-based methods when encoding
high resolution images due to the large number of non-zero coefﬁcients present within
such images.
The authors in investigated whether human vision or machine vision algorithms could
outperform one another when identifying objects in natural images. They performed their
experiment using their own dataset of animal photographs they had manually annotated.
They used LBP Features and COSINE scale space representations in order to compute simi-
larities between pairs of images. Their experiments revealed that humans perform better
than machine vision algorithms in tasks involving object recognition, localization, segmen-
tation, etc., while machine vision performs better than humans in tasks involving detection
and pose estimation. Machine vision algorithms are also less computationally expensive.
The authors in [ 16] studied how semantic segmentation can be employed to aid appli-
cations in various industries including medicine, self-driving cars, and surveillance. They
concluded that computer vision models trained via unsupervised learning are capable of
producing more accurate results than models trained via supervised learning. Moreover,
it was discovered that training methods based on either small or large minibatches per-
formed better than methods based on medium sized minibatches. Finally, it was found that
unsupervised training techniques performed better than supervised ones when utilizing
noisy labels for data labeling purposes.
This study conﬁrms that machine vision models based on unsupervised learning can
perform just as well as those based on supervised learning, but have the added beneﬁt of
being quicker to train.
However, how semantic segmentation can be employed to aid applications in various
industries including medicine, self-driving cars, and surveillance. They concluded that
computer vision models trained via unsupervised learning are capable of producing more
accurate results than models trained via supervised learning. Moreover, it was discovered
that training methods based on either small or large minibatches performed better than
methods based on medium sized minibatches.
4.3. Deep Residual Learning Image Restoration
Image restoration [ 17] is the problem of removing a uniform blur from an image. It is
well-known that information-theoretic approaches to this problem, based on the concept
of a log-likelihood ratio operator, can be modelled well by deep neural networks (DNNs).
Recent work has shown that DNNs trained on maximising generalisation performance can
also be used to solve this task with remarkable effectiveness. This paper describes an exten-
sion of such an architecture; we call it Deep Residual Learning (DRL). DRL uses Riemannian
geometry to minimise the cost function and achieve an optimal sparse approximation of
the true posterior density.
The author in [ 18] studied the use of deep residual learning for image recognition.
They found that it can effectively remove noise and improve the performance of image
restoration models. In addition, they showed that deep residual learning can be used to
improve the accuracy of image classiﬁcation models. The authors also demonstrated that
deep residual learning can be used to improve the performance of object detection models.
Finally, they showed that deep residual learning can be used to improve the accuracy of
scene recognition models.
Similarly, the author in [ 19] showed that deep residual learning can be used to improve
the accuracy of image retrieval models. Similarly, the author in [ 20] showed that deep
residual learning can be used to improve the accuracy of video captioning models. The
author in pointed out that deep residual learning presents an excellent alternative to
traditional deep neural networks. Using deep-residual-learning may lead to improvements
on accuracy or speed of inference at run time without compromising other objectives such
as throughput or energy efﬁciency [ 21,22]. Similarly, they suggested that this method could