Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 23 of 43
5.5. Image Recognition System
In the past few years, deep learning has revolutionized the ﬁeld of image recognition.
One of the most successful and widely used methods is called Deep Residual Learning
(ResNet). In this blog post, we will survey the current state of the art in image recognition
using deep residual networks. We will also discuss some of the challenges that still remain.
The paper Image Recognition with Deep Residual Learning: A Survey by Animesh Garg et al.,
published on 12 April 2017 discusses these topics. It was able to show how powerful deep
residual networks are for image recognition.
The image recognition system uses DL to learn which patterns of pixels in an image
correspond to what it sees as objects, for example, a cat or a car. With DL, neural networks
are trained to ﬁnd certain features from input images such as edges or curves. These neural
networks can be seen as tools that let computers learn from their mistakes and continually
improve performance over time. For example, if the network misidentiﬁes something in an
image as a dog when it’s actually a cat, then at the next iteration the system can recognize
that mistake and try to avoid making it again.
The current leading method for image recognition systems is called Deep Residual
Learning. Some of its advantages include its ability to handle highly repetitive tasks like
image recognition systems because it does not rely on human supervision or labeling data
sets before training. Additionally, it is able to deal with noisy images because of its ability
to extract reliable information out of heavily corrupted images. Moreover, Deep Residual
Learning offers several ways to train new models from scratch or from old models without
retraining. Finally, its robustness against adversarial attacks makes it very useful for
applications like image recognition systems where malicious users may attempt to corrupt
images. Despite its many advantages, deep residual learning has shortcomings too. Most
notably, deep residual learning requires signiﬁcantly more computational power than other
machine learning techniques do and often takes longer to train models even though they
perform better on image recognition systems. Training these networks requires signiﬁcant
amounts of computational power, but there are indications that hardware advances will
soon make this less of a problem. As computing power increases and access to images
becomes easier, we can expect deep residual learning to play an increasingly important role
in the image recognition systems industry. Additionally, deep residual learning could be
the key to solving some of the fundamental problems image recognition systems face today.
For instance, it is possible that deep residual learning could help image recognition systems
identify faces and stop spooﬁng attacks. However, until further research has been done on
this topic, one cannot say for sure whether or not deep residual learning will have positive
effects on image recognition systems in the future. One thing is for sure, however. The work
presented in Image Recognition with Deep Residual Learning: A Survey marks the beginning of
a new era of image recognition systems. Deep residual learning should become an integral
part of image recognition systems in the future. However, one area where many experts
predict that Deep Residual Learning will not live up to its promises is training models
from scratch. This is because deep residual learning only relies on layers and does not
include pre-training steps like other neural networks. For instance, expert groups like
those who work at Google Brain have shown that retraining pre-trained models led to far
superior performance over training from scratch. Indeed, when they trained their Inception
model using a pre-trained CaffeNet Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) they achieved
more than 97% accuracy on the ImageNet test set, whereas without any pretraining their
best model managed less than 87%. Likewise, recent research has shown that without
any pretraining researchers could achieve almost 80% accuracy while doing supervised
transfer learning.
5.6. Image Recognition Method
The author in [ 79] studied the deep residual learning (ResNet) architecture for image
recognition. They found that the ResNet architecture outperforms previous image recogni-
tion models, including those that use much deeper architectures. Furthermore, they showed