Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 26 of 43
propagation through time (BPTT), extra care must be taken when designing these systems
to account for gradient noise that might occur. (4) Training still needs careful parameter
tuning—even with all these beneﬁts, there is still room for improvement by carefully se-
lecting appropriate values of hyperparameters during training. Finally, we would like to
mention two drawbacks of deep residual networks:
(1) More complex architecture. Although this isn’t necessarily a bad thing, it means
that it will take longer for beginners to understand how the system works. For example,
many other types of neural networks follow a standard three layer architecture consisting
of input layer!hidden layer!output layer. A deep residual network will consist of
several additional layers (e.g., input layer !convolutional or deconvolutional layer !
RELU/tanh or sigmoid activation function !pooling layer!fully connected layer).
The added complexity means that one will have to spend more time understanding how
a network is put together before they can start modifying it themselves; (2) It is not yet
applicable to all use cases. At the moment, deep residual networks are only useful for image
recognition. They cannot be used for speech recognition or text generation. As mentioned
earlier, there are many advantages associated with deep residual learning; however, it is
important to consider any tradeoffs before deciding whether this technique is suitable for a
particular application.
7. Current Research Trends in Deep Residual Networks
Deep residual networks (ResNets) have been shown to be very effective in image
recognition tasks. There has recently been a surge of interest in using deep residual net-
works for other computer vision tasks such as object detection and semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we survey the current state-of-the-art methods for deep residual learning in
image recognition. We will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each method and
provide insights into future research directions. All work presented in this paper is related
to image classiﬁcation, since our goal is to provide an overview of deep residual learning
techniques that are widely used for that task [83].
In order to provide insight into what constitutes recent progress in the ﬁeld, we
restrict ourselves only to contributions that were published after 2010 when AlexNet
was introduced.
We begin by discussing the recent phenomenon of model stacking, which is a key idea
underlying many recent advances in model performance on ImageNet classiﬁcation tasks.
Recent studies show promising results on neural machine translation [ 84] and speech
recognition tasks through representation compression with pre-trained language models or
visual representations from large datasets like ImageNet or COCO. One important question
raised by these studies is whether it is possible to generalize the successful paradigm of
supervised pre-training to semi-supervised or unsupervised training regimes where no
labeled data are available at all. A natural extension would be to use unlabeled data not
just for feature extraction but also as a source of supervision during training, in which
case active exploration of unlabeled data could enable more efﬁcient supervised training.
More concretely, if there are two modes corresponding to two different values of the
latent variable z2{0,1}, then one might want to explore both modes during training.
If the objective function being optimized is convex, then any locally optimal value of z
can serve as a local optimum. However, if the objective function is non-convex and/or
multimodal, then exploring multiple modes during training may lead to better performance
than exploiting any single mode because sampling trajectories close to the boundary
between different modes can bring the system closer to global optima. Similarly, deep
residual learning provides another instance of explicit supervision whereby inputs or labels
themselves are provided through auxiliary input channels called recurrent connections.
The implications of the recurrent connection design decision deserve further study in
combination with strategies like exploration mentioned above. A particularly important
contribution to the ﬁeld of deep residual learning comes from the ImageNet project, in
which researchers trained models on 1.2 million images in order to train an algorithm to