Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 10 of 43
be combined with variational methods to handle data sparsity and label noise. Similarly,
deep residual learning presents an excellent alternative to traditional deep neural networks.
Similarly, they also noted that using deep-residual-learning may lead to improvements in
accuracy or speed of inference at run time without compromising other objectives such as
throughput or energy efﬁciency.
4.4. Deep Residual Learning Sensing Ct Reconstruction
Deep Residual Discriminator (Deep Residual Learning Sensing Ct Reconstruction) [ 23,24]
is a deep learning model for helping radiologists classify and identify detections, which
are placed in the CT image [ 25]. The goal of Deep Residual Discriminator is to improve
radiologists’ workﬂow by reducing the time it takes to scan and produce reports, while
also improving detection efﬁcacy.
The author in [ 26] studied the problem of image recognition using deep residual
learning. They proposed a method that can be used to achieve high accuracy in image
recognition tasks. The proposed method is based on the idea of using deep residual learn-
ing to improve the accuracy of image recognition models. The authors showed that their
method can achieve better accuracy than the state-of-the-art methods on the ImageNet
dataset. They also analyzed and evaluated various modiﬁcations to the deep residual
network, and showed that it outperforms other approaches like dropout and batch normal-
ization. The authors noted that there are some limitations to the study. Another limitation
is that they only considered convolutional neural networks, which means that their con-
clusions may not extend to generative adversarial networks or recurrent neural networks.
Nevertheless, their results indicate the promise of deep residual learning as an effective
way to improve classiﬁcation accuracy. For example, when comparing the traditional
ReLU layer to ReLU + depthwise separable convolution layer for depth 16, the accuracy
improved [ 27]. When comparing a combination of all three layers ( ReLU + depthwise
separable convolution + kernel activation) versus ReLU alone at depths 16 and 32, then
the combined layer performed signiﬁcantly better. The results show that including deep
residual layers within a neural network has signiﬁcant beneﬁts on performance. However,
the use of many layers slows down computation speed. Future research should explore
ways to train large deep networks faster while still achieving good accuracy.
In conclusion, deep residual learning was shown to provide promising improvement
over standard architectures for image recognition. However, additional research needs to
be done before we can make ﬁrm conclusions about how much improvement it offers and
why this approach might work better than others currently available. A major limitation of
this research is that only one type of neural network architecture was investigated, meaning
that generalizations to other architectures need to be made cautiously. Also, little data
were given regarding potential drawbacks to using deep residual learning for training
deep networks such as increases in computational complexity or difﬁculty scaling up for
very large networks. Finally, it would have been helpful if the researchers had examined
whether speciﬁc optimization techniques were applied better with deep residual learning
or without it; unfortunately, no such comparison was made here.
4.5. Deep Residual Learning Hyperparameter Optimization
Deep Residual Learning Hyperparameter Optimization [ 28] is a method for optimizing
the hyperparameters of a Deep Residual Learning model. When optimizing the parameters
of a deep residual network for image recognition, there are many factors to consider. The
ﬁrst is the depth of the network. Deeper networks have more layers and can therefore learn
more complex features. Shallower networks, on the other hand, are faster to train and may
be more efﬁcient in terms of memory usage. Another important parameter is the width
of the network, which refers to the number of neurons in each layer. Wider networks can
learn more complex features, but are also more expensive to train. Finally, the learning
rate is an important parameter that controls how quickly the network learns from data. A
higher learning rate means that the network learns faster, but may also be more likely to