Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 3 of 43
learning with artiﬁcial intelligence techniques like reinforcement learning, and they discuss
whether or not deep residual learning will help advance machine learning in general.
The study also notes that deep residual learning is successful because it can take
advantage of large amounts of training data without requiring much hand engineering or
task-speciﬁc feature engineering. The author of [ 7] proposes to develop a new framework
which may be required when using deep residual learning. These tools are difﬁcult to
make assumptions about what they should do in terms of accuracy gains or performance
losses due to complexity. The author states that deep residuals provide more accurate
representations of object boundaries than traditional models and also allow for localization
without global context. The basic structure is shown in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 46 
 
The study also notes that deep residual lear ning is successful because it can take ad-
vantage of large amounts of training data without requiring much hand engineering or 
task-specific feature engineering. The author of [7] proposes to develop a new framework which may be required when using deep resi dual learning. These tools are difficult to 
make assumptions about what they should do in terms of accuracy gains or performance 
losses due to complexity. The author states that deep residuals provide more accurate 
representations of object boundaries than traditional models and also allow for localiza-
tion without global context. The basic structure is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Basic Structure of DRN.  
Zhu in [8] mentions how standard convolutional neural networks have limited the 
amount of parameters when compared to st andard feedforward neural networks, which 
could explain why these types of models outper form them on certain tasks such as detec-
tion, localization, segmentation, tracking, and classification. The author mentions how dif-
ficult it would be to design different objectiv e functions, with one pe r desired application. 
They propose an improved form of standard deep residual learning by combining batches 
into a single input batch and taking an average gradient across all images. The idea behind 
this is the hope that all datasets are similar enough so that averaging their gradients im-
proves the gradient quality. 
The result of implementing these change s was improved computational efficiency, 
while maintaining good accuracy levels which might make this model applicable to real 
world applications. The proposed improvemen ts were shown to improve deep residual 
learning’s ability to work well with large amounts of high dimensional data and thus 
make it useful for many applications. It woul d be interesting to see if these improvements 
in computing power can be applied to other fi elds besides image recognition. The author 
then goes on to talk about future steps and argues that deep residual learning’s potential 
beyond image recognition needs to be explored. 
The author talks about how deep residual learning does better than its counterparts 
at some tasks such as detecting objects, lo calizing objects and segmenting images. They 
conclude that it would be worth exploring ways to decrease computation time through 
cost reductions at early stages in the training  process or by finding some way of leveraging 
shared computation across processes. The author  finally notes that deep residual learning 
has been quite successful becaus e it is able to take advantage of large amounts of data 
without requiring much engineering time. Howe ver, the most searches across the world 
is shown in Figure 3. China is the country in this category. 
Figure 2. Basic Structure of DRN.
Zhu in [ 8] mentions how standard convolutional neural networks have limited the
amount of parameters when compared to standard feedforward neural networks, which
could explain why these types of models outperform them on certain tasks such as detection,
localization, segmentation, tracking, and classiﬁcation. The author mentions how difﬁcult
it would be to design different objective functions, with one per desired application. They
propose an improved form of standard deep residual learning by combining batches into a
single input batch and taking an average gradient across all images. The idea behind this is
the hope that all datasets are similar enough so that averaging their gradients improves the
gradient quality.
The result of implementing these changes was improved computational efﬁciency,
while maintaining good accuracy levels which might make this model applicable to real
world applications. The proposed improvements were shown to improve deep residual
learning’s ability to work well with large amounts of high dimensional data and thus make
it useful for many applications. It would be interesting to see if these improvements in
computing power can be applied to other ﬁelds besides image recognition. The author
then goes on to talk about future steps and argues that deep residual learning’s potential
beyond image recognition needs to be explored.
The author talks about how deep residual learning does better than its counterparts
at some tasks such as detecting objects, localizing objects and segmenting images. They
conclude that it would be worth exploring ways to decrease computation time through
cost reductions at early stages in the training process or by ﬁnding some way of leveraging
shared computation across processes. The author ﬁnally notes that deep residual learning
has been quite successful because it is able to take advantage of large amounts of data
without requiring much engineering time. However, the most searches across the world is
shown in Figure 3. China is the country in this category.