Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8972 7 of 43
in turn will allow for reﬁned solutions for any objective. Machines can always become
smarter than humans in some aspect of intelligence, but this shouldn’t impede our ability
to teach them what we know so they may learn faster than we ever could alone.
3. What Is Image Recognition?
Image recognition is a ﬁeld of computer vision that deals with the identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of objects in digital images. It is a subset of machine learning, which is a
branch of artiﬁcial intelligence that deals with the design and development of algorithms
that can learn from and make predictions on data. When you take a picture, it could be an
image containing any number of items: dogs, cars, people, etc. There are countless other
things in the world besides these. The goal of image recognition is to assign categories to
each one; so that when you upload an image to your social media feed or search Google
Images you will get back information about what is in it and ﬁnd out where else you might
ﬁnd them. For instance, if you were looking at this photo of someone holding their dog,
our application would recognize that there is a person in the photo and show their name as
well as the name of their pet.
Image recognition is a problem within computer vision which refers to automatically
detecting and understanding a wide range of objects in images. Computer vision can
be seen as an artiﬁcial version of human sight or photography. There are several steps
involved in image recognition. The ﬁrst step is usually to convert an image into numbers
that computers understand. An image contains hundreds of thousands (if not millions) of
colors that are made up of red, green and blue (RGB) [ 13]. These colors are turned into
data points which form vectors what we call images. A vector has three different values:
one for each color channel. To reduce the size of the resulting vector and represent just a
few shades of a particular color instead, methods use either linear classiﬁers or non-linear
classiﬁers to create a predictive model that is able to classify new inputs.
Currently, most deep neural networks include residual connections that help propagate
local gradients through many layers of nonlinear hidden units without exploding gradients.
The future of deep residual learning is promising and worthy of further exploration. Deep
residual learning is a form of reinforcement learning that builds on the success of residual
networks. Deep residual networks have shown great potential in a variety of settings
and have been used to solve image recognition tasks such as classiﬁcation and semantic
segmentation with high levels of accuracy.
The author in 2021 [ 14] concludes that deep residual learning offers signiﬁcant im-
provements over traditional techniques such as VGG and ResNet on image recognition
tasks, which they have explored with CNNs and RNNs. They note that future work should
include investigating the effects of changing some parameters in the networks, exploring
how deep residual networks adapt to sequential data, accounting for full system quality
metrics, and furthering exploration into this topic.
In their paper, they detail multiple architectures including a novel global alignment-
based network architecture combined with region proposal generation using two addi-
tional channels. They propose a global alignment approach between those two generators
along with more structure to determine whether a given pixel was in motion or not. They
determined that these global constraints made it easier for neural network methods to
provide accurate proposals on image recognition tasks, allowing for higher accuracy and
computational savings when compared against individual models trained without these
constraints. The proposed methodology provides a high level of accuracy while being
more computationally efﬁcient than previous approaches. In the proposed frameworks, we
present and analyze the main performance metrics for classiﬁcation and semantic segmen-
tation. The authors go on to describe their proposed methodologies in-depth, noting that all
experimental datasets were gathered from public sources. Image recognition is a problem
within computer vision, which refers to automatically detecting and understanding a wide
range of objects in images.