2 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
an overview of the approaches for structure learning of graphical models including Bayesian
networks.
The R(RCore Team 2022) packages pcalg(Kalisch, Mächler, Colombo, Maathuis, and
Bühlmann 2012), bnlearn(Scutari 2010), bnstruct (Franzin, Sambo, and Camillo 2017) and
theTETRAD toolbox (Ramsey, Zhang, Glymour, Romero, Huang, and Ebert-Uphoff 2018)
basedin Java(Gosling, Joy, Steele, andBracha2000)implement multipleapproachestostruc-
ture learning, including both constraint-based and search-and-score methods. Constraint-
based methods use conditional independence tests to learn the edges of the graph. Search-
and-score methods rely on an efficient search strategy in the space of DAGs and a score
function to find the graph which best explains the data. Hybrid methods, such as max-min
hill climbing (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006), use a combination of both approaches
to learn the optimal graph. A comparison of accuracy and efficiency of different methods for
structure learning of Bayesian networks can be found in Scutari, Graafland, and Gutiérrez
(2019). Despite a wide variety of available tools, most of them aim to find one best solution.
However, especially when the number of observations is modest, relying on one best graph
can be inadequate because many graphs may explain the data similarly well (Friedman and
Koller 2003). Bayesian methods can help to address this issue. Posterior sampling, in par-
ticular, enables Bayesian model averaging and allows us to adequately account for modeling
uncertainty when the number of observations is finite. However, only a few tools exist for
Bayesian structure learning, probably because Bayesian approaches are computationally de-
manding and unfeasible in large domains. The Rpackage mcmcabn (Kratzer and Furrer 2019)
implements a structure MCMC algorithm for sampling DAGs from their posterior distribu-
tion given the data. Structure MCMC is only suitable for domains with a limited number
of nodes. The Rpackage dealimplements Bayesian parameter learning, but for structure
learning, it uses a greedy search with random restarts (Bøttcher and Dethlefsen 2003). The
Matlab/C/Java (The MathWorks, Inc. 2011) package BDagl(Eaton and Murphy 2007) im-
plements an order MCMC scheme (Friedman and Koller 2003) without any restrictions on
the search space, so that it is only feasible for small networks and does not scale well beyond
20 nodes.
Here, we describe the Rpackage BiDAG, an implementation of various MCMC schemes,
whichovercomestheissuespreviouslyrestrictingBayesianmethodstosmalldomains. BiDAG
implementsorder(FriedmanandKoller2003)andpartition(KuipersandMoffa2016)MCMC
schemes. These scales to networks with hundreds of nodes when combined with the hybrid
approach of Kuipers, Suter, and Moffa (2022). Both order and partition MCMC schemes
can sample from the posterior and find a MAP DAG, and both reach convergence much
faster than the structure MCMC approach. Simulation studies have shown that the iterative
order MCMC scheme (Kuipers et al.2022) displays better accuracy to discover the ground
truth DAG compared to other well-established methods such as the PC algorithm (Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2000) or greedy equivalent search (GES) (Chickering 1996).
TheBiDAGsoftware supports both discrete and continuous data types, and the methods also
apply to weighted data as required, for example, in mixture models (Kuipers et al.2018b).
Further, all the implemented MCMC schemes handle structure learning and sampling of first-
order dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs). BiDAGis available from the Comprehensive R
Archive Network (CRAN) at https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=BiDAG .
BiDAGalso imports some methods from other packages. In the first step of a hybrid ap-
proach, it uses by default the constraint-based PC algorithm from pcalgto define a search