Journal of Statistical Software 9
corresponding to each of the classes were used for sampling and learning of DAGs in the
previous versions of the package ( <2.0.6) instead of learnBN andsampleBN .
The functions learnBN andsampleBN share mostly similar syntax. We will describe the main
parameters of the function sampleBN :
sampleBN(scorepar, algorithm = c("order", "orderIter", "partition"),
chainout = TRUE, scoreout = FALSE, alpha = 0.05, moveprobs = NULL,
iterations = NULL, stepsave = NULL, gamma = 1, verbose = FALSE,
compress = TRUE, startspace = NULL, blacklist = NULL, scoretable = NULL,
startpoint = NULL, plus1 = TRUE, cpdag = FALSE, hardlimit = 12,
iterpar = list(posterior = 0.5, softlimit = 9, mergetype = "skeleton",
accum = FALSE, plus1it = NULL, addspace = NULL, alphainit = NULL))
and point out important differences with learnBN. All parameters, except scorepar and
algorithm , are either optional or have default values. However, the MCMC schemes are very
flexible, and the parameters should be consistent with the objectives and constraints of a
particular structure learning problem. Parameters fall into four categories:
•parameters defining the search space: startspace ,scoretable ,cpdag,plus1;
•parameters of the Markov chain: iterations ,stepsave ,moveprobs ;
•parameters to include prior information: blacklist ,startorder ;
•parameters defining objects included in the output: chainout ,scoreout
•iterpar is a list containing additional parameters if the iterative MCMC scheme is
chosen ( algorithm = "orderIter" )
The number of MCMC iterations defined by the parameter iterations should be large
enough for the MCMC chain to converge, while still controlling the runtime. The num-
ber of MCMC iterations required for convergence cannot be calculated analytically. Heuris-
tics (Kuipers and Moffa 2016) and simulation studies (Kuipers et al.2022) suggest that we
needO(n2logn)iterations to reach convergence or discover a maximum DAG. Motivated by
this finding, in BiDAG, we set the default value of iterations to6n2lognfor order MCMC,
20n2lognfor partition MCMC and 3.5n2lognfor iterative MCMC. The decreased default
number of iterations for iterative MCMC is motivated by the fact that with each expan-
sion of the search space, a new MCMC chain is constructed. By algorithm definition (see
Algorithm 1), two last chains are constructed in the same search space, hence the effective
number of MCMC iterations is doubled compared to standard order MCMC.
To avoid excessively long runtimes, the algorithm does not sample DAGs at each MCMC
iterationbutonceevery stepsave steps. Theideaof stepsave isthatthenumberofiterations
neededfortheMCMCchaintoconvergeislargeandcanbetensofthousandsorevenmillions,
while the required number of DAGs sampled from the posterior is usually much smaller.
Sampling DAGs from the orders after each lsteps significantly reduces the runtime without
having a negative effect on convergence. By default, we define stepsave in such a way that
the algorithm samples 1001DAGs. This procedure is also known as thinning and results
in reduced autocorrelation between the resulting samples. Less correlated samples provide