8 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
3.1. Constructing the score object
All functions for structure learning require an object of class ‘ scoreparameters ’, which stores
the data and other quantities needed to score Bayesian networks. We can construct an object
of class ‘ scoreparameters ’ using the function
scoreparameters(scoretype = c("bge", "bde", "bdecat", "usr"), data,
bgepar = list(am = 1, aw = NULL, edgepf = 1),
bdepar = list(chi = 0.5, edgepf = 2),
bdecatpar = list(chi = 0.5, edgepf = 2),
dbnpar = list(samestruct = TRUE, slices = 2, b = 0),
usrpar = list(pctesttype = c("bge", "bde", "bdecat")),
mixedpar = list(nbin = 0), DBN = FALSE, weightvector = NULL,
bgnodes = NULL, edgepmat = NULL, nodeslabels = NULL)
The datashould be in the form of a data.frame or a matrixwithNrows andncolumns,
wherenis the number of variables in the Bayesian network and Nthe number of observations.
The parameter scoretype defines which score function is used: bdefor binary data, bdecat
for categorical data, bgefor continuous data and usrfor a user-defined score. An optional
parameter weightvector defines the weight of each observation. The need for weighted data
mayarise, forexample, insurveyanalysis(Kuipers, Moffa, Kuipers, Freeman, andBebbington
2018a) and Bayesian network-based clustering (Kuipers et al.2018b).
There are several ways to include prior information in structure learning. The parameter
bgnodes lists root nodes (those who can have children but no parents). For example, we may
expect that the gender of a participant in a survey data can have an effect on the answers,
but not the opposite. Through the parameter edgepmat we can define a graphical prior
that penalizes specific edges with individual penalization factors: we do not exclude them
completely but simply reduce their chance to be sampled. Excluding the edges from the
search space is also possible via the parameter blacklist of the structure learning functions,
which we will discuss in Section 3.2. For penalizing each additional edge in the parent set and
favoring sampling of sparse DAGs, the element edgepfof the corresponding score parameter
can be used.
3.2. Structure learning and sampling
The functions learnBN andsampleBN implement the described MCMC schemes for learning
and sampling of Bayesian networks. The function sampleBN implements order, partition and
iterative order MCMC schemes for sampling of DAGs from the posterior distribution. The
function learnBN implements order and iterative order MCMC schemes for finding a MAP
DAG. In sampleBN the order score is calculated according to Equation 1, while in learnBN it
is calculated using Equation 3. At each MCMC step, learnBN returns the maximally scoring
DAG from the order, and sampleBN samples DAGs from the orders or partitions according
to their scores.
Functions learnBN andsampleBN return the objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’
or‘iterativeMCMC ’dependingonthevalueoftheparameter algorithm withavailableoptions
being "order","partition" and"orderIter" (the corresponding algorithms were described
in Sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.4). The functions orderMCMC ,partitionMCMC anditerativeMCMC