4 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
the posterior distribution given the data D. Rather than examining the highest scoring DAG,
we can select the model that consists only of edges whose posterior probabilities are higher
than a desired threshold. Although not guaranteed to give a DAG, simulation studies show a
reduction in the number of false-positive edges with this approach compared to choosing one
maximally scoring model (Kuipers et al.2022), while hardly ever resulting in directed cycles.
2.1. Order MCMC
The rationale behind MCMC schemes is to construct a Markov chain Msuch that its sta-
tionary distribution equals the posterior distribution P(G|D)we would like to sample from.
One of the schemes implemented in BiDAGis order MCMC, which does not operate directly
on the space of DAGs but on the smaller space of orders. The posterior landscape is smoother
in the space of orders than in the space of DAGs since the likelihood of each order is a sum
over multiple DAGs (Friedman and Koller 2003). Consequently order MCMC can achieve
faster convergence with respect to structure MCMC (Friedman and Koller 2003).
A permutation (i1,i2,...,i n)of thennodes of a DAG defines a linear order i1≺i2≺···≺in.
A DAGGis compatible with an order ≺ifi≺jwheneverjis a parent of iinG(Kuipers et al.
2022). We denote with Γ≺the set of all DAGs compatible with ≺. Each order is assigned a
score that equals the sum of the scores of all DAGs compatible with this order,
R(≺|D) =/summationdisplay
G∈Γ≺P(G|D)∝/summationdisplay
G∈Γ≺n/productdisplay
i=1S(Xi,Pai|D).
As discussed in Friedman and Koller (2003) we can exchange the product and sum and get
the order score by summing over all parent sets compatible with the order instead of summing
over all possible DAGs. Similarly to DAGs we can formulate the compatibility requirement
for parent sets. A parent set Paiof a nodeiis compatible with an order ≺ifi≺jfor all
parentsj∈Pai. For each node i, we denote the set of all parent sets compatible with ≺by
U≺,i. Then
R(≺|D)∝n/productdisplay
i=1/summationdisplay
Pai∈U≺,iS(Xi,Pai|D). (1)
To construct a Markov chain in the space of orders we use the following moves from an order
≺to a new order≺′:
•local move: swapping adjacent nodes in ≺;
•global move: swapping two random nodes in ≺;
•node relocation: in this move we place a single node ikin each possible position
(1,2,...,n )of the current order (i1,i2,...,i n), while keeping the order of the other
nodes in≺fixed. Allnorders corresponding to all possible positions of the node ikin
the order are scored according to Equation 1 and the new order ≺′is sampled according
to these scores.
The Metropolis-Hastings acceptance probability for the first two moves is
ρ= min/braceleftigg
1,R(≺′|D)
R(≺|D)/bracerightigg
.