Journal of Statistical Software 13
3.5. Model comparison
The function DAGscore computes the score of a single DAG. When the goal is MAP discovery,
we can use this function to compare structures estimated by different algorithms. We can
also compare scores of the estimated structures to the score of the ground truth DAG when
the latter is known.
To compare the performance of structure learning algorithms it is useful to assess how close
the estimated structure is to the ground truth DAG on the basis of a certain distance measure.
The function compareDAGs allows several measures: the number of true-positive edges (TP),
the number of false-positive edges (FP), the number of false-negative edges (FN), the struc-
tural Hamming distance (SHD) and others; see ?compareDAGs for a detailed list of measures
and formulas. All measures apart from SHD refer to differences in the skeletons of two DAGs,
i.e., the directions of the edges are disregarded. SHD equals the sum of all types of mistakes:
false negatives, false positives, and edges with erroneous directions. The functions plotdiffs ,
plotdiffsDBN andplot2in1 can be used to visualize the differences and similarities between
two graphs.
4. Structure learning of dynamic Bayesian networks
A dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) is a graphical model that encodes temporal relationships
between random variables in X. A DBN defines a joint probability distribution over Xt=
(Xt
1,...,Xt
n)for all discrete time points t= 1,...,T. The random variable Xt
idescribes
featureiat time point t. InBiDAG, we consider first-order homogeneous DBNs, where the
conditional probability distributions P(Xt|Xt−1)are assumed to be the same for all time
pointst. In a first-order DBNs, variables in time slice tcan only depend on other variables
in the same time slice or on variables in the previous time slice t−1. The structure of a
first-order homogeneous DBN Gis fully specified by the initial structure G0and the transition
structureG→.G0represents the structure of the first slice, and G→represents the structure
for transitioning between any pair of consecutive time slices. Specifically, G→includes intra-
slice edges, i.e., edges between the nodes within the same time slice and inter-slice edges,
i.e., edges from the nodes in a previous time slice to the current time slice. Intra-slice edges
are also called instantaneous or contemporaneous to characterize the time interval in which
interactions between the corresponding variables occur. Similarly, inter-slice edges are also
called time-delayed or temporal. The unfolded DBN structure Gshown in Figure 1 can be
more compactly represented as the two structures G0andG→shown in Figure 2.
BiDAGcan also be used for learning DBNs from data. When we initialize the score object
with the function scoreparameters we set the parameter DBNtoTRUE(the default is FALSE).
The dataobject must adhere to a special DBN format to perform structure learning correctly.
The number of columns must equal the number of variables in all time slices b+n·T, where
bis the number of static variables, nthe number of dynamic variables in one time slice and T
the number of time points. All bstatic variables, if present, have to be in the first bcolumns
of the dataandbshould be specified via the parameter dbnpar, containing a list of variables
specific to DBNs. We assume that static variables are present in every time slice, but since
they do not change over time we need to store their values only once. The next n·Tcolumns
should store the observations of the dynamic variables over all time slices. They need to be
ordered in such a way that for each group of nvariables, the ithcolumn of group tcontains
the observations of the variable Xt
i.