Journal of Statistical Software 19
0200 400 600 800 1000−17000 −16500 −16000 −15500DAG logscores
iterationlogscore
200 400 600 800 1000−15400 −15360 −15320excluding burn−in
iterationlogscore
Figure 5: Trace plot of DAGs sampled by the order MCMC scheme. The sampling is per-
formed on a search space that was previously optimized by iterative MCMC.
the trace plots of scores after excluding the burn-in period. If we choose the burn-in period
adequately, the scores on the right will stay in a narrow stable range. To modify the default
burn-in period of 20% we can set the parameter burninto another value.
To demonstrate a more rigorous convergence diagnostic, we need to run MCMC two (or more)
times for the same data but with different starting points. By default, the starting point of
each run is random unless the parameter startorder is set to a specific value.
We proceed with computing posterior probabilities of edges based on each of the two chains
with the function edgepand visualize the results with the function plotpcor , Figure 6.
R> orderfit2 <- sampleBN(score100, algorithm = "order",
+ scoretable = iterSpace)
R> epd <- lapply(list(orderfit, orderfit2), edgep, pdag = TRUE)
R> plotpcor(epd, xlab = "run 1", ylab = "run 2")
The concordance plot in Figure 6a does not indicate any convergence issues. All points are
close to diagonal, meaning that posterior probabilities of single edges based on two samples
of DAGs produced by order MCMC are close to each other.
We repeat the same procedure for a pair of runs of partition MCMC. The concordance plot
in Figure 6b indicates convergence issues. Several edges have a high posterior probability
in one run and low in the other. When the concordance plot looks concerning, increasing
the number of iterations and repeating sampling is recommended. However, even with
the default number of iterations, partition sampling takes longer than order sampling, and
any further increase in runtime might be unwanted. It is important to be aware of the
convergence and complexity properties of both approaches in order to choose the right trade-
off between runtime and prior over structures. As mentioned in Section 2.2, partition MCMC
was designed in order to impose a uniform prior over structures. However, this feature comes
at the cost of slower convergence and longer runtimes. In this example, we proceed with the
sample obtained by the order MCMC scheme for model selection. Section 6 will demonstrate
an example using real data, where the convergence diagnostics of the partition MCMC sample
does not indicate any issues.