Journal of Statistical Software 27
7. Runtime
ThenumberofMCMCiterationsusedintheorderMCMCschemebydefaultis 6n2logn, fora
network with nnodes. Each MCMC iteration requires the computation of the score R(≺′|D)
of at least one proposed order. When implemented naively, the complexity of scoring an order
is exponential, O(nK+1), whereKis the maximum number of parents allowed in the scheme.
This brings the total chain complexity to O(nKn2logn). For efficient implementation, we
use the approach and computational optimizations described by Kuipers et al.(2022) and
pre-compute the quantities needed to score an order at each iteration of the MCMC scheme.
We refer to this step further as pre-computing the score tables. This reduces the complexity
of the chain by a factor of nKtoO(n2logn)(Kuipers et al.2022). Of course, the complexity
of computing the score tables remains exponential, but now it is independent of the number
of MCMC iterations as it has to be done only once. In addition, using the search space
Hinstead of restricting the number of parents to a hard limit Kreduces the complexity of
computing the score tables to O(K32K)for order MCMC. In H+the complexity grows by a
factor ofntoO(nK32K)for order MCMC and to O(nK23K)for partition MCMC.
When the score tables are pre-computed, the complexity of the MCMC scheme is polynomial
in the size of the number of nodes of the network, n, such that the algorithm is applicable to
large networks with hundreds of nodes. The computation of the score tables is exponential in
themaximalparentsetsize K, soKimposesafeasibilitylimitontheimplementedalgorithms.
While no hard limit for Kis required in BiDAG, for largeK, the score table computations
can become prohibitive.
Figure 13 shows how much time is needed to compute the score tables for a node with Kpar-
0255075100
5 10 15 20
Ktime (sec)scheme
order MCMC, H
order MCMC, H+
partition MCMC, H+
Figure 13: Time needed to compute a score table for a node with Kparents for a network
withn= 100nodes.