18 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
MCMC (−15195.67)is higher than the score of the ground truth structure (−15239.79),
and much higher than the score of a MAP graph found in the core PC-defined search
space (−17952.42). Outside of simulation studies, DAG score is the most used criterion that
informs model selection and iterative MCMC has shown great performance in maximizing the
score (Kuipers et al.2022).
Since we know the ground truth DAG, we can use the function itercomp to assess how close
the estimated MAP structures are to the true DAG with each expansion of the search space:
R> it100 <- itercomp(iterativefit, gsimmat)
R> plot(it100, vars = c("score", "TPR"), showit = 1:6)
R> plot(it100, vars = c("FP", "SHD"), col = 2, showit = 1:6)
As visualized in Figure 4a, the results of this comparison show that the TPR grows as the
score increases with each search space expansion and is very close to 1 in the last iteration.
However, FP grows as well, and thus, the improvement of SHD is not as impressive as of
TPR (Figure 4b).
Simulation studies help us by guiding what we can expect from applying a particular method
in a specific simulation setting, e.g., low sample size. In our example, using the PC-defined
search space results in a low TPR. While iterative MCMC helps with the TPR and the DAG
score, it does not necessarily result in the best structure fit, as previously mentioned, due to
a possible increase in false positives. In the next section, we will describe how to use BiDAG
to obtain consensus graphs that help mitigate this problem.
5.2. Sampling graphs from posterior distribution
So far, we focused on finding one maximally scoring DAG. For sampling from the poste-
rior distribution, we can use the function sampleBN . In addition to two algorithms available
for MAP discovery, sampleBN suggests the option algorithm = "partition" implementing
partition MCMC.
For sampling, it is important that the search space includes as many true positives as possi-
ble. The iterative MCMC scheme has been shown to optimize the search space in multiple
simulation settings successfully (Kuipers et al.2022). Therefore, we can pass the search
space optimized in Section 5.1 to the sampling function via the parameters startspace or
scoretable . The parameter startspace allows passing an arbitrary adjacency matrix. In
contrast, scoretable requires an object of class ‘ scorespace ’ which in addition to the adja-
cency matrix includes the score tables described in Section 2 and hence decreases the runtime.
R> iterSpace <- getSpace(iterativefit)
R> orderfit <- sampleBN(score100, algorithm = "order",
+ scoretable = iterSpace)
R> plot(orderfit)
For MCMC sampling schemes, it is important to check if the chain has converged, and we
can look at diagnostic plots, which may highlight lack of convergence. The trace plot in
Figure 5 shows the scores of all sampled DAGs. When a random order is used as a starting
point, typically, the scores increase sharply in the beginning, reflecting the burn-in period of
the chain. A sharp increase is visible on the left subgraph, while the right subgraph shows