12 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
3.4. Diagnostic plots
The convergence of the MCMC schemes is essential both for sampling from the posterior
distribution as well as for MAP discovery. It is generally impossible to prove that the Markov
chain has converged. However, diagnostic plots may help analyzing convergence and spotting
cases when convergence was not reached. Trace plots are the basic tool for convergence
diagnostics. For objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’ and ‘ iterativeMCMC ’, the
method plotis available, which plots the trace of log scores of sampled DAGs.
To plot the changes in posterior probabilities of all single edges with the addition of new
graphs from the sample according to Equation 2 we can use the function
plotpedges(MCMCtrace, cutoff = 0.2, pdag = FALSE, onlyedges = NULL,
highlight = NULL, ...)
Large fluctuations of posterior probabilities are possible at the beginning, but while approach-
ing convergence posterior probabilities should also reach stable levels.
Convergence diagnostic plots based on a single chain may be misleading. For a better un-
derstanding of convergence we can examine jointly several independent MCMC runs with
random starting points. If all chains converge, the DAGs in each chain should represent the
posterior distribution in a similar way. Posterior probabilities of single edges calculated on
the basis of each sample should then be close to each other. If some chains do not converge,
we are likely to see significant differences between posterior probabilities of single edges. We
can plot the concordance between pairs of MCMC runs using the function
plotpcor(pmat, highlight = 0.3, printedges = FALSE, cut = 0.05, ...)
where the parameter pmatis a list of matrices containing posterior probabilities of single
edges; such a list can be created by applying the function edgepto a list of objects of class
‘orderMCMC ’ or ‘ partitionMCMC ’. We can also inspect the edges whose posterior probabilities
differ by more than highlight in the first two matrices by setting printedges to TRUE.
The functions bidag2coda andbidag2codalist transform the objects of classes ‘ orderMCMC ’
and ‘ partitionMCMC ’ (or a list of such objects) into objects of classes ‘ mcmc’ and ‘ mcmc.list ’
from the R-package coda(Plummer, Best, Cowles, and Vines 2006). The package coda
contains standard tools for convergence diagnostics of MCMC chains of continuous or cate-
gorical variables. However, samples of DAGs usually cannot be analyzed by standard conver-
gence diagnostic tools. For this reason, the MCMC objects constructed by bidag2coda and
bidag2codalist contain the traces of DAG scores from a single or multiple MCMC chains
that can be visualized in one plot for mixing diagnostics using codafunctions traceplot and
densplot . When the parameter edgesis set to TRUE, instead of score traces, these func-
tions compute the traces of posterior probabilities of single edges, that are continuous and
can be used to perform convergence diagnostics based on the potential scale reduction factor
(PRSF) that compares within- and between-chain means and variances (Gelman and Rubin
1992; Goudie and Mukherjee 2016). The function gelman.diag from the package codacan be
used to compute PRSF. However, as noted by Goudie and Mukherjee (2016) this diagnostics
failed to produce reliable results for DAGs. The most common convergence diagnostics of
MCMC schemes for DAGs is implemented in the BiDAGfunction plotpcor , hence it is the
recommended option.