Journal of Statistical Software 5
The last move is always accepted, but it can return the current order.
Order MCMC produces a sample of orders. Obtaining a sample of graphs from the posterior
distribution requires an additional step of sampling DAGs from these orders according to their
scores. Due to score decomposability we can do this on a per-node basis: We sample a parent
set for each node from the set of parents compatible with the order, independently of other
nodes. The exact functional form of score terms in Equation 1 assigned to each parent set
depends on the model assumptions, namely parameter and graphical priors. The parameter
prior can be chosen between normal-Wishart and Dirichlet corresponding to the BGe and
BDe score functions mentioned previously in Section 2. The graphical prior is uniform by
default, hence each parent set has the same probability a priori. However, BiDAGsuggests
the possibility of imposing a prior that penalizes each additional edge to favor sampling of
sparse DAGs. BiDAGalso suggests the possibility of penalizing each edge with an individual
penalization factor to include more detailed prior information. In Section 3.1, we describe
how to define a parameter and graphical priors in BiDAG. In addition, for large DAGs, all
possible parent sets must be limited to a set corresponding to the reduced search space for
computational feasibility. The efficient algorithm for defining the reduced search space in a
way that it includes the bulk of the posterior weight is described in Section 2.4. In this way,
we obtain a sample of DAGs G1,...,GM, from which we usually exclude the first mto account
for the burn-in period. Assuming that the Markov chain has converged within msteps, we
can approximate the posterior probability of any structural feature fby the sample average
P(f|D)≈1
M−mM/summationdisplay
i=m+1f(Gi), (2)
wheref(Gi)equals 1 if the feature fis present in structure Giand 0 otherwise.
2.2. Partition MCMC
One advantage of the order MCMC sampling scheme compared to structure MCMC resides
in its increased efficiency. Another characteristic of order MCMC is that it imposes a non-
uniform prior over structures by over-representing DAGs that belong to several orders (Fried-
man and Koller 2003). To achieve unbiased sampling, Kuipers and Moffa (2016) proposed an
MCMC scheme in the space of ordered partitions instead. A labeled partition Λis defined
by two components: a node ordering ≺and a vector of sizes of the parts κ= (k1,...,k p),
where 1≤p≤nand/summationtextp
i=1ki=n. The vector κdivides the order ≺intopparts:v1,...,v p,
such thatv1includes the first k1nodes of the permutation ≺,v2includes the following k2
nodes, etc. A DAG Gis compatible with a partition Λ = (≺,κ)if the following conditions
are satisfied for every node Xiwith, say,Xi∈vj:
•ifj <p,Xihas at least one parent in the part vj+1;
•all nodes in Paibelong to the parts with indices higher than j;
•Pai=∅if and only if j=p.
BiDAGimplements the following moves in the space of partitions:
•swap any two nodes from different parts;