Journal of Statistical Software 7
Algorithm 1: Iterative MCMC procedure.
Input:dataD
Output: MAP estimateGmax, optimized search space H
1Initiate the search space Hwith the PC algorithm or an arbitrary adjacency matrix
2Run the order MCMC scheme on the search space H+
3AssignGmaxthe maximally scoring DAG obtained by the MCMC scheme
4UpdateH,Hold:
Hold=H
H=H∪Gmax
5Repeat Steps 2 to 4, till H=Hold
show that the true positive rate (TPR) of structures estimated by the PC algorithm decreases
when the density of the ground truth DAG, defined as an average number of parents of one
node, increases (Kalisch and Bühlmann 2007). If the search space Hlacks some of the edges
from a MAP DAG GMAP, we will not be able to find it when searching in H. To address
this limitation, Kuipers et al.(2022) propose to expand the search to an extended space H+
in which the possible parent sets of every node include not only all combinations of parents
ofXiinHbut also these parent sets joined with any other node that is not a parent of Xi
inH. Searching inH+provides the opportunity to correct for any mistakes of the pruning
algorithm and yields higher scoring DAGs. We will refer to Has the core search space and
toH+as the extended search space.
The improvements we can achieve by simply searching in the extended space are limited. For
example, if two or more parents are missing in the same node’s parent set, the approach would
allow us to recover only one of them. However, if we iterate the procedure we may be able
to correct for more than one mistake per parent set. The iterative order MCMC procedure
is summarized in Algorithm 1 below:
Simulation studies show that the iterative MCMC procedure can improve even poor search
spaces containing only 50−60%true positive edges so that the final space contains 90−100%
true positive edges (Kuipers et al.2022). However, the worse the original search space is, the
more expansion iterations we need to optimize it. Defining a reasonable search space Hto
start with can significantly decrease the total runtime of the iterative MCMC scheme. In the
current version of BiDAG, in addition to the PC algorithm, it is possible to define the search
space with an arbitrary adjacency matrix, which may stem from expert knowledge or another
algorithm for structure learning. Computational complexity of the MCMC schemes in H+is
higher than inH. We will discuss differences in runtimes between using HandH+in more
detail in Section 7.
3.BiDAGpackage
The core functions of the package learnBN andsampleBN can be used for structure learning
and sampling of Bayesian networks accordingly. The remaining functions can be divided into
four main groups: convergence diagnostics, model averaging, model comparison, and network
visualization. In this section, we describe the most important functions from all groups.