6 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
•swap any two nodes in adjacent parts;
•split a part or join two parts;
•move a single node into an existing part or form a new part with the single node.
The unbiased sampling with partition MCMC comes at the cost of a higher complexity and
slower convergence as compared to order MCMC. However, the bias of order MCMC may not
be a strong limitation in practice. Kuipers et al.(2022) have shown in simulation studies that
the models obtained via averaging over the sample of DAGs obtained by the order MCMC
scheme are very close to the ground truth structures.
2.3. MAP discovery
In addition to sampling from the posterior distribution, we can also use the algorithms imple-
mented in BiDAGto search for a MAP graph (Kuipers et al.2022). To do so, we replace the
sum in Equation 1 with a maximum. Then, the order score equals the score of a maximum
scoring DAG compatible with this order,
Q(≺|D) =n/productdisplay
i=1max
Pai∈Ui,≺S(Xi,Pai|D) = max
G∈Γ≺P(G|D). (3)
A non-uniform prior on DAGs imposed by order MCMC sampling does not affect the MAP
search since DAG scores are equal in the order and partition schemes. Due to order MCMC
being more computationally efficient, we implement it for both sampling and MAP estimation
and partition MCMC only for sampling.
2.4. Hybrid sampling scheme
Even in the efficient order score decomposition of Equation 1, the number of possible parent
sets, which need to be scored, is exponential of order O(2n−1). To apply the algorithm to
networks with, say, n>20nodes, we prune the search space. BiDAGimplements the hybrid
approach of Kuipers et al.(2022) which limits the search space by means of a (possibly
undirected) graph H, whose maximal parent set size per node is K, so that the number of
possible parent sets reduces to O(n2K). Since we wish to sample DAGs from the posterior
distribution, prior knowledge together with evidence from the data drive the pruning process
to ensure that the search space Hcaptures the bulk of the posterior weight. In BiDAG, we
used the constraint-based PC algorithm (Spirtes et al.2000) to define the search space.
The PC algorithm starts with a complete undirected graph and deletes edges based on condi-
tional independence tests. After deleting as many edges as possible, we identify the skeleton
graph, i.e., a graphical structure where all edges are bi-directional. Inference with the PC
algorithm includes steps to direct some edges which yield a completed partially directed
acyclic graph (CPDAG), which represents a class of equivalent DAGs. By default, we use a
PC-defined skeleton as search space Hand not the CPDAG to avoid mistakes in directing
edges.
An essential feature of BiDAGis the possibility to improve the initially defined search space
H(Kuipers et al.2022). Errors in the statistical tests of the PC algorithm can lead to the
deletion of true positive edges or edges appearing in high-scoring DAGs. Simulation studies