10 BiDAG : Bayesian Structure Learning and Sampling in R
a better representation of the posterior distribution. However, it was shown that unthinned
chainsoffermorepreciseestimates(LinkandEaton2011)inthemajorityofcasesbecausethey
contain more samples and hence more information about the posterior distribution. Thinning
is still recommended to avoid the need for large computational and memory resources (Link
and Eaton 2011).
The function learnBN implements the MAP search and does not save the list of DAGs found
at each MCMC step. By default, it returns only one maximally scoring DAG. The list of
DAGs can be saved for inspection by setting the parameter chainout toTRUE. However, it is
not recommended to use for model averaging since learnBN does not yield a random sample
from the posterior distribution. In contrast, the function sampleBN targets obtaining a sample
of DAGs from the posterior distribution and its default output includes a trace of sampled
DAGs.
Theparameter startspace candefinethesearchspaceviaasparseorbinaryadjacencymatrix
of sizen×n. An entry [i,j]in the adjacency matrix is 1to indicate the presence of an edge
fromitoj. The search space can be an arbitrary graph without the acyclicity requirement.
When edges are bidirectional both entries [i,j]and[j,i]should be equal to 1. Unit entries
in columnjdetermine the permissible parent sets for node j. Another way to pass a search
space is the parameter scoretable , which has to be an object of class ‘ scorespace ’. The
parameter scoretable can be used to pass an adjacency matrix together with the score tables
and decrease the overall runtime (see Section 7 for details). Objects of class ‘ scorespace ’ can
be extracted from the objects of classes ’ orderMCMC ’, ‘partitionMCMC ’ or ‘ iterativeMCMC ’
returned by the sampleBN andlearnBN functions using the function getSpace . When neither
startspace norscoretable is specified, we define the search space by the skeleton estimated
by the PC algorithm or by an equivalence class represented by a CPDAG if the parameter
cpdagequals TRUE.
The parameter alphadefines the significance level αused in the conditional independence
tests of the PC algorithm. Larger αvalues lead to larger search spaces, which decrease the
risk that true positive edges are absent as a result of errors in the statistical tests. By the
same principle though, high αvalues will also increase the number of false-positive edges.
While a higher number of false positive edges in the search space does not affect the goodness
of fit of the resulting structures, it can negatively affect the runtime. Moreover, larger α
values also imply longer runtimes for the PC algorithm, which is worst-case exponential. By
defaultα= 0.05.
For the order MCMC scheme, the parameter plus1indicates whether the algorithm should
perform the search/sampling in the core search space Hor in the extended space H+. When
plus1equals TRUE, then the chain is constructed in H+instead ofH, as described in Sec-
tion 2.4.
The parameter blacklist defines all single edges we wish to remove from the search space,
and hence they will not appear in any of the sampled DAGs. If a node is not allowed to have
any parents, it is computationally more efficient to define it as a root node via the parameter
bgnodes in the scorepar object instead of specifying all edges from any other node in a
blacklist . The parameter edgepmat of the function scoreparameters mentioned above
can be regarded as a soft version of the blacklist.
In Section 2.4, we noted that the maximum number of parents has to be limited to ensure
feasibility of the schemes for larger DAGs. The parameter hardlimit sets a limit on the