Journal of Statistical Software 3
space, complemented by a new implementation of conditional independence tests for discrete
and weighted data. BiDAGincludes a visualization tool, which imports methods from the
Rpackages graph(Gentleman, Whalen, Huber, and Falcon 2022) and Rgraphviz (Hansen
et al.2019).
In Section 2, we describe the methodological background behind the algorithms in BiDAG. In
Section 3, we describe the BiDAGfunctions, further divided into four subsections on struc-
ture learning and sampling, posterior model selection, convergence diagnostics, and model
comparison. In Section 4, we describe how to use the package for structure learning of DBNs.
Section 5 contains examples of structure learning and sampling on two simulated data sets.
In this section we also show how sampling from the posterior can improve model selection. In
Section 6, we apply the package to the problem of characterizing cancer sub-types. Finally,
in Section 7, we discuss the runtime of the implemented algorithms in different simulation
settings.
2. Methodological background
ABayesiannetworkdescribesafactorizationofajointprobabilitydistribution P(X)ofasetof
random variables X= (X1,...,X n)by means of a DAG. Specifically we can define a Bayesian
networkBas a pair (G,Θ)whereGis a DAG whose nodes represent the random variables
inXandΘare the parameters of the probability distributions P(Xi|Pai)describing the
relationship between each variable Xiand its parents Paiin the graphG, such that
P(X) =n/productdisplay
i=1P(Xi|Pai).
Learning a Bayesian network requires estimating both components: parameters Θand struc-
tureG. Maximizing or marginalizing the parameters for a given structure will provide a score
for each DAG. In BiDAG, the scoreSof each DAG is proportional to its posterior probability
given the data D. For computational feasibility of the implementation, it is essential that the
score function factorizes into a product where each term depends only on one node and its
parents:
P(G|D)∝P(D|G)P(G) =n/productdisplay
i=1S(Xi,Pai|D).
See Geiger and Heckerman (1995) for the technical conditions guaranteeing the desired score
factorization. Two score functions Smeeting the conditions for the decomposition in Equa-
tion 2 are implemented in BiDAG: (1) the Bayesian Dirichlet equivalent score (BDe) (Geiger
and Heckerman 1995) with a Dirichlet parameter prior for binary and categorical data, and
(2) the Bayesian Gaussian equivalent score (BGe) (Geiger and Heckerman 2002; Consonni
and Rocca 2012) with a Wishart prior for continuous data.
Learning the structure component of a network Brequires finding the DAG G, which best fits
a data setD. As far as search-and-score methods are concerned, this means finding a graph
with a score larger or equal than any other. In situations where several structures achieve
similar scores, focusing on a single structure may be misleading (Friedman and Koller 2003).
The MCMC methods in BiDAGaccount for structure uncertainty by sampling DAGs from