Journal of Statistical Software 11
number of parents any node may have. If the initial search space is higher than this limit,
the functions sampleBN andlearnBN stop execution and warn the user to redefine the search
space or increase hardlimit . The runtimes for computing the scores of a all possible parent
sets for a node with Kpossible parents in the search space Hand its extension H+are given
in Section 7.
When the parameter algorithm = "orderIter" , the parameter iterpar includes additional
parameters to define the iterative expansions of the search space. The element plus1it
defines the number of iterations of expansion of the search space; In the function learnBN,
when plus1it is not specified, the search space expands until no edges can be added to the
search space to improve the score of a maximally scoring DAG Gmax. When sampleBN is used,
the expansion graph G∗is estimated at each iteration on the basis of a sample of graphs and a
posterior probability threshold given by the element posterior of the parameter iterpar.G∗
includes all edges with posterior probabilities higher than the threshold. When extending the
search space, the maximal parent set size Kmay increase as well. The parameter hardlimit
sets a limit on the number of parents any node may have. When we hit the limit for one
node, the algorithm prevents adding further elements to that node’s parent set, but it can
still expand the parent sets of other nodes until they all reach the limit or the score does not
improve further. Another element of iterpar controlling the expansion of the search space is
mergetype . The possible values of mergetype , namely dag,cpdag, and skeleton , correspond
to merging the core space Hwith a maximally scoring graph Gmax(or posterior-based G∗in
sampleBN ), its equivalence class or a skeleton accordingly.
3.3. Bayesian model averaging and posterior model selection
To calculate posterior probabilities of single edges based on a sample of graphs from MCMC
schemes we can use the function
edgep(MCMCchain, pdag = FALSE, burnin = 0.2, endstep = 1)
wheretheparameter MCMCchain isanobjectofoneoftheclasses‘ orderMCMC ’,‘partitionMCMC ’
or ‘iterativeMCMC ’. The parameter burnindefines the proportion of samples to discard as
burn-in. We can also perform posterior model selection by constructing a graph consisting
only of edges with posterior probability higher than a certain threshold with the function
modelp(MCMCchain, p, pdag = FALSE, burnin = 0.2)
which however is not guaranteed to result in a DAG. When building a consensus graph from
a sample of DAGs it is possible to account for the uncertainty related to equivalence class by
setting the parameter pdagtoTRUE. In this case, we first convert all DAGs in the sample to
CPDAGs corresponding to their equivalence classes. In this case, the resulting graph is not
guaranteed to be either a DAG or a CPDAG. However, this option is still recommended since
it results in more stable posterior probabilities of non-directed edges. In model averaging,
the focus is on selecting individual edges rather than on specific structure requirements. For
example, model selection based on posterior probabilities of individual edges was beneficial
for small datasets, where estimated MAP DAGs contained more than half of false-positive
edges (Kuipers et al.2022).