Benchmarking Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Tingwu Wang1;2, Xuchan Bao1;2, Ignasi Clavera3, Jerrick Hoang1;2, Yeming Wen1;2,
Eric Langlois1;2, Shunshi Zhang1;2, Guodong Zhang1;2, Pieter Abbeel3& Jimmy Ba1;2
1University of Toronto2Vector Institute3UC Berkeley
{tingwuwang,jhoang,ywen,edl,gdzhang}@cs.toronto.edu
{xuchan.bao,matthew.zhang}@mail.utoronto.ca, iclavera@berkeley.edu,
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu, jba@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is widely seen as having the potential
to be signiﬁcantly more sample efﬁcient than model-free RL. However, research in
model-based RL has not been very standardized. It is fairly common for authors to
experiment with self-designed environments, and there are several separate lines of
research, which are sometimes closed-sourced or not reproducible. Accordingly, it
is an open question how these various existing MBRL algorithms perform relative to
each other. To facilitate research in MBRL, in this paper we gather a wide collection
of MBRL algorithms and propose over 18 benchmarking environments specially
designed for MBRL. We benchmark these algorithms with uniﬁed problem settings,
including noisy environments. Beyond cataloguing performance, we explore
and unify the underlying algorithmic differences across MBRL algorithms. We
characterize three key research challenges for future MBRL research: the dynamics
bottleneck, the planning horizon dilemma, and the early-termination dilemma.
Finally, to maximally facilitate future research on MBRL, we open-source our
benchmark in http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~tingwuwang/mbrl.html .
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are most commonly classiﬁed in two categories: model-free
RL (MFRL), which directly learns a value function or a policy by interacting with the environment,
and model-based RL (MBRL), which uses interactions with the environment to learn a model of
it. While model-free algorithms have achieved success in areas including robotics [ 30,44,20,1],
video-games [ 34,33], and motion animation [ 38], their high sample complexity limits largely their
application to simulated domains. By learning a model of the environment, model-based methods
learn with signiﬁcantly lower sample complexity. However, learning an accurate model of the
environment has proven to be a challenging problem in certain domains. Modelling errors cripple
the effectiveness of these algorithms, resulting in policies that exploit the deﬁciencies of the models,
which is known as model-bias [ 11]. Recent approaches have been able to alleviate the model-bias
problem by characterizing the uncertainty of the learned models by the means of probabilistic models
and ensembles. This has enabled model-based methods to match model-free asymptotic performance
in challenging domains while using much fewer samples [27, 7, 8].
These recent advances have led to a great deal of excitement in the ﬁeld of model-based reinforcement
learning. Despite the impressive results achieved, how these methods compare against each other
and against standard baselines remains unclear. Reproducibility and lack of open-source code are
persistent problems in RL [ 22,24], which makes it difﬁcult to compare novel algorithms against
prior lines of research. In MBRL, this problem is exacerbated by the modiﬁcations made to the
environments: pre-processing of the observations, modiﬁcation of the reward functions, or using
different episode horizons. Such lack of standardized implementations and environments in MBRL
makes it difﬁcult to quantify scientiﬁc progress.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:1907.02057v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jul 2019