controllerRS, and then distill the controller into a neural network policy using DAgger [ 41],
which minimizes DKL((st);RS). After the policy distillation step, the policy is ﬁne-tuned using
standard model-free algorithms. In particular the authors use TRPO [43].
Probabilistic Ensembles with Trajectory Sampling (PETS-RS and PETS-CEM) [7]: In the
PETS algorithm, the dynamics are modelled by an ensemble of probabilistic neural networks models,
which captures both epistemic uncertainty from limited data and network capacity, and aleatoric
uncertainty from the stochasticity of the ground-truth dynamics. Except for the difference in modeling
the dynamics, PETS-RS is the same as RS. Instead, in PETS-CEM, the online optimization problem
is solved using cross-entropy method (CEM) [9, 4] to obtain a better solution.
3.4 Model-free Baselines
In our benchmark, we include MFRL baselines to quantify the sample complexity and asymptotic
performance gap between MFRL and MBRL. Speciﬁcally, we compare against representative MFRL
algorithms including Trust-Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [ 43], Proximal-Policy Optimization
(PPO) [ 44,20], Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) [ 18], and Soft Actor-Critic
(SAC) [ 19]. The former two are state-of-the-art on-policy MFRL algorithms, and the latter two are
considered the state-of-the-art off-policy MFRL algorithms.
4 Experiments
In this section, we present the results of our benchmarking and examine the causes that stagnate the
performance of MBRL methods. Speciﬁcally, we designed the benchmark to answer the following
questions: 1) How do existing MBRL approaches compare against each other and against MFRL
methods across environments with different complexity (Section 4.3)? 2) Are MBRL algorithms
robust against observation and action noise (Section 4.4)? and 3) What are the main bottlenecks in
the MBRL methods?
Aiming to answer the last question, we present three phenomena inherent of MBRL methods, which
we refer to as dynamics bottleneck (Section 4.5), planning horizon dilemma (Section 4.6), and early
termination dilemma (Section 4.7).
4.1 Benchmarking Environments
Our benchmark consists of 18 environments with continuous state and action space based on OpenAI
Gym [ 5]. We include a full spectrum of environments with different difﬁculty and episode length,
from CartPole to Humanoid. More speciﬁcally, we have the following modiﬁcations:
To accommodate traditional MBRL algorithms such as iLQG and GPS, we modify the reward
function so that the gradient with respect to observation always exists or can be approximated.
We note that early termination has not been applied in MBRL, and we speciﬁcally have both the
raw environments and the variants with early termination, indicated by the sufﬁx ET.
The original Swimmer-v0 in OpenAI Gym was unsolvable for all algorithms. Therefore, we
modiﬁed the position of the velocity sensor so that it’s easier to solve. We name this easier version
as Swimmer while still keep the original one as a reference, named as Swimmer-v0.
For a detailed description of the environments and the reward functions used, we refer readers to
Appendix A.
4.2 Experiment Setup
Performance Metric and Hyper-parameter Search : Each algorithm is run with 4 random seeds. In
the learning curves, the performance is averaged with a sliding window of 5 algorithm iterations. The
error bars were plotted by the default Seaborn [ 50] smoothing scheme from the mean and standard
deviation of the results. Similarly, in the tables, we show the performance averaged across different
random seeds with a window size of 5000 time-steps. We perform a grid search for each algorithm
separately, which is summarized in appendix B. For each algorithm, We show the results using the
hyper-parameters producing the best average performance.
4