Systematic evaluation and comparison will not only further our understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of the existing algorithms, but also reveal their limitations and suggest directions for future
research. Benchmarks have played a crucial role in other ﬁelds of research. For instance, model-free
RL has beneﬁted greatly from the introduction of benchmarking code bases and environments such
as rllab [ 14], OpenAI Gym [ 5], and Deepmind Control Suite [ 48]; where the latter two have been the
de facto benchmarking platforms. Besides RL, benchmarking platforms have also accelerated areas
such as computer vision [13, 31], machine translation [26] and speech recognition [37].
In this paper, we benchmark 11 MBRL algorithms and 4 MFRL algorithms across 18 environments
based on the standard OpenAI Gym [ 5]. The environments, designed to hold the common assumptions
in model-based methods, range from simple 2D tasks, such as Cart-Pole, to complex domains that are
usually not evaluated on, such as Humanoid. The benchmark is further extended by characterizing the
robustness of the different methods when stochasticity in the observations and actions is introduced.
Based on the empirical evaluation, we propose three main causes that stagnate the performance
of model-based methods: 1) Dynamics bottleneck : algorithms with learned dynamics are stuck at
performance local minima signiﬁcantly worse than using ground-truth dynamics, i.e. the performance
does not increase when more data is collected. 2) Planning horizon dilemma : while increasing the
planning horizon provides more accurate reward estimation, it can result in performance drops due to
the curse of dimensionality and modelling errors. 3) Early termination dilemma : early termination
is commonly used in MFRL for more directed exploration, to achieve faster learning. However,
similar performance gain are not yet observed in MBRL algorithms, which limits their effectiveness
in complex environments.
2 Preliminaries
We formulate all of our tasks as a discrete-time ﬁnite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP),
which is deﬁned by the tuple (S;A;p;r; 0;
;H ). Here,Sdenotes the state space, Adenotes the
action space, p(s0ja;s) :SAS! [0;1]is transition dynamics density function, r(s;a;s0) :
SAS! Rdeﬁnes the reward function, 0is the initial state distribution, 
is the discount
factor, andHis the horizon of the problem. Contrary to standard model-free RL, we assume access
to an analytic differentiable reward function. The aim of RL is to learn an optimal policy that
maximizes the expected total reward J() =Eat
stp[PH
t=1
tr(st;at)].
Dynamics Learning: MBRL algorithms are characterized by learning a model of the environment.
After repeated interactions with the environment, the experienced transitions are stored in a data-
setD=f(st;at;st+1)gwhich is then used to learn a dynamics function ~f. In the case where
ground-truth dynamics are deterministic, the learned dynamics function ~fpredicts the next state.
In stochastic settings, it is common to represent the dynamics with a Gaussian distribution, i.e.,
p(st+1jat;st)N ((st;at);(st;at))and the learned dynamics model corresponds to ~f=
(~(st;at);~(st;at)).
3 Algorithms
In this section, we introduce the benchmarked MBRL algorithms, which are divided into: 1) Dyna-
style Algorithms, 2) Policy Search with Backpropagation through Time, and 3) Shooting Algorithms.
3.1 Dyna-Style Algorithms
In the Dyna algorithm [ 45,46,47], training iterates between two steps. First, using the current
policy, data is gathered from interaction with the environment and then used to learn the dynamics
model. Second, the policy is improved with imagined data generated by the learned model. This class
of algorithms learn policies using model-free algorithms with rich imaginary experience without
interaction with the real environment.
Model-Ensemble Trust-Region Policy Optimization (ME-TRPO) [27]: Instead of using a single
model, ME-TRPO uses an ensemble of neural networks to model the dynamics, which effectively
combats model-bias. The ensemble ~f=f~f1;:::;~fKgis trained using standard squared L2
2