Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 12 of 22
production value, especially when the oil rate changes steadily, such as the oil rate of Well 2 from
the 200th to 1100th day and Well 7 from the 200th to 700th day. However, the relative errors soar
when enormous ﬂuctuations or sudden variances occur, such as the oil rate of Well 2 at the 107th day,
Well 7 around the 200th day, and frequent variances of Well 58, Well 22, and Well 31. The sudden drop
or rise could lead to bigger uncertainties and errors for the prediction, which is rarely considered in
previous studies. The prediction results show that the trained model can capture the complex and
ﬂexible variance of production, whereas the ability to capture sharp and sudden variances is limited.
In the future, we can smooth the area when there is a brief and sudden change or extend the forecast
unit from day to month to improve model accuracy.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 24 
 day, Well 7 around the 200th day, and frequent variances  of Well 58, Well 22, and Well 31. The sudden 
drop or rise could lead to bigger uncertainties  and errors for the prediction,  which is rarely considered  
in previous  studies. The prediction  results show that the trained model can capture the complex and 
flexible variance of production,  whereas the ability to capture sharp and sudden variances  is limited. 
In the future, we can smooth the area when there is a brief and sudden change or extend the forecast 
unit from day to month to improve model accuracy.  
 
Figure 10. The predicted  production  of test wells with GRU and the SingleStep  approach.  
The proposed  GRU model takes choke size and shut‐in operation  into account, providing  a 
method to predict the oil rate under variable external features.  The predicted  production  can be 
changed by CS and SI. In total, nine training wells were selected to test the sensitivity  of changing  
external features to the production  rate. As shown in Figure 11, when the CS is changed from 2 mm, 
5 mm to 8mm, the larger the choke size, the higher the production  rate will be. As the SI is modified  
from 0 h, to 12 h to 24 h, the oil rate shows that production  will increase with the shut‐in period 
prolonged  (see Figure 12). It is reasonable  because the pressure  will build up during the shut‐in 
period. The predicted  results are consistent  with field experience  and existing understanding.  
Figure 10. The predicted production of test wells with GRU and the SingleStep approach.
The proposed GRU model takes choke size and shut-in operation into account, providing a method
to predict the oil rate under variable external features. The predicted production can be changed by CS
and SI. In total, nine training wells were selected to test the sensitivity of changing external features to
the production rate. As shown in Figure 11, when the CS is changed from 2 mm, 5 mm to 8mm, the
larger the choke size, the higher the production rate will be. As the SI is modiﬁed from 0 h, to 12 h to
24 h, the oil rate shows that production will increase with the shut-in period prolonged (see Figure 12).
It is reasonable because the pressure will build up during the shut-in period. The predicted results are
consistent with ﬁeld experience and existing understanding.
4.2. Application of the GRU Model with the Iterative Approach
In application, we often need to predict a longtime production provided with limited production
history. In this research, we also explored the Iterative approach, in which we repeat the iterations
using the predicted production. More narrowly, given data of the ﬁrst HW (14 days), we predict the
production rate of the 15th day. Based on the actual rate from the 2nd to the 14th day and the predicted
rate of the 15th day, we can predict the rate of the 16th day. Then based on the actual rate from 3rd to
14th day and the predicted rate from 15th to 16th day, we can predict the rate of the 17th. Repeat the
above iterations, and we can get the predicted production rate at any point in time.