Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 2 of 22
Decline curve analysis (DCA) is also frequently used in the oilﬁeld, which is based on empirical
production decline [ 7]. It is straightforward and fast compared with reservoir numerical simulation.
Additionally, it does not need many static and dynamic data. However, it has many limitations to
constrain its application [ 8,9]. First, traditional DCA can be utilized when the well has entered the
production decline stage, which means the target well has to produce for at least several months.
However, for wells that are newly put into operation, it is di cult to apply this method for rate
prediction. Further, traditional DCA cannot take operational changes into account, which have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on production. Last but not least, as many production curves ﬂuctuate heavily,
selecting the start of ﬁtting data manually is essential. The analyst’s subjectivity will largely inﬂuence
the analysis results [10].
Machine learning, also known as data mining, is one approach that could extract implicit
knowledge from massive data. With the development of computer technology and intelligent oilﬁeld
construction, it has been widely used for production analysis in the oil and gas industry [ 11–13].
Conventional time-series prediction methods including Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA),
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), and Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
with Exogenous Variables (ARIMAX) are successfully applied for production prediction. They perform
well in the production prediction of unconventional gas and oil reservoirs with regular changing
patterns [ 14–16]. As a branch of machine learning, deep learning has shown excellent performance in
various applications, such as refracturing candidate selection [ 17], pressure prediction [ 18–20], history
matching [ 21,22], and production forecasting. Wang et al. established a deep fully connected neural
network model to predict cumulative oil production of 6 and 18 months [ 23]. A total of 18 static
parameters relating to well information, formation property, fractures, and fracturing property are
used as input features, and values of cumulative production at ﬁxed time points are used as output
features. Luo et al. developed a deep learning model for the ﬁrst-year production Barrel of Oil
Equivalent (BOE) in the Bakken ﬁeld and explored the inﬂuence of geology and completion parameters
on BOE [ 24]. He established a data-driven model for Estimated Ultimate Recovery in Marcellus shale,
considering reservoir characteristics and completion strategies [ 25]. However, these studies focus on
the relationship between geological and fracturing features and cumulative production at a ﬁxed time
and do not involve time-series rate prediction.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is an important part of deep learning, which focuses on time-series
problems because of its advantages over sequence dependence. However, due to gradient exploding and
vanishing, there is a length limitation when applying the RNN algorithm [ 26]. Subsequently, variants
of RNN, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [ 27] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [ 28] neural
network, are proposed to deal with long sequence prediction problems. Various researches have been
done in applying RNN and LSTM in tackling time-series problems in recent years. Based on the initial
3-month data, Zhan et al. established a three-layer LSTM model for sequent 700-day oil prediction with
tubing pressure as latency information [ 29]. Lee et al. successfully utilized LSTM to predict monthly
shale-gas production, considering the shut-in period [ 10]. Sun et al. compared LSTM with DCA in wells
that have been producing for over 800 days and found that LSTM showed a better trend and less error
calculation with tubing pressure as an external feature [ 30]. Song et al. combined LSTM with Particle
Swarm Optimization to predict the daily oil rate of the volcanic reservoir [ 31]. The results show that
LSTM could capture the changing patterns of production and outperforms DCA, RNN, and traditional
time series forecasting methods. However, most wells used in the above models have a long production
time with few field operations. Batch production forecasting for newly developed wells with multiple
external features is rarely involved.
In this paper, GRU models with multiple external features and various prediction approaches were
established for oil rate prediction of the M conglomerate oilﬁeld in China for the ﬁrst time. Our objective
is to establish a production prediction model suitable for the whole well block, which enables batch
prediction given limited production data. In the following section, a comprehensive data preprocessing
was introduced in detail ﬁrstly, which is of vital importance to successful prediction. Then, the relevant