Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 14 of 22
with changing choke size and shut-in operation, pointing out the four-feature model can capture the
complex variation pattern under multiple factors.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   15 of 24 
 from 3rd to 14th day and the predicted  rate from 15th to 16th day, we can predict the rate of the 17th. 
Repeat the above iterations,  and we can get the predicted  production  rate at any point in time.  
The one‐feature (qo) model and the four‐feature (qo + TP + SI + CS) model were firstly applied to 
two training wells. As shown in Figure 13, Well 11 and Well 36 are selected to show the influence  of 
iterations  under different  features.  The first 14 days serve as HW, and the rest is treated as the 
prediction  section.  
Firstly, we focus on the comparison  of the two models. It can be found that the one‐feature model 
can only capture the descent trend and are not sensitive  to oilfield operations,  which could lead to 
enormous  errors. For Well 36 with a stable decline trend production  and fewer operations,  both 
models can predict a reasonable  production  and the four‐feature model shows a better performance.  
Obviously,  for Well 11 with an undulating  production,  the predicted  points of the four‐feature model 
coincide with changing  choke size and shut‐in operation,  pointing  out the four‐feature model can 
capture the complex variation  pattern under multiple  factors.  
  
(a)  (b) 
Figure 13. Comparison  of the one‐feature model and the four‐feature model with the Iterative 
approach  under multiple  factors; (a) Well 11; (b) Well 36. 
Figure 14 shows the half boxplot of the mismatch  between the two GRU models on six test wells. 
The difference  between the predicted  and true production  rate of test wells is quantified  by MAE and 
RMSE. The mean value of RMSE from the four‐feature model, 13.84, is much less than that of the one‐
feature model, which is 25.91. Similarly,  the mean value of MAEs from the four‐feature model, 11.21, 
is less than that of the one‐feature model, which is 22.79. Many scholars have corroborated  the 
feasibility  of RNN and LSTM algorithms  in production  prediction,  but few focus on the influence  of 
external variables  on prediction  performance.  In this research,  we compared  the two models and 
found that the ability of the four‐feature model to capture variances  and prediction  accuracy  
outperforms  the one‐feature model. 
Figure 13. Comparison of the one-feature model and the four-feature model with the Iterative approach
under multiple factors; ( a) Well 11; ( b) Well 36.
Figure 14 shows the half boxplot of the mismatch between the two GRU models on six test wells.
The di erence between the predicted and true production rate of test wells is quantiﬁed by MAE and
RMSE. The mean value of RMSE from the four-feature model, 13.84, is much less than that of the
one-feature model, which is 25.91. Similarly, the mean value of MAEs from the four-feature model,
11.21, is less than that of the one-feature model, which is 22.79. Many scholars have corroborated the
feasibility of RNN and LSTM algorithms in production prediction, but few focus on the inﬂuence of
external variables on prediction performance. In this research, we compared the two models and found
that the ability of the four-feature model to capture variances and prediction accuracy outperforms the
one-feature model.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   16 of 24 
  
Figure 14. Half boxplot of mean absolute error (MAE) and RMSE of the one‐feature model and four‐
feature model with the Iterative approach  on test wells. 
Then, we focus on the performance  of the four‐feature model itself. It can be found from Figure 
13 that the production  data are not monotonically  decreasing  but display a complex variation  pattern 
because of frequent operations.  The proposed  model could capture the complicated  changes and 
fluctuate  with changing  choke size and shut‐in operation.  However,  the available  production  history, 
long prediction  section, and frequent  operations  increase the difficulties  of iterative prediction.  
Although  errors of the SingleStep  scheme are small, the errors become bigger if the Iterative approach  
is used. Figure 15 shows some typical prediction  results of training wells with big relative errors. The 
first is partial inconsistency,  which results from oilfield operations.  The ability of the trained model 
to capture sharp and sudden variances  is limited, which leads to predicted  values usually lower than 
actual values when CS is changed.  This phenomenon  is obvious in Well 32. The shut‐in operation  
around the 380th day results in a stable gap between the predicted  and actual values after the 
operation.  The second is the overall trend lower than actual points, such as Well 35, which might be 
caused by the diversity  of formation  and fracturing  conditions.  The changing  trend of predicted  
points is consistent  with the recorded  production  rate, but a stable difference  exists during the whole 
prediction.  Although  all the wells belong to the same well block, the geological  and fracturing  
features change with the distribution  of fault blocks and the advance of stimulation  technologies.  
Another possible explanation  is that the production  of the first 14 days is still on the rise, which will 
provide an inaccurate  baseline for later iterative prediction.  The errors also occur in test wells when 
using the Iterative approach  for prediction.  Although  the accuracy  of single‐point prediction  is pretty 
high, the performance  becomes  worse as the number of iterations  increase.  The mean RMSE of test 
wells with the Iterative approach  is 13.91, 2.8 times of the SingleStep  approach,  which is 4.91. The 
increased  error is the comprehensive  effect of numerous  iterations,  sharp variances,  and diversity  of 
formation  and fracturing.  
Figure 14. Half boxplot of mean absolute error (MAE) and RMSE of the one-feature model and
four-feature model with the Iterative approach on test wells.
Then, we focus on the performance of the four-feature model itself. It can be found from
Figure 13 that the production data are not monotonically decreasing but display a complex variation
pattern because of frequent operations. The proposed model could capture the complicated changes