Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 18 of 22
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   19 of 24 
  
Figure 17. The predicted  production  of test wells with RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF.  
Figure 18 compares  the prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test 
wells. It is shown that GRU_RF  outperforms  the other three methods.  The mean RMSE of GRU_RF  
is 10.67, smaller than the mean RMSE of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 16.82, 13.49, and 13.91, 
respectively.  The mean MAE of GRU_RF  is 7.55, less than that of RNN, LSTM, and GRU, which is 
13.51, 10.60, and 11.29, respectively.  In general, the effect of the GRU_RF  is better than RNN, LSTM, 
and GRU. It is worth noting that only inputs of the first HW are available  during the whole prediction.  
Although  the predicted  points are not in perfect agreement  with the recorded  production  curve, it is 
exciting that the trained model provides  a feasible method to predict long‐term production  for newly 
developed  wells with limited production  data. The traditional  DCA and conventional  prediction  
methods  cannot be applied to new wells with little data easily. 
   
(a)  (b) 
Figure 18. Comparison  of prediction  performance  of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF  on test wells 
with two evaluation  indices: (a) RMSE; (b) MAE. 
The proposed  model has advantages  over traditional  DCA and conventional  time‐series 
prediction  methods.  Firstly, it can be applied to new wells with production  time of over 2 weeks. For 
Figure 18. Comparison of prediction performance of RNN, LSTM, GRU, and GRU_RF on test wells
with two evaluation indices: ( a) RMSE; ( b) MAE.
The proposed model has advantages over traditional DCA and conventional time-series prediction
methods. Firstly, it can be applied to new wells with production time of over 2 weeks. For most
of these new wells, the initial production rate shows an increasing trend because of the wellbore
storage e ect. Traditional DCA is nowhere to be utilized in wells without a declining trend [ 9].
The conventional time-series prediction methods (i.e., ARMA, ARIMA, ARIMAX) are linear models
based on statistics [ 8,44]. Learning from the initial production will obtain a rising prediction trend
contrary to the long prediction section, which will lead to huge errors. Therefore, neither traditional
DCA nor conventional time-series prediction methods can achieve the production prediction of wells
with short production time. Secondly, the proposed model can achieve batch forecasting of multiple
wells. Additionally, it is much faster because it doesn’t need to train the GRU_RF model every
time. However, the other two methods have to tune multiple model hyperparameters (such as initial
decline rate, decline index, autoregression coe cient, moving average coe cient) with wells changed,
which is time-consuming and cumbersome. Thirdly, it takes CS and SI into account, o ering a way to
analyze the e ect of external features on the production rate. As we can see from Figures 11 and 12,
the predicted rate will change with CS and SI changes. However, traditional DCA, ARMA and ARIMA
cannot consider the e ect of CS and SI on production rate. Although ARIMAX can consider external
features, it has many restrictions in application due to strict statistical background [ 45], such as strong
correlations between the dependent feature and external features, which constrain its application in
production prediction. Finally, the proposed model prevents the subjectivity of analysts from a ecting
the predicted results. The same inputs will guarantee the same output. However, the predicted
values of DCA vary with the selection of the starting point, which will result in great uncertainty for
production prediction [10].
Figure 19 shows the feature importance ranking determined by RF. It can be seen from Figure 19a
that the most important features for model revising are the predicted rate 7 days ago, CS and oil
saturation, which account for more than 60% of feature importance. Figure 19b displays the importance
scores of di erent feature types. Production, formation conditions, and oilﬁeld operations play an
important role in revising the production rate. It is consistent with the previous analysis of the cause of
errors, in which the rising trend of initial production, various oilﬁeld operations, and di erences in
formation and stimulation will a ect the single well prediction. This infers that it is essential to take
the geological and completion features into account when building a model for a whole well block.
4.4. Continuous Learning
Production is a dynamic and coupled process, related to fracture propagation, proppant failure,
formation property variation, and oilﬁeld operations. With the production data updated dynamically,