Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 19 of 22
we plan to introduce continuous learning into production prediction. Continuous learning is the
concept of learning continuously and adaptively about the external world and enabling the autonomous
incremental development of ever more complex skills and knowledge [ 46,47]. Here continuous learning
refers to updating the history window and trained models for future production predictions during
the whole production period. For one new well, continuous learning refers to the PartIterative scheme,
as depicted in Figure 8c, in which the HW will be updated as time goes on to make full use of production
data. For multiple wells, continuous learning means that as data streams into the database, the model
is updated as soon as enough new data are available, as shown in Figure 20. Firstly, the currently
available data are divided into the training set and test set. The No.1 model is obtained based on
current data. With new data added into the database, the old data serve as the training set, and new
data become the test set. The No.2 model can be developed and the old data become the training set
and so on. In this way, the well-block model could be updated continuously, similar to the cognitive
process from simple to deep. In the future, we will further explore the continuous prediction to make
full use of available data.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   21 of 24 
  
Figure 19. Feature importance  ranking of RF: (a) sorted by single parameter;  (b) sorted by parameter  
types. 
4.4. Continuous  Learning 
Production  is a dynamic  and coupled process, related to fracture propagation,  proppant  failure, 
formation  property  variation,  and oilfield operations.  With the production  data updated 
dynamically,  we plan to introduce  continuous  learning into production  prediction.  Continuous  
learning is the concept of learning continuously  and adaptively  about the external world and 
enabling  the autonomous  incremental  development  of ever more complex skills and knowledge  
[46,47]. Here continuous  learning refers to updating  the history window and trained models for 
future production  predictions  during the whole production  period. For one new well, continuous  
learning refers to the PartIterative  scheme, as depicted  in Figure 8c, in which the HW will be updated 
as time goes on to make full use of production  data. For multiple  wells, continuous  learning means 
that as data streams into the database,  the model is updated as soon as enough new data are available,  
as shown in Figure 20. Firstly, the currently  available  data are divided into the training set and test 
set. The No.1 model is obtained  based on current data. With new data added into the database,  the 
old data serve as the training set, and new data become the test set. The No.2 model can be developed  
and the old data become the training set and so on. In this way, the well‐block model could be 
updated continuously,  similar to the cognitive  process from simple to deep. In the future, we will 
further explore the continuous  prediction  to make full use of available  data. 
Figure 19. Feature importance ranking of RF: ( a) sorted by single parameter; ( b) sorted by
parameter types.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   22 of 24 
  
Figure 20. The diagram for continuous  learning in production  prediction.  
5. Conclusions  
In this research,  a novel hybrid model GRU_RF  considering  multiple  external factors was 
proposed  for the production  prediction  of the X well block. A thorough  data preprocessing  and 
modeling  procedure  were explained,  which can be migrated  to other reservoirs  for batch production  
prediction.  The prediction  unit and length are changeable  with flexible model architecture.  
The major conclusions  are as follows: 
(1). The proposed  GRU_RF  model provided  a promising  method for predicting  long‐term 
production  of new‐developed  wells with the initial production,  as evidenced  by six test wells. 
Its generalization  ability was satisfactory  when applying  to wells that do not join in the training 
set. 
(2). The model considering  SI and CS provided  a method to explore the effects of variable external 
features.  The four‐feature model outperformed  the conventional  one‐feature model. It could 
accurately  capture the complex variance pattern under multiple  factors. 
(3). In addition  to production  and oilfield operations,  formation  and fracturing  parameters  
significantly  affected production  prediction  of multiple  wells from one well block, as illustrated  
by feature importance  ranking of RF. It was essential  to combine  statistic features with dynamic  
features into the time‐series prediction.  
(4). The proposed  model outperformed  traditional  DCA, conventional  time‐series methods,  simple 
RNN, LSTM, and GRU. Given limited production,  the model could achieve batch processing  
and provide a continuous  learning method for real‐time prediction.  
Author Contributions:  Methodology,  X.L.; validation,  X.L. and X.M.; investigation,  X.L. and F.X.; data curation,  
X.L. and S.Z.; writing—original  draft preparation,  X.L. and F.W. All authors have read and agreed to the 
published  version of the manuscript.  
Funding:  This research was jointly funded by the National  Major Science and Technology  Projects of China 
(2017ZX05049 ‐006), the National  Natural Science Foundation  of China (51974332  and U1762210)  and major 
projects in Karamay  (2018ZD001B).  
Acknowledgments:  The authors would like to express their gratitude  to the support of the National  Major 
Science and Technology  Projects of China, the National  Natural Science Foundation  of China and major projects 
in Karamay.   
Conflicts  of Interest:  The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References  
1. Hennigan,  H.W.; Canon, M.W.; Ziara, B.A. An interactive  production  forecasting  and economic  evaluation  
system. In Proceedings  of the SPE Annual Technical  Conference  and Exhibition,  San Antonio,  TX, USA, 4–
7 October 1981. 
2. Wang, N.; Zhao, Q. China shale gas economic  evaluation  based on Monte Carlo simulation.  In Proceedings  
of the 22nd World Petroleum  Congress,  Istanbul,  Turkey, 9–13 July 2017. 
3. Wright, J.D. Economic  evaluation  of shale gas reservoirs.  In Proceedings  of the SPE Shale Gas Production  
Conference , Fort Worth, TX, USA, 16–18 November  2008; pp. 136–145. 
4. Wilson, K.C.; Durlofsky,  L.J. Optimization  of shale gas field development  using direct search techniques  
and reduced‐physics models. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 2013, 108, 304–315. 
Figure 20. The diagram for continuous learning in production prediction.