Energies 2020 ,13, 6121 15 of 22
and ﬂuctuate with changing choke size and shut-in operation. However, the available production
history, long prediction section, and frequent operations increase the di culties of iterative prediction.
Although errors of the SingleStep scheme are small, the errors become bigger if the Iterative approach
is used. Figure 15 shows some typical prediction results of training wells with big relative errors.
The ﬁrst is partial inconsistency, which results from oilﬁeld operations. The ability of the trained model
to capture sharp and sudden variances is limited, which leads to predicted values usually lower than
actual values when CS is changed. This phenomenon is obvious in Well 32. The shut-in operation
around the 380th day results in a stable gap between the predicted and actual values after the operation.
The second is the overall trend lower than actual points, such as Well 35, which might be caused by the
diversity of formation and fracturing conditions. The changing trend of predicted points is consistent
with the recorded production rate, but a stable di erence exists during the whole prediction. Although
all the wells belong to the same well block, the geological and fracturing features change with the
distribution of fault blocks and the advance of stimulation technologies. Another possible explanation
is that the production of the ﬁrst 14 days is still on the rise, which will provide an inaccurate baseline
for later iterative prediction. The errors also occur in test wells when using the Iterative approach for
prediction. Although the accuracy of single-point prediction is pretty high, the performance becomes
worse as the number of iterations increase. The mean RMSE of test wells with the Iterative approach is
13.91, 2.8 times of the SingleStep approach, which is 4.91. The increased error is the comprehensive
eect of numerous iterations, sharp variances, and diversity of formation and fracturing.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW   17 of 24 
   
(a)  (b) 
Figure 15. Typical prediction  results of training wells with big relative errors: (a) partial inconsistency;  
(b) overall inconsistency.  
4.3. GRU_RF  Model for Improving  “Iterative”  Accuracy   
To improve  the prediction  accuracy,  we set up an RF model to fit the errors between the 
predicted  and true production  rate. The allocation  scheme of the training set, validation  set, and test 
set is the same as that of the GRU model. Considering  two kinds of errors, the inputs of RF include 
dynamic  and static features relating to production,  operations,  formation,  and fracturing,  as listed in 
Table 3. The number of estimators  is set to 50, and the maximum  depth is 3. 
Table 3. The input and output features of the Random  Forest (RF) model. 
Input Features   Symbol 
Production  predicted  production  by GRU  Predicted  qT 
the predicted  production  of the previous  7 
days by GRU Predicted  qT−1, qT−2, qT−3, qT−4, qT−5, 
qT−6, qT−7 
Cumulative  production  of the first 14 days  Q14 days 
Cumulative  production  of the first 30 days  Q30 days 
Number of iterations  (production  time)  Niter 
Operations  Choke size  CS 
Shut‐in time  SI 
changes of choke size  CS T − CS T−1 
changes of shut‐in time  SIT − SIT−1 
Fracturing  Total sand per well  Total sand 
Total liquid per well  Total liquid 
Well lateral length  Length 
Formation  The minimal horizontal  principle  stress  MHPS 
Oil saturation   Soil 
Porosity  Poro 
Well vertical depth  TVD 
Output the errors between the predicted  and true 
production  rate Error 
The overall workflow  of the GRU_RF  model is illustrated  in Figure 16. The proposed  model in 
the blue dashed box consists of two sub‐models: the GRU model and the RF model. Each step in the 
flowchart  is described  in detail below:  
Figure 15. Typical prediction results of training wells with big relative errors: ( a) partial inconsistency;
(b) overall inconsistency.
4.3. GRU_RF Model for Improving “Iterative” Accuracy
To improve the prediction accuracy, we set up an RF model to ﬁt the errors between the predicted
and true production rate. The allocation scheme of the training set, validation set, and test set is the
same as that of the GRU model. Considering two kinds of errors, the inputs of RF include dynamic
and static features relating to production, operations, formation, and fracturing, as listed in Table 3.
The number of estimators is set to 50, and the maximum depth is 3.
The overall workﬂow of the GRU_RF model is illustrated in Figure 16. The proposed model in
the blue dashed box consists of two sub-models: the GRU model and the RF model. Each step in the
ﬂowchart is described in detail below:
Step 1. Training the GRU model. After data preprocessing (as described in Figure 2), the data set
are split into three parts, and the GRU model is fed by training wells and optimized by
validation wells.