Figure 1: To compute the meta-gradientP
idLi(i)
d, the MAML algorithm differentiates through
the optimization path, as shown in green, while ﬁrst-order MAML computes the meta-gradient by
approximatingdi
dasI. Our implicit MAML approach derives an analytic expression for the exact
meta-gradient without differentiating through the optimization path by estimating local curvature.
Despite its appealing properties, meta-learning an initialization requires backpropagation through
the inner optimization process. As a result, the meta-learning process requires higher-order deriva-
tives, imposes a non-trivial computational and memory burden, and can suffer from vanishing gra-
dients. These limitations make it harder to scale optimization-based meta learning methods to tasks
involving medium or large datasets, or those that require many inner-loop optimization steps. Our
goal is to develop an algorithm that addresses these limitations.
The main contribution of our work is the development of the implicit MAML (iMAML) algorithm,
an approach for optimization-based meta-learning with deep neural networks that removes the need
for differentiating through the optimization path. Our algorithm aims to learn a set of parameters
such that an optimization algorithm that is initialized at and regularized to this parameter vector
leads to good generalization for a variety of learning tasks. By leveraging the implicit differentiation
approach, we derive an analytical expression for the meta (or outer level) gradient that depends only
on the solution to the inner optimization and not the path taken by the inner optimization algorithm,
as depicted in Figure 1. This decoupling of meta-gradient computation and choice of inner level
optimizer has a number of appealing properties.
First, the inner optimization path need not be stored nor differentiated through, thereby making
implicit MAML memory efﬁcient and scalable to a large number of inner optimization steps. Sec-
ond, implicit MAML is agnostic to the inner optimization method used, as long as it can ﬁnd an
approximate solution to the inner-level optimization problem. This permits the use of higher-order
methods, and in principle even non-differentiable optimization methods or components like sample-
based optimization, line-search, or those provided by proprietary software (e.g. Gurobi). Finally, we
also provide the ﬁrst (to our knowledge) non-asymptotic theoretical analysis of bi-level optimiza-
tion. We show that an –approximate meta-gradient can be computed via implicit MAML using
~O(log(1=))gradient evaluations and ~O(1)memory, meaning the memory required does not grow
with number of gradient steps.
2 Problem Formulation and Notations
We ﬁrst present the meta-learning problem in the context of few-shot supervised learning, and then
generalize the notation to aid the rest of the exposition in the paper.
2.1 Review of Few-Shot Supervised Learning and MAML
In this setting, we have a collection of meta-training tasks fTigM
i=1drawn from P(T). Each taskTi
is associated with a dataset Di, from which we can sample two disjoint sets: Dtr
iandDtest
i. These
datasets each consist of Kinput-output pairs. Let x2X andy2Y denote inputs and outputs,
respectively. The datasets take the form Dtr
i=f(xk
i;yk
i)gK
k=1, and similarly for Dtest
i. We are
interested in learning models of the form h(x) :X ! Y , parameterized by 2Rd.
Performance on a task is speciﬁed by a loss function, such as the cross entropy or squared error loss.
We will write the loss function in the form L(;D), as a function of a parameter vector and dataset.
The goal for taskTiis to learn task-speciﬁc parameters iusingDtr
isuch that we can minimize the
population or test loss of the task, L(i;Dtest
i).
2