4 Experimental Results and Discussion
In our experimental evaluation, we aim to answer the following questions empirically: (1) Does
the iMAML algorithm asymptotically compute the exact meta-gradient? (2) With ﬁnite iterations,
does iMAML approximate the meta-gradient more accurately compared to MAML? (3) How does
the computation and memory requirements of iMAML compare with MAML? (4) Does iMAML
lead to better results in realistic meta-learning problems? We have answered (1) - (3) through our
theoretical analysis, and now attempt to validate it through numerical simulations. For (1) and (2),
we will use a simple synthetic example for which we can compute the exact meta-gradient and
compare against it (exact-solve error, see deﬁnition 3). For (3) and (4), we will use the common
few-shot image recognition domains of Omniglot and Mini-ImageNet.
To study the question of meta-gradient accuracy, Figure 2 considers a synthetic regression example,
where the predictions are linear in parameters. This provides an analytical expression for Alg?
ial-
lowing us to compute the true meta-gradient. We ﬁx gradient descent (GD) to be the inner optimizer
for both MAML and iMAML. The problem is constructed so that the condition number ()is large,
thereby necessitating many GD steps. We ﬁnd that both iMAML and MAML asymptotically match
the exact meta-gradient, but iMAML computes a better approximation in ﬁnite iterations. We ob-
serve that with 2 CG iterations, iMAML incurs a small terminal error. This is consistent with our
theoretical analysis. In Algorithm 2, is dominated by 0when only a small number of CG steps
are used. However, the terminal error vanishes with just 5 CG steps. The computational cost of 1
CG step is comparable to 1 inner GD step with the MAML algorithm, since both require 1 hessian-
vector product (see section C for discussion). Thus, the computational cost as well as memory of
iMAML with 100 inner GD steps is signiﬁcantly smaller than MAML with 100 GD steps.
To study (3), we turn to the Omniglot dataset [30] which is a popular few-shot image recognition
domain. Figure 2 presents compute and memory trade-off for MAML and iMAML (on 20-way,
5-shot Omniglot). Memory for iMAML is based on Hessian-vector products and is independent
of the number of GD steps in the inner loop. The memory use is also independent of the number
of CG iterations, since the intermediate computations need not be stored in memory. On the other
hand, memory for MAML grows linearly in grad steps, reaching the capacity of a 12 GB GPU in
approximately 16 steps. First-order MAML (FOMAML) does not back-propagate through the opti-
mization process, and thus the computational cost is only that of performing gradient descent, which
is needed for all the algorithms. The computational cost for iMAML is also similar to FOMAML
along with a constant overhead for CG that depends on the number of CG steps. Note however, that
FOMAML does not compute an accurate meta-gradient, since it ignores the Jacobian. Compared
to FOMAML, the compute cost of MAML grows at a faster rate. FOMAML requires only gradient
computations, while backpropagating through GD (as done in MAML) requires a Hessian-vector
products at each iteration, which are more expensive.
Finally, we study empirical performance of iMAML on the Omniglot and Mini-ImageNet domains.
Following the few-shot learning protocol in prior work [57], we run the iMAML algorithm on the
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2: Accuracy, Computation, and Memory tradeoffs of iMAML, MAML, and FOMAML. (a) Meta-
gradient accuracy level in synthetic example. Computed gradients are compared against the exact meta-gradient
per Def 3. (b) Computation and memory trade-offs with 4 layer CNN on 20-way-5-shot Omniglot task. We
implemented iMAML in PyTorch, and for an apples-to-apples comparison, we use a PyTorch implementation
of MAML from: https://github.com/dragen1860/MAML-Pytorch
7