and produce weight updates [25, 5, 33, 48] or predictions for new inputs [50, 12, 58, 40, 38], and
optimization-based approaches that use bi-level optimization to embed learning procedures, such
as gradient descent, into the meta-optimization problem [15, 13, 8, 60, 34, 17, 59, 23]. Hybrid
approaches have also been considered to combine the beneﬁts of different approaches [49, 56]. We
build upon optimization-based approaches, particularly the MAML algorithm [15], which meta-
learns an initial set of parameters such that gradient-based ﬁne-tuning leads to good generalization.
Prior work has considered a number of inner loops, ranging from a very general setting where all
parameters are adapted using gradient descent [15], to more structured and specialized settings,
such as ridge regression [8], Bayesian linear regression [23], and simulated annealing [2]. The main
difference between our work and these approaches is that we show how to analytically derive the
gradient of the outer objective without differentiating through the inner learning procedure.
Mathematically, we view optimization-based meta-learning as a bi-level optimization problem.
Such problems have been studied in the context of few-shot meta-learning (as discussed previ-
ously), gradient-based hyperparameter optimization [35, 46, 19, 11, 10], and a range of other set-
tings [4, 31]. Some prior works have derived implicit gradients for related problems [46, 11, 4]
while others propose innovations to aid back-propagation through the optimization path for speciﬁc
algorithms [35, 19, 24], or approximations like truncation [53]. While the broad idea of implicit
differentiation is well known, it has not been empirically demonstrated in the past for learning more
than a few parameters (e.g., hyperparameters), or highly structured settings such as quadratic pro-
grams [4]. In contrast, our method meta-trains deep neural networks with thousands of parameters.
Closest to our setting is the recent work of Lee et al. [32], which uses implicit differentiation for
quadratic programs in a ﬁnal SVM layer. In contrast, our formulation allows for adapting the full
network for generic objectives (beyond hinge-loss), thereby allowing for wider applications.
We also note that prior works involving implicit differentiation make a strong assumption of an exact
solution in the inner level, thereby providing only asymptotic guarantees. In contrast, we provide
ﬁnite time guarantees which allows us to analyze the case where the inner level is solved approxi-
mately. In practice, the inner level is likely to be solved using iterative optimization algorithms like
gradient descent, which only return approximate solutions with ﬁnite iterations. Thus, this paper
places implicit gradient methods under a strong theoretical footing for practically use.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a method for optimization-based meta-learning that removes the need
for differentiating through the inner optimization path, allowing us to decouple the outer meta-
gradient computation from the choice of inner optimization algorithm. We showed how this gives us
signiﬁcant gains in compute and memory efﬁciency, and also conceptually allows us to use a variety
of inner optimization methods. While we focused on developing the foundations and theoretical
analysis of this method, we believe that this work opens up a number of interesting avenues for
future study.
Broader classes of inner loop procedures. While we studied different gradient-based optimization
methods in the inner loop, iMAML can in principle be used with a variety of inner loop algorithms,
including dynamic programming methods such as Q-learning, two-player adversarial games such
as GANs, energy-based models [39], and actor-critic RL methods, and higher-order model-based
trajectory optimization methods. This signiﬁcantly expands the kinds of problems that optimization-
based meta-learning can be applied to.
More ﬂexible regularizers. We explored one very simple regularization, `2regularization to the pa-
rameter initialization, which already increases the expressive power over the implicit regularization
that MAML provides through truncated gradient descent. To further allow the model to ﬂexibly reg-
ularize the inner optimization, a simple extension of iMAML is to learn a vector- or matrix-valued ,
which would enable the meta-learner model to co-adapt and co-regularize various parameters of the
model. Regularizers that act on parameterized density functions would also enable meta-learning to
be effective for few-shot density estimation.
9