Meta-Learning with Implicit Gradients
Aravind Rajeswaran
University of Washington
aravraj@cs.washington.eduChelsea Finn
University of California Berkeley
cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu
Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington
sham@cs.washington.eduSergey Levine
University of California Berkeley
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
A core capability of intelligent systems is the ability to quickly learn new tasks by
drawing on prior experience. Gradient (or optimization) based meta-learning has
recently emerged as an effective approach for few-shot learning. In this formu-
lation, meta-parameters are learned in the outer loop, while task-speciﬁc models
are learned in the inner-loop, by using only a small amount of data from the cur-
rent task. A key challenge in scaling these approaches is the need to differentiate
through the inner loop learning process, which can impose considerable computa-
tional and memory burdens. By drawing upon implicit differentiation, we develop
the implicit MAML algorithm, which depends only on the solution to the inner
level optimization and not the path taken by the inner loop optimizer. This ef-
fectively decouples the meta-gradient computation from the choice of inner loop
optimizer. As a result, our approach is agnostic to the choice of inner loop opti-
mizer and can gracefully handle many gradient steps without vanishing gradients
or memory constraints. Theoretically, we prove that implicit MAML can compute
accurate meta-gradients with a memory footprint no more than that which is re-
quired to compute a single inner loop gradient and at no overall increase in the
total computational cost. Experimentally, we show that these beneﬁts of implicit
MAML translate into empirical gains on few-shot image recognition benchmarks.
1 Introduction
A core aspect of intelligence is the ability to quickly learn new tasks by drawing upon prior expe-
rience from related tasks. Recent work has studied how meta-learning algorithms [51, 55, 41] can
acquire such a capability by learning to efﬁciently learn a range of tasks, thereby enabling learn-
ing of a new task with as little as a single example [50, 57, 15]. Meta-learning algorithms can be
framed in terms of recurrent [25, 50, 48] or attention-based [57, 38] models that are trained via a
meta-learning objective, to essentially encapsulate the learned learning procedure in the parameters
of a neural network. An alternative formulation is to frame meta-learning as a bi-level optimization
procedure [35, 15], where the “inner” optimization represents adaptation to a given task, and the
“outer” objective is the meta-training objective. Such a formulation can be used to learn the initial
parameters of a model such that optimizing from this initialization leads to fast adaptation and gen-
eralization. In this work, we focus on this class of optimization-based methods, and in particular
the model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) formulation [15]. MAML has been shown to be as ex-
pressive as black-box approaches [14], is applicable to a broad range of settings [16, 37, 1, 18], and
recovers a convergent and consistent optimization procedure [13].
Equal Contributions. Project page: http://sites.google.com/view/imaml
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.