Figure 2: VTN. The encoder and decoder are parameterized by attention-based neural networks. This biases the network
to learn relationships between the layout elements and enables processing layouts of arbitrary size. During training (black
arrow) the reconstruction loss and the KL-divergence between the prior p(z)and the approximate posterior distribution are
minimized. During inference (red arrow) we sample latent representations zfrom the prior and transform those into layouts
using our self-attention-based decoder.
stead of eq. ( 1)
L(θ,φ) =E
z∼qθ(z|x)[log(pφ(x|z))]−βKL(qθ(z|x)||p(z))
(2)
To optimize eq. 2we use Adam [ 18] and follow the learning
rate schedule in [ 35]. To further reduce the risk of posterior
collapse, it is common to increase βat the beginning of
training from zero to the desired value. Speciﬁcally, we im-
plement the exponential beta schedule proposed by [ 2,26].
In all our experiments we use β= 1with the autoregressive
decoder and β= 0.5with the non-autoregressive decoder.
Moreover, we follow [ 9] in discretizing the location,
width and height of the bounding boxes. Thus each bound-
ing box is represented by a feature vector containing a one-
hot encoding of the class concatenated with the one-hot en-
codings representing the above discretization. We use cate-
gorical cross-entropy as a reconstruction loss.
Implementation Details We implement our method us-
ing Tensorﬂow 2 [ 1] and a NVIDIA V100 GPU for acceler-
ation. We train using the Adam optimizer with a batch size
of 64 for 30 epochs in the case of the autoregressive decoder
and 50 epochs using the non-autoregressive version.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
We evaluate our method on the following publicly avail-
able datasets of layouts for documents, natural scenes, fur-
niture arrangements and mobile phone UIs.
PubLayNet [42] contains 330K samples of machine-
annotated scientiﬁc documents crawled from the Internet.
It has the categories text,title,ﬁgure ,list,table .
RICO [5] is a dataset of user interface designs for mobile
applications. It contains 91K entries with 27 element cate-gories ( button ,toolbar ,list item . . . ). Due to memory con-
straints we omit layouts with more than 100 elements1, in
total removing 0.031% of the data.
COCO [24] Contains ∼100K images of natural scenes. We
use the Stuff variant, which contains 80 thing and 91 stuff
categories, removing small bounding boxes ( ≤2%image
area), as well as instances that are tagged as “ iscrowd ”.
SUN RGB-D [32] is a scene understanding dataset with
10000 samples, including scenes from [ 31], [15] and [ 38].
The annotations comprise different household objects. We
compute the 2D bounding boxes of the semantic regions
from a top-down perspective.
4.2. Evaluation methodology
It is important to evaluate layouts along two high-level
dimensions - perceptual quality and diversity. Note that in
the case of layouts perceptual quality is prone to subjectiv-
ity and different aspects must be considered from dataset to
dataset. It is thus difﬁcult to deﬁne a single metric that en-
tirely covers both aspects. We therefore resort to a set of
metrics where each aims at representing an individual as-
pect of either perceptual quality or diversity.
Alignment and overlap. Some datasets, such as Pub-
LayNet or RICO, consist of entries with strictly deﬁned
alignments and small overlaps between bounding boxes.
Consequently, these properties are an indicator of the per-
ceptual quality of synthesized layouts. We follow Layout-
GAN [ 23] in measuring overlaps using the total overlapping
area among any two bounding boxes inside the whole page
(overlap index ) and the average Intersection over Union
(IoU) between elements. Additionally, we quantify align-
ment using the alignment loss proposed by [ 22].
Unique matches under DocSim metric. We use the
1Note that this restriction originates from memory constraints and does
not imply that our approach is not capable of learning larger layouts given
sufﬁcient memory.
13646