number of unique matches between real sets of layouts and
synthesized layouts as a proxy for diversity. We use the
DocSim metric [ 28] as a similarity metric. Note that, while
the number of unique matches primarily analyzes diversity,
it also partially reﬂects perceptual quality.
Wasserstein distance. A rigorous approach to evalu-
ate diversity would be computing the Wasserstein distance
between the real and learned data distributions. Unfortu-
nately this is infeasible. However, we can approximate the
Wasserstein distance between real and generated data for
two marginal distributions - the class distribution (discrete)
and the bounding box distribution (continuous, 4-d vectors
(xcenter,ycenter,width ,height )). In practice, we compute
these Wasserstein distances from a ﬁnite set of samples.
4.3. Quantitative results
Comparison to state of the art A comparison to any of
the methods described in section 2is difﬁcult, since, to the
best of our knowledge, none has a publicly available imple-
mentation2. Similar to the authors of LayoutV AE [ 16], we
were unable to reproduce the results of LayoutGAN [ 23] on
documents. We reimplement LayoutV AE and the approach
of Gupta et al. [9]. In the LayoutV AE case, we follow [ 9]
and sample category counts from the test dataset. For Gupta
et al., we use a mixture of nucleus sampling with p= 0.9
and top-ksampling with k= 30 . As suggested by the au-
thors, we found nucleus sampling to improve the diversity
of the synthesized layouts. We, further, compare against
NDN [ 28] on RICO using their proposed alignment metric.
In tab. 3we ablate our model on the prior type and the
decoding strategy. We observe that, while the autoregres-
sive decoder slightly decreases diversity (Wasserstein dis-
tance class/bounding box and number of unique matches),
it yields large improvements regarding perceptual quality
(IoU, overlap index and alignment). Moreover, in the case
of the non-autoregressive decoder a learned prior yields im-
provements regarding perceptual quality. However, when
using an autoregressive decoder the learned and non-learned
priors yield similar results. Therefore, we apply an autore-
gressive decoder with a non-learned prior in the remaining
experiments, since it strikes the optimal balance between
diversity, perceptual quality and model simplicity.
We report quantitative results for the aforementioned
metrics on different datasets. Unless explicitly stated, all
metrics are computed on 1000 samples, and the value is av-
eraged across 5 trainings with different random initializa-
tion. In tabs. 2and4we show the results of our method
in comparison to existing art. We show that our method
produces a large number of distinct layouts that have sim-
ilar alignment metrics as the real data. Furthermore, we
2Though the LayoutGAN authors recently released an imple-
mentation, they only did so for a toy example on MNIST:
https://github.com/JiananLi2016/LayoutGAN-Tensorﬂowclearly outperform LayoutV AE [ 16] across all metrics and
demonstrate improved diversity at similar perceptual qual-
ity compared to [ 9], as expected since our method explicitly
approximates the layout distribution. Given that both Lay-
outV AE and Gupta et al. generate layouts autoregressively
and considering our ablation in tab. 3, we note that autore-
gressive modeling denotes an important element of learning
layout distributions.
Furhtermore, in tab. 5we also compare our approach
to Lee et al. [22] on the RICO dataset using their proposed
alignment metric. We demonstrate superior results when
no explicit design constraints are given (NDN-none), show-
ing that our method is better at discovering relationships
without supervision. Even in the NDN-all case, where all
relationships are given to the network, we show similar per-
formance despite not relying on this information.
4.4. Qualitative results
We show qualitative results for PubLayNet in ﬁg. 3, as
well as a qualitative comparison with existing methods in
ﬁg.4. In alignment with the quantitative results in section
4.3, we observe that our approach and [ 9] yield similar per-
ceptual quality. Furthermore, LayoutV AE [ 16] struggles to
model layouts with a large number of elements. As previ-
ously discussed, this results from the application of RNNs,
which are inferior at modeling the relationships between
a large number of elements compared with the attention
mechanism. In ﬁg. 5we show synthetic samples for RICO
as well as the closest DocSim match in the real dataset. We
show similar results for SUN RGB-D in ﬁg. 7. In order to
show the capabilities of our method on the task of natural
scene generation, we train our model on the COCO-Stuff
dataset. In ﬁg. 6we show samples from our network. For
better understanding we feed our generations to a pretrained
instance of LostGAN [ 34]3. These results show that our
method is capable of capturing relationships between ele-
ments regardless of their distance or position in the input
sequence. This is observed by the strict margins modeled
by our network, which resemble those of the real data. In
the case of COCO or SUN RGB-D, we show how the net-
work identiﬁes joint occurrences of different elements ( e.g.
giraffe andtree,person andplayingﬁeld ortable andchair ).
4.5. Layout detection
This experiment demonstrates the beneﬁt of our ap-
proach regarding data augmentation for a downstream task.
Document understanding comprises multiple tasks that go
beyond simple Optical Character Recognition (OCR). Un-
derstanding the arrangement of different pieces of text and
images and their boundaries (the document layout ) is also
necessary for applications such as text extraction or to de-
termine the reading order in a complex document. While
3https://github.com/iVMCL/LostGANs
13647