to create, prone to ambiguity and fail to generalize across
datasets. Therefore, we introduce an inductive bias to learn
from the relationships by using an attention-based neural
network. Notably, the attention mechanism is an ideal can-
didate for exploiting pairwise relationships, since it lever-
ages the pairwise dot product as its fundamental computa-
tional block for guiding the information ﬂow.
Moreover, the attention mechanism also helps modeling
another aspect of the data - namely a varying and large num-
ber of elements. To mitigate this problem other works have
restricted the maximum number of elements occurring in
one layout [ 23,22]. However, attention-based architectures
are well suited for learning the relationships of a large num-
ber of elements, since this is one of the reasons for their
success in the NLP literature [ 35]. Notably, RNNs, as used
by LayoutV AE [ 16], are also capable of modeling a vary-
ing number of elements in a layout. However, they strug-
gle with long-term dependencies, i.e. a large number of el-
ements in a layout. This follows from results in the NLP
literature and is also observed by us (see section 4.4).
3.3. Architecture of VTNs
The architecture of VTNs is based on Transformers [ 35],
which are sequence models that consist of an encoder-
decoder architecture, where both encoder and decoder use
attention layers as their fundamental building blocks. We
refer to ﬁg. 2for a schematic overview of our approach.
The encoder of the Transformer architecture parameter-
izes the posterior distribution qθ(z|x)in the V AE frame-
work. In particular, qθ(z|x)is parameterized as a multi-
variate normal distribution with diagonal covariance matrix,
whose parameters are determined by the output of the en-
coder network. To train the encoder using backpropagation,
we apply the local re-parameterization trick [ 20]. The orig-
inal Transformer is a highly specialized language model,
which is usually trained on vast quantities of text data.
Therefore, it is necessary to adjust the hyper-parameters. It
is essential to keep the number of attention heads large (here
nheads= 8) to average out outliers from individual attention
heads [ 35]. Similarly, we keep a large model dimensional-
ity (dmodel= 512 ) and size of the point-wise feed-forward
layers (dff= 2048 ). However, we ﬁnd that the number
of attention-blocks (see [ 35]) can be reduced to four with-
out performance loss. This hints that relationships between
elements in a layout are less complex than between words
in language. We further omit the positional encodings used
in the context of NLP since the features of bounding boxes
already contain positional information.
The decoder pφ(x|z)in VTNs is a mirrored version of
the encoder. Note that this breaks with [ 35] which adds ad-
ditional attention-layers whose keys and queries are the out-
put of the encoder. We empirically ﬁnd that feeding the out-
put of the encoder as an input to the ﬁrst layer of the decoderyields better results. We further experiment with another
major architectural choice: the autoregressive decoder, i.e.
pφ(x|z) =/producttextl
i=1pφ(xi|xi−1,z), whereldenotes the num-
ber of bounding boxes in a layout, and a non-autoregressive
variant. While the former has more representational power,
since theoretically any distribution can be modeled as an
autoregressive one, it is also more prone to posterior col-
lapse due to the expressive decoder [ 2] and requires more
computational resources.
Furthermore, we consider two distinct prior distribu-
tions. First, we use the common choice of a ﬁxed multi-
variate zero-mean normal distribution. However, this often
proves too restrictive for learning the true posterior distri-
bution [ 4]. In principle there are two avenues to mitigate
this issue: use a more expressive parameterization of the
posterior [ 19] or the prior distribution [ 4]. In this work we
attempt to extend the expressiveness of the prior distribu-
tion by learning the parameters of the multivariate normal
distribution with a diagonal covariance matrix. Since lay-
outs consist of a varying number of bounding boxes, we
parameterize the distribution with an LSTM [ 14].
Importantly, while an autoregressive decoder enables
sampling of layouts with varying number of elements - e.g.
by introducing symbols for start/end of the layout - the non-
autoregressive decoder requires incorporating this into the
prior distribution. Therefore, we model the prior in this
case asp(z,s) =p(z|s)p(s)wheresdenotes the number
of bounding boxes. We learn p(s)during training by count-
ing the number of occurrences of each sequence length.
Finally, we note that in the case of the autoregressive
decoder, we ﬁnd empirically that aggregating the latent rep-
resentations zacross all elements in a layout yields better
perceptual quality. This corresponds to parameterizing the
posterior distribution with the output of the encoder aggre-
gated along the dimension of the layout elements. To this
end we follow BERT [ 6] where the ﬁnal hidden state of the
encoder for the ﬁrst token is used to represent the entire se-
quence, and used as the ﬁrst element in the the decoder in-
put. In the case of the non-autoregressive decoder we do not
aggregate the latent representations, but feed them directly
with variable dimensionality to the decoder.
3.4. Optimizing VTNs
Since we are learning the layout distribution using a
V AE, we optimize the ELBO deﬁned in eq. ( 1). However,
a practical optimization challenge of V AEs is the so-called
posterior collapse [ 2,10]. The decoder ignores the informa-
tion in the latent representation and collapses onto modes of
the data distribution. At the same time the posterior distri-
bution parameterized by the encoder can perfectly match
the prior distribution, since it does not need to transmit in-
formation to the decoder. Therefore, this work follows a
common heuristic by optimizing the β-V AE objective in-
13645