Variational Transformer Networks for Layout Generation
Diego Martin Arroyo1
martinarroyo@google.com
1Google, IncJanis Postels2
jpostels@vision.ee.ethz.ch
2ETH Z ¨urichFederico Tombari1,3
tombari@google.com
3Technische Universit ¨at M ¨unchen
Abstract
Generative models able to synthesize layouts of different
kinds ( e.g. documents, user interfaces or furniture arrange-
ments) are a useful tool to aid design processes and as a ﬁrst
step in the generation of synthetic data, among other tasks.
We exploit the properties of self-attention layers to capture
high level relationships between elements in a layout, and
use these as the building blocks of the well-known Varia-
tional Autoencoder (VAE) formulation. Our proposed Vari-
ational Transformer Network (VTN) is capable of learning
margins, alignments and other global design rules without
explicit supervision. Layouts sampled from our model have
a high degree of resemblance to the training data, while
demonstrating appealing diversity. In an extensive evalua-
tion on publicly available benchmarks for different layout
types VTNs achieve state-of-the-art diversity and percep-
tual quality. Additionally, we show the capabilities of this
method as part of a document layout detection pipeline.
1. Introduction
Layouts, i.e. the abstract positioning of elements in a
scene or document, constitute an essential tool for various
downstream tasks. Consequently, the ability to ﬂexibly ren-
der novel, realistic layouts has the potential to yield sig-
niﬁcant improvements in many tasks, such as neural scene
synthesis [ 36], graphic design or in data synthesis pipelines.
Even though the task of synthesizing novel layouts has re-
cently started to gain the attention of the deep learning com-
munity [ 23,16,22,28], it is still a sparsely explored area
and provides unique challenges to generative models based
on neural networks, namely a non-sequential data structure
consisting of varying length samples with discrete (classes)
and continuous (coordinates) elements simultaneously.
Generative models based on neural networks have re-
ceived a signiﬁcant share of attention in recent years, as
they proved capable of learning complex, high-dimensional
distributions. Common formulations such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [ 8] and Variational Autoen-
Text
Figure
Text
Text
Text
List
Text
Title
Text
Toolbar
Text
List Item
List Item
List Item
List Item
List Item
Text
box
shelf
box
chair
papers
desktop
desk
desk
monitorDocument UI design Natural Scene Room layout
Figure 1: Given a random vector z, our novel transformer
V AE model produces layouts that follow the design con-
straints of the training data. It can generate various layouts
types, from documents to objects and scenes.
coders (V AEs) [ 21] have shown impressive results in tasks
such as image translation [ 43], image synthesis [ 17], and
text generation [ 2]. A GAN is comprised of an arrangement
of generator-discriminator neural networks in a zero-sum
conﬁguration, while a V AE learns a lower bound of the data
distribution using an encoder-decoder neural network with a
regularized bottleneck. Since these are general frameworks,
they leave room for adapting the underlying neural architec-
tures to exploit the properties of the data. For example, the
weight sharing strategy of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) renders them the most common building block for
image processing, while for sequential data ( e.g., text), Re-
current Neural Networks (RNNs) or attention modules are
often the architecture of choice. In particular, the attention
mechanism has recently demonstrated strong performance
on a variety of tasks, such as language translation [ 35] and
object detection [ 3], proving its superiority over RNNs re-
garding modeling long-term relationships.
Prior work has built the foundation by proving the ef-
13642