fectiveness of deep learning to generate novel documents
[22,28,9], natural scenes [ 16] and User Interface (UI) de-
signs [ 22]. Mostly, the location and size of a given element
depends not only on the particularities of its type ( e.g. titles
tend to be small and at the top of a document, while ﬁgures
or tables usually occupy a signiﬁcant amount of space), but
also on their relationship to other elements. One way to
incorporate this knowledge into modeling a layout distri-
bution is to deﬁne handcrafted rules, ( e.g. enforcing mar-
gins, alignment, the allowed number of elements in a docu-
ment. . . ). However, such rules are subjective, hard to deﬁne
unambiguously and certainly do not generalize to arbitrary
layout distributions. Consequently, we refrain from mod-
eling any prior knowledge by i.e. enforcing heuristics, and
instead equip the neural architecture itself with an inherent
bias towards learning the relationship between elements in a
layout. This makes the attention mechanism a suitable fun-
damental architectural component, since it naturally models
many-to-many relationships and is, thus, particularly suit-
able for discovering relationships in a given layout distribu-
tion in an unsupervised manner.
By instantiating the V AE framework with an attention-
based architecture, this work investigates an important gap
in literature. We explore relevant design choices in great
detail - e.g. autoregressive vs. non-autoregressive decoder,
learned vs. non-learned prior. Furthermore, we tailor our
novel approach to the yet under-explored task of layout
generation, where we demonstrate state-of-the-art perfor-
mance across various metrics on several publicly available
datasets. To summarize, our main contributions are:
•A novel generative model specialized in layout gener-
ation that incorporates an inductive bias towards high-
level relationships between a large number of elements
in a layout without annotations.
•Exploration of strategies for creating a variational bot-
tleneck on sequences with varying lengths.
2. Related work
Layout synthesis The task of layout synthesis has not yet
been exhaustively covered by literature, but fueled increas-
ing interest in the research community in recent years. Lay-
outGAN [23] is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst
paper to apply generative models (in particular GANs) to
this task. The authors use a generator network to synthe-
size bounding box annotations. In order to use a CNN as
discriminator, LayoutGAN applies a novel differential ren-
der module to turn a collection of bounding boxes into an
image. Similarly to our approach, it uses self-attention to
model many-to-many relationships. However, the authors
only evaluate single-column documents with at most nine
elements, which corresponds to much sparser layouts than
provided by common publicly available datasets.LayoutV AE [16] proposes an autoregressive model
based on a conditional V AE with a conditional prior (con-
ditioned on the number and type of elements in the layout).
The authors use an Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [ 13]
to aggregate information over time. Additionally they pro-
pose using a second conditional V AE to model the dis-
tribution of category counts which is used as conditional
information during layout generation. Their underlying
neural architecture is comprised of fully-connected layers
and LSTMs. Consequently, it is expected that LayoutV AE
struggles to model layouts with a large number of elements,
since LSTMs do not explicitly model the relationships of all
components. Unlike LayoutV AE, our work explicitly biases
the underlying neural network towards learning the rela-
tionships between elements in a layout, and only makes the
decoder autoregressive (reducing the computational costs).
Further, we only train a single V AE for learning the layout
distribution instead of resorting to two separate V AEs.
InNeural Design Networks the authors [ 22] generate
document layouts with an optional set of design constraints.
Initially, a complete graph for modeling the relationships
between elements is built. The distribution of these relation-
ships is learned using a V AE based on Graph Convolution
Networks (GCNs), where the labels of the relationships are
based on heuristics. The actual layout is subsequently gen-
erated by a separate GCN. The resulting raw layout is then
polished by an additional reﬁnement network. In contrast to
Neural Design Networks, this work does not rely on labels
extracted using heuristics on the training data for learning a
layout distribution, which is prone to introduce ambiguities
and unlikely to generalize across datasets. Moreover, our
approach learns the layout distribution end-to-end without
relying on training three separate neural networks.
Similarly, READ [28] also uses heuristics to determine
the relationships between elements and then trains a V AE
which is based on Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs) [ 7]
to learn the layout distribution.
Content-aware Generative Modeling of Graphic De-
sign Layouts [39] trains a V AEGAN conditioned on im-
ages, keywords, attributes of the layout and corresponding
coordinates. However, the authors focus on learning the lay-
out distribution conditioned on additional user input.
Layout Generation and Completion with Self-
attention [9] is most relevant to this work. The authors
perform self-supervised training ( i.e. layout completion) us-
ing an autoregressive decoder motivated by Transformers
[35]. Subsequently, novel layouts are synthesized using
beam search [ 27]. While this generation approach can yield
strong results, it requires optimizing additional hyperpa-
rameters ( e.g. beam size) and, more importantly, it does
not have any theoretical guarantees for learning the actual
data distribution. The resulting distribution rather depends
on ﬁnding the right level of regularization at training time.
13643