Only if the model is regularized appropriately beam search
will yield outcomes of sufﬁcient diversity. Since this gener-
ation process lacks theoretical guarantees for capturing the
full diversity of the layout distribution and heavily relies on
heuristics, we directly approximate the distribution using a
attention-based V AE instead.
Some works have been proposed with particular focus on
furniture arrangement [ 36,12]. In the method of Wang et al.
[36], one CNN places elements in a room by estimating the
likelihood of each possible location, while a second CNN
determines when the scene is complete. [ 30] extends this to
model orientations and room dimensions. Moreover, Hen-
derson et al. [12] propose to learn a distribution for each
element type and model high-order relationships between
objects using a direct acyclical graph. Since all of these
methods use the now unavailable SUNCG dataset [ 33] for
training, establishing a comparison with them is difﬁcult.
Additionally, tab. 1provides a high-level comparison
between this work and the most relevant adjacent meth-
ods. We differentiate existing works along four important
dimensions: 1) Are models equipped with inductive biases
towards learning the relationships between elements? 2)
Are these relationships learned without supervision or are
additional labels, using e.g. heuristics, necessary? 3) Can
layouts contain an arbitrary number of elements? 4) Does
the learning approach provide guarantees for learning the
underlying distribution by applying probabilistic methods?
Attention-based V AEs are a recent development in the
Natural Language Processing (NLP) literature. The com-
mon goal is to learn the distribution of real data more ac-
curately than with deterministic self-supervised approaches
[25,26,37]. To combine Transformers and V AEs [ 26] uses
self-attention layers for the encoder and decoder compo-
nents. The encoder turns a sentence into a collection of
high-dimensional vectors of the same length as the input.
These constitute the V AE bottleneck, and are passed after
re-parameterization to the decoder to reconstruct the sen-
tence. By feeding a set of vectors sampled from the prior, a
sentence of the same length can be generated. Further, [ 25]
implements a conditional V AE (conditioned on the context
of a conversation) based on the Transformer to improve
diversity on the task of response generation. [ 37] devel-
ops a Transformer-based V AE to enhance variability on the
task of story completion. Their encoder and decoder share
weights while the bottleneck of their V AE is fed into the
penultimate layer of the decoder.
3. Variational Transformer Networks
This section illustrates the proposed Variational Trans-
former Networks. From a high-level perspective VTNs are
an instance of the V AE framework tailored to the task of lay-
out synthesis, where the main building blocks of the neural
networks parameterizing the encoder and decoder are atten-Inductive
BiasUnsupervised
RelationshipArbitrary
SizeDistribution
Learning
LayoutGAN [ 23]✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
LayoutV AE [ 16] ✗ ✓ Practically
difﬁcult✓
READ [ 28] ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
NDN [ 22] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
Gupta et al. [9] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 1: Comparison with existing methods. We consider
whether methods 1) equip their models with inductive bi-
ases towards learning the relationships between elements,
2) learn relationships unsupervised, 3) allow layouts of arbi-
trary size and 4) have guarantees for learning the underlying
distribution by applying probabilistic methods.
tion layers. Firstly, we brieﬂy revisit the concept of V AEs.
Subsequently, we explain how VTNs exploit the data format
of layouts, their architecture and how to train them.
3.1. Variational Autoencoders
V AEs are a family of latent variable models that approx-
imate a data distribution P(X)by maximizing the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) [ 21]
L(θ,φ) =E
z∼qθ(z|x)[log(pφ(x|z))]−KL(qθ(z|x)||p(z))
(1)
wherepφ(x|z)denotes a decoder parameterized by a neu-
ral network with parameter φ,qθ(z|x)is the approximate
posterior distribution, similarly parameterized by a neural
network with weights θ, andp(z)the prior distribution.
3.2. Exploiting the Data Format of Layouts
The central aspect of layout generation is its unique un-
derlying data format. Layouts are sets of elements of vari-
able size, where each element can be described by both
discrete and continuous features. More formally, each lay-
outxin a given dataset Xconsists of a variable number
lof bounding boxes. Further, each bounding box xiwith
i∈[1,...,l]contains information about its class (for doc-
uments, e.g. text, image. . . ), location and dimension.
Another important characteristic of layout datasets is that
there exists a high degree of correlation between the individ-
ual elements in a layout. For example, in case of document
layouts, titles tend to be positioned at the top of a text. It
is therefore essential to bias an approach for learning layout
distributions towards exploiting the relationships between
elements. While some methods introduce additional fea-
tures, such as annotations for the relationships between ele-
ments [ 22,28], our approach instead relies solely on bound-
ing box annotations, since additional features are expensive
13644