also call the unmodified inputs and adversarially perturbed inputs
as “benign examples ” and “adversarial examples ”. When evaluating
the model’s classification performance, “train accuracy ” and “test
accuracy ” are used to denote the classification accuracy of benign
examples from training and test sets; “adversarial train accuracy’ ’
and “adversarial test accuracy ” represent the classification accuracy
of adversarial examples from training and test sets; “verified train
accuracy ” and “verified test accuracy ” measure the classification
accuracy under the verified worst-case predictions from training
and test sets. Finally, an input example is called “secure ” when it is
correctly classified by the model for all adversarial perturbations
within the constraint Bϵ, “insecure ” otherwise.
The performance of membership inference attacks is highly re-
lated to generalization error of target models [ 47,64]. An extremely
simple attack algorithm can infer membership based on whether or
not an input is correctly classified. In this case, it is clear that a large
gap between the target model’s train and test accuracy leads to a
significant membership inference attack accuracy (as most mem-
bers are correctly classified, but not the non-members). Tsipras et al.
[59] and Zhang et al. [ 66] show that robust training might lead to a
drop in test accuracy. This is shown based on both empirical and
theoretical analysis on toy classification tasks. Moreover, the gener-
alization gap can be enlarged for a robust model when evaluating its
accuracy on adversarial examples [ 42,51]. Thus, compared with the
natural models, the robust models might leak more member-
ship information, due to exhibiting a larger generalization
error, in both the benign or adversarial settings.
The performance of membership inference attack is related to
the target model’s sensitivity with regard to training data [ 32]. The
sensitivity measure is the influence of one data point on the tar-
get model’s performance by computing its prediction difference,
when trained with and without this data point. Intuitively, when a
training point has a large influence on the target model (high sensi-
tivity), its model prediction is likely to be different from the model
prediction on a test point, and thus the adversary can distinguish
its membership more easily. The robust training algorithms aim to
ensure that model predictions remain unchanged for a small area
(such as the l∞ball) around any data point. However, in practice,
they guarantee this for the training examples, thus, magnifying the
influence of the training data on the model. Therefore, compared
with the natural training, the robust training algorithms might
make the model more susceptible to membership inference
attacks, by increasing its sensitivity to its training data.
To validate the above insights, let’s take the natural and the
robust CIFAR10 classifiers provided by Madry et al. [ 33] as an ex-
ample. From Figure 1, we have seen that compared to the natural
model, the robust model has a larger divergence between the pre-
diction loss of training data and test data. Our fine-grained analysis
in Appendix A further reveals that the large divergence of robust
model is highly related to its robustness performance. Moreover,
the robust model incurs a significant generalization error in the
adversarial setting, with 96%adversarial train accuracy, and only
47%adversarial test accuracy. Finally, we will experimentally show
in Section 5.2.1 that the robust model is indeed more sensitive with
regard to training data.3.1 Membership Inference Performance
Table 1: Notations for membership inference attacks against
robust machine learning models.
Symbol Description
F Target machine learning model.
Bϵ Adversarial perturbation constraint when training a robust model.
Dtrain Model’s training set.
Dtest Model’s test set.
x Benign (unmodified) input example.
y Ground truth label for the input x.
xadv Adversarial example generated from x.
V Robustness verification to compute verified worst-case predictions.
I Membership inference strategy.
Ainf Membership inference accuracy.
ADVT inf Membership inference advantage compared to random guessing.
In this part, we describe the membership inference attack and
its performance formally, with notations listed in Table 1. For a
neural network model F(we skip its parameter θfor simplicity) that
is robustly trained with the adversarial constraint Bϵ, the mem-
bership inference attack aims to determine whether a given input
example z=(x,y)is in its training set Dtrain or not. We denote the
inference strategy adopted by the adversary as I(F,Bϵ,z), which
codes members as 1, and non-members as 0.
We use the fraction of correct membership predictions, as the
metric to evaluate membership inference accuracy. We use a test
setDtestwhich does not overlap with the training set, to represent
non-members. We sample a random data point ( x,y) from either
DtrainorDtestwith an equal 50%probability, to test the membership
inference attack. We measure the membership inference accuracy
as follows.
Ainf(F,Bϵ,I)=Í
z∈DtrainI(F,Bϵ,z)
2·|Dtrain|+Í
z∈Dtest1−I(F ,Bϵ,z)
2·|Dtest|,
(15)
where|·|measures the size of a dataset.
The membership inference accuracy evaluates the probability
that the adversary can guess correctly whether an input is from
training set or test set. Note that a random guessing strategy will
lead to a 50%inference accuracy. To further measure the effective-
ness of our membership inference strategy, we also use the notion
of membership inference advantage proposed by Yeom et al. [ 64],
which is defined as the increase in inference accuracy over random
guessing (multiplied by 2).
ADVT inf=2×(Ainf−0.5) (16)
3.2 Exploiting the Model’s Predictions on
Benign Examples
We adopt a confidence-thresholding inference strategy due to its
simplicity and effectiveness [ 64]: an input(x,y)is inferred as mem-
ber if its prediction confidence F(x)yis larger than a preset thresh-
old value. We denote this inference strategy as IBsince it relies on
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
245