Privacy Risks of Securing Machine Learning Models against
Adversarial Examples
Liwei Song
liweis@princeton.edu
Princeton UniversityReza Shokri
reza@comp.nus.edu.sg
National University of SingaporePrateek Mittal
pmittal@princeton.edu
Princeton University
ABSTRACT
The arms race between attacks and defenses for machine learn-
ing models has come to a forefront in recent years, in both the
security community and the privacy community. However, one big
limitation of previous research is that the security domain and the
privacy domain have typically been considered separately. It is thus
unclear whether the defense methods in one domain will have any
unexpected impact on the other domain.
In this paper, we take a step towards resolving this limitation by
combining the two domains. In particular, we measure the success
ofmembership inference attacks against six state-of-the-art defense
methods that mitigate the risk of adversarial examples (i.e., evasion
attacks). Membership inference attacks determine whether or not
an individual data record has been part of a model’s training set.
The accuracy of such attacks reflects the information leakage of
training algorithms about individual members of the training set.
Adversarial defense methods against adversarial examples influence
the model’s decision boundaries such that model predictions remain
unchanged for a small area around each input. However, this objec-
tive is optimized on training data. Thus, individual data records in
the training set have a significant influence on robust models. This
makes the models more vulnerable to inference attacks.
To perform the membership inference attacks, we leverage the
existing inference methods that exploit model predictions. We also
propose two new inference methods that exploit structural prop-
erties of robust models on adversarially perturbed data. Our exper-
imental evaluation demonstrates that compared with the natural
training (undefended) approach, adversarial defense methods can
indeed increase the target model’s risk against membership inference
attacks. When using adversarial defenses to train the robust models,
the membership inference advantage increases by up to 4.5times
compared to the naturally undefended models. Beyond revealing
the privacy risks of adversarial defenses, we further investigate
the factors, such as model capacity, that influence the membership
information leakage.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Software and application security ;
•Computing methodologies →Neural networks.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
©2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6747-9/19/11.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3354211KEYWORDS
machine learning; membership inference attacks; adversarial exam-
ples and defenses
ACM Reference Format:
Liwei Song, Reza Shokri, and Prateek Mittal. 2019. Privacy Risks of Secur-
ing Machine Learning Models against Adversarial Examples. In 2019 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’19),
November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3354211
1 INTRODUCTION
Machine learning models, especially deep neural networks, have
been deployed prominently in many real-world applications, such
as image classification [ 28,49], speech recognition [ 11,21], natural
language processing [ 2,10], and game playing [ 35,48]. However,
since the machine learning algorithms were originally designed
without considering potential adversarial threats, their security and
privacy vulnerabilities have come to a forefront in recent years,
together with the arms race between attacks and defenses [ 7,22,39].
In the security domain, the adversary aims to induce misclassifi-
cations to the target machine learning model, with attack methods
divided into two categories: evasion attacks and poisoning attacks
[22]. Evasion attacks, also known as adversarial examples, perturb
inputs at the test time to induce wrong predictions by the target
model [ 5,8,15,38,56]. In contrast, poisoning attacks target the
training process by maliciously modifying part of training data to
cause the trained model to misbehave on some test inputs [ 6,27,43].
In response to these attacks, the security community has designed
new training algorithms to secure machine learning models against
evasion attacks [ 16,33,34,50,61,66] or poisoning attacks [ 24,55].
In the privacy domain, the adversary aims to obtain private infor-
mation about the model’s training data or the target model. Attacks
targeting data privacy include: the adversary inferring whether in-
put examples were used to train the target model with membership
inference attacks [ 37,47,64], learning global properties of training
data with property inference attacks [ 12], or covert channel model
training attacks [ 52]. Attacks targeting model privacy include: the
adversary uncovering the model details with model extraction at-
tacks [ 58], and inferring hyperparameters with hyperparameter
stealing attacks [ 60]. In response to these attacks, the privacy com-
munity has designed defenses to prevent privacy leakage of training
data [1, 19, 36, 46] or the target model [26, 31].
However, one important limitation of current machine learning
defenses is that they typically focus solely on either the security
domain or the privacy domain. It is thus unclear whether defense
methods in one domain will have any unexpected impact on the
other domain. In this paper, we take a step towards enhancing our
understanding of machine learning models when both the security
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
241