(a) Adversarially robust model from Madry et al. [33], with 99%train
accuracy and 87%test accuracy.
(b) Naturally undefended model, with 100% train accuracy and 95%
test accuracy. Around 23%training and test examples have zero loss.
Figure 1: Histogram of CIFAR10 classifiers’ loss values of training data (members) and test data (non-members). We can see
the larger divergence between the loss distribution over members and non-members on the robust model as compared to the
natural model. This shows the privacy risk of securing deep learning models against adversarial examples.
domain and privacy domain are considered together. In particu-
lar, we seek to understand the privacy risks of securing machine
learning models by evaluating membership inference attacks against
adversarially robust deep learning models, which aim to mitigate the
threat of adversarial examples.
The membership inference attack aims to infer whether a data
point is part of the target model’s training set or not, reflecting the
information leakage of the model about its training data. It can also
pose a privacy risk as the membership can reveal an individual’s
sensitive information. For example, participation in a hospital’s
health analytic training set means that an individual was once a
patient in that hospital. It has been shown that the success of mem-
bership inference attacks in the black-box setting is highly related
to the target model’s generalization error [ 47,64]. Adversarially
robust models aim to enhance the robustness of target models by
ensuring that model predictions are unchanged for a small area
(such as l∞ball) around each input example. The objective is to
make the model robust against any input, however, the objective is
optimized only on the training set. Thus, intuitively, adversarially
robust models have the potential to increase the model’s general-
ization error and sensitivity to changes in the training set, resulting
in an enhanced risk of membership inference attacks. As an ex-
ample, Figure 1 shows the histogram of cross-entropy loss values
of training data and test data for both naturally undefended and
adversarially robust CIFAR10 classifiers provided by Madry et al.
[33]. We can see that members (training data) and non-members
(test data) can be distinguished more easily for the robust model,
compared to the natural model.
To measure the membership inference risks of adversarially ro-
bust models, besides the conventional inference method based on
prediction confidence, we propose two new inference methods that
exploit the structural properties of robust models. We measure the
privacy risks of robust models trained with six state-of-the-art ad-
versarial defense methods, and find that adversarially robust models
are indeed more susceptible to membership inference attacks thannaturally undefended models. We further perform a comprehen-
sive investigation to analyze the relation between privacy leakage
and model properties. We finally discuss the role of adversary’s
prior knowledge, potential countermeasures and the relationship
between privacy and robustness.
In summary, we make the following contributions in this paper:
(1)We propose two new membership inference attacks spe-
cific to adversarially robust models by exploiting adversarial
examples’ predictions and verified worst-case predictions.
With these two new methods, we can achieve higher in-
ference accuracies than the conventional inference method
based on prediction confidence of benign inputs.
(2)We perform membership inference attacks on models trained
with six state-of-the-art adversarial defense methods (3 em-
pirical defenses [ 33,50,66] and 3 verifiable defenses [ 16,34,
61]). We demonstrate that all methods indeed increase the
model’s membership inference risk. By defining the member-
ship inference advantage as the increase in inference accu-
racy over random guessing (multiplied by 2) [ 64], we show
that robust machine learning models can incur a membership
inference advantage 4.5×,2×,3.5×times the membership
inference advantage of naturally undefended models, on Yale
Face, Fashion-MNIST, and CIFAR10 datasets, respectively.
(3)We further explore the factors that influence the member-
ship inference performance of the adversarially robust model,
including its robustness generalization, the adversarial per-
turbation constraint, and the model capacity.
(4)Finally, we experimentally evaluate the effect of the adver-
sary’s prior knowledge, countermeasures such as tempera-
ture scaling and regularization, and discuss the relationship
between training data privacy and model robustness.
Some of our analysis was briefly discussed in a short workshop
paper [ 53]. In this paper, we go further by proposing two new
membership inference attacks and measuring four more adversarial
defense methods, where we show that all adversarial defenses can
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
242