increase privacy risks of target models. We also perform a compre-
hensive investigation of factors that impact the privacy risks.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK:
ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES AND
MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE ATTACKS
In this section, we first present the background and related work on
adversarial examples and defenses, and then discuss membership
inference attacks.
2.1 Adversarial Examples and Defenses
LetFθ:Rd→Rkbe a machine learning model with dinput
features and koutput classes, parameterized by weights θ. For an
example z=(x,y)with the input feature xand the ground truth
labely, the model outputs a prediction vector over all class labels
Fθ(x)withÍk−1
i=0Fθ(x)i=1, and the final prediction will be the
label with the largest prediction probability ˆy=argmaxiFθ(x)i.
For neural networks, the outputs of its penultimate layer are known
as logits, and we represent them as a vector дθ(x). The softmax
function is then computed on logits to obtain the final prediction
vector.
Fθ(x)i=exp(дθ(x)i)
Ík−1
j=0exp(дθ(x)j)(1)
Given a training set Dtrain, the natural training algorithm aims to
make model predictions match ground truth labels by minimizing
the prediction loss over all training examples.
min
θ1
|Dtrain|Õ
z∈Dtrainℓ(Fθ,z), (2)
where|Dtrain|denotes the size of training set, and ℓcomputes the
prediction loss. A widely-adopted loss function is the cross-entropy
loss:
ℓ(Fθ,z)=−k−1Õ
i=01{i=y}·log(Fθ(x)i), (3)
where1{·}is the indicator function.
2.1.1 Adversarial examples: Although machine learning models
have achieved tremendous success in many classification scenarios,
they have been found to be easily fooled by adversarial examples
[5,8,15,38,56]. Adversarial examples induce incorrect classifi-
cations to target models, and can be generated via imperceptible
perturbations to benign inputs.
argmax
iFθ(˜x)i,y,such that ˜x∈Bϵ(x), (4)
whereBϵ(x)denotes the set of points around xwithin the per-
turbation budget of ϵ. Usually a lpball is chosen as the perturba-
tion constraint for generating adversarial examples i.e., Bϵ(x)=
{x′|∥x′−x∥p≤ϵ}. We consider the l∞-ball adversarial constraint
throughout the paper, as it is widely adopted by most adversarial
defense methods [16, 33, 34, 40, 50, 61, 66].
The solution to Equation (4)is called an “untargeted adversarial
example” as the adversarial goal is to achieve any incorrect classi-
fication. In comparison, a “targeted adversarial example” ensuresthat the model prediction is a specified incorrect label y′, which is
not equal to y.
argmax
iFθ(˜x)i=y′,such that ˜x∈Bϵ(x). (5)
Unless otherwise specified, an adversarial example in this paper
refers to an untargeted adversarial example.
To provide adversarial robustness under the perturbation con-
straintBϵ, instead of natural training algorithm shown in Equation
(2), a robust training algorithm is adopted by adding an additional
robust loss function.
min
θ1
|Dtrain|Õ
z∈Dtrainα·ℓ(Fθ,z)+(1−α)·ℓR(Fθ,z,Bϵ),(6)
whereαis the ratio to trade off natural loss and robust loss, and ℓR
measures the robust loss, which can be formulated as maximizing
prediction loss ℓ′under the constraint Bϵ.
ℓR(Fθ,z,Bϵ)=max
˜x∈Bϵ(x)ℓ′(Fθ,(˜x,y)) (7)
ℓ′can be same as ℓor other appropriate loss functions.
However, it is usually hard to find the exact solution to Equation
(7). Therefore, the adversarial defenses propose different ways to
approximate the robust loss ℓR, which can be divided into two
categories: empirical defenses and verifiable defenses.
2.1.2 Empirical defenses: Empirical defense methods approximate
robust loss values by generating adversarial examples xadvat each
training step with state-of-the-art attack methods and computing
their prediction loss. Now the robust training algorithm can be
expressed as following.
min
θ1
|Dtrain|Õ
z∈Dtrainα·ℓ(Fθ,z)+(1−α)·ℓ′(Fθ,(xadv,y))(8)
Three of our tested adversarial defense methods belong to this
category, which are described as follows.
PGD-Based Adversarial Training (PGD-Based Adv-Train) [33]:
Madry et al. [ 33] propose one of the most effective empirical defense
methods by using the projected gradient descent (PGD) method to
generate adversarial examples for maximizing cross-entropy loss
(ℓ′=ℓ) and training purely on those adversarial examples ( α=0).
The PGD attack contains Tgradient descent steps, which can be
expressed as
˜xt+1=ΠBϵ(x)[˜xt+η·sign(∇ ˜xtℓ(Fθ,(˜xt,y)))], (9)
where ˜x0=x,xadv=˜xT,ηis the step size value, ∇denotes the
gradient computation, and ΠBϵ(x)means the projection onto the
perturbation constraint Bϵ(x).
Distributional Adversarial Training (Dist-Based Adv-Train)
[50]: Instead of strictly satisfying the perturbation constraint with
projection step ΠBϵ(x)as in PGD attacks, Sinha et al. [ 50] generate
adversarial examples by solving the Lagrangian relaxation of cross-
entropy loss:
max
˜xℓ(Fθ,(˜x,y))−γ∥˜x−x∥p, (10)
whereγis the penalty parameter for the lpdistance. A multi-step
gradient descent method is adopted to solve Equation (10). The
model will then be trained on the cross-loss entropy ( ℓ′=ℓ) of
adversarial examples only ( α=0).
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
243