Table 12: Membership inference attacks against natural and
empirically robust models [33] on the HAR dataset with a l∞
perturbation constraint ϵ=0.05. Based on Equation (16), the
natural model has an inference advantage of 10.72%, while
the robust model has an inference advantage of 20.26%.
Training train test adv-train adv-test inference inference
method acc acc acc acc acc (IB) acc (IA)
Natural 100% 96.61% 33.56% 29.69% 55.36% 55.03%
PGD-Based96.10% 92.53% 92.51% 73.84% 58.29% 60.13%Adv-Train [33]
training, we follow Wong and Kolter [ 61] by using the l∞pertur-
bation constraint with the size of 0.05, and apply the PGD-based
adversarial training [ 33]. The results for membership inference
attacks against the robust classifier and its naturally trained coun-
terpart are presented in Table 12. We can see that the robust train-
ing algorithm still leaks more membership information: the robust
model has a 2×membership inference advantage (Equation (16))
over the natural model.
7.3.2 Is the conflict a fundamental principle? It is difficult to judge
whether the privacy-robustness conflict is fundamental or not: will a
robust training algorithm inevitably increase the model risk against
membership inference attacks, compared to the natural training
algorithm? On the one hand, there is no direct tension between
privacy of training data and model robustness. We have shown in
Section 5.2.2 that the privacy leakage of robust model is related to
its generalization error in the adversarial setting. The regulariza-
tion method in Section 7.2.2, which improves the adversarial test
accuracy and decreases the generalization error, indeed helps to
decrease the membership inference accuracy.
On the other hand, our analysis verifies that state-of-the-art ro-
bust training algorithms [ 16,33,34,50,61,66] magnify the influence
of training data on the model by minimizing the loss over a lpball
of each training point, leading to more training data memorization.
In addition, we find that a recently-proposed robust training algo-
rithm [ 29], which adds a noise layer for robustness, also leads to an
increase of membership inference accuracy in Appendix E. These
robust training algorithms do not achieve good generalization of
robustness performance [ 42,51]. For example, even the regularized
Yale Face classifier in Table 11 has a generalization error of 11%
in the adversarial setting, resulting a 2.3×membership inference
advantage than the natural Yale Face classifier in Table 2.
Furthermore, the failure of robustness generalization may partly
be due to inappropriate (toy) distance constraints that are used to
model adversaries. Although lpperturbation constraints have been
widely adopted in both attacks and defenses for adversarial exam-
ples [ 5,15,33,61], the lpdistance metric has limitations. Sharif et al.
[45] empirically show that (a) two images that are perceptually sim-
ilar to humans can have a large lpdistance, and (b) two images with
a small lpdistance can have different semantics. Jacobsen et al. [ 23]
further show that robust training with a lpperturbation constraint
makes the model more vulnerable to another type of adversarial
examples: invariance based attacks that change the semantics of
the image but leave the model predictions unchanged. Meaningful
perturbation constraints to capture evasion attacks continue to bean important research challenge. We leave the question of deciding
whether the privacy-robustness conflict is fundamental (i.e., will
hold for next generation of defenses against adversarial examples)
as an open question for the research community.
8 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have connected both the security domain and the
privacy domain for machine learning systems by investigating the
membership inference privacy risk of robust training approaches
(that mitigate the adversarial examples). To evaluate the member-
ship inference risk, we propose two new inference methods that
exploit structural properties of adversarially robust defenses, beyond
the conventional inference method based on the prediction confi-
dence of benign input. By measuring the success of membership
inference attacks on robust models trained with six state-of-the-art
adversarial defense approaches, we find that all six robust training
methods will make the machine learning model more susceptible to
membership inference attacks, compared to the naturally undefended
training. Our analysis further reveals that the privacy leakage is
related to target model’s robustness generalization, its adversarial
perturbation constraint, and its capacity. We also provide thorough
discussions on the adversary’s prior knowledge, potential counter-
measures and the relationship between privacy and robustness. The
detailed analysis in our paper highlights the importance of thinking
about security and privacy together. Specifically, the membership
inference risk needs to be considered when designing approaches
to defend against adversarial examples.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to anonymous reviewers at ACM CCS for valu-
able insights, and would like to specially thank Nicolas Papernot
for shepherding the paper. This work was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-1553437, CNS-
1704105, CIF-1617286 and EARS-1642962, by the Office of Naval
Research Young Investigator Award, by the Army Research Office
Young Investigator Prize, by Faculty research awards from Intel and
IBM, and by the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s
Office, Singapore, under its Strategic Capability Research Centres
Funding Initiative.
REFERENCES
[1]Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov,
Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep learning with differential privacy. In
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS). 308–318.
[2]Daniel Andor, Chris Alberti, David Weiss, Aliaksei Severyn, Alessandro Presta,
Kuzman Ganchev, Slav Petrov, and Michael Collins. 2016. Globally normalized
transition-based neural networks. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). 2442–2452.
[3]Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra, and Jorge Luis
Reyes-Ortiz. 2013. A public domain dataset for human activity recognition using
smartphones.. In European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN).
[4]Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David Wagner. 2018. Obfuscated gradients
give a false sense of security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
[5]Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Šrndić, Pavel
Laskov, Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. 2013. Evasion attacks against machine
learning at test time. In European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles
and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML PKDD). 387–402.
[6]Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov. 2012. Poisoning attacks against
support vector machines. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
1467–1474.
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
254