the benign examples’ predictions. We have the following expres-
sions for this inference strategy and its inference accuracy.
IB(F,Bϵ,(x,y))=1{F(x)y≥τB}
Ainf(F,Bϵ,IB)=1
2+1
2·(Í
z∈Dtrain1{F(x)y≥τB}
|Dtrain|
−Í
z∈Dtest1{F(x)y≥τB}
|Dtest|),(17)
where1{·}is the indicator function and the last two terms are
the values of complementary cumulative distribution functions of
training examples’ and test examples’ prediction confidences, at
the point of threshold τB, respectively. In our experiments, we eval-
uate the worst case inference risks by choosing τBto achieve the
highest inference accuracy, i.e., maximizing the gap between two
complementary cumulative distribution function values. In prac-
tice, an adversary can learn the threshold via the shadow training
technique [47].
This inference strategy IBdoes not leverage the adversarial
constraintBϵof the robust model. Intuitively, the robust training
algorithm learns to make smooth predictions around training ex-
amples. In this paper, we observe that such smooth predictions
around training examples may not generalize well to test examples
and we can leverage this property to perform stronger membership
inference attacks. Based on this observation, we propose two new
membership inference strategies against robust models by taking
Bϵinto consideration.
3.3 Exploiting the Model’s Predictions on
Adversarial Examples
Our first new inference strategy is to generate an (untargeted)
adversarial example xadvfor input(x,y)under the constraint Bϵ,
and use a threshold on the model’s prediction confidence on xadv.
We have following expression for this strategy IAand its inference
accuracy.
IA(F,Bϵ,(x,y))=1{F(xadv)y≥τA}
Ainf(F,Bϵ,IA)=1
2+1
2·(Í
z∈Dtrain1{F(xadv)y≥τA}
|Dtrain|
−Í
z∈Dtest1{F(xadv)y≥τA}
|Dtest|)(18)
We use the PGD attack method shown in Equation (9)to obtain
xadv. Similarly, we choose the preset threshold τAto achieve the
highest inference accuracy, i.e., maximizing the gap between two
complementary cumulative distribution functions of prediction
confidence on adversarial train and test examples.
To perform membership inference attacks with the strategy IA,
we need to specify the perturbation constraint Bϵ. For our experi-
mental evaluations in Section 5 and Section 6, we use the same per-
turbation constraint Bϵas in the robust training process, which is
assumed to be prior knowledge of the adversary. We argue that this
assumption is reasonable following Kerckhoffs’s principle [ 25,44].
In Section 7.1, we measure privacy leakage when the robust model’s
perturbation constraint is unknown.3.3.1 Targeted adversarial examples. We extend the attack to ex-
ploiting targeted adversarial examples. Targeted adversarial ex-
amples contain information about distance of the benign input
to each label’s decision boundary, and are expected to leak more
membership information than the untargeted adversarial example
which only contains information about distance to a nearby label’s
decision boundary.
We adapt the PGD attack method to find targeted adversarial
examples (Equation (5)) by iteratively minizing the targeted cross-
entropy loss.
˜xt+1=ΠBϵ(x)[˜xt−η·sign(∇ ˜xtℓ(Fθ,(˜xt,y′)))] (19)
The confidence thresholding inference strategy does not apply
for targeted adversarial examples because there exist k−1targeted
adversarial examples (we have k−1incorrect labels) for each input.
Instead, following Shokri et al. [ 47], we train a binary inference
classifier for each class label to perform the membership inference
attack. For each class label, we first choose a fraction of training
and test points and generate corresponding targeted adversarial
examples. Next, we compute model predictions on the targeted ad-
versarial examples, and use them to train the membership inference
classifier. Finally, we perform inference attacks using the remaining
training and test points.
3.4 Exploiting the Verified Worst-Case
Predictions on Adversarial Examples
Our attacks above generate adversarial examples using the heuristic
strategy of projected gradient descent. Next, we leverage verification
techniquesVused by the verifiably defended models [ 16,34,61]
to obtain the input’s worst-case predictions under the adversarial
constraintBϵ. We use the input’s worst-case prediction confidence
to predict its membership. The expressions for this strategy IVand
its inference accuracy are as follows.
IV(F,Bϵ,(x,y))=1{V(F(˜x)y,Bϵ)≥τV}
Ainf(F,Bϵ,IV)=1
2+1
2·(Í
z∈Dtrain1{V(F(˜x)y,Bϵ)≥τV}
|Dtrain|
−Í
z∈Dtest1{V(F(˜x)y,Bϵ)≥τV}
|Dtest|),
(20)
whereV(F(˜x)y,Bϵ)returns the verified worst-case prediction con-
fidence for all examples ˜xsatisfying the adversarial perturbation
constraint ˜x∈Bϵ(x), andτVis chosen in a similar manner as our
previous two inference strategies.
Note that different verifiable defenses adopt different verifica-
tion methodsV. Our inference strategy IVneeds to use the same
verification method which is used in the target model’s verifiably
robust training process. Again, we argue that it is reasonable to
assume that an adversary has knowledge about the verification
methodVand the perturbation constraint Bϵ, following Kerck-
hoffs’s principle [25, 44].
4 EXPERIMENT SETUP
In this section, we describe the datasets, neural network architec-
tures, and corresponding adversarial perturbation constraints that
we use in our experiments. Throughout the paper, we focus on
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
246