Table 4: Membership inference attacks against natural and
empirically robust models [33, 50, 66] on the CIFAR10
dataset with a l∞perturbation constraint ϵ=8/255. Based on
Equation (16), the natural model has an inference advantage
of14.86%, while the robust model has an inference advantage
up to 51.34%.
Training train test adv-train adv-test inference inference
method acc acc acc acc acc (IB) acc (IA)
Natural 100% 95.01% 0% 0% 57.43% 50.86%
PGD-Based99.99% 87.25% 96.08% 46.61% 74.89% 75.67%Adv-Train [33]
Dist-Based100% 90.10% 40.56% 25.92% 67.16% 64.24%Adv-Train [50]
Diff-Based99.50% 87.99% 76.06% 46.50% 61.18% 67.08%Adv-Train [66]
We also find that for robust models, membership inference
attacks based on adversarial example’s prediction confidence
(IA) have higher inference accuracy than the inference at-
tacks based on benign example’s prediction confidence (I B)
in most cases. On the other hand, for natural models, in-
ference attacks based on benign examples’ prediction confi-
dence lead to higher inference accuracy values. This happens
because our inference strategies rely on the difference between
confidence distribution of training points and that of test points.
For robust models, most of training points are (empirically) secure
against adversarial examples, and adversarial perturbations do not
significantly decrease the confidence on them. However, the test set
contains more insecure points, and thus adversarial perturbations
will enlarge the gap between confidence distributions of training
examples and test examples, leading to a higher inference accuracy.
For natural models, the use of adversarial examples will decrease
the confidence distribution gap, since almost all training points and
test points are not secure with adversarial perturbations. The only
exception is Dist-Based Adv-Train CIFAR10 classifier, where infer-
ence accuracy with strategy IBis higher, which can be explained by
the poor robustness performance of the model: around 60%training
examples are insecure. Thus, adversarial perturbations will decrease
the confidence distribution gap between training examples and test
examples in this specific scenario.
5.2 Detailed Membership Inference Analysis of
PGD-Based Adversarial Training
In this part, we perform a detailed analysis of membership inference
attacks against PGD-based adversarial training defense method [ 33]
by using the CIFAR10 classifier as an example. We first perform
a sensitivity analysis on both natural and robust models to show
that the robust model is more sensitive with regard to training
data compared to the natural model. We then investigate the re-
lation between privacy leakage and model properties, including
robustness generalization, adversarial perturbation constraint and
model capacity. We finally show that the predictions of targeted ad-
versarial examples can further enhance the membership inference
advantage.
Figure 2: Sensitivity analysis of both robust [33] and natu-
ral CIFAR10 classifiers. x-axis denotes the excluded training
point id number (sorted by sensitivity) during the retrain-
ing process, and y-axis denotes the difference in prediction
confidence between the original model and the retrained
model (measuring model sensitivity). The robust model is
more sensitive to the training data compared to the natural
model.
5.2.1 Sensitivity Analysis. In the sensitivity analysis, we remove
sample CIFAR10 training points from the training set, perform
retraining of the models, and compute the performance difference
between the original model and retrained model.
We excluded 10 training points (one for each class label) and
retrained the model. We computed the sensitivity of each excluded
point as the difference between its prediction confidence in the
retrained model and the original model. We obtained the sensitivity
metric for 60 training points by retraining the classifier 6 times.
Figure 2 depicts the sensitivity values for the 60 training points
(in ascending order) for both robust and natural models. We can
see that compared to the natural model, the robust model is in-
deed more sensitive to the training data, thus leaking more
membership information.
5.2.2 Privacy risk with robustness generalization. We perform the
following experiment to demonstrate the relation between privacy
risk and robustness generalization. Recall that in the approach of
Madry et al. [ 33], adversarial examples are generated from alltrain-
ing points during the robust training process. In our experiment,
we modify the above defense approach to (1) leverage adversarial
examples from a subset of the CIFAR10 training data to compute
the robust prediction loss, and (2) leverage the remaining subset of
training points as benign inputs to compute the natural prediction
loss.
The membership inference attack results are summarized in
Table 5, where the first column lists the ratio of training points
used for computing robust loss. We can see that as more training
points are used for computing the robust loss, the member-
ship inference accuracy increases , due to the larger gap between
adv-train accuracy and adv-test accuracy.
5.2.3 Privacy risk with model perturbation budget. Next, we explore
the relationship between membership inference and the adversarial
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
248