Figure 4: Verified train accuracy and membership inference
accuracy using inference strategy IVfor robust Yale Face
classifiers [16] with varying capacities. The model with a ca-
pacity scale of scontains 4 convolution blocks with output
channel numbers (s,2s,4s,8s), as described in Section 4.
.
model capacity is not large enough to fit on this partial CIFAR10
set using the verifiable training algorithm [61].
We show the obtained results in Table 10, where the natural
model has a low test accuracy (below 75%) and high privacy leakage
(inference accuracy is 71.50%) since we only use 20%training exam-
ples to learn the classifier. By using the verifiable defense method
[61],the verifiably robust models have increased member-
ship inference accuracy values , for allϵvalues. We can also
see that when increasing the ϵvalues, at the beginning, the ro-
bust model is more and more susceptible to membership inference
attacks (inference accuracy increases from 71.50%to78.50%). How-
ever, beyond a threshold of ϵ=1/255, the inference accuracy starts
to decrease, since a higher ϵrequires a model with a larger capacity
to fit well on the training data.
7 DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we first evaluate the success of membership infer-
ence attacks when the adversary does not know the l∞perturbation
constraints of robust models. Second we discuss potential coun-
termeasures, including temperature scaling and regularization, to
reduce privacy risks. Finally, we discuss the relationship between
training data privacy and model robustness.
7.1 Membership Inference Attacks with
Varying Perturbation Constraints
Our experiments so far considered an adversary with prior knowl-
edge of the robust model’s l∞perturbation constraint. Next, we
evaluate privacy leakage of robust models in the absence of such
prior knowledge by varying perturbation budgets used in the mem-
bership inference attack. Specifically, we perform membership in-
ference attacksIAwith varying perturbation constraints against
robust Yale Face classifiers [ 33,50,66], which are robustly trained
with the l∞perturbation budget ( ϵ) of8/255.
Figure 5: Membership inference accuracy on robust Yale
Face classifiers [33, 50, 66] trained with the l∞perturbation
constraint of 8/255. The privacy leakage is evaluated via the
inference strategy IAbased on adversarial examples gener-
ated with varying perturbation budgets.
We present the membership inference results in Figure 5, where
the inference strategy IAwith the perturbation budget of 0is equiv-
alent to the inference strategy IB. In general, we observe a higher
membership inference accuracy when the perturbation budget used
in the inference attack is close to the robust model’s exact perturba-
tion constraint. An attack perturbation budget that is very small will
not fully utilize the classifier’s structural characteristics, leading to
high robustness performance for adversarial examples generated
from both training and test data. On the other hand, a very large
perturbation budget leads to low accuracy on adversarial examples
generated from both training training data and test data. Both of
these scenarios will reduce the success of membership inference
attacks.
Based on results shown in Figure 5, the adversary does not need
to know the exact value of robust model’s l∞perturbation budget:
approximate knowledge of ϵsuffices to achieve high membership
inference accuracy. Furthermore, the adversary can leverage the
shadow training technique (with shadow training set) [ 47] in prac-
tice to compute the best attack parameters (the perturbation budget
and the threshold value), and then use the inferred parameters
against the target model. The best perturbation budget may not
even be same as the exact ϵvalue of robust model. For example,
we obtain the highest membership inference accuracy by setting
ϵas9/255for the PGD-Based Adv-Train Yale Face classifier [ 33],
and10/255for the other two robust classifiers [ 50,66]. We observe
similar results for Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, which are
presented in Appendix D.
7.2 Potential Countermeasures
We discuss potential countermeasures that can reduce the risk of
membership inference attacks while maintaining model robustness.
7.2.1 Temperature scaling. Our membership inference strategies
leverage the difference between the prediction confidence of the
target model on its training set and test set. Thus, a straightforward
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
252