Sinha et al. [ 50] derive a statistical guarantee for l2distributional
robustness with strict conditions requiring the loss function ℓto
be smooth on x, which are not satisfied in our setting. We mainly
use widely-adopted ReLU activation functions for our machine
learning models, which result in a non-smooth loss function. Also,
we generate adversarial examples with l∞distance penalties by
using the algorithm proposed by Sinha et al. [ 50] in Appendix E,
where there is no robustness guarantee. Thus, we categorize the
defense method as empirical.
Difference-based Adversarial Training (Diff-Based Adv-Train)
[66]: Instead of using the cross-entropy loss of adversarial exam-
ples, with insights from a toy binary classification task, Zhang et
al. [66] propose to use the difference (e.g., Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence) between the benign output Fθ(x)and the adversarial
output Fθ(xadv)as the loss function ℓ′, and combine it with natural
cross entropy loss ( α,0).
ℓ′(Fθ,(xadv,y))=dkl(Fθ(xadv),Fθ(x)), (11)
where dklcomputes the KL divergence. Adversarial examples are
also generated with PGD-based attacks, except that now the attack
goal is to maximize the output difference,
˜xt+1=ΠBϵ(x)[˜xt+η·sign(∇ ˜xtdkl(Fθ(˜xt),Fθ(x)))] . (12)
2.1.3 Verifiable defenses: Although empirical defense methods are
effective against state-of-the-art adversarial examples [ 4], there is
noguarantee for such robustness. To obtain a guarantee for robust-
ness, verification approaches have been proposed to compute an
upper bound of prediction loss ℓ′under the adversarial perturbation
constraintBϵ. If the input can still be predicted correctly in the ver-
ified worst case, then it is certain that there is no misclassification
existing underBϵ.
Thus, verifiable defense methods take the verification process
into consideration during training by using the verified worst case
prediction loss as robust loss value ℓR. Now the robust training
algorithm becomes
min
θ1
|Dtrain|Õ
z∈Dtrainα·ℓ(Fθ,z)+(1−α)·V( ℓ′(Fθ,(˜x,y)),Bϵ),(13)
whereVmeans verified upper bound computation of prediction
lossℓ′under the adversarial perturbation constraint Bϵ. In this
paper, we consider the following three verifiable defense methods.
Duality-Based Verification (Dual-Based Verify) [61]: Wong and
Kolter [ 61] compute the verified worst-case loss by solving its dual
problem with convex relaxation on non-convex ReLU operations
and then minimize this overapproximated robust loss values only
(α=0, ℓ′=ℓ). They further combine this duality relaxation method
with the random projection technique to scale to more complex
neural network architectures [62], like ResNet [20].
Abstract Interpretation-Based Verification (Abs-Based Ver-
ify) [34]: Mirman et al. [ 34] leverage the technique of abstract
interpretation to compute the worse-case loss: an abstract domain
(such as interval domain, zonotope domain [ 13]) is used to express
the adversarial perturbation constraint Bϵat the input layer, and by
applying abstract transformers on it, the maximum verified range
of model output is obtained. They adopt a softplus function on the
logitsдθ(˜x)to compute the robust loss value and then combine itwith natural training loss ( α,0).
ℓ′(Fθ,(˜x,y))=log(exp(max
y′,yдθ(˜x)y′−дθ(˜x)y)+1) (14)
Interval Bound Propagation-Based Verification (IBP-Based
Verify) [16]: Gowal et al. [ 16] share a similar design as Mirman
et al. [ 34]: they express the constraint Bϵas a bounded interval
domain (one specified domain considered by Mirman et al. [ 34])
and propagate this bound to the output layer. The robust loss is
computed as a cross-entropy loss of verified worse-case outputs
(ℓ′=ℓ) and then combined with natural prediction loss ( α,0) as
the final loss value during training.
2.2 Membership Inference Attacks
For a target machine learning model, the membership inference
attacks aim to determine whether a given data point was used to
train the model or not [ 18,32,37,41,47,64]. The attack poses a
serious privacy risk to the individuals whose data is used for model
training, for example in the setting of health analytics.
Shokri et al. [ 47] design a membership inference attack method
based on training an inference model to distinguish between pre-
dictions on training set members versus non-members. To train the
inference model, they introduce the shadow training technique : (1)
the adversary first trains multiple “shadow models” which simulate
the behavior of the target model, (2) based on the shadow models’
outputs on their own training and test examples, the adversary
obtains a labeled (member vs non-member) dataset, and (3) finally
trains the inference model as a neural network to perform mem-
bership inference attack against the target model. The input to the
inference model is the prediction vector of the target model on a
target data record.
A simpler inference model, such as a linear classifier, can also
distinguish significantly vulnerable members from non-members.
Yeom et al. [ 64] suggest comparing the prediction confidence value
of a target example with a threshold (learned for example through
shadow training). Large confidence indicates membership. Their
results show that such a simple confidence-thresholding method is
reasonably effective and achieves membership inference accuracy
close to that of a complex neural network classifier learned from
shadow training.
In this paper, we use this confidence-thresholding membership
inference approach in most cases. Note that when evaluating the
privacy leakage with targeted adversarial examples in Section 3.3.1
and Section 5.2.5, the confidence-thresholding approach does not
apply as there are multiple prediction vectors for each data point. In-
stead, we follow Shokri et al. [ 47] to train a neural network classifier
for membership inference.
3 MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE ATTACKS
AGAINST ROBUST MODELS
In this section, we first present some insights on why training
models to be robust against adversarial examples make them more
susceptible to membership inference attacks. We then formally
present our membership inference attacks.
Throughout the paper, we use “natural (default) model ” and
“robust model ” to denote the machine learning model with natural
training algorithm and robust training algorithm, respectively. We
Session 2B: ML Security I
CCS ’19, November 11–15, 2019, London, United Kingdom
244