JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 20
Born_inKnowledge Graph
Question: Which
country is Barack
Obama from ?Marry_toMichelle  Obama
Barack  ObamaHonolulu  
City_of
Located_in
HawaiiUSA1776
Founded_in
LLM agent
Answer: USA
KGsLLMsReasoning-on-Graphs
Fig. 25. Using LLMs as agents for reasoning on KGs.
reasoning paths and generate answers. To enhance the agent
abilities, AgentTuning [248] presents several instruction-
tuning datasets to guide LLM agents to perform reasoning
on KGs.
Comparison and Discussion. LLM-KG Fusion Reasoning
combines the LLM encoder and KG encoder to represent
knowledge in a unified manner. It then employs a syner-
gized reasoning module to jointly reason the results. This
framework allows for different encoders and reasoning
modules, which are trained end-to-end to effectively utilize
the knowledge and reasoning capabilities of LLMs and KGs.
However, these additional modules may introduce extra
parameters and computational costs while lacking inter-
pretability. LLMs as Agents for KG reasoning provides a
flexible framework for reasoning on KGs without additional
training cost, which can be generalized to different LLMs
and KGs. Meanwhile, the reasoning process is interpretable,
which can be used to explain the results. Nevertheless,
defining the actions and policies for LLM agents is also chal-
lenging. The synergy of LLMs and KGs is still an ongoing
research topic, with the potential to have more powerful
frameworks in the future.
7 F UTURE DIRECTIONS AND MILESTONES
In this section, we discuss the future directions and several
milestones in the research area of unifying KGs and LLMs.
7.1 KGs for Hallucination Detection in LLMs
The hallucination problem in LLMs, which generates fac-
tually incorrect content, significantly hinders the reliability
of LLMs. As discussed in Section 4, existing studies try
to utilize KGs to obtain more reliable LLMs through pre-
training or KG-enhanced inference. Despite the efforts, the
issue of hallucination may continue to persist in the realm of
LLMs for the foreseeable future. Consequently, in order to
gain the public’s trust and border applications, it is impera-
tive to detect and assess instances of hallucination within
LLMs and other forms of AI-generated content (AIGC).
Existing methods strive to detect hallucination by training a
neural classifier on a small set of documents [249], which are
neither robust nor powerful to handle ever-growing LLMs.
Recently, researchers try to use KGs as an external source
to validate LLMs [250]. Further studies combine LLMs
and KGs to achieve a generalized fact-checking model that
can detect hallucinations across domains [251]. Therefore,it opens a new door to utilizing KGs for hallucination
detection.
7.2 KGs for Editing Knowledge in LLMs
Although LLMs are capable of storing massive real-world
knowledge, they cannot quickly update their internal
knowledge updated as real-world situations change. There
are some research efforts proposed for editing knowledge in
LLMs [252] without re-training the whole LLMs. Yet, such
solutions still suffer from poor performance or computa-
tional overhead [253]. Existing studies [254] also reveal that
edit a single fact would cause a ripple effect for other related
knowledge. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a more
efficient and effective method to edit knowledge in LLMs.
Recently, researchers try to leverage KGs to edit knowledge
in LLMs efficiently.
7.3 KGs for Black-box LLMs Knowledge Injection
Although pre-training and knowledge editing could update
LLMs to catch up with the latest knowledge, they still need
to access the internal structures and parameters of LLMs.
However, many state-of-the-art large LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT)
only provide APIs for users and developers to access, mak-
ing themselves black-box to the public. Consequently, it is
impossible to follow conventional KG injection approaches
described [38], [244] that change LLM structure by adding
additional knowledge fusion modules. Converting various
types of knowledge into different text prompts seems to be
a feasible solution. However, it is unclear whether these
prompts can generalize well to new LLMs. Moreover, the
prompt-based approach is limited to the length of input to-
kens of LLMs. Therefore, how to enable effective knowledge
injection for black-box LLMs is still an open question for us
to explore [255], [256].
7.4 Multi-Modal LLMs for KGs
Current knowledge graphs typically rely on textual and
graph structure to handle KG-related applications. How-
ever, real-world knowledge graphs are often constructed
by data from diverse modalities [99], [257], [258]. Therefore,
effectively leveraging representations from multiple modal-
ities would be a significant challenge for future research in
KGs [259]. One potential solution is to develop methods
that can accurately encode and align entities across different
modalities. Recently, with the development of multi-modal
LLMs [98], [260], leveraging LLMs for modality alignment
holds promise in this regard. But, bridging the gap between
multi-modal LLMs and KG structure remains a crucial
challenge in this field, demanding further investigation and
advancements.
7.5 LLMs for Understanding KG Structure
Conventional LLMs trained on plain text data are not
designed to understand structured data like knowledge
graphs. Thus, LLMs might not fully grasp or understand the
information conveyed by the KG structure. A straightfor-
ward way is to linearize the structured data into a sentence
that LLMs can understand. However, the scale of the KGs