JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 16
sentence-level RE and document-level RE, according to the
scope of the text analyzed.
Sentence-level RE focuses on identifying relations be-
tween entities within a single sentence. Peng et al. [159] and
TRE [215] introduce LLM to improve the performance of
relation extraction models. BERT-MTB [216] learns relation
representations based on BERT by performing the matching-
the-blanks task and incorporating designed objectives for
relation extraction. Curriculum-RE [160] utilizes curriculum
learning to improve relation extraction models by gradu-
ally increasing the difficulty of the data during training.
RECENT [217] introduces SpanBERT and exploits entity
type restriction to reduce the noisy candidate relation types.
Jiewen [218] extends RECENT by combining both the entity
information and the label information into sentence-level
embeddings, which enables the embedding to be entity-
label aware.
Document-level RE (DocRE) aims to extract relations
between entities across multiple sentences within a docu-
ment. Hong et al. [219] propose a strong baseline for DocRE
by replacing the BiLSTM backbone with LLMs. HIN [220]
use LLM to encode and aggregate entity representation at
different levels, including entity, sentence, and document
levels. GLRE [221] is a global-to-local network, which uses
LLM to encode the document information in terms of entity
global and local representations as well as context relation
representations. SIRE [222] uses two LLM-based encoders to
extract intra-sentence and inter-sentence relations. LSR [223]
and GAIN [224] propose graph-based approaches which
induce graph structures on top of LLM to better extract
relations. DocuNet [225] formulates DocRE as a semantic
segmentation task and introduces a U-Net [226] on the LLM
encoder to capture local and global dependencies between
entities. ATLOP [227] focuses on the multi-label problems
in DocRE, which could be handled with two techniques,
i.e., adaptive thresholding for classifier and localized con-
text pooling for LLM. DREEAM [161] further extends and
improves ATLOP by incorporating evidence information.
End-to-End KG Construction. Currently, researchers are
exploring the use of LLMs for end-to-end KG construction.
Kumar et al. [95] propose a unified approach to build
KGs from raw text, which contains two LLMs powered
components. They first finetune a LLM on named entity
recognition tasks to make it capable of recognizing entities
in raw text. Then, they propose another “2-model BERT”
for solving the relation extraction task, which contains two
BERT-based classifiers. The first classifier learns the relation
class whereas the second binary classifier learns the direc-
tion of the relations between the two entities. The predicted
triples and relations are then used to construct the KG. Guo
et al. [162] propose an end-to-end knowledge extraction
model based on BERT, which can be applied to construct
KGs from Classical Chinese text. Grapher [41] presents a
novel end-to-end multi-stage system. It first utilizes LLMs
to generate KG entities, followed by a simple relation con-
struction head, enabling efficient KG construction from the
textual description. PiVE [163] proposes a prompting with
an iterative verification framework that utilizes a smaller
LLM like T5 to correct the errors in KGs generated by a
larger LLM (e.g., ChatGPT). To further explore advanced
LLMs, AutoKG design several prompts for different KG
Brarck Obama
PoliticianOf
USAHonolulu
BornIn
LocatedIn
CapitalOfMarriedT o
Michelle
ObamaLiveInConstruct KGs
LLMsObama born in [MASK]
Honolulu is located in [MASK]
USA's capital is [MASK]Cloze Question
(Obama, BornIn, Honolulu)
(Honolulu, LocatedIn, USA)
(Washingto D.C., CapitalOf, USA)
Washingto
D.C.Distilled T riplesFig. 20. The general framework of distilling KGs from LLMs.
construction tasks (e.g., entity typing, entity linking, and
relation extraction). Then, it adopts the prompt to perform
KG construction using ChatGPT and GPT-4.
5.3.4 Distilling Knowledge Graphs from LLMs
LLMs have been shown to implicitly encode massive knowl-
edge [14]. As shown in Fig. 20, some research aims to distill
knowledge from LLMs to construct KGs. COMET [164]
proposes a commonsense transformer model that constructs
commonsense KGs by using existing tuples as a seed set of
knowledge on which to train. Using this seed set, a LLM
learns to adapt its learned representations to knowledge
generation, and produces novel tuples that are high quality.
Experimental results reveal that implicit knowledge from
LLMs is transferred to generate explicit knowledge in com-
monsense KGs. BertNet [165] proposes a novel framework
for automatic KG construction empowered by LLMs. It re-
quires only the minimal definition of relations as inputs and
automatically generates diverse prompts, and performs an
efficient knowledge search within a given LLM for consis-
tent outputs. The constructed KGs show competitive quality,
diversity, and novelty with a richer set of new and complex
relations, which cannot be extracted by previous methods.
West et al. [166] propose a symbolic knowledge distillation
framework that distills symbolic knowledge from LLMs.
They first finetune a small student LLM by distilling com-
monsense facts from a large LLM like GPT-3. Then, the
student LLM is utilized to generate commonsense KGs.
5.4 LLM-augmented KG-to-text Generation
The goal of Knowledge-graph-to-text (KG-to-text) genera-
tion is to generate high-quality texts that accurately and
consistently describe the input knowledge graph infor-
mation [228]. KG-to-text generation connects knowledge
graphs and texts, significantly improving the applicability
of KG in more realistic NLG scenarios, including story-
telling [229] and knowledge-grounded dialogue [230]. How-
ever, it is challenging and costly to collect large amounts
of graph-text parallel data, resulting in insufficient training
and poor generation quality. Thus, many research efforts re-
sort to either: 1) leverage knowledge from LLMs or2) construct
large-scale weakly-supervised KG-text corpus to solve this issue.
5.4.1 Leveraging Knowledge from LLMs
As pioneering research efforts in using LLMs for KG-to-Text
generation, Ribeiro et al. [167] and Kale and Rastogi [231]
directly fine-tune various LLMs, including BART and T5,
with the goal of transferring LLMs knowledge for this