JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 8
LLMs
Bob Dylan wrote blowin ... 1962Bob
DylanBlowin’  in
the W ind
Input T ext: Bob Dylan  wrote Blowin’  in the W ind in 1962...Text RepresentationsKnowledge Graph
Representations
Text Sequence EntitiyText-knowledge
Alignment
Fig. 9. Injecting KG information into LLMs training objective via text-
knowledge alignment loss, where hdenotes the hidden representation
generated by LLMs.
sentiment words in the word masking objective.
The other line of work explicitly leverages the connec-
tions with knowledge and input text. As shown in Fig. 9,
ERNIE [35] proposes a novel word-entity alignment training
objective as a pre-training objective. Specifically, ERNIE
feeds both sentences and corresponding entities mentioned
in the text into LLMs, and then trains the LLMs to pre-
dict alignment links between textual tokens and entities in
knowledge graphs. Similarly, KALM [91] enhances the input
tokens by incorporating entity embeddings and includes
an entity prediction pre-training task in addition to the
token-only pre-training objective. This approach aims to
improve the ability of LLMs to capture knowledge related
to entities. Finally, KEPLER [40] directly employs both
knowledge graph embedding training objective and Masked
token pre-training objective into a shared transformer-based
encoder. Deterministic LLM [104] focuses on pre-training
language models to capture deterministic factual knowledge.
It only masks the span that has a deterministic entity as the
question and introduces additional clue contrast learning
and clue classification objective. WKLM [106] first replaces
entities in the text with other same-type entities and then
feeds them into LLMs. The model is further pre-trained to
distinguish whether the entities have been replaced or not.
4.1.2 Integrating KGs into LLM Inputs
As shown in Fig. 10, this kind of research focus on in-
troducing relevant knowledge sub-graph into the inputs
of LLMs. Given a knowledge graph triple and the corre-
sponding sentences, ERNIE 3.0 [101] represents the triple as
a sequence of tokens and directly concatenates them with
the sentences. It further randomly masks either the relation
token in the triple or tokens in the sentences to better
combine knowledge with textual representations. However,
such direct knowledge triple concatenation method allows
the tokens in the sentence to intensively interact with the
tokens in the knowledge sub-graph, which could result in
Knowledge Noise [36]. To solve this issue, K-BERT [36] takes
the first step to inject the knowledge triple into the sentence
via a visible matrix where only the knowledge entities have
access to the knowledge triple information, while the tokens
in the sentences can only see each other in the self-attention
module. To further reduce Knowledge Noise , Colake [107]
proposes a unified word-knowledge graph (shown in Fig.
10) where the tokens in the input sentences form a fully
Input T ext: Mr. Darcy  gives Elizabeth a letterMr.
Darcy
Elizabeth gives
a
letterBeloved
FatherMr.
BennetMother JaneLLMs
Mr.
BennetFatherBelovedMother JaneText GraphKnowledge GraphMr.
Darcy... [MASK] Mother [MASK] ...
Text
SequenceEntity
SequenceletterMr.
BennetMask Text
PredictionMask Entity
PredictionFig. 10. Injecting KG information into LLMs inputs using graph structure.
connected word graph where tokens aligned with knowl-
edge entities are connected with their neighboring entities.
The above methods can indeed inject a large amount
of knowledge into LLMs. However, they mostly focus on
popular entities and overlook the low-frequent and long-
tail ones. DkLLM [108] aims to improve the LLMs repre-
sentations towards those entities. DkLLM first proposes a
novel measurement to determine long-tail entities and then
replaces these selected entities in the text with pseudo token
embedding as new input to the large language models.
Furthermore, Dict-BERT [125] proposes to leverage exter-
nal dictionaries to solve this issue. Specifically, Dict-BERT
improves the representation quality of rare words by ap-
pending their definitions from the dictionary at the end of
input text and trains the language model to locally align
rare word representations in input sentences and dictionary
definitions as well as to discriminate whether the input text
and definition are correctly mapped.
4.1.3 KGs Instruction-tuning
Instead of injecting factual knowledge into LLMs, the KGs
Instruction-tuning aims to fine-tune LLMs to better com-
prehend the structure of KGs and effectively follow user
instructions to conduct complex tasks. KGs Instruction-
tuning utilizes both facts and the structure of KGs to cre-
ate instruction-tuning datasets. LLMs finetuned on these
datasets can extract both factual and structural knowledge
from KGs, enhancing the reasoning ability of LLMs. KP-
PLM [109] first designs several prompt templates to transfer
structural graphs into natural language text. Then, two self-
supervised tasks are proposed to finetune LLMs to further
leverage the knowledge from these prompts. OntoPrompt
[110] proposes an ontology-enhanced prompt-tuning that
can place knowledge of entities into the context of LLMs,
which are further finetuned on several downstream tasks.
ChatKBQA [111] finetunes LLMs on KG structure to gener-
ate logical queries, which can be executed on KGs to obtain
answers. To better reason on graphs, RoG [112] presents a
planning-retrieval-reasoning framework. RoG is finetuned
on KG structure to generate relation paths grounded by KGs
as faithful plans. These plans are then used to retrieve valid