JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 9
reasoning paths from the KGs for LLMs to conduct faithful
reasoning and generate interpretable results.
KGs Instruction-tuning can better leverage the knowl-
edge from KGs for downstream tasks. However, it requires
retraining the models, which is time-consuming and re-
quires lots of resources.
4.2 KG-enhanced LLM Inference
The above methods could effectively fuse knowledge into
LLMs. However, real-world knowledge is subject to change
and the limitation of these approaches is that they do
not permit updates to the incorporated knowledge without
retraining the model. As a result, they may not generalize
well to the unseen knowledge during inference [126]. There-
fore, considerable research has been devoted to keeping the
knowledge space and text space separate and injecting the
knowledge while inference. These methods mostly focus on
the Question Answering (QA) tasks, because QA requires
the model to capture both textual semantic meanings and
up-to-date real-world knowledge.
4.2.1 Retrieval-Augmented Knowledge Fusion
Retrieval-Augmented Knowledge Fusion is a popular
method to inject knowledge into LLMs during inference.
The key idea is to retrieve relevant knowledge from a large
corpus and then fuse the retrieved knowledge into LLMs.
As shown in Fig. 11, RAG [92] proposes to combine non-
parametric and parametric modules to handle the external
knowledge. Given the input text, RAG first searches for rel-
evant KG in the non-parametric module via MIPS to obtain
several documents. RAG then treats these documents as
hidden variables zand feeds them into the output generator,
empowered by Seq2Seq LLMs, as additional context infor-
mation. The research indicates that using different retrieved
documents as conditions at different generation steps per-
forms better than only using a single document to guide
the whole generation process. The experimental results
show that RAG outperforms other parametric-only and
non-parametric-only baseline models in open-domain QA.
RAG can also generate more specific, diverse, and factual
text than other parameter-only baselines. Story-fragments
[127] further improves architecture by adding an additional
module to determine salient knowledge entities and fuse
them into the generator to improve the quality of generated
long stories. EMAT [115] further improves the efficiency of
such a system by encoding external knowledge into a key-
value memory and exploiting the fast maximum inner prod-
uct search for memory querying. REALM [114] proposes a
novel knowledge retriever to help the model to retrieve and
attend over documents from a large corpus during the pre-
training stage and successfully improves the performance
of open-domain question answering. KGLM [113] selects
the facts from a knowledge graph using the current context
to generate factual sentences. With the help of an external
knowledge graph, KGLM could describe facts using out-of-
domain words or phrases.
4.2.2 KGs Prompting
To better feed the KG structure into the LLM during infer-
ence, KGs prompting aims to design a crafted prompt that
Knowledge
RetrieverLLMs A: USA
BackpropagationKGs
Q: Which country
is Obama from?Retrieved Facts
(Obama, BornIn, Honolulu)
(Honolulu, LocatedIn, USA)Fig. 11. Retrieving external knowledge to enhance the LLM generation.
converts structured KGs into text sequences, which can be
fed as context into LLMs. In this way, LLMs can better take
advantage of the structure of KGs to perform reasoning. Li
et al. [64] adopt the pre-defined template to convert each
triple into a short sentence, which can be understood by
LLMs for reasoning. Mindmap [65] designs a KG prompt to
convert graph structure into a mind map that enables LLMs
to perform reasoning by consolidating the facts in KGs and
the implicit knowledge from LLMs. ChatRule [116] sam-
ples several relation paths from KGs, which are verbalized
and fed into LLMs. Then, LLMs are prompted to generate
meaningful logical rules that can be used for reasoning. CoK
[117] proposes a chain-of-knowledge prompting that uses a
sequence of triples to elicit the reasoning ability of LLMs to
reach the final answer.
KGs prompting presents a simple way to synergize
LLMs and KGs. By using the prompt, we can easily harness
the power of LLMs to perform reasoning based on KGs
without retraining the models. However, the prompt is
usually designed manually, which requires lots of human
effort.
4.3 Comparison between KG-enhanced LLM Pre-
training and Inference
KG-enhanced LLM Pre-training methods commonly en-
rich large-amount of unlabeled corpus with semantically
relevant real-world knowledge. These methods allow the
knowledge representations to be aligned with appropri-
ate linguistic context and explicitly train LLMs to lever-
age those knowledge from scratch. When applying the
resulting LLMs to downstream knowledge-intensive tasks,
they should achieve optimal performance. In contrast, KG-
enhanced LLM inference methods only present the knowl-
edge to LLMs in the inference stage and the underlying
LLMs may not be trained to fully leverage these knowledge
when conducting downstream tasks, potentially resulting in
sub-optimal model performance.
However, real-world knowledge is dynamic and requires
frequent updates. Despite being effective, the KG-enhanced
LLM Pre-training methods never permit knowledge up-
dates or editing without model re-training. As a result, the
KG-enhanced LLM Pre-training methods could generalize
poorly to recent or unseen knowledge. KG-enhanced LLM
inference methods can easily maintain knowledge updates
by changing the inference inputs. These methods help im-
prove LLMs performance on new knowledge and domains.
In summary, when to use these methods depends on the
application scenarios. If one wishes to apply LLMs to han-