JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 19
Text-Knowledge Fusion Module
Self-Attention
Input T extSelf-Attention Self-AttentionT-encoderN LayersText Outputs Knowledge Graph Outputs
M LayersK-encoder
Knowledge Graph
Fig. 23. Synergized knowledge representation by additional KG fusion
modules.
effectively represent knowledge from both LLMs and KGs.
The synergized model can provide a better understanding
of the knowledge from both sources, making it valuable for
many downstream tasks.
To jointly represent the knowledge, researchers propose
the synergized models by introducing additional KG fu-
sion modules, which are jointly trained with LLMs. As
shown in Fig. 23, ERNIE [35] proposes a textual-knowledge
dual encoder architecture where a T-encoder first encodes
the input sentences, then a K-encoder processes knowledge
graphs which are fused them with the textual representation
from the T-encoder . BERT-MK [241] employs a similar dual-
encoder architecture but it introduces additional informa-
tion of neighboring entities in the knowledge encoder com-
ponent during the pre-training of LLMs. However, some of
the neighboring entities in KGs may not be relevant to the
input text, resulting in extra redundancy and noise. Coke-
BERT [242] focuses on this issue and proposes a GNN-based
module to filter out irrelevant KG entities using the input
text. JAKET [243] proposes to fuse the entity information in
the middle of the large language model.
KEPLER [40] presents a unified model for knowledge
embedding and pre-trained language representation. In KE-
PLER, they encode textual entity descriptions with a LLM as
their embeddings, and then jointly optimize the knowledge
embedding and language modeling objectives. JointGT [42]
proposes a graph-text joint representation learning model,
which proposes three pre-training tasks to align represen-
tations of graph and text. DRAGON [44] presents a self-
supervised method to pre-train a joint language-knowledge
foundation model from text and KG. It takes text segments
and relevant KG subgraphs as input and bidirectionally
fuses information from both modalities. Then, DRAGON
utilizes two self-supervised reasoning tasks, i.e., masked
language modeling and KG link prediction to optimize the
model parameters. HKLM [238] introduces a unified LLM
which incorporates KGs to learn representations of domain-
specific knowledge.
6.2 Synergized Reasoning
To better utilize the knowledge from text corpus and knowl-
edge graph reasoning, Synergized Reasoning aims to design
a synergized model that can effectively conduct reasoning
with both LLMs and KGs.
Question <SEP> Option  LLM EncoderKG EncoderJoint Reasoning LayerDynamic Pruning
LM Rep.
KG Rep.LM to KG Att.
KG to LM Att.LM to KG
AttentionAnswer 
Answer
InferenceFig. 24. The framework of LLM-KG Fusion Reasoning.
LLM-KG Fusion Reasoning. LLM-KG Fusion Reasoning
leverages two separated LLM and KG encoders to process
the text and relevant KG inputs [244]. These two encoders
are equally important and jointly fusing the knowledge
from two sources for reasoning. To improve the interac-
tion between text and knowledge, KagNet [38] proposes
to first encode the input KG, and then augment the input
textual representation. In contrast, MHGRN [234] uses the
final LLM outputs of the input text to guide the reasoning
process on the KGs. Yet, both of them only design a single-
direction interaction between the text and KGs. To tackle this
issue, QA-GNN [131] proposes to use a GNN-based model
to jointly reason over input context and KG information
via message passing. Specifically, QA-GNN represents the
input textual information as a special node via a pooling
operation and connects this node with other entities in KG.
However, the textual inputs are only pooled into a single
dense vector, limiting the information fusion performance.
JointLK [245] then proposes a framework with fine-grained
interaction between any tokens in the textual inputs and any
KG entities through LM-to-KG and KG-to-LM bi-directional
attention mechanism. As shown in Fig. 24, pairwise dot-
product scores are calculated over all textual tokens and KG
entities, the bi-directional attentive scores are computed sep-
arately. In addition, at each jointLK layer, the KGs are also
dynamically pruned based on the attention score to allow
later layers to focus on more important sub-KG structures.
Despite being effective, in JointLK, the fusion process be-
tween the input text and KG still uses the final LLM outputs
as the input text representations. GreaseLM [178] designs
deep and rich interaction between the input text tokens and
KG entities at each layer of the LLMs. The architecture and
fusion approach is mostly similar to ERNIE [35] discussed in
Section 6.1, except that GreaseLM does not use the text-only
T-encoder to handle input text.
LLMs as Agents Reasoning. Instead using two encoders
to fuse the knowledge, LLMs can also be treated as agents
to interact with the KGs to conduct reasoning [246], as
illustrated in Fig. 25. KD-CoT [247] iteratively retrieves facts
from KGs and produces faithful reasoning traces, which
guide LLMs to generate answers. KSL [239] teaches LLMs
to search on KGs to retrieve relevant facts and then generate
answers. StructGPT [237] designs several API interfaces to
allow LLMs to access the structural data and perform rea-
soning by traversing on KGs. Think-on-graph [240] provides
a flexible plug-and-play framework where LLM agents it-
eratively execute beam searches on KGs to discover the