JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 10
Fig. 12. The general framework of using knowledge graph for language
model probing.
dle time-insensitive knowledge in particular domains (e.g.,
commonsense and reasoning knowledge), KG-enhanced
LLM Pre-training methods should be considered. Other-
wise, KG-enhanced LLM inference methods can be used to
handle open-domain knowledge with frequent updates.
4.4 KG-enhanced LLM Interpretability
Although LLMs have achieved remarkable success in many
NLP tasks, they are still criticized for their lack of inter-
pretability. The large language model (LLM) interpretability
refers to the understanding and explanation of the inner
workings and decision-making processes of a large lan-
guage model [17]. This can improve the trustworthiness of
LLMs and facilitate their applications in high-stakes scenar-
ios such as medical diagnosis and legal judgment. Knowl-
edge graphs (KGs) represent the knowledge structurally and
can provide good interpretability for the reasoning results.
Therefore, researchers try to utilize KGs to improve the
interpretability of LLMs, which can be roughly grouped into
two categories: 1) KGs for language model probing , and 2) KGs
for language model analysis .
4.4.1 KGs for LLM Probing
The large language model (LLM) probing aims to under-
stand the knowledge stored in LLMs. LLMs, trained on
large-scale corpus, are often known as containing enor-
mous knowledge. However, LLMs store the knowledge in
a hidden way, making it hard to figure out the stored
knowledge. Moreover, LLMs suffer from the hallucination
problem [15], which results in generating statements that
contradict facts. This issue significantly affects the reliability
of LLMs. Therefore, it is necessary to probe and verify the
knowledge stored in LLMs.
LAMA [14] is the first work to probe the knowledge
in LLMs by using KGs. As shown in Fig. 12, LAMA first
converts the facts in KGs into cloze statements by a pre-
defined prompt template and then uses LLMs to predict the
missing entity. The prediction results are used to evaluate
the knowledge stored in LLMs. For example, we try to
probe whether LLMs know the fact (Obama, profession, pres-
ident) . We first convert the fact triple into a cloze question
“Obama’s profession is .” with the object masked. Then, we
test if the LLMs can predict the object “president” correctly.
However, LAMA ignores the fact that the prompts are
inappropriate. For example, the prompt “Obama worked as
a”may be more favorable to the prediction of the blank
by the language models than “Obama is a by profession” .
Fig. 13. The general framework of using knowledge graph for language
model analysis.
Thus, LPAQA [118] proposes a mining and paraphrasing-
based method to automatically generate high-quality and
diverse prompts for a more accurate assessment of the
knowledge contained in the language model. Moreover,
Adolphs et al. [128] attempt to use examples to make the
language model understand the query, and experiments
obtain substantial improvements for BERT-large on the T-
REx data. Unlike using manually defined prompt templates,
Autoprompt [119] proposes an automated method, which
is based on the gradient-guided search to create prompts.
LLM-facteval [121] designs a systematic framework that
automatically generates probing questions from KGs. The
generated questions are then used to evaluate the factual
knowledge stored in LLMs.
Instead of probing the general knowledge by using
the encyclopedic and commonsense knowledge graphs,
BioLAMA [129] and MedLAMA [120] probe the medical
knowledge in LLMs by using medical knowledge graphs.
Alex et al. [130] investigate the capacity of LLMs to re-
tain less popular factual knowledge. They select unpopular
facts from Wikidata knowledge graphs which have low-
frequency clicked entities. These facts are then used for the
evaluation, where the results indicate that LLMs encounter
difficulties with such knowledge, and that scaling fails to
appreciably improve memorization of factual knowledge in
the tail.
4.4.2 KGs for LLM Analysis
Knowledge graphs (KGs) for pre-train language models
(LLMs) analysis aims to answer the following questions
such as “how do LLMs generate the results?”, and “how do
the function and structure work in LLMs?”. To analyze the
inference process of LLMs, as shown in Fig. 13, KagNet [38]
and QA-GNN [131] make the results generated by LLMs
at each reasoning step grounded by knowledge graphs. In
this way, the reasoning process of LLMs can be explained
by extracting the graph structure from KGs. Shaobo et al.
[123] investigate how LLMs generate the results correctly.
They adopt the causal-inspired analysis from facts extracted
from KGs. This analysis quantitatively measures the word
patterns that LLMs depend on to generate the results. The
results show that LLMs generate the missing factual more
by the positionally closed words rather than the knowledge-
dependent words. Thus, they claim that LLMs are inade-
quate to memorize factual knowledge because of the inaccu-
rate dependence. To interpret the training of LLMs, Swamy