JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 6
Structural
FactT ext
CorpusImageKGs LLMsExplicit Knowledge
Domain-speciﬁc Knowledge
Decisiveness
Interpretability
General Knowledge
Language Processing
GeneralizabilityPrompt Engineering Graph Neural Network
Representation Learning Neural-symbolic ReasoningIn-context Learning
Few-shot LearningSearch
EngineRecommender
SystemDialogue
SystemAI
Assistant
V ideo DataSynergized
ModelT echniqueApplication
Fig. 7. The general framework of the Synergized LLMs + KGs , which
contains four layers: 1) Data ,2) Synergized Model ,3) Technique , and
4) Application .
KGs to interpret the facts [14] and the reasoning process of
LLMs [38].
3.1.2 LLM-augmented KGs
KGs store structure knowledge playing an essential role in
many real-word applications [19]. Existing methods in KGs
fall short of handling incomplete KGs [33] and processing
text corpus to construct KGs [93]. With the generalizability
of LLMs, many researchers are trying to harness the power
of LLMs for addressing KG-related tasks.
The most straightforward way to apply LLMs as text
encoders for KG-related tasks. Researchers take advantage
of LLMs to process the textual corpus in the KGs and then
use the representations of the text to enrich KGs representa-
tion [94]. Some studies also use LLMs to process the original
corpus and extract relations and entities for KG construction
[95]. Recent studies try to design a KG prompt that can
effectively convert structural KGs into a format that can be
comprehended by LLMs. In this way, LLMs can be directly
applied to KG-related tasks, e.g., KG completion [96] and
KG reasoning [97].
3.1.3 Synergized LLMs + KGs
The synergy of LLMs and KGs has attracted increasing
attention from researchers these years [40], [42]. LLMs and
KGs are two inherently complementary techniques, which
should be unified into a general framework to mutually
enhance each other.
To further explore the unification, we propose a unified
framework of the synergized LLMs + KGs in Fig. 7. The
unified framework contains four layers: 1) Data ,2) Syner-
gized Model ,3) Technique , and 4) Application . In the Data layer,
LLMs and KGs are used to process the textual and structural
data, respectively. With the development of multi-modal
LLMs [98] and KGs [99], this framework can be extended
to process multi-modal data, such as video, audio, andimages. In the Synergized Model layer, LLMs and KGs could
synergize with each other to improve their capabilities. In
Technique layer, related techniques that have been used in
LLMs and KGs can be incorporated into this framework to
further enhance the performance. In the Application layer,
LLMs and KGs can be integrated to address various real-
world applications, such as search engines [100], recom-
mender systems [10], and AI assistants [101].
3.2 Categorization
To better understand the research on unifying LLMs and
KGs, we further provide a fine-grained categorization for
each framework in the roadmap. Specifically, we focus
on different ways of integrating KGs and LLMs, i.e., KG-
enhanced LLMs, KG-augmented LLMs, and Synergized
LLMs + KGs. The fine-grained categorization of the research
is illustrated in Fig. 8.
KG-enhanced LLMs. Integrating KGs can enhance the
performance and interpretability of LLMs in various down-
stream tasks. We categorize the research on KG-enhanced
LLMs into three groups:
1) KG-enhanced LLM pre-training includes works that
apply KGs during the pre-training stage and im-
prove the knowledge expression of LLMs.
2) KG-enhanced LLM inference includes research that
utilizes KGs during the inference stage of LLMs,
which enables LLMs to access the latest knowledge
without retraining.
3) KG-enhanced LLM interpretability includes works that
use KGs to understand the knowledge learned by
LLMs and interpret the reasoning process of LLMs.
LLM-augmented KGs. LLMs can be applied to augment
various KG-related tasks. We categorize the research on
LLM-augmented KGs into five groups based on the task
types:
1) LLM-augmented KG embedding includes studies that
apply LLMs to enrich representations of KGs by
encoding the textual descriptions of entities and
relations.
2) LLM-augmented KG completion includes papers that
utilize LLMs to encode text or generate facts for
better KGC performance.
3) LLM-augmented KG construction includes works that
apply LLMs to address the entity discovery, corefer-
ence resolution, and relation extraction tasks for KG
construction.
4) LLM-augmented KG-to-text Generation includes re-
search that utilizes LLMs to generate natural lan-
guage that describes the facts from KGs.
5) LLM-augmented KG question answering includes stud-
ies that apply LLMs to bridge the gap between
natural language questions and retrieve answers
from KGs.
Synergized LLMs + KGs. The synergy of LLMs and KGs
aims to integrate LLMs and KGs into a unified framework
to mutually enhance each other. In this categorization, we
review the recent attempts of Synergized LLMs + KGs from
the perspectives of knowledge representation and reasoning .
In the following sections (Sec 4, 5, and 6), we will provide
details on these categorizations.