JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 17
Brarck Obama
PoliticianOf
USAHonolulu
BornIn
LocatedIn
CapitalOf
Washingto
D.C.MarriedT o
Michelle
ObamaLiveInKGs
LLMsBrack Obama  is a
politician of  USA . He
was born in Honolulu ,
and married to Michelle
Obama . Graph Linearization
Brack Obama [SEP]
PoliticianOf [SEP] 
USA [SEP] .....
[SEP] Michelle Obama Description T ext
Fig. 21. The general framework of KG-to-text generation.
task. As shown in Fig. 21, both works simply represent
the input graph as a linear traversal and find that such
a naive approach successfully outperforms many existing
state-of-the-art KG-to-text generation systems. Interestingly,
Ribeiro et al. [167] also find that continue pre-training could
further improve model performance. However, these meth-
ods are unable to explicitly incorporate rich graph semantics
in KGs. To enhance LLMs with KG structure information,
JointGT [42] proposes to inject KG structure-preserving
representations into the Seq2Seq large language models.
Given input sub-KGs and corresponding text, JointGT first
represents the KG entities and their relations as a sequence
of tokens, then concatenate them with the textual tokens
which are fed into LLM. After the standard self-attention
module, JointGT then uses a pooling layer to obtain the
contextual semantic representations of knowledge entities
and relations. Finally, these pooled KG representations are
then aggregated in another structure-aware self-attention
layer. JointGT also deploys additional pre-training objec-
tives, including KG and text reconstruction tasks given
masked inputs, to improve the alignment between text and
graph information. Li et al. [168] focus on the few-shot
scenario. It first employs a novel breadth-first search (BFS)
strategy to better traverse the input KG structure and feed
the enhanced linearized graph representations into LLMs
for high-quality generated outputs, then aligns the GCN-
based and LLM-based KG entity representation. Colas et
al. [169] first transform the graph into its appropriate repre-
sentation before linearizing the graph. Next, each KG node
is encoded via a global attention mechanism, followed by
a graph-aware attention module, ultimately being decoded
into a sequence of tokens. Different from these works, KG-
BART [37] keeps the structure of KGs and leverages the
graph attention to aggregate the rich concept semantics in
the sub-KG, which enhances the model generalization on
unseen concept sets.
5.4.2 Constructing large weakly KG-text aligned Corpus
Although LLMs have achieved remarkable empirical suc-
cess, their unsupervised pre-training objectives are not nec-
essarily aligned well with the task of KG-to-text genera-
tion, motivating researchers to develop large-scale KG-text
aligned corpus. Jin et al. [170] propose a 1.3M unsupervised
KG-to-graph training data from Wikipedia. Specifically, they
first detect the entities appearing in the text via hyperlinks
and named entity detectors, and then only add text that
shares a common set of entities with the correspondingknowledge graph, similar to the idea of distance supervision
in the relation extraction task [232]. They also provide a
1,000+ human annotated KG-to-Text test data to verify the
effectiveness of the pre-trained KG-to-Text models. Simi-
larly, Chen et al. [171] also propose a KG-grounded text
corpus collected from the English Wikidump. To ensure the
connection between KG and text, they only extract sentences
with at least two Wikipedia anchor links. Then, they use
the entities from those links to query their surrounding
neighbors in WikiData and calculate the lexical overlapping
between these neighbors and the original sentences. Finally,
only highly overlapped pairs are selected. The authors ex-
plore both graph-based and sequence-based encoders and
identify their advantages in various different tasks and
settings.
5.5 LLM-augmented KG Question Answering
Knowledge graph question answering (KGQA) aims to find
answers to natural language questions based on the struc-
tured facts stored in knowledge graphs [233], [234]. The
inevitable challenge in KGQA is to retrieve related facts and
extend the reasoning advantage of KGs to QA. Therefore,
recent studies adopt LLMs to bridge the gap between nat-
ural language questions and structured knowledge graphs
[174], [175], [235]. The general framework of applying LLMs
for KGQA is illustrated in Fig. 22, where LLMs can be used
as 1) entity/relation extractors, and 2) answer reasoners.
5.5.1 LLMs as Entity/relation Extractors
Entity/relation extractors are designed to identify entities
and relationships mentioned in natural language questions
and retrieve related facts in KGs. Given the proficiency in
language comprehension, LLMs can be effectively utilized
for this purpose. Lukovnikov et al. [172] are the first to uti-
lize LLMs as classifiers for relation prediction, resulting in a
notable improvement in performance compared to shallow
neural networks. Nan et al. [174] introduce two LLM-based
KGQA frameworks that adopt LLMs to detect mentioned
entities and relations. Then, they query the answer in KGs
using the extracted entity-relation pairs. QA-GNN [131]
uses LLMs to encode the question and candidate answer
pairs, which are adopted to estimate the importance of
relative KG entities. The entities are retrieved to form a
subgraph, where an answer reasoning is conducted by a
graph neural network. Luo et al. [173] use LLMs to calculate
the similarities between relations and questions to retrieve
related facts, formulated as
s(r, q) =LLM(r)⊤LLM(q), (12)
where qdenotes the question, rdenotes the relation, and
LLM(·)would generate representation for qandr, respec-
tively. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [236] propose a LLM-based
path retriever to retrieve question-related relations hop-by-
hop and construct several paths. The probability of each
path can be calculated as
P(p|q) =|p|Y
t=1s(rt, q), (13)
where pdenotes the path, and rtdenotes the relation at the
t-th hop of p. The retrieved relations and paths can be used