JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. ??, NO. ??, MONTH 20YY 14
LLMs
Given head entity and relation, predict the tail
entity from the candidates: [ 100 candidates ]
Head: Charlie's Angels
Relation: genre of
Tail: Comedy-GB
Head: Charlie's Angels
Relation: prequel of
Tail:Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle
Fig. 18. The framework of prompt-based PaG for KG Completion.
novel KGC model that fulfils four key requirements of
such models: scalability, quality, versatility, and simplicity.
To address these objectives, the proposed model employs a
straightforward T5 small architecture. The model is distinct
from previous KGC methods, in which it is randomly ini-
tialized rather than using pre-trained models. KG-S2S [147]
is a comprehensive framework that can be applied to var-
ious types of KGC tasks, including Static KGC, Temporal
KGC, and Few-shot KGC. To achieve this objective, KG-S2S
reformulates the standard triple KG fact by introducing an
additional element, forming a quadruple (h, r, t, m ), where
mrepresents the additional ”condition” element. Although
different KGC tasks may refer to different conditions, they
typically have a similar textual format, which enables uni-
fication across different KGC tasks. The KG-S2S approach
incorporates various techniques such as entity description,
soft prompt, and Seq2Seq Dropout to improve the model’s
performance. In addition, it utilizes constrained decoding
to ensure the generated entities are valid. For closed-source
LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT and GPT-4), AutoKG adopts prompt
engineering to design customized prompts [93]. As shown
in Fig. 18, these prompts contain the task description, few-
shot examples, and test input, which instruct LLMs to
predict the tail entity for KG completion.
Comparison between PaE and PaG. LLMs as Encoders
(PaE) applies an additional prediction head on the top of
the representation encoded by LLMs. Therefore, the PaE
framework is much easier to finetune since we can only
optimize the prediction heads and freeze the LLMs. More-
over, the output of the prediction can be easily specified
and integrated with existing KGC functions for different
KGC tasks. However, during the inference stage, the PaE
requires to compute a score for every candidate in KGs,
which could be computationally expensive. Besides, they
cannot generalize to unseen entities. Furthermore, the PaE
requires the representation output of the LLMs, whereas
some state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g. GPT-41) are closed sources
and do not grant access to the representation output.
LLMs as Generators (PaG), on the other hand, which
does not need the prediction head, can be used without
finetuning or access to representations. Therefore, the frame-
work of PaG is suitable for all kinds of LLMs. In addition,
PaG directly generates the tail entity, making it efficientin inference without ranking all the candidates and easily
generalizing to unseen entities. But, the challenge of PaG is
that the generated entities could be diverse and not lie in
KGs. What is more, the time of a single inference is longer
due to the auto-regressive generation. Last, how to design
a powerful prompt that feeds KGs into LLMs is still an
open question. Consequently, while PaG has demonstrated
promising results for KGC tasks, the trade-off between
model complexity and computational efficiency must be
carefully considered when selecting an appropriate LLM-
based KGC framework.
5.2.3 Model Analysis
Justin et al. [187] provide a comprehensive analysis of KGC
methods integrated with LLMs. Their research investigates
the quality of LLM embeddings and finds that they are
suboptimal for effective entity ranking. In response, they
propose several techniques for processing embeddings to
improve their suitability for candidate retrieval. The study
also compares different model selection dimensions, such as
Embedding Extraction, Query Entity Extraction, and Lan-
guage Model Selection. Lastly, the authors propose a frame-
work that effectively adapts LLM for knowledge graph
completion.
5.3 LLM-augmented KG Construction
Knowledge graph construction involves creating a struc-
tured representation of knowledge within a specific domain.
This includes identifying entities and their relationships
with each other. The process of knowledge graph construc-
tion typically involves multiple stages, including 1) entity
discovery ,2) coreference resolution , and 3) relation extraction .
Fig 19 presents the general framework of applying LLMs for
each stage in KG construction. More recent approaches have
explored 4) end-to-end knowledge graph construction , which
involves constructing a complete knowledge graph in one
step or directly 5) distilling knowledge graphs from LLMs .
5.3.1 Entity Discovery
Entity discovery in KG construction refers to the process of
identifying and extracting entities from unstructured data
sources, such as text documents, web pages, or social me-
dia posts, and incorporating them to construct knowledge
graphs.
Named Entity Recognition (NER) involves identifying
and tagging named entities in text data with their positions
and classifications. The named entities include people, or-
ganizations, locations, and other types of entities. The state-
of-the-art NER methods usually employ LLMs to leverage
their contextual understanding and linguistic knowledge
for accurate entity recognition and classification. There are
three NER sub-tasks based on the types of NER spans
identified, i.e., flat NER, nested NER, and discontinuous
NER. 1) Flat NER is to identify non-overlapping named entities
from input text. It is usually conceptualized as a sequence
labelling problem where each token in the text is assigned
a unique label based on its position in the sequence [1],
[148], [188], [189]. 2) Nested NER considers complex scenarios
which allow a token to belong to multiple entities. The span-
based method [190]–[194] is a popular branch of nested