2 I.C. Duta et al.
ResNets [6] are composed by stacking together a large number of building
blocks. The core idea of ResNets is to facilitate the learning of the identity
mappings for its building blocks, if needed. This is accomplished by using a
shortcut/skip connection: adding the input of the block to its learned output.
Theoretically, the network can learn the identity mappings by itself, without
these shortcuts. However, in practice, it is not easy for the optimizer to learn
identity mappings. This is called the degradation problem. This problem is easily
noticeable when training a very deep network, where the accuracy gets worse
than for its shallower counterpart, with signicantly less layers, even though,
theoretically, the situation should be vice-versa, or at least it should not be-
come worse. The ResNet idea is a solution to address the degradation problem,
allowing to eciently learn much deeper networks. However, the degradation
problem has not been completely solved, as pointed out in [7] and thoroughly
veried in our experiments. For instance, increasing the depth from 152 to 200
layers on the ImageNet [27] dataset leads to signicantly worse results, including
training error, suggesting severe optimization problems. This shows that ResNet
still harms propagation of information through the network when the number
of layers is increased. In this work, we propose an improved architecture design
that facilitates the propagation of information through the network. Our design
specically separates the network into stages and applies a dierent building
block depending on the location within each stage. Our proposed architecture is
able to learn extremely deep networks, showing no optimization diculty with
increasing depth.
In ResNets, when the dimensions of a building block do not match the di-
mensions of the next building block, a projection shortcut must be used. The
ResNet work [6] concluded that projection shortcuts are not essential for the
degradation problem. However, the projection shortcuts can play an important
role in the network architecture, as they are found on the main information prop-
agation path and can thus easily perturb the signal or cause information loss.
We introduce an improved shortcut projection, which is parameter-free improve-
ment and shows a signicant boost in performance. In the original ResNet [6], a
bottleneck building block is introduced to control the number of parameters and
computational cost when the depth is considerably increased. However, in this
building block architecture, the only convolution responsible for learning spatial
lters receives the least number of input/output channels. We propose a building
block that changes the focus to the spatial convolution, our architecture contains
four times more spatial channels in a building block than the original ResNet [6],
while keeping the number of parameters and computational cost under control.
To summarize, our main contributions are: ( 1) We introduce a network archi-
tecture for residual learning based on stages. The proposed approach facilitates
the learning process by providing a better path for information to propagate
through network's layers (Section 3.1); ( 2) We propose an improved projection
shortcut that reduces the information loss and provides better results (see Sec-
tion 3.2); ( 3) We present a building block that considerably increases the spa-
tial channels for learning more powerful spatial patterns (Section 3.3); ( 4) Our