6 I.C. Duta et al.
the components is changed. Note that, for our proposed ResStage, in each main
stage, we eliminate the rst BN in the rst Middle ResBlock, as the signal is
already normalized by our Start ResBlock.
Dierent from the original approach [6], our proposed ResStage contains a
xed number of ReLUs on the main path for the information to propagate for-
ward and backward. For instance, the number of ReLUs on the main propagation
path in [6] is directly proportional to the network depth. While in our ResStage,
for the main stages, there are only four ReLUs on the main information prop-
agation path, which are not in
uenced by changing the depth. This enables
the network to avoid hampering the signal when information is passed through
numerous layers.
Dierent from [7], we specically split the networks into several stages, each
of which contains three parts. The End Resblock of each stage is completed with
a BN and ReLU, which can be seen as preparation for the next stage, stabiliz-
ing and preparing the signal to enter into a new stage. In our Start ResBlock,
there is a BN layer after the last conv, which normalizes the signal, preparing it
for the element-wise addition with the projection shortcut (which also provides
a normalized signal). Our proposed approach facilitates learning by oering a
better path for information to propagate through the network. ResStage eases
optimization, allowing extremely deep networks to be easily trained. The net-
work can easily and dynamically choose which ResBlocks to use and which to
discard (by easily setting the weights towards 0) during the learning process.
Our proposal for learning in stages (with 3 main parts for each stage, sim-
ilar to the parts of a story: introduction, body and conclusion) is designed for
ecient information 
ow but also for keeping the signal under control. In the
experimental section we show the gain in performance of our model over the
baseline [6] and [7], while maintaining a similar model complexity.
3.2 Improved projection shortcut
In the original ResNet architecture [6], when the dimensions of xdo not match
the output dimensions of F, then a projection shortcut is applied to x(instead of
an identity shortcut, see Equation 1) to make the element-wise addition possible.
The default projection shortcut used in the original ResNet [6] is illustrated in
Fig. 2(a).1The original projection shortcut uses a conv with a 1 1 kernel to
project the channels of xto the number of output channels of F. Note that
the stride of the 1 1 conv is two, aligning the spatial sizes between xand the
output ofF. Then, a BN is applied before the element-wise addition with the
output ofF. Therefore, both channel and spatial matching are performed by a
11 conv. This causes a signicant loss in information as the 1 1 conv (with
stride 2) skips 75% of the feature maps activations when reducing the spatial
size by two. Furthermore, there is no meaningful criterion for selecting the 25%
1Note that [6] introduced three projection shortcut options: A, B, C. However, B is
widely used and adopted as the default option, as option A negatively aects the
accuracy and option C considerably increases the model complexity (even doubled).