20 I.C. Duta et al.
Table 14 presents the comparison results on the projection shortcut with [8] us-
ing a 50-layer deep network. Our approach outperforms [8] by a large margin.
We call our network ResMax, when using only our proposed projection shortcut
on the ResNet baseline.
A.5 Discussion
Someone may say: "Your work improved convolutional neural networks, that's
good and useful in practice for reasonable depths such as 50 and 101. But what
about these outrageous depths: over 400 or over 3000 layers!? What is the mean-
ing of this and how are these unrealistic depths going to be useful in practice?"
As we pointed, depth is a key factor for learning powerful representations, and
what is unpractical today, tomorrow may be ordinary and irreplaceable. Human
brain contains a tremendous number of neurons, connections between them and
layers, unmatched by any articially built learning system. And yet, the human
brain is able to process information extremely quickly, using very low energy,
in comparison with our articially built systems where the power consumption
is signicantly higher and falls far behind human level intelligence as perfor-
mance. The human brain is able to achieve this impressive performance by not
using its full capacity at the same time. One possible scenario that we see in the
not-so-distant future is the following: we will be able to build neural networks
very close to the capacity of the human brain, but these unrealistically (today)
huge networks will not be static. The neural network can dynamically change
and choose at the run-time which neurons, connections and layers to use, based,
for instance, on the complexity of the input data, task to solve and/or previous
activations. This will tremendously reduce the computational complexity and
power consumption. But the learning of deep and powerful representations may
have "no limits". Having systems that can easily learn without being negatively
aected by signicantly increasing depth can play a critical factor in achieving
the ultimate goal, human level intelligence.