Improved Residual Networks 3
proposed approach provides consistent improvements over the baseline. It is im-
portant to note that these improvements are obtained without increasing the
model complexity. We present results on six datasets (four for images and two
for large-scale video classication). With our network architecture, we are able
to eectively train extremely deep CNNs, while the baseline architecture shows
signicant optimization issues. We successfully train a 404-layer deep CNN on
the ImageNet dataset and a 3002-layer network on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100,
while the baseline was not able to converge for such depths. To the best of
our knowledge, these are the deepest networks ever trained on these datasets
(Section 4).
2 Related Work
Residual networks (ResNets) [6] are very ecient in training deep architectures
for visual recognition. ResNets use a shortcut connection to facilitate the signal
propagation along the network. We use ResNets as baselines in our work, and
show dierent improved architectures. There are many works focused on improv-
ing this powerful architecture. The work [7] introduces pre-activation ResNets
by proposing a new order of the elements for the building block to improve signal
propagation along the network. Our work is related to pre-activation ResNets
method as one of our contributions addresses also the 
ow of information through
the network. However, dierent from [7], our approach specically splits the net-
work in stages and proposes a dierent block for each part of the stage: start,
middle and end. Our approach shows better results starting from relatively deep
network to very deep ones, while [7] shows its benets mostly on very deep
networks. As a matter of fact [7] shows the results starting with the depth 152
on ImageNet dataset [27].
The works [16] uses grouped convolution to split the computation of the
convolutions over two GPUs to overcome the limitations in computational re-
sources. The work [35] uses also group convolution but with the goal to im-
prove the recognition performance of ResNet architectures. We make also use
of grouped convolution, however, dierent from [35], we propose a new build-
ing block architecture, with a dierent shape, which introduces two times more
spatial lters than [35], showing improved performance. The work [10] and [33]
improve ResNets by introducing squeeze-and-excitation and non-local blocks.
However, dierent from our work, these are additional blocks that need to be
inserted in the network, which increase the model and computational complex-
ity. Another work [8], focused on improving ResNets, collects some renements
in a bag of tricks to boost the performance of the network. We propose dier-
ent directions, and most of their collected renements do not overlap with our
work, they are mostly complementary, therefore, they can be used together for
further improvements. Although, there is an overlap in a point with our work,
regarding the projection shortcut, our proposed projection shortcut is dierent
than [8]. We use a dierent block, and we include it also in the rst stage of
the network. In the Appendix we present a direct comparison of our proposed
projection shortcut with [8].