8 I.C. Duta et al.
3.3 Grouped building block
The bottleneck building block was introduced in [6] for practical considerations,
to maintain a reasonable computational cost when increasing the network depth.
It rst contains a 1 1 conv for reducing the number of channels, then a 3 3 conv
bottleneck which operates on the smallest number of input/output channels,
and, nally, a 11 conv that increases the number of channels back to the
original. The reason for this design is to run the 3 3 conv on the smaller number
of channels to keep computational cost and the number of parameters under
control. However, the 3 3 conv is very important as it is the only component
able to learn spatial patterns, but in the bottleneck design it receives the smaller
number of input/output channels.
We propose an improved building block that contains the biggest number of
input/output channels on the 3 3 conv. In the design of our proposed building
block we make use of grouped convolution, we call it ResGroup block. Grouped
convolution was used in [16] as a solution to distribute the model over two GPUs
to overcome the limitations caused by computational cost and memory. Recently,
[35] exploited grouped convolution to improve accuracy. For the standard con-
volution, each output channel is connected to all input channels. The main idea
of grouped convolution is to split the input channels into several groups and
perform convolution operations independently for each group. In this way, the
number of parameters (params) and 
oating-point operations (FLOPs) can be
reduced by a factor equal to the number of groups. The number of params and
FLOPs (on image data) can be computed as:
params =chin
Gchoutk1k2;FLOPs =chin
Gchoutk1k2wh; (2)
where, chinandchoutare the number of input and output channels; k1andk2
represent the kernel size of the conv; wandhare the width and height of the
channels; and Grepresents the number of groups the channels are split into.
IfG= 1, then we have a standard convolution. If Gis equal to the number
of input channels, then we are at the other extreme, which is called depthwise
convolution, used successfully in [1].
The proposed network architecture, which has a similar computational cost
and number of parameters as the original ResNet-50 [6], is illustrated in Table 1.
To keep the number of parameters and computational cost under control, the
grouped convolution is used with the 3 3 spatial kernel. Note that each convo-
lution involves a BN and a ReLU (not represented for simplicity). We propose
two architectures: (1) ResGroupFix-50 represents the case where the number of
groups for each stage is xed (64 in our case). This option generates a similar
number of FLOPs and 8.57% less parameters than the baseline [6] for 50 layers;
(2) ResGroup-50 represents the case where we adapt the number of groups to
the channels, in such a way that all stages have the same number of channels
per group (32 in our case). ResGroup-50 has a similar number of parameters as
the original ResNet-50 and more FLOPs.