Improved Residual Networks 7
of the feature maps activations considered by the 1 1 conv. The result is then
added to the main ResBlock output. Thus, this noisy output of the projection
shortcut contributes with relatively half of the information to the next ResBlock.
This introduces noise and information loss, and can negatively perturb the main

ow of the information through the network.
BN conv 1x1 
(stride=1 ) MaxPool 3x3 
(stride=2 ) 
BN conv 1x1 
(stride=2 ) 
(a) original (b) proposed 
Fig. 2: (a) orig-
inal projection
shortcut [6];
(b) proposed
projection
shortcut.Our proposed projection shortcut is presented in Fig. 2(b).
We disentangle the spatial projection from the channel projec-
tion. For the spatial projection, we perform a 3 3 max pooling
with stride 2. Then, we apply a 1 1 conv with stride 1 for the
channel projection, followed by a BN. With the max pooling,
we introduce a criterion for selecting which activations should
be considered for 1 1 conv. Furthermore, the spatial projection
considers all the information from the feature maps and picks
the element with the highest activation to be considered in the
next step. Note that the kernel of the max pooling coincides
with the kernel of the middle conv from the ResBlock, which
ensures that the element-wise addition is performed between
elements computed over the same spatial window. Our pro-
posed projection shortcut reduces the information loss and, in
the experimental section, we show the benet in performance.
Besides the rst motivation to reduce the information loss and the pertur-
bation of the signal, there are other two reasons for our proposed projection
shortcut. Second, having a max pooling on Start ResBlock of each main stage
improves the translation invariance of the network and ultimately improves the
overall recognition performance. Third motivation: with our projection short-
cut, the Start ResBlock of each stage, which performs the downsampling, can
be seen as a combination between "soft downsampling" (or weighted downsam-
pling), accomplished by the 3x3 conv (with learnable weights for downsampling)
of the Start ResBlock, and "hard downsampling", accomplished by the 3x3 max
pooling of our projection shortcut. For illustration, we can force to make a par-
allel view between soft assignment (see in Fisher Vectors encoding [26]) and
hard assignment (see in VLAD encoding [13]). Each of the two downsamplings
comes with complementary benets. The "hard downsampling" is benecial for
classication (picking the element with the highest activation), while the "soft
downsampling" is also a contribution to not losing all spacial context (therefore,
helping for better localization, as the transition between elements is smoother).
Note that our proposed projection shortcut does not add any additional pa-
rameters to the model. A ResNet usually requires only four projection shortcuts,
at the beginning of each stage (on the Start ResBlock of a stage). Therefore, for
our proposed projection shortcut the increase in computational cost for ResNet
is negligible, since we need to additionally include only three max pooling layers
(as for the rst stage we use the existing max pooling in the ResNet), which are
usually cheap to compute. We refer to the improved residual network ( iResNet )
when using the idea of stages from the previous section together with the pro-
posed projection shortcut.