1 
 An Ensemble Architecture of Deep Convolutional Segnet  and Unet  1 
Networks for Building Semantic Segmentation from High -resolution 2 
Aerial Images  3 
 4 
Abstract  5 
Building objects is one of the principal features that are essential for updating the geospatial database. 6 
Extracting building features from high -resolution imagery automatically and accurately is challenging 7 
because of the existence of some obstacles in these images , such a s shadows, trees , and cars. Although deep 8 
learning approaches have shown significant improvement s in the results of image segmentation in recent 9 
years, most deep neural networks still cannot achieve highly accurate  results with correct segmentation map 10 
when processing high -resolution remote sensing images. Therefore, w e implement ed a new deep neural 11 
network named Seg –Unet method , which  is a composition of Segnet and Unet techniques , to exploit 12 
building objects from high -resolution aerial imagery. Results obtained 92.73% accuracy carried on the 13 
Massachusetts building dataset. The proposed technique improve d the performance to 0.44%, 1.17%, and 14 
0.14% compared with fully convolutional neural network  (FCN) , Segnet , and Unet methods , respectively . 15 
Results also confirmed the superiority of the proposed method in building extraction.  16 
Keywords:  building extraction; image segmentation; remote sensing; Seg–Unet approach   17 
1. Introduction  18 
Highly accurate  feature extraction from high -resolution remote sensing imager y produce s 19 
reliable information for various  applications  (Shrestha and Vanneschi 2018) . The extraction of  20 
small  ground objects , such as building objects from the imagery of the surface of the earth , can be 21 
a potential application  (Krizhevsky  et al.  2012) . High -precision building extraction from high - 22 
resolution satellite i mages can perform an essential task in several applications , such as disaster 23 
management, geospatial database updating, urban planning, and navigation (Mayer 1999) . Raw 24 
data should be converted into sensible information  by using geospatial information system  (GIS)  25 
to enable the quantification process. The time-consuming  and labor -intensive data interpretation 26 
and digitization are often required for this transformation. Although Yuan (2017) introduced a 27 
source called  volunteered geographic information (VGI) as an alternative option , its availability  is 28 
restricted due to  the differences in positional and completeness accuracy . Participation inequality , 29