VICRegL: Self-Supervised Learning of Local Visual
Features
Adrien Bardes1,2Jean Ponce2,4Yann LeCun1,3,4
1Meta, FAIR
2Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
3Courant Institute, New York University
4Center for Data Science, New York University
Abstract
Most recent self-supervised methods for learning image representations focus on
either producing a global feature with invariance properties, or producing a set of
local features. The former works best for classification tasks while the latter is best
for detection and segmentation tasks. This paper explores the fundamental trade-
off between learning local and global features. A new method called VICRegL
is proposed that learns good global and local features simultaneously, yielding
excellent performance on detection and segmentation tasks while maintaining
good performance on classification tasks. Concretely, two identical branches of a
standard convolutional net architecture are fed two differently distorted versions
of the same image. The VICReg criterion is applied to pairs of global feature
vectors. Simultaneously, the VICReg criterion is applied to pairs of local feature
vectors occurring before the last pooling layer. Two local feature vectors are
attracted to each other if their l2-distance is below a threshold or if their relative
locations are consistent with a known geometric transformation between the two
input images. We demonstrate strong performance on linear classification and
segmentation transfer tasks. Code and pretrained models are publicly available at:
https://github.com/facebookresearch/VICRegL
1 Introduction
Recent advances in self-supervised learning for computer vision have been largely driven by down-
stream proxy tasks such as image categorization, with convolutional backbones [Chen et al., 2020a,b,
Grill et al., 2020, Lee et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2020, Zbontar et al., 2021, Bardes et al., 2022,
Tomasev et al., 2022], or vision transformers [Caron et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022,
Zhou et al., 2022a]. Current approaches rely on a joint embedding architecture and a loss function
that forces the learned features to be invariant to a sampling process selecting pairs of different views
of the same image, obtained by transformation such as cropping, rescaling, or color jittering [Misra
and Maaten, 2020, Chen et al., 2020a, He et al., 2020, Grill et al., 2020]. These methods learn
to eliminate the irrelevant part of position and color information, in order to satisfy the invariance
criterion, and perform well on image classification benchmarks. Some recent approaches go beyond
learning global features: to tackle tasks such as semantic segmentation where spatial information
plays a key role, [Yang et al., 2021, Xie et al., 2021, Hénaff et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2022, Hénaff
et al., 2022, El-Nouby et al., 2022] also learn image models with more emphasis on local image
structure. In the end most recent approaches to self-supervised learning of visual features learn
the corresponding image model using either a (possibly quite sophisticated) global criterion, or a
(necessarily) different one exploiting local image characteristics and spatial information. The best
performing local methods require a non-parametric pre-processing step that compute unsupervised
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).