pixel space between the objects. Copy pasting a patch on a random background [Yang et al., 2021,
Wang et al., 2022] has also shown to be effective for learning to localize an object without relying on
spurious correlations with the background. Aggregating multiple images corresponding to several
object instances into a single image can also help the localization task [Yang et al., 2022]. These
approaches rely on carefully and handcrafted constructions of new images with modified background
or with aggregation of semantic content from several other images, which is not satisfactory, while
our method simply rely on the classical augmentations commonly used in self-supervised learning.
The best current approaches consist in using the information from unsupervised segmentation masks,
which can be computed as a pre-processing step [Hénaff et al., 2021] or computed online [Hénaff
et al., 2022]. The feature vectors coming from the same region in the mask are pooled together
and the resulting vectors are contrasted between each other with a contrastive loss function. These
approaches explicitly construct semantic segmentation masks using k-means for every input image,
which is computationally not efficient, and is a strong inductive bias in the architecture. Our method
does not rely on these masks and therefore learns less specialized features.
3 Method
Background. VICReg was introduced as a self-supervised method for learning image representations
that avoid the collapse problem by design. Its loss function is composed of three terms: a variance
term, that preserves the variance of the embeddings, and consists in a hinge loss function on the
standard deviation, on each component of the vectors individually and along the batch dimension; an
invariance term, which is simply an l2distance between the embeddings from the two branches of a
siamese architecture; and finally a covariance term, that decorrelates the different dimensions of the
embeddings, by bringing to 0 the off-diagonal coefficients of the empirical covariance matrix of the
embeddings.
For completeness, we describe how the VICReg framework works [Bardes et al., 2022]. A seed
imageIis first sampled in the unlabelled training dataset. Two views xandx′are obtained by
a rectangular crop at random locations in I, rescaling them to a fixed size (R,S)and applying
various color jitters with random parameters. The views are fed to an encoder fθ:RC×R×S→RC
producing their representations y=fθ(x)andy′=fθ(x′)∈RC, which are mapped by an expander
hϕ:RC→RDonto the embeddings z=hϕ(y)andz′=hϕ(y′)∈RD. The VICReg loss function
is defined as follows:
ℓ(z,z′) =λs(z,z′) +µ[v(z) +v(z′)] +ν[c(z) +c(z′)], (1)
wheres,vandcare the invariance, variance and covariance terms as described in [Bardes et al.,
2022], andλ,µandνare scalar coefficients weighting the terms.
3.1 VICRegL: feature vectors matching
When the encoder fθis a convolutional neural network, the final representations are obtained
by performing an average pooling operation ⊕:RC×H×W→RCon the output feature maps,
withCthe number of channels and (H,W )the spatial dimensions. We now denote the pooled
representations y⊕andy′
⊕∈RCand the unpooled representations yandy′∈RC×H×W. We denote
yi,jandy′
i,j∈RCthe feature vectors at position (i,j)in their corresponding feature maps. The main
idea is to apply the VICReg criterion between pairs of feature vectors from yandy′, by matching an
element ofyto one from y′, using spatial and l2-distance based information. We introduce a local
projector network hl
ϕ:RC×H×W→RD×H×W, that embed the feature maps yandy′∈RC×H×W
onto feature maps embeddings z=hl
ϕ(y)andz′=hl
ϕ(y′)∈RD×H×W. The standard expander
of VICReg is now the global expander hg
ψ:RC→RD, which maps the pooled representations y⊕
andy′
⊕∈RCto the embeddings z⊕=hg
ψ(z⊕)andz′
⊕=hg
ψ(z′
⊕)∈RD. We describe now how we
perform the matching, and introduce our loss functions.
Location-based matching. In order to take into account the transformation that occurs between the
viewsxandx′of an image I, and thus matching features from similar locations, we compute the
absolute position in Ithat corresponds to the coordinate of each feature vector in its feature map.
Each feature vector zpat positionpin the feature map is matched to its spatial nearest neighbor
according the the absolute position in I, and among the H×Wresulting pairs, only the top- γpairs
3