covariance (C) criterion, in addition to the invariance (I) criterion, applied by the local loss functions
on the feature vectors, is useful or not. Table 7 shows that these regularization criteria are actually
helping the performance, introducing the variance criterion improves on segmentation by +0.8 mIoU,
and additionally adding the covariance criterion further improves the performance by +1.3 mIoU over
the baseline. Similar to other ablations on the local loss functions, the classification accuracy is not
significantly impacted.
Study of a different collapse prevention method. Our collapse-prevention mechanism is the
variance and covariance regularization of VICReg, which is a non-contrastive criterion that therefore
does not contrast negatively on potential positive matchings. We study however the incorporation
of our local criterion with a contrastive criterion, SimCLR [Chen et al., 2020a]. We simply replace
VICReg by SimCLR in Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) and refer this new method as SimCLR-L. Table 4 reports
the performance, and we observe that although there is a gap in performance between regular SimCLR
and VICReg, the additional benefit provided by the local criterion is much stronger with VICReg.
Impact of multi-crop. We study the impact of using the multi-crop strategy for the data augmentation,
by comparing VICReg to VICRegL. Table 5 reports our results. Whether multi-crop is used or not,
introducing the local criterion always improve significantly the segmentation results, while preserving
again most of the classification performance.
4.3 Visualization
We provide in Figure 3, a visualization of the pairs of matched feature vectors selected by VICRegL.
Right to the seed image, the left column shows the feature-based matches, and the right column shows
the location-based matches. Each case in the the grid represents a position in the feature map, and a
match between two feature vectors is represented by a yellow line. The receptive field of these feature
vectors is larger than a single case in the grid, and actually spans the entire image, but we observe
that the embedding space is shaped such that the feature-based matching is coherent regarding the
semantic content at a position in the image where a feature vector is pooled. A feature vector that is
located at a position corresponding to a texture representing "sky" or "grass" in one view is matched
to another one on the other view located at a position corresponding to a similar "sky" or "grass"
texture. Additional visualizations are available in Appendix ??.
5 Conclusion
In this work, we introduced VICRegL, a method for learning both local and global visual features
at the same time, by matching feature vectors with respect to their distance in the pixel space
and in the embedding space. We show that introducing a local criterion significantly improves the
performance on segmentation tasks, while preserving the classification accuracy. We also demonstrate
that convolutional networks are competitive to vision transformers in self-supervised learning, by
using the ConvNeXt backbone.
Limitations and Future work. Convolutional neural networks by design produce feature maps that
have a receptive field that covers the entire image. It is not clear to which extent a feature vector at a
given position in the feature maps actually contains mainly information about the objects located
at the corresponding location in the input image. The learned tokens of a vision transformers are
also good candidates for local features, and a detailed study of the actual local nature of both the
feature vectors of a convolutional network and the tokens of a vision transformer, would provide
useful insights for future directions of self-supervised learning of local features. Future work will
also tackle the problem of learning hierarchical features, by applying a criterion not only at a local
and a global scale, but also at multiple levels in the encoder network.
Acknowledgement. Jean Ponce was supported in part by the French government under management
of Agence Nationale de la Recherche as part of the ”Investissements d’avenir” program, reference
ANR-19-P3IA-0001 (PRAIRIE 3IA Institute), the Louis Vuitton/ENS Chair in Artificial Intelligence
and the Inria/NYU collaboration. Adrien Bardes was supported in part by a FAIR/Prairie CIFRE
PhD Fellowship. The authors wish to thank Li Jing, Randall Balestriero, Amir Bar, Grégoire Mialon,
Jiachen Zhu, Quentin Garrido, Florian Bordes, Bobak Kiani, Surya Ganguli, Megi Dervichi, Yubei
Chen, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas and Pascal Vincent for useful discussions.
10