number of matches and a threshold value used to compute the matches, which did not improve the
performance compared to using a fixed number of matches. In practice, there are with high probability
always good local features to match as the views have a low probability of not overlapping, and this
explains why always matching the top- γpairs, compared to introducing a threshold value at which
the pair is considered a match, does not degrade the performance.
Our final loss function is a combination of the location-based and feature-based loss functions, which
form the local criterion, with in addition a standard VICReg loss function applied on the pooled
representations, which is the global criterion. Both location and feature-based loss functions are
symmetrized, because for both, the search for the best match is not a symmetric operation. Our final
loss function is described as follows:
L(z,z′) =αℓ(z⊕,z′
⊕) + (1−α){Ls(z,z′) +Ls(z′,z) +Ld(z,z′) +Ld(z′,z)}, (4)
whereαis an hyper-parameter controlling the importance one wants to put on learning global
rather than local features. We study later in Section 4.2 the influence of αon the downstream
performance, and show that there exists a trade-off such that the learned representations contain local
and global information at the same time, and therefore transfer well on both image classification and
segmentation tasks.
3.2 VICRegL with the ConvNeXt backbone
The feature matching procedure is designed to work with any kind of convolutional neural network.
In the experimental section, we provide results with a standard ResNet-50 backbone. However,
one can considerably improve the performance on downstream tasks by using a more sophisticated
backbone. We propose to use the recently introduced ConvNeXt architecture [Liu et al., 2022], that is
very similar to the ResNet one, but with many simple modifications to the original architecture, which
make it work as well as modern vision transformers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
time ConvNeXts have been used in self-supervised learning, and our work shows that convolutional
neural networks are still able to deliver state-of-the-art performances in most standard self-supervised
learning benchmarks. In order to make the performance competitive with recent approaches, we use
the multi-crop strategy introduced in [Caron et al., 2020]. Surprisingly, we found that the combination
of multi-crop with encoders from the ResNet family and the VICReg criterion is extremely difficult
to optimize, and haven’t been able to make it work properly. However, multi-crop shows very good
results when combined with ConvNeXts. Our intuitive explanation is based on a study of the optimal
batch size. The VICReg criterion regularizes the empirical covariance matrix of the embeddings,
computed using the current batch, and we hypothesize that there is a link between the size of the
batch, and the dimensionality of the representations. VICReg combined with a ResNet-50 has shown
to have an optimal batch size of 2048, which is exactly the dimensionality of the representations of a
ResNet-50. We found that the optimal batch size when working with ConvNeXts is 512 which is
much smaller, and correlates with the fact that ConvNeXts also have smaller representations (768
for ConvNeXt-S and 1024 for ConvNeXt-B). The optimal batch size might therefore be close to
the dimensionality of the representations. Now, the multi-crop strategy artificially increases the size
of the batch, which is much easier to handle when the size of the batch before multi-crop is small.
Indeed the effective batch size otherwise becomes too large, which causes optimization issues.
We now describe how the matching loss functions are adapted in order to work with multi-crop.
Instead of generating only two views of the seed image, Nviews (2 large, and N−2small), resized
to two different resolutions are generated, and further encoded into the feature maps embeddings
z1andz2for large views, and {zn}N
n=3for small views. The spatial matching loss function is then
defined as follows:
Ls({zn}N
n=1) =2/summationdisplay
m=1N/summationdisplay
n̸=m{/summationdisplay
p∈Pl(zm
p,zn
NN(p)) +/summationdisplay
p∈Pl(zn
p,zm
NN(p))}, (5)
where only the top- γ1and top-γ2pairs of feature vectors of large and small views respectively are
kept in the computation of the loss. The feature-based loss function, and the global criterion are
adapted in a very similar way, one large view is matched to the other large views and to the small
views, and the final loss function is defined as follows:
L({zn}N
n=1) =αℓ({zn
⊕}N
n=1) + (1−α){Ls({zn}N
n=1) +Ld({zn}N
n=1)}. (6)
5