1.0 0.9 0.75 0.5 0.25 0.0
Alpha6062646668707274Linear classification accuracy (%)
5657585960
Linear segmentation (mIoU)
Figure 2: Study of the trade-off between local
and global criteria. Evaluation on linear classifi-
cation on ImageNet and on linear Segmentation
on Pascal VOC of VICRegL pretrained with vari-
ousαcoefficients of Eq. (4), controlling the im-
portance of the global criterion against the local
criterion.
Table 3: Ablation: matching criterion. Compar-
ison between using the feature-based matching
loss (Ld), the location-based matching loss ( Ls),
none of the two (Baseline), or both at the same
time.
Method Cls. (%) Seg. (mIoU)
Baseline 73.8 56.0
Ls 73.5 58.9
Ld 73.6 57.7
Ls-Ld 73.6 60.3
Figure 3: Selected matches: visualization of the
locations of the best local matches selected by
VICRegL. Left image is the seed image, with in
red and blue the crop locations for the two views.
Left column are the feature-based matches. Right
column are the location-based matches. Only 10
matches are visualized for better clarity, but the
actual number of selected matches is 20. We dis-
play the matches according to the location of the
feature vectors in the feature maps. Note that the
receptive field of these feature vectors is much
larger than only the patch represented by one
square of the grid in the figure. Best viewed in
color with zoom .
global features at the same time. The performance of most local methods is greatly impacted on
classification where they all perform around 10 to 20% below global methods. Global methods on
the contrary are efficient for classification but underperform in segmentation compared to VICRegL.
ConvNeXt backbone. Table 2 presents our results when pretraining with ConvNeXts backbones
against several other global and local self-supervised learning methods pretrained with vision trans-
formers [Dosovitskiy et al., 2021]. Similar to our experiments with a ResNet-50 backbone, the main
observation we make is the improvement on segmentation tasks provided by the introduction of
the local criterion. With a ConvNeXt-S backbone, in the linear frozen regime, VICRegL α= 0.9
improves over VICReg by +6.6 mIoU on the Pascal VOC, and by +2.2 mIoU on the ADE20K, while
preserving most of the classification accuracy. VICRegL α= 0.75further improves by +7.4 mIoU
and+3.6 over VICReg on these two benchmarks respectively. With a ConvNeXt-B backbone, the
performance improvement remain consistent over VICReg, and VICRegL α= 0.75is competitive
with other strong methods such as DINO and IBOT. The improvement also remain consistent in linear
fine-tuning where VICRegL also achieves a strong performance. Finally, we report the performance of
a much larger ConvNeXt-XL backbone, pretrained in ImageNet-22k, which is significantly improved
on segmentation tasks and set a new state-of-the art in linear segmentation. Our results highlight
the trade-off between classification and segmentation performance, which can be controlled by the
weight given to the local criterion.
4.2 Ablations
For all the experiments done in this section, unless specified otherwise, we pretrain a ConvNeXt-S on
ImageNet over 100 epochs, with the hyper-parameters described in Section 3.3, and report both the
linear classification accuracy on ImageNet, and the linear frozen segmentation mIoU on Pascal VOC.
8