segmentation masks [Hénaff et al., 2021], which can be done online [Hénaff et al., 2022], but with an
additional computational burden.
We argue that more complex reasoning systems should be structured in a hierarchical way, by learning
at several scales. To this end, we propose VICRegL, a method that learn features at a global scale,
and that additionally uses spatial information, and matches feature vectors that are either pooled from
close-by regions in the original input image, or close in the embedding space, therefore learning
features at a local scale. In practice, the global VICReg criterion [Bardes et al., 2022] is applied
to pairs of feature vectors, before and after the final pooling layer of a convolutional network, thus
learning local and global features at the same time. When a segmentation mask is available as
in [Hénaff et al., 2021], feature vectors that correspond to the same region in the mask can be pooled
together, and compared using a contrastive loss function, which allows spatial vectors far away in
the original image to be pooled together if they belong to the same object. In our case, segmentation
masks are not available, and we therefore face two challenges: (1) there is no a priori information on
how to pool vectors from the same object together, thus long-range matching should be learned in
a self-supervised manner, and (2) contrasting negatively feature vectors corresponding to far away
locations can have a negative effect, as these vectors could have been pooled from locations that
represent the same object in the image. In order to address these issues, VICRegL (1) matches feature
vectors according to a l2nearest-neighbor criterion exploiting both the distances between features
and image locations, properly weighted, and (2) uses the VICReg criterion between matched feature
vectors. We use VICReg for its simplicity and its non-contrastive nature, which alleviates the need
for negative samples and therefore does not have an explicit negative contrasting effect between
feature vectors that could have been potential matches.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of VICRegL by evaluating the learned representations on vision
tasks such as image classification on ImageNet and semantic segmentation on various datasets. Our
evaluation is (mostly) done in the setting where the backbone learned by VICRegL is frozen, with
only a linear classification or segmentation head tuned to the task at hand. We believe that this
setting is a much better evaluation metric than the commonly used fine-tuning benchmarks, as the
performance can not be attributed to the use of a complex head, or to the availability of the ground
truth masks. Our results show that learning local features, in addition to global features, does not hurt
the classification performance, but significantly improves segmentation accuracy. On the Pascal VOC
linear frozen semantic segmentation task, VICRegL achieves 55.9 mIoU with a ResNet-50 backbone,
which is a +8.1 mIoU improvement over VICReg, and 67.5 mIoU with a ConvNeXt-S backbone,
which is a +6.6 mIoU improvement.
2 Related work
Global features. Most recent methods for global feature learning are based on a joint embedding
architecture that learns representations that are invariant to various views. These methods differ
in the way collapsing solutions are avoided. Contrastive methods [Hjelm et al., 2019, Chen et al.,
2020a, He et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020b, Mitrovic et al., 2021, Dwibedi et al., 2021, Chen et al.,
2021, Tomasev et al., 2022] uses negative samples to push dissimilar samples apart from each other.
Clustering methods [Caron et al., 2018, 2020, 2021] ensure a balanced partition of the samples within
a set of clusters. Non-contrastive methods, which are dual to contrastive ones [Garrido et al., 2022],
rely on maintaining the informational content of the representations by either explicit regularization
[Zbontar et al., 2021, Bardes et al., 2022] or architectural design [Chen and He, 2020, Grill et al.,
2020, Richemond et al., 2020, Lee et al., 2021]. Finally, the best performing methods today are based
on vision transformers [Caron et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022, Zhou et al., 2022a,b] and
deliver strong results in both downstream classification and segmentation tasks.
Local features. In opposition to global methods, local one focus on explicitly learning a set of local
features that describe small parts of the image, which global methods do implicitly [Chen et al.,
2022], and are therefore better suited for segmentation tasks. Indeed these methods commonly only
evaluate on segmentation benchmarks. A contrastive loss function can be applied directly: (1) at the
pixel level [Xie et al., 2021], which forces consistency between pixels at similar locations; (2) at the
feature map level [Wang et al., 2021], which forces consistency between groups of pixels: (3) at the
image region level [Xiao et al., 2021], which forces consistency between large regions that overlap in
different views of an image. Similar to [Wang et al., 2021], our method VICRegL operates at the
feature map level but with a more advanced matching criterion that takes into account the distance in
2