8 Future Challenges
Research on enhancing the safety and trustworthiness of DNNs is still in its
infancy. In the following, we discuss a few prominent challenges.
8.1 Distance Metrics closer to Human Perception
Distance metrics are key building blocks of the techniques we surveyed, and
are mainly used to measure the similarity between two inputs. Ideally, two
inputs with smaller distance should be more similar with respect to human
perception ability. Given the fact that it is hard to measure human perception
ability, well-known metrics including L0,L1,L2, andL1-norms, are applied.
While most techniques are orthogonal to the consideration of distance metrics
(under the condition that the distances can be eciently computed), it has
been argued that better metrics may be needed. For example, [Lu et al., 2017]
argued that adversarial examples found by a few existing methods (mostly based
onL2orL1) are not necessarily physical, and [Yosinski et al., 2015] claims
that gradient-based approaches (where the computation of gradients are usually
based on certain norm distance) for interpretability do not produce images that
resemble natural images.
[Lipton, 2018] states that the demand for interpretability arises when there
is a mismatch between the formal objectives of supervised learning (test set pre-
dictive performance) and the real world costs in a deployment setting. Distance
metrics are key components in various training objectives of supervised learning.
Actually, for DNNs on perception tasks, it is the mismatch of distance metrics
used in the training objective and used by human to dierentiate objects that
hinders an intuitive explanation of a given decision.
For pattern recognition and image classication, there are other image simi-
larity distances proposed, such as the structure similarity measure SSIM [Wang
et al., 2003], but they are restricted to the computational eciency problem
and the existence of analytical solution when computing gradients. It will be
interesting to understand if the application of such metrics become more practical
for the tasks we are concerned with when more ecient computational methods
such as [Bruni and Vitulano, 2017] become available.
8.2 Improvement to Robustness
Traditional verication techniques aim to not only verify (software and hardware)
systems when they are correct, but also nd counterexamples whenever they
are incorrect. These counterexamples can be used to either directly improve the
system (e.g., counterexample-guided abstract renement [Clarke et al., 2003], etc)
or to provide useful information to the system designers for them to improve the
system. This is similar for the software testing, where bugs are utilised to repair
implementation errors (e.g., automatic repair techniques [K onighofer and Bloem,
2013], etc) and for the programmers to improve their implementation. While
similar expectation looks reasonable since existing DNN verication and testing
71