Exact deterministic guarantee, which states exactly whether a property
holds. We will omit the word exact and call it deterministic guarantee in
the remainder of the paper.
One-sided guarantee, which provides either a lower bound or an upper
bound to a variable, and thus can serve as a sucient condition for a
property to hold { the variable can denote, e.g., the greatest value of some
dimension in Reach (f;).
Guarantee with converging lower and upper bounds to a variable.
Statistical guarantee, which quanties the probability that a property
holds.
Note that, algorithms with one-sided guarantee and bound-converging guar-
antee are used to compute the real values, e.g., output reachability property
(Denition 10), interval property (Denition 12), or Lipschitzian property (De-
nition 14). Their respective verication problems are based on these values, see
Denitions 11, 13, and 15.
4.1 Approaches with Deterministic Guarantees
Deterministic guarantees are achieved by transforming a verication problem into
a set of constraints (with or without optimisation objectives) so that they can be
solved with a constraint solver. The name \deterministic" comes from the fact
that solvers often return a deterministic answer to a query, i.e., either satisable
or unsatisable. This is based on the current success of various constraint solvers
such as SAT solvers, linear programming (LP) solvers, mixed integer linear
programming (MILP) solvers, Satisability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers.
4.1.1 SMT/SAT
The Boolean satisability problem (SAT) determines if, given a Boolean formula,
there exists an assignment to the Boolean variables such that the formula is
satisable. Based on SAT, the satisability modulo theories (SMT) problem
determines the satisability of logical formulas with respect to combinations of
background theories expressed in classical rst-order logic with equality. The
theories we consider in the context of neural networks include the theory of real
numbers and the theory of integers. For both SAT and SMT problems, there
are sophisticated, open-source solvers that can automatically answer the queries
about the satisability of the formulas.
An abstraction-renement approach based on SMT solving. A solu-
tion to the verication of the interval property (which can be easily extended to
work with the reachability property for ReLU activation functions) is proposed
in
[Pulina and Tacchella, 2010] by abstracting a network into a set of Boolean com-
binations of linear arithmetic constraints. Basically, the linear transformations
23