at most linear time in the number of (hyper)parameters of a given model and any
input, which makes them applicable for choosing classiers based on robustness.
4.2.4 Output Reachable Set Estimation
In [Xiang et al., 2018], the output reachable set estimation is addressed. Given
a DNNNwith its associated function f, and a set of inputs , the output
reachable set is Reach (f;) as in Denition 10. The problem is to either
compute a close estimation Y0such thatReach (f;)Y0, or to determine
whetherReach (f;)\:S =;for a safety specication S, whereSis also
expressed with a set similar as the one in Equation (12). Therefore, it is actually
to compute the interval property. First, a concept called maximum sensitivity is
introduced and, for a class of multi-layer perceptrons whose activation functions
are monotonic functions, the maximum sensitivity can be reduced to a MILP
problem as that of Section 4.1.2. Then, using a simulation-based method, the
output reachable set estimation problem for neural networks is formulated into
a chain of optimisation problems. Finally, an automated safety verication is
developed based on the output reachable set estimation result. The approach is
applied to the safety verication for a robotic arm model with two joints.
4.2.5 Linear Approximation of ReLU Networks
FastLin /FastLip [Weng et al., 2018] analyses the ReLU networks on both interval
property and Lipschitzian property. For interval property, they consider linear
approximation over those ReLU neurons that are uncertain on their status of
being activated or deactivated. For Lipschitzian property, they use the gradient
computation for the approximation computation. Crown [Zhang et al., 2018a]
generalises the interval property computation algorithm in FastLin /FastLip by
allowing the linear expressions for the upper and lower bounds to be dierent and
enabling its working with other activation functions such as tanh, sigmoid and
arctan. The Lipschitzian property computation is improved in RecurJac [Zhang
et al., 2019].
4.3 Approaches to Compute Converging Bounds
While the above approaches can work with small networks (up to a few thousands
hidden neurons), state-of-the-art DNNs usually contain at least multi-million
hidden neurons. It is necessary that other approaches are developed to work
with real-world systems. In Section 4.3 and Section 4.4, the approaches are able
to work with large-scale networks, although they might have other restrictions or
limitations. Since the approaches surveyed in this subsection compute converging
upper and lower bounds, they can work with both output reachability property
and interval property.
28