mechanism that determines whether the DNN behaves correctly for a test case.
It is dependent on the properties to be tested, and will be discussed further in
Section 3.
2.4 Interpretability
Interpretability is an issue arising as a result of the black-box nature of DNNs.
Intuitively, it should provide a human-understandable explanation for the be-
haviour of a DNN. An explanation procedure can be separated into two steps: an
extraction step and an exhibition step. The extraction step obtains an interme-
diate representation, and the exhibition step presents the obtained intermediate
representation in a way easy for human users to understand. Given the fact
that DNNs are usually high-dimensional, and the information should be made
accessible for understanding by the human users, the intermediate representation
needs to be at a lower dimensionality. Since the exhibition step is closely related
to the intermediate representation, and is usually conducted by e.g., visualising
the representation, we will focus on the extraction step in this survey.
Depending on the requirements, the explanation can be either an instance-
wise explanation, a model explanation, or an information-
ow explanation. In
the following, we give their general denitions, trying to cover as many techniques
to be reviewed as possible.
Denition 2 (Instance-Wise Explanation) Given a function f:Rs1!
RsK, which represents a DNN N, and an input x2Rs1, an instance-wise
explanation expl (f;x)2Rtis another representation of xsuch thatts1.
Intuitively, for instance-wise explanation, the goal is to nd another repre-
sentation of an input x(with respect to the function fassociated to the DNN
N), with the expectation that the representation carries simple, yet essential,
information that can help the user understand the decision f(x). Most of the
techniques surveyed in Section 7.1, Section 7.2, and Section 7.3 t with this
denition.
Denition 3 (Model Explanation) Given a function f:Rs1!RsK, which
represents a DNN N, a model explanation expl(f)includes two functions g1:
Ra1!Ra2, which is a representation of fsuch thata1s1anda2sK, and
g2:Rs1!Ra1, which maps original inputs to valid inputs of the function g1.
Intuitively, the point of model explanation is to nd a simpler model which
can not only be used for prediction by applying g1(g2(x)) (with certain loss)
but also be comprehended by the user. Most of the techniques surveyed in
Section 7.5 t with this denition. There are other model explanations such as
the in
uence function based approach reviewed in Section 7.4, which provides
explanation by comparing dierent learned parameters by e.g., up-weighting
some training samples.
Besides the above two deterministic methods for the explanation of data and
models, there is another stochastic explanation method for the explanation of
information 
ow in the DNN training process.
13