(a) Original: `9'
 (b) Adversarial: `8'
 (c) x-dimension
 (d) y-dimension
Figure 9: Applying spatial transformation to MNIST image of a `9' [Xiao et al.,
2018]. the Image (a) on the left is the original MNIST example image of a
`9', and image (b) is the spatially transformed adversarial version that a simple
convolutional network [Papernot et al., 2018] labels as `8'. Notice how minor
the dierence between the two images is - the `9' digit has been very slightly
`bent' - but is sucient for miss-classication. The 
ow-eld that denes the
spatial transformation is visualised in Image (c) (x-dimension) and Image (d)
(y-dimension). The brighter areas indicate where the transformation is most
intense - leftwards in the x-dimension and upwards in the y-dimension.
dilation, erosion, average smoothing, and median smoothing. Every transforma-
tion is controlled by a key parameter with a polynomial-sized domain. Those
transformations are exhaustively operated on a set of input images. Then the
robustness of a neural network model can be measured. VeriVis is applied to
evaluate several state-of-the-art classication models, which empirically reveals
that all classiers show a signicant number of safety violations.
6.3 Input-Agnostic Adversarial Attacks
A key characteristic of the above attacks lies on that an adversarial example is
generated with respect to a specic input, and therefore cannot be applied to
the other input. Thus some researchers show more interests in input-agnostic
adversarial perturbations.
6.3.1 Universal Adversarial Perturbations
The rst method on input-agnostic adversarial perturbation was proposed
by [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017], called universal adversarial perturbations
(UAP), since UAP is able to fool a neural network on anyinput images with high
probability. Let the the current perturbation. UAP iteratively goes through
a setXof inputs sampled from the input distribution X. At the iteration for
xi2Xit updates the perturbation as follows. First, it nds the minimal  i
w.r.t.L2-norm distance so that xi++ iis incorrectly classied by neural
networkN. Then, it projects + iback intoLp-norm ball with a radius dto
50