transformations.
6.2.1 Rotation and Translation
[Engstrom et al., 2017] argues that most existing adversarial attacking techniques
generate adversarial images which appear to be human-crafted and less likely to be
`natural'. It shows that DNNs are also vulnerable to some image transformations
which are likely occurring in a natural setting. For example, translating or/and
rotating an input image could signicantly degrade the performance of a neural
network classier. Figure 8 gives a few examples. Technically, given an allowed
range of translation and rotation such as 3pixels30, [Engstrom et al., 2017]
aims to nd the minimum rotation and translation to cause a misclassication.
To achieve such an purpose, in this paper, several ideas are explored including
a rst-order iterative method using the gradient of the DNN's loss function,
performing an exhaustive search by descretizing the parameter space,
a worst-of-k method by randomly sampling kpossible parameter values
and choosing the value that cause the DNN to perform the worst.
6.2.2 Spatially Transformed Adversarial Examples
[Xiao et al., 2018] introduces to produce uncontrived adversarial images via
mortifying the pixel's location using spatial transformations instead of directly
changing its pixel value. The authors use the 
ow eld to control the spatial
transformations, which essentially quanties the location displacement of a
pixel to its new position. Figure 9 gives a few examples. Using a bi-linear
interpolation approach the generated adversarial example is dierentiable w.r.t.
the 
ow eld, which then can be formulated as an optimisation problem to
calculate the adversarial 
ow eld. Technically, [Xiao et al., 2018] introduce
a distance measure Lflow() (rather than the usual Lpdistance) to capture
the local geometric distortion. Similar to C&W attack [Carlini and Wagner,
2017c], the 
ow eld is obtained by solving an optimisation problem in which the
loss function is dened to balance between the Lflowloss and adversarial loss.
Through human study, [Xiao et al., 2018] demonstrate that adversarial examples
based on such spatial transformation are more similar to original images based
on human perception, comparing to those adversarial examples from Lp-norm
based attacks such as FGSM [Goodfellow et al., 2014b] and C&W [Carlini and
Wagner, 2017c].
6.2.3 Towards Practical Verication of Machine Learning: The Case
of Computer Vision Systems (VeriVis)
[Pei et al., 2017b] introduce a vericaiton framework, called VeriVis, to measure
the robustness of DNNs on a set of 12 practical image transformations includ-
ing re
ection, translation, scale, shear, rotation, occlusion brightness, contrast,
49