5 Testing
Similar to traditional software testing against software verication, DNN testing
provides a certication methodology with a balance between completeness and
eciency. In established industries, e.g., avionics and automotive, the needs for
software testing have been settled in various standards such as DO-178C and
MISRA. However, due to the lack of logical structures and system specication,
it is still unclear how to extend such standards to work with systems with DNN
components. In the following, we survey testing techniques from three aspects:
coverage criteria (Section 5.1), test case generation (Section 5.2), and model-
level mutation testing (Section 5.3). The rst two do not alter the structure of
the DNN, while the mutation testing involves the change to the structure and
parameters of the DNN.
5.1 Coverage Criteria for DNNs
Research in software engineering has resulted in a broad range of approaches
to testing software. Please refer to [Zhu et al., 1997,Jia and Harman, 2011,Su
et al., 2017] for comprehensive reviews. In white-box testing, the structure of a
program is exploited to (perhaps automatically) generate test cases. Structural
coverage criteria (or metrics) dene a set of test objectives to be covered, guiding
the generation of test cases and evaluating the completeness of a test suite.
E.g., a test suite with 100% statement coverage exercises all statements of the
program at least once. While it is arguable whether this ensures functional
correctness, high coverage is able to increase users' condence (or trust) in the
testing results [Zhu et al., 1997]. Structural coverage analysis and testing are
also used as a means of assessment in a number of safety-critical scenarios, and
criteria such as statement and modied condition/decision coverage (MC/DC)
are applicable measures with respect to dierent criticality levels. MC/DC was
developed by NASA [Hayhurst et al., 2001] and has been widely adopted. It is
used in avionics software development guidance to ensure adequate testing of
applications with the highest criticality [RTCA, 2011].
We let Fbe a set of covering methods, and R=O(N) be the set of test
objectives to be covered. In [Sun et al., 2019b] O(N) is instantiated as the set
of causal relationships between feature pairs, while in [Pei et al., 2017a] O(N) is
instantiated as the set of statuses of hidden neurons.
Denition 19 (Test Suite) Given a DNNN, a test suiteTis a nite set of
input vectors, i.e., T D1D1:::D1. Each vector is called a test case.
Usually, a test case is a single input T D1, e.g., in [Pei et al., 2017a], or a
pair of inputsT D1D1, e.g., in [Sun et al., 2019b]. Ideally, given the set
of test objectives Raccording to some covering method cov, we run a test case
generation algorithm to nd a test suite Tsuch that
82R9 (x1;x2;:::;xk)2T:cov(;(x1;x2;:::;xk)) (22)
33