such as DeepFool [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016]and C&W attack [Carlini and
Wagner, 2017c].
It also has been demonstrated that adversarial examples are transferable
across dierent neural network models [Szegedy et al., 2014, Papernot et al.,
2016c]. In [Kurakin et al., 2016], the authors further demonstrate that adversarial
examples can be transferred into real world scenarios. Namely, adversarial
examples can be still misclassied after being printed in a paper physically. In
the following, we will review a few notable works in details.
6.1.1 Limited-Memory BFGS Algorithm (L-BFGS)
[Szegedy et al., 2014] noticed the existence of adversarial examples, and described
them as `blind spots' in DNNs. They found that adversarial images usually
appear in the neighbourhood of correctly-classied examples, which can fool
the DNNs although they are human-visually similar to the natural ones. It
also empirically observes that random sampling in the neighbouring area is not
ecient to generate such examples due to the sparsity of adversarial images in
the high-dimensional space. Thus, they proposed an optimization solution to
eciently search the adversarial examples. Formally, assume we have a classier
f:Rs1!f1:::sKgthat maps inputs to one of sKlabels, and x2Rs1is an
input,t2f1:::sKgis a target label such that t6=arg maxlfl(x). Then the
adversarial perturbation rcan be solved by
minjjrjj2
s.t. arg maxlfl(x+r) =t
x+r2Rs1(27)
Since the exact computation is hard, an approximate algorithm based on the
limited-memory Broyden{Fletcher{Goldfarb{Shanno algorithm (L-BFGS) is
used instead. Furthermore, [Szegedy et al., 2014] observed that adversarial
perturbations are able to transfer among dierent model structures and training
sets, i.e., an adversarial image that aims to fool one DNN classier also potentially
deceives another neural network with dierent architectures or training datasets.
6.1.2 Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
Fast Gradient Sign Method [Goodfellow et al., 2014b] is able to nd adversarial
perturbations with a xed L1-norm constraint. FGSM conducts a one-step
modication to all pixel values so that the value of the loss function is increased
under a certain L1-norm constraint. The authors claim that the linearity
of the neural network classier leads to the adversarial images because the
adversarial examples are found by moving linearly along the reverse direction of
the gradient of the cost function. Based on this linear explanation, [Goodfellow
et al., 2014b] proposes an ecient linear approach to generate adversarial images.
Letrepresents the model parameters, x;ydenote the input and the label and
46