of awareness of the program structure, the fuzzer can be white/grey/block-box.
There are recent works that adopt fuzz testing to deep neural networks.
TensorFuzz [Odena and Goodfellow, 2018] is a coverage-guided fuzzing method
for DNNs. It randomly mutates the inputs, guided by a coverage metric over
the goal of satisfying user-specied constraints. The coverage is measured by
a fast approximate nearest neighbour algorithm. TensorFuzz is validated in
nding numerical errors, generating disagreements between DNNs and their
quantized versions, and surfacing undesirable behaviour in DNNs. Similar to
TensorFuzz, DeepHunter [Xie et al., 2018] is another coverage-guided grey-box
DNN fuzzer, which utilises these extensions of neuron coverage from [Ma et al.,
2018a]. Moreover, DLFuzz [Guo et al., 2018] is a dierential fuzzing testing
framework. It mutates the input to maximise the neuron coverage and the
prediction dierence between the original input and the mutated input.
5.2.3 Symbolic Execution and Testing
Though input mutation and fuzzing are good at generating a large amount of
random data, there is no guarantee that certain test objectives will be satised.
Symbolic execution (also symbolic evaluation) is a means of analysing a program
to determine what inputs cause each part of a program to execute. It assumes
symbolic values for inputs rather than obtaining actual inputs as normal execution
of the program would, and thus arrives at expressions in terms of those symbols
for expressions and variables in the program, and constraints in terms of those
symbols for the possible outcomes of each conditional branch.
Concolic testing is a hybrid software testing technique that alternates between
concrete execution, i.e., testing on particular inputs, and symbolic execution, i.e.,
symbolically encoding particular execution paths. This idea still holds for deep
neural networks. In DeepConcolic [Sun et al., 2018b,Sun et al., 2019a], coverage
criteria for DNNs that have been studied in the literature are rst formulated
using the Quantied Linear Arithmetic over Rationals, and then a coherent
method for performing concolic testing to increase test coverage is provided. The
concolic procedure starts from executing the DNN using concrete inputs. Then,
for those test objectives that have not been satised, they are ranked according
to some heuristic. Consequently, a top ranked pair of test objective and the
corresponding concrete input are selected and symbolic analysis is thus applied
to nd a new input test. The experimental results show the eectiveness of the
concolic testing approach in both achieving high coverage and nding adversarial
examples.
The idea in [Gopinath et al., 2018] is to translate a DNN into an imperative
program, thereby enabling program analysis to assist with DNN validation.
It introduces novel techniques for lightweight symbolic analysis of DNNs and
applies them in the context of image classication to address two challenging
problems, i.e., identication of important pixels (for attribution and adversarial
generation), and creation of 1-pixel and 2-pixel attacks. In [Agarwal et al., 2018],
black-box style local explanations are rst called to build a decision tree, to
which the symbolic execution is then applied to detect individual discrimination
41