7 Interpretability
Interpretability (or explainability) has been an active area of research, due to
the black-box nature of DNNs. DNNs have shown the ability of achieving high
precision in their predictions. However, to gain the trust from human users,
it is essential to enable them to understand the decisions a DNN has made.
Moreover, it is also possible that the results in interpretability can enhance other
techniques, such as verication, testing, and adversarial attacks.
In the following, we review three categories of interpretability methods. First
of all, instance-wise explanation, which aims to explain the decision made by a
DNN on a given input, is presented in Section 7.1, Section 7.2, and Section 7.3.
Second, model explanation, which aims to provide a better understanding on the
complex model, is reviewed in Section 7.4 and Section 7.5. Finally, in Section 7.6,
we review the recent progress of using information theoretical methods to explain
the training procedure.
7.1 Instance-wise Explanation by Visualising a Synthe-
sised Input
The rst line of research aims to understand the representation learned by
DNNs through visualisation over another input generated based on the current
input. It focuses on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with images as their
inputs, and is mainly for instance-wise explanation. Technically, with respect to
Denition 2, it is to let t=s1andexpl (f;x)2Rs1.
7.1.1 Optimising Over a Hidden Neuron
Recall that uk;l(x) is the activation of the l-th neuron on the k-th layer for the
inputx. [Erhan et al., 2009] synthesises images that cause high activations for
particular neurons by treating the synthesis problem as an optimisation problem
as follows.
x= arg max
xuk;l(x): (38)
In general, the optimisation problem is non-convex, and therefore a gradient
ascent based algorithm is applied to nd a local optimum. Starting with some
initial input x=x0, the activation uk;l(x) is computed, and then steps are taken
in the input space along the gradient direction @uk;l(x)=@xto synthesize inputs
that cause higher and higher activations for the neuron nk;l, and eventually the
process terminates at some xwhich is deemed to be a preferred input stimulus
for the neuron in question. By visualising the hidden representations, it provides
insights into how the neural network processes an input.
7.1.2 Inverting Representation
[Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2015] computes an approximate inverse of an image
representation. Let rep:Rs1!Ra1be a representation function, which maps
59