by monotonically improving its upper and lower bounds. The Monte-Carlo tree
search algorithm is applied to compute upper bounds for both games, and the
Admissible A* and the Alpha-Beta Pruning algorithms are, respectively, used to
compute lower bounds for the MSRandFRgames.
4.3.3 Global Optimisation Based Approaches
DeepGO [Ruan et al., 2018a] shows that most known layers of DNNs are Lipschitz
continuous, and presents a verication approach based on global optimisation.
For a single dimension, an algorithm is presented to always compute the lower
bounds (by utilising the Lipschitz constant) and eventually converge to the
optimal value. Based on this single-dimensional algorithm, the algorithm for
multiple dimensions is to exhaustively search for the best combinations. The
algorithm is able to work with state-of-the-art DNNs, but is restricted by the
number of dimensions to be perturbed.
InDeepTRE [Ruan et al., 2019], the authors focus on the Hamming distance,
and study the problem of quantifying the global robustness of a trained DNN,
where global robustness is dened as the expectation of the maximum safe radius
over a testing dataset. They propose an approach to iteratively generate lower
and upper bounds on the network's robustness. The approach is anytime, i.e.,
it returns intermediate bounds and robustness estimates that are gradually,
but strictly, improved as the computation proceeds; tensor-based, i.e., the
computation is conducted over a set of inputs simultaneously, instead of one
by one, to enable ecient GPU computation; and has provable guarantees, i.e.,
both the bounds and the robustness estimates can converge to their optimal
values.
4.4 Approaches with Statistical Guarantees
This subsection reviews a few approaches aiming to achieve statistical guarantees
on their results, by claiming e.g., the satisability of a property, or a value is a
lower bound of another value, etc., with certain probability.
4.4.1 Lipschitz Constant Estimation by Extreme Value Theory
[Weng et al., 2018] proposes a metric, called CLEVER , to estimate the Lipschitz
constant, i.e., the approach works with Lipschitzian property. It estimates the
robustness lower bound by sampling the norm of gradients and tting a limit
distribution using extreme value theory. However, as argued by [Goodfellow,
2018], their evaluation approach can only nd statistical approximation of the
lower bound, i.e., their approach has a soundness problem.
4.4.2 Robustness Estimation
[Bastani et al., 2016] proposes two statistics of robustness to measure the
frequency and the severity of adversarial examples, respectively. Both statistics
are based on a parameter , which is the maximum radius within which no
30