The lift of the most basic element from neuron to a set of neurons will also
aect the design of test case generation algorithms. Moreover, it is expected
that interpretability techniques can be employed as building blocks for test case
generation algorithms.
8.7 Learning-Enabled Systems
As suggested in e.g., [Sifakis, 2018], real-world autonomous systems contain
both logic components { to handle e.g., high-level goal management, planning,
etc. { and data-drive learning components { to handle e.g., perception tasks,
etc. To analyse such learning-enabled systems, methods are needed to interface
the analysis techniques for individual components. Compositional and assume-
guarantee reasoning can be applied in this context. Signicant eorts are needed
to be on a few topics including e.g., how to utilise logic components to identify
safety properties of DNN components (e.g., a set of constraints DNN components
need to satisfy, a subspace of the input domain needed to be considered, etc),
how the safety assurance cases of DNN components can be streamlined into the
assurance cases of the whole system, etc.
Verication techniques have been developed to work with learning-enabled
systems. In [Dreossi et al., 2017], a compositional framework is developed for
the falsication of temporal logic properties of cyber physical systems with ML
components. Through experiments on a dynamic tracking system based on high
resolution imagery input, [Sun et al., 2020] studies the uncertainties eliminated
and introduced from the interaction between components. Based on this, [Huang
et al., 2020] suggests a formal verication technique to work with robustness
and resilience of learning-enabled state estimation systems.
For the safety assurance of learning-enabled systems, it would be useful to
understand how low level evidences { obtained via e.g., verication, testing, etc.
{ can be utilised to reason about high level assurance goals such as the system
can operate correctly in the next 100 days with probability more than 99%.
Research on this has started in [Zhao et al., 2020], where a Bayesian inference
approach is taken.
8.8 Distributional Shift, Out-of-Distribution Detection, and
Run-time Monitoring
DNNs are trained over a set of inputs sampled from the real distribution. However,
due to its high-dimensionality, the training dataset may not be able to cover the
input space. Therefore, although it is reasonable to believe that the resulting
trained models can perform well on new inputs close to the training data, it
is also understandable that the trained models might not perform correctly in
those inputs where there is no neighbouring training data. While techniques are
being requested to achieve better generalisability for DNN training algorithm
including various regularisation techniques (see e.g., [Goodfellow et al., 2016] for
a comprehensive overview), as suggested in e.g., [Amodei et al., 2016,Ashmore
and Hill, 2018,Moreno-Torres et al., 2012], it is also meaningful (particularly for
74