by an auto-encoder moves adversarial examples towards the manifold of normal
examples so that they can be classied correctly.
On the other hand, [Song et al., 2018] observe that most of the adversarial
images lie in the low probabilistic area of the distribution. So they train a
PixelCNN generative model [van den Oord et al., 2016] to project the potential
perturbed images into the data manifold and then greedily search an image with a
highest probability, which was nally fed into DNNs. Along this line, [Samangouei
et al., 2018] adopt a similar idea but apply Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) [Goodfellow et al., 2014a] instead of the PixelCNN.
[Guo et al., 2017] exercise over ve input transformations, including (i)
random image cropping and re-scaling, to altering the spatial positioning of the
adversarial perturbation; (ii) conducting bit-depth reduction to removes small
(adversarial) variations in pixel values from an image; (iii) JPEG compression to
remove small perturbations; (iv) total variance minimisation by randomly drop
pixels; and (v) image quilting, which reconstructs images by replacing small
(e.g., 55) patches with patches from clean images.
[Xie et al., 2017] present a defence idea through adding several randomization
layers before the neural networks. For example, for a DNN with a 299 299
input, it rst uses a randomization layer to randomly rescale the image into an
image with a [299 ;331)[299;331) size, and then takes a second randomisation
layer to randomly zero-pad the image. By doing so, a number of randomised
patterns can be created before an image is fed to the DNN. The paper claims
that randomization at inference time makes the network much more robust to
adversarial images, especially for iterative attacks (both white-box and black
box), but hardly hurts the performance on clean (non-adversarial) images.
6.6.5 Combining Input Discretisation with Adversarial Training
Input discretization is to separate continuous-valued pixel inputs into a set of
non-overlapping buckets, which are each mapped to a xed binary vector. Similar
as input transformations, input discretization based approaches apply a non-
dierentiable and non-linear transformation (discretization) to the input, before
passing it into the model. In [Buckman et al., 2018], the authors present an idea
of using thermometer encoding in adversarial training. Because the gradient-
based methods such as PGD is impossible due to the discretization brought
by the thermometer encoding in adversarial training, as an alternative, the
authors introduce Logit-Space Projected Gradient Ascent (LS-PGA). This paper
demonstrates that, the combination of thermometer encoding with adversarial
training, can improve the robustness of neural networks against adversarial
attacks.
6.6.6 Activation Transformations
[Dhillon et al., 2018] introduces stochastic activation pruning, by adapting the
activation of hidden layers on their way to propagating to the output. The idea
is that, in each layer during forward propagation, it stochastically drops out
55