J(;x;y ) is the loss function. We can calculate adversarial perturbation rby
r=sign (rxJ(;x;y )) (28)
A largerleads to a higher success rate of attacking, but potentially results in a
bigger human visual dierence. This attacking method has since been extended
to a targeted and iterative version [Kurakin et al., 2016].
6.1.3 Jacobian Saliency Map based Attack (JSMA)
[Papernot et al., 2016c] present a L0-norm based adversarial attacking method
by exploring the forward derivative of a neural network. Specically it utilizes
the Jacobian matrix of a DNN's logit output w.r.t. its input to identify those
most sensitive pixels which then are perturbed to fool the neural network model
eectively. Let c2Ldenote a target class and x2[0;1]s1represent an input
image. JSMA will assign each pixel in xa salient weight based on the Jacobian
matrix. Each salient value basically quanties the sensitivity of the pixel to
the predicted probability of class c. To generate the adversarial perturbation,
the pixel with the highest salient weight is rstly perturbed by a maximum
distortion parameter  >0. If the perturbation leads to a mis-classication,
then JSMA attack terminates. Otherwise, the algorithm will continue until a
mis-classication is achieved. When a maximum L0-norm distortion d >0 is
reached, the algorithm also terminates. This algorithm is primarily to produce
adversarial images that are optimized under the L0-norm distance. JMSA is
generally slower than FGSM due to the computation of the Jacobian matrix.
6.1.4 DeepFool: A Simple and Accurate Method to Fool Deep Neu-
ral Networks
In DeepFool, [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016] introduces an iterative approach
to generate adversarial images on any Lp;p2[1;1) norm distance. In this
work, the authors rst show how to search adversarial images for an ane binary
classier, i.e., g(x) =sign(wTx+b). Given an input image x0, DeepFool is
able to produce an optimal adversarial image by projecting x0orthogonally on
the hyper-planeF=fxjwTx+b= 0g. Then this approach is generalized
for a multi-class classier: W2Rmkandb2Rk. LetWiandbibe thei-th
component of Wandb, respectively. We have
g(x) = argmax
i2f1:::kggi(x) wheregi(x) =WT
ix+bi
For this case, the inupt x0is projected to the nearest face of the hyper-polyhedron
Pto produce the optimal adversarial image, namely,
P(x0) =k\
i=1fxjgk0(x)gi(x)g
wherek0=g(x0). We can see that Pis the set of the inputs with the same label
asx0. In order to generalize DeepFool to neural networks, the authors introduce
47