1 Introduction
In the past few years, signicant progress has been made in the development
of deep neural networks (DNNs), which now outperform humans in several
dicult tasks, such as image classication [Russakovsky et al., 2015], natural
language processing [Collobert et al., 2011], and two-player games [Silver et al.,
2017]. Given the prospect of a broad deployment of DNNs in a wide range of
applications, concerns regarding the safety and trustworthiness of this approach
have been raised [Tes, 2018,Ube, 2018]. There is signicant research that aims
to address these concerns, with many publications appearing in the past few
years.
Whilst it is dicult to cover all related research activities, we strive to survey
the past and current research eorts on making the application of DNNs safe
and trustworthy. Figure 1 visualises the rapid growth of this area: it gives the
number of surveyed papers per calendar year, starting from 2008 to 2018. In
total, we surveyed 202 papers.
Trust, or trustworthiness, is a general term and its denition varies in
dierent contexts. Our denition is based on the practice that has been widely
adopted in established industries, e.g., automotive and avionics. Specically,
trustworthiness is addressed predominantly within two processes: a certication
process and an explanation process. The certication process is held before
the deployment of the product to make sure that it functions correctly (and
safely). During the certication process, the manufacturer needs to demonstrate
to the relevant certication authority, e.g., the European Aviation Safety Agency
or the Vehicle Certication Agency, that the product behaves correctly with
respect to a set of high-level requirements. The explanation process is held
whenever needed during the lifetime of the product. The user manual explains a
set of expected behaviours of the product that its user may frequently experience.
More importantly, an investigation can be conducted, with a formal report
produced, to understand any unexpected behaviour of the product. We believe
that a similar practice should be carried out when working with data-driven
deep learning systems. That is, in this survey, we address trustworthiness based
on the following concept:
Trustworthiness = Certication + Explanation
In other words, a user is able to trust a system if the system has been certied by
a certication authority and any of its behaviour can be well explained. Moreover,
we will discuss brie
y in Section 8.11 our view on the impact of human-machine
interactions on trust.
In this survey, we will consider the advancement of enabling techniques for
both the certication and the explanation processes of DNNs. Both processes
are challenging, owing to the black-box nature of DNNs and the lack of rigorous
foundations.
6