2016c] and [Ruan et al., 2019], where a ranking over the input dimensions
provides heuristics to nd good adversarial examples.
8.11 Human-in-the-Loop
All the techniques reviewed are to improve the trust of human users on the DNNs
through the angles of certication and explanation. Certication techniques
improve the condence of the users on the correctness of the DNNs, and the
explanation techniques increase human users' understanding about the DNNs
and thus improve the trust. These can be seen as a one-way enhancement of
condence from the DNNs to the human users. The other direction, i.e., how
human users can help improve the trustworthiness of the DNNs, is less explored.
There are only a few works such as [Tamagnini et al., 2017], where a visual
analytic interface is presented to enable expert user by interactively exploring a
set of instance-level explanations.
Trust is a complex notion, viewed as a belief, attitude, intention or behaviour,
and is most generally understood as a subjective evaluation of a truster on a
trustee about something in particular, e.g., the completion of a task [Hardin,
2002]. A classical denition from organisation theory [Mayer et al., 1995] denes
trust as the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another
party based on the expectation that the other will perform a particular action
important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that
party. It is therefore reasonable to assume that the interaction between the
DNNs and their human users can signicantly aect the trust, and the trust is
not a constant value and can be 
uctuated. The formulation of the changes of
trust in terms of the interaction has been started in [Huang and Kwiatkowska,
2017] with a comprehensive reasoning framework.
9 Conclusions
In this survey, we reviewed techniques to determine and improve the safety and
trustworthiness of deep neural networks, based on the assumption that trustwor-
thiness is determined by two major concepts: certication and explanation. This
is a new, and exciting, area requiring expertise and close collaborations from
multidisciplinary elds including formal verication, software testing, machine
learning, and logic reasoning.
DSTL/JA122942 This document is an overview of UK MOD (part) sponsored research
and is released for informational purposes only. The contents of this document should not be
interpreted as representing the views of the UK MOD, nor should it be assumed that they
re
ect any current or future UK MOD policy. The information contained in this document
cannot supersede any statutory or contractual requirements or liabilities and is oered without
prejudice or commitment.
Content includes material subject to c
Crown copyright (2020), Dstl. This material is li-
censed under the terms of the Open Government Licence except where otherwise stated. To view
this licence, visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or
email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
76