2.2 Verication
Given a DNNNand a property C, verication is considered a set of techniques
to check whether the property Cholds onN. Dierent from other techniques
such as testing and adversarial attack, a verication technique needs to provide
provable guarantees for its results. A guarantee can be either a Boolean guarantee,
an approximate guarantee, an anytime approximate guarantee, or a statistical
guarantee. A Boolean guarantee means that the verication technique is able
to arm when the property holds, or otherwise return a counterexample. An
approximate guarantee provides either an over-approximation or an under-
approximation to a property. An anytime approximate guarantee has both an
over-approximation and an under-approximation, and the approximations can
be continuously improved until converged. All the above guarantees need to be
supported with a mathematical proof. When a mathematical proof is hard to
achieve, a statistical guarantee provides a quantitative error tolerance bound on
the resulting claim.
We will formally dene safety properties for DNNs in Section 3, together
with their associated verication problems and provable guarantees.
2.3 Testing
Verication problems usually have high computational complexity, such as being
NP-hard, when the properties are simple input-output constraints [Katz et al.,
2017,Ruan et al., 2018a]. This, compounded with the high-dimensionality and
the high non-linearity of DNNs, makes the existing verication techniques hard
to work with for industrial scale DNNs. This computational intensity can be
partially alleviated by considering testing techniques, at the price of provable
guarantees. Instead, assurance cases are pursued in line with thouse of existing
safety critical systems [Rushby, 2015].
The goal of testing DNNs is to generate a set of test cases, that can demon-
strate condence in a DNN's performance, when passed, such that they can
support an assurance case. Usually, the generation of test cases is guided by
coverage metrics.
LetNbe a set of DNNs, Ra set of test objective sets, and Ta set of test suites.
We useN;R;Tto range over N;RandT, respectively. Note that, normally both
RandTcontain a set of elements by themselves. The following is an adaption
of a denition in [Zhu et al., 1997] for software testing:
Denition 1 (Test Accuracy Criterion/Test Coverage Metric) A test ad-
equacy criterion, or a test coverage metric, is a function M:NRT![0;1].
Intuitively, M(N;R;T) quanties the degree of adequacy to which a DNN
Nis tested by a test suite Twith respect to a set Rof test objectives. Usually,
the greater the number M(N;R;T), the more adequate the testing2. We will
elaborate on the test criteria in Section 5. Moreover, a testing oracle is a
2We may use criterion and metric interchangeably.
12