6 Adversarial Attack and Defence
The goal of attack techniques is to provide evidence (i.e., adversarial examples)
for the lack of robustness of a DNN without having a provable guarantee. Defence
techniques are dual to attack techniques, by either improving the robustness of
the DNN to immune the adversarial examples, or dierentiating the adversarial
examples from the correct inputs. From Section 6.1 to Section 6.3, we review
the attack techniques from dierent aspects. These techniques are compared in
Section 6.5 with a few other techniques from verication. Then, in Section 6.6
and Section 6.7, we review defence techniques (without a guarantee), and certied
defence techniques, respectively.
6.1 Adversarial Attacks
Given an input, an adversarial attack (or attacker) tries to craft a perturbation
or distortion to the input to make it misclassied by a well-trained DNN. Usually,
it is required that the adversarial example is misclassied with high condence.
Attack techniques can be divided roughly into two groups based on the type of
misclassication they try to achieve:
With a targeted perturbation, the attacker is able to control the resulting
misclassication label.
With an un-targeted perturbation, the attacker can enable the misclassi-
cation but cannot control its resulting misclassication label.
According to the amount of information an attacker can access, adversarial
perturbations can also be classied into two categories:
White-box perturbation - the attacker needs to access the parameters and
the internal structure of the trained DNN, and may also need to access
the training dataset.
Black-box perturbation - an attacker can only query the trained DNN with
perturbed inputs, without the ability to access the internal structure and
parameters of the DNN.
Moreover, according to the norm-distances used to evaluate the dierence
between a perturbed input and the original input, adversarial attacks can be
generally classied as L0,L1,L2orL1-attacks. Please note that all perturba-
tions can be measured with any of these norms, but an attack technique can
produce adversarial examples which are better measured with a particular norm.
Currently, most of the adversarial attacks are concentrating on computer
vision models. From a technical point of view, those attacks can be categorised
as using cost gradients, such as in [Goodfellow et al., 2014b,Moosavi-Dezfooli
et al., 2017, Biggio et al., 2013], or using gradients of the output w.r.t neural
network's input, such as JSMA attack [Papernot et al., 2016c], or directly
formulating into optimisation problems to produce adversarial perturbations
45