data, injecting faults to the labels, removing some data points, and adding
noises to the data. For program mutations, a few operations are considered,
including adding or deleting a layer and remvoing activation function. Model-level
mutations include changing the weights, shuing the weights between neurons in
neighboring layers, etc. Moreover, [Cheng et al., 2018] simulates program bugs
by mutating Weka implementations of several classication algorithms, including
Naive Bayes, C4.5, k-NN, and SVM.
5.4 Summary
We compare the testing methods for DNNs in Table 2. Overall, search algorithms,
including greedy search and gradient ascent (GA) search, are often used in the
testing. For simple coverage criteria such as neuron coverage and its extensions
and surprise coverage, established machine learning adversarial attack algorithms
(e.g., FGSM [Goodfellow et al., 2014b] and JSMA [Papernot et al., 2016c]) are
sucient enough for test case generation. In the more complex cases, Linear
Programming (LP) or Integer Linear Programming (ILP) approaches can be
used, and the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) method is called for generating
tests for the safety coverage. Advanced testing methods like concolic testing and
fuzzing have been also developed for DNNs.
Sometimes, distances between test inputs need to be taken into account in
DNN testing to guide the tests generation. As in the last column of Table 2,
dierent norm distances have been applied, however, there is no conclusion on
which one is the best. Works like [Pei et al., 2017a, Guo et al., 2018] are in
principle based on dierential analysis of multiple DNNs, thus more than one
DNN inputs are expected. As in [Noller et al., 2020], DNN adversarial testing
can be formulated in the form of software dierential testing.
Up to now, most techniques are developed by extending the existing tech-
niques from software testing with simple adaptations. It is necessary to validate
the developed techniques (as discussed in Section 8.6) and study the necessity
of developing dedicated testing techniques. Meanwhile, recent eort has been
also made to apply surveyed DNN testing methods from feedforward networks
to other deep learning models like recurrent neural networks [Huang et al.,
2019a,Huang et al., 2019b,Du et al., 2019].
43