practical scenarios. Whilst DNN verication techniques are promising, they
suer from a scalability problem, due to the high computational complexity and
the large size of DNNs. Up to now, DNN verication techniques either work with
small scale DNNs or with approximate methods with convergence guarantees on
the bounds.
DNN testing techniques arise as a complement to the DNN verication
techniques. Instead of providing mathematical proofs to the satisability of
a property over the system, testing techniques aim to either nd bugs (i.e.,
counterexamples to a property) or provide assurance cases [Rushby, 2015], by
exercising the system with a large set of test cases. These testing techniques are
computationally less expensive and therefore are able to work with state-of-the-
art DNNs. In particular, coverage-guided testing generates test cases according
to pre-specied coverage criteria. Intuitively, a high coverage suggests that more
of a DNN's behaviour has been tested and therefore the DNN has a lower chance
of containing undetected bugs.
1.2 Explanation
The goal of Explainable AI [exp, 2018] is to overcome the interpretability problem
of AI [Voosen, 2017]; that is, to explain why the AI outputs a specic decision,
say to in determining whether to give a loan someone. The EU General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [GDR, 2016] mandates a \right to explanation",
meaning that an explanation of how the model reached its decision can be
requested. While this \explainability" request is denitely benecial to the end
consumer, obtaining such information from a DNN is challenging for the very
developers of the DNNs.
1.3 Organisation of This Survey
The structure of this survey is summarised as follows. In Section 2, we will
present preliminaries on the DNNs, and a few key concepts such as verication,
testing, interpretability, and distance metrics. This is followed by Section 3,
which discusses safety problems and safety properties. In Section 4 and Section 5,
we review DNN verication and DNN testing techniques, respectively. The
attack and defence techniques are reviewed in Section 6; and is followed by a
review of a set of interpretability techniques for DNNs in Section 7. Finally, we
discuss future challenges in Section 8 and conclude this survey in Section 9.
Figure 2 outlines the causality relation between the sections in this paper.
We use dashed arrows from attack and defence techniques (Section 6) to several
sections because of their potential application in certication and explanation
techniques.
8