4.3.1 Layer-by-Layer Renement
[Huang et al., 2017b] develops an automated verication framework for feedfor-
ward multi-layer neural networks based on Satisability Modulo Theory (SMT).
The key features of this framework are that it guarantees a misclassication
being found if it exists, and that it propagates the analysis layer-by-layer , i.e.,
from the input layer to, in particular, the hidden layers, and to the output layer.
In this work, safety for an individual classication decision, i.e., pointwise
(or local) robustness, is dened as the invariance of a classier's outcome to
perturbations within a small neighbourhood of an original input. Formally,
N;k;kj=x
wherexdenotes an input, Na neural network, ka region surrounding the
corresponding activation of the input xat layerk, and ka set of manipulations
at layerk. Later, in [Wicker et al., 2018,Wu et al., 2020], it is shown that the
minimality of the manipulations in  can be guaranteed with the existence of
Lipschitz constant.
To be more specic, its verication algorithm uses single-/multi-path search
to exhaustively explore a nite region of the vector spaces associated with the
input layer or the hidden layers, and a layer-by-layer renement is implemented
using the Z3 solver to ensure that the local robustness of a deeper layer implies the
robustness of a shallower layer. The methodology is implemented in the software
tool DLV, and evaluated on image benchmarks such as MNIST, CIFAR10,
GTSRB, and ImageNet. Though the complexity is high, it scales to work
with state-of-the-art networks such as VGG16. Furthermore, in [Wicker et al.,
2018, Wu et al., 2020], the search problem is alleviated by Monte-Carlo tree
search.
4.3.2 Reduction to A Two-Player Turn-based Game
InDeepGame [Wu et al., 2020], two variants of pointwise robustness are studied:
themaximum safe radius (MSR) problem, which for a given input sample
computes the minimum distance to an adversarial example, and
thefeature robustness (FR) problem, which aims to quantify the robustness
of individual features to adversarial perturbations.
It demonstrates that, under the assumption of Lipschitz continuity, both
problems can be approximated using nite optimisation by discretising the
input space, and the approximation has provable guarantees, i.e., the error is
bounded. It subsequently reduces the resulting optimisation problems to the
solution of a two-player turn-based game, where Player Iselects features and
Player IIperturbs the image within the feature. While Player IIaims to
minimise the distance to an adversarial example, depending on the optimisation
objective Player Ican be cooperative orcompetitive . An anytime approach is
employed to solve the games, in the sense of approximating the value of a game
29