of general, instead of ad hoc, formal analysis techniques to work with various
properties expressible with that language. The development of a high-level
specication language for DNNs is hindered by the lack of specications for
data-driven machine learning techniques, which learn the model directly from a
set of data samples. A possible direction can be to obtain specications from
the training data, e.g., by studying how the data samples are scattered in the
input high-dimensional space.
8.5 Scalable Verication with Tighter Bounds
Existing verication approaches either cannot scale to work with state-of-the-art
networks (e.g., for constraint-solving based approaches) or cannot achieve a
tight bound (e.g., for over-approximation approaches). After the initial eorts
on conducting exact computation, such as [Huang et al., 2017b, Katz et al.,
2017, Lomuscio and Maganti, 2017, Ehlers, 2017], recent eorts have been on
approximate techniques to alleviate the computational problem while still achieve
tangible bounds, e.g., [Wicker et al., 2018, Ruan et al., 2018a, Gehr et al.,
2018]. Signicant research eorts are required to achieve tight bounds with
approximate techniques for state-of-the-art DNNs. It can be hard to work with
real-world models which usually contain complex structures and lots of real-
valued parameters. A possible direction will be to develop an abstraction and
renement framework, as [Clarke et al., 2000] did for concurrent systems, and it
will be interesting to see how it is related to the layer-by-layer renement [Huang
et al., 2017b].
8.6 Validation of Testing Approaches
Up to now, testing DNNs is mainly on coverage-based testing, trying to emulate
the structural coverage testing developed in software testing. However, dierent
from traditional (sequential) software in which every input is associated with a
single activated path and eventually leads to an output, in DNNs every input
is associated with a large set of activated paths of neurons and the output
is collectively determined by these paths, i.e., activation pattern [Sun et al.,
2018a, Sun et al., 2019c]. Such semantic dierence suggests that, a careful
validation of the coverage-based testing is needed to make sure that the extended
methods can work eectively in the context of DNNs.
In particular, for most proposals up to now, neurons are treated as the most
basic elements in the coverage denitions and are regarded as the variables in
the traditional software. However, unlike a variable which usually holds certain
weight in determining the execution path, a single neuron in most cases cannot
solely determine, or change, the activation path of an input. Therefore, the
testing coverage based on neurons does not examine the actual functionality
of DNNs. It can be reasonable to consider emulating variables in traditional
software with a set of neurons (instead of a single neuron) and therefore let
paths be the sequences of sets of neurons. A preliminary study appears in [Sun
et al., 2019b] with more sophisticated design on the coverage metrics required.
73