can remove a designated target class while reserving the original segmentation
outcome. This work also empirically demonstrated that UAP on semantic level
has a smaller perturbation space than image classication tasks. Later on, [Li
et al., 2019] presented a UAP method that can attack image retrieval systems, i.e.,
enabling an image retrieval system to put irrelevant images at the top places of a
returned ranking list for a query. Since images in a retrieval system are labeled by
similarity instead of labels in classication, the authors proposed to corrupt the
similarity relationship of neighborhood structures by swapping the similarity in
the tuple structures. Except for those UAPs on image domain, lately [Neekhara
et al., 2019] proposed a universal attacking method to fool speech recognition
systems. In this work, the authors revealed the existence of audio-agnostic
perturbations on deep speech recognition systems. They discovered that the
generated universal perturbation is transferable across dierent DNN model
architectures. Those universal adversarial perturbations further demonstrate
that the venerability of DNNs to universal adversarial examples not only appears
in image classication domain but also exists in a wide range of DNN-based
systems.
6.5 Summary of Adversarial Attack Techniques
Table 3 summarises the main similarities and dierences of a number of surveyed
adversarial attacks from ve aspects: distance metric, whether the attack is
targeted or un-targeted, the level of accessed information required (i.e., model
structures/parameters, logits, output condences, label), dataset tested, and
core method used.
6.6 Adversarial Defence
On the opposite side of adversarial attacks [Biggio et al., 2013,Szegedy et al.,
2014], researchers also show huge interests in designing various defence techniques,
which are to either identify or reduce adversarial examples so that the decision
of the DNN can be more robust. Until now, the developments of attack and
defence techniques have been seen as an \arm-race". For example, most defences
against attacks in the white-box setting, including [Papernot et al., 2016a,
Metzen et al., 2017, Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016, Meng and Chen, 2017a],
have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to e.g., iterative optimisation-based
attacks [Carlini and Wagner, 2017b,Carlini and Wagner, 2017a].
6.6.1 Adversarial Training
Adversarial training is one of the most notable defence methods, which was rst
proposed by [Goodfellow et al., 2014b]. It can improve the robustness of DNNs
against adversarial attacks by retraining the model on adversarial examples. Its
basic idea can be expressed as below:
= arg min
E(x;y)2X`(x;y;f): (32)
52