in a DNN: such a discrimination exists when two inputs, diering only in the
values of some specied attributes (e.g., gender/race), get dierent decisions
from the neural network.
5.2.4 Testing using Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a class of AI algorithms used in
unsupervised machine learning. It is implemented by a system of two neural
networks contesting with each other in a zero-sum game framework. Deep-
Road [Zhang et al., 2018b] automatically generate large amounts of accurate
driving scenes to test the consistency of DNN-based autonomous driving systems
across dierent scenes. In particular, it synthesises driving scenes with various
weather conditions (including those with rather extreme conditions) by applying
the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) along with the corresponding
real-world weather scenes.
5.2.5 Dierential Analysis
We have already seen dierential analysis techniques in [Pei et al., 2017a] and [Guo
et al., 2018] that analyse the dierences between multiple DNNs to maximise the
neuron coverage. Dierential analysis of a single DNN's internal states has been
also applied to debug the neural network model by [Ma et al., 2018d], in which
a DNN is said to be buggy when its test accuracy for a specic output label
is lower than the ideal accuracy. Given a buggy output label, the dierential
analysis in [Ma et al., 2018d] builds two heat maps corresponding to its correct
and wrong classications. Intuitively, a heat map is an image whose size equals
to the number of neurons and the pixel value represents the importance of a
neuron (for the output). Subsequently, the dierence between these two maps
can be used to highlight these faulty neurons that are responsible for the output
bug. Then, new inputs are generated (e.g., using GAN) to re-train the DNN so
to reduce the in
uence of the detected faulty neurons and the buggy output.
5.3 Model-Level Mutation Testing
Mutation testing is a white-box testing technique that performs by changing
certain statements in the source code and checking if the test cases are able to
nd the errors. Once a test case fails on a mutant, the mutant is said to be
killed. Mutation testing is not used to nd the bugs in software but evaluate the
quality of the test suite which is measured by the percentage of mutants that
they kill.
[Shen et al., 2018] proposes ve mutation operators, including (i) deleting
one neuron in input layer, (ii) deleting one or more hidden neurons, (iii) changing
one or more activation functions, (iv) changing one or more bias values, and (v)
changing weight value. [Ma et al., 2018b] considers data mutations, program
mutations, and model-level mutations. For data mutations, a few operations
on training dataset are considered, including duplicating a small portion of
42