between layers can be encoded directly, and the non-linear activation functions
such as Sigmoid are approximated { with both lower and upper bounds { by
piece-wise linear functions. It is shown that whenever the abstracted model is
declared to be safe, the same holds for the concrete model. Spurious counterex-
amples, on the other hand, trigger renements and can be leveraged to automate
the correction of misbehaviour. This approach is validated on neural networks
with fewer than 10 neurons, with logistic activation function.
SMT solvers for neural networks. Two SMT solvers Reluplex [Katz et al.,
2017] and Planet [Ehlers, 2017] were put forward to verify neural networks on
properties expressible with SMT constraints. SMT solvers often have good
performance on problems that can be represented as a Boolean combination of
constraints over other variable types. Typically, an SMT solver combines a SAT
solver with specialised decision procedures for other theories. In the verication
of networks, they adapt linear arithmetic over real numbers, in which an atom
(i.e., the most basic expression) is of the formPn
i=1aixib, whereaiandbare
real numbers.
In both Reluplex andPlanet , they use the architecture of the Davis-Putnam-
Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) algorithm in splitting cases and ruling out con
ict
clauses, while they dier slightly in dealing with the intersection. For Reluplex ,
the approach inherits rules in the algorithm of Simplex and adds some rules for
theReLU operation. Through the classical pivot operation, it rst looks for a
solution for the linear constraints, and then applies the rules for ReLU to satisfy
theReLU relation for every node. Conversely, Planet uses linear approximation
to over-approximate the neural network, and manages the condition of ReLU
and max-pooling nodes with a logic formula.
SAT approach. Narodytska et al. [Narodytska et al., 2018,Narodytska, 2018]
propose to verify properties of a class of neural networks (i.e., binarised neural
networks) in which both weights and activations are binary, by reduction to the
well-known Boolean satisability. Using this Boolean encoding, they leverage
the power of modern SAT solvers, along with a proposed counterexample-guided
search procedure, to verify various properties of these networks. A particular
focus is on the robustness to adversarial perturbations. The experimental results
demonstrate that this approach scales to medium-size DNN used in image
classication tasks.
4.1.2 Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP)
Linear programming (LP) is a technique for optimising a linear objective function,
subject to linear equality and linear inequality constraints. All the variables
in an LP are real, if some of the variables are integers, the problem becomes a
mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problem. It is noted that, while LP
can be solved in polynomial time, MILP is NP-hard.
24