the certication of safety critical systems) to be able to identify those inputs
on which the trained models should not have high condence. Technically, such
inputs can be formally dened as both topologically far away from training
data in the input space and being classied with high probability by the trained
models. Moreover, [Abbasi et al., 2018] suggests having an extra class \dustbin"
for such inputs.
The distributional shift has been studied from the perspective of out-of-
distribution detection, which checks whether an input is on the distribution from
which the training data is sampled. Research on this direction has been active,
see e.g., [Liang et al., 2018,DeVries and Taylor, 2018].
The ubiquity of experiencing distributional shift in the application of deep
neural networks, and the diculty of having the verication completeness,
suggest the importance of developing run-time monitoring techniques to enable
the detection of safety problems on-the-
y. Research is needed to understand
which quantity or property is to monitor, although some suggestions have been
made including e.g., the activation patterns [Cheng et al., 2018].
8.9 Unifying Formulation of Interpretability
There is a lack of consistent denitions of interpretability, although a number
of approaches have been surveyed (e.g., in [Lipton, 2018]) from dierent angles.
While the existing research is able to provide various partial information about
the DNNs, it is hard to compare them under a systematic framework. Recently,
there were some attempts to accommodate several similar approaches to a
single unied framework, to facilitate the comparison. For example, [Olah
et al., 2017] suggested that some visualisation methods could be tted in the
optimisation problem with dierent regularisation terms, [Lundberg and Lee,
2017] used Shapley value to explain a few attribute-based approaches with an
additive model, and [Ancona et al., 2018] used a modied gradient function to
accommodate a few gradient-based approaches. Although it may be dicult, if
not impossible, to have a unied denition for interpretability, it is necessary to
dene it in a consistent way for the purpose of comparison. It is hoped that our
attempt in dening interpretability from dierent dimensions of data, model,
and information could shed light on such a unifying formulation.
8.10 Application of Interpretability to other Tasks
Except for the size of DNNs, the key diculty of verifying, testing, or attacking
DNNs is due to the fact that DNNs are black-box. It is therefore reasonable to
expect that, the interpretation results will be able to enable better verication
and testing approaches. For testing, interpretability can potentially enhance, or
rene, the design of coverage metrics and enable more ecient test case generation
algorithms. For verication, it is expected that interpretability can help identify
more specications to enhance the verication completeness. The applications
of interpretability in attack techniques have been seen in e.g., [Papernot et al.,
75