inhave a class l6=j, which the DNN believes is more possible than the class j.
Usually, the region is dened with respect to an input xand a norm Lp, as in
Denition 5. If so, it means that all inputs in have the same class as input x.
For targeted local robustness, it is required that none of the inputs in the region
is classied as a given label j.
In the following, we dene a test oracle for the local robustness property.
Note that, all existing testing approaches surveyed relate to local robustness,
and therefore we only provide the test oracle for local robustness.
Denition 9 (Test Oracle of Local Robustness Property) LetDbe a set
of correctly-labelled inputs. Given a norm distance Lpand a real number d, a
test case (x1;:::;xk)2T passes the test oracle's local robustness property, or
oracle for simplicity, if
81ik9x02D:xi2(x0;Lp;d) (11)
Intuitively, a test case ( x1;:::;xk) passes the oracle if all of its components xi
are close to one of the correctly-labelled inputs, with respect to Lpandd. Recall
that, we dene (x0;Lp;d) in Denition 5.
3.3 Output Reachability Property
Output reachability computes the set of outputs with respect to a given set of
inputs. We follow the naming convention from [Xiang et al., 2018,Ruan et al.,
2018a,Ruan et al., 2018b]. Formally, we have the following denition.
Denition 10 (Output Reachability) Given a DNNNwith its associated
functionf, and an input region [0;1]s1, the output reachable set of fand
is a setReach (f;)such that
Reach (f;),ff(x)jx2g (12)
The region includes a large, and potentially innite, number of inputs, so
that no practical algorithm that can exhaustively check their classications. The
output reachability problem is highly non-trivial for this reason, and that fis
highly non-linear (or black-box). Based on this, we can dene the following
verication problem.
Denition 11 (Verication of Output Reachability) Given a DNNNwith
its associated function f, an input region [0;1]s1, and an output region Y,
the verication of output reachability on f,, andYis to determine if
Reach (f;) =Y: (13)
Thus, the verication of reachability determines whether all inputs in are
mapped onto a given set Yof outputs, and whether all outputs in Yhave a
corresponding xin.
As a simpler question, we might be interested in computing for a specic
dimension of the set Reach (f;), its greatest or smallest value; for example, the
greatest classication condence of a specic label. We call such a problem a
reachability problem.
18