tools are able to nd e.g., counterexamples to local robustness (i.e., adversarial
examples), it is relatively unclear how these counterexamples can be utilised to
improve the correctness (such as the local robustness) of the DNN, other than
the straightforward method of adding the adversarial examples into the training
dataset, which may lead to bias towards those input subspaces with adversarial
examples. Section 6.6 reviews a few techniques such as adversarial training.
Another pragmatic way can be to design a set of quantitative metrics to
compare the robustness of DNNs with dierent architectures (for example
dierent numbers and types of hidden layers) so that a DNN designer is able to
diagnose the DNN and gure out a good architecture for a particular problem.
Relevant study has been started in e.g., [Sun et al., 2019b, Sun et al., 2018b],
with some preliminary results reported in the experiments. A signicant next
step will be to automate the procedure and synthesise an architecture according
to some given criteria.
8.3 Other Machine Learning Models
Up to now, most eorts are spent on feedforward DNNs, with image classication
as one of the main tasks. Research is needed to consider other types of neural
networks, such as deep reinforcement learning models [Mnih et al., 2015,Schaul
et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2016, van Hasselt et al., 2015] and recursive neural
networks, and other types of machine learning algorithms, such as SVM, k-NN,
naive Bayesian classier, etc. Most deep reinforcement learning models use
feedforward DNNs to store their learned policies, and therefore for a single
observation (i.e., an input) similar safety analysis techniques can be applied.
However, reinforcement learning optimises over the objectives which may base
on the rewards of multiple, or even an innite number of, time steps. Therefore,
other than the DNN, the subject of study includes a sequence of, instead of one,
observations. A few attack techniques, such as [Huang et al., 2017a,Pattanaik
et al., 2018, Lin et al., 2017, Tretschk et al., 2018], have been proposed, with
the key techniques based on generalising the idea of FGSM [Goodfellow et al.,
2014b]. For recurrent neural networks, there are a few attack techniques such
as [Wei et al., 2018]. Less work has been done for verication, testing, and
interpretability.
8.4 Verication Completeness
Additional to the properties we mentioned in Section 3, the correctness of a DNN
may include other properties. More importantly, the properties in Section 3
are expressed in dierent ways, and for each property, a set of ad hoc analysis
techniques are developed to work with them. See e.g., Table 1 for a comparison of
verication technqiues. Similar to the logic languages LTL (linear time logic) and
CTL (computational tree logic) which can express various temporal properties
related to the safety and liveness properties of a concurrent system, research
is needed to develop a high-level language that can express a set of properties
related to the correctness of a DNN. Such a language will enable the development
72