untapped potential. The self-supervision that guides repre-
sentation learning in current methods is based on image-
level comparisons. As a result, the pre-trained represen-
tation may be well-suited for image-level inference, such
as image classiﬁcation, but may lack the spatial sensitivity
needed for downstream tasks that require pixel-level pre-
dictions, e.g., object detection and semantic segmentation.
How to perform self-supervised representation learning at
the pixel level is a problem that until now has been rela-
tively unexplored.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by introducing
pixel-level pretext tasks for self-supervised visual repre-
sentation learning. Inspired by recent instance discrimina-
tion methods, our ﬁrst attempt is to construct a pixel-level
contrastive learning task, where each pixel in an image is
treated as a single class and the goal is to distinguish each
pixel from others within the image. Features from the same
pixel are extracted via two random image crops containing
the pixel, and these features are used to form positive train-
ing pairs. On the other hand, features obtained from differ-
ent pixels are treated as negative pairs. With training data
collected in this self-supervised manner, a contrastive loss
is applied to learn the representation. We refer to this ap-
proach as PixContrast .
In addition to this contrastive approach, we present a
method based on pixel-to-propagation consistency , where
positive pairs are obtained by extracting features from the
same pixel through two asymmetric pipelines instead. The
ﬁrst pipeline is a standard backbone network with a pro-
jection head. The other has a similar form but ends with a
proposed pixel propagation module, which ﬁlters the pixel’s
features by propagating the features of similar pixels to it.
This ﬁltering introduces a certain smoothing effect, while
the standard feature maintains spatial sensitivity. A differ-
ence of this method from the contrastive approach of Pix-
Contrast is that it encourages consistency between positive
pairs without consideration of negative pairs. While the per-
formance of contrastive learning is known to be inﬂuenced
heavily by how negative pairs are handled [ 18,8], this is-
sue is avoided in this consistency-based pretext task. Em-
pirically, we ﬁnd that this pixel-to-propagation consistency
method, which we call PixPro , signiﬁcantly outperforms
thePixContrast approach over various downstream tasks.
Besides learning good pixel-level representations, the
proposed pixel-level pretext tasks are found to be effective
for pre-training on not only backbone networks but also
head networks used for dense downstream tasks, contrary
to instance-level discrimination where only backbone net-
works are pre-trained and transferred. This is especially
beneﬁcial for downstream tasks with limited annotated data,
as all layers can be well-initialized. Moreover, the proposed
pixel-level approach is complementary to existing instance-
level methods, where the former is good at learning a spa-tially sensitive representation and the latter provides better
categorization ability. A combination of the two methods
capitalizes on both of their strengths, while also remaining
computationally efﬁcient in pre-training as they both can
share a data loader and backbone encoders.
The proposed PixPro achieves state-of-the-art transfer
performance on common downstream benchmarks requir-
ing dense prediction. Speciﬁcally, with a ResNet-50 back-
bone, it obtains 60.2 AP on Pascal VOC object detection us-
ing a Faster R-CNN detector (C4 version), 41.4 / 40.5 mAP
on COCO object detection using a Mask R-CNN detector
(both the FPN / C4 versions, 1×settings), and 77.2 mIoU
Cityscapes semantic segmentation using an FCN method,
which are 2.6 AP, 0.8 / 1.0 mAP, and 1.0 mIoU better than
the leading unsupervised/supervised methods. Though past
evaluations of unsupervised representation learning have
mostly been biased towards linear classiﬁcation on Ima-
geNet, we advocate a shift in attention to performance on
downstream tasks, which is the main purpose of unsuper-
vised representation learning and a promising setting for
pixel-level approaches.
2. Related Works
Instance discrimination Unsupervised visual represen-
tation learning is currently dominated by the pretext task of
instance discrimination, which treats each image as a sin-
gle class and learns representations by distinguishing each
image from all the others. This line of investigation can
be traced back to [ 14], and after years of progress [ 34,29,
21,38,1,35], transfer performance superior to supervised
methods was achieved by MoCo [ 18] on a broad range of
downstream tasks. After this milestone, considerable at-
tention has been focused in this direction [ 8,30,3,17,5].
While follow-up works have quickly improved the linear
evaluation accuracy (top-1) on ImageNet-1K from about
60% [ 18] to higher than 75% [ 5] using a ResNet-50 back-
bone, the improvements on downstream tasks such as object
detection on Pascal VOC and COCO have been marginal.
Instead of using instance-level pretext tasks, our work
explores pretext tasks at the pixel level for unsupervised fea-
ture learning. We focus on transfer performance to down-
stream tasks such as object detection and semantic segmen-
tation, which have received limited consideration in prior
research. We show that pixel-level representation learning
can surpass the existing instance-level methods by a signif-
icant margin, demonstrating the potential of this direction.
Other pretext tasks using a single image Aside from in-
stance discrimination, there exist numerous other pretext
tasks including context prediction [ 13], grayscale image
colorization [ 36], jigsaw puzzle solving [ 26], split-brain
auto-encoding [ 37], rotation prediction [ 16], learning to
216685