cluster [ 4], and missing part prediction [ 21,32,7]. In-
terest in these tasks for unsupervised feature learning has
fallen off considerably due to their inferior performance and
greater complexity in architectures or training strategies.
Among these methods, the approach most related to ours
is missing parts prediction [ 21,32,7], which was inspired
by successful pretext tasks in natural language process-
ing [ 12,2]. Like our pixel-propagation consistency tech-
nique, such methods also operate locally. However, they
either partition images into patches [ 32,21] or require spe-
cial architectures/training strategies to perform well [ 21,7],
while our approach directly operates on pixels and has no
special requirements on the encoding networks. Training
with our method is also simple, with few bells and whis-
tles. More importantly, our approach achieves state-of-the-
art transfer performance on the important dense prediction
tasks of object detection and semantic segmentation.
3. Method
3.1. Pixel­level Contrastive Learning
The state-of-the-art unsupervised representation learning
methods are all built on the pretext task of instance discrimi-
nation. In this section, we show that the idea of instance dis-
crimination can be also applied at the pixel level for learning
visual representations that generalize well to downstream
tasks. We adopt the prevalent contrastive loss to instanti-
ate the pixel-level discrimination task, and call this method
PixContrast .
As done in most instance-level contrastive learning
methods, PixContrast starts by sampling two augmentation
views from the same image. The two views are both re-
sized to a ﬁxed resolution (e.g., 224×224) and are passed
through a regular encoder network and a momentum en-
coder network [ 18,9,17] to compute image features. The
encoder networks are composed of a backbone network and
a projection head network, where the former could be any
image neural network (we adopt ResNet by default), and
the latter consists of two successive 1×1convolution lay-
ers (of 2048 and 256 output channels, respectively) with
a batch normalization layer and a ReLU layer in-between
to produce image feature maps of a certain spatial resolu-
tion, e.g., 7×7. While previous methods compute a single
image feature vector for each augmentation view, PixCon-
trast computes a feature map upon which pixel-level pretext
tasks can be applied. The learnt backbone representations
are then used for feature transfer. An illustration of the ar-
chitecture is shown in Figure 2.
Pixel Contrast With the two feature maps computed from
two views, we can construct pixel contrast pretext tasks for
representation learning. Each pixel in a feature map is ﬁrst
warped to the original image space, and the distances be-tween all pairs of pixels from the two feature maps are
computed. The distances are normalized to the diagonal
length of a feature map bin to account for differences in
scale between the augmentation views, and the normalized
distances are used to generate positive and negative pairs,
based on a threshold T:
A(i,j) =/braceleftBigg
1,if dist(i,j)≤ T,
0,if dist(i,j)>T,(1)
whereiandjare pixels from each of the two views;
dist(i,j)denotes the normalized distance between pixel i
andjin the original image space; and the threshold is set to
T= 0.7by default.
Similar to instance-level contrastive learning methods,
we adopt a contrastive loss for representation learning:
LPix(i) =−log/summationtext
j∈Ωipecos(xi,x′
j)/τ
/summationtext
j∈Ωipecos(xi,x′
j)/τ+/summationtext
k∈Ωinecos(xi,x′
k)/τ,(2)
whereiis a pixel in the ﬁrst view that is also located in the
second view; Ωi
pandΩi
nare sets of pixels in the second
view assigned as positive and negative, respectively, with
respect to pixel i;xiandx′
jare the pixel feature vectors in
two views; and τis a scalar temperature hyper-parameter,
set by default to 0.3. The loss is averaged over all pixels on
the ﬁrst view that lie in the intersection of the two views.
Similarly, the contrastive loss for a pixel jon the second
view is also computed and averaged. The ﬁnal loss is the
average over all image pairs in a mini-batch.
As later shown in the experiments, this direct extension
of instance-level contrastive learning to the pixel level per-
forms well in representation learning.
3.2. Pixel­to­Propagation Consistency
Thespatial sensitivity andspatial smoothness of a learnt
representation may affect transfer performance on down-
stream tasks requiring dense prediction. The former mea-
sures the ability to discriminate spatially close pixels,
needed for accurate prediction in boundary areas where la-
bels change. The latter property encourages spatially close
pixels to be similar, which can aid prediction in areas that
belong to the same label. The PixContrast method de-
scribed in the last subsection only encourages the learnt rep-
resentation to be spatially sensitive . In the following, we
present a new pixel-level pretext task which additionally in-
troduces spatial smoothness in the representation learning.
This new pretext task involves two critical components.
The ﬁrst is a pixel propagation module, which ﬁlters a
pixel’s features by propagating the features of similar pixels
to it. This propagation has a feature denoising/smoothing
effect on the learned representation that leads to more coher-
ent solutions among pixels in pixel-level prediction tasks.
316686