Propagate Yourself: Exploring Pixel-Level Consistency for Unsupervised Visual
Representation Learning
Zhenda Xie*13, Yutong Lin∗23, Zheng Zhang3, Yue Cao3, Stephen Lin3, Han Hu3
1Tsinghua University2Xi’an Jiaotong University
3Microsoft Research Asia
xzd18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn yutonglin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{zhez,yuecao,stevelin,hanhu }@microsoft.com
Abstract
Contrastive learning methods for unsupervised visual
representation learning have reached remarkable levels of
transfer performance. We argue that the power of con-
trastive learning has yet to be fully unleashed, as current
methods are trained only on instance-level pretext tasks,
leading to representations that may be sub-optimal for
downstream tasks requiring dense pixel predictions. In this
paper, we introduce pixel-level pretext tasks for learning
dense feature representations. The ﬁrst task directly ap-
plies contrastive learning at the pixel level. We addition-
ally propose a pixel-to-propagation consistency task that
produces better results, even surpassing the state-of-the-art
approaches by a large margin. Speciﬁcally, it achieves 60.2
AP ,41.4 / 40.5 mAP and 77.2 mIoU when transferred to
Pascal VOC object detection (C4), COCO object detection
(FPN / C4) and Cityscapes semantic segmentation using a
ResNet-50 backbone network, which are 2.6AP ,0.8 / 1.0
mAP and 1.0mIoU better than the previous best methods
built on instance-level contrastive learning. Moreover, the
pixel-level pretext tasks are found to be effective for pre-
training not only regular backbone networks but also head
networks used for dense downstream tasks, and are com-
plementary to instance-level contrastive methods. These
results demonstrate the strong potential of deﬁning pretext
tasks at the pixel level, and suggest a new path forward in
unsupervised visual representation learning. Code is avail-
able athttps://github.com/zdaxie/PixPro .
1. Introduction
According to Yann LeCun, “if intelligence is a cake,
the bulk of the cake is unsupervised learning”. This quote
reﬂects his belief that human understanding of the world
*Equal Contribution. The work is done when Zhenda Xie and Yutong
Lin are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.
consistency
view #2view #1Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed PixPro method, which is
based on a pixel-to-propagation consistency pretext task for pixel-
level visual representation learning. In this method, two views are
randomly cropped from an image (outlined in black), and the fea-
tures from the corresponding pixels of the two views are encour-
aged to be consistent. For one of them, the feature comes from
a regular pixel representation (illustrated as orange crosses). The
other feature comes from a smoothed pixel representation (shown
as green dots) built by propagating the features of similar pixels
(illustrated as the light green region). Note that this hard selec-
tion of similar pixels is for illustration only. In implementation, all
pixels on the same view will contribute to propagation, with the
propagation weight of each pixel determined by its feature simi-
larity to the center pixel.
is predominantly learned from the tremendous amount of
unlabeled information within it. Research in machine in-
telligence has increasingly moved in this direction, with
substantial progress in unsupervised and self-supervised
learning[ 34,18,25,8,30]. In computer vision, recent ad-
vances can largely be ascribed to the use of a pretext task
called instance discrimination , which treats each image in
a training set as a single class and aims to learn a feature
representation that discriminates among all the classes.
Although self-supervised learning has proven to be re-
markably successful, we argue that there remains signiﬁcant
1
16684