inputview
#1
view
#2augmentationbackbone+projection
momentum
backbone+projectionPixel-to-Propagation
Module	(PPM)
PixContrast	Loss	(Eq.	2)
PixPro	Loss	(Eq.	5)
Figure 2. Architecture of the PixContrast andPixPro methods.
The second component is an asymmetric architecture de-
sign where one branch produces a regular feature map and
the other branch incorporates the pixel-propagation mod-
ule. The pretext task seeks consistency between the features
from the two branches without considering negative pairs.
On the one hand, this design maintains the spatial sensitiv-
ityof the learnt representation to some extent, thanks to the
regular branch. On the other hand, while the performance
of contrastive learning is known to be heavily affected by
the treatment of negative pairs [ 18,8], the asymmetric de-
sign enables the representation learning to rely only on con-
sistency between positive pairs, without facing the issue of
carefully tuning negative pairs [ 17]. We refer to this pre-
text task as pixel-to-propagation consistency (PPC) and de-
scribe these primary components in the following.
Pixel Propagation Module For each pixel feature xi, the
pixel propagation module computes its smoothed transform
yiby propagating features from all pixels xjwithin the
same image Ωas
yi= Σj∈Ωs(xi,xj)·g(xj), (3)
wheres(·,·)is a similarity function deﬁned as
s(xi,xj) = (max( cos(xi,xj),0))γ, (4)
withγbeing an exponent to control the sharpness of the
similarity function and is set by default to 2;g(·)is a trans-
formation function that can be instantiated by llinear layers
with a batch normalization and a ReLU layer between two
successive layers. When l= 0,g(·)is an identity function
and Eq. ( 3) will be a non-parametric module. Empirically,
we ﬁnd that all of l={0,1,2}perform well, and we set
l= 1 by default as its results are slightly better. Figure 3
illustrates the proposed pixel propagation module.
Pixel-to-Propagation Consistency Loss In the asymmet-
ric architecture design, there are two different encoders: a
regular encoder with the pixel propagation module applied
afterwards to produce smoothed features, and a momentum
encoder without the propagation module. The two augmen-
tation views both pass through the two encoders, and theCxHxWtransform
g(*)similarity	computation
s(*,*)
CxHW HWxC CxHxWHWxHW CxHxWCxHxW
HWxC
HWxC
Figure 3. Illustration of the pixel propagation module ( PPM ). The
input and output resolutions of each computation block are in-
cluded.
features from different encoders are encouraged to be con-
sistent:
LPixPro=−cos(yi,x′
j)−cos(yj,x′
i), (5)
whereiandjare a positive pixel pair from two augmenta-
tion views according to the assignment rule in Eq. ( 1);x′
i
andyiare pixel feature vectors of the momentum encoder
and the propagation encoder, respectively. This loss is aver-
aged over all positive pairs for each image, and then further
averaged over images in a mini-batch to drive the represen-
tation learning.
Comparison to PixContrast The overall architecture of
the pixel-to-propagation consistency ( PPC ) method is illus-
trated in Figure 2. Compared to the PixContrast method de-
scribed in Section 3.1(see the blue-color loss in Figure 2),
there are two differences: the introduction of a pixel prop-
agation module ( PPM ), and replacement of the contrastive
loss by a consistency loss. Table 2(c) and 3show that both
changes are critical for the feature transfer performance.
Computation complexity The proposed PixContrast and
PixPro approaches adopt the same data loader and back-
416687