bone architectures as those of the instance discrimination
based representation learning methods. There computa-
tion complexity in pre-training is thus similar as that of the
counterpart instance-level method (i.e. BYOL [ 17]): 8.6G
vs. 8.2G FLOPs using a ResNet-50 backbone architecture,
where the head and loss contribute about 0.4G FLOPs over-
head.
3.3. Aligning Pre­training to Downstream Networks
Previous visual feature pre-training methods are gener-
ally limited to classiﬁcation backbones. For supervised pre-
training, i.e. by the ImageNet image classiﬁcation pretext
task, the standard practice is to transfer only the pre-trained
backbone features to downstream tasks. The recent unsu-
pervised pre-training methods have continued this practice.
One reason is that the pre-training methods operate at the
instance level, making them less compatible with the dense
prediction required in head networks for downstream tasks.
In contrast, the ﬁne-grained spatial inference of pixel-
level pretext tasks more naturally aligns with dense down-
stream tasks. To examine this, we consider an object de-
tection method, FCOS [ 31], for dense COCO detection.
FCOS [ 31] applies a feature pyramid network (FPN) from
P3 (8×down-sampling) to P7 ( 128×down-sampling) [ 22],
followed by two separate convolutional head networks
(shared for all pyramidal levels) on the output feature maps
of a ResNet backbone to produce classiﬁcation and regres-
sion results.
We adopt the same architecture from the input image un-
til the third 3×3convolutional layer in the head. In FPN,
we involve feature maps from P3 to P6, with P7 omitted be-
cause the resolution is too low. A pixel propagation module
(PPM ) with shared weights and the pixel-to-propagation
consistency (PPC ) loss described in Section 3.2are applied
on each pyramid level. The ﬁnal loss is ﬁrst averaged at
each pyramidal level and then averaged over all the pyra-
mids.
Pre-training the FPN layers and the head networks used
for downstream tasks can generally improve the transfer ac-
curacy, as shown in Tables 5and6.
3.4. Combined with Instance Contrast
The presented pixel-level pretext tasks adopt the same
data loader and encoders as in state-of-the-art instance-level
discrimination methods [ 18,17], with two augmentation
views sampled from each image and fed into backbone en-
coders. Hence, our pixel-level methods can be conveniently
combined with instance-level pretext tasks, by sharing the
same data loader and backbone encoders, with little pre-
training overhead.
Speciﬁcally, the instance-level pretext task is applied on
the output of the res5 stage, using projection heads that are
independent of the pixel-level task. Here, we use a popu-lar instance-level method, SimCLR [ 8], with a momentum
encoder to be aligned with the pixel-level pretext task. In
this combination, the two losses from the pixel-level and
instance-level pretext tasks are balanced by a multiplicative
factorα(set to 1 by default), as
L=LPixPro+αLinst. (6)
In general, the two tasks are complementary to each
other: a pixel-level pretext task learns representations good
for spatial inference, while an instance-level pretext task is
good for learning categorization representations. Table 4
shows that an additional instance-level contrastive loss can
signiﬁcantly improve ImageNet-1K linear evaluation, indi-
cating that a better categorization representation is learnt.
Likely because of better categorization ability, it achieves
noticeably improved transfer accuracy on the downstream
task of FCOS [ 31] object detection on COCO (about 1 mAP
improvement).
4. Experiments
4.1. Pre­training Settings
Datasets We adopt the widely used ImageNet-1K [ 11]
dataset for feature pre-training, which consists of ∼1.28
million training images.
Architectures Following recent unsupervised meth-
ods [ 18,17], we adopt the ResNet-50 [ 20] model as
our backbone network. The two branches use different
encoders, with one using a regular backbone network and a
regular projection head, and the other using the momentum
network with a moving average of the parameters of the
regular backbone network and the projection head. The
proposed pixel propagation module ( PPM ) is applied on
the regular branch.The FPN architecture with P3-P6 feature
maps are also tested in some experiments.
Data Augmentation In pre-training, the data augmenta-
tion strategy follows [ 17], where two random crops from the
image are independently sampled and resized to 224×224
with a random horizontal ﬂip, followed by color distortion,
Gaussian blur, and a solarization operation. We skip the
loss computation for cropped pairs with no overlaps, which
compose only a small fraction of all the cropped pairs.
Optimization We vary the training length from 50 to 400
epochs, and use 100-epoch training in our ablation study.
The LARS optimizer with a cosine learning rate scheduler
and a base learning rate of 1.0 is adopted in training, where
the learning rate is linearly scaled with the batch size as
lr=lrbase×#bs/256. Weight decay is set to 1e-5. The
total batch size is set to 1024, using 8 V100 GPUs. For the
516688