An Improved Analysis of (Variance-Reduced) Policy
Gradient and Natural Policy Gradient Methods
Yanli Liu\Kaiqing ZhangyTamer Ba¸ saryWotao Yin\
\Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
yDepartment of ECE and CSL, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yanli, wotaoyin}@math.ucla.edu, {kzhang66, basar1}@illinois.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we revisit and improve the convergence of policy gradient (PG),
natural PG (NPG) methods, and their variance-reduced variants, under general
smooth policy parametrizations. More speciﬁcally, with the Fisher information
matrix of the policy being positive deﬁnite: i) we show that a state-of-the-art
variance-reduced PG method, which has only been shown to converge to stationary
points, converges to the globally optimal value up to some inherent function
approximation error due to policy parametrization; ii) we show that NPG enjoys a
lower sample complexity; iii) we propose SRVR-NPG, which incorporates variance-
reduction into the NPG update. Our improvements follow from an observation
that the convergence of (variance-reduced) PG and NPG methods can improve
each other: the stationary convergence analysis of PG can be applied to NPG as
well, and the global convergence analysis of NPG can help to establish the global
convergence of (variance-reduced) PG methods. Our analysis carefully integrates
the advantages of these two lines of works. Thanks to this improvement, we have
also made variance-reduction for NPG possible, with both global convergence and
an efﬁcient ﬁnite-sample complexity.
1 Introduction
Policy gradient (PG) methods, or more generally direct policy search methods, have long been
recognized as one of the foundations of reinforcement learning (RL) [ 1]. Speciﬁcally, PG methods
directly search for the optimal policy parameter that maximizes the long-term return in Markov
decision processes (MDPs), following the policy gradient ascent direction [ 2,3]. This search
direction can be more efﬁcient using a preconditioning matrix, e.g., using the natural PG direction
[4]. These methods have achieved tremendous empirical successes recently, especially boosted by
the power of (deep) neural networks for policy parametrization [ 5,6,7,8]. These successes are
primarily attributed to the fact that PG methods naturally incorporate function approximation for
policy parametrization, in order to handle massive and even continuous state-action spaces.
In practice, the policy gradients are usually estimated via samples using Monte-Carlo rollouts and
bootstrapping [ 2,9]. Such stochastic PG methods notoriously suffer from very high variances, which
not only destabilize but also slow down the convergence. Several conventional approaches have
been advocated to reduce the variance of PG methods, e.g., by adding a baseline [ 3,10], or by using
function approximation for estimating the value function, namely, developing actor-critic algorithms
[11,12,13]. More recently, motivated by the advances of variance-reduction techniques in stochastic
optimization [ 14,15,16,17], there have been surging interests in developing variance-reduced PG
methods [18, 19, 20, 21, 22], which are shown to be faster.
In contrast to the empirical successes of PG methods, their theoretical convergence guarantees,
especially non-asymptotic global convergence guarantees, have not been addressed satisfactorily
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.