classiﬁcation; CNN E XPLAINER visualizes the new prediction with the
new activation maps in every layer. Similarly, users can interactively
explore how hyperparameters affect the convolution operation (Fig. 7).
Customization enables hypothesis testing. Many
participants used visualization customization to test their
predictions of model behaviors. For example, through
inspecting the input layer in the Overview , B4 learned
that the input layer comprised multiple different image
channels (e.g., red, green, and blue). He changed the input image to a
red bell pepper from Tiny Imagenet (shown on the right) and expected
to see high values in the input red channel: “ If I click the red image, I
would see... ” After the updated visualization showed what he predicted,
he said “ Right, it makes sense. ” We found the Hyperparameter Wid-
getalso allowed participants to test their hypotheses. While reading
the description of convolution hyperparameters in the tutorial article,
K3 noted “ Wait, then sometimes they won’t work ”. He then modiﬁed
the hyperparatmeters in the Hyperparameter Widget and noticed some
combinations indeed did not yield a valid operation output: “ It won’t
be able to slide, because the stride and kernel size don’t ﬁt the matrix ”.
Customization facilitates engagement. Participants
were intrigued to modify the visualization, and their en-
gagement sparked further interest in learning CNNs. In
the study, B6 spent a large amount of time on testing the
CNN’s behavior on edge cases by ﬁnding “difﬁcult” im-
ages online. He searched with keywords “koala”, “koala
in a car”, “bell pepper pizza”, and eventually found a bell
pepper pizza photo (shown on the right3). Our CNN model predicted
the image as
bellpepper with a probability of 0:71and
ladybug with a
probability of 0:2. He commented, “ The model is not robust [...] oh, the
ladybug [’s high softmax score] might come from the red dot. ” Another
participant B5 uploaded his own photo as a new input image for the
CNN model. After seeing his picture being classiﬁed as
espresso , B5
started to use our tool to explore the reason of such classiﬁcation by
tracking back activation maps. He also asked how do experts interpret
CNNs and said he would be interested in learning more about deep
learning interpretability. This observation reﬂects previous ﬁndings
that customizable visualization makes learning more engaging [13, 42].
8.3.4 Limitations
While we found CNN E XPLAINER provided participants with an en-
gaging and enjoyable learning experience and helped them to more
easily learn about CNNs, we also noticed some potential improvements
to our current system design from this study.
Beginners need more guidance. We found that participants with
less knowledge of CNNs needed more instructions to begin using CNN
EXPLAINER . Some participants reported that the visual representation
of the CNN and animation initially were not easy to understand, but
the tutorial article and text annotations greatly helped them to interpret
the visualizations. B8 skimmed through the tutorial article before
interacting with the main visualization. She said, “ After going through
the article, I think I will be able to use the tool better [...] I think
the article is good, for beginner users especially. ” B2 appreciated the
ability to jump to a certain section in the article by clicking the layer
name in the visualization, and he suggested us to “ include a step-by-
step tutorial for ﬁrst time users [...] There was too much information,
and I didn’t know where to click at the beginning ”. Therefore, we
believe adding more text annotation and having a step-by-step tutorial
mode could help beginners better understand the relations between
CNN operations and their visual representations.
Limited explanation of why CNN works. Some participants, espe-
cially those less experienced with CNNs, were interested in learning
why the CNN architecture works in addition to learning how a CNN
model makes predictions. For example, B7 asked “ Why do we need
ReLU? ” when he was learning the formula of the ReLU function. B5
understood what a Max Pooling layer’s operation does but was unclear
why it contributes to CNN’s performance: “ It is counter-intuitive that
Max Pooling reduces the [representation] size but makes the model
3Photo by Jennifer Laughlin, used with permission.better. ” Similarly, B6 commented on the Max Pooling layer: “ Why not
take the minimum value? [...] I know how to compute them [layers],
but I don’t know why we compute them. ” Even though it is still an open
question why CNNs work so well for various applications [17, 59],
there are some commonly accepted “intuitions” of how different layers
help this model class succeed. We brieﬂy explain them in the tutorial
article: for example, ReLU function is used to introduce non-linearty in
the model. However, we believe it is worth designing visualizations that
help users to learn about these concepts. For example, allowing users
to change the ReLU activation function to a linear function, and then vi-
sualizing the new model predictions may help users gain understanding
ofwhynon-linear activation functions are needed in CNNs.
9 D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Explaining training process and backpropagation. CNN E X-
PLAINER helps users to learn how a pre-trained CNN model transforms
the input image data into a class prediction. As we identiﬁed from
two preliminary studies and an observational study, students are also
interested in learning about the training process and backpropagation
of CNNs. We plan to work with instructors and students to design and
develop new visualizations to help beginners gain understanding of the
training process and backpropagation in detail.
Generalizing to other layer types and neural network models.
Our observational study demonstrated that CNN E XPLAINER helps
users more easily understand low-level layer operations, high-level
model structure, and their connections. We can adapt the Interactive
Formula Views to explain other layer types (e.g., Leaky ReLU [38])
or a combination of layers (e.g. Residual Block [21]). Similarly, the
transition between different levels of abstraction can be generalized to
other neural networks, such as long short-term memory networks [22]
and Transformer models [55] that require learners to understand the
intricate layer operations in the context of a complex network structure.
Integrating algorithm visualization best practices. Existing work
has studied how to design effective visualizations to help students learn
algorithms. CNN E XPLAINER applies two key design principles from
A V—visualizations with explanations and customizable visualizations
(G4). However, there are many other A V design practices that future
researchers can integrate in educational deep learning tools, such as
giving interactive “pop quizzes” during the visualization process [41]
and encouraging users to build their own visualizations [52].
Quantitative evaluation of educational effectiveness. We con-
ducted a qualitative observational study to evaluate the usefulness and
usability of CNN E XPLAINER . Further quantitative user studies would
help us investigate how visualization tools help users gain understand-
ing of deep learning concepts. We will draw inspiration from recent
research [11, 28] to assess users’ engagement level and content under-
standing through analysis of interaction logs.
10 C ONCLUSION
As deep learning is increasingly used throughout our everyday life, it
is important to help learners take the ﬁrst step toward understanding
this promising yet complex technology. In this work, we present CNN
EXPLAINER , an interactive visualization system designed for non-
experts to more easily learn about CNNs. Our tool runs in modern web
browsers and is open-sourced, broadening the public’s education access
to modern AI techniques. We discussed design lessons learned from
our iterative design process and an observational user study. We hope
our work will inspire further research and development of visualization
tools that help democratize and lower the barrier to understanding and
appropriately applying AI technologies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Anmol Chhabria, Kaan Sancak, Kantwon Rogers, and
the Georgia Tech Visualization Lab for their support and construc-
tive feedback. This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS-
1563816, CNS-1704701, NASA NSTRF, DARPA GARD, gifts from
Intel, NVIDIA, Google, Amazon. Use, duplication, or disclosure is sub-
ject to the restrictions as stated in Agreement number HR00112030001
between the Government and the Performer.