3 R ELATED WORK
3.1 Visualization for Deep Learning Education
Researchers and practitioners have been developing visualization sys-
tems that aim to help beginners learn about deep learning concepts.
Teachable Machine [9] teaches the basic concept of machine learning
classiﬁcation, such as overﬁtting and underﬁtting, by allowing users
to train a deep neural network classiﬁer with data collected from their
own webcam or microphone. The Deep Visualization Toolbox [58] also
uses live webcam images to interactively help users to understand what
each neuron has learned. These deep learning educational tools feature
direct model manipulation as core to their experience. For example,
users learn about CNNs, dense neural networks, and GANs through
experimenting with model training in ConvNetJS MNIST demo [30],
TensorFlow Playground [50], and GAN Lab [29], respectively. Beyond
2D visualizations, Node-Link Visualization [20] and TensorSpace [3]
demonstrate deep learning models in 3D space. Inspired by Chris
Olah’s interactive blog posts [44], interactive articles explaining deep
learning models with interactive visualization are gaining popularity as
an alternative medium for education [10, 39].
Most existing educational resources focus on explaining either the
high-level model structures and training process or the low-level math-
ematics, but not both. However, we found that one key challenge for
beginners learning about deep learning models is the difﬁculty con-
necting unfamiliar layer mechanisms with complex model structures
(discussed in Sect. 4). For example, TensorFlow Playground [50],
one of the few yet popular deep learning educational tools, focuses
on helping users develop intuition about the effects of different dense
neural network architectures, but does not explain the underlying math-
ematical operations. TensorFlow Playground also operates on synthetic
2D data, which can be challenging for users to transfer newly learned
concepts to more realistic data and models. In comparison, our work ex-
plains both model structure and mathematics of CNNs , a more complex
architecture, with real image data.
3.2 Algorithm Visualization
Before deep learning started to attract interest from students and prac-
titioners, visualization researchers have been studying how to design
algorithm visualizations (A V) to help people learn about dynamic be-
havior of various algorithms [7, 26, 48]. These tools often graphically
represent data structures and algorithms using interactive visualization
and animations [7, 14, 18]. While researchers have found mixed re-
sults on A V’s effectiveness in computer science education [8, 13, 16],
growing evidence has shown that student engagement is the key factor
for successfully applying A V in education settings [25, 42]. Naps, et
al. deﬁned a taxonomy of six levels of engagement2at which learners
can interact with A Vs [42], and studies have shown higher engagement
level leads to better learning outcomes [13, 19, 32, 47].
Deep learning models can be viewed as specialized algorithms com-
prised of complex and stochastic interactions between multiple different
computational layers. However, there has been little work in designing
and evaluating visual educational tools for deep learning in the context
of A V . CNN E XPLAINER ’s design draws inspiration from the guide-
lines proposed in A V literature (discussed in Sect. 5); our user study
results also corroborate some of the key ﬁndings in prior A V research
(discussed in Sect. 8.3). Our work advances A V’s landscape in covering
modern and pervasive machine learning algorithms.
3.3 Visual Analytics for Neural Networks & Predictions
Many visual analytics tools have been developed to help deep learning
experts analyze their models and predictions [5,15,23,27,36,37]. These
tools support many different tasks. For example, recent work such as
Summit [24] uses interactive visualization to summarize what features
a CNN model has learned and how those features interact and attribute
to model predictions. LSTMVis [54] makes long short-term memory
(LSTM) networks more interpretable by visualizing the model’s hidden
states. Similarly, GANVis [56] helps experts to interpret what a trained
2Six engagement categories: No Viewing ,Viewing ,Responding ,Changing ,
Constructing ,Presenting .generative adversarial network (GAN) model has learned. People
also use visual analytics tools to diagnose and monitor the training
process of deep learning models. Two examples, DGMTracker [35]
and DeepEyes [46], help developers better understand the training
process of CNNs and GANs, respectively. Also, visual analytics tools
recently have been developed to help experts detect and interpret the
vulnerability in their deep learning models [12, 34]. These existing
analytics tools are designed to assist experts in analyzing their model
and predictions, however, we focus on non-experts and learners, helping
them more easily learn about deep learning concepts.
4 F ORMATIVE RESEARCH & D ESIGN CHALLENGES
Our goal is to build an interactive visual learning tool to help students
gain understanding of key CNN concepts to design their own models.
To identify the learning challenges faced by the students, we conducted
interviews with deep learning instructors and surveyed past students.
Instructor interviews. To inform our tool’s design, we recruited
4 instructors (2 female, 2 male) who have taught CNNs in a large
university. We refer to them as T1-T4 throughout our discussion. One
instructor teaches computer vision, and the others teach deep learning.
We interviewed them one-on-one in a conference room (3/4) and via
a video-conferencing software (1/4); each interview lasted around 30
minutes. Through these semi-structured interviews, we learned that
(1) instructors currently rely on simple illustrations with toy examples
to explain CNN concepts, and an interactive tool like TensorFlow
Playground with real image inputs would be highly appreciated; and
(2) key challenges exist for instructors teaching and students learning
about CNNs, which informed us to design a student survey.
Student survey. After the interviews, we recruited students from a
large university who have previously studied CNNs to ﬁll out an online
survey. We received 43 responses, and 19 of them (4 female, 15 male)
met the criteria. Among these 19 participants, 10 were Ph.D. students, 3
were M.S. students, 5 were undergraduates, and 1 was a faculty member.
We asked participants what were “the biggest challenges in studying
CNNs” and “the most helpful features if there was a visualization tool
for explaining CNNs to beginners”. We provided pre-selected options
based on the prior instructor interviews, but participants could write
down their own response if it was not included in the options. The
aggregated results of this survey are shown in Fig. 3.
Together with a literature review, we synthesized our ﬁndings from
these two studies into the following ﬁve design challenges (C1-C5).
Connectionofmath&structure
Mathbehindlayers
CNNtrainingworkflow
Backpropagation
Layerandweightdimensions
Layerconnections
CNNstructure
ShowstructureofCNNs
UsealiveCNNmodel
Showmathformulas
Algorithmanimation
ExplainintermediatecomputationsExplainmathingeometriccontext
Uploaduser'sownmodelExplainbackpropagationChangehyperparametersRunonuser'sownimage
02468101214CountBiggestChallengesinLearningCNNs
MostDesiredFeaturesforaVisualLearningTool
13
11
10
10
10
9
9
99
8
8
8
5
4
3
9
9
Fig. 3. Survey results from 19 participants who have previously learned
about CNNs. Top: Biggest challenges encountered during learning.
Bottom: Desired features for an interactive visual learning tool for CNNs.