CNN E XPLAINER : Learning Convolutional Neural Networks with
Interactive Visualization
Zijie J. Wang, Robert Turko, Omar Shaikh, Haekyu Park, Nilaksh Das,
Fred Hohman, Minsuk Kahng, and Duen Horng (Polo) Chau
ConvolutionalElasticExplanationB
AOverview
ConvolutionalInteractiveFormulaC
Fig. 1. With CNN E XPLAINER , learners can visually examine how Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) transform input images
into classiﬁcation predictions (e.g., predicting espresso for an image of a coffee cup), and interactively learn about their underlying
mathematical operations. In this example, a learner uses CNN E XPLAINER to understand how convolutional layers work through three
tightly integrated views, each explaining the convolutional process in increasing levels of detail. (A)TheOverview visualizes a CNN
architecture where each neuron is encoded as a square with a heatmap representing the neuron’s output. (B)Clicking a neuron reveals
how its activations are computed by the previous layer’s neurons, displaying the often-overlooked intermediate computation through
animations of sliding kernels. (C)Convolutional Interactive Formula View for inspecting underlying mathematics of the dot-product
operation core to convolution. For clarity, some annotations are removed and views are re-positioned.
Abstract — Deep learning’s great success motivates many practitioners and students to learn about this exciting technology. However,
it is often challenging for beginners to take their ﬁrst step due to the complexity of understanding and applying deep learning. We
present CNN E XPLAINER , an interactive visualization tool designed for non-experts to learn and examine convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), a foundational deep learning model architecture. Our tool addresses key challenges that novices face while learning about
CNNs, which we identify from interviews with instructors and a survey with past students. CNN E XPLAINER tightly integrates a model
overview that summarizes a CNN’s structure, and on-demand, dynamic visual explanation views that help users understand the
underlying components of CNNs. Through smooth transitions across levels of abstraction, our tool enables users to inspect the interplay
between low-level mathematical operations and high-level model structures. A qualitative user study shows that CNN E XPLAINER
helps users more easily understand the inner workings of CNNs, and is engaging and enjoyable to use. We also derive design lessons
from our study. Developed using modern web technologies, CNN E XPLAINER runs locally in users’ web browsers without the need for
installation or specialized hardware, broadening the public’s education access to modern deep learning techniques.
Index Terms —Deep learning, machine learning, convolutional neural networks, visual analytics
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning now enables many of our everyday technologies. Its
continued success and potential application in diverse domains has
•Zijie J. Wang, Robert Turko, Omar Shaikh, Haekyu Park, Nilaksh Das, Fred
Hohman, and Duen Horng Chau are with Georgia Tech. E-mail:
fjaywjrturko3joshaikhjhaekyujnilakshdasjfredhohmanjpolog@gatech.edu.
• Minsuk Kahng is with Oregon State University. E-mail:
minsuk.kahng@oregonstate.edu.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxxattracted immense interest from students and practitioners who wish
to learn and apply this technology. However, many beginners ﬁnd it
challenging to take the ﬁrst step in studying and understanding deep
learning concepts. For example, convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
a foundational deep learning model architecture, is often one of the ﬁrst
and most widely used models that students learn. CNNs are often used
in image classiﬁcation, achieving state-of-the-art performance [33].
However, through interviews with deep learning instructors and a survey
of past students, we found that even for this “introductory” model, it can
be challenging for beginners to understand how inputs (e.g., image data)
are transformed into class predictions. This steep learning curve stems
from CNN’s complexity, which typically leverages many computational
layers to reach a ﬁnal decision. Within a CNN, there are many types ofarXiv:2004.15004v3  [cs.HC]  28 Aug 2020