Fig. 7. The Hyperparameter Widget , a component of the accompanying
interactive article, allows users to adjust hyperparameters and observe in
real time how the kernel’s sliding pattern changes in convolutional layers.
Panel , a user can adjust the color scale range used by the network to
investigate activations with different groupings.
Explore hyperparameter impact. The tutorial article (Sect. 6.5)
includes an interactive Hyperparameter Widget that allows users to
experiment with convolutional hyperparameters (Fig. 7). Users can
adjust the input and hyperparameters of the stand-alone visualization
to test how different hyperparameters change the sliding convolutional
kernel and the output’s dimensions. This interactive element empha-
sizes learning through experimentation by supplementing knowledge
gained from reading the article and using the main visualization.
6.7 Web-based, Open-sourced Implementation
CNN E XPLAINER is a web-based, open-sourced visualization tool
to teach students the foundations of CNNs. A new user only needs
a modern web-broswer to access our tool, no installation required.
Additionally, other datasets and linear models can be quickly applied
to our visualization system due to our robust implementation.
Model Training. The CNN architecture, Tiny VGG (Fig. 4), pre-
sented by CNN E XPLAINER for image classiﬁcation is inspired by
both the popular deep learning architecture, VGGNet [49], and Stan-
ford’s CS231n course notes [31]. It is trained on the Tiny ImageNet
dataset [1]. The training dataset consists of 200 image classes and con-
tains 100,000 6464 RGB images, while the validation dataset contains
10,000 images across the 200 image classes. The model is trained using
TensorFlow [4] on 10 handpicked, everyday classes:
lifeboat ,
ladybug ,
bellpepper
,
pizza ,
schoolbus ,
koala ,
espresso ,
redpanda ,
orange ,
and
sportcar . During the training process, the batch size and learning
rate are ﬁne-tuned using a 5-fold-cross-validation scheme. This simple
model achieves a 70.8% top-1 accuracy on the validation dataset.
Front-end Visualization. CNN E XPLAINER loads the pre-trained
Tiny VGG model and computes forward propagation results in real
time in a user’s web browser using TensorFlow.js [51]. These results
are visualized using D3.js [6] throughout the multiple interactive views.
7 U SAGE SCENARIOS
7.1 Beginner Learning Layer Connectivity
Janis is a virology researcher using CNNs in a current project. Through
an online deep learning course she has a general understanding of the
goals of applying CNNs, and some basic knowledge of different types
of CNN layers, but she needs help ﬁlling in some gaps in knowledge.
Interested in learning how a 3-dimensional input (RGB image) leads to
a 1-dimensional output (vector of class probabilities) in a CNN, Janis
begins exploring the architecture from the Overview (Fig. 5A).
After clicking the “Show detail” button, Janis notices that the
output layer is a 1-dimensional tensor of size 10, while max_pool_2 ,
the previous layer, is a 3-dimensional (13 1310) tensor. Confused,
she hovers over a neuron in the output layer to inspect connections
between the ﬁnal two layers of the architecture: the max_pool_2 layer
has 10 neurons; the output layer has 10 neurons each representing a
class label, and the output layer is fully-connected to the max_pool_2
layer. She clicks that output neuron, which transitions the Overview(Fig. 5A) to the Flatten Elastic Explanation View (Fig. 5B). She notices
that edges between these two layers intersect a 1-dimensional ﬂatten
layer and pass through a softmax function. By hovering over pixels
from the activation map, Janis understands how the 2-dimensional ma-
trix is “unwrapped” to yield a portion of the 1-dimensional flatten
layer. As she continues to follow the edge after the flatten layer, she
clicks the softmax button which leads her to the Softmax Interactive For-
mula View (Fig. 5C). She learns how the outputs of the flatten layer
are normalized by observing the equation linked with logits through an-
imations. Janis recognizes that her previous coursework has not taught
these “hidden” operations prior to the output layer, which ﬂatten and
normalize the output of the max_pool_2 layer. Instead of searching
through lecture videos and textbooks, CNN E XPLAINER enables Janis
to learn these often-overlooked operations through a hierarchy of inter-
active views in a stand-alone website. She now feels more equipped to
apply CNNs to her virology research.
7.2 Teaching Through Interactive Experimentation
A university professor, Damian, is currently teaching a computer vision
class which covers CNNs. Damian begins his lecture with standard
slides. After describing the theory of convolutions, he opens CNN
EXPLAINER to demonstrate the convolution operation working inside a
full CNN for image classiﬁcation. With CNN E XPLAINER projected to
the class, Damian transitions from the Overview (Fig. 1A) to the Con-
volutional Elastic Explanation View (Fig. 1B). Damian encourages the
class to interpret the sliding window animation (Fig. 2B) as it generates
several intermediate results. He then asks the class to predict kernel
weights in a speciﬁc neuron. To test student’s hypotheses, Damian
enters the Convolutional Interactive Formula View (Fig. 1C), to display
the convolution operation with the true kernel weights. In this view, he
can hover over the input and output matrices to answer questions from
the class, and display computations behind the operation.
Recalled from theory, a student asks a question regarding the impact
of altering the stride hyperparameter on the animated sliding window
in convolutional layers. To illustrate the impact of alternative hyperpa-
rameters, Damian scrolls down to the “Convolutional Layer” section of
the complementary article, where he experiments by adjusting stride
and other hyperparameters with the Hyperparameter Widget (Fig. 7) in
front of the class. CNN E XPLAINER is the ﬁrst software that allows
Damian to explain convolutional operations and hyperparameters with
real image inputs, and quickly answer students’ questions in class. Pre-
viously, Damian had to draw illustrations with simple matrix inputs on
slides or a chalkboard. Finally, to reinforce the concepts and encourage
individual experimentation, Damian provides the class with a URL to
the web-based CNN E XPLAINER for students to return to in the future.
8 O BSERVATIONAL STUDY
We conducted an observational study to investigate how CNN E X-
PLAINER ’s target users (e.g., aspiring deep learning students) would
use this tool to learn about CNNs, and also to test the tool’s usability.
8.1 Participants
CNN E XPLAINER is designed for deep learning beginners who are
interested in learning CNNs. In this study, we aimed to recruit partic-
ipants who aspire to learn about CNNs and have some knowledge of
basic machine learning concepts (e.g., knowing what an image classi-
ﬁer is). We recruited 16 student participants from a large university (4
female, 12 male) through internal mailing lists (e.g., machine learning
and computer science Ph.D., M.S., and undergraduate students). Seven
participants were Ph.D. students, seven were M.S. students, and the
other two were undergraduates. All participants were interested in
learning CNNs, and none of them had known CNN E XPLAINER be-
fore. Participants self-reported their level of knowledge on non-neural
network machine learning techniques, with an average score of 3.26 on
a scale of 0 to 5 (0 being “no knowledge” and 5 being “expert”); and an
average score of 2.06 on CNNs (on the same scale). No participant self-
reported a score of 5 for their knowledge on CNNs, and one participant
had a score of 0. To help better organize our discussion, we refer to
participants with CNN knowledge score of 0, 1 or 2 as B1-B11, where