C1. Intricate model structure. CNN models consist of many layers,
each having a different structure and underlying mathematical
functions [33]. Fewer past students listed CNN structure as their
biggest challenge, but most of them believe a visual learning tool
should explain the structure (Fig. 3), as the complex construc-
tion of CNNs can be overwhelming, especially for beginners who
just started learning. T2 said “ It can be very hard for them [stu-
dents with less knowledge of neural networks] to understand the
structure of CNNs, you know, the connections between layers. ”
C2. Complex layer operations. Different layers serve different pur-
poses in CNNs [17]. For example, convolutional layers exploit the
spatially local correlations in inputs—each convolutional neuron
connects to only a small region of its input; whereas max pooling
layers introduce regularization to prevent overﬁtting. T1 said, “ The
most challenging part is learning the math behind it [CNN model]. ”
Many students also reported that CNN layer computations are the
most challenging learning objective (Fig. 3). To make CNNs per-
form better than other models in tasks like image classiﬁcation,
these models have complex and unique mathematical operations
that many beginners may not have seen elsewhere.
C3. Connection between model structure and layer operation.
Based on instructor interviews and the survey results from past
students (Fig. 3), one of the cruxes to understand CNNs is under-
standing the interplay between low-level mathematical operations
(C2) and the high-level model structure ( C1). Smilkov et al., cre-
ators of the popular dense neural network learning tool Tensorﬂow
Playground [50], also found this challenge key to learning about
deep learning models: “ It’s not trivial to translate the equations
deﬁning a deep network into a mental model of the underlying
geometric transformations [change of feature representations]. ”
In other words, in addition to comprehending the mathematical
formulas behind different layers, students are also required to un-
derstand how each operation works within the complex, layered
model structure.
C4. Effective algorithm visualization (A V). The success of applying
visualization to explain machine learning algorithms to beginners
[9,29,50] suggests that an A V tool is a promising approach to help
people more easily learn about CNNs. However, A V tools need
to be carefully designed to be effective in helping learners gain
an understanding of algorithms [13]. In particular, A V systems
need to clearly explain the mapping between the algorithm and its
visual encoding [40], and actively engage learners [32].
C5. Challenge in deploying interactive learning tools. Most neural
networks are written in deep learning frameworks, such as Tensor-
Flow [4] and PyTorch [45]. Although these libraries have made it
much easier to create AI models, they require users to understand
key concepts of deep learning in the ﬁrst place [53]. Can we make
understanding CNNs more accessible without installation and cod-
ing, so that everyone has the opportunity to learn and interact with
deep learning models?
The above design challenges cover most of the desired features (Fig. 3).
We assessed the feasibility to also support explaining backpropagation
in the same tool, and we concluded that its effective explanation will
necessitate designs that are hard to be uniﬁed (e.g., backpropagation
Algorithm [2]) . Indeed, T1 commented that “ Deriving backpropaga-
tion is applying a series chain rules [...] It doesn’t really make sense
to visualize the gradients [in our tool] .” Supporting the training pro-
cess would require client-side in-browser computation on many data
examples, which incur both high amount of data download and slow
convergence ( [29,30]). Therefore, as the ﬁrst prototype, we decided for
CNN E XPLAINER to focus on explaining inference after a model has
been trained. We plan to support the explanation for backpropagation
and training process as future work (Sect. 9).
5 D ESIGN GOALS
Based on the identiﬁed design challenges (Sect. 4), we distill the fol-
lowing key design goals ( G1G5 ) for CNN E XPLAINER , an interactive
visualization tool to help students more easily learn about CNNs.G1. Visual summary of CNN models and data ﬂow. Based on the
survey results, showing the structure of CNNs is the most desired
feature for a visual learning tool (Fig. 3). Therefore, to give users
an overview of the structure of CNNs, we aim to create a visual
summary of a CNN model by visualizing all layer outputs and
connections in one view. This could help users to visually track
how input image data are transformed to ﬁnal class predictions
through a series of layer operations ( C1). (Sect. 6.1)
G2. Interactive interface for mathematical formulas. Since CNNs
employ various complex mathematical functions to achieve high
classiﬁcation performance, it is important for users to understand
each mathematical operation in detail ( C2). In response, we would
like to design an interactive interface for each mathematical for-
mula, enabling users to examine and better understand the inner-
workings of layers. (Sect. 6.3)
G3. Fluid transition between different levels of abstraction. To
help users connect low-level layer mathematical mechanisms to
high-level model structure ( C3), we would like to design a focus +
context display of different views, and provide smooth transitions
between them. By easily navigating through different levels of
CNN model abstraction, users can get a holistic picture of how
CNN works. (Sect. 6.4)
G4. Clear communication and engagement. Our goal is to design
and develop an interactive system that is easy to understand and
engaging to use so that it can help people to more easily learn
about CNNs ( C4). We aim to accompany our visualizations with
explanations to help users to interpret the graphical representation
of the CNN model (Sect. 6.5), and we wish to actively engage
learners through visualization customizations. (Sect. 6.6)
G5. Web-based implementation. To develop an interactive visual
learning tool that is accessible for users without installation and
coding ( C5), we would like to use modern web browsers as the
platform to explain the inner-workings of a CNN model, where
users can access directly on their laptops or tablets. We also open-
source our code to support future research and development of
deep learning educational tools. (Sect. 6.7)
6 V ISUALIZATION INTERFACE OF CNN E XPLAINER
CNN E XPLAINER ’s interface is built on our prior prototype [57]. We
visualize the forward propagation, i.e., transforming an input image
into a class prediction, of a trained model (Fig. 4). Users can explore
a CNN at different levels of abstraction through the tightly integrated
Overview (Sect. 6.1), Elastic Explanation View (Sect. 6.2), and the
Interactive Formula View (Sect. 6.3). Our tool allows users to smoothly
transition between these views (Sect. 6.4), provides text annotations and
a tutorial article to help users interpret the visualizations (Sect. 6.5), and
engages them to test hypotheses through visualization customizations
(Sect. 6.6). The system is targeted towards beginners and describes all
mathematical operations necessary for a CNN to classify an image.
Convolutional
ReLU
Convolutional
ReLU
MaxPooling
Convolutional
ReLU
Convolutional
ReLU
MaxPoolingUnit 1 Unit 3 Unit 2 Unit 4
Module 1 Module 2 Output Inputlifeboat
ladybug
pizza
bellpepper
schoolbus
koala
espresso
redpanda
orange
sportcar
Fig. 4. Illustration of Tiny VGG model used in CNN E XPLAINER : this
model uses the same, but fewer, convolutional layers as the original
VGGNet model [49]. We trained it to classify 10 classes of images.