FlattenElasticExplanation
B Overview
A
 SoftmaxInteractiveFormula
C
C2
C1Fig. 5. CNN E XPLAINER helps users learn about the connection between the output layer and its previous layer via three tightly integrated views.
Users can smoothly transition between these views to gain a more holistic understanding of the output layer’s
lifeboat prediction computation. (A)
TheOverview summarizes neurons and their connections. (B)TheFlatten Elastic Explanation View visualizes the often-overlooked ﬂatten layer,
helping users more easily understand how a high-dimensional max_pool_2 layer is connected to the 1-dimensional output layer. (C)TheSoftmax
Interactive Formula View further explains how the softmax function that precedes the output layer normalizes the penultimate computation results
(i.e., logits) into class probabilities through linking the (C1) numbers from the formula to (C2) their visual representations within the model structure.
Color scales are used throughout the visu-
alization to show the impact of weight, bias,
and activation map values. Consistently in the
interface, a redtoblue color scale is used to visualize neuron activation
maps as heatmaps, and a yellow togreen color scale represents weights
and biases. A persistent color scale legend is present across all views,
so the user always has context for the displayed colors. We chose these
distinct, diverging color scales with white representing zero, so that
a user can easily differentiate positive and negative values. We group
layers in the Tiny VGG model, our CNN architecture, into four units
and two modules (Fig. 4). Each unit starts with one convolutional layer.
Both modules are identical and contain the same sequence of operations
and hyperparameters. To analyze neuron activations throughout the
network with varying contexts, users can alter the range of the heatmap
color scale (Sect. 6.6).
6.1 Overview
The Overview (Fig. 1A, Fig. 5A) is the opening view of CNN E X-
PLAINER . This view represents the high-level structure of a CNN:
neurons grouped into layers with distinct, sequential operations. It
shows neuron activation maps for all layers represented as heatmaps
with a diverging redtoblue color scale. Neurons in consecutive layers
are connected with edges, which connect each neuron to its inputs; to
see these edges, users simply can hover over any activation map. In
the model, neurons in convolutional layers and the output layer are
fully connected to the previous layer, while all other neurons are only
connected to one neuron in the previous layer.
6.2 Elastic Explanation View
TheElastic Explanation Views visualize the computations that leads to
an intermediate result without overwhelming users with low-level math-
ematical operations. CNN E XPLAINER enters two elastic views after
a user clicks a convolutional or an output neuron from the Overview .
After the transition, far-away heatmaps and edges fade out to help users
focus on the selected layers while providing CNN structural context in
the background (Fig. 1A).
Explaining the Convolutional Layer (Fig. 1B). The Convolutional
Elastic Explanation View applies a convolution on each input node
of the selected neuron, visualized by a kernel sliding across the input
neurons, which yields an intermediate result for each input neuron. This
sliding kernel forms the output heatmap during the animation, whichimitates the internal process during a convolution operation. While
the sliding kernel animation is in progress, the edges in this view are
represented as ﬂowing-dashed lines; upon the animations completion,
the edges transition to solid lines.
Explaining the Flatten Layer (Fig. 5B). The Flatten Elastic Expla-
nation View visualizes the operation of transforming an n-dimensional
tensor into a 1-dimensional tensor by traversing pixels in row-major
order. This ﬂattening operation is often necessary in a CNN prior to
classiﬁcation so that the fully-connected output layer can make clas-
siﬁcation decisions. The view represents each neuron in the flatten
layer as a short line whose color is the same as its source pixel in the
previous layer. Then, edges connect these neurons with their source
components and intermediate results. These edges are colored based on
the model’s weight value. Users can hover over any component of this
connection to highlight the associated edges as well as the flatten
layer’s neuron and the pixel value from the previous layer.
6.3 Interactive Formula View
The Interactive Formula View consists of four variations designed
for convolutional layers, ReLU activation layers, pooling layers, and
the softmax activation function. After users have built up a mental
model of the CNN model structure from the previous Overview and
Elastic Explanation Views , these four views demonstrate the detailed
mathematics occurring in each layer.
Explaining Convolution, ReLU Activation, and Pooling (Fig. 6A,
B, C)) Each view animates the window-sliding operation on the input
matrix and output matrix over an interval, so that the user can under-
stand how each element in the input is connected to the output, and
vice versa. In addition, the user can interact with the these matrices
by hovering over the heatmaps to control the position of the sliding
window. For example, in the Convolutional Interactive Formula View
(Sect. 6.3A), as the user controls the window (kernel) position in either
the input or the output matrix, this view visualizes the dot-product
formula with input numbers and kernel weights directly extracted from
the current kernel. This synchronization between the input, the output
and the mathematical function enables the user to better understand
how the kernel convolves a matrix in convolutional layers.
Explaining the Softmax Activation (Fig. 6D). This view outlines
the operations necessary to calculate the classiﬁcation score. It is ac-
cessible from the Flatten Elastic Explanation View to explain how the
results (logits) from the previous view lead to the ﬁnal classiﬁcation.
The view consists of logit values encoded as circles and colored with a