D
B
CAFig. 6. The Interactive Formula Views explain the underlying mathe-
matical operations of a CNN. (A)shows the element-wise dot-product
occurring in a convolutional neuron, (B)visualizes the activation function
ReLU, and (C)illustrates how max pooling works. Users can hover over
heatmaps to display an operation’s input-to-output mapping. (D)inter-
actively explains the softmax function, helping users connect numbers
from the formula to their visual representations. Users can click the info
button
 to scroll to the corresponding section in the tutorial article, and
the play button
 to start the window sliding animation in (A)-(C).
light orange todark orange color scale, which provides users with a
visual cue of the importance of every class. This view also includes a
corresponding equation, which explains how the classiﬁcation score is
computed. When users enter this view, pairs of each logit circle and
its corresponding value in the equation appear sequentially with anima-
tions. As a user hovers over a logit circle, its value will be highlightedin the equation along with the logit circle itself, so the user can under-
stand how each logit contributes to the softmax function. Hovering
over numbers in the equation will also highlight the appropriate logit
circles. Interacting with logit circles and the mathematical equation in
combination allows a user to discern the impact that every logit has on
the classiﬁcation score in the output layer.
6.4 Transitions Between Views
The Overview is the starting state of CNN E XPLAINER and shows
the model architecture. From this high-level view, the user can begin
inspecting layers, connectivity, classiﬁcations, and tracing activations
of neurons through the model. When a user is interested in more detail,
they can click on neuron activation maps in the visualization. Neurons
in a layer that have simple one-to-one connections to a neuron in the
previous layer do not require an auxiliary Elastic Explanation View ,
so upon clicking one of these neurons, a user will be able to enter
theInteractive Formula View to understand the low-level operation
that a tensor undergoes at that layer. If a neuron has more complex
connectivity, then the user will enter an Elastic Explanation View ﬁrst.
In this view, CNN E XPLAINER uses visualizations and annotations
before displaying mathematics. Through further interaction, a user can
hover and click on parts of the Elastic Explanation View to uncover the
mathematical operations as well as examine the values of weights and
biases. The low-level Interactive Formula Views are only shown after
transitioning from the previous two views, so that users can learn about
the underlying mathemtical operations after hainvg a mental model of
the complex and layered CNN model structure.
6.5 Visualizations with Explanations
CNN E XPLAINER is accompanied by an interactive tutorial article
beneath the interface that explains CNN layer functions, hyperparam-
eters, and outlines CNN E XPLAINER ’s interactive features. Learners
can read freely, or jump to speciﬁc sections by clicking layer names
or the info buttons (Fig. 6) from the main visualization. The article
provides beginner users detailed information regarding CNNs that can
supplement their exploration of the visualization.
Additionally, text annotations are placed
throughout the visualization (e.g., explaining the
ﬂatten layer operation in the right image), which
further guide users and explain concepts that are
not easily discernible from the visualization alone.
These annotations help users map the underlying
algorithm to its visual encoding.
6.6 Customizable Visualizations
TheControl Panel located across the top of the visualization (Fig. 1)
allows the user to alter the CNN input image and edit the overall repre-
sentation of the network. The Hyperparameter Widget (Fig. 7) enables
the user to experiment with differnt convolution hyperparameters.
Change input image. Users can choose
between (1) preloaded input images for each
output class, or (2) upload their own custom image. Preloaded im-
ages allow a user to easily access data from the classes the model
was originally trained on. User can also freely upload any image for
classiﬁcation into the ten classes the network was trained on. CNN
EXPLAINER resizes a user’s image while preserving the aspect ratio
to ﬁt one dimension of the model input size, and then crop the central
region if the other dimensions does not match. The fourth of six A V tool
engagement levels is allowing users to change the A V tool’s input [42].
Supporting custom image upload engages users, by allowing them to
analyze the network’s classiﬁcation decisions and interactively testing
their own hypotheses on diverse image inputs.
Show network details. A user can toggle the
“Show detail” button, which displays additional net-
work speciﬁcations in the Overview . When toggled on, the Overview
will reveal layer dimensions and show color scale legends. Additionally,
a user can vary the activation map color scale range. The CNN architec-
ture presented by CNN E XPLAINER is grouped into four units and two
modules (Fig. 4). By modifying the drop-down menu in the Control