network layers (e.g., fully-connected, convolutional, activation), each
with a different structure and underlying mathematical operations. Thus,
a student needs to develop a mental model of not only how each layer
operates, but also how to choose different layers that work together to
transform data. Therefore, a key challenge in learning about CNNs is
the intricate interplay between low-level mathematical operations and
high-level integration of such operations within the network.
Key challenges in designing learning tools for CNNs. There is
a growing body of research that uses interactive visualization to ex-
plain the complex mechanisms of modern machine learning algorithms,
such as TensorFlow Playground [50] and GAN Lab [29], which help
students learn about dense neural networks and generative adversarial
networks (GANs) respectively. Regarding CNNs, some existing visu-
alization tools focus on demonstrating the high-level model structure
and connections between layers (e.g., Harley’s Node-Link Visualiza-
tion [20]), while others focus on explaining the low-level mathematical
operations (e.g., Karpathy’s interactive CNN demo [30]). There is no
visual learning tool that explains and connects CNN concepts from
both levels of abstraction. This interplay between global model struc-
ture and local layer operations has been identiﬁed as one of the main
obstacles to learning deep learning models, as discussed in [50] and
corroborated from our interviews with instructors and student survey.
CNN E XPLAINER aims to bridge this critical gap.
Contributions. In this work, we contribute:
•CNN E XPLAINER , an interactive visualization tool designed
for non-experts to learn about both CNN’s high-level model
structure and low-level mathematical operations, addressing learn-
ers’ key challenge in connecting unfamiliar layer mechanisms
with complex model structures. Our tool advances over prior
work [20, 30], overcoming unique design challenges identiﬁed
from a literature review, instructor interviews and a survey with
past students (Sect. 4).
•Novel interactive system design ofCNN E XPLAINER (Fig. 1),
which adapts familiar techniques such as overview + detail and
animation to simultaneously summarize intricate model structure,
while providing context for users to inspect detailed mathematical
operations. CNN E XPLAINER ’s visualization techniques work to-
gether through ﬂuid transitions between different abstraction levels
(Fig. 2), helping users gain a more comprehensive understanding
of complex concepts within CNNs (Sect. 6).
•Design lessons distilled from user studies on an interactive vi-
sualization tool for machine learning education. While visual
and interactive approaches have been gaining popularity in ex-
plaining machine learning concepts to non-experts, little work
has been done to evaluate such tools [28, 43]. We interviewed
four instructors who have taught CNNs and conducted a survey
with 19 students who have previously learned about CNNs to iden-
tify the needs and challenges for a deep learning educational tool
(Sect. 4). In addition, we conducted an observational study with
16 students to evaluate the usability of CNN E XPLAINER , and
investigated how our tool could help students better understand
CNN concepts (Sect. 8). Based on these studies, we discuss the
advantages and limitations of interactive visual educational tools
for machine learning.
•An open-source, web-based implementation that broadens the
public’s education access to modern deep learning techniques with-
out the need for advanced computational resources. Deploying
deep learning models conventionally requires signiﬁcant com-
puting resources, e.g., servers with powerful hardware. In addi-
tion, even with a dedicated backend server, it is challenging to
support a large number of concurrent users. Instead, CNN E X-
PLAINER is developed using modern web technologies, where
all results are directly and efﬁciently computed in users’ web
browsers (Sect. 6.7). Therefore, anyone can access CNN E X-
PLAINER using their web browser without the need for installa-
tion or a specialized backend. Our code is open-sourced1and
1Code: https://github.com/poloclub/cnn-explainer
1.93
-0.21X
-0.12X
0.13X1.57
0.96+
+
++
+
++
+
=3.19
-0.25X
-0.08X
-0.08X2.54
1.963.12
-0.1X
0.02X
-0.15X3.05
2.67
-2.26OverviewA ElasticViewB InteractiveFormulaCFig. 2. In CNN E XPLAINER , tightly integrated views with different levels
of abstractions work together to help users more easily learn about the
intricate interplay between a CNN’s high-level structure and low-level
mathematical operations. (A)theOverview summarizes connections of
all neurons; (B)theElastic View animates the intermediate convolutional
computation of the user-selected neuron in the Overview ; and (C)Inter-
active Formula interactively demonstrates the detailed calculation on the
selected input in the Elastic View .
CNN E XPLAINER is available at the following public demo link:
https://poloclub.github.io/cnn-explainer .
Broadening impact of visualization for AI. In recent years, many
visualization systems have been developed for deep learning, but very
few are designed for non-experts [20, 29, 44, 50], as surveyed in [23].
CNN E XPLAINER joins visualization research that introduces begin-
ners to modern machine learning concepts. Applying visualization
techniques to explain the inner workings of complex models has great
potential. We hope our work will inspire further research and devel-
opment of visual learning tools that help democratize and lower the
barrier to understanding and applying artiﬁcial intelligent technologies.
2 B ACKGROUND FOR CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS
This section provides a high-level overview of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in the context of image classiﬁcation, which will help
ground our work throughout this paper.
Image classiﬁcation has a long history in the machine learning re-
search community. The objective of supervised image classiﬁcation is
to map an input image, X, to an output class, Y. For example, given a
cat image, a sophisticated image classiﬁer would output a class label
of “cat”. CNNs have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on this
task, in part because of their multiple layers of computation that aim to
learn a better representation of image data.
CNNs are composed of several different layers (e.g., convolutional
layers, downsampling layers, and activation layers)—each layer per-
forms some predetermined function on its input data. Convolutional
layers “extract features” to be used for image classiﬁcation, with early
convolutional layers in the network extracting low-level features (e.g.,
edges) and later layers extracting more-complex semantic features (e.g.,
car headlights). Through a process called backpropagation, a CNN
learns kernel weights and biases from a collection of input images.
These values also known as parameters, which summarize important
features within the images, regardless of their location. These kernel
weights slide across an input image performing an element-wise dot-
product, yielding intermediate results that are later summed together
with the learned bias value. Then, each neuron gets an output based
on the input image. These outputs are also called activation maps. To
decrease the number of parameters and help avoid overﬁtting, CNNs
downsample inputs using another type of layer called pooling. Acti-
vation functions are used in a CNN to introduce non-linearity, which
allows the model to learn more complex patterns in data. For example,
a Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) is deﬁned as max (0;x), which outputs
the positive part of its argument. These functions are also often used
prior to the output layer to normalize classiﬁcation scores, for example,
the activation function called Softmax performs a normalization on
unscaled scalar values, known as logits, to yield output class scores that
sum to one. To summarize, compared to classic image classiﬁcation
models that can be over-parameterized and fail to take advantage of
inherent properties in image data, CNNs create spatially-aware repre-
sentations through multiple stacked layers of computation.