Overview
Elasticexplanationview
Interactiveformulaview
Transitionbetweenviews
Animations
Inputcustomization
Tutorialarticle
Performance
notatall
usefulvery
useful 12345676.62
6.44
6.50
6.62
6.81
6.50
6.50
6.62Easytouse
Easytounderstand
Enjoyabletouse
Iwilluseitinthefuture
Helpedmetolearn
1234567strongly
disagreestrongly
agree
UsefulnessofFeaturesUsabilityEvaluation
6.25
5.94
6.88
6.37
6.37Fig. 8. Average ratings from 16 participants regarding the usability
and usefulness of CNN E XPLAINER .Top: Participants thought CNN
EXPLAINER was easy to use, enjoyable, and helped them learn about
CNNs. Bottom: All features, especially animations, were rated favorably.
“B” stands for “Beginner”; and those with score of 3 or 4 as K1-K5,
where “K” stands for “Knowledgeable.”
8.2 Procedure
We conducted this study with participants one-on-one via video-
conferencing software. With the permission of all participants, we
recorded the participants’ audio and computer screen for subsequent
analysis. After participants signed consent forms, we provided them
a 5-minute overview of CNNs, followed by a 3-minute tutorial of
CNN E XPLAINER . Participants then freely explored our tool in their
computer’s web browser. We also provided a feature checklist, which
outlined the main features of our tool and encouraged participants to
try as many features as they could. During the study, participants were
asked to think aloud and share their computer screen with us; they
were encouraged to ask questions when necessary. Each session ended
with a usability questionnaire coupled with an exit interview that asked
participants about their process of using CNN E XPLAINER , and if this
tool could be helpful for them. Each study lasted around 50 minutes,
and we compensated each participant with a $10 Amazon Gift card.
8.3 Results and Design Lessons
The exit questionnaire included a series of 7-point Likert-scale ques-
tions about the utility and usefulness of different views in CNN E X-
PLAINER (Fig. 8). All average Likert rating were above 6 except the
rating of “easy to understand”. From the high ratings and our observa-
tions, participants found our tool easy to use and understand, retained
a high engagement level during their session, and eventually gained a
better understanding of CNN concepts. Our observations also reﬂect
key ﬁndings in previous A V research [13, 32]. This section describes
design lessons and limitations of our tool distilled from this study.
8.3.1 Transitions between different views
Transitions help users link CNN operations and structures. Several
participants (9/16) commented that they liked how our tool transitions
between high-level CNN structure views and low-level mathematical
explanations. It helps them better understand the interplay between
layer computations and the overall CNN data transformation—one of
the key challenges for understanding CNN concepts, as we identiﬁed
from our instructor interviews and our student survey. For example,
initially K4 was confused to see the Convolutional Elastic Explanation
View , but after reading the annotation text, he remarked, “ Oh, I under-
stand what an intermediate layer is now—you run the convolution onthe image, then you add all those results to get this. ” After exploring
theConvolutional Interactive Formula View , he immediately noted,
“Every single aspect of the convolution layer is shown here. [This] is
super helpful. ” Similarly, B5 commented, “ Good to see the big picture
at once and the transition to different views [...] I like that I can hide
details of a unit in a compact way and expand it when [needed]. ”
CNN E XPLAINER employs the ﬁsheye view technique for present-
ing the Elastic Explanation Views (Fig. 1B, Fig. 5B): after transitioning
from the Overview to a speciﬁc layer, neighboring layers are still shown
while further layers (lower degree-of-interest) have lower opacity. Par-
ticipants found this transition design helpful for them to learn layer-
speciﬁc details while having CNN structural context in the background.
For instance, K5 said “ I can focus on the current layer but still know
the same operation goes on for other layers. ” Our observations from
this study suggest that our ﬂuid transition design between different
level of abstraction can help users to better connect unfamiliar layer
mechanisms to the complex model structure.
8.3.2 Animations for enjoyable learning experience
Another favorite feature of CNN E XPLAINER that participants men-
tioned was the use of animations, which received the highest rating
in the exit questionnaire (Fig. 8). In our tool, animations serve two
purposes: to assimilate the relationship between different visual com-
ponents and to help illustrate the model’s underlying operations.
Transition animations help navigating. Layer movement is ani-
mated during view transitions. We noticed it helped participants to
be aware of different views, and all participants navigated through the
views naturally. In addition to assisting with understanding the rela-
tionship between distinct views, animation also helped them discover
the linking between different visualization elements. For example, B8
quickly found that the logit circle is linked to its corresponding value
in the formula, when she saw the circle-number pair appear one-by-one
with animation in the Softmax Interactive Formula View (Fig. 5C).
Algorithm animations contribute to understanding. Animations
that simulate the model’s inner-workings helped participants learn
underlying operations by validating their hypotheses. In the Convolu-
tional Elastic Explanation View (Fig. 2B), we animate a small rectangle
sliding through one matrix to mimic the CNN’s internal sliding win-
dow. We noticed many participants had their attention drawn to this
animation when they ﬁrst transitioned into the Convolutional Elastic
Explanation View . However, they did not report that they understood
the convolution operation until interacting with other features, such
as reading the annotation text or transitioning to the Convolutional
Interactive Formula View (Fig. 2C). Some participants went back to
watch the animation multiple times and commented that it made sense,
for example, K5 said “ Very helpful to see how the image builds as the
window slides through, ” but others, such as B9 remarked, “ It is not easy
to understand [convolution] using only animation. ” Therefore, we hy-
pothesize that this animation can indirectly help users to learn about the
convolution algorithm by validating their newly formed mental models
of how speciﬁc operation behave. To test this hypothesis, a rigorous
controlled experiment would be needed. Related research work on
the effect of animation in computer science education also found that
algorithm animation does not automatically improve learning, but it
may lead learners to make predictions of the algorithm behavior which
in turn helps learning [8].
Animations improve learning engagement and enjoyment. We
found animations helped to increase participants’ engagement level
(e.g., spending more time and effort) and made CNN E XPLAINER more
enjoyable to use. In the study, many participants repeatedly played and
viewed different animations. For example, K2 replayed the window
sliding animation multiple times: “ The is very well-animated [...] I
always love smooth animations. ” B7 also attributed animations to his
enjoyable experience with our tool: “ [The tool is] enjoyable to use [...]
I especially like the lovely animation. ”
8.3.3 Engaging learning through visualization customization
CNN E XPLAINER allows users to modify the visualization. For exam-
ple, users can change the input image or upload their own image for