Understanding AI adoption in manufacturing and production firms using
an integrated TAM-TOE model
Sheshadri Chatterjee
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
Email: sheshadri.academic@gmail.com
Nripendra P. Rana* 
School of Management
University of Bradford, Richmond Road
Bradford, BD7 1DP, UK
Email: nrananp@gmail.com
Yogesh K. Dwivedi 
School of Management
Swansea University Bay Campus
Swansea, SA1 8EN, UK
Email: ykdwivedi@gmail.com
Abdullah M. Baabdullah
Department of Management Information Systems
 Faculty of Economics and Administration 
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
Email: baabdullah@kau.edu.sa
*Corresponding Author
Abstract
This study aims to identify how environmental, technological, and social factors influence the
adoption of Industry 4.0 in the context of digital manufacturing. The Industry 4.0 era has
brought a breakthrough in advanced technologies in fields such as nanotechnology, quantum
computing,  biotechnology,  artificial  intelligence,  robotics,  the  Internet  of  Things,  fifth-
generation wireless technology, fully autonomous vehicles, 3D printing and so on. In this
study,  we  attempted  to  identify  the  socioenvironmental  and  technological  factors  that
influence  the  adoption  of  artificial  intelligence  embedded  technology  by  digital
manufacturing  and  production  organizations.  In  doing  so,  the  extended  technology-
organization-environment (TOE) framework is used to explore the applicability of Industry
4.0. A conceptual model was proposed that used an integrated technology acceptance model
(TAM)-TOE model and was tested using survey-based data collected from 340 employees of
small, medium and large organizations. The results highlight that all the relationships, except
organizational readiness, organizational compatibility and partner support on perceived ease
of use, were found to be significant in the context of digital manufacturing and production
organizations. The results further indicated that leadership support acts as a countable factor
to moderate such an adoption.
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Industry 4.0, Manufacturing and Production Firms, TOE
Framework, TAM, Leadership Support
1