the patterns in the dataset of the study which will allow better understanding of adoption of
AI in the manufacturing and production firms. All these uncovered issues could be left for
future researchers to investigate.
6. Conclusion
This study has investigated how the manufacturing environment has undergone remarkable
transformation  owing  to  the  use  of  disruptive  Industry  4.0  technology  by  reshaping
production processes and operations (Luthra & Mangle, 2018) , leading to a more advanced
manufacturing system (Sung, 2018). This study has been able to explain how using Industry
4.0  technology transforms  the production  system  of  organizations  into  a  smart  system
composed of several smart interconnected machines with the help of the IoT (Metallo et al.,
2018).  This  study has  focused  on the essential  environmental,  social,  and  technological
developments  in  organizations’  operational  techniques  for  effectively  digitalizing
manufacturing and production systems through the use of disruptive Industry 4.0 technology.
This  study aimed to identify  the socioenvironmental  and technological  factors  that  help
organizations adopt AI, a component of Industry 4.0 technology. To identify the antecedents,
the study successfully utilized a TOE-TAM-based hybrid model. The TAM helped to identify
technological issues, while the TOE mainly helped to identify socioenvironmental issues. As
few studies have examined the adoption of Industry 4.0 in organizations in the context of
socioenvironmental issues with a focus on technological aspects, this study is deemed to be a
special endeavour. 
References
Aboelmaged,  M.  G.,  2014.  Predicting  E-Readiness  at  Firm-Level:  An  Analysis  of
Technological,  Organizational  and Environmental  (TOE) Effects  on E-Maintenance
Readiness in Manufacturing Firms. International Journal of Information Management,
34(5), 639-651.
Aghion, P., Jones, B. F., Jones, C. I., 2017. Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth.
National Bureau of Economic Research,  Available at: http://www.nber.org/ papers/
w23928.
Ajzen,  I.,  1991.  The  theory  of  planned  behavior.  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human
Decision Processes.  Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,  50(2),
179–221.
Aktar, A., Pangil F., 2017. The relationship between employee engagement, HRM practices
and perceived organizational support: Evidence from banking employees. International
Journal of Human Resource Studies , 7(3), 1-22.
Alshamaila, Y., Papagiannidis, S, Li, F., 2013. Cloud computing adoption by SMEs in the
north  east  of  England:  a  multi-perspective  framework.  Journal  of  Enterprise
Information Management,  26(3), 250-275.
26