can explain not only technological and organizational aspects but also external factors that
include social and environmental aspects (Wang et al., 2010). Hence, by combining TAM
and TOE, it is possible to cover all the internal and external antecedents for the adoption of
AI. Thus, in the adoption of Industry 4.0, the TAM-TOE hybrid model is perceived as
appropriate for use in interpreting the socioenvironmental and technological aspects of the
adoption of AI in organizations. Figure 1 shows the TOE-TAM based framework.
Figure 1: TOE-TAM-based Framework (Sources: Davis 1989; Tornatzky and Fleisher 1990)
In the context of marketing, planning, and development, production along with distribution,
the  manufacturing  environment  has  experienced  a  drastic  reduction  that  warrants
digitalization  for  obtaining  sustainable  production  and  manufacturing  systems  befitting
Industry 4.0 (Reischaur,  2018; Frank et al., 2019). Among the different  components  of
Industry 4.0, artificial intelligence (AI) is considered one of the vital components (Wang et
al.,  2016).  Applications  of  AI  embedded  technology  have  been  able  to  revolutionize
operations, as well as production processes (Luthra & Mangla, 2018; Jabbour et al., 2018).
The  manufacturing  system  has  experienced  drastic  innovation  by  using  AI  embedded
technology  (Sung, 2018;  Li, 2018). The  use  of AI-embedded  technology  has  facilitated
manufacturing  process  systems  for  developing  smart,  flexible,  ecofriendly  production
ecosystems (Oesterreich & Teuteberg, 2016; Metallo et al., 2018). Studies have highlighted
that  industrial  engineers  and production  managers  have  expressed  interest  in integrating
process innovation with contemporary technological developments for managing sustenance
in production systems (Buer et al., 2018). However, several studies have suggested that the
managers and executives of organizations are found to have expressed reluctance towards the
use of the developed process and operation systems during the transition to Industry 4.0-
5