various recommendations to managers of organizations to facilitate the adoption of AI in
organizations.
5.3 Limitations and future research directions
Like any other study, this research is not without limitations. In validating the conceptual
model by survey, the data were analysed based only on 340 responses only. This number is
not perceived as a large sample size, and the results obtained should be considered cautiously
while  generalizing  it  for  the  other  contexts.  The  survey  was  conducted  with  selected
manufacturing and production firms in India. Therefore, the findings of this research should
be tested in the context of other developing countries. Additionally, as  this research has
analysed the cross-sectional data gathered at only one point in time, future research should
collect longitudinal data to see how the model performs using data collected from the same
employees after a certain period of time. In India, the adoption of AI in organizations is in the
preliminary stage, and survey responses have been gathered from nonadopters. Hence, proper
precautions  need  be  taken  when  the  findings  of  this  research  are  applied  to  adopters.
Additionally, experimental research (Balakrishnan & Dwivedi, 2021) can be conducted to
show high internal validity in such research. This study has not considered the vulnerable
issues  of  security  and  privacy  that  might  impede  the  progress  of  adoption  of  AI  in
organizations.  Also, the present study deals with the issues of technology acceptance. The
present study can be further extended and improved by using the application of fuzzy-set
Qualitative  Comparative  Analysis  (fsQCA)  (Ragin,  2009).  The  application  of  fsQCA
technique allows to get much deeper insights into the data. Also, fsQCA technique enables
the researchers to identify the required necessary and sufficient conditions for an outcome to
occur (Woodside, 2017; Pappas & Woodside, 2021; Woodside, 2017). To extend the present
study,  the  future  researchers  can  examine  which  factors  from  organizational-internal
environment and organizational-external environment, or a combination of both the factors,
are  necessary  or  sufficient  for  explaining  PU,  PEOU,  intention  to  adopt,  or  how  the
leadership support, which is a moderator in this study, can be used as a condition that will
enable case by case analysis. There are few previous studies in this area which successfully
applied  fsQCA  technique  in  the  technology  adoption  studies  for  explaining  behavioral
intentions and demonstrated how the application of fsQCA technique allows the researchers
to go back to the cases to get a much richer understanding of the data (Pappas, 2018; Park et
al., 2020; Pappas & Woodside, 2021). Future researchers can also use the integrated TAM-
TOE model used in this study and can further analyse using fsQCA technique for identifying
25