Organizational  readiness  is  defined  as  the  accessibility  of  the  required  organizational
resources  for adoption  (Iacovou et al., 1995). In any organization,  the  adoption  of any
innovative technology is impacted by some specific organizational characteristics, including
the organization size and the availability of resources. These are salient factors that are
instrumental to measuring organizational readiness (Idris, 2015). The organization’s  size
directly affects its adoption readiness relating to any innovative technology (Rogers, 2003).
Several studies have also subscribed the view of Rogers (2003). Larger organizations need
more  technical  and  financial  resources  (Aboelmaged,  2014;  Ransbotham  et  al.,  2017;
Gartner, 2017). If an organization is not ready to use a new system such as AI (Industry 4.0),
employees will feel constrained regarding the use of the new technology, and the usefulness
of this new technology will not be realized by them. The above discussion leads to the
formulation of the following hypotheses:
H3a: Organizational readiness has a positive impact on perceived usefulness.
H3b: Organizational readiness has a positive impact on perceived ease of use.
2.2.4 Organizational compatibility (OCO)
Compatibility  can  be  defined  as  the  level  to  which  an  innovation  is  considered  to  be
consistent with the potential users’ existing values, previous experiences and requirements
(Geczy et al., 2012). Organizational compatibility is an internal organizational issue and is
considered relevant for its behavioural pattern, existing values and experience. To what
extent these characteristics of the organization are reconcilable with an innovative technology
is assessed (Peng et al., 2012). Practically, compatibility is perceived as the extent to which
AI innovation (in the context of the present study) can be easily assimilated and integrated
with the existing process and available infrastructure of the organization (Geczy et al., 2012).
The old production systems of organizations are considered strong inhibitors of innovative
adoption, as the system is not compatible with innovation (Chen & Tan, 2004). Based on the
above discussion, the following hypotheses are proposed:
H4a: Organizational compatibility has a positive impact on perceived usefulness.
H4b: Organizational compatibility has a positive impact on perceived ease of use.
2.2.5 Competitive advantage (COA)
Competitive  advantage  is defined as the level  at which a technological  factor seems  to
provide a better benefit for organizations (Rogers, 2003). The additional advantages of a
technology in comparison to its alternatives play a considerably decisive role towards its
adoption in an organization. This external factor is associated with the sense of the threat of
9