This  study  will  explain  how  some  factors  concerned  with  the  internal  and  external
environment of organizations could impact the intention to adopt AI if organizations find
such adoption useful and easy to use (Lee et al., 2003; Yousafzai et al., 2007).
The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  First,  Section  2  presents  the  theoretical
background and develops a conceptual model. Section 3 discusses the research methodology,
while Section 4 analyses the data and presents the results. Section 5 discusses the results with
respect to the available literature. Finally, Section 6 provides concluding remarks.
2. Theoretical Background, Conceptual Model and Hypotheses Formulation
2.1 Theoretical Background
It  is  difficult  to  apply  any  existing  adoption  model  in  the  context  of  AI  adoption  in
organizations, as it is a complex technology (De Graaf, 2016). AI is a modern technological
genre.  In  this  context,  it  is  argued  that  the  TAM  (Davis,  1989)  and  TOE  frameworks
(Tornatzky & Fleisher, 1990) may best explain AI adoption in organizations. Davis (1989)
developed the TAM framework to understand the factors influencing the intention and use of
technology.  Other  acceptance  models  were  subsequently  developed.  We  are  aligned  to
depend  on  TAM.  The  reasons  are  multi-fold.  TAM  is  considered  a  commonly  applied
influential model in the field of information systems (Lee et al. 2003). It has a widespread
popularity for many reasons. It is an IT specific and parsimonious model. It can explore and
predict the acceptance of a wide range of technologies. It is helpful to explain the adoption of
any technology in a flexible way with a robust theoretical and strong psychometric base and
has strong explanatory power (Maartje et al., 2018). Its two core constructs include many
acceptance beliefs exploring behavioural intention and act as the primary determinants of
system use (Chen & Tan, 2004; Hong et al., 2006; Benbasat & Barki, 2007; Cagliano et al.,
2019). The are many reasons for not considering other acceptance models developed after
TAM  .  These  models  have  highly  correlated  variables,  which  create  unnaturally  high
explained variance (Maartje et al., 2018). The TOE framework can exhaustively explain the
factors  impacting  adoption  decisions.  This  framework  can  explain  adoption  using
technological, organizational and environmental dimensions and can explain any modern
technology in the socioenvironmental and technological context (Hossain & Quaddus, 2011).
It has found successful applications in the adoption of cloud computing (Yang et al., 2015), e-
commerce (Idris, 2015), etc.
The two core variables of TAM (i.e., perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use) can
explain at least 40% of the reasons for using the system (Ifinedo, 2011). The TOE framework
4