(Veliu & Manxhari, 2017). From this perspective, this study has used competency as one of
the factors that help in the adoption of AI. A review of different literature from other studies
has helped to enrich the proposed research model. This theoretical model has been developed
for the adoption of AI in organizations  to improve the digitalization  of production  and
manufacturing systems, which is a unique context and contribution. By using perceived
usefulness and perceived ease of use as two mediating variables to trigger the intention to
adopt AI, lending ideas from Davis (1989), this study has been able to bridge the several
factors covering social, environmental, and technological aspects with the intention to adopt
AI technology and provide a unique way to present the TOE-TAM-based integrated model
using perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness as mediating variables.
5.2 Managerial implications
In terms of the findings of this study, managerial implications can be developed to guide the
future  development  of  AI  technology  acceptance  intentions  in  organizations.  The  vital
endogenous variables impacting the intention to adopt AI in organizations are perceived
usefulness and ease of use (Davis, 1989). Managers of manufacturing and production firms
must be sincere to make clear to all stakeholders the utility of AI technology in organizations.
The designers and developers of AI technology must be vigilant so that the use of this
technology may not be complex. The importance of the usefulness of this adoption of AI
technology must be apprised by the managers of the organization so that its acceptance by all
stakeholders is not hindered. This is in support of the observations made in earlier studies
(Fink et al., 2013).
Since  competency  impacts  usefulness,  managers  should  try  to  appropriately  train  the
employees of the organization to enhance their expertise and skill. This will enhance the
intention to adopt AI by employees, which would facilitate the organizational authority to
adopt AI in an easier way. Since the readiness factor acts as a vital predictor of usefulness
and ease of use for adoption of AI in organizations, managers should clearly define the
strategy  for adoption,  ensure  strong and committed  sponsorship (resource mobilization),
active support of mid-level managers, keep stakeholders apprised about the urgent needs for
such adoption, ensure that the data to be analysed by AI after adoption are trustworthy and
actionable and ensure effective availability of conducive infrastructure (Williams, 2004).
In this way, managers will attempt to keep the organization ready for the adoption of AI. As
competitive advantage has a strong impact on PU and PEOU in the context of adoption of AI
in an organization, it should be the duty of the managers of organizations contemplating the
23