H6b: Partners’ support has a positive impact on perceived ease of use.
2.2.7 Perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEOU)
Perceived ease of use is interpreted as the extent to which a person has a belief that using a
new system or a new technology would be free of effort (Davis, 1989). Several studies have
used TAM to successfully describe an individual’s acceptance of any new system or new
technology (Lee et al., 2003). In this study, TAM has been used to explain the use intention
of AI adoption in a firm. In addition, PEOU includes the concepts of self-efficacy, perception
of  external  control,  anxiety,  playfulness,  and  enjoyment  (Venkatesh  &  Bala,  2008).  As
already  stated,  TAM  confirms  that  PEOU  is  a  predictor  of  usefulness.  Therefore,  we
hypothesize the following:
H7: Perceived ease of use positively influences perceived usefulness.
As per TAM, PEOU acts as a predictor of the intention of users to use a new system or
technology. The sense of easiness in using a system motivates users to intend to use the
system (Yousafzai et al., 2007). TAM is considered to be the most widely accepted model for
the intention to use a new technology (Venkatesh & Morris, 2000). From different studies,
including those on the adoption of e-commerce (Kufaris, 2002) and multipurpose information
appliances (Hong & Tam, 2006), it has been observed that the intention to use a new system
is predicted by the concept of ease of use. These discussions have helped to perceive that
intention to adopt AI in any firm is derived from the ease of using a technology. Hence, we
formulate the following hypothesis:
H8: Perceived ease of use positively influences the intention to adopt AI.
Perceived usefulness is interpreted as the potential users’ subjective possibility that using a
system or the application of a system will enhance the job performance of the users within the
context of the firm (Lee et al., 2003). Ajzen (1991) believed that the perceived usefulness of a
technology will motivate users to intend to use that technology. In this study, TAM has been
used to explain use intention by users since this model has demonstrated that there exists a
linear relationship between usefulness and intention (Maartje et al., 2019). PU includes the
concepts of subjective norms, image, job relevance, output quality, and result demonstrability
(Venkatesh & Bala, 2008). These predictors prompted us to construe that individuals form
perceived  usefulness  judgements  partly  due  to  cognitively  comparing  what  a  system  is
capable of doing with what they need to accomplish in their job (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000).
Hence, it is perceived that a sense of usefulness would lead an individual to intend to use a
new technology. Therefore, we hypothesize the following:
11