efficiency  of  the  employees  of  the  organization.  The  results  show  that  organizational
complexity negatively impacts perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, confirming
hypotheses H2a and H2b. This concept has been supported in earlier studies (Parveen &
Sulaiman, 2008), where it has been asserted that system complexity is inversely proportional
to perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. This indicates that if the users find using a
system (AI technology in the present case) difficult, they would perceive the system to be
useless and that it cannot be handled effortlessly.
Organizational readiness positively affects perceived usefulness, supporting Hypothesis H3a.
This confirms the findings of earlier studies (Ransbotham et al., 2017), which observe that if
appropriate financial and technical resources and trained employees are available, there will
be  no  impediment  to  adopting  an  innovative  technology.  However,  it  has  also  been
hypothesized that organizational readiness has a positive impact on perceived ease of use
(H3b).  However,  upon  validation,  it  appears  that  this  hypothesis  (H3b)  has  not  been
supported. This is contradictory to earlier studies (Aboelmaged, 2014), which is presumably
because this  study (Aboelmaged,  2014) was conducted in a Western country where the
cultural disposition is completely or partially different from the culture of India, from which
responses have been used to test the hypothesis (H3b) in this study.
Indians are initially conservative and resist using new technology. They are found to be
reluctant to undertake training to become ready to use a new system. They believe in the
existing system, and this has been perceived when attempts were made to convert the legacy
system to an ERP system (Gangadharan & Swami, 2004). This reluctance is perhaps why this
hypothesis (H3b) is not supported (Rajesh, 2008). Organizational compatibility positively
affects perceived usefulness, as the corresponding hypothesis (H4a) has been supported after
validation, which is in parity with an earlier study (Peng et al., 2012). In the study by Peng et
al. (2012), it was observed that if the existing technologies and practices are found to be
compatible with the new technology, the users will intend to use it.
Again, organizational compatibility has no significant impact on perceived ease of use, as
Hypothesis H4b has not been supported. There may be many reasons for this finding. The
authors perceive that this result was arrived at by analysis of responses from 340 respondents
chosen from some firms. Had it been possible to include more respondents, the authors
expect that such a contradiction from earlier studies (Geczy et al., 2012) would not have
occurred. The inadequate number of respondents might have yielded such a contradictory
result because the result arrived at is not construed as a general picture.
19