adoption  of  AI  technology  to  emphasize  the  strategic  importance,  such  as  mobility,
scalability, etc. This will help the users of the organizations (users of AI technology in future
after adoption) to realize that the use of AI would make the organizations more productive
compared to the other organizations. Managers need to make users realize the importance of
competitive  advantages  by  using  AI  technology,  which  might  lead  to  better  results  by
ensuring  greater  employee  productivity  and  reducing  inventory  costs  with  enhanced
coordination with partners. A developed understanding of these various advantages of AI
technology  over  the  existing  system  would  improve  customer  relationship  management,
which would be beneficial for organizations.
Compatibility strongly impacts perceived usefulness, as ascertained from the study, since this
AI  technology  has  been  found  to  be  consistent  with  the  existing  format,  existing
technological architecture and other available structural data. If in any organization there
exists an installation of many complex applications, it should be the duties of the managers to
implement initiatives to change the existing processes to meet compatibility needs of the AI
technology.  AI  adoption  should  also  be  befitting  and  compatible  with  the  policy  of
organizations, business essentialities and the environment for IT development (Lin & Chen,
2012). Managers of organizations need to focus on these points. It has been hypothesized that
compatibility  positively  impacts  PEOU  (H4b).  However,  while  testing  the  hypotheses
through a statistical approach, it appears that this hypothesis has not been supported. This was
presumably  (with  other  reasons)  because  the  users  of  organizations  perceived  that,  for
adopting AI in the organization, it will be necessary to make major changes in their work
style and nature of jobs, which is why this hypothesis was not supported. The managers of the
organization need to focus on this point and should arrange to ensure that in the adoption of
AI in the organization, users are apprehensive regarding changes to nature of jobs and work
style.  The  findings  in  this  study  highlight  that  the  adoption  of  AI  in  organizations  is
necessarily driven by the support of partners. Hence, managers approaching AI adoption in
organizations should encourage the formation of networks for the sharing of knowledge and
resources so that the needs of customers are fulfilled.
Regarding leadership support as a moderator, unless there is strong leadership support, the
adoption  of  any  innovative  technology  in  an  organization  will  not  be  successful.  Top
management  is  required  to  perform  an  effective  and  pragmatic  role  to  convince  their
employees to motivate their functional behaviour. This will ensure a conducive environment
to facilitate adoption. Managers need to focus on this point. Hence, this study provides
24