2.2.1 Organizational competency (OCM)
Organizational competency is associated with the concept of employees’ skill, knowledge,
capabilities, and other relevant traits essential for effective performance in an employment
position (Long et al., 2013). Competency increases by ameliorating the performance of the
employees  of  the  firm  (Veliu  &  Manxhari,  2017).  The  TOE  framework  indicates  the
necessity of the competency of organizations (Riyadh et al., 2009). The concept and idea of
competency has enormous facets. Employee competency brings about the competency of the
organization (Halabi et al., 2017). Its concept is associated with performance (Tortorella et
al., 2019). Hence, to ensure a performance-oriented culture in a firm, competent personnel are
required (Riyadh et al., 2009). It is natural that if the employees of the organization are
competent to use a system, the organization is considered a competent organization (Veliu &
Manxhari, 2017). However, if the employees of an organization are not capable of using a
technology, they will not perceive the usefulness of that technology (Maduka et al., 2018).
Based on the above discussion, the following hypothesis is developed:
H1: Organizational competency has a positive impact on perceived usefulness.
2.2.2 Organizational complexity (OCX)
The concept of complexity in an organization comes from the sense of ease of use lent from
TAM,  as  already  discussed.  Complexity  is  defined  as  the  level  of  inconvenience  and
constraints towards understanding and using a system (Sonnenwald et al., 2001). From the
perspective of AI adoption in an organization, this complexity is considered an internal
organizational  issue, and it is conceptualized  and weighed by measuring the extent that
applications  are  using  the  AI  infrastructure,  the  time  required  for  performing  a  task,
intelligent decision-making effectiveness, the efficiency of the system functionality and the
interface design (Parveen and Sulaiman, 2008). This concept is conceptualized through the
sense of ease of use (Chau and Hu, 2001). As the complexity in an organization increases, the
usefulness and ease of use decrease (Idris, 2015). If there is complexity in the system of an
organization, employees will experience problems in using a new technology with a complex
system and will not be able to realize the usefulness of the new system (Sonnenwald et al.,
2001). From the above discussion, the following hypotheses are formulated:
H2a: Organizational complexity negatively influences perceived usefulness.
H2b: Organizational complexity negatively influences perceived ease of use.
2.2.3 Organizational readiness (ORE)
8