greater than that of the dotted line. The influence is almost identical when we consider the
effect  on  intention  to  adopt  AI  by  perceived  usefulness  considering  strong  and  weak
leadership support as a moderator (Figure 5). This signifies (in brief) that if strong leadership
support exists in an organization, the adoption of AI in that organization will be accelerated.
This concept is in agreement with earlier studies (Wang et al., 2010), where it has been
mentioned that top management support helps to cultivate a favourable organizational climate
to overcome the resistance to change regarding the adoption of innovative technology.
5.1 Theoretical contributions
This  study  has  been  able  to  theorize  the  environmental,  social,  and  technological
developments in the operations of organizations to unlock the digitalization of sustainable
manufacturing  and  production  systems.  This  study  has  also  theorized  that  such  digital
systems are compatible in the context of emerging Industry 4.0. In achieving so, this study
has  imported  the  concept  to  interpret  the  socioenvironmental  aspects  and  technological
factors involved in using Industry 4.0; which is, here, AI. For this, the help of a hybrid model,
i.e.,  the  integrated  TOE-TAM  model,  has  been  taken.  This  hybrid  model  has  been
successfully used to explore organizations’ intention to adopt AI from social, environmental,
and technological aspects. Since few research studies are available to nurture the use of
Industry 4.0 in organizations to gain competitive advantage (Muller et al., 2018), this study
provides a novel contribution in this context. This study has examined how cultural aspects
pose an impediment to adopting a new technology (e.g. , big data) in an organization (Lunde
et al., 2019), and it has been explained through this study how the TOE framework will help
to interpret the situation. The reasons for using the TOE-TAM-based integrated model have
been explained in the theoretical background section. The aim of this study is to explain what
factors could influence the intention to adopt AI, a component of Industry 4.0. Basically, this
study analyses the adoption of AI in organizations. In this context, this study could have used
an updated standard adoption model. However, the study has ventured to select better suited
antecedents from TOE-TAM-based integrated models.
From the perspective of consideration of leadership support as a moderator to impact the
intention to adopt AI, the concept of previous literature has been taken. Studies have revealed
that in the context of e-commerce and cloud computing adoption, leadership support has been
considered  an  important  factor  to  promote  such  an  adoption  (Yang  et  al.,  2015).  This
construct was used in this study to consider leadership support as a moderator to adopt AI.
One study revealed that in SMEs in Kosovo, competency impacted business performance
22