improve  its  business  strategy.  It  is  also unclear  how  AI technology  could  improve  the
practices  of  organizations  (Margherita  &  Braceini,  2020),  but  studies  are  available  that
indicate that the adoption of big data analytics, as well as machine learning could ensure
some business and social values in organizations (Dubey et al., 2021; Dwivedi et al., 2021;
2020; Pappas et al., 2018; Mikalef et al., 2020; Shareef et al., 2021).  Top management
support is also considered a vital challenge in the adoption of any innovative technology in an
organization (Pu et al., 2019). Top management should realize the business-oriented benefits
of  AI  and  should  mobilize  finance  and  technical  know-how  for  such  an  AI  adoption
(Alshamaila et al., 2013). Hence, strong leadership support is considered to moderate such
adoption  issues.  It  is  known  that  the  adoption  of  any  technology  in  the  context  of
socioenvironmental  and  technological  aspects can  be  easily  interpreted  in  terms  of  the
technology-organizational-environment  (TOE) framework (Hossain & Kuaddus, 2011) , as it
has been successful in explaining  the adoption of e-commerce and cloud computing (Idris,
2015; Yang et al., 2015). As such, this framework has been used to identify the factors
affecting the adoption of AI in organizations in the context of the current research.
As already stated, there are studies that have emphasized that the use of Industry 4.0 could
improve the business strategy of a manufacturing and production firm. However, how the
business  strategy  of  manufacturing  and  production  firms  could  be  improved  by  the
application of AI from a socioenvironmental  perspective is still not clear , and this aspect has
been underexplored (Hofmann & Rush, 2017; Jabbour et al., 2019; Baryannis et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020).  In addition, how organizations  can become ready  to utilize the best
potential of AI has not been studied exhaustively. Moreover, there are a few studies on how
organizational leadership support can facilitate the adoption of innovative technologies, such
as AI, in manufacturing and production firms, which has not been investigated in an explicit
manner (Pu et al., 2019).  Hence, in this context, this study aims to address the following
objectives:
[1] To identify the antecedents of AI adoption in manufacturing and production organizations
in the digital environment in the context of an extended TOE framework.
[2]  To  ascertain  the  readiness  of  organizations  to  adopt  AI  in  the  context  of  social,
technological, and environmental perspectives.
[3] To determine how leadership support moderates the adoption of AI in organizations.
3