losing advantages (Aboelmaged, 2014). The competitive pressure for acquiring a competitive
advantage acts as an important factor for the diffusion of an innovative technology (Yang et
al., 2015). Since AI is able to create new opportunities and to spur innovation, the adoption of
AI in an organization is considered to gain the highest competitive advantage (Gartner, 2017;
Fast & Horvitz, 2017).
Gaining a competitive  advantage over other contemporary organizations  will impact the
employees of that organization, as they feel complacent when possessing an advantageous
position (Press, 2016). Thus, competitive advantage has a socioenvironmental aspect that is
developed by organizations through the use of AI embedded technology (Makridakis, 2017).
The use of AI-enabled technology means the use of machine learning, deep learning, natural
language processing, and so on in organizations. The use of these technologies will help
organizations  gain  competitive  advantages  (Curran  &  Pureel,  2017).  Properly  trained
employees will then perceive the usefulness of this technology and perceive the technology to
be easy to use. The above discussion helps to formulate the following hypotheses:
H5a: Having a competitive advantage has a positive impact on perceived usefulness.
H5b: Having a competitive advantage has a positive impact on perceived ease of use.
2.2.6 Partner support (PSU)
The potentialities of any innovation cannot be achieved without collaborative support (Haans
et al., 2016). In the context of the knowledge-based view, researchers believe that apart from
financial support, partner support acts as an external agent to help an organization develop
the knowledge repository of employees. It helps to adopt any cutting-age technology, such as
Industry 4.0 (here AI) (Zheng et al., 2015). Partner support is external and helps to generate
the  innovation  performance  of  an  organization  through  knowledge  exchange  (Koka  &
Prescott, 2002). The knowledge development of employees through their own and through
the help of inputs from partners of the organization would help in the easy adoption of AI
embedded  technology,  and  the  knowledge  gained  would  help  employees  realize  the
usefulness  of  AI  applications  in  organizations  (Asgari  et  al.,  2017).  The  knowledge
assimilated by employees would also help them to use AI, increasing its perceived ease of
use. Such an achievement may be deemed to be the contribution of partner support, as
partners provide supplemental support to develop the knowledge of employees (Hottenrott &
Lopes-Bento,  2016).  The  above  discussions  lead  to  the  formulation  of  the  following
hypotheses:
H6a: Partners’ support positively influences perceived usefulness.
10