Thus, in brief, it is expected that a survey that considers more respondents would have
projected a general picture, and in that case, the authors presume that Hypothesis H4b would
instead be supported. Competitive advantage has significant effects on perceived usefulness
and perceived ease of use in supporting Hypotheses H5a and H5b. This result has received
support  from  earlier  studies  (Curran  &  Purcel,  2017),  which  find  that  the  use  of  AI
technology  means  the  use  of  ML,  NLG  and  DL  in  an  organization  and  use  of  these
techniques would provide a competitive advantage to the organization compared to those
organizations where these are not used.
Partner support has a significant and positive impact on perceived usefulness, and as such,
Hypothesis H6a is supported. This is in agreement with earlier studies (Haans et al., 2016),
which highlight that partner support would be helpful for sharing knowledge in addition to
financial support, and this would enrich the ability of employees to adopt any innovative
technology. However, partner support does not support Hypothesis H6b since the validation
shows that partner support has a nonsignificant impact on PEOU (H6b), which contradicts the
outcomes of other studies (Koka & Prescott, 2002). This is presumably because, through
partner support, organizations may obtain financial help and can acquire knowledge through
the sharing of knowledge, but other external conditions might not be conducive to easily
using new systems despite the employees having sufficient knowledge of the technology .
The study has highlighted that perceived ease of use positively impacts perceived usefulness
(H7), and intention to adopt AI (H8) and perceived usefulness impact the intention to adopt
AI (H9). All these findings conform with the concept of TAM (Davis, 1989). The study
considered leadership support as a moderator impacting linkages H8 and H9. We considered
the effect of weak leadership support and strong leadership support. The study synthesized
the effects of this moderator quantitatively by using the MGA process and noticed that in the
two  contexts  (weak  and  strong  leadership  support),  the  use  of  the  moderator  achieved
considerable significance. The moderator effects were shown through two groups considering
the effects of the intention to adopt AI against the perceived ease of use linkage by weak and
strong leadership support (see Figure 4) and intention to adopt AI against the perceived
usefulness linkage by weak and strong leadership support (see Figure 5).
20