(OCM) existing legacy system with AI.
Maduka et al. 
2018OCM2:  Having  specialized  technological  resources  at  the
organization  level  is  important  for  the  smooth  adoption  of  AI
technology.
OCM3: We have experts in the AI domain in our organization.
OCM4: Organizations with trained manpower in the AI domain
will obtain competitive advantages.
Organizational 
Complexity (OCX)Sonnenwald et 
al. 2001OCX1: Using AI technology is more flexible for manufacturing
and production than the existing legacy system.
Idris 2015OCX2: AI technology for manufacturing and production can be
risky,  as  most  of  the  processes  are  automated  and  technology
dependent.
Parveen and 
Sulaiman 2008OCX3: Integrating AI technology with the existing legacy system
is a difficult task for our organization.
OCX4: Resistance to change is high regarding migrating from the
legacy  system  to  an  AI  based  manufacturing  and  production
system.
Organizational 
Readiness (ORE)Iacovou et al. 
1995ORE1: The AI based manufacturing and production technology
procedure is easily understandable to me.
Aboelmaged 
2014ORE2: I have all the readiness resources for learning the AI based
manufacturing and production system in my firm.
Idris 2015ORE3: We have different ways (virtual, in person, etc.) of training
in our organization.
ORE4: It is easy for me to learn AI technology.
Organizational 
Compatibility 
(OCO)Peng et al. 2012OCO1: We have a good plan to integrate AI technology with the
existing legacy system in our organization.
Geczy et al. 
2012OCO2: Our partner helps us to integrate AI technology into the
existing legacy system.
OCO3:  AI  technology  is  compatible  with  the  existing  legacy
system for production and manufacturing in our firm.
OCO4: Customization is easier for AI based manufacturing and
production systems.
Competitive 
Advantage (COA)Rogers 2003COA1: I am aware that an AI based manufacturing and production
system is being implemented by a few of our competitors.
Yang 2015COA2: I understand that by using an AI based manufacturing and
production system, my firm will have a competitive advantage.
Makridakis 
2017COA3: I believe that an AI based manufacturing and production
system is necessary for sustaining our industry.
COA4: I am aware that many firms are moving towards AI based
manufacturing and production systems.
Partner Support 
(PSA)Zheng et al. 
2015PSA1:  I  believe  that  partner  support  is  essential  during  the
migration process from an existing legacy system to an AI based
manufacturing and production system.
Haans et al. 
2016PSA2: Excellent partner support makes things easier to adopt.
PSA3: Partner support is essential for solving any technical issue
quickly.
PSA4:  I  believe  that  partner  support  is  cost  effective  for  our
organization.
Perceived 
Usefulness (PU)Davis, 1989PU1: I agree that using an AI based manufacturing and production
system makes our firm more efficient.
Lee et al. 2003PU2: I believe that the use of an AI based manufacturing  and
production system increases productivity in our organization.
PU3: I can achieve things in a quicker way using an AI based
manufacturing and production system.
PU4: AI based systems reduce production costs.
Perceived Ease Of 
Use (PEOU)Lee et al. 2003PEOU1:  The  process  of  using  an  AI  based  system  is  easily
understandable by me.
34