For the data collection, a purposeful sample was used for the selection of the respondents.
Top- and middle-level professionals of IT and other companies where AI is being adopted or
contemplated  were  targeted.  Practically,  we  targeted  manufacturing  and  production
organizations  from  the  (official)  database  of  the  Bombay  Chamber  of  Commerce  and
Industry (India). Telephone calls and emails were chosen as the medium to contact the top-
level and mid-level  IT professionals  of the manufacturing  and production organizations.
Initially,  we  targeted  800  organizations.  Through  telephone  and  email  contact,  it  was
ascertained that 562 organizations were interested in adopting or were in the process of
adopting AI technology. Among these 562 organizations, we were able to gather contact
information for 857 respondents. We emailed them with a set of 36 questions to gain their
feedback. The prospective respondents were informed that the aim of this study was purely
academic.  They were assured that their  anonymity and confidentiality  would be strictly
preserved. A guideline was also provided to them explaining how to fill in the response sheet.
All these initiatives were taken to enhance the response rate (Chidlow et al., 2015).  They
were asked to respond within 30 days from the date of receipt of the email. During this time
window, 391 responses were received, which was a response rate of 45.6%. To analyse the
nonresponse bias, the  recommendations of Armstrong and Overtone (1977) were followed.
Chi-square tests and independent sample t- tests were conducted by considering the first and
last 100 responses. From the analysis, no mentionable differences between these two groups
were found (p<0.05). This confirms that no non-response bias is present. All 391 responses
were scrutinized. Out of the 391 replies, 51 were found to be incomplete and, hence, were
discarded from further analysis. We started our analysis with 340 usable and valid replies.
The details of these 340 respondents are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Demographic Profile
CategoryCriterion of Category Number of Respondents
SmallNumber of Employees ≤ 350 79
Medium350 < Number of Employees ≤ 800 117
LargeNumber of Employees > 800 144
3.3 Data analysis technique
We used a partial least squares (PLS)-based structural equation modelling (SEM) technique
to analyse the data. This technique has been adopted because this process gives better results
in the analysis of this type of exploratory study (Aktar and Pangil, 2017). This process can
also analyse those data that are not normally distributed (Hair et al., 2018). This technique
13