H9: Perceived usefulness has a positive impact on intention to adopt AI.
2.2.8 Effects of leadership support as a moderator
Leadership support (LS) is associated with the sincere engagement of a higher ranking leader
in the implementation of the new system, which would affect the relation between perceived
usefulness and intention, as well as the perceived ease of use and intention (Ifinedo, 2011).
Leadership  commitment  is  considered  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  adoption  of
innovative technology (Yang et al., 2015). As an example, in the context of the research on
information  science,  leadership  support  was  considered  important  for  promoting  cloud
computing adoption, as well as the adoption of electronic business (Yang et al., 2015). In this
study, we considered LS as a variable moderating the two linkages covering H8 (PEOU to
IAA) and H9 (PU to IAA). In terms of the above discussions, the following hypotheses are
developed:
H10a:  Leadership  support  moderates  the  linkage  between  perceived  usefulness  and  the
intention to adopt AI.
H10b: Leadership support moderates the linkage between perceived ease of use and the
intention to adopt AI.
3. Research Methodology
3.1 Research instrument
The conceptual model and the hypotheses were validated through quantitative studies by
conducting surveys. For this, it was essential to prepare a questionnaire. From the literature
survey and theory, constructs have been identified. The questionnaire was created using all
the items representing the constructs selected for the proposed research model. The meaning
and  contexts  of  the  questions  were  designed  to  represent  the  measures  for  all  given
constructs, which were tested in the pretesting phase of questionnaire development. The
questionnaire was first reviewed by academic experts who were experienced in the area of
AI. Then, the questionnaire was again piloted with the help of IT experts to ensure that the
respondents would be able to understand the measures and provide appropriate responses to
the questions. A total of 36 items concerning all the relevant constructs were designed as part
of questionnaire in which the responses were answered. We used a 5-point Likert scale for
the measures used for constructs for the purpose of data collection , with ‘1’  representing
‘strongly disagree’  and ‘5’  representing ‘strongly agree’.  The measurement instrument is
shown in Table 1 (see Appendix A).
3.2 Data collection strategy
12