Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 10 of 32
it has been made available for microcontrollers. TFLite Micro supports a wide range
of operations [ 41], enabling the deployment of a variety of deep neural networks such
as multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks including residual neural
networks. Deep neural networks are developed and trained using TensorFlow/Keras,
and can then be deployed semi-automatically onto a microcontroller.
TFLite Micro is intended to be generic enough to be deployed on any kind of 32-bit
microcontroller. The inference library is therefore portable, but it also means there is
no integration with speciﬁc microcontroller families and vendor tools. The trained deep
neural network (topology and weights) can indeed be automatically converted to a format
understandable by the inference library, but there are no tools to generate and deploy
the application code. Moreover, application test must be written by hand. Nevertheless,
a template source code for a few development boards (e.g., the SparkFun Edge) as well
as a few demo applications (e.g., keyword spotting) are available. Finally, TFLite Micro
does not come with tools to measure metrics such as the inference time or the RAM and
ROM usage.
TFLite Micro supports computation on both ﬂoating-point in binary32 format and
ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers. The quantization technique uses a non-power of two scale
factor, a symmetric range for weights and an asymmetric range for the activations. Biases
are quantized on 32-bit integers. Convolution operations can make use of per-ﬁlter scale
factor and offset, while other operations use per-tensor (i.e., per-layer) scale factor and
offset [42,43]. There is no support for ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers.
Inference on 8-bit integers can be accelerated using low-level optimizations pro-
vided by the CMSIS-NN [ 3] library from ARM. This library uses SIMD-like instructions
(from the ARMv7E-M instruction set architecture of Cortex-M4 cores) to perform two multi-
ply–accumulate (MACC) on 16-bit operands with a single 32-bit accumulator in one cycle.
While being entirely free/open-source, the complexity of the software architecture
makes it quite difﬁcult to manipulate and extend. This is a substantial drawback in a
research environment, and it also comes with additional overhead. The deep neural
network topology is deployed as a sort of microcode that is interpreted at runtime instead
of being statically compiled. This process makes it more difﬁcult for the compiler to
perform optimizations and causes a larger memory usage.
5.1.2. STM32Cube.AI
STM32Cube.AI is a software suite from STMicroelectronics enabling the deployment
of deep neural networks onto their STM32 family of microcontrollers. STM32Cube.AI
supports deployment of trained deep neural network models from several frameworks
including Keras and TensorFlow Lite. A wide range of operations are supported [ 44],
allowing the deployment of several deep neural network architectures such as multi-layer
perceptron and convolutional neural networks including residual neural networks.
STM32Cube.AI is a software suite fully integrated with other STMicroelectronics devel-
opment and deployment tools such as STM32CubeMX, STM32CubeIDE and
STM32CubeProgrammer. This provides a very straightforward and easy to use ﬂow.
Moreover, a test application is included to evaluate the model on target with a real test
dataset, providing metrics on inference time, ROM and RAM usage, without having to
write a single line of code.
Like TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI supports computations on ﬂoating-point in binary32
format and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers. In fact, the quantization on 8-bit integers comes
from TFLite. There is no support for ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers.
STM32Cube.AI also has an optimized inference engine that seems to be partially based
on CMSIS-NN. However, as the source code of the inference engine is not freely available,
it is not clear what is optimized and how.
The inference library is entirely proprietary/closed-source, therefore it is not possible
to manipulate and extend this library. This represents a major drawback in a research
environment. It is also not possible to use STM32Cube.AI on microcontrollers which are not