Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 27 of 32
Then, if the conﬁdence is too low, inference is done using a larger deep neural network
to reduce the confusion of the classiﬁcation task. This technique allows a fast inference
response time for most inputs, thus lowering the power consumption. In fact, it has
been shown that only a small set of inputs are difﬁcult to classify and so require running
the bigger deep neural network. However, this approach does not lower the memory
footprint. Other techniques such as pruning can also be used to obtain a smaller deep
neural network while keeping the same accuracy. When structured pruning [ 59] is used for
instance, the entire ﬁlters are completely removed from the convolutional neural network
model. This would reduce both the memory footprint and the power consumption. Finally,
other optimizations techniques also consider new neural network architectures. One can
cite for example the recently published MCUNet [ 2] framework with its TinyNAS tool that
intends to identify a neural network model that performs well on the target.
Future works will also be dedicated to the deployment of neural network architectures
on FPGA using High-Level Synthesis tool such as Vivado. In fact, a feasibility study has
already been performed and has shown that our framework can be used for a deployment
on FPGA as well. Moreover, work is in progress to natively support automatic PyTorch
deployment. To do so, the features provided by the torch.fx module of the newly released
PyTorch 1.8.0 is used.
Finally, we are currently working on a real application of our framework that consists
in integrating artiﬁcial intelligence into smart glasses [ 60] to perform human activity
recognition in the context of elder care among other tasks. Preliminar results have been
published in [6].
Author Contributions: Investigation, P .-E.N.; methodology, P .-E.N. and G.B.H.; software, P .-E.N. and
G.B.H.; supervision, A.P ., B.M. and V .G.; writing—original draft preparation, P .-E.N.; writing—review
and editing, G.B.H., A.P ., B.M., V .G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
Funding: This research is funded by “Université Côte d’Azur”, “CNRS”, “Région Sud Provence-
Alpes-Côte d’Azur, France” and “Ellcie Healthy”.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.
Appendix A. Comparison of Inference Time between a Microcontroller, a CPU and
a GPU
Table A1. Microcontroller (STM32L452RE), CPU (Intel Core i7-8850H) and GPU (NVidia Quadro
P2000M) platforms. Power consumption ﬁgures for GPU and CPU are the TDP values from the
manufacturer and do not reﬂect the exact power consumption of the device.
Platform Model Framework Power Consumption
MCU STM32L452RE STM32Cube.AI 0.016 W
CPU Intel Core i7-8850H TensorFlow 45 W
GPU NVidia Quadro P2000M TensorFlow 50 W