Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 9 of 32
QuantizeInputs
(Previous layer outputs)Weights Bias
Layer operation (Convolution, FC…)
Outputs
(Next layer inputs)Quantize
Update scale factorUpdate scale factor Update scale factorLayer parameters
Quantized forward pass Non-quantized backward passif training:
if training:
Skipped during inferenceQuantize
Figure 2. Quantization-Aware Training.
In case of a convolutional neural network, the convolutional and fully connected
layers require a quantization-aware training for the weights. Please note that batch normal-
ization layers also require quantization-aware training. However, as we do not use batch
normalization in our experiments, it has not been implemented. Concerning max-pooling
layers, nothing must be trained with quantization as they do not have weights. Moreover,
as max-pooling only consists of an element-wise max, there is no need to quantize: inputs
are already quantized from the previous layer and the dynamic range cannot be expanded.
Actually, max-pooling can only shrink data without the possibility to recover an already
lost precision. Therefore, no quantization is done on the max-pooling layers. It is similar
for the ReLU activation which is considered to be a separate layer. On the other hand,
the element-wise addition layer requires quantization. It does not have trainable weights;
however, the dynamic range of the output can increase after adding two large numbers.
Therefore, the same quantization process is applied to compute the output scale factor.
5. Deployment of Quantized Neural Network
After the network has been trained and optionally quantized, it is deployed onto a
microcontroller to perform the inference on the target platform. Deployment involves the
following phases:
• exporting the weights of the deep neural network and encoding them into a format
suitable for on-target inference,
• generating the inference program according to the topology of the deep neural network,
• compiling the inference program,
• and then uploading the inference program with the weights onto the microcon-
troller’s ROM.
5.1. Existing Embedded AI Frameworks
Several embedded AI frameworks are already available. Among them, the most popu-
lar ones are TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers [ 39] and STM32Cube.AI [ 40]. Other frame-
works stemming from research projects also exist and are discussed in the following.
5.1.1. TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers (or TFLite Micro) is a project derived from
TensorFlow Lite. Originally focused on deep neural network deployment on smartphones,