Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 2 of 32
devices such as a microcontroller used in Internet of Things (IoT) devices or wearables is a
challenging task [2–4].
These devices have indeed only a very small amount of memory, often less than
1 MiB. They also run DNN algorithms several orders of magnitude slower than GPUs
or even CPUs (see Appendix A). The reason is that microcontrollers generally rely on a
general-purpose processing core that does not implement parallelism techniques such as
thread-level parallelism or advanced vectorization. Moreover, microcontrollers typically
run at a much lower frequency than GPU (8 MHz to 80 MHz compared to 1 GHz to
2 GHz). Microcontrollers can also be coupled with tiny battery cells. In some cases, for
example when data are collected in remote areas, they cannot even be recharged in the
ﬁeld. Therefore, performing inference at the edge faces major issues in terms of real-
time constraint, power consumption and memory footprint. To meet these embedded
constraints, the deployment of a DNN must respect an upper bound for one inference
response time as well as an upper bound for the number of parameters of the network.
As a result, a DNN must be limited in width and depth to be deployed on a micro-
controller. As it has been observed many times so far, deeper and/or wider networks are
often able to solve more complex tasks with better accuracy [ 5]. As such, there is always
a trade-off between memory footprint, response time, power consumption and accuracy
of the model. In a previous work [ 6], we already presented a trade-off between memory
footprint, power consumption and accuracy when performing HAR onto smart glasses.
This work has shown that HAR is feasible in real time on a low-power Cortex-M4F-based
microcontroller. However, we also concluded that there was room for memory footprint
and power consumption improvement.
A technique that can provide a signiﬁcant decrease of the memory footprint is based
on network quantization. Quantization consists of reducing the number of bits used to
encode each weight of the model, so that the total memory footprint is reduced by the same
factor. Quantization also enables the use of ﬁxed-point rather than ﬂoating-point encoding.
In other words, operations can be performed using integer rather than ﬂoating-point data
types. This is something interesting as integer operations require much less computations
on most processor cores, including microcontrollers. Without a Floating-Point Unit (FPU),
ﬂoating-point instructions must be emulated in software, thus creating a large overhead as
it has been illustrated in [ 7]. In this study, a comparison between software, hardware and
hybrid custom FPU implementation is provided.
In this paper, we present a framework, called MicroAI, to perform end-to-end training,
quantization and deployment of deep neural networks on microcontrollers. The training
phase relies on well-known TensorFlow and PyTorch deep learning frameworks. Our ob-
jective is to provide a framework easy to adapt and extend, while maintaining a good
compromise between accuracy, energy efﬁciency and memory footprint.
As a second contribution we provide some comparative results using two different
microcontrollers (STM32L452RE and Ambiq Apollo3) and three different inference engines
(TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers, STM32Cube.AI and our own MicroAI). Results are
compared in terms of memory footprint, inference time and power efﬁciency. Finally,
we propose to apply 8-bit and 16-bit quantization methods on three datasets dealing with
different modalities: acceleration and angular velocity from body-worn sensors for UCI-
HAR, speech for Spoken MNIST and images for GTSRB. These datasets are light enough to
be handled by a deep neural network running on a microcontroller, but still relevant for
applications relying on embedded artiﬁcial intelligence.
Section 2 presents the challenges of running deep neural networks on microcontrollers
and recent advances in this ﬁeld. Section 3 describes the two common ways of repre-
senting real numbers on modern computers: ﬂoating-point and ﬁxed-point. Section 4
presents the methodology implemented in our MicroAI framework for deep neural net-
works quantization. Section 5 details our MicroAI framework and compares it to existing
solutions. In Section 6, some comparative results between our framework MicroAI and
two popular embedded neural network frameworks (TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers