Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 25 of 32
This amount of energy is similar to the one obtained with TensorFlow Lite for Microcon-
trollers on the SparkFun Edge board when performing floating-point inference.
7. Discussion
First, a high variance can be observed when we compare the accuracy results obtained
on the three datasets versus the model size. This variability makes it difﬁcult to draw any
deﬁnitive conclusions. However, there is a trend in our results that allows getting some
insights of the performance for each experiment.
As has been shown, execution using ﬁxed-point on 8-bit and 16-bit integers provide
a signiﬁcant decrease of the inference time, thus reducing as well the average power
consumption. As power consumption is a key parameter in embedded systems, having a
lower inference time is interesting as it is possible either to reduce the microcontroller’s
operating frequency or to put the microcontroller in sleep mode for a longer period between
two inferences. Additionally, execution using 8-bit and 16-bit integers also provide a
signiﬁcant reduction in memory footprint. The required memory for the model parameters
is divided by 4 and 2 for for 8-bit and 16-bit quantization, respectively. It is worth noticing
that the RAM usage, which is not illustrated here, is also reduced.
Our results also show that performing inference using quantization for ﬁxed-point
on 16-bit integers does not lead to an accuracy drop whatever the considered test case.
Moreover, inference using 16-bit does not require quantization-aware training to achieve
such results. As both the power consumption and the memory footprint can be decreased,
ﬁxed-point quantization on 16-bit integers can therefore always be preferred to a 32-bit
ﬂoating-point inference.
On the other hand, 8-bit quantization does not provide a substantial improvement over
16-bit quantization. Moreover, 8-bit quantization requires performing a quantization-aware
training to even achieve the obtained results. It is worth noting that quantization-aware
training for 8-bit quantization introduces more variance in the results over the baseline,
and is also more sensitive to a change in the training parameters. As it is quite difﬁcult to
achieve a stable training, it is preferable to use an optimizer such as SGD with conservative
parameters, instead of optimizers such as Adam or RAdam, to reduce the variance of the
results, even though it means achieving a lower maximum accuracy.
During our experiments, it has also been observed that the 8-bit Post-Training Quanti-
zation of TensorFlow Lite achieves better results compared to the 8-bit Quantization-Aware
Training provided by our framework. This is likely due to the combination of per-ﬁlter
quantization, asymmetric range, non-power of two scale factor as well as optimizations
of TensorFlow Lite to avoid unnecessary truncation, therefore loss of precision. We also
observed that using 9-bit instead of 8-bit during the Post-Training Quantization allows us
to outperform the TensorFlow Lite quantization performance. Some results showing this
improvement are available in Appendix B for the UCI-HAR dataset. From these results, we
can conclude that the slight additional precision brought by the combination of per-ﬁlter
quantization, asymmetric range and non-power of two scale factor does in fact matter.
Implementing these methods in our framework seems therefore required to reduce the
accuracy loss of our 8-bit quantization.
Another beneﬁt of 8-bit quantization is that SIMD instructions can be used (with some
classes of microcontrollers) to improve the inference time and then further reduce the
power consumption. Such instructions allow performing in a single cycle either 2 mul-
tiply–accumulate with common accumulator of 16-bit operand ( SMLAD ), or 2 additions
of16-bit operand ( QADD16 ), or shift and saturation in ( SSAT ). In the case of inference
using 16-bit integers, it is not always possible to make use of such instructions since in-
termediate results must be stored in 32-bit and some of these instructions require 16-bit
operands. The SMLAD ,QADD16 and SSAT instructions are not yet used in our framework,
but it is a work on progress. Nonetheless, a 16-bit quantization scheme can be used with
our framework, which is not the case with either TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers or
STM32Cube.AI. The 16-bit quantization from our framework provides a good compromise