Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 15 of 32
inference function is generated from a Jinja2 [ 51] template ﬁle using the layer’s conﬁgura-
tion. Similarly, the layer’s weights are converted into a C array from a Jinja2 template ﬁle.
Code generation is used to avoid runtime overhead of an interpreter such as the one used
in TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers. Additionally, it allows the compiler to perform
better optimizations. Indeed, the layer’s conﬁguration is generated as constants or literals
in the code, allowing the compiler to perform appropriate optimizations such as loop
unrolling, using immediates when relevant and doing better register allocation. By default,
GCC’s -Ofast optimization level is enabled. Moreover, the code is written in a simple and
straightforward way. So far, no special effort has been made to further optimize the source
code for faster execution.
The allocator module aims at saving the RAM usage. To do so, it allocates the layer’s
output buffers in the smallest number of pools without conﬂicts. For each layer of the
model, its output buffer is allocated to the ﬁrst pool that satisﬁes two conditions: it must
neither overwrite its input, nor the output of a layer that has not already been consumed.
If there is no such available pool, a new one is created. It is worth noting that the allocator
module does not yet try to optimize the allocation to minimize the size of each pool (this is
a harder problem to solve). In consequence, the total RAM usage is not optimized.
Finally, the main function cnn(...) is generated. This function only contains the
allocation of the buffers done by the allocator module and a sequence of calls to each of the
layers’ inference function. The correct input and output buffers are passed to each layer
according to the graph of the model.
5.8. KerasCNN2C: Quantization and Fixed-Point Computation
The post-training quantization is performed by the quantization module itself. The scale
factor for each layer is found according to the method in Section 4.1.4, but it can also
be speciﬁed manually for the whole network. The ﬁxed-point coding used for all the
weights is computed according to this method as well, and the data type is converted
from float to an integer data type, such as int8_t for 8-bit quantization or int16_t for
16 bits quantization.
When doing quantization-aware training, the scale factors are found during the
training phase (also according to the method in Section 4.1.4 as previously explained).
Therefore, the quantization module reuses them. However, the weights are still in ﬂoating-
point representation since the training phase only relies on ﬂoating-point computation.
In consequence, the quantization module must perform a data type conversion similar to
the one performed for post-training quantization.
Once the model is deployed and running on the target, the ﬁxed-point computation
can be done using a regular integer arithmetic and logic unit. The data type for the
input and output of a layer is the same as the one used to store the weights. To avoid
overﬂows, computation is done using a data type twice the width of the operands’ data type.
For example, if the data type of the weights and inputs is int16_t , then the intermediate
results in a layer are computed and stored with an int32_t data type. The result is then
scaled back to the correct output scale factor before saturating and converting it back to the
original operands’ data type.
Before performing an addition or a subtraction, operands must be represented with
the same number of integer and fractional bits. It is not required for the multiplication,
but the result’s number of bits allocated for the fractional part is the sum of the number of
bits for the fractional part of both operands. Therefore, after a multiplication, the result
must be scaled to the required format by shifting the result to the right by the appropriate
number of bits.
In Appendix E, the number of operations required for the main layers of a residual
neural network in our implementation are provided, along with the number of cycles
taken for these operations. Enabling compiler optimizations generates some ARMv7E-M
instructions, namely SMLABB that performs a multiply–accumulate operation in one cycle
(instead of two cycles). However, the compiler does not make use of the SSAT operation