Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 11 of 32
part of the STMicroelectronics portfolio. The inference process and optimizations are not
detailed, but unlike TFLite Micro, the network topology is compiled into a set of function
calls to the closed-source library rather than being interpreted at runtime.
5.1.3. Other Frameworks
Some other frameworks have been developed as part of research projects. These frame-
works mainly focus on “classical” machine learning (SVM, Decision Tree . . . ) such as
emlearn [ 45] and Micro-LM [ 46], or multi-layer perceptron such as Gravity [ 47] and FANN-
on-MCU [ 48]. These frameworks do not support convolutional neural networks with
residual connections. At the time of this work, microTVM seems less mature and popular
than TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI. It is, therefore, not studied
in this work.
5.2. MicroAI: Our Framework Proposition
As mentioned above, existing tools for quantized neural networks have some draw-
backs that motivated the development of our own framework. This framework addresses
the following issues:
• open-source frameworks do not support convolutional neural networks with non-
sequential topologies,
• frameworks that support convolutional neural networks are proprietary or too com-
plex to be modiﬁed and extended easily,
• frameworks do not provide 16-bit quantization,
• some frameworks are dedicated to a limited family of hardware targets.
In this work, we aim at providing a framework, easy to extend and modify, that
allows for a complete pipeline from the neural network training to the deployment and
evaluation on the microcontroller. Additionally, this framework must provide a lightweight
runtime on the microcontroller to reduce the overhead. Finally, our objective is to achieve
performance close to existing solutions.
Our framework, called MicroAI, is built in two parts:
1. The neural network training code that relies on Keras or PyTorch.
2. The conversion tool (called KerasCNN2C) that takes a trained Keras model and
produces a portable C code for the inference
Both parts are written in Python since it is the most popular programming language
to build deep neural networks and it easily interfaces with existing frameworks, libraries
and tools.
5.3. MicroAI: General Flow
As seen in Figure 3, MicroAI provides an interface to automatically train, deploy and
evaluate an artiﬁcial neural network model. A conﬁguration ﬁle written in TOML [ 49] is
used to describe the whole ﬂow of an experiment:
• The number of iterations for the experiment (for statistical purposes)
• The dataset to use for training and evaluation
• The preprocessing steps to apply to the dataset
• The framework used for training
• The various model conﬁgurations to train, deploy and evaluate
• The conﬁguration of the optimizer
• The post-processing steps to apply to the trained model
• The target conﬁguration for deployment and evaluation
The three main steps, training, deployment and evaluation, are described in the
following. The commands used to trigger them are available in Appendix C.