Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 22 of 32
The deep neural network used in our experiments is the residual neural network
described in Section 6. This network has been trained on the UCI-HAR dataset presented
in Section 6.1.1. Inference time is measured from 50 test vectors from the testing set of UCI-
HAR on the microcontrollers. TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers version 2.4.1 has been
used to deploy the deep neural network on the SparkFun Edge board, while STM32Cube.AI
version 5.2.0 has been used to deploy it on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board, both for the 32-bit
ﬂoating-point and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers inference. Our framework is used to deploy
the deep neural network on both platforms for 32-bit ﬂoating-point, ﬁxed-point on 16-bit
integers and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integer inference. It is worth noting that optimizations
for the Cortex-M4F provided by CMSIS-NN are enabled for both TensorFlow Lite for
Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI tools. Our framework does not make use of these
optimizations yet. The main characteristics of the frameworks are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4. Embedded AI frameworks.
Framework STM32Cube.AI TFLite Micro MicroAI
Source Keras, TFLite, . . . Keras, TFLite Keras, PyTorch *
Validation Integrated tools None Integrated tools
Metrics RAM/ROM footprint, None ROM footprint
inference time, MACC inference time
Portability STM32 only Any 32-bit MCU Any 32-bit MCU
Built-in platform STM32 boards 32F746GDiscovery, SparkFun Edge,
support (Nucleo, . . . ) SparkFun Edge, . . . Nucleo-L452-RE-P
Sources Private Public Public
Data type float ,int8_t float ,int8_t float ,int8_t ,int16_t
Quantized data Weights, activations Weights, activations Weights, activations
Quantizer Uniform (from TFlite) Uniform Uniform
Quantized coding Offset and scale Offset and scale Fixed-point Qm.n
* PyTorch models must be semi-automatically converted to Keras model prior to deployment.
To compare software and hardware platforms, only the results with 80 ﬁlters per
convolution are analyzed below. Nevertheless, results with less than 80 ﬁlters are still
available in the tables of Appendix D to highlight how fast and efﬁcient a small deep
neural network can be when deployed on a constrained embedded target. They also
highlight a higher overhead for very small neural networks especially for TensorFlow Lite
for Microcontrollers compared to our framework.
In Figure 11, we can observe that TFLite Micro has a higher overhead than
STM32Cube.AI, while MicroAI exhibits a slightly lower overhead than STM32Cube.AI.
As outlined in Table A3 of Appendix D, when the number of ﬁlters per convolution
increases, most of the ROM is used by the model’s weights.
The inference time obtained for both platforms and the different deployment tools is
illustrated in Figure 12. As can be seen, the STM32Cube.AI with the 8-bit inference provides
the best solution as it requires only 352ms for one inference. In the same conﬁguration,
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers requires 592ms for one inference. Finally, 1034 ms
and 1003 ms are required for one inference using our framework on the Nucleo-L452RE-P
board and the SparkFun Edge board, respectively.
When using ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers for the inference, our framework provides
approximately the same performance than with 8 bits. The reason is that the inference
code is the same: similar instructions are generated, and computations are still performed
using 32-bit registers. On the Nucleo-L452RE-P , we can observe that the inference time
for one input is 1223 ms, while it is only 1042 ms on the SparkFun Edge board. We guess