Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 4 of 32
A non-uniform quantization scheme was implemented in [ 28] on an FPGA device.
In this work, instead of coding the value in a ﬁxed-point format, only the nearest power of
two is coded. Using this approach, it is possible to obtain a better resolution compared to a
ﬁxed-point representation for numbers near 0. This approach also allows large values to be
represented, but at the cost of a lower resolution. The quantization step is determined by
minimizing the quantization error at the output of the layer, thus balancing the precision
and the dynamic range. As the implementation relies on bit shifts rather than on integer
multiplications, this solution has some beneﬁts in terms of resource usage and latency for
an FPGA target. Additionally, results show that there is a slight accuracy degradation
when using the proposed non-uniform quantization versus a uniform quantization.
Using lower precision computation for deep neural networks has already been ex-
plored in [ 29] where the authors compare the test error rates on various image datasets for
single precision ﬂoating-point, half-precision ﬂoating-point, 20-bit ﬁxed-point and their
own dynamic ﬁxed-point approach with 10 bits for activations and 12 bits for weights.
In their work, it is worth noting that the training is also performed using a lower precision
arithmetic. Training with ﬁxed-point arithmetic was already presented in [ 30] with 16-bit
weights and 8-bit inputs, causing an accuracy loss of a few percent in their evaluation of
text-to-speech, parity bit computation, protein structure prediction and sonar signals classi-
ﬁcation problems. In [ 31], the authors show that on an Intel ®E5640 microprocessor with
an x86 architecture, using 8-bit integer instructions instead of ﬂoating-point instructions
provides an execution speedup of more than 2, without a loss of accuracy on a speech recog-
nition problem. In this case, the training is performed using single precision ﬂoating-point
arithmetic, and the evaluation is done after the quantization of the network parameters.
These prior works were however mostly out of the scope of embedded computing on
microcontrollers. Running deep neural networks on microcontrollers started to be popular
in the last few years thanks to the rise of the Internet of Things and the improved efﬁciency
of deep neural networks.
In [32], the authors insist on the fact that the ISA (Instruction Set Architecture) of
available microcontrollers can be a great limitation to running quantized neural networks.
Indeed, most microcontroller architectures do not exhibit any kind of SIMD instructions.
On the other hand, most of these microcontrollers rely on 32-bit registers. Thus, even if
the neural network parameters and the input data use a lower precision representation,
they must be computed one by one using the register width of 32 bits. Some more advanced
microcontroller architectures offer instructions able to handle 4 ×8-bit or 2 × 16-bit data
packed in 32-bit registers. However, such advances do not allow working with intermediate
precision or sub-byte precision, and not all arithmetic and logic instructions are covered.
Intermediate or sub-byte precision requires manually packing and unpacking data, thus in-
ducing a noticeable computation overhead, even though it helps further reducing the
memory footprint.
Moreover, microcontrollers used in IoT mostly rely on ARM Cortex-M cores with
the associated ISA. However, ARM cores are not open, meaning that modifying and
extending the ISA is not possible. To overcome these limitations, the authors in [ 32]
proposed an extension to the RISC-V ISA, which is open, with instructions to handle
sub-byte quantization. Unfortunately, as microcontrollers implementing RISC-V are still
scarce on the market, and not readily available with the proposed extension, this approach
cannot be reasonably used to deploy IoT devices since it requires manufacturing a custom
microcontroller. Manufacturing a custom microcontroller is not feasible when the goal
is to release an IoT product on the market due to large costs, time and the required level
of expertise. As a result, only off-the-shelf microcontrollers are considered in this work.
Only 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit precision will therefore be studied.
Deep neural networks have already been deployed on 8-bit microcontrollers. One of
the ﬁrst method was proposed in [ 33]. Although interesting, this method requires a lot
of work to implement pseudo-ﬂoating-point coding, a custom multiplication algorithm
over 16 bits, as well as a hyperbolic tangent approximation for the activation function,