Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 13 of 32
Once the model is trained, some post-processing can be applied. It is for instance
possible to remove the SoftMax layer for Keras models with the RemoveKerasSoftmax
module. This layer is indeed useless when only inference is performed.
Even though it also performs model training, Quantization-aware training described in
Section 4.3 is also included for PyTorch as a post-processing step in the
QuantizationAwareTraining module. The actual training step before post-processing
is seen as a general training, before optionally performing post-training quantization
or quantization-aware training. The quantization-aware training can be seen as a ﬁne-
tuning on top of the more general training (which can also be skipped if necessary).
The quantization-aware training does not actually convert the weights from a ﬂoating-
point data type to an integer data type with ﬁxed-point representation. This conversion is
rather performed by the KerasCNN2C conversion tool or another deployment tool.
Support for additional learning frameworks can be added by creating a new class imple-
menting the LearningFramework interface and by supplying compatible model templates.
5.5. MicroAI: Deployment
MicroAI can deploy a trained model to perform inference on a target using either
STM32Cube.AI, TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers or our own tool, KerasCNN2C.
STM32Cube.AI can be used for STM32 platforms, support for the Nucleo-L452RE-P
with an STM32L452RE microcontroller is included. Support for other platforms using
a STM32 microcontroller can be added by providing a sample STM32CubeIDE project
including the X-CUBE-AI package. STM32Cube.AI does not support microcontrollers
outside the STM32 family.
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers is a portable library that can be included in any
project. Therefore, it could be used for any 32-bit microcontroller. However only integration
with the SparkFun Edge platform with an Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller is included in
our framework so far.
Similarly, KerasCNN2C produces a portable library that can be included in any project.
So far, only integration with the Nucleo-L452RE-P and the SparkFun Edge boards has
been performed. Support for other platforms can be added by providing project ﬁles
calling the inference code and a module interfacing with the build and deployment tools
for that platform.
Please note that none of these tools can take a PyTorch trained model as an input to
deploy onto a microcontroller. The PyTorch trained model must therefore be converted to a
Keras model prior to the deployment. Our framework provides a module to perform semi-
automatic conversion from a PyTorch model to a Keras model. A Keras model that matches
the structure of the PyTorch model must be programmed and the matching between the
PyTorch model and Keras model layer names also must be speciﬁed. The semi-automatic
conversion module can then automatically copy the weights from the PyTorch model to
the Keras model and export it for use by one of the deployment tool.
5.6. KerasCNN2C: Conversion Tool from Trained Keras Model to Portable C Code
KerasCNN2C is a tool that we developed to automatically generate, from a trained
Keras model exported as an HDF5 ﬁle, a C library for the inference. It can also be used
independently of the MicroAI framework.
In this work, only 1D models are evaluated on target. Work is underway for full
support of 2D models deployment. Training and quantization are already supported,
therefore 2D models are evaluated ofﬂine. Here are the supported layers so far:
• Add
• AveragePooling1D
• BatchNormalization
• Conv1D
• Dense
• Flatten