Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 12 of 32
Data acquisition and windowing
float32 Training
int16 Post-training quantization
int8 Quantization-aware training with PyTorch
PyTorch to Keras model conversion
C inference code generation from Keras model
Deployment on microcontroller
Evaluation on microcontroller
Figure 3. MicroAI general ﬂow for neural network quantization and evaluation on embedded target.
5.4. MicroAI: Training
For the training phase, MicroAI is simply a wrapper around Keras or PyTorch.
A dataset requires an importation module to be loaded into an appropriate data model.
The training process expects a RawDataModel instance, which gathers the train and test
sets. This instance contains numpy arrays for the data and the labels. A higher-level data
model HARDataModel is also available for Human Activity Recognition to process subjects
and activities more easily. This model is then converted to a RawDataModel using the
DatamodelConverter in the preprocessing phase. The preprocessing phase also includes
features such as normalization. Dataset importation module for UCI-HAR, SMNIST and
GTSRB (described in Section 6) are included and can be easily extended to new datasets.
To make use of a deep neural network architecture in the model conﬁguration, it must
be ﬁrst described according to the training framework API in use. The description of
the model is a template where parameters can be set by the user in the conﬁguration ﬁle.
MicroAI provides the following neural network architectures for both Keras and PyTorch:
• MLP: a simple multi-layer perceptron with conﬁgurable number of layers and neurons
per layer.
• CNN: a 1D or 2D convolutional neural network with conﬁgurable number of layers,
ﬁlters per layer, kernels and pools size, and number of neurons per fully connected
layer for the classiﬁer
• ResNet: a 1D or 2D residual neural network (v1) with convolutional layers. The num-
ber of blocks and ﬁlters per layer, stride, kernel size, and optional BatchNorm can be
conﬁgured.
All architectures use ReLU activation units.
In the conﬁguration ﬁle, several model settings can be described, each inside their
own [[model]] block. Each model will be trained sequentially. A common conﬁguration
for all the models can be speciﬁed in a [model_template] block. Model conﬁguration
also includes optimizer conﬁguration and other parameters such as the batch size and the
number of epochs.