Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 26 of 32
between accuracy, inference time and memory footprint without requiring additional work
on quantization-aware training as presented in the previous results.
The results obtained on inference time clearly show that both the software and the
hardware platforms have a substantial impact on energy efﬁciency. STM32Cube.AI offers
the most optimized inference engine in terms of execution time, both in ﬂoating-point
and ﬁxed-point on integers. Our results show that TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
is slower than STM32Cube.AI in both conditions. For the ﬂoating-point inference, our
framework is in between these two software platforms as it is only slightly slower than
STM32Cube.AI. However, as optimizations using SIMD instructions have not been imple-
mented yet in our framework, inference using 8-bit integers still provides lower perfor-
mance than TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI.
Regardless of the software performance, running STM32Cube.AI on a Nucleo-L452RE-
P board is only competitive with inference using 8-bit integers when compared to Tensor-
Flow Lite for Microcontrollers in 32-bit floating-point inference on the SparkFun Edge board.
The reason is that the Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller on the SparkFun Edge board is much
more energy efficient. In all remaining cases, running TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
or our framework on the SparkFun Edge board provides much better energy efficiency
figures than running STM32Cube.AI or our framework on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board.
8. Conclusions
In this work, we presented a framework to perform quantization and then deployment
of deep neural networks on microcontrollers. This framework represents an alternative to
the STM32Cube.AI proprietary solution or TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers, an open-
source but complex environment. Inference time and energy efﬁciency measured on two
different embedded platforms demonstrated that our framework is a viable alternative to
the aforementioned solutions to perform inference of deep neural networks. Our frame-
work also introduces a ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers post-training quantization which is
not available with the two other frameworks. We have shown that this 16-bit ﬁxed-point
quantization provides an improvement over a 32-bit ﬂoating-point inference, while being
competitive with ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers quantization-aware training. It provides
a reduced inference time compared to ﬂoating-point inference. Moreover, the memory
footprint is dived by two while keeping the same accuracy. The 8-bit quantization provides
further improvements in inference time and memory footprint but at the cost of a slight
accuracy decrease and a more complex implementation.
Work is still in progress to implement some optimizations techniques for ﬁxed-point
on 8-bit integers inference. Three optimizations are especially targeted: per-ﬁlter quanti-
zation, asymmetric range and non-power of two scale factor. On top of that, using SIMD
instructions in the inference engine should help further decreasing inference time. These
optimizations would therefore make our framework more competitive in terms of inference
time and accuracy. Another possible improvement for ﬁxed-point on integers inference
consists of using 8-bit quantization for weights and 16-bit quantization for activations. Ten-
sorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers is currently in the process of implementing this technique.
Mixed precision can indeed provide a way to reduce the memory footprint of layers that
do not need a high precision representation (using 8-bit for weights and activations), while
keeping a higher precision (16-bit representation) for layers that need it. The CMix-NN [ 57]
library already provides an implementation of convolution functions for various data
types of conﬁguration (in 2, 4 and 8 bits). To further improve power consumption and
memory footprint, binary neural networks can also be considered. However, to run them
efﬁciently on microcontrollers, binary neural networks need to be implemented using
bit-wise operations on 32-bit registers. This way, as many as 32 computations could be
performed in parallel.
Apart from quantization, other techniques can be used to improve the execution of
deep neural network on embedded targets. One of these techniques is the big/LITTLE
DNN approach [ 58] where the inference is done ﬁrst on a very small deep neural network.