Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 3 of 32
and STM32Cube.AI) are given for two microcontroller platforms (Nucleo-L452RE-P and
SparkFun Edge) in terms of inference time and power efﬁciency. Impact of our 8- and 16-bit
quantization methods for three different datasets (UCI-HAR, Spoken MNIST and GTSRB)
is also presented. In Section 7 a discussion on obtained results is given. Finally, Section 8
concludes this work and discusses future perspectives.
2. State of the Art on Embedded Execution of Quantized Neural Networks
A ﬁrst family of optimization methods for embedded deep neural networks, based on
network quantization, proposes to reduce the precision (i.e., the number of bits used to
represent a value). Numerous works propose to use low-bit quantization (i.e., 2 or 3 bits to
quantize both weights and activations) such as PArameterized Clipping acTivation (PACT)
combined to Statistics-Aware Weight Binning (SAWB) [ 8], Learned Step Size Quantization
(LSQ) [ 9], Bit-Pruning [ 10] or Differentiable Quantization of Deep Neural Networks [ 11]
(DQDNN). In the extreme case, this amounts to binarizing the network parameters [ 12,13].
Nevertheless, it is usually possible to ﬁnd a good compromise between the precision and
the performance of a given architecture.
Another family of methods focuses on low-cost architectures. This is notably the case
of the well-known MobileNet [ 14] and Squeeze-Net [ 15] networks. Finding a good architec-
ture for a given problem is difﬁcult, and remains an open issue even if hardware constraints
are not taken into account. Indeed, the combinatorial explosion of hyperparameters makes
the exploration of an architecture very expensive. These networks are often tailored to
solve computer vision problems such as ImageNet [ 16] classiﬁcation, and are therefore
not well suited for general use cases or simpler problems. In practice, many applications
use a generic network such as ResNet [ 17]. This is also the solution retained in this work.
The reason is that we want to easily make use of the same deep neural network on different
kind of data (time series, audio spectrum and image) and simplify the implementation.
In a third family of possibilities, some authors explored the possibility of reducing
the number of parameters in neural networks by identifying parts of the network that
are not very useful for decision making. These parts can then be removed from the
architecture. These pruning techniques make it possible to considerably reduce the number
of parameters. Hence, in [ 18], the authors manage to remove up to 90% of the number
of parameters. However, the unstructured nature of the removed parameters makes it
difﬁcult to operate the network. Recently, several works have been proposed to prune in
a structured way where a whole kernel, a ﬁlter of even a layer is pruned according to a
speciﬁc criterion [19–22].
Finally, a last family of methods consists of identifying similar parts at various points
in the architectures to factorize them. For example, in [ 23] the authors demonstrate that it
is possible to reduce the number of parameters by replacing them with memory pointers.
Some works propose to improve accuracy by adding some learning steps and algorithms
to get a more representative factorization [24,25].
All these compression techniques make it possible to considerably reduce the size of
architectures, but usually at the cost of a reduction in performance. In practice, it is also
common to reduce by two or even two thirds the memory used to store the parameters
while maintaining a similar level of performance.
In this work we will focus on quantization-based compression. To reduce the number
of bits used to represent a value, quantization maps values from one set to another smaller
set. The smaller set can have a constant step between its elements, in which case the
quantization scheme is said to be uniform. In the case of convolutional neural networks,
the authors in [ 26] show that the weights of convolutional layers typically follow a Gaussian
distribution when weight decay is applied. More generally, it has been shown that weights
can closely ﬁt Gaussian Mixture Models [ 27]. Therefore, choosing a non-uniform quantiza-
tion scheme to better represent the values of the non-unform distribution of weights would
allow for a lower quantization error.