AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy Schmidt, Albrecht
adds new features predicting what you look for, or a spreadsheet
suggests graphs you may want to create. One central question that
arises here is, what happens if we are not involved in routine mental
tasks anymore? Will we lose skills, or what skills will we lose? Is
this a bad thing or is this rather positive to free mental capabilities
for more important and relevant tasks? Another issue is whether
automation lead to more consistent behavior. Will it lead to less
variety (e.g. texts become more and more similar as keyboards sug-
gest next words or provide template texts for responses)? Research
here is still in its infancy and we have to address these questions
experimentally.
5.2 Artificial Intelligence to Amplify our
Perception
Using artificial intelligence, we can change what we see and hear.
This ranges from providing images that are processed to increase
the human ability to see specific things, be it a tumor in a tissue or
an enemy in the woods. AI can help to focus on the “right” things
by directing attention based on information extracted from the
environment. Another example is the use of sensors that are more
sensitive than human senses (e.g. hearing) or capture information
human senses can’t (e.g. thermal imagining) and processing these
signals for human perception. We have explored numerous research
probes in the context of the European project AMPLIFY [7].
On a higher level, perception can be aided by providing the right
amount of information to not overload the user or to provide it in
ways that can be more easily understood (e.g. reading interfaces).
This amplification of perception is in the tradition of optical
instruments (in particular the microscope and telescope), but with
using AI as the material to create the new tools. By literally making
things visible or perceivable that could not be seen before a new
level understanding is provided. Once things can be perceived (e.g.
bacteria in the example of the microscope), they fundamentally
change how we understand the world.
6 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO AMPLIFY
OUR MIND
Iron improved the strength of mechanical tools. Engines amplified
the physical strength of humans through powered machines. Writ-
ing and reading had a strong impact on the memory capabilities of
humans. With artificial intelligence we have the chance to create
a change for improving the abilities of the mind, similar to what
engines and motors have done for the body.
The ingenuity in amplifying physical strength was and is rooted
in the devices that are built around the motor. In many cases the
motor is very much exchangeable as the innovation lies in the
system or device. Relating this back to AI and ML, we can see that
it is important to have good algorithms and methods, but in order
to make it useful for human kind we have to find the innovations
that advance the abilities of individuals as well as of society.
6.1 Human Centered Training of Artificial
Intelligence
To truly advance what we can do with AI it is not enough to observe
the current world and learn from it. Scraping existing databases,document collections, or online forums is not a good idea, as we
have seen from several examples. Observing the world as it is, is not
enough. The question of how to transfer skills and knowledge to a
system is not as simple as collecting data, as each data collection is
biased. When training systems, humans will need to define goals
and aims, which may be on very high and abstract level. We will
always encode our values – explicitly through the algorithms and
methods, or implicitly through the selection of data. It is important
to make transparent exactly which values have been encoded as
this aids in understandability.
6.2 No Opting Out of Artificial Intelligence
I would expect that individuals as well as societies will realistically
have no opportunity to opt-out of using devices and interaction
with systems that are driven by AI. Not using AI will create major
disadvantages, as others will be faster, see things you do not see,
and will be able predict events long before you encounter them.
Opting out is like putting your head in the sand. Since opting out
is not a viable option, we need to ensure that AI is working for
humans and not against them.
Societies that will be effective in using AI and ML – by creating
products and services around them – will have major advantages
(and likely to dominate the others). The important part of this
statement is that it is not just the societies that have AI, but those
who are able to use it effectively to advance their cultures and
economies who will succeed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly conducted
within the Amplify project which
received funding from the Euro-
pean Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no.
683008).
REFERENCES
[1]Janna Anderson, Lee Rainie, and Alex Luchsinger. 2018. Artificial intelligence and
the future of humans. Pew Research Center 10 (2018).
[2]Douglas C Engelbart and William K English. 1968. A research center for augment-
ing human intellect. In Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer
conference, part I. 395–410.
[3]John Etchemendy Fei-Fei Li. 2020. Advancing AI research, education, policy, and
practice to improve the human condition. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from https:
//hai.stanford.edu/
[4]Paul Lukowicz. 2020. European Project Humane AI: Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from https://www.humane-ai.eu/
[5]Albrecht Schmidt. 2017. Augmenting human intellect and amplifying perception
and cognition. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16, 1 (2017), 6–10.
[6]Albrecht Schmidt. 2017. Technologies to amplify the mind. Computer 50, 10 (2017),
102–106.
[7]Albrecht Schmidt. 2020. European Project ERC AMPLIFY: Digital Technologies to
Amplify Human Perception (ERC Consolidator Grant no.683008). Retrieved August
20, 2020 from https://amp.ubicomp.net/
[8]Albrecht Schmidt and Thomas Herrmann. 2017. Intervention user interfaces: a
new interaction paradigm for automated systems. interactions 24, 5 (2017), 40–45.