Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence:
A Definition and Research Challenges
Albrecht Schmidt
albrecht.schmidt@ifi.lmu.de
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
München, Germany
Figure 1: Is AI and ML a new material to name an epoch? Will it impact live as the “stone age” or “bronze age” did?
ABSTRACT
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become the buzzword of the last
decade. Advances so far have been largely technical with a focus on
machine learning (ML). Only recently have we begun seeing a shift
towards focusing on the human aspects of artificial intelligence,
centered on the narrow view of making AI interactive and explain-
able. In this paper I suggest a definition for “Interactive Human
Centered Artificial Intelligence” and outline the required properties.
Staying in control is essential for humans to feel safe and have
self-determination. Hence, we need to find ways for humans to
understand AI based systems and means to allow human control
and oversight. In our work, we argue that levels of abstractions and
granularity of control are a general solution to this. Furthermore,
it is essential that we make explicit why we want AI and what are
the goals of AI research and development. We need to state the
properties that we expect of future intelligent systems and who
will benefit from a system or service. For me, AI and ML are very
much comparable to raw materials (like stone, iron, or bronze).
Historical periods are named after these materials as they funda-
mentally changed what humans can build and what tools humans
can engineer. Hence, I argue that in the AI age we need to shift
the focus from the material (e.g. the AI algorithms, as there will
be plenty of material) towards the tools and infrastructures that
are enabled which are beneficial to humans. It is apparent that AI
will allow the automation of mental routine tasks and that it will
extend our ability to perceive the world and foresee events. For me,
the central question is how to create these tools for amplifying the
human mind without compromising human values.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7535-1/20/09.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3399715.3400873CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Human computer interac-
tion (HCI) ;Ubiquitous and mobile computing theory, con-
cepts and paradigms ;•Computing methodologies →Artifi-
cial intelligence; Machine learning.
KEYWORDS
Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence, Human Com-
puter Interaction, Artificial Intelligence
ACM Reference Format:
Albrecht Schmidt. 2020. Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence:
A Definition and Research Challenges . In International Conference on Ad-
vanced Visual Interfaces (AVI ’20), September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3399715.3400873
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become the buzzword of the last
decade. With strong advances in Machine Learning (ML), a range
of new applications have become possible and many others appear
to be within reach in the near future. Speech interaction, intelli-
gent assistants, and autonomous driving are just some examples.
In conferences, exploding in size, researchers in AI and ML have
demonstrated technical feasibility (e.g. fast and robust face recog-
nition techniques) and celebrated major scientific advances with
regard to gains in speed, recognition performance and precision,
sometimes even under real world conditions. The applications that
were enabled by these advances, received a mixed response from so-
ciety. On one side there is great excitement about new applications
(e.g. personal image search including names), but also fear about
the use of this technology against individuals and society (e.g. face
recognition for surveillance). This has stirred up the old question of
whether a technology is good or bad and raises concerns about the
bigger picture of responsibility.
There is an understanding that the advances seen in AI and ML
are only the beginning and that there will be more to come as our