Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy
3.2 Staying in control
Control of our environment is of great importance for humans.
Being able to determine what should happen is strongly related
to self-determination and freedom of choice, and is ultimately a
basis for feeling safe. The granularity of control is however of
lesser importance. When going on a train or a plane we want to
decide where we want to go, we want to have control of the target
destination. In this case we are less concerned with the exact route
taken or from which runway we will take off. In a conventional
car there is a very fine-grained control. We have many choices, e.g.
where we drive on the road (e.g. more to the middle or closer to
the edge) or how fast we accelerate. Most of these choices are not
relevant in general and we may be happy to hand them off to an AI
that can handle the details of driving for us. As long as these choices
are not relevant to what we want to do (typically arriving safely
and in time at a certain place) we may not feel a loss of control –
as we still stay in control on a different level of abstraction.
To achieve this, we argue that we must fundamentally rethink
how we create systems that support humans. Requiring humans
to interact does not scale with ubiquitous computing technologies.
To overcome this problem, we have suggested a new interaction
paradigm: Intervention User Interfaces [ 8]. Here the idea is that
systems are well designed and run autonomously, but humans can
intervene operation at any time. In this paradigm, systems must
make their state observable and provide ways for humans to see
how to intervene and predict the outcome of their interventions.
4 A NEW MATERIAL FOR TOOLS?
Is AI and ML just another material for creating new tools? Is there
something fundamentally new when we can build systems based
on AI? It seems AI is in a tradition of other materials that have
changed human abilities and massively changed societies.
4.1 AI as basis for new tools?
Human history is an impressive account how tools have changed
abilities. The invention of the wheel has changed our ability to
transport things; changes in record keeping and writing tools fun-
damentally changed the human ability to remember things. We
could consider AI and ML as a new technological basis – as a mate-
rial for new tools – and that changes what tools can be made, see
figure 1.
In history we have name these epochs by the base material (e.g.
“stone age”, “bronze age” or “iron age”) and not by the tools that
were created. AI could therefore be a new material that advances
humankind. What tools we make out of it (good or bad) – an iron
shovel to dig large irrigation canals or a highly effective battle axe –
is obviously not a new question. It is interesting to see that epochs
are name on materials: “stone age”, “bronze age”, or “iron age”.
Whenreferring to oral cultures and societies that could read and
write we look at the impact of tools. With AI and ML the technical
and the societal aspects may be combined.
Also interesting in this historic reference is that once a material
was understood, the focus of the majority of people was on what to
create and achieve with the material. Only a few concentrated on
how to improve the materials. With regard to AI this would meanthat the next focus is not on a new algorithm or model, but on the
human ability to make use of it.
4.2 Automation vs. Augmentation vs.
Amplification
Automation vs. augmentation is an old but still highly relevant
discussion. In our work we added a further term: Amplification,
see [ 5] and [ 6]. This is to highlight that we aim for improving and
amplifying abilities at larger scale. With current technologies it
becomes harder to make a clear discrimination. In a simplistic view
we can see automation that serves a human need as augmentation,
potentially on a larger scale of granularity.
Smart tools are one example. A broom augments our ability
to sweep the floor. A manual vacuum cleaner is just advancing
this tool to augment the ability even further. What is a vacuum
cleaning robot? Is it just an advanced broom, where my need for
interaction and control is further reduced or is it an automation?
Here it becomes clear that this discrimination is in many cases no
longer helpful. The questions shift to how agency and control are
implemented and how this is manifested in the interaction between
humans and smart tools. In these cases, we off-load larger and larger
tasks to tools that are somehow intelligent.
We see similar developments in the space of cognitive and per-
ceptual support. AI technologies provide means for augmentation
or automation of cognitive and perceptual processes. Here too the
border between augmentation and automation is blurred. Already
Douglas Engelbart made a strong argument for keeping the human
in the loop, for Augmenting the Human intellect [ 2] rather than
for automation.
In the following we have several themes that show that there
are opportunities for more general benefits for humankind through
advances in AI. To highlight that this is an advancement we use
the term amplify rather than augment.
5 HOW DOES HUMANKIND BENEFIT FROM
AI?
Who benefits from AI? This question needs to be at the very center
of any technological advancement. So far, the novelty and techno-
logical progress provide enough excitement to put this question to
the back – even on a political level where large national investments
are made in AI. At the same time, it is apparent that some individu-
als and many companies have a clear understanding how they can
benefit from using AI and how their profits can be increased using
ML-based technologies. Related to this question is also who will
lose out from AI, and this too must be discussed and addressed.
5.1 Artificial Intelligence to Automate Mental
Routine Tasks
Digital technologies have provided new tools that are based on
automating routine tasks that are based on data. Examples are
searching in big data bases for specific content or matching data
from different sources. With AI there is a hope to automate routine
mental tasks, e.g. automating decision making or classification tasks.
In many areas this step is gradual rather than revolutionary. Text
processing tools provide new smart corrections, a search engine