AVI ’20, September 28-October 2, 2020, Salerno, Italy Schmidt, Albrecht
lives become increasingly digital. From a technical perspective, this
is truly exciting. From an individual as well as societal perspective,
there is a fear of competition between humans and AI. This fear
may be very concrete (and very realistic): is the job I am good at
easily be replaced by an intelligent agent? Or it may be very abstract
(and in my view not well founded at this point in time): will AI
take over control and dominate humankind. In general, there is the
hope that if we get it right, the majority of people could benefit
from the advances driven by AI. This is well summarized by the
following statement from the title page of [1]:
"Experts say the rise of artificial intelligence will make
most people better off over the next decade, but many
have concerns about how advances in AI will affect
what it means to be human, to be productive and to
exercise free will".
To focus on the human aspects of artificial intelligence, there are
several initiatives working towards a human centered AI as well as
towards making AI interactive and explainable. Examples include
the European Humane AI Project[ 4] and the Stanford Institute for
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence[3]. These initiatives bring
together researchers from different backgrounds, in particular from
artificial intelligence and human computer interaction but also from
social science, philosophy, and ethics. With the following definition
of “Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence” we hope to
start a more in-depth discussion on the goals of AI research and
the properties that we expect of future systems.
2 INTERACTIVE HUMAN CENTERED
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The term “Artificial Intelligence” is used in many different ways and
there is no clear definition. The term “Machine Learning” is more
technical and more specific, but here too finding a clear definition
is difficult. Even going one step back and looking for a definition of
“intelligence” it becomes clear that this also opens a philosophical
discussion.
Hence that the term “Interactive Human Centered Artificial
Intelligence” is in no way self-explaining. However, attempting to
defining this term can help to uncover what challenges we will face
when working towards an Interactive Human Centered Artificial
Intelligence. In the following I suggest a definition as a starting
point for further discussion.
2.1 Definition
AnInteractive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence is an
Artificial Intelligence that enables interactive exploration and ma-
nipulation in real time and is designed with a clear purpose for
human benefit while being transparent about who has control over
data and algorithms.
2.2 Properties
An “Interactive Human Centered Artificial Intelligence” has the
following properties:
•Individuals can interact in real time with the algorithms,
models, and data and can manipulate and control all relevant
parameters.•The impact of changes and manipulations made by the user
can be observed in real time.
•In fast processes the speed can be reduced to allow interac-
tions, interventions, and manipulation.
•Individuals can interactively explore why and how specific
decisions are made and find out how changes in the parame-
ters, data, and models impact outcomes.
•It states how humans can benefit from the artificial intelli-
gence.
•It explains what risks the artificial intelligence poses for
individuals as well as on societal level.
•It is visible who has control of the artificial intelligence, in
particular who has the power over data, models, and algo-
rithms.
•It is visible what data, knowledge base, and information is
used or has been used to create and inform the artificial
intelligence.
With this definition and list of properties we aim to be inclusive
with regard to different technologies and to ensure that humans can
effectively explore and control how an AI works. We also ask that
the underlying goals that motivated the design be made transparent.
To verify that an AI is human centric it is essential to know the
design goals and who has control of the data and algorithms.
3 LEVELS OF ABSTRACTION AND
GRANULARITY OF CONTROL
Working with different levels of abstractions is one of the most
powerful methods in computer science. For creating an Interactive
Human Centered Artificial Intelligence abstractions and granular-
ity of control play a major role in understanding and controlling
systems.
3.1 Understanding Systems
Understanding an algorithm on a very abstract level is in many
cases straight forward and does not required in-depth knowledge.
For example, the explanation that a chat-bot has “learned” all the
responses people gave on Reddit to a certain question and compiles
its response based on this “knowledge” can be understood by virtu-
ally anyone. In most cases, this is explanation is good enough to
understand the behavior of the chat-bot. In specific cases, individ-
uals may want to dig deeper into the behavior, e.g. by looking at
knowledge representation or learned weights.
Arguing for open sourcing of code and models may be mislead-
ing as this limits comprehension to a very small set of people. To
understand systems that are built on current ML and AI techniques,
looking at the implementation of the algorithm, the models, or the
parameters of a trained network may provide little insight to even
an experienced AI researcher. An algorithmic level of understand-
ing, which we see in current AI explainability research, seems to
focus again on technological curiosity of the experts who really
want to understand how and why their neural networks works. But
this will add little to making AI understandable for end-users.
Looking at the design goals and the functionality that was imple-
mented with these techniques provides insights as to what outputs
can be expected. Hence we ask that not only the source code be
made publicly available, but also the design goals.