Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
The CIFAR-10 validationThe CIFAR-10 testCIFAR-10
Figure 7: Results keeping keep running estimates for BN layers in each searching cell . We use
parameter sharing based NAS methods to search the architecture on CIFAR-10. After each search-
ing epoch, we derive the architecture and show its validation accuracy (V ALID) and test accuracy
(TEST) on CIFAR-10. The 0-th epoch indicates the architecture is derived from the randomly ini-
tialized architecture encoding.
The CIFAR-10 validationThe CIFAR-10 testCIFAR-10
Figure 8: Results using batch statistics without keeping keep running estimates for BN layers in
each searching cell . We use parameter sharing based NAS methods to search the architecture on
CIFAR-10. After each searching epoch, we derive the architecture and show its validation accuracy
(V ALID) and test accuracy (TEST) on CIFAR-10. The 0-th epoch indicates the architecture is
derived from the randomly initialized architecture encoding.
ranking of each architecture. (2) DARTS-V1 and DARTS-V2 quickly converge to ﬁnd the architec-
ture whose edges are all skip connection. A possible reason is that the original hyper-parameters
of DARTS are chosen for their search space instead of ours. (3) The strategy of BN layers can
signiﬁcantly effect the NAS methods with parameter sharing. Using batch statistics are better than
keep running estimates of the mean and variance. (4) Using our ﬁne-grained information, REA,
REINFORCE and RS can be ﬁnished in seconds which could signiﬁcantly reduce the search costs
and let researchers focus solely on the search algorithm itself.
In Figure 7 and Figure 8, we show the performance of the architecture derived from each algorithm
per searching epoch. DARTS-V1 will gradually over-ﬁt to an architecture with all skip-connection
operations. DARTS-V2 can alleviate this problem to some extent but will still over-ﬁt after more
epochs. It can further alleviate this problem by using batch statistics for BN layers. We train RSPS,
GDAS, SETN, and ENAS ﬁve times longer than DARTS (250 epochs vs. 50 epochs). This is
because at every iteration, RSPS, GDAS, SETN, and ENAS only optimize1
jOj=5parameters of
the shared parameters, whereas DARTS optimize all shared parameters. The searched architecture
performs similar for GDAS after 50 searching epochs. RSPS and SETN show a higher variance of
the searched architecture compared to GDAS.
Clariﬁcation. We have tried our best to implement each method. However, still, some algorithms
might obtain non-optimal results since their hyper-parameters might not ﬁt our NAS-Bench-201 . We
empirically found that some NAS algorithms are sensitive to some hyper-parameters, whereas we try
to compare them in a fair way as we can (Please see more explanation in Appendix). If researchers
can provide better results with different hyper-parameters, we are happy to update results according
to the new experimental results. We also welcome more NAS algorithms to test on our dataset and
would include them accordingly.
9