Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
convcell  N×imageresidual block(stride=2)globalavg. poolarchitecturezeroizeskip-connect11 conv33 conv33 avg pool×××predeﬁned operation setcellcellcellcell….…….…cell  N×residual block(stride=2)cell  N×
Figure 1: Top: the macro skeleton of each architecture candidate. Bottom-left : examples of neural
cell with 4 nodes. Each cell is a directed acyclic graph, where each edge is associated with an
operation selected from a predeﬁned operation set as shown in the Bottom-right .
different. (1) Different search space is utilized, e.g., different macro skeletons of the whole archi-
tecture (Zoph et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2019) and a different operation set for the micro cell within
the skeleton (Pham et al., 2018), etc. (2) After a good architecture is selected, various strategies
can be employed to train this architecture and report the performance, e.g., different data augmen-
tation (Ghiasi et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), different regularization (Zoph et al., 2018), different
scheduler (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), and different selections of hyper-parameters (Liu et al.,
2018; Dong & Yang, 2019a). (3) The validation set for testing the performance of the selected archi-
tecture is not split in the same way (Liu et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2018). These discrepancies raise
a comparability problem when comparing the performance of various NAS algorithms, making it
difﬁcult to conclude their contributions.
In response to this problem, NAS-Bench-101 (Ying et al., 2019) and NAS-HPO-Bench (Klein &
Hutter, 2019) are proposed. However, some NAS algorithms can not be applied directly on NAS-
Bench-101, and NAS-HPO-Bench only has 144 candidate architectures, which maybe insufﬁcient
to evaluate NAS algorithms. To extend these two benchmarks and towards better reproducibility of
NAS methods1, we propose NAS-Bench-201 with a ﬁxed cell search space, inspired from the search
space used in the most popular neural cell-based searching algorithms (Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2019). As shown in Figure 1, each architecture consists of a predeﬁned skeleton with a stack of the
searched cell. In this way, architecture search is transformed into the problem of searching a good
cell. Each cell is represented as a densely-connected directed acyclic graph (DAG) as shown in the
bottom section of Figure 1. Here the node represents the sum of the feature maps and each edge is
associated with an operation transforming the feature maps from the source node to the target node.
The size of the search space is related to the number of nodes deﬁned for the DAG and the size of
the operation set. In NAS-Bench-201 , we choose 4 nodes and 5 representative operation candidates
for the operation set, which generates a total search space of 15,625 cells/architectures. Each ar-
chitecture is trained multiple times on three different datasets. The training log and performance
of each architecture are provided for each run. The training accuracy/test accuracy/training loss/test
loss after every training epoch for each architecture plus the number of parameters and ﬂoating point
operations (FLOPs) are accessible.
Hopefully, NAS-Bench-201 will show its value in the ﬁeld of NAS research. (1) It provides a uniﬁed
benchmark for most up-to-date NAS algorithms including all cell-based NAS methods. With NAS-
Bench-201 , researchers can focus on designing robust searching algorithm while avoiding tedious
hyper-parameter tuning of the searched architecture. Thus, NAS-Bench-201 provides a relatively
fair benchmark for the comparison of different NAS algorithms. (2) It provides the full training log
of each architecture. Unnecessary repetitive training procedure of each selected architecture can be
avoided (Liu et al., 2018; Zoph & Le, 2017) so that researchers can target on the essence of NAS,
i.e., search algorithm. Another beneﬁt is that the validation time for NAS largely decreases when
testing in NAS-Bench-201 , which provides a computational power friendly environment for more
participations in NAS. (3) It provides results of each architecture on multiple datasets. The model
transferability can be thoroughly evaluated for most NAS algorithms. (4) In NAS-Bench-201 , we
provide systematic analysis of the proposed search space. We also evaluate 10 recent advanced NAS
1One parallel concurrent work for the similar purpose is NAS-Bench-1SHOT1 (Zela et al., 2020).
2