Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
NAS-B ENCH -201: E XTENDING THE SCOPE OF RE-
PRODUCIBLE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH
Xuanyi Dongyzand Yi Yangy
yReLER, CAI, University of Technology Sydney, zBaidu Research
ABSTRACT
Neural architecture search (NAS) has achieved breakthrough success in a great
number of applications in the past few years. It could be time to take a step back
and analyze the good and bad aspects in the ﬁeld of NAS. A variety of algorithms
search architectures under different search space. These searched architectures are
trained using different setups, e.g., hyper-parameters, data augmentation, regular-
ization. This raises a comparability problem when comparing the performance
of various NAS algorithms. NAS-Bench-101 has shown success to alleviate this
problem. In this work, we propose an extension to NAS-Bench-101: NAS-Bench-
201with a different search space, results on multiple datasets, and more diagnos-
tic information. NAS-Bench-201 has a ﬁxed search space and provides a uniﬁed
benchmark for almost any up-to-date NAS algorithms. The design of our search
space is inspired from the one used in the most popular cell-based searching al-
gorithms, where a cell is represented as a directed acyclic graph. Each edge here
is associated with an operation selected from a predeﬁned operation set. For it to
be applicable for all NAS algorithms, the search space deﬁned in NAS-Bench-201
includes all possible architectures generated by 4 nodes and 5 associated operation
options, which results in 15,625 neural cell candidates in total. The training log
using the same setup and the performance for each architecture candidate are pro-
vided for three datasets. This allows researchers to avoid unnecessary repetitive
training for selected architecture and focus solely on the search algorithm itself.
The training time saved for every architecture also largely improves the efﬁciency
of most NAS algorithms and brings a more computational cost friendly NAS com-
munity for a broader range of researchers. We provide additional diagnostic in-
formation such as ﬁne-grained loss and accuracy, which can give inspirations to
new designs of NAS algorithms. In further support of the proposed NAS-Bench-
201, we have analyzed it from many aspects and benchmarked 10 recent NAS
algorithms, which verify its applicability.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The deep learning community is undergoing a transition from hand-designed neural architecture (He
et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015) to automatically designed neural archi-
tecture (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019; Dong & Yang, 2019b; Liu et al.,
2019). In its early era, the great success of deep learning was promoted by novel neural architec-
tures, such as ResNet (He et al., 2016), Inception (Szegedy et al., 2015), VGGNet (Simonyan &
Zisserman, 2015), and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). However, manually designing one archi-
tecture requires human experts to try numerous different operation and connection choices (Zoph
& Le, 2017). In contrast to architectures that are manually designed, those automatically found by
neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms require much less human interaction and expert effort.
These NAS-generated architectures have shown promising results in many domains, such as image
recognition (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019), sequence modeling (Pham et al.,
2018; Dong & Yang, 2019b; Liu et al., 2019), etc.
Recently, a variety of NAS algorithms have been increasingly proposed. While these NAS methods
are methodically designed and show promising improvements, many setups in their algorithms are
Part of this work was done when Xuanyi was a research intern with Baidu Research.
1arXiv:2001.00326v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jan 2020