Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
algorithms including reinforcement learning (RL)-based methods, evolutionary strategy (ES)-based
methods, differentiable-based methods, etc. We hope our empirical analysis can bring some insights
to the future designs of NAS algorithms.
2NAS-Bench-201
OurNAS-Bench-201 is algorithm-agnostic. Put simply, it is applicable to almost any up-to-date NAS
algorithms. In this section, we will brieﬂy introduce our NAS-Bench-201 . The search space of NAS-
Bench-201 is inspired by cell-based NAS algorithms (Section 2.1). NAS-Bench-201 evaluates each
architecture on three different datasets (Section 2.2). All implementation details of NAS-Bench-201
are introduced in Section 2.3. NAS-Bench-201 also provides some diagnostic information which can
be used for potentially better designs of future NAS algorithms (discussed in Section 2.4).
2.1 A RCHITECTURES IN THE SEARCH SPACE
Macro Skeleton . Our search space follows the design of its counterpart as used in the recent neural
cell-based NAS algorithms (Liu et al., 2019; Zoph et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018). As shown in the
top of Figure 1, the skeleton is initiated with one 3-by-3 convolution with 16 output channels and
a batch normalization layer (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). The main body of the skeleton includes three
stacks of cells, connected by a residual block. Each cell is stacked N= 5times, with the number of
output channels as 16, 32 and 64 for the ﬁrst, second and third stages, respectively. The intermediate
residual block is the basic residual block with a stride of 2 (He et al., 2016), which serves to down-
sample the spatial size and double the channels of an input feature map. The shortcut path in this
residual block consists of a 2-by-2 average pooling layer with stride of 2 and a 1-by-1 convolution.
The skeleton ends up with a global average pooling layer to ﬂatten the feature map into a feature
vector. Classiﬁcation uses a fully connected layer with a softmax layer to transform the feature
vector into the ﬁnal prediction.
Searched Cell . Each cell in the search space is represented as a densely connected DAG. The
densely connected DAG is obtained by assigning a direction from the i-th node to the j-th node
(i < j ) for each edge in an undirected complete graph. Each edge in this DAG is associated with
an operation transforming the feature map from the source node to the target node. All possible
operations are selected from a predeﬁned operation set, as shown in Figure 1(bottom-right). In our
NAS-Bench-201 , the predeﬁned operation set OhasL= 5 representative operations: (1) zeroize,
(2) skip connection, (3) 1-by-1 convolution, (4) 3-by-3 convolution, and (5) 3-by-3 average pooling
layer. The convolution in this operation set is an abbreviation of an operation sequence of ReLU,
convolution, and batch normalization. The DAG has V= 4nodes, where each node represents the
sum of all feature maps transformed through the associated operations of the edges pointing to this
node. We choose V= 4 to allow the search space to contain basic residual block-like cells, which
requires 4 nodes. Densely connected DAG does not restrict the searched topology of the cell to be
densely connected, since we include zeroize in the operation set, which is an operation of dropping
the associated edge. Besides, since we do not impose the constraint on the maximum number of
edges (Ying et al., 2019), our search space is applicable to most NAS algorithms, including all
cell-based NAS algorithms.
2.2 D ATASETS
We train and evaluate each architecture on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and
ImageNet-16-120 (Chrabaszcz et al., 2017). We choose these three datasets because CIFAR and
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) are the most popular image classiﬁcation datasets.
We split each dataset into training, validation and test sets to provide a consistent training and evalu-
ation settings for previous NAS algorithms (Liu et al., 2019). Most NAS methods use the validation
set to evaluate architectures after the architecture is optimized on the training set. The validation
performance of the architectures serves as supervision signals to update the searching algorithm.
The test set is to evaluate the performance of each searching algorithm by comparing the indicators
(e.g., accuracy, model size, speed) of their selected architectures. Previous methods use different
splitting strategies, which may result in various searching costs and unfair comparisons. We hope to
use the proposed splits to unify the training, validation and test sets for a fairer comparison.
3