Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
6 D ISCUSSION
How to avoid over-ﬁtting on NAS-Bench-201 ?Our NAS-Bench-201 provides a benchmark for
NAS algorithms, aiming to provide a fair and computational cost-friendly environment to the NAS
community. The trained architecture and the easy-to-access performance of each architecture might
provide some insidious ways for designing algorithms to over-ﬁt the best architecture in our NAS-
Bench-201 . Thus, we propose some rules which we wish the users will follow to achieve the original
intention of NAS-Bench-201 , a fair and efﬁcient benchmark.
1. No regularization for a speciﬁc operation. Since the best architecture is known in our benchmark,
speciﬁc designs to ﬁt the structural attributes of the best performed architecture are insidious ways to
ﬁt our NAS-Bench-201 . For example, as mentioned in Section 5, we found that the best architecture
with the same amount of parameters for CIFAR10 on NAS-Bench-201 is ResNet. Restrictions on the
number of residual connections is a way to over-ﬁt the CIFAR10 benchmark. While this can give a
good result on this benchmark, the searching algorithm might not generalize to other benchmarks.
2. Use the provided performance. The training strategy affects the performance of the architecture.
We suggest the users stick to the performance provided in our benchmark even if it is feasible to use
otherHto get a better performance. This provides a fair comparison with other algorithms.
3. Report results of multiple searching runs. Since our benchmark can help to largely decrease the
computational cost for a number of algorithms. Multiple searching runs give stable results of the
searching algorithm with acceptable time cost.
Limitation regarding to hyper-parameter optimization (HPO). The performance of an architec-
ture depends on the hyper-parameters Hfor its training and the optimal conﬁguration of Hmay vary
for different architectures. In NAS-Bench-201 , we use the same conﬁguration for all architectures,
which may bring biases to the performance of some architectures. One related solution is HPO,
which aims to search the optimal hyper-parameter conﬁguration. However, searching the optimal
hyper-parameter conﬁgurations and the architecture in one shot is too computationally expensive
and still is an open problem.
Potential designs using diagnostic information in NAS-Bench-201 . As pointed in Section 2.4,
different kinds of diagnostic information are provided. We hope that more insights about NAS could
be found by analyzing these diagnostic information and further motivate potential solutions for NAS.
For example, parameter sharing (Pham et al., 2018) is the crucial technique to improve the searching
efﬁciency, but the shared parameter would sacriﬁce the accuracy of each architecture. Could we ﬁnd
a better way to share parameters of each architecture from the learned 15,625 models’ parameters?
Generalization ability of the search space . It is important to test the generalization of observations
on this dataset. An idea strategy is to do all benchmark experiments on a much larger search space.
Unfortunately, it is prohibitive regarding the expensive computational cost. We bring some results
from (Ying et al., 2019) and (Zela et al., 2020) to provide some preliminary evidence of generaliza-
tion. In Figure 2, we show the rankings of RS, REA, and REINFORCE is ( REA > REINFORCE
> RS ). This is consistent with results in NAS-Bench-101, which contains more architecture candi-
dates. For NAS methods with parameter sharing, we ﬁnd that GDAS DARTSENAS, which is
also consistent with results in NAS-Bench-1SHOT1. Therefore, observations from our NAS-Bench-
201may generalize to other search spaces.
7 C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduce NAS-Bench-201 that extends the scope of reproducible NAS. In NAS-
Bench-201 , almost any NAS algorithms can be directly evaluated. We train and evaluate 15,625
architecture on three different datasets, and we provide results regarding different metrics. We
comprehensively analyze our dataset and test some recent NAS algorithms on NAS-Bench-201 to
serve as baselines for future works. In future, we will (1) consider HPO and NAS together and (2)
much larger search space. We welcome researchers to try their NAS algorithms on our NAS-Bench-
201and would update the paper to include their results.
Acknowledgements. We thank the ICLR area chair, ICLR reviewers, and authors of NAS-Bench-
101 for the constructive suggestions during the rebuttal and revision period.
10