Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1758 4 of 31
Recently , GA has been broadly used in machine learning, adaptive control, combinatorial optimization,
and signal processing areas . GA has a good capability of global search and also it is considered as
one of the essential technologies that are associated with the modern intelligent calculation [ 35].
Additionally, the GA has been implemented in many applications such as face recognition, where GA
has been applied to optimize the feature search process [ 36]. In addition, GA has used for task
scheduling to solve the problem of task scheduling for phased array radar (PAR) [ 37]. In addition,
GA has been used in image encryption for analyzing the image encryption security [ 38]. The GA has also
been used in healthcare facilities for formulating an e cient prediction model of stochastic deterioration
that combines the latest observed condition in the forecasting process for overcoming uncertainties
and the subjectivity, which are related to the currently used methods [ 39]. Additionally, the GA has
been applied in the fuzzy logic in order to ﬁnd the association rules of the fuzzy logic [ 40]. The authors
in [41] have combined GA with hesitant intuitionistic fuzzy sets to obtain the optimal solution for
the decision making. The work in [ 42] presents an e cient GA-based content distribution scheme to
reduce the transmission delay and also to improve the throughput of fog radio access network (F-RAN).
The GA was used in [ 43] to enhance the performance of ELM algorithm by selecting the optimal
input weights and applying it in breast cancer detection. Moreover, there are many optimizations and
improvements have been done on the GA. For example, in [ 44–46] they present hybrid GAs, [ 47,48]
propose enhancements on the GA in terms of operations (i.e., selection, mutation, and crossover),
and the study in [11] worked on separating the population pools (crossover and mutation pools).
2.2. Genetic Algorithm Based on Natural Selection Theory (GABONST)
The GABONST was created based on the concept of natural selection theory. Natural selection is
a biological theory was ﬁrst proposed by Charles Darwin [ 49]. The natural selection theory entails the
idea that genes adjust and survive throughout generations with the help of several factors. In other
words, the organism with high ability is qualiﬁed to survive in the current environment and generates
new organisms into the new generation. Whilst the organism with a low ability has two chances to
survive in the current environment and avoid extinction: 1: the ﬁrst chance is getting married to a
well-qualiﬁed organism (an organism with high ability), which may lead to generating a new high ability
ospring into the new generation, and 2: the second chance is the genetic mutation, which might lead
to making the organism stronger and able to survive in the current environment. In case the organism,
which is obtained from one of the two chances, does not satisfy the environment’s requirements,
the organism may become extinct over the time. However, it is a mutual impact where the environment
aects the organisms and at the same time, the organisms a ect the environment. Therefore, over time
both the organisms and the environment will obtain changes [ 50]. Thus, applying the idea of the
natural selection theory into GA promises to improve the exploration, exploitation and the solution’s
diversity of the conventional GA by controlling the search space based on both the organisms and
the environment.
This study is simulating the idea of natural selection theory and integrating it into the genetic
algorithm. The new proposed algorithm is named as a genetic algorithm based on natural selection
theory (GABONST). The procedure of the GABONST is presented in the following steps:
1. Beginning of the algorithm.
2. Set number of population n and number of iteration NumIter.
3. Generate the population (chromosomes (S)) randomly; where S ={s1, s2,: : :, sn}.
4. Calculate the ﬁtness value of each chromosome in the population g(S).
5. Calculate the mean of the ﬁtness values using Equation (1).
Mean =Pn
i=1g(si)
n(1)