Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1758 2 of 31
explored [ 15]. Optimal solution is not found via intense exploration, while algorithm is trapped in
local optima due to deep exploitation [ 15]. Hence, a balance between both factors is pertinent for any
nature-inspired algorithm [15,16].
Numerous nature-inspired algorithms have been suggested in literature such as particle swarm
optimization [ 17]; genetic algorithm [ 18]; bat algorithm [ 19]; harmony search [ 20]; and kidney-inspired
algorithm [ 21]. Physical /biological activities found in the natural world form the basis for nature-inspired
algorithms in the quest to ﬁnd solutions for various optimization problems [ 21], which then render these
algorithms to be e ective optimization algorithms. Nevertheless, shortcomings including ﬁnding the
balance between the key factors of exploration and exploitation could still be prevalent, which a ects
the algorithm’s e cacy [15,21].
Among these metaheuristics, the genetic algorithm (GA) is considered as one of the most popular
metaheuristic algorithms that has been used in practically all optimization, design and application
areas [ 11]. GA is actually one of the earliest proposed population-based stochastic algorithms.
GA consists of the selection, crossover, and mutation operations, similar to other evolutionary
algorithms (EAs). Darwin’s theory of evolution [ 22–24], i.e., the survival of the ﬁttest, makes up the
basis of GA whereby the ﬁttest genes are simulated. Its algorithm is population-based, and each
solution matches a chromosome whilst each parameter denotes a gene. A ﬁtness (objective) function
is used to evaluate the ﬁtness of each individual in the population. For improving poor solutions,
the best solutions are chosen randomly with a selection (e.g., random, k-tournament or roulette
wheel) mechanism. This operator is more likely to choose the best solutions since the probability is
proportional to the ﬁtness (objective value). What increases local optima avoidance is the probability
of choosing poor solutions. This means that if good solutions are trapped in a local solution, they can
be pulled out with other solutions.
Despite its proven capacity in resolving numerous search and optimization problems [ 25], GA still
has several weaknesses. For example, in GA, the mechanism of both 1: the new population is generated
from the existing parents and 2: the randomness involvement that happened in the population at the
time of solution initialization may both lead to making the GA fail to create exploration in the solution
search space. In addition, the mutation is applied to the new chromosomes (o spring) that are obtained
from the crossover operation and then moved to the next generation (using same pool) that might
lead to not providing a good enough exploration and solution diversity. In other words, the crossover
followed by mutation may prevent the mutation and crossover operations from guaranteeing an
optimal solution [ 26–28]. Hence, this current study proposes a new GA based on the theory of natural
selection to improve the GA performance. The proposed genetic algorithm based on natural selection
theory (GABONST) has been evaluated based on the following: ( i) ﬁfteen renowned benchmark test
functions ( ii) apply the GABONST in language identiﬁcation (LID) through integrating the GABONST
with extreme learning machine (ELM) (GABONST-ELM) and compare the proposed GABONST-ELM
with enhanced self-adjusting extreme learning machine (ESA-ELM) algorithm. The ESA-ELM is based
on enhanced ameliorated teaching learning-based optimization (EATLBO) [ 29], where EATLBO still
suers from some downsides in terms of the selection criteria and the ability to create good fresh
solutions. The explanation of the new proposed GABONST is provided in Section 2.2.
A reminder that this paper is organized as such: Section 2 presents the proposed method.
Section 3 details the experiments carried out and their respective ﬁndings, and ﬁnally Section 4 presents
the general conclusions and suggestions for future research.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Genetic Algorithm
The concept of GA is aimed to imitate the natural changes that occur in living ecosystems,
which is social systems, evaluate the psychological consequences, and model the variable methods.
Holland [ 30] pointed out that Goldberg [ 22] had signiﬁcantly contributed to the widespread usage of