Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1758 16 of 31
Figure 5. The comparison results of GABONST, GA, EATLBO, Bee and Bat algorithms using the ﬁfteen
objective functions ( F1–F15).
The achieved results are shown in Figure 5a–o, which are based on the best solution in each
iteration obtained from GABONST, GA, EATLBO, Bee and Bat algorithms using F1–F15 during a
single run. The optimal solutions of the F1–F15 are provided in Table 1. The results clearly show the
superiority of the GABONST over the traditional GA, EATLBO, Bee and Bat algorithms. The GABONST
has achieved and reached the optimal solutions faster and with fewer iterations in comparison to the
traditional GA, EATLBO, Bee and Bat algorithms.
3.2. Experimental Test Two
Additionally, this study also aims to evaluate the impact of the proposed GABONST in an
application. Thus, this section will implement and evaluate the GABONST in spoken language
identiﬁcation (LID) by integrating the GABONST into the ELM. According to [ 53], ELM is a
single-hidden layer feedforward neural network (SLFN), which entails the random generation of its
hidden layer thresholds and input weights. Due to the fact that its output weights are computed using
the least squares method, the ELM exhibits speedy training and testing functions. However, its training
goal achievement and global minimum requirement are not guaranteed by the randomly generated
input weights and hidden layer thresholds, indicating that both are not the best parameters for usage.
Many studies have proven that the SLFN’s weight optimization as trained by the ELM using various
methods is problematical. Several studies have attempted to carry out weights optimization using
metaheuristic searching methods [ 54–57], one of which is the enhanced self-adjusting extreme learning
machine (ESA-ELM) [ 29], which utilizes the teaching and learning phases under the framework of the
enhanced ameliorated teaching learning-based optimization (EATLBO). However, the approach of
optimization EATLBO is still su ering from several disadvantages such as criteria of selection and the
capability of generating good fresh solutions. This could result in an incomplete optimization or a slow
rate of convergence, which could not often assure achieving the optimum solution. Therefore, the aim
of this study is to enhance the ELM algorithm by integrating the new proposed GABONST into
the ELM instead of EATLBO and then implemented into the spoken language identiﬁcation (LID).
Finally, this study aims to prove the capacity of the newly o ered GABONST optimization algorithm
in enhancing ELM’s e ciency and e ectiveness as a classiﬁer model for LID.
3.2.1. Basic ELM
One study [ 53] proposed the training of SLFN by utilizing the initial ELM algorithm. The ELM’s
main concepts are made up of the random bias generation and the hidden layer weights. The calculation
of the output weights was done using the least squares solution as delineated by the hidden layer and