Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1758 3 of 31
GA by demonstrating that a large number of problems can basically be solved by utilizing the GA
methods. According to [ 31,32], GA is a widely popular search and optimization method for resolving
highlyintricate problems. The success of its methods has been proven in areas involving machine
learning approaches. A complete description of the actual coded GA is provided in this section.
Figure 1 provides the ﬂowchart of the standard GA.
Figure 1. Flowchart of the standard genetic algorithm (GA) [33].
Below is the description of the standard GA procedure [33]:
Initial population. This entails the possible solution for set P , i.e., a series of random generations
of real values, P ={p1, p2,: : :, ps}.
Evaluation (calculate the ﬁtness value). The ﬁtness function must be delineated in order to
evaluate each chromosome in the population, characterized as ﬁtness =g(P).
Selection. Following the ﬁtness value calculation, the chromosomes are arranged by their ﬁtness
values. The selection of parents is then conducted entailing two parents for the crossover and
the mutation.
Genetic operators. Once the selection process is complete, the parents’ new chromosomes
or the o spring (C 1, C2) are created by utilizing the genetic operators. The new chromosomes
(C1, C2) are then saved into children population C. This process involves the crossover and mutation
operations [ 34]. The crossover operation is applied to exchange information between two parents,
which were selected earlier. Several methods of crossover operators are available such as single-point,
two-point, k-point crossover, arithmetical crossover... etc. While in the mutation operation, the genes
of the crossed o spring’s chromosomes are changed. Likewise, several methods are available for the
mutation operator.
Upon completion of the selection, crossover and mutation operations, children population C is
completely generated and will be transferred to the subsequent population (P). P is then utilized in the
next iteration, whereby the whole process is run again. The iterations will stop if there is convergence
of results, or if the number of iterations goes beyond the maximum threshold.