Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
2.4.3 Fleiss' 
As seen in Equation 2, Cohen's measures the agreement between two annotators, but
often many evaluators have scored the generated texts, particularly in tasks that are run on
crowdsourcing platforms. Fleiss' (Fleiss, 1971) can measure agreement between multiple
evaluators. This is done by still looking at how often pairs of evaluators agree, but now
considering all possible pairs of evaluators. So now ai, which we dened earlier to be the
agreement in the scores for a generated text xi, is calculated across all evaluator pairs:
ai=P
s2S# of evaluator pairs who score xiass
total # of evaluator pairs(4)
Then we can once again dene Pa, the overall agreement probability, as it is dened in
Equation 1|the average agreement across all the texts.
To calculate Pc, we estimate the probability of a judgment P(sjei) by the frequency of
the score across all annotators. So if rsis the proportion of judgments that assigned a score
s, then the likelihood of two annotators assigning score sby chance is rsrs=r2
s. Then
our overall probability of chance agreement is:
Pc=X
s2Sr2
s (5)
With these values for PaandPc, we can use Equation 3 to calculate Fleiss' .
2.4.4 Krippendorff's 
Each of the above measures treats all evaluator disagreements as equally bad, but in some
cases, we may wish to penalize some disagreements more harshly than others. Krippen-
dor's(Krippendor, 1970), which is technically a measure of evaluator disagreement
rather than agreement, allows dierent levels of disagreement to be taken into account.11
Like themeasures above, we again use the frequency of evaluator agreements and
the odds of them agreeing by chance. However, we will now state everything in terms of
disagreement. First, we nd the probability of disagreement across all the dierent possible
score pairs ( sm;sn), which are weighted by whatever value wm;nwe assign the pair. So:
Pd=jSjX
m=0jSjX
n=0wm;njXjX
i=0# of evaluator pairs that assign xias (sm;sn)
total # of evaluator pairs(6)
(Note that when m==n, i.e., the pair of annotators agree, wm;nshould be 0.)
Next, to calculate the expected disagreement, we make a similar assumption as in Fleiss'
: the random likelihood of an evaluator assigning a score sican be estimated from the
overall frequency of si. Ifrm;nis the proportion of all evaluation pairs that assign scores
11. Note that there are other measures that permit evaluator disagreements to be weighted dierently.
For example, weighted (Cohen, 1968) extends Cohen's by adding weights to each possible pair of
score assignments. In NLG evaluation, though, Krippendor's is the most common of these weighted
measures; in the set of NLG papers surveyed in Amidei et al. (2019a), only one used weighted .
12