Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
leave out important details on how the human evaluations were run, such as who the
evaluators are and how many people evaluated the text (van der Lee et al., 2019).
Clear reporting of human evaluations is very important, especially for replicability
purposes.
We encourage NLG researchers to design their human evaluations carefully, paying
attention to best practices described in NLG and crowdsourcing research, and to
include the details of the studies and data collected from human evaluations, where
possible, in their papers. This will allow new research to be consistent with previous
work and enable more direct comparisons between NLG results. Human evaluation-
based shared tasks and evaluation platforms can also provide evaluation consistency
and help researchers directly compare how people perceive and interact with dierent
NLG systems.
•Evaluating ethical issues. There is still a lack of systematic methods for evaluating
how eectively an NLG system can avoid generating improper or oensive language.
The problem is particularly challenging when the NLG system is based on neural
language models whose output is not always predictable. As a result, many social
chatbots, such as XiaoIce (Zhou et al., 2020), resort to hand-crafted policies and edi-
torial responses to make the system's behavior predictable. However, as pointed out
by Zhou et al. (2020), even a completely deterministic function can lead to unpre-
dictable behavior. For example, a simple answer \Yes" could be perceived as oensive
in a given context. For these reasons and others, NLG evaluations should also consider
the ethical implications of their potential responses and applications. We should also
note that the landscape and focus of ethics in AI in general is constantly changing
due to new advances in neural text generation, and as such, continuing development
of ethical evaluations of the machine-generated content is crucial for new advances in
the eld.
We encourage researchers working in NLG and NLG evaluation to focus on these chal-
lenges moving forward, as they will help sustain and broaden the progress we have seen in
NLG so far.
References
Proceedings of the 11th international workshop on semantic evaluation (SemEval-2017).
Vancouver, Canada, August 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Abhaya Agarwal and Alon Lavie. Meteor, mbleu and mter: Evaluation metrics for high-
correlation with human rankings of machine translation output. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , StatMT '08, pp. 115{118, USA,
2008. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 9781932432091.
Eneko Agirre, Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre, Inigo Lopez-Gazpio, Montse Maritxalar, German
Rigau, and Larraitz Uria. Semeval-2016 task 2: Interpretable semantic textual similarity.
pp. 512{524, 01 2016.
47