Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
Dialog Response Generation Image Captioning
ContextSpeaker A : Hey John, what do
you want to do tonight?
Speaker B : Why don't we go see
a movie?
Ground-Truth Response: Nah, I hate that
stu, let's do something active.Caption: a man wearing a red
life jacket is sitting in a canoe on
a lake
Model/Distorted Output Response: Oh sure! Heard the
lm about Turing is out!Caption: a guy wearing a life
vest is in a small boat on a lake
BLEU 0.0 0.20
ROUGE 0.0 0.57
WMD 0.0 0.10
Table 3: Demonstration of issues with using automatic evaluation metrics that rely on n-
gram overlap using two short-text generation tasks: dialog response generation and image
captioning. The examples are adapted from Liu et al. (2016) and Kilickaya et al. (2017).
Extending word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) to produce word or phrase embeddings,
one of the earliest sentence embeddings models, Deep Semantic Similarity Model ( dssm )
(Huang et al., 2013) introduced a series of latent semantic models with a deep structure
that projects two or more text streams (such as a query and multiple documents) into a
common low-dimensional space where the relevance of one text towards the other text can
be computed via vector distance. The skip-thought vectors model (Kiros et al., 2015)
exploits the encoder-decoder architecture to predict context sentences in an unsupervised
manner (see Figure 4). Skip-thought vectors allow us to encode rich contextual information
by taking into account the surrounding context, but are slow to train. fastsent (Hill
et al., 2016) makes training ecient by representing a sentence as the sum of its word
embeddings, but also dropping any knowledge of word order. A simpler weighted sum
of word vectors (Arora et al., 2019) weighs each word vector by a factor similar to the
tf-idf score, where more frequent terms are weighted less. Similar to fastsent , it ignores
word order and surrounding sentences. Extending dssm models, infersent (Conneau et al.,
2017) is an eective model, which uses lstm -based Siamese networks, with two additional
advantages over the fastsent . It encodes word order and is trained on a high-quality
sentence inference dataset. On the other hand, quick-thought (Logeswaran & Lee, 2018)
is based on an unsupervised model of universal sentence embeddings trained on consecutive
sentences. Given an input sentence and its context, a classier is trained to distinguish a
context sentence from other contrastive sentences based on their embeddings.
The recent large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs) such as elmo andbert use
contextualized word embeddings to represent sentences. Even though these PLMs outper-
form the earlier models such as dssm s, they are more computationally expensive to use for
evaluating NLG systems. For example, the sentence similarity metrics that use Transformer-
based encoders, such as bert model (Devlin et al., 2018) and its extension roberta (Liu
et al., 2019c), to obtain sentence representations are designed to learn textual similarities in
25