Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
can become prohibitively costly (by requiring lots of head-to-head comparisons) or complex
(by requiring participants to rank long lists of output) when there are many models to
compare, though there are methods to help in these cases. For example, best-worst scal-
ing (Louviere et al., 2015) has been used in NLG tasks (Kiritchenko & Mohammad, 2016;
Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2019) to simplify comparative evaluations; best-worst scaling asks
participants to choose the best and worst elements from a set of candidates, a simpler task
than fully ranking the set that still provides reliable results.
Almost all text generation tasks today are evaluated with intrinsic human evaluations.
Machine translation is one of the text generation tasks in which intrinsic human evaluations
have made a huge impact on the development of more reliable and accurate translation
systems, as automatic metrics are validated through correlation with human judgments.
One metric that is most commonly used to judge translated output by humans is measuring
itsadequacy , which is dened by the Linguistic Data Consortium as \how much of the
meaning expressed in the gold-standard translation or source is also expressed in the target
translation"4. The annotators must be bilingual in both the source and target languages in
order to judge whether the information is preserved across translation. Another dimension
of text quality commonly considered in machine translation is 
uency , which measures the
quality of the generated text only (e.g., the target translated sentence), without taking the
source into account. It accounts for criteria such as grammar, spelling, choice of words, and
style. A typical scale used to measure 
uency is based on the question \Is the language
in the output 
uent?". Fluency is also adopted in several text generation tasks including
document summarization (Celikyilmaz et al., 2018; Narayan et al., 2018), recipe generation
(Bosselut et al., 2018), image captioning (Lan et al., 2017), video description generation
(Park et al., 2018), and question generation (Du et al., 2017), to name a few.
While 
uency and adequacy have become standard dimensions of human evaluation for
machine translation, not all text generation tasks have an established set of dimensions
that researchers use. Nevertheless, there are several dimensions that are common in human
evaluations for generated text. As with adequacy, many of these dimensions focus on the
content of the generated text. Factuality is important in tasks that require the generated
text to accurately re
ect facts described in the context. For example, in tasks like data-
to-text generation or summarization, the information in the output should not contradict
the information in the input data table or news article. This is a challenge to many neu-
ral NLG models, which are known to \hallucinate" information (Holtzman et al., 2020;
Welleck et al., 2019); Maynez et al. (2020) nd that over 70% of generated single-sentence
summaries contained hallucinations, a nding that held across several dierent modeling
approaches. Even if there is no explicit set of facts to adhere to, researchers may want to
know how well the generated text follows rules of commonsense or how logical it is. For
generation tasks that involve extending a text, researchers may ask evaluators to gauge the
coherence orconsistency of a text|how well it ts the provided context. For example, in
story generation, do the same characters appear throughout the generated text, and do the
sequence of actions make sense given the plot so far?
Other dimensions focus not on what the generated text is saying, but how it is being
said. As with 
uency, these dimensions can often be evaluated without showing evaluators
4. https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/docs/LDC2003T17/TransAssess02.pdf
7