Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
followed them. System success-based extrinsic evaluations, on the other hand, measure an
NLG system's ability to complete the task for which it has been designed. For example,
Reiter et al. (2003) generate personalized smoking cessation letters and report how many
recipients actually gave up smoking. Post-editing, most often seen in machine translation
(Aziz et al., 2012; Denkowski et al., 2014), can also be used to measure a system's success
by measuring how many changes a person makes to a machine-generated text.
Extrinsic human evaluations are commonly used in evaluating the performance of dialog
systems (Deriu et al., 2019) and have made an impact on the development of the dialog
modeling systems. Various approaches have been used to measure the system's performance
when talking to people, such as measuring the conversation length or asking people to rate
the system. The feedback is collected by real users of the dialog system (Black et al., 2011;
Lamel et al., 2000; Zhou et al., 2020) at the end of the conversation. The Alexa Prize5follows
a similar strategy by letting real users interact with operational systems and gathering the
user feedback over a span of several months. However, the most commonly used human
evaluations of dialog systems is still via crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical
Turk (AMT) (Serban et al., 2016a; Peng et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020).
Jurcicek et al. (2011) suggest that using enough crowdsourced users can yield a good quality
metric, which is also comparable to the human evaluations in which subjects interact with
the system and evaluate afterwards.
2.3 The Evaluators
For many NLG evaluation tasks, no specic expertise is required of the evaluators other
than a prociency in the language of the generated text. This is especially true when

uency-related aspects of the generated text are the focus of the evaluation. Often, the
target audience of an NLG system is broad, e.g., a summarization system may want to
generate text for anyone who is interested in reading news articles or a chatbot needs to
carry out a conversation with anyone who could access it. In these cases, human evaluations
benet from being performed on as wide a population as possible.
Evaluations can be performed either in-person or online. An in-person evaluation could
simply be performed by the authors or a group of evaluators recruited by the researchers to
come to the lab and participate in the study. The benets of in-person evaluation are that it
is easier to train and interact with participants, and that it is easier to get detailed feedback
about the study and adapt it as needed. Researchers also have more certainty and control
over who is participating in their study, which is especially important when trying to work
with a more targeted set of evaluators. However, in-person studies can also be expensive
and time-consuming to run. For these reasons, in-person evaluations tend to include fewer
participants, and the set of people in proximity to the research group may not accurately
re
ect the full set of potential users of the system. In-person evaluations may also be more
susceptible to response biases, adjusting their decisions to match what they believe to be
the researchers' preferences or expectations (Nichols & Maner, 2008; Orne, 1962).
To mitigate some of the drawbacks of in-person studies, online evaluations of generated
texts have become increasingly popular. While researchers could independently recruit par-
ticipants online to work on their tasks, it is common to use crowdsourcing platforms that
5.https://developer.amazon.com/alexaprize
9