Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
tive as there are often many plausible references in these scenarios and collecting them all is
impossible. Even though human evaluation methods are useful in these scenarios for evalu-
ating aspects like coherency, naturalness, or 
uency, aspects like diversity or creativity may
be dicult for human judges to assess as they have no knowledge about the dataset that the
model is trained on (Hashimoto et al., 2019). Language models can learn to copy from the
training dataset and generate samples that a human judge will rate as high in quality, but
may fail in generating diverse samples (i.e., samples that are very dierent from training
samples), as has been observed in social chatbots (Li et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2020). A
language model optimized only for perplexity may generate coherent but bland responses.
Such behaviours are observed when generic pre-trained language models are used for down-
stream tasks `as-is' without ne-tuning on in-domain datasets of related downstream tasks.
A commonly overlooked issue is that conducting human evaluation for every new generation
task can be expensive and not easily generalizable.
To calibrate human judgments and automatic evaluation metrics, model-based ap-
proaches that use human judgments as attributes or labels have been proposed. Lowe
et al. (2017) introduced a model-based evaluation metric, adem , which is learned from hu-
man judgments for dialog system evaluation, specically response generation in a chatbot
setting. Using Twitter data (each tweet response is a reference, and its previous dialog
turns are its context), they have dierent models (such as RNNs, retrieval-based methods,
or other human responses) generate responses and ask humans to judge the appropriateness
of the generated response given the context. For evaluation they use a higher quality labeled
Twitter dataset (Ritter et al., 2011), which contains dialogs on a variety of topics.
Figure 6: The ADEM evaluation model. Image source (Lowe et al., 2017).
Using this score-labeled dataset, the adem evaluation model is trained as follows: First,
a latent variational recurrent encoder-decoder model ( vhred ) (Serban et al., 2016b) is pre-
trained on a dialog dataset to learn to represent the context of a dialog. vhred encodes
the dialog context into a vector representation, from which the model generates samples
of initial vectors to condition the decoder model to generate the next response. Using the
pre-trained vhred model as the encoder, they train adem as follows (see Figure 6). First,
the dialog context, c, the model generated response ^ r, and the reference response rare fed
tovhred to get their embedding vectors, c,^ randr. Then, each embedding is linearly
projected so that the model response ^ rcan be mapped onto the spaces of the dialog context
and the reference response to calculate a similarity score. The similarity score measures how
27