Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
target and source translations (Popovic et al., 2011; Han et al., 2013b). POS tag information
has been used for other text generation tasks such as story generation (Agirrezabal et al.,
2013), summarization (Suneetha & Fatima, 2011), and question generation (Zerr, 2014).
Syntactic analysis studies the arrangement of words and phrases in well-formed sen-
tences. For example, a dependency parser extracts a dependency tree of a sentence to
represent its grammatical structure. Several text generation tasks have enriched their eval-
uation criteria by leveraging syntactic analysis. In machine translation, Liu & Gildea (2005)
used constituent labels and head-modier dependencies to extract structural information
from sentences for evaluation, while others use shallow parsers (Lo et al., 2012) or depen-
dency parsers (Yu et al., 2014, 2015). Yoshida et al. (2014) combined a sequential decoder
with a tree-based decoder in a neural architecture for abstractive text summarization.
4. Machine-Learned Evaluation Metrics
Many of the untrained evaluation metrics described in Section 3 assume that the generated
text has signicant word (or n-gram) overlap with the ground-truth text. However, this
assumption does not hold for NLG tasks that permit signicant diversity and allow multiple
plausible outputs for a given input (e.g., a social chatbot). Table 3 shows two examples
from the dialog response generation and image captioning tasks, respectively. In both tasks,
the model-generated outputs are plausible given the input, but they do not share any words
with the ground-truth output.
One solution to this problem is to use embedding-based metrics, which measure semantic
similarity rather than word overlap, as in Section 3.2.2. But embedding-based methods
cannot help in situations when the generated output is semantically dierent from the
reference, as in the dialog example. In these cases, we can build machine-learned models
(trained on human judgment data) to mimic human judges to measure many quality metrics
of output, such as factual correctness, naturalness, 
uency, coherence, etc. In this section
we survey the NLG evaluation metrics that are computed using machine-learned models,
with a focus on recent neural models.
4.1 Sentence Semantic Similarity Based Evaluation
Neural approaches to sentence representation learning seek to capture semantic meaning
and syntactic structure of sentences from dierent perspectives and topics and to map a
sentence onto an embedding vector using neural network models. As with word embeddings,
NLG models can be evaluated by embedding each sentence in the generated and reference
texts.
Figure 4: Illustration of Skip-Thoughts Vectors Model for sentence representation learning
(Image Source: (Kiros et al., 2015)).
24