Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
3.2.2 Vector Similarity-Based Evaluation Metrics
In NLP, embedding-based similarity measures are commonly used in addition to n-gram-
based similarity metrics. Embeddings are real-valued vector representations of character or
lexical units, such as word-tokens or n-grams, that allow tokens with similar meanings to
have similar representations. Even though the embedding vectors are learned using super-
vised or unsupervised neural network models, the vector-similarity metrics we summarize
below assume the embeddings are pre-trained and simply used as input to calculate the
metric.
meant 2.0 The vector-based similarity measure meant uses word embeddings and shal-
low semantic parses to compute lexical and structural similarity (Lo, 2017). It evaluates
translation adequacy by measuring the similarity of the semantic frames and their role llers
between the human references and the machine translations.
yisi Inspired by the meant score, yisi16(Lo, 2019) is proposed to evaluate the accuracy
of machine translation model outputs. It is based on the weighted distributional lexical
semantic similarity, as well as shallow semantic structures. Specically, it extracts the
longest common character sub-string from the hypothesis and reference translations to
measure the lexical similarity.
Word Mover's Distance (wmd) Earth mover's distance ( emd), also known as the
Wasserstein metric (Rubner et al., 1998), is a measure of the distance between two proba-
bility distributions. Word mover's distance ( wmd ; Kusner et al., 2015) is a discrete version
ofemd that calculates the distance between two sequences (e.g., sentences, paragraphs,
etc.), each represented with relative word frequencies. It combines item similarity17on
bag-of-word (BOW) histogram representations of text (Goldberg et al., 2018) with word
embedding similarity. In short, wmd has several intriguing properties:
•It is hyperparameter-free and easy to use.
•It is highly interpretable as the distance between two documents can be broken down
and explained as the sparse distances between few individual words.
•It uses the knowledge encoded within the word embedding space, which leads to high
retrieval accuracy.
Empirically, wmd has been instrumental to the improvement of many NLG tasks, specif-
ically sentence-level tasks, such as image caption generation (Kilickaya et al., 2017) and nat-
ural language inference (Sulea, 2017). However, while wmd works well for short texts, its
cost grows prohibitively as the length of the documents increases, and the BOW approach
can be problematic when documents become large as the relation between sentences is lost.
By only measuring word distances, the metric cannot capture information conveyed in the
group of words, for which we need higher-level document representations (Dai et al., 2015).
Sentence Mover's Distance (smd) Sentence Mover's Distance ( smd) is an automatic
metric based on wmd to evaluate text in a continuous space using sentence embeddings
(Clark et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019). smd represents each document as a collection
16. YiSi, is the romanization of the Cantonese word 意思, which translates as `meaning' in English.
17. The similarity can be dened as cosine, Jaccard, Euclidean, etc.
19