Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
5.1 Generating Referring Expressions
The Attribute Selection for Generating Referring Expressions ( GRE ) (asgre ) Challenge
(Gatt & Belz, 2008) was one of the rst shared-task evaluation challenges in NLG. It was
designed for the content determination of the GRE task, selecting the properties to describe
an intended referent. The goal of this shared task was to evaluate the submitted systems
onminimality (the proportion of descriptions in the system-generated output that are
maximally brief compared to the original denition), uniqueness and humanlikeness .
5.2 Embedded Text Generation
To spur research towards human-machine communication in situated settings, Generating
Instructions in Virtual Environments ( GIVE ) has been introduced as a challenge and an
evaluation testbed for NLG (Koller et al., 2009). In this challenge a human player is given
a task to solve in a simulated 3D space. A generation module's task is to guide the human
player, using natural language instructions. Only the human user can eect any changes
in the world, by moving around, manipulating objects, etc. This challenge evaluates NLG
models on referring expression generation, aggregation, grounding, realization, and user
modeling. This challenge has been organized in four consecutive years (Striegnitz et al.,
2011).
5.3 Regular Expression Generation (REG) in Context
The goal in this task is to map a representation of an intended referent in a given textual
context to a full surface form. The representation of the intended referring expression maybe
one from possible list of referring expressions for that referent and/or a set of semantic and
syntactic properties. This challenge has been organized under dierent sub-challenges:
GREC-Full has focused on improving the referential clarity and 
uency of the text in
which systems were expected to replace regular expressions and where necessary to produce
as clear, 
uent and coherent a text as possible (Belz & Kow, 2010). The GREC-NEG
Task at Generation Challenges 2009 (Belz et al., 2009) evaluated models in select correct
coreference chains for all people entities mentioned in short encyclopaedic texts about people
collected from Wikipedia.
5.4 Regular Expression Generation from Attribute Sets
This task tries to answer the following question: Given a symbol corresponding to an
intended referent, how do we work out the semantic content of a referring expression that
uniquely identies the entity in question? (Bohnet & Dale, 2005). The input to these models
consists of sets of attributes (e.g., ftype=lamp, colour=blue, size=small g), where at least
one attribute set is labelled the intended referent, and the remainder are the distractors.
Then the task is to build a model that can output a set of attributes for the intended referent
that uniquely distinguishes it from the distractors. Gatt et al. (2008) have introduced the
tune Corpus and the tuna Challenge based on this corpus that covered a variety of tasks,
including attribute selection for referring expressions, realization and end-to-end referring
expression generation.
35