Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
In this paper we provide a comprehensive survey of NLG evaluation methods with a focus
on evaluating neural NLG systems. We group evaluation methods into three categories: (1)
human-centric evaluation metrics, (2) automatic metrics that require no training, and (3)
machine-learned metrics. For each category, we discuss the progress that has been made,
the challenges still being faced, and proposals for new directions in NLG evaluation.
1.1 Evolution of Natural Language Generation
NLG is dened as the task of building software systems that can write (e.g., producing
explanations, summaries, narratives, etc.) in English and other human languages2. Just as
people communicate ideas through writing or speech, NLG systems are designed to produce
natural language text or speech that conveys ideas to its readers in a clear and useful way.
NLG systems have been used to generate text for many real-world applications, such as
generating weather forecasts, carrying interactive conversations with humans in spoken
dialog systems (chatbots), captioning images or visual scenes, translating text from one
language to another, and generating stories and news articles.
NLG techniques range from simple template-based systems that generate natural lan-
guage text using rules to machine-learned systems that have a complex understanding of
human grammar3. The rst generation of automatic NLG systems uses rule-based or data-
driven pipeline methods. In their book, Reiter & Dale (2000b) presented a classical three-
stage NLG architecture. The rst stage is document planning , which determines the content
and its order and generates a text plan outlining the structure of messages. The second is
themicro-planning stage, when referring expressions that identify objects like entities or
places are generated, along with the choice of words to be used and how they are aggregated.
Collating similar sentences to improve readability with a natural 
ow also occurs in this
stage. The last stage is realization , in which the actual text is generated, using linguistic
knowledge about morphology, syntax, semantics, etc. Earlier work has focused on mod-
eling discourse structures and learning representations of relations between text units for
text generation (McKeown, 1985; Marcu, 1997; Ono et al., 1994; Stede & Umbach, 1998),
for example using Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann & Thompson, 1987) or Segmented
Discourse Representation Theory (Asher & Lascarides, 2003). There is a large body of
work that is based on template-based models and has used statistical methods to improve
generation by introducing new methods such as sentence compression, reordering, lexical
paraphrasing, and syntactic transformation, to name a few (Sporleder, 2005; Steinberger,
2006; Knight, 2000; Clarke & Lapata, 2008; Quirk et al., 2004).
These earlier text generation approaches and their extensions play an important role
in the evolution of NLG research. Following this earlier work, an important direction that
several NLG researchers have focused on is data-driven representation learning, which has
gained attention with the availability of more data sources. Availability of large datasets,
treebanks, corpora of referring expressions, as well as shared tasks have been benecial in
the progress of several NLG tasks today (Gkatzia et al., 2015; Gatt et al., 2007; Mairesse
et al., 2010; Konstas & Lapata, 2013; Konstas & Lapara, 2012).
2. From Ehud Reiter's Blog (Reiter, 2019).
3. For an extensive survey on the evolution of NLG techniques, please refer to Gatt & Krahmer (2018).
2