Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
the film is set in a united states library , located at an old - fashioned desk and surrounded by bookshelves . it consists of three stories with police officers throughout each story . there are two versions : one for each floor ; the other for every room . the narrator ( played by john wayne ) explains that he has constructed short films to help people who need them . these include " cops " , " policemen " , " robbers " , " criminals " , " murderers " , " killers " , " terrorists " , " gangsters " , " assassins " , " revolutionaries " , " anarchists " , " traitors " , " villains " , " murderers " , and " rapists " .they have erected a large statue of napoleon , but when questioned why they did n't capture him yet , they simply say that their boss wanted to make sure that his men would never find out where he hid the money . after hearing the news , they decide to go undercover and infiltrate the bank owned by the president of the state department . while infiltrating the vault , they discover that the robbery will take place over a long period of time . during the heist , the group discovers that the leader of the gang is actually a member of the national film registry , known only as the chief of security . the head of the operation is named mr hoover , and the rest of the team are called " cops " .the plan works perfectly until the thieves break into the museum using a concealed tunnel . they steal all the books and papers , leaving the prisoners free to escape . the prison guards chase after them , but the boys manage to hide themselves under desks and chairs before escaping . the boys return home to tell their parents about the incident . their mother is shocked and angry , believing that her sons ' actions led to the death penalty . she scolds them for running away without telling anyone . they explain that they just ran away because they could no longer stand living in fear .finally , the thief reveals herself as mrs robinson , the librarian of the united states library . she informs the heroes that she knows everything about them and even helped them escape . she wants to show them something . she shows them a picture of the famous hero , william shakespeare , who died fighting the nazis . the four friends wonder what happened to him . the policeman returns and takes the photo . the others realize that the policeman is none other than william shakespeare himself . the policeman claims that he killed shakespeare because he knew too much information about the nazi regime . he leaves .the film features a detailed description of the structure of the library , including its construction and layout . the illustrations are based upon actual events . the buildings featured in the pictures depicted are modeled after those found in real life such as stonehenge , atlantis , mount rushmore , the great pyramid , etc . the photographs depict the entire town of granville , california , and the surrounding countryside . the map used in the documentary is described as having been taken from 1899 to 1947 . the location of granville is shown in the film .Memdual:•cops (film) •police officers throughout •constructed short films •national film registry •united states library  •pork pie hat proppedred: outline points       : mentioned (partially) at least once       : mentioned multiple timesPlotMachines
Figure 17: Example document generated using PlotMachines . Red text indicates where
plot points are mentioned. (Table Source (Rashkin et al., 2020).)
43