Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
rouge. Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation ( rouge ) (Lin, 2004) is a set
of metrics for evaluating automatic summarization of long texts consisting of multiple sen-
tences or paragraphs. Although mainly designed for evaluating single- or multi-document
summarization, it has also been used for evaluating short text generation, such as machine
translation (Lin & Och, 2004), image captioning (Cui et al., 2018), and question generation
(Nema & Khapra, 2018; Dong et al., 2019). rouge includes a large number of distinct vari-
ants, including eight dierent n-gram counting methods to measure n-gram overlap between
the generated and the ground-truth (human-written) text: rouge- f1/2/3/4 gmeasures the
overlap of unigrams /bigrams /trigrams /four-grams (single tokens) between the reference
and hypothesis text (e.g., summaries); rouge-l measures the longest matching sequence
of words using longest common sub-sequence (LCS); rouge-s (less commonly used) mea-
sures skip-bigram15-based co-occurrence statistics; rouge-su (less commonly used) mea-
sures skip-bigram and unigram-based co-occurrence statistics.
Compared to bleu ,rouge focuses on recall rather than precision and is more inter-
pretable than bleu (Callison-Burch & Osborne, 2006). Additionally, rouge includes the
mean or median score from individual output text, which allows for a signicance test of
dierences in system-level rouge scores, while this is restricted in bleu (Graham & Bald-
win, 2014; Graham, 2015). However, rouge 's reliance on n-gram matching can be an issue,
especially for long-text generation tasks (Kilickaya et al., 2017), because it doesn't provide
information about the narrative 
ow, grammar, or topical 
ow of the generated text, nor
does it evaluate the factual correctness of the text compared to the corpus it is generated
from.
meteor. The Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering ( meteor ) (Lavie
et al., 2004; Banerjee & Lavie, 2005) is a metric designed to address some of the issues
found in bleu and has been widely used for evaluating machine translation models and
other models, such as image captioning (Kilickaya et al., 2017), question generation (Nema
& Khapra, 2018; Du et al., 2017), and summarization (See et al., 2017; Chen & Bansal,
2018; Yan et al., 2020). Compared to bleu , which only measures precision, meteor is
based on the harmonic mean of the unigram precision and recall, in which recall is weighted
higher than precision. Several metrics support this property since it yields high correlation
with human judgments (Lavie & Agarwal, 2007).
meteor has several variants that extend exact word matching that most of the metrics
in this category do not include, such as stemming and synonym matching. These variants
address the problem of reference translation variability, allowing for morphological variants
and synonyms to be recognized as valid translations. The metric has been found to produce
good correlation with human judgments at the sentence or segment level (Agarwal & Lavie,
2008). This diers from bleu in that meteor is explicitly designed to compare at the
sentence level rather than the corpus level.
cider. Consensus-based Image Description Evaluation ( cider) is an automatic metric for
measuring the similarity of a generated sentence against a set of human-written sentences
using a consensus-based protocol. Originally proposed for image captioning (Vedantam
et al., 2014), cider shows high agreement with consensus as assessed by humans. It enables
15. A skip-gram (Huang et al., 1992) is a type of n-gram in which tokens (e.g., words) don't need to be
consecutive but in order in the sentence, where there can be gaps between the tokens that are skipped
over. In NLP research, they are used to overcome data sparsity issues.
16