Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
Figure 2: (LEFT) Illustration of Word Mover's Distance (WMD). Picture source: (Kusner
et al., 2015); (RIGHT) Illustration of Sentence Mover's Distance (SMD). Picture source:
(Clark et al., 2019).
of sentences or of both words and sentences (as seen in Figure 2), where each sentence
embedding is weighted according to its length. smd measures the cumulative distance of
moving the sentences embeddings in one document to match another document's sentence
embeddings. On a summarization task, smd correlated better with human judgments than
rouge (Clark et al., 2019).
Zhao et al. (2019) proposed a new version of smd that attains higher correlation with
human judgments. Similar to smd, they used word and sentence embeddings by taking the
average of the token-based embeddings before the mover's distance is calculated. They also
investigated dierent contextual embeddings models including ELMO and BERT by taking
the power mean (which is an embedding aggregation method) of their embeddings at each
layer of the encoding model.
3.3n-gram-Based Diversity Metrics
The lexical diversity score measures the breadth and variety of the word usage in writing
(Inspector, 2013). Lexical diversity is desirable in many NLG tasks, such as conversational
bots (Li et al., 2018), story generation (Rashkin et al., 2020), question generation (Du et al.,
2017; Pan et al., 2019), and abstractive question answering (Fan et al., 2019). Nevertheless,
diversity-based metrics are rarely used on their own, as text diversity can come at the cost
of text quality (Montahaei et al., 2019a; Hashimoto et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021), and
some NLG tasks do not require highly diverse generations. For example, Reiter et al. (2005)
reported that a weather forecast system was preferred over human meteorologists as the
system produced report has a more consistent use of certain classes of expressions relating
to reporting weather forecast.
In this section we review some of the metrics designed to measure the quality of the
generated text in terms of lexical diversity.
Type-Token Ratio (ttr) is a measure of lexical diversity (Richards, 1987), mostly used
in linguistics to determine the richness of a writer's or speaker's vocabulary. It is computed
as the number of unique words (types) divided by the total number of words (tokens) in a
given segment of language.
Although intuitive and easy to use, ttris sensitive to text length because the longer the
document, the lower the likelihood that a token will be a new type. This causes the ttr to
20