Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
quality of a generated summary is associated with the number of questions (from a set of
relevant ones) that can be answered by reading the summary.
Figure 13: APES evaluation 
ow. Image Source: (Hashimoto et al., 2019).
To build such an evaluator to assess the quality of generated summaries, they intro-
duce two components: (a) a set of relevant questions for each source document and (b) a
question-answering system. They rst generate questions from each reference summary by
masking each of the named entities present in the reference based on the method described
in Hermann et al. (2015). For each reference summary, this results in several triplets in the
form (generated summary, question, answer) , where question refers to the sentence contain-
ing the masked entity, answer refers to the masked entity, and the generated summary is
generated by their summarization model. Thus, for each generated summary, metrics can
be derived based on the accuracy of the question answering system in retrieving the correct
answers from each of the associated triplets. This metric is useful for summarizing docu-
ments for domains that contain lots of named entities, such as biomedical or news article
summarization.
4.6 Composite Metric Scores
The quality of many NLG models like machine translation and image captioning can be
evaluated for multiple aspects, such as adequacy, 
uency, and diversity. Many composite
metrics have been proposed to capture a multi-dimensional sense of quality. Sharif et al.
(2018) presented a machine-learned composite metric for evaluating image captions. The
metric incorporates a set of existing metrics such as meteor ,wmd , and spice to measure
both adequacy and 
uency. They evaluate various combinations of the metrics they chose to
compose and and show that their composite metrics correlate well with human judgments.
Li & Chen (2020) propose a composite reward function to evaluate the performance
of image captions. The approach is based on rened Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (rAIRL), which eases the reward ambiguity (common in reward-based generation
models) by decoupling the reward for each word in a sentence. The proposed composite
reward is shown on MS COCO data to achieve state-of-the-art performance on image cap-
tioning. Some examples generated from this model that uses the composite reward function
are shown in Figure 14. They have shown that their metric not only generates grammatical
captions but also correlates well with human judgments.
33