Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
any context. This can be something as basic as checking for simple language errors by asking
evaluators to rate how grammatical the generated text is. It can also involve asking about
the overall style,formality , or tone of the generated text, which is particularly important
in style-transfer tasks or in multi-task settings. Hashimoto et al. (2019) ask evaluators
about the typicality of generated text; in other words, how often do you expect to see text
that looks like this? These dimensions may also focus on how eciently the generated text
communicates its point by asking evaluators how repetitive orredundant it is.
Note that while these dimensions are common, they may be referred to by other names,
explained to evaluators in dierent terms, or measured in dierent ways (Lee et al., 2021).
Howcroft et al. (2020) found that ~25% of generation papers published in the last twenty
years failed to mention what the evaluation dimensions were, and less than half included
denitions of these dimensions. More consistency in how user evaluations are run, especially
for well-dened generation tasks, would be useful for producing comparable results and for
focused eorts for improving performance in a given generation task. One way to enforce this
consistency is by handing over the task of human evaluation from the individual researchers
to an evaluation platform, usually run by people hosting a shared task or leaderboard. In
this setting, researchers submit their models or model outputs to the evaluation platform,
which organizes and runs all the human evaluations. For example, GENIE (Khashabi et al.,
2021) and GEM (Gehrmann et al., 2021) both include standardized human evaluations for
understanding models' progress across several generation tasks. ChatEval is an evaluation
platform for open-domain chatbots based on both human and automatic metrics (Sedoc
et al., 2019), and TuringAdvice (Zellers et al., 2020) tests models' language understanding
capabilities by having people read and rate the models' ability to generate advice.
Of course, as with all leaderboards and evaluation platforms, with uniformity and con-
sistency come rigidity and the possibility of overtting to the wrong objectives. Discussions
of how to standardize human evaluations should take this into account. A person's goal
when producing text can be nuanced and diverse, and the ways of evaluating text should
re
ect that.
2.2 Extrinsic Evaluation
Anextrinsic evaluation measures how successful the system is in a downstream task. Ex-
trinsic evaluations are the most meaningful evaluation as they show how a system actually
performs in a downstream setting, but they can also be expensive and dicult to run (Re-
iter & Belz, 2009). For this reason, intrinsic evaluations are more common than extrinsic
evaluations (Gkatzia & Mahamood, 2015; van der Lee et al., 2019) and have become in-
creasingly so, which van der Lee et al. (2019) attribute to a recent shift in focus on NLG
subtasks rather than full systems.
An NLG system's success can be measured from two dierent perspectives: a user's
success in a task and the system's success in fullling its purpose (Hastie & Belz, 2014b).
Extrinsic methods that measure a user's success at a task look at what the user is able
to take away from the system, e.g., improved decision making or higher comprehension
accuracy (Gkatzia & Mahamood, 2015). For example, Young (1999), which Reiter & Belz
(2009) point to as one of the rst examples of extrinsic evaluation of generated text, evaluate
automatically generated instructions by the number of mistakes subjects made when they
8