Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
Evaluation Criteria Evaluation Metric
measures semantic similarity (content) pyramid ,spice ,spider ,yisi,sps,te
measures diversity wmd ,smd,ttr,self-bleu
measures 
uency bleu ,rouge ,nist
punishes length dierences f-score ,bleu ,nist,rouge
punishes grammatical errors meteor ,nist
correlates well with human judgments meteor ,spice ,ter
Table 2: Clustering several of the untrained metrics based on dierent criteria.
using vectors. Then, we compute the distance between the vectors. The smaller the dis-
tance, the more similar the two text units are. This section reviews distance-based similarity
measures where text vectors can be constructed using discrete tokens, such as bag of words
(§3.2.1) or embedding vectors ( §3.2.2). We note that even though the embeddings that
are used by these metrics to represent the text vectors are pre-trained, these metrics are
not trained to mimic the human judgments, as in the machine-learned metrics that we
summarize in Section 4.
3.2.1 Edit Distance-Based Metrics
Edit distance, one of the most commonly used evaluation metrics in natural language pro-
cessing, measures how dissimilar two text units are based on the minimum number of oper-
ations required to transform one text into the other. We summarize some of the well-known
edit distance measures below.
wer Word error rate ( wer) has been commonly used for measuring the performance of
speech recognition systems, as well as to evaluate the quality of machine translation systems
(Tom as et al., 2003). Specically, wer is the percentage of words that need to be inserted,
deleted, or replaced in the translated sentence to obtain the reference sentence, i.e., the edit
distance between the reference and hypothesis sentences.
wer has some limitations. For instance, while its value is lower-bounded by zero, which
indicates a perfect match between the hypothesis and reference text, its value is not upper-
bounded, making it hard to evaluate in an absolute manner (Mccowan et al., 2004). It is
also reported to suer from weak correlation with human evaluation. For example, in the
task of spoken document retrieval, the wer of an automatic speech recognition system is
reported to poorly correlate with the retrieval system performance (Ka
e & Huenerfauth,
2017).
ter Translation edit rate ( ter) (Snover et al., 2006) is dened as the minimum number
of edits needed to change a generated text so that it exactly matches one of the references,
normalized by the average length of the references. While terhas been shown to correlate
well with human judgments in evaluating machine translation quality, it suers from some
limitations. For example, it can only capture similarity in a narrow sense, as it only uses a
single reference translation and considers only exact word matches between the hypothesis
and the reference. This issue can be partly addressed by constructing a lattice of reference
translations, a technique that has been used to combine the output of multiple translation
systems (Rosti et al., 2007).
18