Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
•Making evaluation explainable. Explainable AI refers to AI and machine learn-
ing methods that can provide human-understandable justications for their behaviour
(Ehsan et al., 2019). Evaluation systems that can provide reasons for their decisions
are benecial in many ways. For instance, the explanation could help system develop-
ers to identify the root causes of the system's quality problems such as unintentional
bias, repetition, or factual inconsistency. The eld of explainable AI is growing, par-
ticularly in generating explanations of classier predictions in NLP tasks (Ribeiro
et al., 2016, 2018; Thorne et al., 2019). Text generation systems that use evaluation
methods that can provide justication or explanation for their decisions will be more
trusted by their users. Future NLG evaluation research should focus on developing
easy-to-use, robust, and explainable evaluation tools.
•Improving corpus quality. Creating high-quality datasets with multiple reference
texts is essential for not only improving the reliability of evaluation but also for al-
lowing the development of new automatic metrics that correlate well with human
judgments (Belz & Reiter, 2006). Among many important critical aspects of building
corpora for natural language generation tasks, the accuracy ,timeliness ,completeness ,
cleanness and unbiasedness of the data plays a very important role. The collected
corpus (whether created manually or automatically through retrieval or generation)
must be accurate so the generation models can serve for the downstream tasks more
eciently. The corpora used for language generation tasks should be relevant to the
corresponding tasks so intended performance can be achieved. Missing information,
information biased toward certain groups, ethnicities, religions, etc. could prevent
the models from gathering accurate insights and could damage the eciency of the
task performance (Eckart et al., 2012; McGue & Newhouse, 2020; Barbaresi, 2015;
Bender et al., 2021; Gehrmann et al., 2021).
•Standardizing evaluation methods. Most untrained automatic evaluation metrics
are standardized using open source platforms like Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK)20
or spaCy21. Such platforms can signicantly simplify the process of benchmarking
dierent models. However, there are still many NLG tasks that use task-specic eval-
uation metrics, such as metrics to evaluate the contextual quality or informativeness
of generated text. There are also no standard criteria for human evaluation methods
for dierent NLG tasks.
It is important for the research community to collaborate more closely to standardize
the evaluation metrics for NLG tasks that are pursued by many research teams. One
eective way to achieve this is to organize challenges or shared tasks, such as the
Evaluating Natural Language Generation Challenge22and the Shared Task on NLG
Evaluation23.
•Developing eective human evaluations. For most NLG tasks, there is little
consensus on how human evaluations should be conducted. Furthermore, papers often
20. nltk.org
21. spacy.io
22. https://framalistes.org/sympa/info/eval.gen.chal
23. https://github.com/evanmiltenburg/Shared-task-on-NLG-Evaluation
46