Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
2008). An entity should be referred to properly in the text and should not be used before
introduced. Roemmele et al. (2017) capture the proportion of the entities in the generated
sentence that are co-referred to an entity in the corresponding context as a metric of entity
co-reference, in which a higher co-reference score indicates higher coherence.
In machine translation, Wong & Kit (2019) introduce a feature that can identify lexical
cohesion at the sentence level via word-level clustering using WordNet (Miller, 1995) and
stemming to obtain a score for each word token, which is averaged over the sentence. They
nd that this new score improves correlation of bleu andter with human judgments.
Other work, such as Gong et al. (2015), uses topic modeling together with automatic metrics
likebleu andmeteor to evaluate lexical cohesion in machine translation of long text.
Chow et al. (2019) investigate the position of the word tokens in evaluating the 
uency of
the generated text. They modify wmd by adding a fragmentation penalty to measure the

uency of a translation for evaluating machine translation systems.
6.2.3 Evaluation via Writing Style
Gamon (2004) show that an author's writing is consistent in style across a particular work.
Based on this nding, Roemmele et al. (2017) propose to measure the quality of generated
text based on whether it presents a consistent writing style. They capture the category
distribution of individual words between the story context and the generated following
sentence using their part-of-speech tags of words (e.g., adverbs, adjectives, conjunctions,
determiners, nouns, etc.).
Text style transfer re
ects the creativity of the generation model in generating new
content. Style transfer can help rewrite a text in a dierent style, which is useful in creative
writing such as poetry generation (Ghazvininejad et al., 2016). One metric that is commonly
used in style transfer is the classication score obtained from a pre-trained style transfer
model (Fu et al., 2018). This metric measures whether a generated sentence has the same
style as its context.
6.2.4 Evaluation with Multiple References
One issue of evaluating text generation systems is the diversity of generation, especially
when the text to evaluate is long. The generated text can be 
uent, valid given the input,
and informative for the user, but it still may not have lexical overlap with the reference text
or the prompt that was used to constrain the generation. This issue has been investigated
extensively (Li et al., 2016; Montahaei et al., 2019b; Holtzman et al., 2020; Welleck et al.,
2019; Gao et al., 2019). Using multiple references that cover as many plausible outputs
as possible is an eective solution to improving the correlation of automatic evaluation
metrics (such as adequacy and 
uency) with human judgments, as demonstrated in machine
translation (Han, 2018; L aubli et al., 2020) and other NLG tasks.
7. Conclusions and Future Directions
Text generation is central to many NLP tasks, including machine translation, dialog re-
sponse generation, document summarization, etc. With the recent advances in neural lan-
guage models, the research community has made signicant progress in developing new
44