Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
Asli Celikyilmaz aslic@fb.com
Facebook AI Research
Elizabeth Clark eaclark7@cs.washington.edu
University of Washington
Jianfeng Gao jfgao@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
Abstract
The paper surveys evaluation methods of natural language generation (NLG) systems
that have been developed in the last few years. We group NLG evaluation methods into
three categories: (1) human-centric evaluation metrics, (2) automatic metrics that require
no training, and (3) machine-learned metrics. For each category, we discuss the progress
that has been made and the challenges still being faced, with a focus on the evaluation of
recently proposed NLG tasks and neural NLG models. We then present two examples for
task-specic NLG evaluations for automatic text summarization and long text generation,
and conclude the paper by proposing future research directions.1
1. Introduction
Natural language generation (NLG), a sub-eld of natural language processing (NLP), deals
with building software systems that can produce coherent and readable text (Reiter & Dale,
2000a) NLG is commonly considered a general term which encompasses a wide range of
tasks that take a form of input (e.g., a structured input like a dataset or a table, a natural
language prompt or even an image) and output a sequence of text that is coherent and
understandable by humans. Hence, the eld of NLG can be applied to a broad range
of NLP tasks, such as generating responses to user questions in a chatbot, translating a
sentence or a document from one language into another, oering suggestions to help write
a story, or generating summaries of time-intensive data analysis.
The evaluation of NLG model output is challenging mainly because many NLG tasks
are open-ended. For example, a dialog system can generate multiple plausible responses for
the same user input. A document can be summarized in dierent ways. Therefore, human
evaluation remains the gold standard for almost all NLG tasks. However, human evaluation
is expensive, and researchers often resort to automatic metrics for quantifying day-to-day
progress and for performing automatic system optimization. Recent advancements in deep
learning have yielded tremendous improvements in many NLP tasks. This, in turn, presents
a need for evaluating these deep neural network (DNN) models for NLG.
1. We are grateful to the following people: Rahul  aJha, Sudha Rao, Ricky Loynd for their helpful comments
and suggestions on earlier versions of this paper. We would like to thank the authors of the papers who
gave us permission to use their gures, tables, and examples in our survey paper to summarize the related
work. We would also like to thank the authors of the GEM Shared Task (Gehrmann et al., 2021), which
aims to improve the evaluation of text generation models, for citing our work.
1arXiv:2006.14799v2  [cs.CL]  18 May 2021