Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
Metric Property MT IC SR SUM DG QG RGn-gram overlapf-score precision and recall X X X X X X X
bleu n-gram precision X X X X X
meteor n-gram w/ synonym match X X X
cider tf-idf weighted n-gram sim. X
nist n-gram precision X
gtm n-gram metrics X
hlepor unigrams harmonic mean X
ribes unigrams harmonic mean
masi attribute overlap
wer % of insert,delete, replace X
ter translation edit rate X
rouge n-gram recall X X
dice attribute overlapdistance-
basededit dist. cosine similarity X X X X X X
meant 2.0 vector based similarity X
yisi weighted similarity X
wmd EMD on words X X
smd EMD on sentences X X X
Frechet distributional similarity Xcontent
over-
lappyramid content selection X
spice scene graph similarity X
spider scene graph similarity Xdiversityttr richness of vocabulary X
self-bleu n-gram precision X
Table 1: Untrained automatic and retrieval-based metrics based on string match, string
distance, or context overlap. The acronyms for some of the NLP sub-research elds that
each metric is commonly used to evaluate text generation are: MT: Machine Translation,
IC: Image Captioning, SR: Speech Recognition, SUM : Summarization, DG: Document
or Story Generation, Visual-Story Generation, QG: Question Generation, RG: Dialog Re-
sponse Generation. EMD:Earth Mover's Distance; Sim.: Similarity.
analysis with models since it is fast, easy to calculate, and enables a comparison with
other models on the same task. However, bleu has some drawbacks for NLG tasks where
contextual understanding and reasoning is the key (e.g., story generation (Fan et al., 2018;
Martin et al., 2017) or long-form question answering (Fan et al., 2019a)). It considers
neither semantic meaning nor sentence structure. It does not handle morphologically rich
languages well, nor does it map well to human judgments (Tatman, 2019). Recent work by
Mathur et al. (2020) investigated how sensitive the machine translation evaluation metrics
are to outliers. They found that when there are outliers in tasks like machine translation,
metrics like bleu lead to high correlations yielding false conclusions about reliability of these
metrics. They report that when the outliers are removed, these metrics do not correlate as
well as before, which adds evidence to the unreliablity of bleu .
We will present other metrics that address some of these shortcomings throughout this
paper.
15