Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
5.5 Deep Meaning Representation to Text (SemEval)
SemEval is a series of NLP workshops organized around the goal of advancing the current
state of the art in semantic analysis and to help create high-quality annotated datasets to
approach challenging problems in natural language semantics. Each year a dierent shared
task is introduced for the teams to evaluate and benchmark models. For instance, Task 9
of the SemEval 2017 challenge was (sem, 2017) on text generation from AMR (Abstract
Meaning Representation), which has focused on generating valid English sentences given
AMR (Banarescu et al., 2013) annotation structure.
5.6 WebNLG
TheWebNLG challenge introduced a text generation task from RDF triples to natural lan-
guage text, providing a corpus and common benchmark for comparing the microplanning
capacity of the generation systems that deal with resolving and using referring expres-
sions, aggregations, lexicalizations, surface realizations and sentence segmentations (Gar-
dent et al., 2017). A second challenge has taken place in 2020 (Zhou & Lampouras, 2020),
three years after the rst one, in which the dataset size increased (as did the coverage of
the verbalisers) and more categories and an additional language were included to promote
the development of knowledge extraction tools, with a task that mirrors the verbalisation
task.
5.7 E2E NLG Challenge
Introduced in 2018, E2E NLG Challenge (Du sek et al., 2018) provided a high quality and
large quantity training dataset for evaluating response generation models in spoken dia-
log systems. It introduced new challenges such that models should jointly learn sentence
planning and surface realisation, while not requiring costly alignment between meaning
representations and corresponding natural language reference texts.
5.8 Data-to-Text Generation Challenge
Most existing work in data-to-text (or table-to-text) generation focused on introducing
datasets and benchmarks rather than organizing challanges. Some of these earlier works
include: eathergov (Liang et al., 2009), robocup (Chen & Mooney, 2008), rotowire
(Wiseman et al., 2017), e2e (Novikova et al., 2016), wikibio (Lebret et al., 2016b) and
recently totto (Parikh et al., 2020). Banik et al. introduced a text generation from
knowledge base18challenge in 2013 to benchmark various systems on the content realization
stage of generation. Given a set of relations which form a coherent unit, the task is to
generate complex sentences that are grammatical and 
uent in English.
5.9 GEM Benchmark
Introduced in ACL 2021, the gem benchmark19(Gehrmann et al., 2021) aims to measure
the progress in NLG, while continuously adding new datasets, evaluation metrics and human
18. http://www.kbgen.org
19. https://gem-benchmark.com
36