Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
shown to generate text with up to 30% factual inconsistencies (Kryscinski et al., 2019b;
Falke et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020). There has been a lot of recent work that focuses on
building models to verify the factual correctness of the generated text, focusing on seman-
tically constrained tasks such as document summarization or image captioning, some of
which we summarize here.
Genera&onThere was feverish talk of a possible military takeover.explthere was talk about the possibility of a military coup.military coup was the feverish talk.There	was	talk	about	the	possibility	of	a	military	coup.amodnmod:aboutHypothesis	2Hypothesis	1military coup was the feverish talk.nsubjamodamodnsubjnmod:ofHypotheses
Figure 11: Illustration of dependency arc entailment formulation using a ltered set of Stanford
Enhanced Dependencies. Image Source: (Goyal & Durrett, 2020).
Some recent evaluation metrics have addressed factual correctness via entailment-based
models (Falke et al., 2019; Maynez et al., 2020; Du sek & Kasner, 2020). However, these
sentence-level, entailment-based approaches do not capture which part of the generated
text is non-factual. Goyal & Durrett presented a new localized entailment-based approach
using dependency trees to reformulate the entailment problem at the dependency arc level.
Specically, they align the the semantic relations yielded by the dependency arcs (see Fig-
ure 11) in the generated output summary to the input sentences. Their dependency arc
entailment model improves factual consistency and shows stronger correlations with human
judgments in generation tasks such as summarization and paraphrasing.
Models adhering to the facts in the source have started to gain more attention in \condi-
tional" or \grounded" text generation tasks, such as document summarization (Kryscinski
et al., 2019b) and data-to-text generation (Reiter, 2007; Lebret et al., 2016a; Sha et al.,
2017; Puduppully et al., 2018; Wang, 2019; Nan et al., 2021). In one of the earlier works
on structured data-to-text generation, Wiseman et al. (2017) dealt with the coherent gen-
eration of multi-sentence summaries of tables or database records. In this work, they rst
trained an auxiliary model as relation extraction classier (entity-mention pairs) based on
information extraction to evaluate how well the text generated by the model can capture the
information in a discrete set of records. Then the factual evaluation is based on the align-
ment between the entity-mention predictions of this classier against the source database
records. Their work was limited to a single domain (basketball game tables and summaries)
and assumed that the tables has similar attributes, which can be limiting for open-domain
data-to-text generation systems.
31