Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
NLG models and systems for challenging tasks like multi-paragraph document generation
or visual story generation. With every new system or model comes a new challenge of
evaluation. This paper surveys the NLG evaluation methods in three categories:
•Human-Centric Evaluation. Human evaluation is the most important for devel-
oping NLG systems and is considered the gold standard when developing automatic
metrics. But it is expensive to execute, and the evaluation results are dicult to
reproduce.
•Untrained Automatic Metrics. Untrained automatic evaluation metrics are
widely used to monitor the progress of system development.
A good automatic metric needs to correlate well with human judgments. For many
NLG tasks, it is desirable to use multiple metrics to gauge dierent aspects of the
system's quality.
•Machine-Learned Evaluation Metrics. In the cases where the reference outputs
are not complete, we can train an evaluation model to mimic human judges. How-
ever, as pointed out in Gao et al. (2019), any machine-learned metrics might lead to
potential problems such as overtting and `gaming of the metric.'
We conclude this paper by summarizing some of the challenges of evaluating NLG
systems:
•Detecting machine-generated text and fake news. As language models get
stronger by learning from increasingly larger corpora of human-written text, they can
generate text that is not easily distinguishable from human-authored text. Due to
this, new systems and evaluation methods have been developed to detect if a piece of
text is machine- or human-generated. A recent study (Schuster et al., 2019) reports
the results of a fact verication system to identify inherent bias in training datasets
that cause fact-checking issues. In an attempt to combat fake news, Vo & Lee (2019)
present an extensive analysis of tweets and a new tweet generation method to identify
fact-checking tweets (among many tweets), which were originally produced to per-
suade posters to stop tweeting fake news. Gehrmann et al. introduced GLTR , which
is a tool that helps humans to detect if a text is written by a human or generated by
a model. Other research focuses on factually correct text generation, with a goal of
providing users with accurate information. Massarelli et al. (2019) introduce a new
approach for generating text that is factually consistent with the knowledge source.
Kryscinski et al. (2019b) investigate methods of checking the consistency of a gener-
ated summary against the document from which the summary is generated. Zellers
et al. (2019) present a new controllable language model that can generate an article
with respect to a given headline, yielding more trustworthy text than human-written
text of fake information. Nevertheless, large-scale language models (even controllable
ones), have a tendency to hallucinate and generate nonfactual information, which
the model designers should measure and prevent. Future work should focus on the
analysis of the text generated from large-scale language models, emphasize careful
examination of such models in terms of how they learn and reproduce potential biases
that in the training data (Sheng et al., 2020; Bender et al., 2021).
45