Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
have their own users whom researchers can recruit to participate in their task, either by
paying them a fee (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk6) or rewarding them by some other means
(e.g., LabintheWild7, which provides participants with personalized feedback or informa-
tion based on their task results). These platforms allow researchers to perform large-scale
evaluations in a time-ecient manner, and they are usually less expensive (or even free) to
run. They also allow researchers to reach a wider range of evaluators than they would be
able to recruit in-person (e.g., more geographical diversity). However, maintaining quality
control online can be an issue (Ipeirotis et al., 2010; Oppenheimer et al., 2009), and the
demographics of the evaluators may be heavily skewed depending on the user base of the
platform (Difallah et al., 2018; Reinecke & Gajos, 2015). Furthermore, there may be a
disconnect between what evaluators online being paid to complete a task would want out
of an NLG system and what the people who would be using the end product would want.
Not all NLG evaluation tasks can be performed by any subset of speakers of a given
language. Some tasks may not transfer well to platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk
where workers are more accustomed to dealing with large batches of microtasks. Specialized
groups of evaluators can be useful when testing a system for a particular set of users, as in
extrinsic evaluation settings. Researchers can recruit people who would be potential users of
the system, e.g., students for educational tools or doctors for bioNLP systems. Other cases
that may require more specialized human evaluation are projects where evaluator expertise
is important for the task or when the source texts or the generated texts consist of long
documents or a collection of documents. Consider the task of citation generation (Luu
et al., 2020): given two scientic documents A and B, the task is to generate a sentence
in document A that appropriately cites document B. To rate the generated citations, the
evaluator must be able to read and understand two dierent scientic documents and have
general expert knowledge about the style and conventions of academic writing. For these
reasons, Luu et al. (2020) choose to run human evaluations with expert annotators (in this
case, NLP researchers) rather than crowdworkers.
2.4 Inter-Evaluator Agreement
8While evaluators9often undergo training to standardize their evaluations, evaluating
generated natural language will always include some degree of subjectivity. Evaluators may
disagree in their ratings, and the level of disagreement can be a useful measure to researchers.
High levels of inter-evaluator agreement generally mean that the task is well-dened and
the dierences in the generated text are consistently noticeable to evaluators, while low
agreement can indicate a poorly dened task or that there are not reliable dierences in the
generated text.
Nevertheless, measures of inter-evaluator agreement are not frequently included in NLG
papers. Only 18% of the 135 generation papers reviewed in Amidei et al. (2019a) include
agreement analysis (though on a positive note, it was more common in the most recent
6.https://www.mturk.com/
7.http://www.labinthewild.org/
8. Some of the other terms used are: inter-rater reliability ,inter-rater agreement ,inter-rater concordance ,
inter-observer reliability , etc. In text generation inter-evaluator or inter-rater agreement are the most
commonly used terms.
9. In text generation, ` judges ' are also commonly used.
10