Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
and dialogue response generation in conversational systems. The ocial score is based
on weighted Pearson correlation between predicted similarity and human-annotated
similarity. The higher the score, the better the the similarity prediction result from
the algorithm (Maharjan et al., 2017; Cer et al., 2017b).
•Paraphrase identication (PI) considers if two sentences express the same meaning
(Dolan & Brockett, 2005; Barzilay & Lee, 2003). PI is used as a text generation
evaluation score based on the textual similarity (Kauchak & Barzilay, 2006) of a
reference and hypothesis by nding a paraphrase of the reference sentence that is
closer in wording to the hypothesis output. For instance, given the pair of sentences:
reference: \ However, Israel's reply failed to completely clear the U.S. suspicions. "
hypothesis: \ However, Israeli answer unable to fully remove the doubts. "
PI is concerned with learning to transform the reference sentence into:
paraphrase: \ However, Israel's answer failed to completely remove the U.S. suspi-
cions. "
which is closer in wording to the hypothesis. In Jiang et al. (2019), a new paraphrasing
evaluation metric, tiger , is used for image caption generation evaluation. Similarly,
Liu et al. (2019a) introduce dierent strategies to select useful visual paraphrase pairs
for training by designing a variety of scoring functions.
•Textual entailment (TE) is concerned with whether a hypothesis can be inferred
from a premise, requiring understanding of the semantic similarity between the hy-
pothesis and the premise (Dagan et al., 2006; Bowman et al., 2015). It has been used
to evaluate several text generation tasks, including machine translation (Pad o et al.,
2009), document summarization (Long et al., 2018), language modeling (Liu et al.,
2019b), and video captioning (Pasunuru & Bansal, 2017).
•Machine Comprehension (MC) is concerned with the sentence matching between
a passage and a question, pointing out the text region that contains the answer (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016). MC has been used for tasks like improving question generation
(Yuan et al., 2017; Du et al., 2017) and document summarization (Hermann et al.,
2015).
3.5 Syntactic Similarity-Based Metrics
A syntactic similarity metric captures the similarity between a reference and a hypothesis
text at a structural level to capture the overall grammatical or sentence structure similarity.
In corpus linguistics, part of speech (POS) tagging is the process of assigning a part-
of-speech tag (e.g., verb, noun, adjective, adverb, and preposition, etc.) to each word in a
sentence, based on its context, morphological behaviour, and syntax. POS tags have been
commonly used in machine translation evaluation to evaluate the quality of the generated
translations. tesla (Dahlmeier et al., 2011) was introduced as an evaluation metric to
combine the synonyms of bilingual phrase tables and POS tags, while others use POS n-
grams together with a combination of morphemes and lexicon probabilities to compare the
23