Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
generation, summarization, and image description generation, to name a few. This research
area presents a particular challenge to state-of-the-art approaches that are based on statis-
tical neural models, which are proven to be insucient to generate coherent long text. As
an example, in Figure 16 and 17 we show two generated text from two long-text generation
models, Grover (Zellers et al., 2019) and PlotMachines (Rashkin et al., 2020). Both
of these controlled text models are designed to generate a multi-paragraph story given a list
of attributes (in these examples a list of outline points are provided), and the models should
generate a coherent long story related to the outline points. These examples demonstrate
some of the cohesion issues with these statistical models. For instance, in the Grover
output, the model often nishes the story and then starts a new story partway through
the document. In contrast, PlotMachines adheres more to a beginning-middle-ending
structure. For example, GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2018) can generate remarkably 
uent sen-
tences, and even paragraphs, for a given topic or a prompt. However, as more sentences are
generated and the text gets longer, it starts to wander, switching to unrelated topics and
becoming incoherent (Rashkin et al., 2020).
Evaluating long-text generation is a challenging task. New criteria need to be im-
plemented to measure the quality of long generated text, such as inter-sentence or inter-
paragraph coherence in language style and semantics. Although human evaluation methods
are commonly used, we focus our discussion on automatic evaluation methods in this section.
6.2.1 Evaluation via Discourse Structure
Text with longer context (e.g., documents, longer conversations, debates, movies scripts,
etc.) usually consist of sections (e.g., paragraphs, sets, topics, etc.) that constitute some
structure, and in natural language generation such structures are referred to as discourse
(Jurafsky & Martin, 2009). Considering the discourse structure of the generated text is
crucial in evaluating the system. Especially in open-ended text generation, the model needs
to determine the topical 
ow, structure of entities and events, and their relations in a
narrative 
ow that is coherent and 
uent. One of the major tasks in which discourse plays
an important role is document-level machine translation (Gong et al., 2015). Hajlaoui &
Popescu-Belis (2013) present a new metric called Accuracy of Connective Translation (ACT)
(Meyer et al., 2012) that uses a combination of rules and automatic metrics to compare the
discourse connection between the source and target documents. Joty et al. (2017), on the
other hand, compare the source and target documents based on the similarity of their
discourse trees.
6.2.2 Evaluation via Lexical Cohesion
Lexical cohesion is a surface property of text and refers to the way textual units are linked
together grammatically or lexically. Lexical similarity (Lapata & Barzilay, 2005) is one of
the most commonly used metrics in story generation. Roemmele et al. (2017) lter the
n-grams based on lexical semantics and only use adjectives, adverbs, interjections, nouns,
pronouns, proper nouns, and verbs for lexical similarity measure. Other commonly used
metrics compare reference and source text on word- (Mikolov et al., 2013) or sentence-level
(Kiros et al., 2015) embedding similarity averaged over the entire document. Entity co-
reference is another metric that has been used to measure coherence (Elsner & Charniak,
41