Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
Figure 15: Taxonomy of summarization evaluation methods. Extended from Steinberger &
Jezek (2009).
6.1.1 Intrinsic Methods
Intrinsic evaluation of generated summaries can focus on the generated text's content, text
quality, and factual consistency, each discussed below.
Content. Content evaluation compares a generated summary to a reference summary
using automatic metrics. The most widely used metric for summarization is rouge , though
other metrics, such as bleu andf-score , are also used. Although rouge has been shown
to correlate well with human judgments for generic text summarization, the correlation is
lower for topic-focused summarization like extractive meeting summarization (Liu & Liu,
2008). Meetings are transcripts of spontaneous speech, and thus usually contain dis
uencies,
such as pauses (e.g., `um,' `uh,' etc.), discourse markers (e.g., `you know,' `i mean,' etc.),
repetitions, etc. Liu & Liu (2008) nd that after such dis
uencies are cleaned, the rouge
score is improved. They even observed fair amounts of improvement in the correlation
between the rouge score and human judgments when they include the speaker information
of the extracted sentences from the source meeting to form the summary.
Quality. Evaluating generated summaries based on quality has been one of the challenging
tasks for summarization researchers. As basic as it sounds, since the denition of a \good
quality summary" has not been established and nding the most suitable metrics to evaluate
quality remains an open research area. Below are some criteria of text, which are used in
recent papers as human evaluation metrics to evaluate the quality of generated text in
comparison to the reference text.
•Coherence andCohesion measure how clearly the ideas are expressed in the sum-
mary (Lapata & Barzilay, 2005). In particular, the idea that, in conjunction with
cohesion, which is to hold the context as a whole, coherence should measure how
well the text is organised and \hangs together." Consider the examples in Table 5,
from the scientic article abstract generation task. The models must include factual
information, but it must also be presented in the right order to be coherent.
38