Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
Source article fragments
(CNN) The mother of a quadriplegic man who
police say was left in the woods for days can-
not be extradited to face charges in Philadelphia
until she completes an unspecied \treatment,"
Maryland police said Monday. The Montgomery
County (Maryland) Department of Police took
Nyia Parler, 41, into custody Sunday (...)(CNN) The classic video game \Space Invaders"
was developed in Japan back in the late 1970's
{ and now their real-life counterparts are the
topic of an earnest political discussion in Japan's
corridors of power. Luckily, Japanese can sleep
soundly in their beds tonight as the govern-
ment's top military ocial earnestly revealed
that (...)
Model generated claims
Quadriplegic man Nyia Parler, 41, left in woods
for days can not be extradited.Video game \Space Invaders" was developed in
Japan back in 1970.
Table 6: Examples of factually incorrect claims output by summarization models. Green
text highlights the support in the source documents for the generated claims; red text
highlights the errors made by summarization models. Table Source (Kryscinski et al.,
2019b).
It is imperative that the summarization models are factually consistent and that any
con
icts between a source document and its generated summary (commonly referred to as
faithfulness (Durmus et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020b)) can be easily measured, especially
for domain-specic summarization tasks like patient-doctor conversation summarization
or business meeting summarization. As a result, factual-consistency-aware and faithful
text generation research has drawn a lot of attention in the community in recent years
(Kryscinski et al., 2019a,b; Zhang et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2020a; Durmus et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2020b). A common approach is to use a model-based approach, in which
a separate component is built on top of a summarization engine that can evaluate the
generated summary based on factual consistency, as discussed in Section 4.5.
6.1.2 Extrinsic Summarization Evaluation Methods
Extrinsic evaluation metrics test the generated summary text by how it impacts the per-
formance of downstream tasks, such as relevance assessment, reading comprehension, and
question answering. Cohan & Goharian (2016) propose a new metric, sera (Summariza-
tion Evaluation by Relevance Analysis), for summarization evaluation based on the content
relevance of the generated summary and the human-written summary. They nd that this
metric yields higher correlation with human judgments compared to rouge , especially on
the task of scientic article summarization. Eyal et al. (2019a) and Wang et al. (2020a)
measure the performance of a summary by using it to answer a set of questions regarding
the salient entities in the source document.
6.2 Long Text Generation Evaluation
A long text generation system aims to generate multi-sentence text, such as a single para-
graph or a multi-paragraph document. Common applications of long-form text generation
are document-level machine translation, story generation, news article generation, poem
40