Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
•Machine-Learned Metrics. These metrics are often based on machine-learned
models, which are used to measure the similarity between two machine-generated
texts or between machine-generated and human-generated texts. These models can
be viewed as digital judges that simulate human judges. We investigate the dierences
among these evaluations and shed light on the potential factors that contribute to
these dierences.
To see how these evaluation methods are applied in practice, we look at the role NLG shared
tasks have played in NLG model evaluation (Section 5) and at how evaluation metrics are
applied in two NLG subelds (Section 6): automatic document summarization and long-
text generation. Lastly, we conclude the paper with future research directions for NLG
evaluation (Section 7).
2. Human-Centric Evaluation Methods
Whether a system is generating an answer to a user's query, a justication for a classication
model's decision, or a short story, the ultimate goal in NLG is to generate text that is
valuable to people. For this reason, human evaluations are typically viewed as the most
important form of evaluation for NLG systems and are held as the gold standard when
developing new automatic metrics. Since automatic metrics still fall short of replicating
human decisions (Reiter & Belz, 2009; Krahmer & Theune, 2010; Reiter, 2018), many NLG
papers include some form of human evaluation. For example, Hashimoto et al. (2019) report
that 20 out of 26 generation papers published at ACL2018 presented human evaluation
results.
While human evaluations give the best insight into how well a model performs in a
task, it is worth noting that human evaluations also pose several challenges. First, human
evaluations can be expensive and time-consuming to run, especially for the tasks that re-
quire extensive domain expertise. While online crowd-sourcing platforms such as Amazon
Mechanical Turk have enabled researchers to run experiments on a larger scale at a lower
cost, they come with their own problems, such as maintaining quality control (Ipeirotis
et al., 2010; Mitra et al., 2015). Second, even with a large group of annotators, there are
some dimensions of generated text quality that are not well-suited to human evaluations,
such as diversity (Hashimoto et al., 2019). Thirdly, there is a lack of consistency in how
human evaluations are run, which prevents researchers from reproducing experiments and
comparing results across systems. This inconsistency in evaluation methods is made worse
by inconsistent reporting on methods; details on how the human evaluations were run are
often incomplete or vague. For example, Lee et al. (2021) nd that in a sample of NLG
papers from ACL and INLG, only 57% of papers report the number of participants in their
human evaluations.
In this section, we describe common approaches researchers take when evaluating gen-
erated text using only human judgments, grouped into intrinsic ( §2.1) and extrinsic ( §2.2)
evaluations (Belz & Reiter, 2006). However, there are other ways to incorporate human
subjects into the evaluation process, such as training models on human judgments, which
will be discussed in Section 4.
5