Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
untrained metrics as depicted in Table 1, discuss about how they are used in evaluating
dierent text generation tasks and provide references for others for further read. We will
highlight some of their strengths and weaknesses in bolded sentences.
3.1n-gram Overlap Metrics for Content Selection
n-gram overlap metrics are commonly used for evaluating NLG systems and measure the de-
gree of \matching" between machine-generated and human-authored (ground-truth) texts.
In this section we present several n-gram match features and the NLG tasks they are used
to evaluate.
f-score. Also called F-measure, the f-score is a measure of accuracy. It balances the
generated text's precision and recall by the harmonic mean of the two measures. The most
common instantiation of the f-score is the f1-score (F1). In text generation tasks such
as machine translation or summarization, f-score gives an indication as to the quality of
the generated sequence that a model will produce (Melamed et al., 2003; Aliguliyev, 2008).
Specically for machine translation, f-score -based metrics have been shown to be eective
in evaluating translation quality.
bleu. The Bilingual Evaluation Understudy ( bleu ) is one of the rst metrics used to
measure the similarity between two sentences (Papineni et al., 2002). Originally proposed
for machine translation, it compares a candidate translation of text to one or more reference
translations. bleu is a weighted geometric mean of n-gram precision scores.
It has been argued that although bleu has signicant advantages, it may not be the
ultimate measure for improved machine translation quality (Callison-Burch & Osborne,
2006). While earlier work has reported that bleu correlates well with human judgments
(Lee & Przybocki, 2005; Denoual & Lepage, 2005), more recent work argues that although
it can be a good metric for the machine translation task (Zhang et al., 2004) for which it is
designed, it doesn't correlate well with human judgments for other generation tasks (such
as image captioning or dialog response generation). Reiter (2018) reports that there's not
enough evidence to support that bleu is the best metric for evaluating NLG systems other
than machine translation. Caccia et al. (2018) found that generated text with perfect bleu
scores was often grammatically correct but lacked semantic or global coherence, concluding
that the generated text has poor information content.
Outside of machine translation, bleu has been used for other text generation tasks,
such as document summarization (Graham, 2015), image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2014),
human-machine conversation (Gao et al., 2019), and language generation (Semeniuta et al.,
2019). In Graham (2015), it was concluded that bleu achieves strongest correlation with
human assessment, but does not signicantly outperform the best-performing rouge vari-
ant. A more recent study has demonstrated that n-gram matching scores such as bleu can
be an insucient and potentially less accurate metric for unsupervised language generation
(Semeniuta et al., 2019).
Text generation research, especially when focused on short text generation like sentence-
based machine translation or question generation, has successfully used bleu for benchmark
evaluation criteria (Shimorina, 2021). The information in Table 2 relating to correlation with human
judgments is obtained from the published work which we discuss in this section. We suggest the reader
refer to the model-based evaluation metrics in the next section, in which we survey evaluation models
that have reported tighter correlation with the human judgments on some of the evaluation criteria.
14