Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
GoldWe investigate mutual benets between syntax and semantic roles using neural
network models, by studying a parsing->SRL pipeline, a SRL->parsing pipeline,
and a simple joint model by embedding sharing. The integration of syntactic and
semantic features gives promising results in a Chinese Semantic Treebank...
PGenIn this paper, we propose a novel approach to learn syntactic and semantic
role labeling models to semantic role labeling (wsd) .In the rst neural network
models induce non-linear feature features from word and part-of-speech (pos)
parsing . We show that semantic features can be used to learn...
Co-OpNetIn this paper, we explore the use of neural network models to jointly train se-
mantic role labelers andparsers forsemantic role labeling (srl) . We rst
propose a simple neural srlmodel that uses a neural long shortterm memory
(lstm)-based parser to represent the output of an srlsystem...
Table 5: Example of gold and generated abstracts from baseline Pointer Networks + Cov-
erage See et al. (2017) ( PGen ) and a recently proposed model, Co-OpNet (Gabriel et al.,
2021), in the NLP scientic domain. Coherence issues and factual errors in generated
abstracts are highlighted in italics . Correct terminology and transitional phrases that con-
tribute to coherent 
ow are also highlighted by properly delineating sections of abstracts in
bold anditalics . (Table Source: (Gabriel et al., 2021).
•Readability and Fluency , associated with non-redundancy, are linguistic quality
metrics used to measure how repetitive the generated summary is and how many
spelling and grammar errors there are in the generated summary (Lapata, 2003).
•Focus indicates how many of the main ideas of the document are captured, while
avoiding super
uous details.
•Informativeness , which is mostly used to evaluate question-focused summarization,
measures how well the summary answers a question. Auto-regressive generation mod-
els trained to generate a short summary text given a longer document(s) may yield
shorter summaries due to reasons relating to bias in the training data or type of the
decoding method (e.g., beam search can yield more coherent text compared to top-k
decoding but can yield shorter text if a large beam size is used) (Huang et al., 2017).
Thus, in comparing dierent model generations, the summary text length has also
been used as an informativeness measure since a shorter text typically preserves less
information (Singh & Jin, 2016).
These quality criterion are widely used as evaluation metrics for human evaluation in
document summarization. They can be used to compare a system-generated summary to a
source text, a human-generated summary, or to another system-generated summary.
Factual Consistency. One thing that is usually overlooked in document summarization
tasks is evaluating the generated summaries' factual correctness. It has been shown in many
recent work on summarization that models frequently generate factually incorrect text. This
is partially because the models are not trained to be factually consistent and can generate
about anything related to the prompt, Table 6 shows a sample summarization model output,
in which the claims made are not consistent with the source document (Kryscinski et al.,
2019b). Zhang et al.
39