Celikyilmaz, Clark, & Gao
1:The film's plot traces the fall of a Mafia don, Joe Crowther, and his relationships with other mobsters and police officers throughout the period from his conception in 1977 to his arrest in 1986 .The official synopsis of the film is as follows: "An actor with a Pork Pie hat proppedullivan on a park bench in Manhattan in November 1982. A scowl on his face. &ndash; and a laugh". In the opening scene, Crowtherâs wife and daughter are shown to have been running a health food store in the Bronx. Crowther has a wife and daughter in Virginia as well as a son and daughter in Brooklyn. He frequently visits their home while on probation .He is inducted into the NYPD, where he settles into his new role and soon finds himself the target of a political scandal. The crew of detectives working with Crowther, in addition to an FBI agent who works with him and his family, make use of all methods they can imagine to ruin his reputations. The film is a series of scenes about him interacting with reporters and his family. The quality of his dialogue and conviviality are characteristic of this actor, and in many of the self-competence that he displays in most of his acting jobs, his voice has been dubbed for them. This is to say that he is writing dialog to archive footage from built-in short films, and he is both speaking and laughing. The character in the film is the system .The federal agents that stand in Crowtherâs way are his former assistants, culminating in a dinner where Crowther mocks his chief rival, that is the current don. Crowther is in for some roughhousing as the folksy talk turns into a quick game of Narcotics with the mobsters, leading to a midnight meeting in the bathroom with all of the buildingâs law enforcement. Crowther goes to sleep that night. 1:Bob Garrett, Gil Wood, Lisa Lee, and Angela Calderon, all of whom work at the United States Library's National Film Registry, talk about how they became the "cops" of the documentary film "Police: A Formic Tale" .They first imagined the idea of a documentary after one of their co-workers, Gilbert, commits suicide. Because Gilbert was obsessed with a horror film, which he attended regularly, he was ostracized by his co-workers. They then found a homeless man with a pork pie hat propped upside down on the sidewalk. They decided that using Bob's trailer, and Gilbert's drinking abilities as a source of budget for their project, they could use a homeless man for a second "cop" to patrol the streets of Los Angeles. Although they did not have experience, they learned about responding to incidents in a three-day period. In their film, they filmed all of the police officers throughout the following day and night, and then they stored a replica of an explosive and a coffin for their "cop" to use in a three-day period. Then all of the police began their crime-fighting duties, leading to comic incidents, a wave of violence, and tense moments. 1:The film, entitled Police Officers Throughout the Homeland, is dedicated to the police officers who have worked and worked hard to keep order and security in communities throughout the United States .It is a collection of nine short films which are constructed short films of the type featured in the National Film Registry of the United States Library and Archives. Each episode contains a fictional story that is the basis for the film. The films, each one focusing on a particular type of police unit, begin with a description of the unit's or the members of their unit's duties and duties in and outside of their duty station. They are then followed by the police officer or members of the patrol team at that particular unit's location. As each episode progresses, it is revealed that the units members are being under false pretenses. Inevitably, the unit is disrupted by trouble makers and other groups who have emerged from the abuses of the United States' government and by the police officers themselves. The film ends with a news segment stating that "the unit charged with protecting America's cities is none other than the Police Officers Throughout the Homeland". At that point, we see a Pork Pie Hat propped Outside Atlanta's federal courthouse. The film ends with the cartoon ending with a caption that reads: "Watch the coming of age film you'll never see. 1:The film is a series of simple, self-constructed short films, in which a murder occurs, and how it is done is shown by the player. They include clips of police officers throughout the film, men dressed in blue suits and blue suits who claim to be cops, and a people's assembly on a bridge. The narrator describes the short as "satiric" and frequently mentions that "those with guns are always gonna shoot" .The film can be viewed on YouTube or in the National Film Registry of the Library of America. It was produced byproductively rendering the word "police" into the words and characters (a police badge for "officers") .According to its name tag on the cover photo, the short film is entitled "Good Cop, Bad Cop, TV Show" and "The Banks Behind The System". (1970).•cops (film) •police officers throughout •constructed short films •national film registry •united states library  •pork pie hat proppedred: outline points bold: are a few notable places where the model seems to end the story and start telling a new one (note: Grover often inserts “1:” at the beginning of stories copying a section header that frequently appears at the beginning of training data.)      : mentioned (partially) at least once       : mentioned multiple timesGrover
Figure 16: Example document generated using Grover . Red text indicates where plot
points are mentioned, while bold text marks the beginning of a new story. (Table Source
(Rashkin et al., 2020).)
42