Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
a comparison of text generation models based on their \human-likeness," without having
to create arbitrary calls on weighing content, grammar, saliency, etc. with respect to each
other.
Thecider metric presents three explanations about what a hypothesis sentence should
contain: (1) n-grams in the hypothesis sentence should also occur in the reference sentences,
(2) If an n-gram does not occur in a reference sentence, it shouldn't be in the hypothesis sen-
tence, (3) n-grams that commonly occur across all image-caption pairs in the dataset should
be assigned lower weights, since they are potentially less informative. While cider has been
adopted as an evaluation metric for image captioning and has been shown to correlate well
with human judgments on some datasets (PASCAL-50S and ABSTRACT-50S datasets)
(Vedantam et al., 2014), recent studies have shown that metrics that include semantic con-
tent matching such as spice can correlate better with human judgments (Anderson et al.,
2016; Liu et al., 2017).
nist. Proposed by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology, nist (Martin
& Przybocki, 2000) is a method similar to bleu for evaluating the quality of text. Unlike
bleu , which treats each n-gram equally, nist heavily weights n-grams that occur less
frequently, as co-occurrences of these n-grams are more informative than common n-grams
(Doddington, 2002).
gtm. The gtm metric (Turian & Melamed, 2003) measures n-gram similarity between the
model-generated hypothesis translation and the reference sentence by using precision, recall
and F-score measures.
hlepor . Harmonic mean of enhanced Length Penalty, Precision, n-gram Position dier-
ence Penalty, and Recall ( hlepor ), initially proposed for machine translation, is a metric
designed for morphologically complex languages like Turkish or Czech (Han et al., 2013a).
Among other factors, hlepor uses part-of-speech tags' similarity to capture syntactic in-
formation.
ribes . Rank-based Intuitive Bilingual Evaluation Score ( ribes ) (Isozaki et al., 2010) is an-
other untrained automatic evaluation metric for machine translation. It was developed
by NTT Communication Science Labs and designed to be more informative for Asian
languages{|like Japanese and Chinese|since it doesn't rely on word boundaries. Speci-
cally, ribes is based on how the words in generated text are ordered. It uses the rank corre-
lation coecients measured based on the word order from the hypothesis (model-generated)
translation and the reference translation.
dice and masi . Used mainly for referring expression generation evaluation, dice (Gatt
et al., 2008) measures the overlap of a set of attributes between the human-provided referring
expression and the model-generated expressions. The expressions are based on an input
image (e.g., the large chair), and the attributes are extracted from the expressions, such as
thetype orcolor (Chen & van Deemter, 2020). The masi metric (Gatt et al., 2008), on the
other hand, adapts the Jaccard coecient, which biases it in favour of similarity when a set
of attributes is a subset of the other attribute set.
3.2 Distance-Based Evaluation Metrics for Content Selection
A distance-based metric in NLG applications uses a distance function to measure the sim-
ilarity between two text units (e.g., words, sentences). First, we represent two text units
17