Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
drop as more words are added. To remedy this, a diversity metric, hd-d (hyper-geometric
distribution function), was proposed to compare texts of dierent lengths (McCarthy &
Jarvis, 2010).
Measuring diversity using n-gram repetitions is a more generalized version of ttr, which
has been use for text generation evaluation. Li et al. (2016) has shown that modeling mutual
information between source and targets signicantly decreases the chance of generating
bland responses and improves the diversity of responses. They use bleu and distinct word
unigram and bigram counts to evaluate the proposed diversity-promoting objective function
for dialog response generation.
Self-bleu Zhu et al. (2018) proposed self-bleu as a diversity evaluation metric, which
calculates a bleu score for every generated sentence, treating the other generated sentences
as references. The average of these bleu scores is the self-bleu score of the text, where
a lower self-bleu score implies higher diversity. Several NLG papers have reported that
self-bleu achieves good generation diversity (Zhu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018a; Lu et al.,
2018). However, others have reported some weakness of the metric in generating diverse
output (Caccia et al., 2018) or detecting mode collapse (Semeniuta et al., 2019) in text
generation with GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) models.
3.4 Explicit Semantic Content Match Metrics
Semantic content matching metrics dene the similarity between human-written and model-
generated text by extracting explicit semantic information units from text beyond n-grams.
These metrics operate on semantic and conceptual levels and are shown to correlate well
with human judgments. We summarize some of them below.
pyramid Thepyramid method is a semi-automatic evaluation method (Nenkova & Pas-
sonneau, 2004) for evaluating the performance of document summarization models. Like
other untrained automatic metrics that require references, this untrained metric also re-
quires human annotations. It identies summarization content units (SCUs) to compare
information in a human-generated reference summary to the model-generated summary. To
create a pyramid, annotators select sets of text spans that express the same meaning across
summaries, and each SCU is a weighted according to the number of summaries that express
the SCU's meaning.
Thepyramid metric relies on manual human labeling eort, which makes it dicult
to automate. peak : Pyramid Evaluation via Automated Knowledge Extraction (Yang
et al., 2016) was presented as a fully automated variant of pyramid model, which can
automatically assign the pyramid weights and was shown to correlate well with human
judgments.
spice Semantic propositional image caption evaluation ( spice ) (Anderson et al., 2016) is
an image captioning metric that measures the similarity between a list of reference human
written captions S=fs1;;smgof an image and a hypothesis caption cgenerated by a
model. Instead of directly comparing the captions' text, spice parses each caption to derive
an abstract scene graph representation, encoding the objects, attributes, and relationships
detected in image captions (Schuster et al., 2015), as shown in Figure 3. spice then com-
putes the f-score using the hypothesis and reference scene graphs over the conjunction
21