Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
evaluation standards. gem provides an environment by providing easy testing of dierent
NLG tasks and evaluation strategies.
6. Examples of Task-Specic NLG Evaluation
In the previous sections, we reviewed a wide range of NLG evaluation metrics individu-
ally. However, these metrics are constantly evolving due to rapid progress in more ecient,
reliable, scalable and sustainable neural network architectures for training neural text gen-
eration models, as well as ever growing compute resources. Nevertheless, it is not easy
to dene what really is an \accurate," \trustworthy" or even \ecient" metric for evalu-
ating an NLG model or task. Thus, in this section we present how these metrics can be
jointly used in research projects to more eectively evaluate NLG systems for real-world
applications. We discuss two NLG tasks, automatic document summarization and long-
text generation, that are sophisticated enough that multiple metrics are required to gauge
dierent aspects of the generated text's quality.
Summarization Evaluation Metrics Long-Text Generation Evaluation Metrics
rouge ,bleu ,f-score ,sera , ... rouge ,bleu ,f-score , ...
model-based factual correctness metrics entity based evaluation
Q/A based factuality metrics syntactic measures for writing style
human-based evaluations human-based evaluations
Table 4: Metrics mentioned in each example text generation project.
6.1 Automatic Document Summarization Evaluation
A text summarization system aims to extract useful content from a reference document and
generate a short summary that is coherent, 
uent, readable, concise, and consistent with
the reference document. There are dierent types of summarization approaches, which can
be grouped by their tasks into (i) generic text summarization for broad topics; (ii) topic-
focused summarization, e.g., a scientic article, conversation, or meeting summarization;
and (iii) query-focused summarization, such that the summary answers a posed query.
These approaches can also be grouped by their method: (i) extractive , where a summary
is composed of a subset of sentences or words in the input document; and (ii) abstractive ,
where a summary is generated on-the-
y and often contains text units that do not occur
in the input document. Depending on the number of documents to be summarized, these
approaches can also be grouped into single-document or multi-document summarization.
Evaluation of text summarization, regardless of its type, measures the system's ability to
generate a summary based on: (i) a set of criteria that are not related to references (Dusek
et al., 2017), (ii) a set of criteria that measure its closeness to the reference document, or
(iii) a set of criteria that measure its closeness to the reference summary. Figure 15 shows
the taxonomy of evaluation metrics (Steinberger & Jezek, 2009) in two categories: intrinsic
and extrinsic, which will be explained below.
37