Evaluation of Text Generation: A Survey
The last decade has witnessed a paradigm shift towards learning representations from
large textual corpora in an unsupervised manner using deep neural network (DNN) models.
Recent NLG models are built by training DNN models, typically on very large corpora of
human-written texts. The paradigm shift starts with the use of recurrent neural networks
(Graves, 2013) (e.g., long short-term memory networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhu-
ber, 1997), gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho et al., 2014), etc.) for learning language rep-
resentations, and later sequence-to-sequence learning (Sutskever et al., 2014), which opens
up a new chapter characterised by the wide application of the encoder-decoder architecture.
Although sequence-to-sequence models were originally developed for machine translation,
they were soon shown to improve performance across many NLG tasks. These models'
weakness of capturing long-span dependencies in long word sequences motivated the devel-
opment of attention networks (Bahdanau et al., 2015) and pointer networks (Vinyals et al.,
2015). The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), which incorporates an encoder
and a decoder, both implemented using the self-attention mechanism, is being adopted by
new state-of-the-art NLG systems. There has been a large body of research in recent years
that focuses on improving the performance of NLG using large-scale pre-trained language
models for contextual word embeddings (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Sun et al.,
2019; Dong et al., 2019), using better sampling methods to reduce degeneration in decoding
(Zellers et al., 2019; Holtzman et al., 2020), and learning to generate tex t with better
discourse structures and narrative 
ow (Yao et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019b; Dathathri et al.,
2020; Rashkin et al., 2020).
Neural models have been applied to many NLG tasks, which we will discuss in this
paper, including:
•summarization: common tasks include single or multi-document tasks, query-focused
or generic summarization, and summarization of news, meetings, screen-plays, social
blogs, etc.
•machine translation: sentence- or document-level.
•dialog response generation: goal-oriented or chit-chat dialog.
•paraphrasing
•question generation
•long text generation: most common tasks are story, news, or poem generation.
•data-to-text generation: e.g., table summarization.
•caption generation from non-textual input: input can be tables, images, or sequences
of video frames (e.g., in visual storytelling), to name a few.
1.2 Why a Survey on Evaluation of Natural Language Generation
Text generation is a key component of language translation, chatbots, question answering,
summarization, and several other applications that people interact with everyday. Building
language models using traditional approaches is a complicated task that needs to take into
account multiple aspects of language, including linguistic structure, grammar, word usage,
and reasoning, and thus requires non-trivial data labeling eorts. Recently, Transformer-
based neural language models have been shown to be very eective in leveraging large
amounts of raw text corpora from online sources (such as Wikipedia, search results, blogs,
Reddit posts, etc.). For example, one of most advanced neural language models, GPT-2/3
3