3
it takes into account these spatial and temporal dependencies
between earthquake events.
C. Ensembles of decision trees
Typical nonlinear baseline in classiﬁcation problems is an
Ensemble of basic decision trees classiﬁers. The advantages
of this approach include a decent performance with default
settings [10], fast model construction, almost no over-ﬁtting
and handling of various problems in data including missing
values and outliers.
Among various approaches for construction of Ensembles
of Decision Trees, the most used nowadays is Gradient
Boosting [11]. Modern implementations serve as baseline
in many practical problems [8] and suitable for imbalanced
classiﬁcation problems [19].
As inputs to Gradient Boosting classiﬁers we use either
RTL features with a set of hyperparameters r0;t0equal to the
optimal ones from [26] or binary indicators of earthquakes for
previous days.
D. Neural networks
1) RNNs: We adopt recurrent neural networks (RNNS) to
capture temporal dependencies. In particular, we use LSTM,
a type of RNN which uses additional state cell to enable
long-term memory [12]. In our case, we use two-dimensional
feature maps as hidden states compared to one-dimensional
hidden states in common LSTM, as we need some map-to-
map transformations.
2) CNNs: We process a distribution of earthquakes on the
map of 200250cells. To beneﬁt from spatial dependencies
between earthquakes we use convolution neural networks [20],
which efﬁciently work with images or other two-dimensional
signals like remote-sensing data.
Our approach combines RNN and CNN architectures, as we
pass information through RNN in a form of a feature map,
obtained using CNN, see paragraph III-F.
E. Residuals normalization for neural networks
The naive classiﬁer III-A performs quite well. To take
advantage of it we adjust predicted earthquake probabilities
with naive classiﬁer outputs as priors at the last neural network
layer. We make an inverse softmax transformation of prior
predictions at each cell. Then we add the neural network
output and combine NN and prior output, applying common
softmax transformation in the end. The following procedure
for classesi2f1;2gis used:
An output of our model is oi. The naive prediction
before softmax equals oi= logpi+c, wherepiis the
earthquake prior probability at a given location, cis a
hyperparameter that scales the power of this prior.
We calculate oi+oi.
The probability of an earthquake as the prediction of the
neural network is ^yi= softmax( oi+oi).
We use a threshold (e.g. t= 0:5): if ^y2> t, the model
reports an earthquake.
During training we use the cross-entropy loss function for pairs
of predicted probabilities ^yiand true labels yi.F . Full pipeline
Fig. 3: Proposed CNN-LSTM model. Green blocks represent
series of convolutions, orange blocks represent convolution
layers, circles — multiplications and additions, and and
tanh — sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent activation functions
correspondingly.
Our main architecture depicted in Figure 3 follows the
pipeline:
1) We represent data as a sequence of heat maps: for each
cell we specify a magnitude of an earthquake on this
day; we set it to zero if no earthquake happened. The
input heat map at each time moment has size 200250.
2) We pass the input heat map through a convolutional
network to create an embedding of size 200250
with 16channels. As an output of LSTM at each time
moment we have a hidden representation (short term
memory) of size 32200250, cell (long term memory)
representation of a similar size, and the output of size
32200250.
3) We transform to the output to the size 2200250
using a series of convolutions.
4) We follow the procedure described in paragraph III-E to
modify our prediction according to the prior probabili-
ties of earthquakes at given locations.
We also tried U-net architecture [28], often used for image
segmentation, instead of the convolutional architecture, but
results were worse.
IV. R ESULTS
In this section we provide results of computation exper-
iments. After necessary deﬁnitions we observe selection of
hyperparameters for our algorithms in subsection IV-C and
then we compare all approaches in subsection IV-D. The code
for the conducted experiments is available at github1.
1https://github.com/romakail/Earthquake prediction DNN