1
Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks help to
predict location of Earthquakes
Roman Kail, IITP RAS,
Alexey Zaytsev, Evgeny Burnaev, Skoltech
Abstract —We examine the applicability of modern neural
network architectures to the midterm prediction of earthquakes.
Our data-based classiﬁcation model aims to predict if an earth-
quake with the magnitude above a threshold takes place at a
given area of size 1010kilometers in 10-60days from a
given moment. Our deep neural network model has a recurrent
part (LSTM) that accounts for time dependencies between
earthquakes and a convolutional part that accounts for spatial
dependencies. Obtained results show that neural networks-based
models beat baseline feature-based models that also account
for spatio-temporal dependencies between different earthquakes.
For historical data on Japan earthquakes our model predicts
occurrence of an earthquake in 10to60days from a given
moment with magnitude Mc>5with quality metrics ROC
AUC 0:975 and PR AUC 0:0890 , making 1:18103correct
predictions, while missing 2:09103earthquakes and making
192103false alarms. The baseline approach has similar ROC
AUC 0:992, number of correct predictions 1:19103, and missing
2:07103earthquakes, but signiﬁcantly worse PR AUC 0:00911 ,
and number of false alarms 1004 103.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The earthquake prediction is a substantial but challenging
problem [9]. The goal is to predict the time and location of
a future earthquake. The two common ways to solve this
problem are physical modeling and machine learning based
on data on past observations.
While physical modeling is a well-established approach, it
covers only part of the full picture due to high uncertain-
ties in data and complex nonlinear behavior of seismicity.
An alternative is to construct a data-based machine learning
model to replace expensive and sometimes imprecise physical
modeling. The machine learning modeling appears to work
in various areas including drilling [18], high energy physics
engineering [6], and earthquake signal detection [23]. The
machine learning serves as an alternative or a complement
to physical modeling in earthquake prediction too [21, 22].
A typical machine learning model takes past information as
input and outputs a future earthquake probability [24, 4, 3,
14, 13]. Different models use different available data sources
as inputs such as soil radon data [30] or history of past
earthquakes itself.
Classic workﬂow of machine learning algorithm includes
generation of precursors or another meaningful features from
available information as model input. In [4] authors used
eight seismic indicators based on seismic characteristics. The
authors of [5] proceed similarly but identify that the set of
useful seismic features for different regions can be different.
Other physics-inspired inputs are RTL features that aggregates
Fig. 1: Workﬂow of our machine learning model: for each
region we put a mark with an indication of an earthquake
magnitude that occurs in this region; we get these indicators
for the last 150 days; the model outputs probability of an
earthquake with the magnitude greater or equal to a threshold
(e.g. 5). Probabilities are indicated by color intensity in the
right image.
the past seismic activity into a single index [29]. To use RTL
features it is crucial to select good values of hyperparame-
ters [26].
More recent idea in machine learning community is to learn
the right input features from data using representation learning
based on Neural networks (NN). For earthquake prediction
usage of NN dates back to at least 1994 [2]. Another work [1]
uses different class of NN Radial Basic Functions and in the
authors conclude that Radial Basis Functions Neural Networks
are also useful for large earthquakes prediction and adopt
speciﬁc methods for training of neural networks to handle class
imbalance in earthquake prediction problem.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) also serve as ma-
chine learning models for earthquake prediction [25]. An
approach [16] uses CNNs to predict earthquakes. The model
predicts the probability of an earthquake with a magnitude
larger than 6happening in Taiwan in the next 30 days. The
authors create a binary map of earthquakes of size 256256
with each pixel is an indicator of the occurrence of an
earthquake in the given region. These maps serve as inputs to
a CNN model. Another recent application of Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN) is in [27]. The authors predict earthquakes
taking into account temporal and spatial correlations among
earthquakes. They predict earthquakes in 9sub-regions of
China and use fully-connected NN block inside RNN solvingarXiv:2004.09140v3  [cs.LG]  3 Jun 2020