Alexetal. JournalofBiomedicalSemantics 2019,10(Suppl1):23 Page4of11
Fig.3Anannotatedreport
atrophy ,microbleed ,subarachnoid ha
emorrhage andhaemorrhagic transformation .
Thefourmodifierentities,whichareusedtoidentifyloca-
tion (deep vs. cortical/lobar) and recency (old vs. recent)
of an observation, are loc:deep ,loc:cortical ,
time:old ,time:recent .
Relations link a subset of observation entities, namely
stroke and microbleed entities, with modifier entities.
Strokes may be associated with both a location and a
time, while microbleeds are associated only with loca-tion. Some words or phrases, such as POCI (Posterior
Circulation Infarct) in Fig. 2, carry both observation and
modifier meaning and in these cases nested entities areused. Here there is a mod-loc relation between the
loc:cortical entity and the ischaemic stroke entity
but we do not require this to be made explicit in theannotationsincethenestingimpliesit.
There is a close relationship between the entity
and relation names and the labels. For example,thelabelIschaemic stroke, cortical, old has
been chosen and this clearly relates to the two occur-
rences of an ischaemic stroke entity in a relationwith both a loc:cortical and atime:old modifier.
The annotators are instructed not to select labels unlessthere is explicit linguistic evidence to support the choice.
Occasionallytheywillbeabletoinferlabelsfromimplicit
informationbuttheyareaskednottoannotatethesecases
as the aim is to model linguistically explicit information
nothumanexpertise.
Proper identification of negation and its scope is
essential to achieving high accuracy. We model negation
in the annotation as an attribute on entities, which isvisualized in BRAT as a crossing out. Wherever the
text contains negation scoping over entities, the anno-
tators must add the negative attribute. The negativeexample in Fig. 2,No acute haemorrhage, masses or
extra-axial collections ,i sac l e a ra n ds i m p l ec a s eb u t
syntactically more complex cases occur, e.g. cases wherethe negation marker is distant from the entities within
its scope. There are cases where the radiologist is unable
to positively identify or exclude an observation, as forexample in a small focus of acute infarct cannot be com-
pletely excluded . The annotators are asked to mark these
cases as negative, as only clearly positive observations