Alexetal. JournalofBiomedicalSemantics 2019,10(Suppl1):23 Page3of11
general metastases, to name but a few. Across all these
application areas the NLP systems surveyed tend to have
the same broad structure where a flow diagram showing
the individual components looks much like our diagramoftheEdIE-RsystemshowninFig. 2below.
Two recent studies by Hassanpour and Langlotz (2016)
and by Cornegruta et al. (2016) describe machinelearning methods for entity recognition from radiol-
ogy reports [ 16,17]. Hassanpour and Langlotz [ 16]
tested two existing feature-based machine learning clas-sifiers for this task. Their annotation scheme contains
four broad types of named entities ( Anatomy ,Anatomy
modifier,Observation andObservation modifier )a sw e l l
as strings expressing Uncertainty .T h e yu s e dN e g E x
to identify negation in the text as a feature feed-
ing into their models. The machine learning classifierboth result in an average F1-score of 85% for 10-fold
cross-validation on a data set containing 150 manu-
ally annotated radiology reports from three different
institutions.
Cornegruta et al. [ 17] describe work on analysing a
large corpus of historical chest X-ray reports. Their sys-
tem described is interestingly similar to ours in the way
the report text is annotated with named entity and nega-tion mark-up although the entity list (Body Location,
Descriptor, Clinical Finding, Medical Device) is both
smaller and more complex in that disjoint entities arepermitted. No relation extraction is performed but nega-
tion mark-up is included. The NER method uses a bidi-
rectional LSTM (BiLSTM) neural network architecture,which is contrasted with a baseline system which uses
stringmatchinglook-upagainstRadLex[ 18]andMedical
Subject Headings (MeSH) [ 19] concepts combined with
parsing, plus NegEx for negation detection. The BiLSTM
NER tagger significantly outperforms the baseline but
it is worth noting that, in general, rule-based and
machine learning approaches attain similar levels of per-
formance on NER if the rule-based system uses moresophisticated techniques than string matching, as ours
does.
There has also been some work on summarising radi-
ology reports. Most recently, Zhang et al. [ 20]p r o p o s e d
astate-of-the-artneuralnetwork-basedapproachtosum-
marisationofradiologyimpressions.Animpressionisthe“Conclusion ”sectionofaradiologyreportsummarisedby
the radiologist after dictating or writing down their find-
ings presented in the image. Automating this step is anextremely useful task that can save radiologists a lot of
effort and time. Two different radiology reports describ-
ing similar symptoms and conditions, however, are notguaranteed to result in the same summary text. The out-
put of summarisation therefore does not lend itself well
for large-scale data analysis in the same way as classifica-
tion of symptoms and conditions does, for example, foridentifying patients with the same findings for epidemio-
logicalstudies.
With a specific focus on stroke, Flynn et al. (2010) [ 21]
developed a system for analysis of brain scan radiologyreports from Tayside, Scotland, i.e. EHR reports which
are very similar to the those in the ESS data set [ 22].
Their aim was to improve on the coding of the reportswhich were frequently given generic ‘stroke’ codes even
when a more precise code could be determined by look-
ingatthereport.Theirmethodusedakeywordmatchingstep looking for affirmative or negative uses of key words
from a stroke lexicon. They report results which were
acceptablyaccurateinidentifyingischaemicstroke(94.7%positive predictive value (precision)) on a dataset of 150
reports manually classified as ischaemic stroke. Their
method performed less reliably in identifying intracere-bral haemorrhage (76.7% positive predictive value) on a
dataset of 150 reports manually classified as intracere-
bral haemorrhage. The paper does not report sensitivity
(recall) scores asthe data only contains positiveexamples
ofeithertype.
To the best of our knowledge, EdIE-R is the first sys-
temthatperformsnamedentityextraction,negatedentity
detection,relationextractionanddocumentlevellabellingwith the goal to classify radiology report with types of
stroke, tumours and other information. The extracted
entities (positive or negative) and relations are all used todothefinalclassification(labelling)step.Theinformation
captured in and about the reports include a compre-
hensive set of entities and labels. We provide a detailedevaluation of EdIE-R for all the steps it is designed to
performusingstandardnaturallanguageprocessingeval-
uation metrics, including precision, recall and F1-score.Compared to the previous study [ 21
] we therefore test
on an unseen test set of random radiology reports which
containpositiveandnegativeexamplesoftheinformation
EdIE-Risdesignedtoextractandlabel.
Method
Annotationscheme
There are four aspects to the annotation of brain scan
reports in our data: entities, relations, negation mark-up,
and labels. These are all illustrated in Fig. 3,ascr eengra b
of an annotated report loaded into the BRAT tool. As
shown, each report is preceded by a list of all possible
labelsbutonlythosethathavebeenmarkedasselectedarelabels for the report. Entities, relations and negation have
beenannotatedwithinthetextualbodyofthereport.
Entities are of two types, observations or mod-
ifiers. The full set of observation entities are:
ischaemic stroke ,haemorrhagic stroke ,
stroke (unknown type) ,tumour:meningioma ,
tumour:metastasis ,tumour:glioma ,tumour,
subdural haematoma ,small vessel disease ,