Alexetal. JournalofBiomedicalSemantics 2019,10(Suppl1):23 Page5of11
should contribute to the labels assigned to the
reports.
TheEdIE-Rsystem
EdIE-Risarule-basedtextminingsystemwhichwedevel-
oped in tandem with manual data annotation in the form
of correction of the system output. The presentation ofthe data in the BRAT tool, as illustrated in Fig. 2,i st h e
view that the annotators see, but this is a format that has
been derived from the data structure which the systemmanipulatesandoutputs,whichisanXMLdatastructure.
Wehavedevelopedthesystem’stextanalysiscomponents
using the LT-XML2 programs, which are the core of our
XML rule-based text mining software [ 23]. Our most
recent software release, the Edinburgh Geoparser [ 24],
contains all of our general-purpose components, such as
the tokeniser, NER tagger and chunker, which we have
adaptedtothebrainscanreportdomaininEdIE-R.
As shown in Fig. 3, the EdIE-R system has a pipeline
architecture. Scan reports are converted from their orig-
inal format into an initial XML format and subsequentcomponents incrementally add annotations to the XML
structure, with each stage making computations over the
annotations of previous stages. The document zoning
step segments the reports into sections including clinicaldetails, the report itself and the radiologist’s conclusion.
It also adds metadata which includes all of the possi-
ble labels that can be assigned; by the final stage of thepipeline an attribute on each label indicates whether that
label has been selected. An example of a report in XML
after document zoning is shown in Fig. 4.W ec o m b i n e
NER and label mark-up in this way so that manual anno-
tation of all levels of analysis can be done at the same
time.
Subsequent steps of the pipeline do linguistic process-
ing. The tokeniser splits textual content into paragraphs,
sentences and word tokens, with punctuation charactersalso treated as tokens. The C&C POS tagger [ 25]l a b e l s
each word with its syntactic category. The default C&C
model has been trained on modern U.S. newspaper text
andalthoughitperformswellonmosttexttypes,itisnot
whollysuitableforthemedicaltextinourreports.Forthis
Fig.4XMLformatafterdocumentzoning