Alexetal. JournalofBiomedicalSemantics 2019,10(Suppl1):23 Page2of11
Fig.1Exampleofentity,relationandnegationmark-up
into two relations, one with a temporal modifier and one
with a location modifier, while the second ischaemic
stroke entity is in a relation with a temporal modifier.
These latter two entities are marked as negative (crossed
out)becausetheyareinthescopeofthenegativeword No.
Annotations such as these are output by the text mining
system and are then used as the basis for the assignment
oflabelstothereports.
InordertodevelopNERandREcomponents,decisions
need to be made about which entities and which rela-tions the system should identify. These decisions are best
madethroughdialoguebetweenthedomainexperts,who
know what information they would ideally like to access,and text mining experts, who can judge which pieces of
information can be identified with sufficient accuracy.
In addition, manually annotated subsets of the data areneeded to train and develop the components as well as to
evaluatetheirperformance.
In building EdIE-R, we used the process of annotation
as a means to focus the radiologist/text miner dialogue
at the same time as developing the prototype system. We
used an agile development methodology where iterationsof system development were interleaved with annotation
iterations. After initial scoping, automatic annotations
from the system were presented to the domain expertsfor correction using the BRAT annotation tool [ 2]. The
system and manual annotations were compared and dis-
agreements were resolved either by adjusting the man-
ual annotation or by improving the system. We iterated
over the process a number of times with both systemand manual annotation improving in each cycle. This
methodhasseveraladvantages.First,itallowsbothteams
to work simultaneously, unlike methods where all theannotation is done in advance of system development.
Second, discussion of the system and manual disagree-
ments allows the text miners to come to a much clearerunderstanding of the meaning of the domain language
and the domain specialists to understand the limitations
of the technology. Through negotiation, several changesto the annotation scheme were made during the iterative
process. Third, doing annotation as correction tends toreduce insignificant differences between manual and sys-
temannotation.
Relatedwork
Named entity recognition is a well-established task in
NLP. The CoNLL shared-task evaluations [ 3]e s t a b l i s h e d
benchmarks for NER evaluation and prompted research
into supervised machine learning methods for NER, forexample, the Stanford NER tagger [ 4]. Rule-based tech-
niques are also still used for NER: see e.g. the ANNIE
NERtaggerwhichispartofGATE[ 5].Relationextraction
is often included as a subtask in text mining applications
[6]withapproachestoitrangingfromrule-basedthrough
supervisedtounsupervisedmachinelearning.
Text mining technology for the biomedical domain has
been a subject of research for two decades with several
community initiatives to provide data and a forum forshared tasks, such as BioCreative [ 7]a n dB i o N L P[ 8].
Both of these organised shared tasks in NE and RE: see
[9,10] for our contributions. More recently the shared
taskapproachhasbeenusedforelectronichealthrecords
(EHRs) by the LOUHI workshops, e.g. LOUHI’17 [ 11]o r
LOUHI’18 [ 12]. There are many individual studies apply-
ing information extraction to EHRs, see [ 13]f o rar e v i e w
ofsomeofthese.Negationdetectionhasbeenrecognisedas an important step, particularly in medical text mining,
withtheNegExalgorithm[ 14]beingfrequentlyused.
Several researchers have applied NLP and text mining
approachestoradiologyreports.Ponsetal.(2016)provide
a useful systematic review of NLP in radiology [ 15]. They
include 67 different studies which they group accordingto 5 distinct purposes, namely diagnostic surveillance,
cohort building for epidemiological studies, query-based
case retrieval, quality assessment of radiologic practice,and clinical support services. Conditions targeted by the
systemsarevariousandincludeappendicitis,pneumonia,
renal cysts, pulmonary embolism, liver conditions and
Fig.2EdIE-Rprocessingpipeline