We train the network with 2,290 airplane point clouds
from ShapeNet [9], and test it with 400 held-out point
clouds augmented with 100 random rotations. At each train-
ing iteration, we randomly select a reference point cloud
and transform it with 10 randomly-sampled rotation ma-
trices to get 10 target point clouds. We feed the paired
reference-target point clouds into the Siamese network and
minimize the L2 loss between the output and the ground-
truth rotation matrices.
We trained the network with 2.6×106iterations. Plot (d)
in Figure 5 shows the mean geodesic errors as training pro-
gresses. Plot (e) and Table (f) show the percentile, mean,
max and standard deviation of errors. Again, the 6D rep-
resentation has the lowest mean and standard deviation of
errors with around 95% of errors lower than 5◦, while Euler
representation is the worst with around 10% of errors higher
than 25◦. Unlike the sanity test, the 5D representation here
performs worse than the 6D representation, but outperforms
the 3D and 4D representations. We hypothesize that the dis-
tortion in the gradients caused by the stereographic projec-
tion makes it harder for the network to do the regression.
Since the ground-truth rotation matrices are available, we
can directly regress the 3×3matrix using L2 loss. During
testing, we use the Gram-Schmidt process to transform the
predicted matrix into SO(3)and then report the geodesic
error (see the bottom row of Table (f) in Figure 5). We hy-
pothesize that the reason for the worse performance of the
3×3matrix compared to the 6D representation is due to the
orthogonalization post-process, which introduces errors.
5.3. Inverse Kinematics for Human Poses
In this experiment, we train a neural network to solve
human pose inverse kinematics (IK) problems. Similar to
the method of Villegas et al. [30] and Hsu et al. [18], our
network takes the joint positions of the current pose as in-
puts and predicts the rotations from the T-pose to the current
pose. We use a ﬁxed forward kinematic function to trans-
form predicted rotations back to joint positions and penalize
their L2 distance from the ground truth. Previous work for
this task used quaternions. We instead test on different ro-
tation representations and compare their performance.
The input contains the 3D positions of the Njoints
on the skeleton marked as P= (p1,p2,p3,...,pN),
pi= (x,y,z)⊺. The output of the network are the ro-
tations of the joints in the chosen representation R=
(r1,r2,r3,...,rN),ri∈RD, whereDis the dimension of
the representation.
We train a four-layer MLP network that has 1024 neu-
rons in hidden layers with the L2 reconstruction loss L=
||P−P′||2
2, whereP′= Π(T,R). HereΠis the forward
kinematics function which takes as inputs the “T” pose of
the skeleton and the predicted joints rotations, and outputs
the 3D positions of the joints. Due to the recursive com-
putational structure of forward kinematics, the accuracy of
the hip orientation is critical for the overall skeleton pose
prediction and thus the joints adjacent to the hip contribute
more weight to the loss (10 times higher than other joints).
We use the CMU Motion Capture Database [25] fortraining and testing because it contains complex motions
like dancing and martial arts, which cover a wide range of
joint rotations. We picked in total 865 motion clips from 37
motion categories. We randomly chose 73 clips for test-
ing and the rest for training. We ﬁx the global position
of the hip so that we do not need to worry about predict-
ing the global translation. The whole training set contains
1.14×106frames of human poses and the test set contains
1.07×105frames of human poses. We train the networks
with 1,960k iterations with batch size 64. During training,
we augmented the poses with random rotation along the y-
axis. We augmented each instance in the test set with three
random rotations along the y-axis as well. The results, as
displayed in subplots (g), (h) and (i) in Figure 5, show that
the 6D representation performs the best with the lowest er-
rors and fastest convergence. The 5D representation has
similar performance as the 6D one. On the contrary, the
4D and 3D representations have higher average errors and
higher percentages of big errors that exceed 10 cm.
We also perform the test of using the 3 ×3 matrix with-
out orthogonalization during training and using the Gram-
Schmidt process to transform the predicted matrix into
SO(3) during testing. We ﬁnd this method creates huge er-
rors as reported in the bottom line of Table (i) in Figure
5. One possible reason for this bad performance is that the
3×3 matrix may cause the bone lengths to scale during the
forward kinematics process. In Appendix G.1, we addition-
ally visualize some human body poses for quaternions and
our 6D representation.
6. Conclusion
We investigated the use of neural networks to approx-
imate the mappings between various rotation representa-
tions. We found empirically that neural networks can better
ﬁt continuous representations. For 3D rotations, the com-
monly used quaternion and Euler angle representations have
discontinuities and can cause problems during learning. We
present continuous 5D and 6D rotation representations and
demonstrate their advantages using an auto-encoder sanity
test, as well as real world applications, such as 3D pose es-
timation and human inverse kinematics.
7. Acknowledgements
We thank Noam Aigerman, Kee Yuen Lam, and Sitao
Xiang for fruitful discussions; Fangjian Guo, Xinchen Yan,
and Haoqi Li for helping with the presentation. This re-
search was conducted at USC and Adobe and was funded
by in part by the ONR YIP grant N00014-17-S-FO14, the
CONIX Research Center, one of six centers in JUMP, a
Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program spon-
sored by DARPA, the Andrew and Erna Viterbi Early Ca-
reer Chair, the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL)
under contract number W911NF-14-D-0005, Adobe, and
Sony. This project was not funded by Pinscreen, nor has
it been conducted at Pinscreen or by anyone else afﬁliated
with Pinscreen. The content of the information does not
necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the Govern-
ment, and no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.
85752