n = 3: 1
n = 4:23 456
5678 1234 9101112
n = 5: 12345 678910 1112131415 1617181920Legend
No projection
Projection #1
Projection #2
Projection #3
Figure 4. An illustration of how n−2normalized projections
can be made to reduce the dimensionality for the representation
ofSO(n)from Case 3 by n−2. In each row we show the dimen-
sionn, and the elements of the vectorized representation γ(M)
containing the ﬁrst n−1columns of M∈SO(n). Each column
is lengthn: the columns are grouped by the thick black rectangles.
Each unique color speciﬁes a group of inputs for the “normalized
projection” of Equation (8). The white regions are not projected.
Here we have dropped the implicit argument Mtoγfor
brevity. Deﬁne the mapping to the original space as:
fP(u) =fGS/parenleftBig
[u1:n2−2n−1,Q(un2−2n:)](n×(n−1))/parenrightBig
(11)
Here the superscript (n×(n−1))indicates that the vec-
tor is reshaped to a matrix of the speciﬁed size before going
through the Gram-Schmidt function fGS. We can now see
why Equation (9) is normalized the way it is. This is so that
projection followed by un-projection can preserve the unit
length property of the basis vector that is a column of M,
and also correctly recover the ﬁrst component of Q(·), so
we getfP(gP(M)) =Mfor allM∈SO(3). We can show
thatgPis deﬁned on its domain and continuous by using
properties of the orthonormal basis produced by the Gram-
Schmidt process gGS. For example, we can show that γ/\e}atio\slash= 0
because components 2 through n+1ofγare an orthonor-
mal basis vector, and N(γ)will never be equal to the projec-
tion point [1,0,...,0,0]that the stereographic projection is
made from. It can also be shown that for all M∈SO(3),
fP(gP(M)) =M. We show some of these details in the
supplemental material.
As a special case, for the 3D rotations, this gives us a
5D representation. This representation is made by using the
6D representation from Case 3, ﬂattening it to a vector, and
then using a normalized projection on the last 4 dimensions.
We can actually make up to n−2projections in a similar
manner, while maintaining continuity of the representation,
as follows. As a reminder, the length of γ, the vectorized
result of the Gram-Schmidt process, is n(n−1): it contains
n−1basis vectors each of dimension n. Thus, we can make
n−2projections, where each projection i= 1,...,n−2
selects the basis vector i+1fromγ(M), prepends to it an
appropriately selected element from the ﬁrst basis vector of
γ(M), such as γn+1−i, and then projects the result. The
resulting projections are then concatenated as a row vector
along with the two unprojected entries to form the represen-
tation. Thus, after doing n−2projections, we can obtain
a continuous representation for SO(3)inn2−2n+ 2di-
mensions. See Figure 4 for a visualization of the grouping
of the elements that can be projected.
Other groups: O(n), similarity transforms, quater-
nions. In this paper, we focus mainly on the representation
of rotations. However, we note that the preceding repre-
sentations can easily be generalized to O(n),the group oforthogonal n×nmatricesMwithMMT=MTM=I.
We can also generalize to the similarity transforms, which
we denote as Sim (n), deﬁned as the afﬁne maps ρ(x)on
Rn,ρ(x) =αRx+u, whereα >0,Ris ann×nor-
thogonal matrix, and u∈Rn[4]. For the orthogonal group
O(n), we can use any of the representations in Case 3 or
4, but with an additional component in the representation
that indicates whether the determinant is +1 or -1. Then the
Gram-Schmidt process in Equation (7) needs to be modiﬁed
slightly: if the determinant is -1 then the last vector bnneeds
to be negated. Meanwhile, for the similarity transforms,
the translation component ucan easily be represented as-
is. The matrix component αRof the similarity transform
can be represented using any of the options in Case 3 or
4. The only needed change is that the Gram-Schmidt pro-
cess in Equations 7 or 11 should multiply the ﬁnal resulting
matrix by α. The term αis simply the norm of any of the
basis vectors input to the Gram-Schmidt process, e.g. ||a1||
in Equation (7). Clearly, if the projections of Case 4 are
used, at least one basis vector must remain not projected,
soαcan be determined. In the supplemental material, we
also explain how one might adapt an existing network that
outputs 3D or 4D rotation representations so that it can use
our 6D or 5D representations.
5. Empirical Results
We investigated different rotation representations and
found that those with better continuity properties work bet-
ter for learning. We ﬁrst performed a sanity test and then
experimented on two real world applications to show how
continuity properties of rotation representations inﬂuence
the learning process.
5.1. Sanity Test
We ﬁrst perform a sanity test using an auto-encoder
structure. We use a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network
as an encoder to map SO(3)to the chosen representation R.
We test our proposed 6D and 5D representations, quater-
nions, axis-angle, and Euler angles. The encoder network
contains four fully-connected layers, where hidden layers
have 128 neurons and Leaky ReLU activations. The ﬁxed
“decoder” mapping f:R/mapsto→SO(3)is deﬁned in Section 4.
For training, we compute the loss using the L2 distance
between the input SO(3)matrixMand the output SO(3)
matrixM′: note that this is invariant to the particular rep-
resentation used, such as quaternions, axis-angle, etc. We
use Adam optimization with batch size 64 and learning rate
10−5for the ﬁrst 104iterations and 10−6for the remain-
ing iterations. For sampling the input rotation matrices dur-
ing training, we uniformly sample axes and angles. We test
the networks using 105rotation matrices generated by ran-
domly sampling axes and angles and calculate geodesic er-
rors between the input and the output rotation matrices. The
geodesic error is deﬁned as the minimal angular difference
between two rotations, written as
Langle=cos−1((M′′
00+M′′
11+M′′
22−1)/2) (12)
M′′=MM′−1(13)
65750