Mapping g
Connected Set
of Rotations inS1Original Space
Disconnected Set of Angular 
Representations in [0, 2 π]0 2πRepresentation Space
Figure 1. A simple 2D example, which motivates our deﬁnition of
continuity of representation. See Section 3 for details.
Representation 
Space 
RInput 
signalOriginal 
Space
X
Mapping f
Neural 
Network
Mapping g
Figure 2. Our deﬁnition of continuous representation, as well as
how it can apply in a neural network. See the body for details.
sional rotations. This group is deﬁned on the set of n×n
real matrices with MMT=MTM=Ianddet(M) = 1 .
The group operation is multiplication, which results in the
concatenation of rotations. We denote the ndimensional
unit sphere asSn={x∈Rn+1:||x||= 1}.
Motivating example: 2D rotations. We now consider
the representation of 2D rotations. For any 2D rotation M∈
SO(2), we can also express the matrix as:
M=/bracketleftbigg
cos(θ)−sin(θ)
sin(θ) cos(θ)/bracketrightbigg
(1)
We can represent any rotation matrix M∈SO(2)by
choosing θ∈R, whereRis a suitable set of angles, for ex-
ample,R= [0,2π]. However, this particular representation
intuitively has a problem with continuity. The problem is
that if we deﬁne a mapping gfrom the original space SO(2)
to the angular representation space R, then this mapping is
discontinuous. In particular, the limit of gat the identity ma-
trix, which represents zero rotation, is undeﬁned: one direc-
tional limit gives an angle of 0and the other gives 2π. We
depict this problem visually in Figure 1. On the right, we
visualize a connected set of rotations C⊂SO(2)by visual-
izing their ﬁrst column vector [cos(θ),sin(θ)]Ton the unit
sphereS1. On the left, after mapping them through g, we
see that the angles are disconnected. In particular, we say
that this representation is discontinuous because the map-
pinggfrom the original space to the representation space
is discontinuous. We argue that these kind of discontinu-
ous representations can be harder for neural networks to ﬁt.
Contrarily, if we represent the 2D rotation M∈SO(2)by
its ﬁrst column vector [cos(θ),sin(θ)]T, then the represen-
tation would be continuous.
Continuous representation: We can now deﬁne what
we consider a continuous representation. We illustrate our
deﬁnitions graphically in Figure 2. Let Rbe a subset of
a real vector space equipped with the Euclidean topology.
We callRtherepresentation space : in our context, a neu-
ral network produces an intermediate representation in R.
This neural network is depicted on the left side of Figure 2.
We will come back to this neural network shortly. Let X
be a compact topological space. We call Xtheoriginalspace . In our context, any intermediate representation in
Rproduced by the network can be mapped into the orig-
inal space X. Deﬁne the mapping to the original space
f:R→X, and the mapping to the representation space
g:X→R. We say (f,g)is arepresentation if for every
x∈X,f(g(x)) =x, that is,fis a left inverse of g. We say
therepresentation is continuous ifgis continuous.
Connection with neural networks: We now return to
the neural network on the left side of Figure 2. We imag-
ine that inference runs from left to right. Thus, the neural
network accepts some input signals on its left hand side,
outputs a representation in R, and then passes this repre-
sentation through the mapping fto get an element of the
original space X. Note that in our context, the mapping f
is implemented as a mathematical function that is used as
part of the forward pass of the network at both training and
inference time. Typically, at training time, we might im-
pose losses on the original space X. We now describe the
intuition behind why we ask that gbe continuous. Suppose
that we have some connected set Cin the original space,
such as the one shown on the right side of Figure 1. Then if
we mapCinto representation space R, andgis continuous,
then the set g(C)will remain connected. Thus, if we have
continuous training data, then this will effectively create a
continuous training signal for the neural network. Contrar-
ily, ifgis not continuous, as shown in Figure 1, then a con-
nected set in the original space may become disconnected
in the representation space. This could create a discontinu-
ous training signal for the network. We note that the units
in the neural network are typically continuous, as deﬁned
on Euclidean topology spaces. Thus, we require the repre-
sentation space Rto have Euclidean topology because this
is consistent with the continuity of the network units.
Domain of the mapping f:We additionally note that
for neural networks, it is speciﬁcally beneﬁcial for the map-
pingfto be deﬁned almost everywhere on a set where the
neural network outputs are expected to lie. This enables f
tomap arbitrary representations produced by the network
back to the original space X.
Connection with topology: Suppose that (f,g)is a con-
tinuous representation. Note that gis a continuous one-to-
one function from a compact topological space to a Haus-
dorff space. From a theorem in topology [22], this implies
that if we restrict the codomain of gtog(X)(and use the
subspace topology for g(X)) then the resulting mapping is
a homeomorphism. A homeomorphism is a continuous bi-
jection with a continuous inverse. For geometric intuition,
a homeomorphism is often described as a continuous and
invertible stretching and bending of one space to another,
with also a ﬁnite number of cuts allowed if one later glues
back together the same points. One says that two spaces are
topologically equivalent if there is a homeomorphism be-
tween them. Additionally, gis a topological embedding of
the original space Xinto the representation space R. Note
that we also have the inverse of g: if we restrict fto the
domaing(X)then the resulting function f|g(X)is simply
the inverse of g. Conversely, if the original space Xis not
homeomorphic to any subset of the representation space R
35747