bi=


N(a1) if i=1
N(ai−/summationtexti−1
j=1(bj·ai)bj) if2≤i < n
det
e1
b1... b n−1...
en
ifi=n.
T
(7)
HereN(·)denotes a normalization function, the same as
before, and e1,...,e nare thencanonical basis vectors of
the Euclidean space. The only difference of fGSfrom an
ordinary Gram-Schmidt process is that the last column is
computed by a generalization of the cross product to ndi-
mensions. Now clearly, gGSis continuous. To check that
for every M∈SO(n),fGS(gGS(M)) =M, we can use
induction and the properties of the orthonormal basis vec-
tors in the columns of Mto show that the Gram-Schmidt
process does not modify the ﬁrst n−1components. Lastly,
we can use theorems for the generalized cross product such
as Theorem 5.14.7 of Bloom [8], to show that the last com-
ponent of fGS(gGS(M))agrees with M. Finally, we can
deﬁne the set Das that where the above Gram-Schmidt-
like process does not map back to SO(n): speciﬁcally, this
is where the dimension of the span of the n−1vectors input
togis less than n−1.
6D representation for the 3D rotations: For the 3D
rotations, Case 3 gives us a 6D representation. The gener-
alized cross product for bnin Equation (7) simply reduces
to the ordinary cross product b1×b2. We give the detailed
equations in Section B in the supplemental document. We
speciﬁcally note that using our 6D representation in a net-
work can be beneﬁcial because the mapping fGSin Equa-
tion (7) ensures that the resulting 3x3 matrix is orthogonal.
In contrast, suppose a direct prediction for 3x3 matrices is
used. Then either the orthogonalization can be done in-
network or as a postprocess. If orthogonalization is done
in network, the last 3 components of the matrix will be dis-
carded by the Gram-Schmidt process in Equation (7), so the
3x3 matrix representation is effectively our 6D representa-
tion plus 3 useless parameters. If orthogonalization is done
as a postprocess, then this prevents certain applications such
as forward kinematics, and the error is also higher as shown
in Section 5.
Group operations such as multiplication: Suppose
that the original space is a group such as the rotation group,
and we want to multiply two representations r1,r2∈R.
In general, we can do this by ﬁrst mapping to the origi-
nal space, multiplying the two elements, and then mapping
back:r1r2=g(f(r1)f(r2)).However, for the proposed
representation here, we can gain some computational efﬁ-
ciency as follows. Since the mapping to the representation
space in Equation (5) drops the last column, when comput-
ingf(r2), we can simply drop the last column and compute
the product representation as the product of an n×nand an
n×(n−1)matrix.
Case 4: Further reducing the dimensionality for the
ndimensional rotations. Forn≥3dimensions, we can
reduce the dimension for the representation in the previous
case, while still keeping a continuous representation. Intu-
itively, a lower dimensional representation that is less re-N0
p
p′xy
Figure 3. An illustration of stereographic projection in 2D. We are
given as input a point pon the unit sphere S1. We construct a ray
from a ﬁxed projection point N0= (0,1)throughpand ﬁnd the
intersection of this ray with the plane y= 0. The resulting point
p′is the stereographic projection of p.
dundant could be easier to learn. However, we found in
our experiments that the dimension reduced representation
does not outperform the Gram-Schmidt-like representation
from Case 3. However, we still develop this representation
because it allows us to show that continuous rotation repre-
sentations can outperform discontinuous ones.
We show that we can perform such dimension reduc-
tion using one or more stereographic projections combined
with normalization. We show an illustration of a 2D stereo-
graphic projection in Figure 3, which can be easily general-
ized to higher dimensions. Let us ﬁrst normalize the input
point, so it projects to a sphere, and then stereographically
project the result using a projection point of (1,0,...,0).
We call this combined operation a normalized projection,
and deﬁne it as P:Rm→Rm−1:
P(u) =/bracketleftbigv2
1−v1,v3
1−v1, ...,vm
1−v1/bracketrightbigT,v=u/||u||.
(8)
Now deﬁne a function Q:Rm−1→Rm, which does a
stereographic un-projection:
Q(u) =1
||u||/bracketleftbig1
2(||u||2−1), u1, ..., u m−1/bracketrightbigT(9)
Note that the un-projection is not actually back to the
sphere, but in a way that coordinates 2 through mare a
unit vector. Now we can use between 1andn−2nor-
malized projections on the representation from the previous
case, while still preserving continuity and one-to-one be-
havior.
For simplicity, we will ﬁrst demonstrate the case of one
stereographic projection. The idea is that we can ﬂatten the
representation from Case 3 to a vector and then stereograph-
ically project the last n+1components of that vector. Note
that we intentionally project as few components as possible,
since we found that nonlinearities introduced by the projec-
tion can make the learning process more difﬁcult. These
nonlinearities are due to the square terms and the division
in Equation (9). If uis a vector of length m, deﬁne the slic-
ing notation ui:j= (ui,ui+1,...,u j), andui:=ui:m. Let
M(i)be theith column of matrix M. Deﬁne a vectorized
representation γ(M)by dropping the last column of Mlike
in Equation (5): γ(M) = [MT
(1),...,MT
(n−1)]. Now we can
deﬁne the mapping to the representation space as:
gP(M) = [γ1:n2−2n−1,P(γn2−2n:)] (10)
55749