the discontinuous ones for several tasks, including a rota-
tion autoencoder “sanity test,” rotation estimation for 3D
point clouds, and 3D human pose inverse kinematics learn-
ing. We note that in our rotation autoencoder experiments,
discontinuous representations can have up to 6 to 14 times
higher mean errors than continuous representations. Fur-
thermore they tend to converge much slower while still pro-
ducing large errors over 170◦at certain rotation angles even
after convergence, which we believe are due to the discon-
tinuities being harder to ﬁt. This phenomenon can also
be observed in the experiments on different rotation repre-
sentations for homeomorphic variational auto-encoding in
Falorsi et al. [14], and in practical applications, such as 6D
object pose estimation in Xiang et al. [31].
We also show that one can perform direct regression on
3x3 rotation matrices. Empirically this approach introduces
larger errors than our 6D representation as shown in Sec-
tion 5.2. Additionally, for some applications such as inverse
and forward kinematics, it may be important for the network
itself to produce orthogonal matrices. We therefore require
an orthogonalization procedure in the network. In particu-
lar, if we use a Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, we then
effectively end up with our 6D representation.
Our contributions are: 1) a deﬁnition of continuity for
rotation representations, which is suitable for neural net-
works; 2) an analysis of discontinuous and continuous rep-
resentations for 2D, 3D, and n-D rotations; 3) new formulas
for continuous representations of SO(3)andSO(n); 4) em-
pirical results supporting our theoretical views and that our
continuous representations are more suitable for learning.
2. Related Work
In this section, we will ﬁrst establish some context for
our work in terms of neural network approximation theory.
Next, we discuss related works that investigate the continu-
ity properties of different rotation representations. Finally,
we will report the types of rotation representations used in
previous learning tasks and their performance.
Neural network approximation theory. We review a
brief sampling of results from neural network approxima-
tion theory. Hornik [17] showed that neural networks can
approximate functions in the Lpspace to arbitrary accuracy
if theLpnorm is used. Barron et al. [6] showed that if a
function has certain properties in its Fourier transform, then
at mostO(ǫ−2)neurons are needed to obtain an order of ap-
proximation ǫ. Chapter 6.4.1 of LeCun et al. [23] provides
a more thorough overview of such results. We note that
results for continuous functions indicate that functions that
have better smoothness properties can have lower approxi-
mation error for a particular number of neurons [32, 10, 33].
For discontinuous functions, Llanas et al. [24] showed that
a real and piecewise continuous function can be approx-
imated in an almost uniform way. However, Llanas et
al. [24] also noted that piecewise continuous functions when
trained with gradient descent methods require many neu-
rons and training iterations, and yet do not give very good
results. These results suggest that continuous rotation rep-
resentations might perform better in practice.Continuity for rotations. Grassia et al. [16] pointed out
that Euler angles and quaternions are not suitable for ori-
entation differentiation and integration operations and pro-
posed exponential map as a more robust rotation represen-
tation. Saxena et al. [28] observed that the Euler angles and
quaternions cause learning problems due to discontinuities.
However, they did not propose general rotation representa-
tions other than direct regression of 3x3 matrices, since they
focus on learning representations for objects with speciﬁc
symmetries.
Neural networks for 3D shape pose estimation. Deep
networks have been applied to estimate the 6D poses of ob-
ject instances from RGB images, depth maps or scanned
point clouds. Instead of directly predicting 3x3 matri-
ces that may not correspond to valid rotations, they typ-
ically use more compact rotation representations such as
quaternion [31, 21, 20] or axis-angle [29, 15, 13]. In
PoseCNN [31], the authors reported a high percentage of
errors between 90◦and 180◦, and suggested that this is
mainly caused by the rotation ambiguity for some symmet-
ric shapes in the test set. However, as illustrated in their
paper, the proportion of errors between 90◦to 180◦is still
high even for non-symmetric shapes. In this paper, we ar-
gue that discontinuity in these representations could be one
cause of such errors.
Neural networks for inverse kinematics. Recently, re-
searchers have been interested in training neural networks
to solve inverse kinematics equations. This is because such
networks are faster than traditional methods and differen-
tiable so that they can be used in more complex learning
tasks such as motion re-targeting [30] and video-based hu-
man pose estimation [19]. Most of these works represented
rotations using quaternions or axis-angle [18, 19]. Some
works also used other 3D representations such as Euler an-
gles and Lie algebra [19, 34], and penalized the joint posi-
tion errors. Csiszar et al. [11] designed networks to output
the sine and cosine of the Euler angles for solving the in-
verse kinematics problems in robotic control. Euler angle
representations are discontinuous for SO(3)and can result
in large regression errors as shown in the empirical test in
Section 5. However, those authors limited the rotation an-
gles to be within a certain range, which avoided the discon-
tinuity points and thus achieved very low joint alignment
errors in their test. However, many real-world tasks require
the networks to be able to output the full range of rotations.
In such cases, continuous rotation representations will be a
better choice.
3. Deﬁnition of Continuous Representation
In this section, we begin by deﬁning the terminology we
will use in the paper. Next, we analyze a simple motivat-
ing example of 2D rotations. This allows us to develop our
general deﬁnition of continuity of representation in neural
networks. We then explain how this deﬁnition of continuity
is related to concepts in topology.
Terminology . To denote a matrix, we typically use M,
andMijrefers to its (i,j)entry. We use the term SO(n)to
denote the special orthogonal group , the space of ndimen-
25746