On the Continuity of Rotation Representations in Neural Networks
Yi Zhou∗
University of Southern California
zhou859@usc.eduConnelly Barnes∗
Adobe Research
connellybarnes@yahoo.comJingwan Lu
Adobe Research
jlu@adobe.com
Jimei Yang
Adobe Research
jimyang@adobe.comHao Li
University of Southern California, Pinscreen
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
hao@hao-li.com
Abstract
In neural networks, it is often desirable to work with var-
ious representations of the same space. For example, 3D
rotations can be represented with quaternions or Euler an-
gles. In this paper, we advance a deﬁnition of a continuous
representation, which can be helpful for training deep neu-
ral networks. We relate this to topological concepts such as
homeomorphism and embedding. We then investigate what
are continuous and discontinuous representations for 2D,
3D, and n-dimensional rotations. We demonstrate that for
3D rotations, all representations are discontinuous in the
real Euclidean spaces of four or fewer dimensions. Thus,
widely used representations such as quaternions and Eu-
ler angles are discontinuous and difﬁcult for neural net-
works to learn. We show that the 3D rotations have con-
tinuous representations in 5D and 6D, which are more suit-
able for learning. We also present continuous represen-
tations for the general case of the ndimensional rotation
groupSO(n). While our main focus is on rotations, we also
show that our constructions apply to other groups such as
the orthogonal group and similarity transforms. We ﬁnally
present empirical results, which show that our continuous
rotation representations outperform discontinuous ones for
several practical problems in graphics and vision, includ-
ing a simple autoencoder sanity test, a rotation estimator
for 3D point clouds, and an inverse kinematics solver for
3D human poses.
1. Introduction
Recently, there has been an increasing number of appli-
cations in graphics and vision, where deep neural networks
are used to perform regressions on rotations. This has been
done for tasks such as pose estimation from images [13, 31]
and from point clouds [15], structure from motion [29], and
skeleton motion synthesis, which generates the rotations of
∗Authors have equal contribution.joints in skeletons [30]. Many of these works represent 3D
rotations using 3D or 4D representations such as quater-
nions, axis-angles, or Euler angles.
However, for 3D rotations, we found that 3D and 4D rep-
resentations are not ideal for network regression, when the
full rotation space is required. Empirically, the converged
networks still produce large errors at certain rotation an-
gles. We believe that this actually points to deeper topolog-
ical problems related to the continuity in the rotation rep-
resentations. Informally, all else being equal, discontinuous
representations should in many cases be “harder” to approx-
imate by neural networks than continuous ones. Theoreti-
cal results suggest that functions that are smoother [33] or
have stronger continuity properties such as in the modulus
of continuity [32, 10] have lower approximation error for a
given number of neurons.
Based on this insight, we ﬁrst present in Section 3 our
deﬁnition of the continuity of representation in neural net-
works. We illustrate this deﬁnition based on a simple exam-
ple of 2D rotations. We then connect it to key topological
concepts such as homeomorphism and embedding.
Next, we present in Section 4 a theoretical analysis of the
continuity of rotation representations. We ﬁrst investigate in
Section 4.1 some discontinuous representations, such as Eu-
ler angle and quaternion representations. We show that for
3D rotations, all representations are discontinuous in four or
fewer dimensional real Euclidean space with the Euclidean
topology. We then investigate in Section 4.2 some continu-
ous rotation representations. For the ndimensional rotation
groupSO(n), we present a continuous n2−ndimensional
representation. We additionally present an option to reduce
the dimensionality of this representation by an additional 1
ton−2dimensions in a continuous way. We show that
these allow us to represent 3D rotations continuously in 6D
and 5D. While we focus on rotations, we show how our con-
tinuous representations can also apply to other groups such
as orthogonal groups O(n)and similarity transforms.
Finally, in Section 5 we test our ideas empirically. We
conduct experiments on 3D rotations and show that our
6D and 5D continuous representations always outperform
1
5745