637 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
3.4  The moderating effect of supply chain dynamism
Yu et al. (2019) defined supply chain dynamism (SCD) using the rate of transformational 
change in the supply chain’s products and processes. Supply chains are becoming increas-
ingly dynamic in response to changing business environments and technology. Continuous 
information is required for the supply chains operating in a dynamic environment as vari-
ous internal and external threats continue to suppress their performance (Lee et al. 2016). 
According to Zhou and Benton (2007), SCD can be evaluated through three main factors, 
i.e., the revenue captured from new products, the level of innovation for products, and the 
pace of innovation of processes. Authors like Dubey et al. (2020), Yu et al. (2019) and Jain 
et al. (2017) supported that a deep understanding of the extent of SCD is an essential ele-
ment for the firms to develop more resilient approaches and improved SCP. OIPT supports 
the influence of supply chain dynamism on information sharing and supply chain practice. 
Supply chain dynamism impacts information sharing practices and the inter-organizational 
relationships positively, improving the supply chain performance (Lee et  al. 2016). In 
another study, the supply chain dynamism was found to positively impact the supply chain 
disruption orientation and supply chain resilience (Yu et  al. 2019). The study identifies 
supply chain dynamism as an antecedent to supply chain resilience, influencing the firm’s 
financial performance. The supply chain dynamism was found to moderate the relation-
ship between supply chain integration and supply chain performance. According to Zhou 
and Benton (2007), SCD affects how information processing capabilities help reduce the 
uncertainty associated with external and internal environments. Therefore, we rely on this 
evidence to assume that:
H5.a, b, c  SCD has a positive moderating effect on the relationship between (a) AI and 
SCP, (b) AI and SCC, and (c) AI and AC.
Further, we incorporate three control variables in our statistical analyses, which impact 
the exogenous constructs in the theoretical framework. First, the firm size (FS) by using the 
annual turnover (Wamba et al. 2020; Dubey et al. 2020), second, the business sector (BS) 
(Dubey et al. 2020) and third, the geographical area (GA).
4  Research methodology
4.1  Instrument development
A cross-sectional study design was used to collect the data through a survey-based instru-
ment. In compliance with Malhotra and Grover’s (1998) recommendations, established 
measures from the literature were adopted with minor modifications in the wording of the 
items according to the study’s context and pre-test results. The measurement items were 
developed using a five-point Likert scale with extreme points ranging from 1 = strongly 
disagree to 5 = strongly agree.
Further, the subjective measures related to SCP commonly used in supply chain research 
have been adopted. The questionnaire has been pre-tested for face-validity by requesting nine 
supply chain experts from different industries to fill the survey in the researcher’s presence 
to uncover any shortcomings. Next, the experts were asked to provide general feedback on