646 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
requires the firms to develop AI capabilities to enhance SCRes through its main enablers 
AC and SCC under the dynamism and uncertainty of the supply chain environment.
The many consecutive outbreaks and supply chain disruptions highlight the increased 
need to exploit the information-processing capabilities to manage the global supply chain 
risks that include business continuity, essential commodity, and food security. The present 
study has made a substantial contribution by emphasizing the benefits AI-driven innova-
tions can provide by creating long-lasting SCP. Besides, this paper contributes to the lack 
of literature in the field of AI.
Although we have taken the necessary precautions during all stages of the design and 
execution of this research, the study is subject to few limitations usually associated with 
most survey designs. Therefore, we suggest that scholars and practitioners evaluate the 
study’s outcomes and implications in light of these limitations. First, the theoretical frame-
work and the constructs used in the study are influenced by OIPT. As with any theory-
grounded research, the measure used to test the hypotheses may not provide comprehensive 
coverage of all the theoretical issues associated with AI and SCRes. Thus, future research 
is recommended to explore more relationships and phenomena using mixed qualitative and 
quantitative methodologies to get deeper insights. Second, the findings represent a cross-
sectional snapshot in time, amplified by the current COVID-19 outbreak requirement. 
Hence, more in-depth longitudinal studies are required to confirm the interrelationships 
between AI, SCRes, and SCP during the post-COVID-19 era. Third, despite the hetero-
geneity of sectors used in this study, all firms are operating in the manufacturing industry. 
Generalization of this study’s findings will require similar investigations to be performed in 
services sectors such as travel, transportation, and healthcare.
Appendix: measurement constructs used in the study
Constructs Source Items
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Dubey et al. (2020) AI_1. We possess the infrastructure 
and skilled resources to apply AI 
information processing system
AI_2. We use AI techniques to 
forecast and predict environmen-
tal behavior
AI_3. We develop statistical, self-
learning, and prediction using AI 
techniques
AI_4. We use AI techniques at all 
level of the supply chain
AI_5. We use AI outcomes in a 
shared way to inform supply 
chain decision-making