636 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
reconfigurable, and adaptive. Further, Macías-Escrivá et al. (2013) concluded that AI 
techniques are among the facilitating means that underpin the advancement of new gen-
erations of adaptive systems. Hence, we propose that:
H3a AI has a significant and positive effect on AC.
Similarly, authors such as Scholten et al. (2019) and Jain et al. (2017) argued that 
SCRes relies heavily on AC, which mitigates the impact of unexpected events through 
the proactive identification of strategies enabling the supply chain to adapt aftershock, 
regaining or even enhancing its initial situation. Li et al. (2020) consider adaptive plan-
ning and adaptive response are vital elements in building SCRes to pick up and recover 
from outbreaks under urban context. Further, Kochan and Nowicki (2018) supported 
the positive impact of AC on building SCRes through minimizing the likelihood of con-
fronting non-routine events, withstand the propagation of shocks through holding con-
trol over organization and processes, and responding by proactive plans to absorb the 
shock and rebuild the robust state of the operations in the supply chain. This leads to the 
formulation of the following hypothesis:
H3b  AC mediates the relationship between AI and SCRes.
Jain et al. (2017) stated that supply chain collaboration (SCC) is the mechanism of 
several firms or partners coordinating and operating cooperatively to plan and perform 
supply chain operations. Despite the scarcity of studies addressing the relationship 
between AI and SCC, past literature positively links SCC to AI techniques. For instance, 
Rodríguez-Espíndola et al. (2020) and Baryannis et al. (2019) emphasized the potential 
of AI techniques to provide reliable and updated forecasts and near real-time visibility 
of inventories which resolve collaboration issues among stakeholders that arise from 
uncertain supply and demand. Hence, we can assume that:
H4a AI has a significant and positive effect on SCC.
SCC has been widely considered as an antecedent to SCRes during disruptive events. 
Jain et al. (2017) asserted that collaborative partnerships enable efficient supply chain 
risk mitigation during disruptions. This finds support in the study of Dubey et al. (2020), 
which concludes that under complexity, collaboration among supply chain partners is 
vital in building SCRes by mitigating the risk of disruption through mutual trust, com-
munication, sourcing decisions and information sharing. This improves response time 
and establishes new business opportunities. Further, Chowdhury et al. (2019) affirmed 
that the poor collaboration between supply chain partners, the integration of the whole 
supply chain might be negatively affected, thereby rendering the supply chain vulner -
able and affecting the SCRes as well as the SCP. Hence, supply chain practitioners 
should create a favorable environment for healthy communication, effective collabora-
tion, coordination, and mutual trust-based relationships between the supply chain part-
ners to enhance the SCRes and positively influence the SCP. Therefore, we hypothesize 
that:
H4b  SCC mediates the relationship between AI and SCRes.