638 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
the structure and relevance of the measures used to evaluate the constructs. The measurement 
items used for the constructs and their literature sources are shown in "Appendix". All the 
constructs were deployed as reflective constructs.
4.2  Sampling design and data collection
The research’s empirical context is international supply chains engaged in digital transforma-
tion involving the deployment of AI techniques. The unit of analysis used in this study was the 
focal firm from which one key respondent has been contacted to provide his perception of the 
study’s constructs. Accordingly, the instrument was designed for a single respondent. Besides, 
1128 potential respondents (including managers and senior executives) were identified from 
digitalized firms located in North Africa, South Europe, and Southern Asia. Special attention 
has been paid to the key respondents’ involvement in AI implementation in the supply chain. 
After that, the survey has been administered to the key respondents via e-mail. A question-
naire along with a covering letter explaining the aim of the study and future use of data col-
lected and a strict guarantee of data confidentiality. Through two waves of data collection over 
four weeks and after three e-mail reminders, we obtained 279 complete and usable responses, 
giving an effective response rate of 24.73%. This response rate is entirely adequate in keeping 
with surveys’ usual response rate in prior studies (Belhadi et al. 2020a, b; Dubey et al. 2020). 
The profiles of the responding firms are summarized in Table 2 .
To overcome the issue related to biasedness in the survey-based approach, we tested the 
non-response bias according to the procedure suggested by Armstrong and Overton (1977) 
by comparing the responses of early respondents (first 25%), late respondents (last 25%), and 
a sample of non-respondents. The results showed that for all items, p  > 0.3, suggesting the 
non-existence of a statistically significant difference between the early, late, and non-respond-
ents. Moreover, there was no significant difference between respondents and non-respondents 
regarding control variables (FS, BS, and GA). Hence, we can conclude that non-response bias 
is not a critical issue in the present study.
4.3  Data analysis and results
Structural equation modeling (SEM) includes statistical procedures for measurement testing, 
functional, predictive, and causal hypotheses (Jin et  al. 2020). SEM is a suitable approach 
for examining interrelationships between one or more independent variables and one or more 
dependent variables since the method includes a set of regression analyses (Jin et al. 2020; 
Dubey et al. 2020). Furthermore, SEM is appropriate when the dependent variable for one 
regression analysis could become an independent variable of another. Besides, SEM allows 
the computation of measurement error variance in both exogenous and endogenous variables, 
which meets this study’s need. Therefore, we proposed to use SEM to test our hypothesis 
using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) (Cudeck 1989) as recommended by Jin et al. 
(2020). All the SEM computations were performed on IBM SPSS ver. 26.
4.4  Measurement validation
To evaluate the construct validity and unidimensionality, we carried out a confirma-
tory factor analysis (CFA) using IBM SPSS v22 and the maximum likelihood pro-
cedures (Hair et  al. 2009). Table  3 depicts the results of descriptive statistics, factor