643 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
5  Discussions and implications
The present research examined a theoretically developed structural framework linking the 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) capabilities, Supply Chain Performance (SCP), and Supply 
chain Resilience (SCRes) under the effect of Adaptive Capabilities (AC), Supply Chain 
Collaboration (SCC), and Supply Chain Dynamism (SCD). Grounded in OIPT, our find-
ings postulate that Supply Chain during disruptive and unexpected events could maintain 
or even enhance the supply chain performance through information processing and adapta-
tion capabilities provided by AI techniques. Despite its scarcity, the past literature has indi-
cated a relationship between AI and SCP (Dubey et al. 2020; Grover et al. 2020; Baryannis 
et al. 2019). Srinivasan and Swink (2018) found that information-processing capabilities 
are the key to maintaining the organization’s performance. Our study attempts to empiri-
cally assess the relationship between AI-driven information processing capabilities and 
innovation, resilience, and organizational performance at the supply chain level under the 
condition of high uncertainty dictated by the dynamic environment. Accordingly, our find-
ings support the previous claims that AI-driven innovations have a high potential to allow 
firms within a highly dynamic environment to enhance or at least maintain the current SCP 
level. This is possible due to AI’s potential to learn from data to adapt the decision-making, 
pomote supply chain innovation and respond quickly during disruptive events (Grover et al. 
2020; Akter et al. 2020). Besides, we have found a strong link between SCRes and SCP. 
This suggests that firms that can develop strong readiness in the pre-disruption, efficient 
response during the disruption, and swift recovery in the post-disruption are more likely 
to maintain long-lasting SCP (Chowdhury et al. 2019; Datta 2017). Therefore, it is judi-
cious to think of a more sustained way to gain superior SCP through AI over time, i.e., by 
developing SCRes through enhancing readiness and recovery capabilities besides response 
mechanisms (Chowdhury et al. 2019).
Nonetheless, there is an insufficient understanding of how AI-driven information pro-
cessing capabilities and innovations could help supply chains develop resilience, includ-
ing readiness, response, and recovery from the disruptive event, thereby gaining long-term 
supply chain performance. This gap that has been mentioned in several studies (Wamba 
and Akter 2019; Akter et al. 2020), stems from the tendency in the literature to treat AI as 
a technological toolbox directly used to enhance SCRes metrics rather than to build organi-
zational capability towards innovation (Trabucchi andBuganza 2019). Authors such as 
Scholten et al. (2019) and Chowdhury et al. (2019) underlined that AC and SCC are among 
the most potent organizational enablers to build SCRes. Therefore, we attempted to fill 
the gap above by studying the effect of AI-based innovation in developing those enablers, 
thereby creating SCRes under a dynamic environment. The results support that develop-
ing AI-based innovation is positively and significantly related to enhancing both AC and 
SCC. This provides empirical evidence to past studies (e.g. Baryannis et al. 2019; Wamba 
andAkter 2019; Macías-Escrivá et al. 2013; Leitao 2009) regarding the ability of AI-driven 
adaptive capabilities to build SCRes alongside those who postulate that AI enhances vis-
ibility and real-time coordination (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al. 2020; Baryannis et al. 2019), 
resulting in reinforcement of supply chain collaboration and building of SCRes.
Firms developing AI-based Information processing capabilities such as self-adap-
tive algorithms, prediction, and learning techniques are witnessing their adaptive skills 
enhanced in the pre-disruption era due to predictive and forecasting capabilities (Baryan-
nis et al. 2019). Besides, they could develop collaboration mechanisms with their partners 
through sharing real-time forecasts of inventories and production capacities and informing