629 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
and deployed in the dynamic supply chains. The reviews by Baryannis et al. (2019) and 
Grover et al. (2020) identified that the literature on the predictive and learning capabilities 
of AI in supply-chain risk management is still in a nascent stage. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first study in the literature that empirically investigates the influence of AI 
on SCP through the mediating effect of SCRes.
The above research gaps have led us to investigate the following research questions in 
the present study.
RQ1: What are the direct, indirect, separate, and combined effects of AI capabilities 
and SCRes on SCP?.
RQ2: What is the effect of SCD on the interplay between AI, SCRes, and SCP?.
In addressing these RQs, we develop a research framework based on the theoretical 
underpinning of Organizational Information Processing Theory (OIPT). The framework is 
then analyzed using structural equation modeling (SEM) on the data collected from a sam-
ple of 279 manufacturing firms representing different manufacturing industries and located 
in different countries. Accordingly, the study makes the following novelties and relevant 
contributions. First, this study is among the first to advance the conceptual understanding 
of how AI-based information-processing innovation affects SCRes and how firms can cre-
ate long-lasting SCP in front of disruptive and unexpected events through AI-based capa-
bilities. Second, the study explains how developing AI-based information processing inno-
vation could generate SCP and build SCRes through several components, thus contributing 
to the theory that aims at understanding how focal firms can maintain or improve SCP 
during disruptive events. Finally, the study paves the way for understanding the integration 
of AI capabilities in the different supply chain tiers to strengthen SCC and cope with SCD.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The second section provides details about 
the underpinning theories associated with the study’s constructs. After that, the third sec-
tion proposes the framework, along with the related hypotheses. The fourth section exhibits 
the research design and methodologies. The findings and outcomes of the study are pre-
sented in the fifth section. The sixth section discusses the contributions, implications, limi-
tations, and future research agenda of the study. Finally, the seventh section concludes the 
paper.
2  The conceptual background of the study
2.1  Organizational information processing theory (OIPT)
The OIPT states that the firm’s information processing performance is an outcome of the 
firm’s information processing needs and information processing capability. The uncertain-
ties in the supply chains can affect the relationship between information processing capa-
bilities and related outcomes (Wong et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2015). Therefore, it becomes 
essential for the supply chains to develop the capability to proactively engage in communi-
cation with stakeholders for improved visibility and traceability in SC operations. In the lit-
erature, the data analytics capability is conceptualized as an information processing capa-
bility based on OIPT while analyzing its impact on the supply chain performance (Kamble 
et al. 2020). Theoretically, organizations could either opt to rely on "mechanistic" organi-
zational resources to reduce their dependency on information or enhance their information