645 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
managers could maintain or even improve SCP in a sustained way through the develop-
ment of SCRes. In doing so, they should recognize the role of developing AI-based infor -
mation processing capabilities to develop AC and SCC among the supply chain partners, 
which leads to the creation of long-lasting SCP under dynamism and uncertainty. Knowl-
edge acquisition, assimilation, transformation, and knowledge exploitation are found to be 
the indicators of the adaptive capability of a firm (Cooper and Molla 2017; Pradana et al. 
2019). Developing adaptive capacity, both in firms and in supply chains, are also integral to 
responding to dynamic markets and customer needs. The findings imply that the adaptive 
capacity is found to influence the utilization of big data and predictive analytics on sustain-
able supply chain innovation, urging the researchers to develop research models for sus-
tainable supply chain innovation applications (Hazen et al. 2016). The firms that can recog-
nize and acquire external knowledge develop environmental competencies and capable of 
assimilating, transforming, exploiting the knowledge and develop environmental capabili-
ties, resulting in better performance (Dzhengiz and Niesten 2020).
Even though the focal firm develops the AI capabilities for building SCRes, those 
capabilities might not be used to its full potential unless all the supply chain partners that 
include the lower tier suppliers respond by implementing a data-driven supply chain. The 
majority of the suppliers at the lower tiers of the supply chain may not have access to the 
skilled resources and technological sophistication needed for developing AI capabilities 
or may possess inconsistent data or incompatible interface standards. The cooperation 
and value of information sharing amongst the supply chain partners are highly critical to 
mitigating the risks (Li et al. 2020). The level of collaboration between the supply chain 
partners contributes to supply chain resilience, benefiting supply chain operations in risk 
management (Yen and Zeng 2011). However, a high level of supply chain uncertainty does 
not always lead to a high degree of collaboration with the supply chain partners but is 
mainly driven by organizational culture having external orientation (Mamillo 2015). In 
another study, it was pointed out that the collaboration between buyers and suppliers does 
not directly lead to supply chain resilience but rather enables the antecedents to SCRes 
(Scholten et al. 2019). The integration of AI capabilities in the different tiers of the sup-
ply chain is critical for SCC and AC to develop SCRes. Besides, the supply chain’s high 
dynamism needs careful consideration since it is assumed to play an inverse effect on the 
relationship between AI-driven SCI, SCRes, and SCP. High turbulence may affect the reli-
ability of data and information shared that feed AI algorithms, thus generating unreliable 
contingencies and poor decision-making.
6  Conclusions, limitations, and future research possibilities
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of AI-based systems in enhancing, 
directly and indirectly, SCP during the influence of dynamism and uncertainty. In doing so, 
the study was based on a conceptual framework grounded in OIPT, including SCRes and 
its antecedent’s AC and SCC. The framework was then empirically evaluated using data 
gathered from 279 firms of different sizes, located in many countries across Africa, Europe, 
and Asia, and operating in many business sectors. The findings provide empirical evidence 
supporting the proposed framework, which demonstrates that AI information processing 
capabilities significantly influence SCP directly by enhancing related metrics or creating 
a long-lasting SCP through SCRes building. Notably, the development of a sustained SCP