633 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
specifically how they are implemented and substitute prevailing current supply chain man-
agement practices (Beltagui et al. 2020). Overall, AI-driven innovation may benefit several 
aspects of supply chain management and attract attention to essential elements of the sup-
ply chain that received insufficient attention in the past, i.e., supply chain resilience and 
performance.
2.4  Supply chain resilience (SCRes)
Following the COVID-19 outbreak, supply chain resilience (SCRes) is at the forefront of 
the C-suite’s agenda these days. SCRes is broadly concerned by the supply chain’s ability 
to deal with instantaneous disruptive events (Jain et al. 2017), hence regaining the previ-
ous level or an even better performance level (Hendry et al. 2019). According to Scholten 
et al. (2019), SCRes is measured in all the three phases of a disruption: readiness (proac-
tive, pre-disruption), response, and recovery (reactive, post-disruption). This definition has 
found the reasoning in past literature, which emphasizes the notion of an equilibrium state 
that should be regained after an unexpected disruptive event. However, the recent global 
disruption caused by the COVID-19 outbreak gives rise to the new concept of adaptive 
resilience, positing that there cannot be a state of equilibrium in complex and intertwined 
supply chains. Therefore, resilience should be seen as situational capability acquired 
through continuous learning and adaptations from a series of disruptions (Belhadi et al. 
2020a, b). Ponomarov and Holcomb (2009) claimed that resilient supply chains are less 
sensitive to disturbances and are more absorptive of supply chain disruptions. SCRes ena-
bles the firms to ensure their products and services’ continuous delivery to their customers 
(Namdar et al. 2018 ). At the same time, the literature on SCRes has expanded drastically 
in the aftermath of Christopher and Peck (2004). However, Datta (2017) and Dubey et al. 
(2020) have argued that research dealing with how supply chains develop resilience is still 
underdeveloped and needs to be updated with the increasing technological advancements 
and supply chain dynamism. This insufficiency affects, undoubtedly one of the most goals 
of supply chain management viz., supply chain performance, which is discussed in the fol-
lowing section.
2.5  Supply Chain Performance (SCP)
Supply Chain Performance (SCP) is, broadly, defined as the benefits derived from the effi-
ciency and resilience of supply chain operations under a changing environment (Chowd-
hury et al. 2019; Jain et al. 2017). It reflects the extent to which the supply chain satisfies 
the end-customer needs in terms of product availability and on-time delivery while min-
imizing costs (Tarafdar andQrunfleh 2017). Past literature has widely demonstrated that 
SCP and its antecedents: SCRes and SCI are critical drivers of organizational and market 
performance. According to Khan et al. (2009), at the organizational level, SCP involves 
resource performance (efficiency), output performance (effectiveness), and flexibility per -
formance (agility). Efficiency is the ability to create more value for the customers with 
less resource utilization; effectiveness is the ability to make the customer’s value, such as 
quality, cost, and delay; agility is the ability to maintain value creation in a turbulent and 
uncertain environment. Previous studies on supply chain management have mainly adopted 
two different measures to evaluate SCP. The first measures are only related to costs, includ-
ing inventory costs and operating costs (Chowdhury et  al. 2019), whereas the second 
measures are combining costs and customer needs in terms of quality, availability, and