630 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
processing capabilities (Galbraith 1974). Organizations preferring the mechanistic mod-
els are required to schedule interdependent operations through the division of work and 
centralization of decisions (Srinivasan and Swink 2018). They tend to tackle issues and 
complexities called "exception scenarios" by using rules, hierarchy, targets, and goals. 
However, the high frequency of exception scenarios increase the mechanistic models’ costs 
and reduce responsiveness (Peng et al. 2014). Alternatively, an organization could enhance 
its information-processing capability by developing lateral and vertical information sys-
tems (Srinivasan and Swink 2018). Vertical information systems allow data processing 
efficiently and intelligently to support resolving complexities through swift adjustment of 
plans with minimal resource involvement (Peng et al. 2014).
OIPT addresses the development of organizational capabilities to fill their information 
processing requirement (Wamba et al. 2020). Importantly, OIPT posits that organizations 
necessitate processing information under increasing uncertainty to sustain a certain per -
formance level. Information processing capability to deal with risk, volatility, and dyna-
mism is a highly required organizational capability (Srinivasan and Swink 2018; Peng 
et al. 2014). In this study, AI is conceptualized as an information-processing capability that 
should be inherently configured to alleviate its operational complexities and uncertainties. 
Furthermore, the OIPT advocates that the firms need to develop capacity buffers and have 
information processing capability to manage the supply chain disruptions (Srinivasan and 
Swink 2018).
Several other theories come to support the assumptions of OIPT. For instance, the 
dynamic capability view (DCV) considers AI and data-driven systems as lower-order 
resources capabilities that create a ground for building higher-order capabilities such as 
supply chain collaboration, adaptation, and supply chain performance (Wamba et al. 2020). 
However, DCV left a gap in explaining the effect of a high scale disruption on the exploi-
tation and the efficiency of lower-order capabilities. On the other hand, the contingency 
theory stipulates that organizations should develop a strategic fit between information pro-
cessing capacity and information processing needs (Tushman and Nadler 1978). The view 
supports that SCRes can be positively associated with the supply chain performance when 
information processing capacity aligns with the scale of supply chain disruptions (Wong 
et al. 2020). Nonetheless, this theory fails to explain the inter-organizational information 
management capabilities within the supply chain network to underpin the development of 
operational capabilities such as supply chain collaboration and adaptation.
Our study seeks to fill the gaps and limitations of these theories by providing a holis-
tic theoretical background built upon the OIPT to construct a solid investigation research 
framework for AI-driven innovation, SCRes, and SCP. The aim is to explore the perfor -
mance impact of SCRes by putting forward SCD as contingent on exogenous factors and 
AI-driven innovation as low-order and inter-organizational capabilities along the supply 
chain.
2.2  Information processing capabilities of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the ability of a system to acquire learnings by analyzing the 
external environment’s data and using acquired learnings to adjust or make new plans 
against the environmental changes (Grover et al. 2020). This includes techniques and algo-
rithms that enable us to learn from input data, with or without being informed about the 
eventual output forms (Baryannis et al. 2019; Rodríguez-Espíndola et al. 2020). The field 
of AI is not new in itself. However, it has witnessed alternating periods of significant rise