Vol.:(0123456789)Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03956-x
1 3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Artificial intelligence‑driven innovation for enhancing supply 
chain resilience and performance under the effect of supply 
chain dynamism: an empirical investigation
Amine Belhadi1  · Venkatesh Mani2  · Sachin S. Kamble3  · 
Syed Abdul Rehman Khan4  · Surabhi Verma5 
Received: 6 August 2020 / Accepted: 16 January 2021 / Published online: 3 February 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Supply chain resilience (SCRes) and performance have become increasingly important in 
the wake of the recent supply chain disruptions caused by subsequent pandemics and cri-
sis. Besides, the context of digitalization, integration, and globalization of the supply chain 
has raised an increasing awareness of advanced information processing techniques such 
as Artificial Intelligence (AI) in building SCRes and improving supply chain performance 
(SCP). The present study investigates the direct and indirect effects of AI, SCRes, and SCP 
under a context of dynamism and uncertainty of the supply chain. In doing so, we have 
conceptualized the use of AI in the supply chain on the organizational information process-
ing theory (OIPT). The developed framework was evaluated using a structural equation 
modeling (SEM) approach. Survey data was collected from 279 firms representing differ -
ent sizes, operating in various sectors, and countries. Our findings suggest that while AI 
has a direct impact on SCP in the short-term, it is recommended to exploit its information 
processing capabilities to build SCRes for long-lasting SCP. This study is among the first 
to provide empirical evidence on maximizing the benefits of AI capabilities to generate 
sustained SCP. The study could be further extended using a longitudinal investigation to 
explore more facets of the phenomenon.
Keywords Supply chain performance · Artificial intelligence · Supply chain resilience · 
organizational information processing theory · Digital transformation
1 Introduction
The literature on big data analytics has demonstrated the use of predictive analytics for 
identifying the sources of supply chain disruptions resulting in improved supply chain resil-
ience (SCRes) (Choi et al. 2018). Firms should develop analytical capabilities to enhance 
the SCRes by effectively utilizing the resident firm knowledge, thereby strengthening 
organizations’ existing information capabilities (Wong et al. 2020; Scholten et al. 2019). 
 * Venkatesh Mani 
 m.venkatesh@montpellier -bs.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article