635 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
authors like Dubey et al. (2020) supported that AI arguably improves firms’ performance 
despite the ambiguity of how this performance could be enhanced through AI adoption.
Based on the OIPT perspective, we propose that AI’s implementation enables supply 
chains to develop information-processing capabilities (Srinivasan and Swink 2018). It 
allows them to decrypt, interpret, and learn from convoluted information gathered from 
different sources to mitigate uncertainties surrounding demands, capacities, and sup-
ply availability (Grover et al. 2020). Otherwise, firms are constrained to keep a high level 
of inventories or rely on limited human capabilities to design a responsive supply chain, 
which in turn influences both profit margins and execution speed (Dubey et al. 2020). Alto-
gether, such perspectives and evidence of the AI adoption can prospectively be translated 
into improved supply chain performance. Hence, we hypothesize that:
H1 AI has a significant and positive effect on supply chain performance (SCP).
3.2  Supply chain resilience and supply chain performance
Evidence from past studies proposed that building SCRes plays a central role in alleviat-
ing contingencies or maintaining the previous level of SCP (Chowdhury et al. 2019; Yu 
et al. 2019). According to Scholten et al. (2019), a resilient supply chain can hold a high 
level of agility (the ability to absorb changes caused by disruptions), responsiveness (the 
ability to respond purposefully and within an appropriate timeframe), and visibility (the 
ability to track and monitor the performance under uncertainty) towards customer needs to 
maintain high performance. Earlier, Carvalho et al. (2012) suggested that resilient strate-
gies influence SCP and raised the issue of preserving SCP in times of crisis and disruption. 
Moreover, they proposed an integrated framework for developing SCRes and assessed its 
positive effect on SCP. Organizations that failed to build SCRes during the global financial 
crisis (Chowdhury et al. 2019) or Brexit (Hendry et al. 2019) were compelled to entirely or 
partially stop their operations during the disruption (Altay et al. 2018 ). Based on the argu-
ments mentioned above, the literature trend points towards the positive effect of SCRes on 
SCP. Thus, we hypothesize that:
H2 SCRes has a significant and positive effect on SCP.
3.3  The mediating role of adaptive capacity and supply chain collaboration
The literature identifies that to compete in the global markets, the firms should have access 
to external knowledge and innovations. Open innovation-driven adaptive capacity is one 
of the key concepts that the firms can adopt to become competitive at the global level. 
The literature highlights adaptive capabilities and supply chain collaboration to be the most 
spread formative elements required to build SCRes (Scholten et al. 2019; Chowdhury et al. 
2019; Jain et al. 2017). Therefore, our theoretical framework proposes to include these two 
factors as enablers of SCRes driven by AI capabilities.
According to Dovers and Handmer (1992), adaptive capabilities (AC) (e.g., stability, 
persistence, adaptability, and transformability) refer to the ability of the firm to accept 
the ineluctability of transformation and to deploy all the necessary resources for adjust-
ing to new conditions and necessities. Previous studies such as Leitao (2009) supported 
that AI constitutes an efficient means of imitating adaptivity through learning from 
the external environment, thereby making complex systems more organized, highly