644 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
them of the risk of upcoming events (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al. 2020). Those firms can 
swiftly adapt their strategies during disruptive event and collaborate with their suppliers 
and customers through AI-driven and shared decision-making (Dubey et al. 2020). Further, 
AI-driven SCI enables firms to rapidly recover in the post-disruption via adaptive algo-
rithms and AI-enabled collaboration among supply chain partners (Baryannis et al. 2019).
Further, we have found a positive effect of the SCD on the links between AI and SCP, 
AC, and SCC. The findings are in line with the studies conducted by Wamba et al. (2020), 
and Dubey et al. (2020). The supply chain’s dynamic environment has a beneficial effect in 
developing organizational capabilities, including information processing capabilities, adap-
tive capabilities, and supply chain collaboration mechanisms. However, they stated that this 
relationship might be nonlinear, and a negative effect could appear in a highly uncertain 
and turbulent environment. Altogether, these complex and nuanced effects provide mean-
ingful implications, advancing theory and practice in this emerging research area.
5.1  Theoretical implications
The achievement of high and long-lasting supply chain performance relies heavily on the 
focal firm’s ability to benefit from its information processing capabilities to operate within 
a dynamic supply chain and build resilience against disruptive and unexpected events. 
According to the OIPT, AI, which embodies statistical-based, prediction, and self-learning 
algorithms, enables the firm to develop information-processing capabilities. These capa-
bilities could either directly improve SCP related metrics or create a sustained SCP through 
building SCRes under moderate dynamism and uncertainty of the environment. While sev -
eral past studies such as Akter et al. (2020), Grover et al. (2020) or Baryannis et al. (2019), 
relied on literature review or qualitative research to postulate the relationship between 
AI-driven innovations, SCRes, and SCP, our study is among the earlier one to understand 
how AI-based information-processing systems affect SCRes empirically. This constitutes 
a significant conceptual contribution to the research of how firms can create long-lasting 
SCP through AI-based capabilities while confronting disruptive and unexpected events. 
Accordingly, the first theoretical contribution of the research is in studying the complex 
relationships between AI, SCRes, and SCP, thereby giving insight on how AI could lead 
directly or indirectly to SCP through the mediating effect of SCRes and the moderating 
effect of SCD. Second, past studies such as Grover et al. (2020), Dubey et al. (2020) and 
Srinivasan and Swink (2018) focus on the direct effect of AI-based information processing 
in building SCRes and enhancing SCP. This study explains how developing AI-based inno-
vations could generate SCP and create SCRes indirectly through SCC and AC. The study 
also expands the extant literature that mainly concentrates on intelligent systems and ante-
cedents of SCRes and their combined impact on the overall SCP, thus contributing to the 
theory that aims to fully understand how focal firms can maintain and improve SCP during 
disruptive events. Finally, our study advances OIPT by empirically demonstrating that AI 
innovations could promote the organizational concepts, i.e., AC and SCC, which are highly 
needed to build SCRes against disruptive events and dynamic environment.
5.2  Implications for practitioners
The findings of this study present several implications for managerial practice concerning 
supply chain management. First, supply chain managers should develop AI capabilities for 
enhancing their SCP metrics. Second, to deal with uncertainties and unexpected events,