628 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652
1 3
The studies have found a positive linkage between the business, information, engineering, 
and analytics to develop digitalization and supply chain risks. Emerging technologies such 
as Artificial Intelligence (AI), industry 4.0, additive manufacturing, and advanced product 
tracking applications hold significant potential for supply chain (SC) risk analytics, thereby 
improving SCRes (Ivanov et al. 2019). Blockchain, the other data-intensive technology, can 
help in mitigating the supply chain risks associated with the intermediaries’ interventions, 
including hacking, compromised privacy, vulnerability to political turmoil, costly compli-
ance with government rules and regulation, instability of financial institutions, and contrac-
tual disputes (Cui et al. 2019). A study to analyze the impact of data analytics capabilities 
on SCRes revealed that information planning, coordination, and control are the critical ena-
blers of supply chain preparedness, alertness, and agility leading to SCRes (Mandal 2019). 
Organizations’ are needed to take a dynamic, innovative, and proactive approach in manag-
ing risks. Risks and disruptions should be opportunities to adapt and evolve in the face of 
hyper-connected networks, advanced cyber threats, highly competitive environments, and 
changing customer expectations to improve the supply chain performance (Butler 2018). 
The resilient organizations must use the technological advancements in automation, AI, 
and the Internet of Things to increase collaboration and cooperation, both vertically and 
horizontally, internally and externally (Butler 2018; Kamble et al. 2018).
The literature identifies AI as a pathbreaking analytics tool to enhance the supply chain 
performance (SCP) sphere (Grover et al. 2020). AI is related to statistical, self-learning, 
and predictive machine learning techniques to amplify human intelligence (Dubey et  al. 
2020). Grover et al. (2020) delineated AI as a facilitating factor presenting diverse solu-
tions, providing prescriptive inputs in the decision-making process in the face of a compli-
cated situation.
The proven potential of AI to underpin the decision-making process in supply chains 
triggers a profound reflection on how AI can be leveraged in pursuing the supply chain’s 
long-term performance and competitive advantage, i.e., innovation (Akter et  al. 2020). 
While prior studies argued that process innovation strengthens SCRes under uncertainty, 
resulting in improved SCP (Akter et  al. 2020; Kwak et  al. 2018), developing AI-driven 
innovation is more advantageous as it may accelerate the decision process in identifying, 
prototyping, and testing novel solutions (Paschen et al. 2020). This decision process, at the 
heart of innovation, is what researchers refer to as design. The effect of AI-driven innova-
tion on designing robust supply chains through information sharing, information process-
ing, and system integration has long been regarded as a critical factor in SCRes building 
and SCP improvement (Wamba and Akter 2019).
The existing literature has demonstrated that AI algorithms have succeeded in promot-
ing innovation to offer solutions leading to improved SCP (Dubey et al. 2020; Baryannis 
et al. 2019). Despite the significant potential of AI techniques to build SCRes, the extant 
literature lacks the focus on how the AI-driven innovation influences the SCRes, and to 
what extent the supply chain dynamism (SCD) and supply chain collaboration (SCC) 
affects this relationship.
In the present scenario, supply chains are becoming increasingly dynamic in changing 
business environments and technology. Continuous information is required for the supply 
chains operating in a dynamic environment as various internal and external threats continue 
to suppress their performance (Belhadi et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2016). Besides, Dubey et al. 
(2020) and Wamba et  al. (2020) have recognized environmental dynamism as a critical 
factor to be investigated while dealing with performance-related issues. Hence, understand-
ing the linkages between AI, SCRes, and SCP is highly relevant, and the relationships are 
expected to provide meaningful insights on how the AI capabilities need to be developed