631 Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:627–652 
1 3
and drastic slump since its first appearance in the 1950s (Baryannis et al. 2019). The grow -
ing computational capacities alongside the spread of big data and the broader application 
of AI in the area of operations, manufacturing, and supply chain management have driven 
renewed emphasis on this computational technology (Sharma et al. 2020). According to 
Haefner et  al. (2021), information processing capabilities (IPC) of AI systems could be 
evaluated through three IPT levels, i.e., exploiting, expanding, and exploring. These levels 
indicate how likely AI systems are to replace and complement human decision-making. 
Through reviewing the literature of AI in the supply chain context, we summarize the most 
used techniques according to the IPT levels proposed by Haefner et al. (2021) as presented 
in Table 1.
First, exploiting techniques includes machine learning and big data (Cavalcante et al. 
2019; Choi et al. 2018), robust optimization (Baryannis et al. 2019), fuzzy logic and pro-
gramming (Leung et al. 2019), stochastic programming(Sabet et al. 2020) and knowledge, 
representation reasoning (Baryannis et al. 2019). Techniques at this level enable to over -
come cognitive information processing constraints and deal with a more considerable 
amount of data while detecting patterns. Second, extension techniques allow generating 
new ideas in support of human-machine interaction during problem analysis. The methods 
at this level may include network-based algorithms (Elhoone et al. 2020; Hosseini andI-
vanov 2020), rough set theory(Mehdizadeh 2020), and tree-based clustering (Zanjani et al. 
2016). Finally, exploring techniques involve more advanced AI algorithms such as agent-
based systems (Baryannis et  al. 2019), model predictive control (Belhadi et  al. 2019), 
robotic process automation(Schniederjans et al. 2020) and computer vision (Dhamija and 
Bag 2020; Grover et  al. 2020). These techniques revolutionize exploring problems and 
solutions and promoting fast prototyping and evaluation of innovative solutions.
2.3  Artificial intelligence‑driven supply chain innovation (SCI)
According to Arlbjørn et  al. (2011, p.  8), supply chain innovation (SCI) can be defined 
as a radical or progressive transformation in the supply chain technology, process, or net-
work that could be implemented to improve new value creation for the stakeholder. SCI 
includes all activities aiming to deal with the environment’s uncertainty through the gen-
eration of information processing and technology innovation to provide solutions for sup-
ply chain issues and identify new ways to improve processes (Kwak et al. 2018; Lee et al. 
2011). Notably, supply chain innovation relies heavily on advanced technologies and pro-
cesses alongside radical changes in product, service, or process that improve efficiency and 
enhance value delivery to the end customer (Akter et al. 2020; Hahn 2020 ). For instance, 
businesses are increasingly making use of AI techniques to overcome information process-
ing constraints inherent to SCI, resulting in innovative paths of designing new products, 
solving supply chain issues and satisfying customers, and eventually, potentially establish-
ing new ways to deal with uncertainty (Lee 2018). According to Haefner et al. (2021), AI 
techniques are prone to lead innovation processes by fasting forward new solutions for sup-
ply chain issues. This acceleration in innovation capacities stands to enable supply chain 
firms to create new profit streams more fastly and decrease costs in the process, thereby 
enhancing supply chain efficiency.
Further, embedding advanced AI techniques into supply chain innovation empowers 
innovation activities to be human-centric, creative, and effective in leveraging iterations 
(Verganti et  al. 2020). However, there are various technology-driven innovations based 
on new digital technologies; significantly fewer studies have addressed AI-driven SCI,