Figure 6: PDE modelling and image segmentation with a Multi-ResNet. [Left,Middle] Rolled
out PDE trajectories (ground-truth, prediction, L2-error) from the Navier-Stokes [Left], and the
Shallow Water equation [Middle]. Figure and code as modiﬁed from [ 6, Figure 1]. [Right] MRI
images from WMHwith overlayed ground-truth (green) and prediction (blue) mask.
Theorem 2 analyses the noising effect of a forward diffusion process in a Haar wavelet basis. It states
that the noise introduced by the forward diffusion process is more prominent in the higher-frequency
wavelet coefﬁcients (large k), whereas the lower-frequency coefﬁcients (small k) preserves the signal.
Optimal recovery of the signal in such scenario has been investigated in [ 43], where soft thresholding
of the wavelet coefﬁcients provides a good L2estimator of the signal and separates this from the data.
In other words, if we add i.i.d. noise to an image, we are noising the higher frequencies faster than
the lower frequencies. In particular, high frequencies are dominated by noise exponentially faster. It
also states that the noising effect of our diffusion on resolution i, compared to the variance of the base
frequencyi= 0, blows up the higher-frequency details as i!1 for any positive diffusion time.
We postulate that U-Nets with average pooling exploit precisely this observation. Recall that the
primary objective of a U-Net in denoising diffusion models is to separate the signal from the noise
which allows reversing the noising process. In the ’learning noise’ or recovery regime, the network
primarily distinguishes the noise from the signal in the input. Yet, our analysis remains relevant, as it
fundamentally pertains to the signal-to-noise ratio. Through average pooling, the U-Net discards those
higher-frequency subspaces which are dominated by noise, because average pooling is conjugate
to projection in a Haar wavelet basis [ 20, Theorem 2]. This inductive bias enables the encoder and
decoder networks to focus on the signal on a low enough frequency which is not dominated by noise.
As the subspaces are coupled via preconditioning, the U-Net can learn the signal which is no longer
dominated by noise, added on each new subspace. This renders U-Nets a computationally efﬁcient
choice in diffusion models and explains their ubiquitous use in this ﬁeld.
5 Experiments
We conduct three main experimental analyses: (A) Multi-ResNets which feature an encoder with no
learnable parameters as an alternative to classical Residual U-Nets, (B) Multi-resolution training and
sampling, (C) U-Nets encoding the topological structure of triangular data. We refer to Appendix B.4
for our Ablation Studies, where a key result is that U-Nets crucially beneﬁt from the skip connections,
hence the encoder is successful and important in compressing information. We also analyse the
multi-resolution structure in U-Nets, and investigate different orthogonal wavelet bases. These
analyses are supported by experiments on three tasks: (1) Generative modelling of images with
diffusion models, (2) PDE Modelling, and (3) Image segmentation. We choose these tasks as U-Nets
are a go-to and competitive architecture for them. We report the following performance metrics with
mean and standard deviation over three random seeds on the test set: FID score [ 44] for (1), rollout
mean-squared error (r-MSE) [ 6] for (2), and the Sørensen–Dice coefﬁcient (Dice) [ 45,46] for (3).
As datasets, we use MNIST [47], a custom triangular version of MNIST ( MNIST-Triangular ) and
CIFAR10 [48] for (1), Navier-stokes andShallow water equations [ 49] for (2), and the MICCAI
2017 White Matter Hyperintensity ( WMH) segmentation challenge dataset [ 50,51] for (3). We provide
our PyTorch code base at https://github.com/FabianFalck/unet-design. We refer to Appendices B, and
D for details on experiments, further experimental results, the datasets, and computational resources
used.
8