B.1 Analysis 1: The role of the encoder in a U-Net
In this section, we provide further experimental results analysing the role of the encoder, and hence
Residual U-Nets with Multi-ResNets. We realise the Multi-ResNet by replacing the parameterised
encoder with a multi-level Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). More speciﬁcally, the skip connection
on resolution jrelative to the input resolution is computed by taking the lower-lower part of the DWT
at levelj(LLj), and then inverting LLjto receive a coarse, projected version of the original input
image.
Generative modelling with diffusion models. In Table 2, we analyse the role of the encoder in
generative modelling with diffusion models. Following our analysis on PDE modelling and image
segmentation, we compare (Haar wavelet) Residual U-Nets with (Haar wavelet) Multi-ResNets where
we add the saved parameters in the encoder back into the decoder. We report performance in terms
of an exponential moving average FID score [ 55] on the test set. In contrast to the other two tasks,
we ﬁnd that diffusion models beneﬁt from a parameterised encoder. In particular, the Multi-ResNet
does not outperform the Residual U-Net with approximately the same number of parameters, as is
the case in the other two tasks. Referring to our theoretical results in §3.1, the input space of Haar
wavelets may be a suboptimal choice for diffusion models, requiring an encoder learning a suitable
change of basis. A second possibility is the FID score itself, which is a useful, yet ﬂawed metric
to quantify the ﬁdelity and diversity of images [ 56,57]. To underline this point, in Figure 10 we
compare samples from two runs with the Residual U-Net and Multi-ResNet as reported in Table 2.
We observe that it is very difﬁcult to tell “by eye” which model produces higher quality samples, in
spite of the differences in FID. A third possibility is that the allocation of the saved parameters is
suboptimal. We demonstrate the importance of beneﬁcially allocating the saved parameters in the
decoder in the context of PDE modelling below.
Table 2: Quantitative performance of the (Haar wavelet) Multi-ResNet compared to a classical (Haar
wavelet) Residual U-Net in generative modelling with diffusion models on CIFAR10 . We report FID
on the test set.
Dataset Neural architecture # Params. FID #CIFAR10
3232Residual U-Net 35.5 M 7:860:25
Multi-ResNet, no params. added in dec. ( ours) 25.8 M 14:870:50
Multi-ResNet, saved params. added in dec. ( ours) 32.4 M 12:440:22
Residual U-Net
(35.5 M Parameters)Multi-ResNet
(32.4 M Parameters)
Figure 10: Samples of a DDPM-type diffusion model with a Residual U-Net [Left] and a Multi-
ResNet [Right]. We trained both models for 1.2 M iterations at which we obtained the samples.
23