A Uniﬁed Framework for U-Net Design and Analysis
Christopher Williams1Fabian Falck;1;2George Deligiannidis1
Chris Holmes1;2Arnaud Doucet1Saifuddin Syed1
1University of Oxford2The Alan Turing Institute
{williams,fabian.falck,deligian,cholmes, doucet,saifuddin.syed}@stats.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
U-Nets are a go-to neural architecture across numerous tasks for continuous signals
on a square such as images and Partial Differential Equations (PDE), however their
design and architecture is understudied. In this paper, we provide a framework
for designing and analysing general U-Net architectures. We present theoretical
results which characterise the role of the encoder and decoder in a U-Net, their
high-resolution scaling limits and their conjugacy to ResNets via precondition-
ing. We propose Multi-ResNets, U-Nets with a simpliﬁed, wavelet-based encoder
without learnable parameters. Further, we show how to design novel U-Net ar-
chitectures which encode function constraints, natural bases, or the geometry of
the data. In diffusion models, our framework enables us to identify that high-
frequency information is dominated by noise exponentially faster, and show how
U-Nets with average pooling exploit this. In our experiments, we demonstrate how
Multi-ResNets achieve competitive and often superior performance compared to
classical U-Nets in image segmentation, PDE surrogate modelling, and generative
modelling with diffusion models. Our U-Net framework paves the way to study the
theoretical properties of U-Nets and design natural, scalable neural architectures
for a multitude of problems beyond the square.
1 Introduction
Bottleneck
Skip connectionSkip connection
Figure 1: A resolution 2 U-Net
(Def. 1). If Ei= IdVi, this is a
Multi-ResNet (see Def. 3).U-Nets (see Figure 1) are a central architecture in deep learning
for continuous signals. Across many tasks as diverse as image
segmentation [ 1,2,3,4,5], Partial Differential Equation (PDE)
surrogate modelling [ 6,7] and score-based diffusion models [ 8,9,
10, 11, 12], U-Nets are a go-to architecture yielding state-of-the-
art performance. In spite of their enormous success, a framework
for U-Nets which characterises for instance the speciﬁc role of
the encoder and decoder in a U-Net or which spaces these operate
on is lacking. In this work, we provide such a framework for
U-Nets. This allows us to design U-Nets for data beyond a square
domain, and enable us to incorporate prior knowledge about a
problem, for instance a natural basis, functional constraints, or
knowledge about its topology, into the neural architecture.
The importance of preconditioning. We begin by illustrating
the importance of the core design principle of U-Nets: precon-
ditioning . Preconditioning informally means that initialising an
optimisation problem with a ‘good’ solution greatly beneﬁts learn-
ing [ 13,14]. Consider a synthetic example using ResNets [ 15] which are natural in the context of
Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).