B Additional experimental details and results
In this section, we provide further details on our experiments, and additional experimental results.
Model and training details. We used slightly varying U-Net architectures on the different tasks.
While we refer to our code base for details, they generally feature a single residual block per resolution
forEiandDi, with 2 convolutional layers, and group normalisation. We in general choose Pias
average pooling. We further use loss functions and other architectural components which are standard
for the respective tasks. This outlined U-Net architecture often required us to make several changes
to the original repositories which we used. This may also explain small differences to the results that
these repositories reported; however, our results are comparable. When using Algorithm 1 during
staged training, we require one ‘head’ and ‘tail’ network on each resolution which processes the input
and output respectively, and hence increases the number of parameters of the overall model relative
to single-stage training.
Hyperparameters and hyperparameter tuning. We performed little to no hyperparameter tuning
in our experiments. In particular, we did not perform a search (e.g. grid search) over hyperparameters.
In general, we used the hyperparameters of the original repositories as stated in Appendix D, and
changed them only when necessary, for instance to adjust the number of parameters so to enable a
fair comparison. There is hence a lot of potential to improve the performance of our experiments,
for instance of the Multi-ResNet, or the U-Net on triangular data. We refer to our code repository
for speciﬁc hyperparameter choices and further details, in particular the respective hyperparam.py
ﬁles.
Evaluation and metrics. We use the following three performance metrics in our experimental
evaluation: FID score [ 44], rollout mean-squared-error (r-MSE) [ 6], and Sørensen–Dice coefﬁcient
(Dice) [ 45,46]. As these are standard metrics, we only highlight key points that are worth noting.
We compute the FID score on a holdout dataset not used during training, and using an evaluation
model where weights are updated with the training weights using an exponential moving average (as
is common practice). The r-MSE is computed as an MSE over pieces of the PDE trajectory against
its ground-truth. Each piece is predicted in an autoregressive fashion, where the model receives the
previous predicted piece and historic observations as input [ 6]. All evaluation metrics are in general
computed on the test set and averaged over three random seeds after the same number of iterations
in each table, if not stated otherwise. The results are furthermore not depending on these reported
evaluation metrics: in our code base, we compute and log a large range of other evaluation metrics,
and we typically observe similar trends as in those reported.
22