B.2 Analysis 2: Staged training enables multi-resolution training and inference
We begin by providing further experimental details. For each dataset, we train each res-
olution for the following number of iterations/epochs: MNIST [5K;5K;5K;5K]iterations,
CIFAR10 [50K;50K;50K;450K]iterations, Navier-Stokes [5;5;5;35]epochs, Shallow water
[2;2;2;14]epochs.
Generative modelling with diffusion models. In Figs. 14 and 15, we illustrate samples of a
diffusion model (DDPM) trained on MNIST with Algorithm 1, with and without freezing, respectively.
These samples show that in both cases, the model produces reasonable samples. Algorithm 1 with
freezing has the advantage that the ﬁnal model can produce samples on all resolutions, instead of only
the intermediate models at the end of each training stage. Preliminary tests showed that as perhaps
expected, freezing lower-resolution U-Net weights tends to produce worse performance in terms
of quantitative metrics measured on the highest resolution. In particular, in Figure 16 we compare
samples and FID scores from a DDPM model trained on CIFAR10 , with and without freezing. As
can be clearly seen from both the FID score and the quality of the samples, training with Algorithm 1
but without the freezing option produces signiﬁcantly better samples. This is why we did not further
explore the freezing option.
MNIST
32 x 32 (at 20 K iter .) 16 x 16 (at 15 K iter .)
8 x 8 (at 10 K iter .) 4 x 4 (at 5 K iter .)
Figure 14: Staged training of Multi-ResNets enables multi-resolution training and sampling of
diffusion models. We train a diffusion model [ 8] with a Residual U-Net architecture using Algorithm
1 with four training stages and with freezing onMNIST corresponding to Figure 7. We show samples
at the end of each training stage.
PDE modelling. In Table 6, we investigate Residual U-Nets and Multi-ResNets using Algorithm 1
onNavier-Stokes andShallow water . We here ﬁnd that staged training makes the runs perform
substantially worse. In particular, the standard deviation is higher, and some runs are outliers with
particularly poor performance. This is in contrast to our experiments on generative modelling with
diffusion models where staged training had only an insigniﬁcant impact on the resulting performance.
We note that we have not further investigated this question, and believe that there are a multitude
of ways which could be attempted to stabilise and improve the performance of staged training, for
instance in PDE modelling, which we leave for future work.
28