Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
60 IV. AREVIW ON DIMENTIONALITY REDUCTIOM METHODS  
A. Feature Selectuion Methods  
Dimensionality reduction utilizes the feature selection 
methods to select relevant features. In th is study, we discuss 
several recent works for feature selection. The kinds of 
literature on feature selection methods are summarized in Table 
III. 
Churmonge and Jena [51] proposed a method to address the 
dimensionality issue based on the clustering combine d with 
correlation filter subset selection. The relevant features were 
found by the K -means clustering algorithm and redundant 
features found from clusters and removed by the correlation 
measure. The presented method used on 8 text and 4 microarray 
dataset s and the Naive Bayes (NB) classifier depended on the 
classification. Furthermore, the authors compared their method 
performance with the ReliefF and information gain (IG) feature 
selection methods relating to the accuracy and computational 
time. The accur acy of the proposed method outperformed both 
methods in all datasets except two datasets, and in 
computational, the proposed was faster than other methods in 
all datasets.  
Tan et al. [52] presented a feature selection method based on 
the evolutionary algo rithm (EA) to reduce the dimensionality 
of motor imagery brain -computer interface from 
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. The subset of important 
features was generated from each iteration of the EA, while the 
redundant and insignificant features were eli minated. The 
experiments were performed in two different datasets: EEG 
dataset and several machine learning datasets. Also, three 
classifiers depended: support vector machine (SVM), K -
Nearest Neighbor (KNN), and discriminant analysis (DA). 
Also, the perfor mance of the proposed EA – feature selection 
method was compared with PCA and independent component 
analysis (ICA), neighborhood component analysis (NCA), and 
variable -length particle swarm optimization (VLPSO). The 
results showed that the introduced metho ds outperformed all 
the above methods and could achieve high accuracy even with 
a small subset of the features.  
Hafiz et al. [53] investigated the feature selection issues in 
the power quality events and proposed a two dimensional PSO 
feature selection met hod. They depended on the two 
dimensional in order to efficiently guide the search space of the 
particle swarm. The noise measurement against the reduced 
subset was studied by the Gaussian. The used induction 
algorithms in this study were KNN and Naïve Bay es. 
Moreover, the proposed method performance was compared 
with the Genetic Algorithm (GA), Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO), Binary PSO (BPSO), Catfish BPSO, and Chaotic 
BPSO (CHBPSO). The results have shown that the presented 
method could find an important and robust feature subset and 
achieve better accuracy than the above -mentioned methods.  
Han et al. [54] worked on the limitation of the local linear 
embedding (LLE) method to propose an unsupervised feature 
selection mechanism. They depended on the low di mensional 
space learning and graph matrix learning. The experiments 
performed in 15 datasets (6 of them from the UGI machine learning repository and 9 from the feature selection dataset 
website). Also, the SVM and decision tree (DT) used as 
classifiers and . In addition, the presented method compared 
with eight unsupervised feature selection methods. The results 
demonstrated that the proposed method accomplished better 
accuracy regarding the SVM and DT classifier except in two 
datasets and better stability i n both classifiers compared to the 
8 feature selection methods.  
Niu et al. [55] presented a method to deal with multivariate 
financial time series nonlinearity inherent to improve the 
accuracy of forecasting and make the financial decision better. 
The proposed method involved a feature selection part, deep 
learning framew ork, and error correlation part. In the feature 
selection part, the RReliefF algorithm (which is the enhanced 
version of the ReliefF) cooperated wrapper -based method to 
remove the redundant feature. Also, the deep learning part has 
consisted of long -short term memory (LSTM), gated recurrent 
unit (GRU), and the optimizer based on adaptive moment 
estimation (Adam). The deep leaning part was trained based on 
the subset generated by the first part. Furthermore, the error 
correlation used to enhance the accuracy  of the method. The 
method performance validated on 16 benchmarks and three 
datasets, and the results have shown its superiority.  
Jain and Singh [56] proposed a hybrid feature selection 
method that consisted of ReliefF and PCA algorithms. First, the 
weigh t for each feature was calculated in the used datasets, and 
a set of satisfying features was generated by the first algorithm. 
The second algorithm was applied in the generated set. In the 
proposed method, two types of datasets were considered (text 
and mi croarray), and the experiments performed in ten datasets. 
The performance of the method evaluated in terms of a number 
of the selected features and computation time. The results 
indicated that the presented method could achieve better 
performance in low an d high dimensional datasets and reduced 
half of the irrelevant and redundant features.  
Hosseini and Moattar [57] presented a feature subset 
selection method for imbalanced data classification with high 
dimensional. The authors focused on the feature space , and the 
method was based on interaction information to improve the 
search process. Through each iteration of the method, multiple 
subsets of the features generated, and the best subset involved 
in the next iteration. In more detail, the candidate feature s 
selected by the Symmetric Uncertainty Algorithm (SUA) first. 
After the multivariate interaction information used to test the 
candidate feature subset and based on the dominated 
relationship the best subset of the features selected. 
Furthermore, KNN, Naïv e Bayes and CART were used as 
classifiers. The efficiency of the proposed method assessed in 
13 datasets from different repositories. Additionally, the  
performance of the method outperformed 10 other feature 
selection methods in terms of accuracy and in a number of the 
reduced features.  
Manbari et al . [58] proposed a hybrid unsupervised feature 
selection method based on the clustering and binary ant system. 
The procedure of the method executed in two stages: In the first,