Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
65 Neural Netwo rk (DNN). They used a wrapper feature 
extraction unit with the DNN framework in order to extract the 
optimal feature vector. Then the extra trees algorithm was used 
as a classifier. Moreover, two intrusion detection datasets 
(UNSW -NB15 and the AWID) were d ependent as well to 
examine their methods’ efficiency. Moreover, the experiment 
of the proposed method performed in two different types of 
attacks, which were binary and multiclass. Furthermore, the 
researchers compared their method with RF, KNN, SVM, DT, 
and NB. The proposed method of detection accuracy 
outperformed the other methods. Whereas the attack 
classification by feed -forward deep neural network was better 
than all the above classifiers.  
Liu and Sui [70] worked on different methods to minimize 
the dimensionality in content -based public cultural video 
retrieval. The public cultural videos’ content features extracted 
by using the combination of the deep learning framework 
(Caffe) and Alex's net network model. Due to the high 
dimension of the extracte d features, the researchers used PCA 
to reduce that dimensionality. The researchers examined their 
work in several videos. The results indicated that the video 
contents of the used datasets could effectively be compressed 
by the PCA algorithm, and only min or contents of the video 
retrieval were lost while lowering the dimensionality of the 
extracted feature.  
Dehzangi and Sahu [71] worked on human activity 
recognition. They used spectral and temporal analysis to extract 
features from the Inertial Measurement  Unit. Moreover, several 
feature extraction methods evaluated and particularly the 
methods based on the time and frequency domain such as power 
spectral density and Autocorrelation. Also, a number of the 
classifiers (DT, KNN, SVM, Neural network, and Ensem ble 
bagged) were utilized for human activity recognition that was 
used in the proposed system. In addition to reducing the 
dimensionality of the extracted features, the researchers used 
PCA and KPCA. Although they used feature selection and transformation methods to reduce dimensionality. The results 
showed that using the Random forest feature selection method 
with Ensemble bagged classiﬁer and using Neighborhood 
component analysis along with Ensemble bagged classiﬁer 
achieved better accuracy.  
Zhang et al.  [86] proposed a system for the hyperspectral 
images to minimize the dimensionality. They depended on the 
sparse graph and spatial as the integrated method. They utilized 
PCA and entropy rate in order to divide hyperspectral images 
to superpixel patch. Mor eover, trained data of the graph was 
constructed by using superpixel segmentation. Then, they 
extracted spatial -spectral information when the sparse and low -
rank graphs generated on the obtained data. After that, to 
transform the graph embedding to nonline ar space and map the 
input data into a high -dimensional space, they used the kernel 
trick. The proposed method was evaluated by two datasets 
(Indian Pines data set and the University of Pavia (Pavia -U) 
data set) and the SVM algorithm was dependent as a cla ssifier. 
The results show that the accuracy of the presented method is 
higher than other methods.  
Alipourfard  et al. [87] worked on the hyperspectral images 
high dimensionality and proposed a system to reduce it. The 
proposed system was a combination of CNN and the subspace 
feature extraction method. The authors reduced the 
dimensionality of the hyperspectral ima ges by the subspace 
method in order to generate high -quality training samples for 
the convolutional neural network and for logistic regression that 
they used as the classifier. Moreover, the presented method was 
examined by the researchers in two famous tw o datasets 
(Indiana Pines and the Pavia University scenes). The 
experimental results proved that the proposed method accuracy 
has been improved and achieved higher marks, even under the 
limited samples of the training samples.  
 
 
TABLE IV.  FEATURE EXTRACTION METHODS SUMMARY  
Ref. Year  Dataset  Technique(s)  Computation 
Time  Classifier(s)  Accuracy  
 [74] 2018  DDSM and MIAS  Wavelet and GLCM  - SVM  97.89%  
[76] 2018  - FTFS and LMD  - - - 
[83] 2018  Indian Pines and 
Pavia University  PCA, TLPP, KPCA, and 
LE PCA: 10,TLPP: 
12, KPCA: 12 
and LE: 28  SVM  96.96%  
[88] 2018  public cultural  deep learning, Alex net, 
and PCA  - - - 
[89] 2018  UCI Spectral, temporal analysis 
and PCA  - DT, KNN, SVM, Neural 
network and Ensemble bagged  KNN:  95.4%, DT: 
90.9%, SVM: 93.2%, 
Neural Network: 90.6% 
and Ensemble bagged: 
96.9%  
[90] 2018  Indian Pines and 
Pavia  sparse graph, spatial and 
PCA  - SVM  93.01%  
[91] 2018  Indiana Pines and the 
Pavia  CNN and subspace feature  - logistic regression  98.3%  
[92] 2019  US breast datasets  LBP and CNN  - SVM  96% 
[80] 2019  TE process  DGAE and neural network  2.47 seconds  NN 83.95%  
[78] 2019  MIAS, DDSM and 
MGM Hospital  EMD  - SVM and LDA  SVM: 96.2% and LDA: 
92.59%