Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
57 to reduce the size of input data and then preserve much variance 
of essential features compared to the dataset with the larger  
size. In real -world data, it will become easy to detect and use 
for data mining applications and gain high accuracy 
performance [1, 9]. Moreover, the role of dimensionality 
reduction is to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of the data 
mining computation , and it is considered as a vital 
preprocessing step. Furthermore, it provides several advantages 
such as eliminating irrelevant, redundant patterns in the dataset; 
as a result, to reduce the time and amount of memory required 
for processing such data [1, 10]. By reducing the dataset, the 
quality of data will improve, the algorithm will work 
efficiently, achieve better accuracy, and pattern design and 
examination will be clearer for researchers [11]. Additionally, 
reducing the cost of computing, improving d imensions 
visualization, and enhancing the results [12, 13].  
This work reviewed more than forty articles of feature 
selection and feature extraction that have been introduced and 
published in the last three years.  
II. DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION TECHNIQUES  
Dimensionality reduction is the operation of transforming 
the high dimensional representation of data in low dimensional 
representations. With the massive growth in high dimensional 
data, the use of various dimensionality reduction techniques has 
become po pular in many areas of use. Moreover, several 
modern approaches are continually emerging. Dimensionality 
reduction techniques transform the original dataset having high 
dimensionality and turn it into a new dataset representing low 
dimensionality while mai ntaining as much as possible the 
original meanings of the data. The low dimensional 
representation of the original data contributes to solving the 
dimensionality curse problem. The low dimensional data can be 
easily analyzed, processed, and visualized [14] . Several 
benefits can be obtained due to applying the dimensionality 
reduction techni ques applied to a dataset. (i) As  the number of 
dimensions comes down, data storage space can be reduced. (ii) 
It takes les s computation time only. (iii) Redundant , irrel evant, 
and n oisy data can be removed. (iv) Data  quality can be 
improved. (v) Some algorithms do not perform well on a greater 
number of dimensions taken. So, reducing these dimensions 
helps an algorithm to work efficiently and improves accuracy. 
(vi) It is  challenging to visualize data in higher dimensions. So, 
reducing the dimension may allow us to design and examine 
patterns more clearly. (vii) It simplifies the process of 
classification and also improves efficiency [15, 16]. Generally, 
the dimensionality  reduction techniques can be classified into 
two main groups, or in other words, the dimensionality 
reduction is achieved through two different techniques: feature 
selection and feature extraction. In feature selection, 
information can be lost since some f eatures should be excluded 
when the process of feature subset choice by doing this 
information can be reduced. However, in feature extraction, the 
dimension can be decreased without losing much initial feature 
dataset [2, 10, 14, 17].  Table I provides a d escriptive summary 
of the methods of dimension reduction.  
 TABLE I.  THE SUMMARY OF DIMENSION REDUCTION TECHNIQUES  
Method  Main concept  Pros  Cons  
Feature  
extraction  Summarize the 
dataset by creating 
linear combinations 
of the features  Preserves the 
original, relative 
distance between  
covers latent 
structure, objects  Not sufficient 
enough in the 
existing of a huge 
number of  
irrelevant features  
Feature 
selection  A sublist of relevant 
features can be 
selected depending 
on defined criteria  Strong against 
irreleva nt features  Latent structure 
does not cover  
 
A. Feature S election  
Feature selection is utilized to reduce the dimensionality 
impact on the dataset through finding the subset of feature 
which efficiently define the data [18, 19]. It selects the 
important and relevant features to the mining task from the 
input data and removes redundant and irrelevant features [20, 
21]. It is useful for detecting a good subset of features that is 
appropriate for the given problem [2, 22].  The main purpose of 
feature selection is to construct a subset of features as small as 
possible but represents the whole input data vital features [11, 
23]. Feature selection provides numerous advantages: reduce 
the size of data, decrease needed storage, prediction accuracy 
improvement, overfi tting evading, and reduce executing and 
training time from easily understanding variables. Feature 
selection algorithm phase is divided into two -phase such as (i) 
Subset Generation: (ii) Subset Evaluation: In subset 
Generation, we need to generate subset f rom the input dataset 
and to use Subset Evaluations we have to check whether the 
generated subset is optimal or not [24, 25]. “Fig.1” shows the 
overall method of the feature selection process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Process of feature s election . 
 
B. Feature Selection Problems  
Various issues can benefit from the feature selection 
techniques application. High dimension, low sample size data  
are becoming more popular in different fields. Many of the 
features of these problems do not facilitate an adequate 
classification. More so, the imbalance problem happens when 
one of the two classes has more samples than other classes. 
Many algorithms neg lect the minority sample when 
concentrating on a major sample classification.  However, the 
minority samples are crucial but seldom occurred. Moreover , in 
 
Subset 
Generatio
n 
Subset 
Evaluation  
Is stopping 
criteria met?  
Selected 
Feature 
Set 
Full Feature 
Set 
No 
 Yes