Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70 (2020 ) 
ISSN: 2708 -0757 
 
JOURNAL OF APPLIED SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS  
 
www.jastt.org   
 
                                                            56 
doi: 10.38094/jastt1224          
 
A Comprehensive Review of Dimensionality Reduction 
Techniques for Feature Selection and Feature Extraction  
 
 
Rizgar R. Zebari 1, *, Adnan Mohsin Abdulazeez2, Diyar Qader Zeebaree3, Dilovan Asaad Zebari4, Jwan Najeeb Saeed5 
  
1IT Department. Technical College of Informatics Akre, Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region, Iraq, 
rizgar.ramadhan@dpu.edu.krd  
2Presidency of Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region , Iraq, Adnan.mohsin@dpu.edu.krd  
3,4Research Center of Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region, Iraq, dqszeebaree@dpu.edu.krd , 
dilovan.zebari@dpu.edu.krd  
5IT Department. Duhok Technical Institute, Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdista n Region, Iraq, 
jwan.najeeb@dpu.edu.krd  
* Correspondence: rizgar.ramadhan@dpu.edu.krd  
  
Abstract  
Due to sharp increases in data dimensions, working on every data mining or machine learning (ML) task requires more efficient  
techniques to get the desired results. Therefore, in recent years, researchers have proposed and developed many methods and techniques 
to reduce the high dimensions of data and to attain the required accuracy. To ameliorate the accuracy of learning features as  well as to 
decrease the t raining time dimensionality reduction is used as a pre -processing step, which can eliminate irrelevant data, noise, and 
redundant features. Dimensionality reduction (DR) has been performed based on two main methods, which are feature selection ( FS) and 
feature extraction (FE). FS is considered an important method because data is generated continuously at an ever -increasing rate; some 
serious dimensionality problems can be reduced with this method, such as decreasing redundancy effectively, eliminating irrel evant data, 
and ameliorating result comprehensibility. Moreover, FE transacts with the problem of finding the most distinctive, informati ve, and 
decreased set of features to ameliorate the efficiency of both the processing and storage of data. This paper o ffers a comprehensive 
approach to FS and FE in the scope of DR. Moreover, the details of each paper, such as used algorithms/approaches, datasets, classifiers, 
and achieved results are comprehensively analyzed and summarized. Besides, a systematic discussi on of all of the reviewed methods to 
highlight authors' trends, determining the method(s) has been done, which significantly reduced computational time, and selec ting the 
most accurate classifiers. As a result, the different types of both methods have been  discussed and analyzed the findings.  
 
Keywords : dimension reduction, dimension reduction techniques, feature selection, feature extraction.  
 
Received: April 29, 2020 / Accepted: May 13, 2020 / Online: May 15, 2020  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, data mining and knowledge discovery have a 
great role in several digital applications. Knowledge is detected 
by processing and an alyzing a large amount of the previously 
collected data [1]. Data generated in a huge volume in different 
fields, and it is on continuous growth in size, complexity, and 
dimensionality [2, 3]. A dataset with high dimensionality 
features its numerous featur es, but few samples have a direct 
relation with data mining and machine learning tasks [4, 5]. 
Therefore, these issues of data become a big challenge for 
extracting potentially useful, and ultimately understandable patterns or information in almost every d ata mining task. Also, 
working in high dimensional data increases the difficulty of 
knowledge discovery and pattern classification because there 
are a lot of redundant and irrelevant features. Reducing high 
dimensional datasets to a low dimensional dataset  by filter or 
remove redundant and noise information is a method to solve 
this problem, and this is known as dimensionality reduction [6].  
Dimensionality reduction is a process for decreasing 
features’ dimensionality, but the data is still present. In the  
reduced or low dimension dataset, the crucial features remain 
even if some particular pattern vanishes [7, 8]. Also, it utilizes