Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
63 [62] 2019  VNRICE  HOG and fisher 
score  - NN 93.34%  
[63] 2019  Kelberg, And 
Brodatz  IG, ReliefF, 
symmetric and K -
means  - SVM, NB and 
KNN  99.95% by KNN and NB, 
and 99% by SVM  
[70] 2019  APKs  GA 3.76 to 8.57 
seconds  SVM and neural 
network  SVM: 96.6% and neural 
network: 95.2%  
[52] 2020  EEG  EA - SVM, KNN and 
DA SVM:99.25%, 
KNN:99.13% and 
DA:100%  
[54] 2020  UGI LLE - SVM and DT  SVM:97.71% and 
DT:97.20%  
[55] 2020  SZCI and DJIA  RReliefF and LSTM  - - 98.62%  
B. Feature Extraction Methods  
In previous literature, the dimensionality reduction uses the 
feature selection methods to select the relevant features have 
been presented. The remainder of the aim of this paper reviews 
is to review the latest literature related to feature extraction and 
dimensionality  reduction techniques. Table IV  illustrates the 
summary of the recent litera ture.  
Moghaddam et al. [41] proposed a method known as 
spectral segmentation and integration (SSI) as supervised 
feature extraction for hyperspectral images. The developed 
method divided pixels’ spectral signature curve to channels. 
Then a mean weighted o perator was used for integration of each 
channel band in order to extract new features in a very minimal 
number compared to the original bands. Moreover, the PSO 
algorithm was used to merge spectral signature curve pixel 
segments so as to reduce the dimens ionality of the image and to 
increase the class accuracy. In the proposed technique, the 
SVM was used as a classifier, and two datasets were used. The 
experimental results confirmed the SSI method outperformed 
other feature extraction methods such as PCA, SRS, NWFE, 
DAFE, PCA, SELD, BCC, and CBFE.  
Berbar [74] worked on malignant masses in mammograms 
based on the feature extraction. The researcher presented Gray 
Level Co -occurrence Matrix (GLCM) texture feature extraction 
by three hybrid methods that were us ed in the proposed method. 
The three hybrid methods called Wavelet CT1, Wavelet CT2, 
and ST -GLCM. The interesting point of the image was divided 
into sub -image then contrast stretching stage was used prior to 
feature extraction. Then the sub -image has been  applied for the 
methods of feature extraction. Next, the GLCM extracted the 
seven -feature texture and have been merged with seven 
statistical features. Moreover, two datasets images were used in 
this research and SVM classifier. The proposed methods 
outpe rformed the multi -resolution feature extractions methods 
in terms of the number of the extracted feature. Also, in Area 
under the Curve (AUC) measure, the researcher methods were 
superior to other feature extraction methods.  
Rahman et al. [75] worked on th e emotion recognition task. 
They used PCA and t -statistical to reduce the dimensionality of 
extracted features from emotional signals of EEG. The 
proposed method was applied to the dataset called SJTU 
emotion EEG. The emotional state with extracted feature s has  
been classified by four classifiers: SVM, ANN, LDA, and 
KNN.  The result indicated that the prepared method outperformed 
several other emotion recognition methods.  Chu et al. [76] 
proposed a system for extracting features from the machinery 
fault-based vibration signals. They used three feature extraction 
methods: Fourier transform frequency spectrum (FTFS), 
envelopment analysis, and local mean decomposition (LMD). 
The vibration signals were analyzed by the Fourier transform 
analysis to get amplitude and phase spectrums. The results have 
given that the envelope analysis and mean decomposition 
methods could extract between cancerous and non -cancerous 
tumors in the breast. The authors used a new threshold to 
improve LBP texture features and the LBP descr iptor for 
identifying the abnormal cases. In the proposed method, the 
features extracted by using CNN and SVM were used for the 
classification. The experimental results have explained that the 
developed method could classify the ultrasound images with 
high accuracy and sensitivity.  
Li et al. [77] worked on fault diagnosis and used 
discriminative graph regularized autoencoder (DGAE) to 
design a feature extraction method.  To map process data to the 
feature space, to avoid manually designing feature problems  
and to ensure that the data characteristics is truly reflected by 
the learned feature reflect they used advanced neural network 
structure. Furthermore, the neural network structure model is 
integrated with the graph to learn internal representation and to  
preserve locality. Also, to improve the performance of the 
classification, training samples for the label information were 
embedded to the graph. NN was used as a classifier. In 
comparison with other fault diagnosis feature extraction 
methods the proposed  method achieved better performance.  
Nagarajan et al. [78] used Empirical Mode Decomposition 
(EMD) to propose two feature extraction methods of 
mammogram image. The interesting point of the images 
divided into a group of different frequency components. Th en 
they performed their first method based on Bi -dimensional 
Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD). Through these 
groups, the GLCM and gray level rum matrix features were 
extracted. However, the extracted features by BEMD first 
feature extraction method were  less orthogonal to each other.  
Therefore, the researchers proposed the second feature 
extraction which was a modified version of the first one and 
called (MBEMD). The SVM and LDA classifier were used in 
this research. Furthermore, the proposed method appl ied in 
different databases and obtained steady performance.