Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
58 machine learning, the shift of the dataset is a popular problem 
that happens when the joint distributi on of inputs and outputs 
varies between training and test stages. A special case of dataset 
shift, which happens when only the input distribution changes 
is called Covariate shift. Furthermore, the reduction of the 
dimensionality and consequently feature s election is one of the 
most common techniques of noisy data elimination. Eventually, 
misclassification costs and test costs are the two most 
significant kinds of cost in cost -sensitive learning [26 -28]. 
C. Feature Selection Methods  
Feature selection aims to s elect a feature subset from the 
original set of features based on a/the feature’s relevance and 
redundancy. Originally evaluation methods in feature selection 
are divided into four kinds: filter, wrapper, embedded [10, 14, 
18], and hybrid [20, 29]. Recentl y, another type of evaluation 
method is developed, i.e., ensemble feature selection [30, 31]. 
“Fig. 2” d epict s the hierarchy of feature selection t echniques.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Hierarchy of feature s election t echniques . 
Filter  is considered the earliest method and also known as 
an open -loop method. It checks the features relying on the 
intrinsic characteristics prior to the learning tasks. It mainly 
measures the feature characteristics depending on four different 
kinds of measu rement criteria, i.e. information, dependency, 
consistency, and distance [32]. In the filter method, the feature 
selection process is performed independently of the data mining 
algorithm. It uses statistical standards for evaluating the ranking 
of the subs et [17, 24]. Moreover, this technique is to perform 
good performance and high -efficiency computing, easily 
scalable in high dimensional datasets, and outperformed the 
wrapper technique. The primary downside of this method is that 
it neglects the integratio n between the selected subset and the 
performance of the induction algorithm [10, 22, 26].  
Wrapper,  or it also can be called a close -loop method, 
wraps the feature selection around the learning algorithm and 
uses the accuracy of the performance or the err or rate of the 
classification process as a criterion of feature evaluation. By 
decreasing the estimation error of a specific classifier, it 
chooses the most discriminative subset of features. The wrapper 
method performs feature selection based on the perfo rmance of 
the learning algorithm; it selects the most optimal feature for 
the prediction algorithm. Hence it achieves better performance 
and high accuracy compared to the filter algorithm [22, 27, 33]. 
The main disadvantage of this approach is computing 
complexity and more exposure to overfitting in comparison to 
the filter approach. Most wrapper methods are multivariate; thus, they need extensive computation times to achieve the 
convergences and can be intractable for  large datasets [33, 34]. 
“Fig. 3” show s the involved steps in the wrapper method.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Wrapper method for feature s election . 
  Embedded  method is a built -in feature selection mechanism 
that embeds feature selection in the learning algorithm and uses 
its properties to guide feature evaluation. The embedded 
method is more effective and more tractable than the wrapper 
method computationally while retaining similar perfor mance. 
This is because the embedded method avoids the repeated 
execution of the classifier and the examination of every feature 
subset. The embedded method combines the qualities of both 
filter and wrapper methods. It selects features during the 
implementa tion of the mining algorithm, and hence it has less 
computational expensiveness [32, 35]. Steps involved in th e 
embedded method are shown in “Fig. 4 ”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Embedded method for feature s election.  
 
 
   Hybrid and ensemble  methods the recent developments in 
feature selection can be represented in the hybrid method. Thus, 
it can be developed either by integrating two 
various  methods  (e.g. wrapper and filter), two methods with the 
same criteria, or two feature selection approaches.  In the hybrid 
method, the advantages of both methods can be inherited by 
combining their complementary strengths [36]. The 
combination of filter and wrappe r methods is the most common 
hybrid method [37]. However, ensemble  method is a method 
that aims at building a group of feature subsets and then 
producing an aggregated result out of the group [38]. This 
method is depending on various subsampling techniques  where 
a particular feature selection method is implemented on a 
variety of subsamples, and the obtained features are merged to 
create a more stable subset. Table II describes the advantages 
and disadvantages of each method  
 
Wrappe
r 
Feature Selection Techniques  
 
Filter 
 Embedde
d 
Hybrid  
 Ensemble  
 
Pearson  
correlation  
LDA 
 
Forward 
selection  
Backward 
elimination  
Recursive 
Feature 
Elimination  
 
Selecting the Best Subset  
Set of all 
Features  
  
 
 
Generate a subset  
Learning Algorithm and 
Performance  
 
Selecting the Best Subset  
Set of all 
features  
 
 
 
Generate a subset  
 Learning  
algorithm  
Performance