Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
61 the clustering was performed in ord er to cluster the features and 
in the second stage and from each cluster the best feature 
calculated through the iteration of the Ant process. Meanwhile, 
the second stage of the proposed method repeated several times 
until the dominated features collected.  The presented method 
compared to seven other unsupervised feature selection 
methods in eight datasets from UCI and Pablo de Olavide 
research group. Moreover, the comparison of the method with 
other methods was performed and the assessment done by using 
four classifiers (SVM, KNN, DT, and RF). The results 
demonstrated that the performance of the method was better 
than other methods and significantly minimized computation 
time.  
Qu et al . [59] proposed feature selection for predicting 
colorectal cancer based  on operational taxonomic units. Three 
feature selection methods were integrated into the proposed 
method. In first the subset of most significant operational 
taxonomic units generated by multiple dimension -reduction 
methods. Then for reducing the dimensio nality and increasing 
the efficiency of the correlation -based feature selection (CFS) 
and maximum relevance –maximum distance (MRMD) was 
used as a combined method. Moreover, according to the 
taxonomy file, the best features selected. The experiment was 
performed in two datasets, and three classifiers (RF, Naïve 
Bayes, and DT) were dependent on evaluation. The results 
illustrated that the correlation -based feature selection method 
performed better reduction, and the MRMD required more 
amount of time and memor y for computation. Among all used 
classifiers, the RF achieved better performance.  
Umbarkar and Shukla [60] presented a method to improve 
the performance of the instruction detection system. They used 
IG, gain ratio (GR), and CFS algorithms for reducing t he 
dimensionality in the used dataset. To obtain the best -reduced 
set of features, they divided the original set into several parts, 
and then each algorithm applied to those parts, and the most 
accurate was selected. The experiment of the proposed system 
was performed on KDD -Cup 99 dataset, and DT used as the 
classifier. The results indicated that the correlation -based 
feature selection method achieved better performance 
compared to other used algorithms.  
Farokhmanesh and Sadeghi [61] proposed a feature 
selection method based on sparse feature selection and deep 
neural networks. Initially, Correntropy -induced, Discriminative 
Least Squares Regression (DLSR), and Sparse Group Lasso 
(SGL) three methods of sparse were evaluated and compared. 
Next, the SGL was i ntegrated with a deep neural network, and 
the performance of this combination also assessed. Meanwhile,  
the K -means algorithm was used in the SGL method in order to 
group features. The nearest neighbor (NN) algorithm was used 
as a classifier in the perform ance evaluation of the used 
techniques. The experiment and valuation process of three 
methods of the sparse and combination method was performed 
on the MNIST dataset. The results illustrated that the SGL 
combined with a deep neural network achieved better accuracy.  Duong and Hoang [62] presented a method based on 
Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) descriptor and feature 
selection method to classify the rice quality. They extracted 
HOG features from the rice image, and the score of each feature 
was calcul ated by the fisher score feature selection method. In 
the proposed method, the VNRICE dataset was used to perform 
the experiment of the method. Also, the NN classifier was 
utilized. The results have shown that the fisher score method 
enhanced the accuracy by 42% of the classification and the 
computation time reduced.  
Alharan et al. [63] proposed a method based on feature 
extraction and feature selection methods for texture image 
classification. Firstly, the set of features was extracted from the 
used datas ets by using three approaches (Gray Level Co -
occurrence Matrix (GLCM), Local Binary Pattern (LBP), and 
Gabor filter). After that, the second stage was performed, which 
was the evaluation of the extracted features, and the assessment 
was done by five techni ques (info gain, Gain ratio, oneR, 
ReliefF, and symmetric). Then based on the previous 
assessment, the feature selection was accomplished by utilizing 
the K -means clustering algorithm. The presented method 
experiment was done on three datasets, and SVM, NB , and 
KNN classifiers were used for the classification. The results 
showed that the NB and KNN achieved better accuracy in the 
first dataset while the SVM attained superior accuracy in the 
second and third datasets.  
Osman et al. [64] proposed a model invo lved in feature 
extraction and feature selection color -based methods for 
identifying origin automatically. The presented method was 
performed in three stages. In the first, the skin color information 
was extracted from human faces by using skin color detec tion 
technique. Next, the wrapper subset evaluator and GA method 
to eliminate the redundant and irrelevant features. Moreover, 
1550 face images from different regions were used by the 
authors, and six classifiers (NB, Bayes Net, KNN, SVM, RF, 
and Multilaye r Perceptron (MLP)) were used for the 
classification. The results illustrated that the individual color 
features accuracy was lower than the accuracy of the combined 
color features. Also, the accuracy of the SVM, NB, and Bayes 
Net was very low, and hence t hey could not be used for the 
proposed method.  
Arshak and Eesa [65] proposed a feature selection method 
for dimensionality reduction based on the cuttlefish algorithm 
(CFA) for gene classification. The cuttlefish was used to 
generate a subset of the optim al features. Also, the KNN was 
used as a classifier for the evaluation and classification of the  
proposed method. The experiment was performed on eight 
different datasets from ELVIRA biomedical dataset repository. 
The performance of the proposed method was  compared with 
SVM and DT and the hidden Markov model in terms of 
accuracy and computational time. The result demonstrated that 
the presented achieved better performance in five datasets 
compared to the other methods.  
Zeebaree et al.[66, 67] proposed a fea ture selection method 
based on the Convolutional neural network (CNN) for