Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
59  
TABLE II.  ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE OF FEATURE SELECTION 
METHODS . 
Method  Advantages  Disadvantages  
Filter  
 - It works faster than 
wrapper  
- Scalable  
- Classifier independent  
- The computational 
complexity is better than   
wrapper  
- Better generalizable 
property  - The interaction 
between 
classifiers is 
neglected  
- The dependency 
among features is 
ignored  
 
Wrapper  
 - It Interacts with classifier  
- Consider the dependence 
among features  
- Higher performance 
accuracy than filter  - More prone to 
over-fitting  
- Classifier specific  
- Need expensive 
computation  
Embedded  
 - Interact with classifier  
- Better computational 
complexity than wrapper  
- Higher performance 
accuracy than filter  
- Less prone to over -fitting 
than wrapper  
- Consider the dependency 
among features  - Classifier specific  
 
Hybrid  
 - The performance accuracy 
is higher than filter  
- Better computational 
complexity than wrapper  
- Less prone to over -fitting 
than wrapper  - Classifier specific  
 
Ensemble  - Less exposed to over -
fitting  
- It has more flexibly and 
robustness upon high 
dimensional data  - An ensemble of 
classifiers is not 
easy to 
understand  
 
 
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION  
Feature extraction method extracting new features from 
original dataset, and it is very beneficial when we want to 
decrease the number of resources required for processing 
without missing relevant feature dataset. Feature extraction can 
also decrease the number of additional features for an offered 
study. Feature extraction produces a remarkable transformation 
of first features to create more significant features. Feature 
extraction is a process for creating new fea tures that depend on 
the original input feature set to decrease the high dimensionality 
of the feature vector. The transformation method is done by 
algebraic transformation, and according to some optimization 
criteria [39, 40]. Also, feature extraction has  the ability to 
handle essential information during dealing with high 
dimensional issues [41, 42]. These dimensionality reduction 
techniques aim to not lose a large amount of information during 
the feature transformation process by conserving the original 
relative distance between features and cover the original data 
potential structure [10]. Feature extraction is less exposed to 
overfitting and perform good accuracy for the classification in 
comparison to the feature selection methods. However, the data 
description is lost occasionally after the transformation, and the 
cost of this process is expensive in several datasets [43, 44] . Feature extraction algorithms are classified into linear and 
nonlinear algorithms [39, 43, 45] . However, the ideal feature 
extraction based dimensionality reduction methods is Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) [46, 47], Multi -Dimensional 
Scaling (MDS), Isometric Mapping (ISOMAP), Locally Linear 
Embedding (LLE), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), 
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) an d clustering methods [48, 
49]. “Fig. 5 ” depict s the overall process of feature extraction 
method.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5. The process of feature extraction  
  In Compare with feature selection, feature extraction 
diminishes the number of variables by transforming a 
considerable number of attributes into a set of reduced features. 
Feature extraction tries to find a significant low -dimensional 
representation of hi gh-dimensional data. In other words, a 
lesser information loss and a higher discriminating power can 
be guaranteed using feature extraction rather than feature 
selection. However, the application of feature extraction in 
sentiment analysis has been hindere d by several  difficulties. 
First, many feature extraction algorithms that have been 
classified as nonlinear methods cannot perform the mapping 
from a high -dimensional space to a low -dimensional space, 
thereby prohibiting the training of a practically usabl e 
classification model and resulting in a loss of data 
interpretability. An expert system that can automatically 
determine the sentiment of documents must obtain a low -
dimensional representation of new documents during the test 
phase. Furthermore, unlike m ost feature selection techniques , 
feature extraction methods are usually unsupervised; that is, 
label information cannot be utilized during the process of 
dimension reduction. When implementing machine learning 
algorithms for sentiment analysis, those docu ments with label 
information must be used to train a predictive model. This same 
information can also help feature extraction methods create 
excellent features [45, 50].  
    In this paper, a comprehensive review is performed for 
the latest and most efficie nt methods that have been performed 
by researchers in the past three years to reduce data dimensions 
in various areas of machine learning and data mining. Also, the 
details of each method, such as used algorithms/approaches, 
datasets, utilized classifiers,  and the results obtained are 
summarized. Moreover, we performed a scientific analysis of 
the studied feature selection and feature extraction methods. 
Furthermore, we highlighted the most widely used approaches, 
the best -reduced dimension, the best decrea sed computational 
time, and the highest achieved accuracy methods. This paper  is 
organized as follows: the introduction is done in section  I, 
section II  presents the dimensionality reduction techniques then  
a review about these techniques is done III , the broad discussi on 
is illustrated in section V , while  section IV contains the 
conclusion.  
 
Full Feature Set  
Extracting new 
Features from 
Existing Features  
New Feature Set