Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
64 Rabin et al. [79] used a short -time Fourier transform (STFT) 
to extract features from the human hand movement -based 
signal of electromyography (EMG). Because the space of the 
extracted features was large, they used PCA and diffusion maps 
(DM) to reduce the dimensionality of the extracted features. 
Also, to perform the comparison for the performance of both 
methods with different sizes of the training set. The researchers 
used KNN as a classifier in this study. The result indicated the 
DM technique outperformed the PCA method in case of the 
limited training set. However, in the large training set, both 
methods achieved high performance in the term of the 
classification.  
Kuncan et al. [80] worked o n the diagnosis of bearing fault 
for the rotary machine. They extracted features from the 
vibration signals of bearing by applying their proposed method 
called a one -dimensional ternary pattern (1D -TP). The signals 
were collected from three different datas ets in size, speed, and 
parts. Moreover, Random Forest (RF), KNN, SVM, Bayes Net, 
and ANN were used as classifiers with the ternary pattern. The 
results indicated that the proposed method could extract 
efficient features from vibration signals for classifi cation. Also, 
all used classifiers attained effective accuracy.  
Liu et al. [81] built a method for feature extractions based 
on the incorporation of the discriminant analysis and the low 
ranks representation of the original data samples. The 
supervised pr oposed feature extraction method is called 
discriminative low rank preserving projection (DLRPP). The 
presented method performance was compared with seven other 
feature extraction methods (LPP, LSDA, DPSR, LRRDP, 
LSPP, LRPP and FOLP) on images of six diffe rent datasets. 
The DLRPP method achieved better performance in the term of 
recognition rate.  
Ma and Yuan [82] proposed a method for extraction 
features from images based on the deep CNN and PCA. They 
used a neural network to extract features. Due to the h igh 
dimension of the extracted features, they improved and 
optimized the PCA algorithm by deep learning through 
simulation experiments. Then the researchers compared the 
performance of the PCA before and after improvement. The 
memory usage before optimizin g the algorithms was more than 
6000 MB and after optimizing the memory utilization 
decreased to less than 1000 MB. Also, there was a big 
difference in the time consumed by the PCA algorithm before 
and after optimization. Rather than the performance of the 
improved PCA was effective, also the classifier accuracy was 
enhanced which was done by the SVM algorithm.  
Sellami and Farah [83] presented a combination of feature 
extraction and band selection methods to reduce the 
dimensionality of hyperspectral images . They used several 
feature extraction methods such as PCA, TLPP, KPCA and LE  
as linear, nonlinear methods. Also, the researchers utilized MI, 
DM, CBS, and PA supervised and unsupervised band selection 
methods. The SVM algorithm was used as a classifier in  the 
proposed implementation. They combine both groups of the 
algorithms as follows: TLPP/CBS, PCA/CBS, KPCA/BS, 
PCA/MI, LE/CBS, TLPP/MI, LE/MI, and KPCA/MI.  The 
authors used two datasets (the first dataset’s images were from 
Indian Pines and the second d ataset’s images were from Pavia University). The results revealed that the classification 
accuracy of the TLPP/CBS was better compared to all other 
combination methods for both used datasets.  
Chen et al. [84] proposed a study on X -ray images for 
determini ng bone age. They used a deep neural network to 
extract features from the X -ray images. The extracted features 
include: Glutamate cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM) 
features and Local Binary Patterns (LBP) features in the image. 
In more detail, the fe atures of the X -ray hand bone image could 
be automatically extracted using deep learning and the bone age 
was assessed automatically by the convolution neural network. 
Moreover, the PCA algorithm was used to reduce the 
dimensionality of the extracted featu res. The extracted features 
were classified by the SVM classifier. The test data, training 
data and verify data established by a captured image from 
several males and females and different ages.  The results 
proved that the presented study achieved better performance 
compared to other methods in this field.   
Jin et al. [85] proposed  a feature extraction algorithm for 
JPEG steganalysis based on the adaptive scale adjustment 
algorithm. In this algorithm, the scale of feature extraction was 
adjusted adaptivel y according to the quality of JPEG images. 
They mainly depended on the Boss Base 1.01 database, and 
they applied their algorithm on the MD -CFR feature. The result 
has shown that the performance of the steganalysis improved 
by the proposed method. Also, the  dimensionality of extracted 
features was reduced by the presented method and hence it 
could be used based on residual images in the other steganalysis 
methods.  
Liu et al. [67] presented a method for feature extraction 
depending on graph -based space to co nstruct an optimal 
algorithm for semi -supervised learning. Particularly the 
presented method was a combination of sparse representation, 
discriminative projection, and manifold learning for 
dimensionality reduction. They designed and performed their 
method  to obtain semi -supervised feature extraction and spars 
structure local manifolds at the same time. Moreover, the 
optimal value was accomplished by modifying the similarity 
matrix in each iteration. The experiment was executed in five 
datasets and the perf ormance of the presented method 
compared with six other methods (PCA, MSEC, DLSR, 
NLDLSR, SOGFS, and SDR). The offered method 
outperformed all other methods in all used datasets.  
Lin et al. [68] worked on the discriminative graph signal to 
propose a featu re extraction method that could extract good 
features to perform the desired classification. All the training 
samples in the contained graph were established. Moreover, 
they used eigenvector decomposition in order to attain the 
Fourier base of the graph. N umerous discriminative signals 
were extracted concurrently for achieving high accuracy 
especially in a problem that has multiple classes. The proposed 
method was performed in four different experiments with 
several datasets. The results indicated that the presented 
methods could achieve encouraging performance, and it was 
considered to be more effective with supervised classification.  
Kasongo and Sun [69] proposed a method for wireless 
intrusion detection systems based on the feed -forward Deep