EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:11
totraditionalmethods,MLismoresuitableforsolvingoptimizationproblemsofECandhasbetter
results[54].Inaddition,AIalgorithmsarealsogoodateffectivelymininghiddeninformationand
lawsfromdataincomplexandnoisyECenvironments,whichhasplaguedtraditionaloptimization
methodsfor along time.
3.2 Introduction of Artificial Intelligence Algorithms in Edge Computing
WearegoingtointroducetheseAIalgorithmsusedinEC,namely,traditionalMLalgorithms,DL,
RL and DRL algorithms. We will also provide some examples of application accordingly. In this
article,wemainlyfocusonthefieldofMLinAIalgorithm.Otheralgorithmssuchasevolutionary
algorithmare notthefocusofthisarticle,butarebrieflyintroducedin thissection.
3.2.1 Traditional Machine Learning. The traditional ML algorithms in this work particularly
refer to those ML algorithms other than DL and RL. Given the availability of label information,
the traditional ML algorithms can be divided into supervised learning, semi-supervised learn-
ing, and unsupervised learning. Among them, supervised learning requires labeled data to train
the model, while unsupervised learning can autonomously discover the principles implicit in the
data.Asahybridofsupervisedlearningandunsupervisedlearning,semi-supervisedlearninghas
access to both labeled data and unlabeled data. For example, the common supervised learning
methods include support vector machines (SVM) , boosting, and random forests; the common
semi-supervised learning methods include label propagation and graphical models; the common
unsupervisedlearningmethodsincludeclusteringalgorithmssuchasK-meansanddimensionre-
ductionalgorithms suchas principal componentanalysis(PCA) .
There are some obvious shortcomings of traditional ML algorithms. For instance, they are sen-
sitivetodatasets,thedatabecomelesseffectivewhenthedatasetislargeenough,andtheyneed
complicatedartificialfeatureengineering.Inspiteoftheseshortcomings,traditionalMLhassmall
energy consumption, small computing power cost, and is easy to deploy compared to DL and
RL. Due to the distributed nature of EC, the appropriate AI algorithm can be reasonably selected
according to the resource situation and task requirements of each edge and terminal device, so
traditionalMLcan alsorely on theseadvantagesto find itsplacein EC[ 55].
3.2.2 Deep Learning. DL resembles the functions of human brains. It has the ability to au-
tonomously learn high-level features from raw data, thereby efficiently performing classification
and prediction tasks [ 56,57]. DL is usually deployed in a multi-layer structure. These layers can
befullyconnectedlayers,convolutionallayers,poolinglayers,normalizationlayers,oractivation
layers. A DL algorithm can be formed by the free combination of these layers. The more layers
thealgorithmincludes,the“deeper”itis.Theinputofaneuronineachlayeristheweightedsum
of the outputs of the neurons in the previous layer. After the input is activated by an activation
function, the obtained number is used as the output of the neuron [ 58]. Compared to traditional
ML algorithms, DL has a more powerful ability to extract high-level features from massive data
due toitsmultilayer structure[ 59].
The common DL models include: deep neural networks (DNN) ,convolutional neural net-
works(CNN) ,recurrent neural networks(RNN) ,andso on.
•DNN,alsoknownas multiplelinearperceptrons(MLP) ,isaneuralnetworkwithmulti-
ple hidden layers. The neural network layer in DNN can be divided into three types: input
layer, hidden layer and output layer. By adding hidden layers, DNN model can obtain more
powerfullearningability.
•CNN is composed of a series of different convolution layers. High-level features hidden in
the input data can be extracted through the convolution operation in these convolution
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.