EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:5
need to purchase cloud server resources at a relatively low cost, without the need of purchasing
their own hardware and equipment at high prices. This greatly reduces the cost of business oper-
ationsand thethresholdfor companiestoengage in technologyresearchand development.
The centralized computing, storage, and network resources of cloud computing has exposed a
series of problems with the development of the times. In this context, EC, a new computing para-
digm,hasbeguntoattracttheattentionofallareas.Inthissection,wewillgiveabriefoverviewof
EC.WewillfirstdiscusswhyECisneeded,andthenintroducewhatECis.Finally,wewilldiscuss
the problems of EC and corresponding traditional solutions, and point out the shortcomings of
thesetraditionalsolutions.
2.1 Why We Need Edge Computing
WewillexplainthenecessityofECfromthefollowingthreeaspects:the“bigdataera”causedby
IoT, more stringent requirements of high network stability and response speed, and the consider-
ation ofprivacyand security.
2.1.1 TheBigData EraCausedbyInternet of Things. TheconceptofIoTwasproposedin 1999
for supply chain management, but now IoT covers a much wider area [ 17]. With the integration
of IoT into traditional industries, many new application areas have been spawned, such as smart
home, smart grid, smart traffic, and intelligent manufacturing. The idea of IoT is that things con-
nected to the Internet form a huge network, achieving the interconnection of these things at any
time and place. With the continuous development of IoT, the number of various sensors, smart-
phones, healthcare applications and online social platforms is soaring, and the resulting global
data will increase to 175 zeta bytes (ZB) by 2025 according to the prediction of International
Data Corporation(IDC) [18]. Thishuge datavolume hasfacilitatedtheworld of bigdata[ 19].
In the era of big data, the most direct and simple method for handling those data is to transfer
thedatatothecloudforprocessing.TheannualglobalcloudIPtrafficof2016was6.0ZB,anditis
expectedtoreach19.5ZBin2021,reportedbyCiscoin2018[ 20].However,thecomputingpower
ofthecloudisincreasinglinearly[ 21],whichismuchslowerthanthecurrentrateofdatagrowth.
Withtherapidgrowthof data,cloud computingwillno longer befully trusted.
2.1.2 More Stringent Requirements of Network Stability and Response Speed. There are some
IoTapplicationscenariosthatrequireextremelyfastresponsespeeds.Forexample,inthescenario
ofintelligentdriving,sensordevicessuchascamerasareinstalledinautonomousvehicles.These
sensor devices can continuously obtain data from the surrounding environment during the au-
tonomous driving mode. In the cloud computing model, these data will be uploaded to the cloud
forcomputing,andtheresultswillbereturnedbacktothevehicle’scontrolchip.Consideringthe
complicated driving environment of a vehicle, this method is actually very time-consuming, and
itmayevencausethesmartvehicletofailtomaketherightdecisioninatimelymanner,resulting
in seriousconsequences[ 3].
Inthefieldsof augmentedreality(AR) andvirtualreality(VR) ,mobileAR/VRapplications
need to continuously transmit high-resolution videos, so they have high requirements for data
computing capabilities, network stability, and response speed [ 22]. At the current rate of data
growth, the cloud’s computing power becomes less and less proficient in meeting these require-
ments.However,uploadingallthedatatothecloudwillcauseseriousnetworkcongestion.Dueto
thelimitednetworkbandwidth,thedatageneratedbyalargenumberofIoTdeviceswillimposea
lotofpressureonthenetworkbandwidth,causingcloudcomputingtonolongermeettherequire-
ments of latency and response speed in these scenarios. In addition, these data may have a large
proportion of noise and errors. Some survey shows that only one third of the data obtained by
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.