184:12 H.Huaetal.
layers [60]. CNN has powerful representation abilities and picture recognition capabilities.
Based on this, some studies have adopted CNN algorithms in the fields of fault detection
andvideosurveillanceinEC.Forexample,Zhangetal.[ 61]detectsmicroseismiceventsby
deployingCNNmodels on edgedevices.
•RNNisaDNNalgorithmthatisgoodatmodelingandprocessingsequencedata.However,a
majordisadvantageofRNNisthatitiseasytoforget.Thatis,theimpactoftheinputofthe
startingmomentonthelatermomentswillbecomesmallerandsmallerwithtime.Therefore,
an improved version of RNN named long short-term memory (LSTM) [62]i sp r o p o s e d .
Atpresent,somestudies[ 63–65]haveadoptedtheLSTMalgorithmtosolvetheissuesfaced
byEC.
When a large number of labeled data are available, compared with traditional ML algorithms,
DL performs better in natural language processing, computer vision and many other fields [ 57].
ThecharacteristicsofECmakethedatacollectedfromthephysicalenvironmentcanbeprocessed
locally, which meets the requirements of DL. Therefore, some EC studies also focus on using DL
in EC anomaly detection [ 66], task scheduling and resource allocation in EC [ 67], and privacy
protection[ 68].
3.2.3 Reinforcement Learning and Deep Reinforcement Learning. Unlike supervised learning
and unsupervised learning that rely on static data, RL is a learning algorithm that trains mod-
els through dynamic interaction with the environment. The core idea is that agents receive the
stateofenvironmentandmakeactionstomaximizetherewardaccordingtohistoricalexperience.
Becausereinforcementlearningisgoodatsolvingdecision-makingproblems,somestudies[ 69,70]
have adopted RL algorithm in the decision-making of EC resource management, allocation, and
scheduling.
Typical algorithms in RL are model-free and value-based Q-learning algorithm [ 71]. Each iter-
ation of Q-learning algorithm will calculate an expected cumulative reward, called the Q-value,
accordingtocurrentstateandgivenaction.However,astheenvironmentbecomesmorecomplex,
the state space and action space will expand exponentially, thus reducing the convergence speed
andtakingupa lotof memory [ 72].
To solve this problem, deep Q network (DQN) [73]i sp r o p o s e d ,w h i c hu t i l i z e saD N Nt oa p -
proximate the Q-values. Compared with the classical RL algorithms, DQN has three advantages
in dealing with EC with high complexity [ 74]. First, it is able to deal with high dimensional and
complex systems. Second, it can learn the regularity of system environment. Last but not least, it
is able to make optimal decisions based on current and past long-term reward. Therefore, some
studies[75,76]useDQNalgorithmstooptimizethecontroldecision-makingproblemsinECand
obtaingoodresults.
However, DQN also has its shortcomings. Especially, when using nonlinear functions such as
neural network to approximate the Q-function, the learning result of DRL is unstable or even
divergent. To solve this problem, an experience replay mechanism using the prior experience is
integratedintoDQN [ 77,78].
3.2.4 FederatedLearning. Federatedlearning(FL) isadistributedMLframework,whichcan
effectively help multiple organizations train models under the requirements of user privacy pro-
tection,datasecurity,andgovernmentregulations[ 79].Inthisframework,differentlocalusersdo
notneedtoputalltherawdataonthecentralserverfortraining,buttrainthelocalmodelthrough
privacy related data, then all the local models are aggregated into a global model on the central
server[80].
As discussed above, the goal of EC is to deploy computing tasks at the edge of the network
near the client. However, the data of a single edge node may not meet the requirements of model
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.