184:26 H.Huaetal.
defective products, on the one hand, and it also reduces the network transmission cost, on the
otherhand.
Microseismic monitoring. In oil and gas production, the low signal-to-noise ratio and the need
forreal-timedatatransmissionbringchallengesinhigh-precisionmicroseismicmonitoring.Zhang
et al. [61] design a neural network-based EC architecture called Edge-to-Center LearnReduce Mi-
croseismic Monitoring Platform under the environment of oil and gas production. The platform
uses EC architecture with a new microseismic events detection algorithm based on LSTM, and
CNN is deployed in the data center (i.e., the cloud). The model obtained through data training in
thecloudwillbedelegatedtoeachedgedevice,sothattheedgedevicehastheabilitytorecognize
microseismicevents.Thereal-timeperformanceisimprovedbyanalyzingandprocessingdataon
the edge side that can get detection results faster and take corresponding actions. However, the
datageneratedwillfirstbeprocessedbytheedgedevicetoextractusefulinformationforthedata
center. This greatly reduces the volume of the data that need to transfer to the data center, so the
platform can effectively improve transmission efficiency and reduce network transmission pres-
sure. Experiments have shown that this monitoring platform combining neural network and EC
can achieve an accuracy rate of more than 96% and improve the data transmission efficiency by
about90%.
4.3 Internet of Vehicles
IoV is currently a hot academic and commercial field, and it is a key step for humans to move
towards an intelligent life in the future [ 147]. IoV can ease traffic congestion, reduce traffic acci-
dents caused by improper driving, and improve passenger experience [ 99]. Abundant in-vehicle
applications,roadconditionsensors,andintelligentsystemsbringaveryconvenient,comfortable,
andsafe ridingexperiencefor peopletraveling.
Although traditional cloud computing is currently the mainstream solution to the challenges
broughtbytheincreasingnumberofapplicationsanddata,itcannotmeettherequirementsofIoV
(e.g., stable networks and low latency), due to the limitations of cloud computing itself. Using EC
can effectively make up for the limitations of cloud computing [ 148]. IoV has the characteristics
oflimitedresources,suchasdistributedcomputingandstorage.Howtoallocatelimitedresources
andhow toscheduletasksaretheproblemsthatIoV needsto solve.
ECandAIcanbringfasterandmoreprecisecontrol,fasternetworkcommunication,betteruser
experience, and more computing resources for traditional vehicular network [ 149]. A typical EC-
basedIoVarchitectureisshowninFigure 6.Today,moreandmorefieldsuseAIasameanstosolve
optimalstrategies,andAIalgorithmscanalsobeappliedtoIoVtodealwiththeaboveproblems.We
will summarize the application of the combination of EC and AI in IoV from three perspectives:
optimizing task offloading and resource allocation in IoV, improving the user experience of on-
boardentertainment,and improvingvehicle intelligence.
4.3.1 OptimizingTaskOffloadingandResourceAllocation. Therapidlychangingnetworkstruc-
ture,communicationstatus,andcomputingloadhaveledtothedynamicsanduncertaintyoftask
offloading [ 150], making efficient task offloading and resource allocation decisions more difficult.
Feng et al. [ 148] use the ant colony optimization algorithm with fast convergence to solve the
NP-hardtaskassignmentproblem.Thismethodestablishesmultipleobjectivefunctions,anduses
heuristics algorithm for optimization. However, this method is not good at making optimal de-
cisions for offloading multiple data dependency tasks. In response to this problem, an EC frame-
work for obtaining the optimal solution of task offloading through DRL is proposed in Reference
[149].Theframeworktakesintoaccountdatadependencies,aswellasresourcerequirements,ve-
hicle movements, and access networks. It uses the asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C)
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.