184:8 H.Huaetal.
strategies are able to reduce energy consumption and latency. Therefore, computing offloading is
animportantresearchtopicforoptimizing EC.
2.3.2 Resource Allocation. Compared to traditional cloud computing, the most prominent ad-
vantageofECisthatitdoesnotneedtouploadallthedatatothecloudforcomputingandstorage
tasks, which largely frees up network bandwidth and other resources occupied by cloud comput-
ing. In the meanwhile, since tasks are distributed on each edge node with limited resources, an
intelligentand efficientsolutionforresourcemanagement is crucialforEC.
2.3.3 Privacy and Security. EC also faces new challenges regarding data security and pri-
vacy [32]. Some of these challenges come from the inherent problems of cloud computing, and
otherscomefromthedistributedandheterogeneitynatureofECitself[ 33].Traditionalsolutions
for data security and privacy issues of cloud computing are not applicable to the non-centralized
computing model of EC. Therefore, further improving data security and further protecting data
privacyisa problemworthyofresearchers’attention.
2.4 Summary
Aiming at the problems described above, many studies based on traditional methods have made
good progress. In solving the problem of resource allocation and computing offloading in EC,
someresearchersadoptLyapunovoptimizationalgorithm[ 34]tofindtheoptimaldecision[ 35,36].
Some studies also regard resource allocation and computing offloading as optimization problems
such as linear programming [ 37] and mixed integer non-linear programming [ 38–40]. Other tra-
ditional methods include alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [41], Stack-
elberg game [ 42], and so on. In terms of security, Jing et al. [ 43] adopt a linear programming
method to reduce data loss. Kang et al. [ 44] use blockchain technology to protect the security of
data storage and sharing. In terms of privacy protection, traditional methods include differential
privacy[45],wavelet transform[ 46],and soon.
AlthoughtraditionalmethodsabovehaveachievedgoodresultsinoptimizingEC,theystillhave
someshortcomings.First,theunderlyingmodelneedstobeknown,whichisnotaneasytaskdue
to the complexity and dynamics of EC itself. Second, they are easy to converge to local optima,
and their efficiency is usually very low. Moreover, they lack the ability to perform deep and high-
dimensionaldatamining,automaticallyextractimportantfeaturestomakefastoptimaldecisions,
and make prediction. Note that these are all advantages of AI algorithms, and we will describe
howtheyoptimize ECin thenext section.
Insummary,thissectionmainlyfocusesontheconceptandmotivationofEC.Atthesametime,
theproblemsandchallengesfacedbythedevelopmentofECarealsodescribed.Itisworthnoting
thattraditionalmethodshaveachievedgoodresultsinsolvingtheseproblems,buttheystillsuffer
someshortcomings.In thefuture,AI algorithms might become more adaptableto new situations,
abletochangeinputs,outputs,andconstraintsmoreeasily,anddonotneedmathematicalmodels
whendataaresufficient[ 12].
3 WHEN EDGE COMPUTING MEETS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
In this section, we will first analyze the respective development of AI and EC and the motiva-
tion for the combination of the two, and then we will give an overview of related AI algorithms.
Finally,wewillsummarizeAI-basedalgorithmsfortopicssuchascomputingoffloadingoptimiza-
tion,non-computingoffloadingmethodstoreduceenergyconsumption,ECsecurity,dataprivacy,
andresourceallocationoptimization.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.