EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:3
The widespread application of AI, especially ML, has clearly become an inevitable trend in the
“bigdataera”broughtbyIoT.ItisworthnotingthatthisarticlefocusesonthenewgenerationAI
algorithm, e.g., deep learning (DL) , and so on. Note that some of these applications have high
requirements for latency and network stability, but these requirements are often not guaranteed
by cloud computing. In contrast, the new EC model can meet these requirements by deploying
AI at the edge and delegating some computing and storage resources to edge devices close to
the terminal. Although EC brings benefits such as reduced latency, improved data privacy, and
enhanced security, the limited computing and storage capacity of edge devices has brought new
problems. Using AI to optimize EC and solve the problems faced by EC has become a new trend
in relatedresearch[ 10].
1.3 Combination of Edge Computing and Artificial Intelligence
ThemotivationsofcombiningAIandECinrecentworkscanberoughlydividedintotwoaspects,
whichfully illustratethemutualbenefitbetweenAI andEC:
(1) ThedevelopmentofECstillfacesmanychallenges,e.g.,taskscheduling,resourceallocation,
delayoptimization,energyconsumptionoptimization,andprivacyandsecurity.Inresponse,
many researchershaveadoptedAI-basedsolutionstopromotethedevelopment of EC.
(2) In spite of the rapid development of AI, its application relies on strong computing power.
Traditional cloud computing can provide abundant computing and storage resources, but
cloud-based AI reasoning and training may lead to significant delay as well as data privacy
andsecurityissues.ByexecutingAItasksinedgenodesclosertotheuserside,ECcangreatly
alleviate theaforementionedissueswithimprovedstability,reliability,and userexperience.
At present, researchers have made many great achievements in the above research problems.
Thisarticlesummarizes theseresults,hopingthatreaderscan quicklyget updatedwiththelatest
researchstatusand relevantresults.
1.4 Review of Existing Surveys
EC and AI are very popular research fields, and some related reviews have been published. In
Reference [ 11], authors focus on the motivation and research work of deploying AI algorithm on
the edge of the network. The latest development of ML in mobile EC is reviewed in Reference
[12], which includes the development of 5G network in automatic adaptive resource allocation,
mobility modeling, security, and energy efficiency. Survey work [ 13] reviews the application of
DL in EC, and it focuses on how to use DL to promote the development of edge applications, e.g.,
intelligentmultimedia,intelligenttransportation,intelligentcity,andintelligentindustry.Various
methods of fast implementation of DL reasoning in the combination of end devices, edge servers
and cloud, and the methods of training DL models in multiple edge devices are also discussed
in Reference [ 14]. To achieve the best performance of DL training and reasoning, Reference [ 15]
comprehensivelydiscusseshowtodesignECarchitecturewithcommunication,computingpower,
and energy consumption constraints. From the perspective of algorithms and systems, [ 16] csys-
tematically summarizes the latest approaches to overcome the communication challenges caused
by AI reasoningand trainingat theedgeof thenetwork.
Nonetheless,themutuallybeneficialrelationshipbetweenECandAI(especiallytraditionalML,
DL,reinforcement learning (RL) ,a n ddeep reinforcement learning (DRL) ) are seldom dis-
cussed in previous surveys. From this point of view, this article reviews existing works on EC
performanceoptimizationanddifferentapplicationscenariosofAI.InadditiontotheDLmethods
discussed in References [ 13–15], other ML algorithms, especially RL and DRL, are also discussed
in thisarticle.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.