EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:7
Fig. 2. Architecture of EC. Gray arrows indicate the data transmission between the end, the edge, and the
cloud. Blueand grayboxes indicate that thetaskis scheduledtotheedge and thecloud,respectively.
EC has advantages in offloading some resources and tasks on the cloud to the edge. The edge
layerisclosertoendusersanddatasource,sothetransmissiondistanceisgreatlyshortened,and
the corresponding transmission time is greatly reduced. This effectively improves the response
speed of user requests. At the same time, the shortened transmission distance also reduces the
cost and data security issues caused by the long-distance transmission. From the perspective of
thecloud,large-scalerawdatawillbeprocessedontheedgetofilteroutalargenumberofuseless
and erroneous data first, and then the edge uploads important data or information to the cloud.
This greatly reduces the bandwidth pressure, the transmission cost, and the possibility of user
privacyleakage.
2.3 Problems Studied in Edge Computing
Next, we will describe three problems studied in the field of EC in detail: computing offloading,
resourceallocation,andprivacyandsecurity.Wewillalsoexplaintheshortcomingsoftraditional
solutionsto theseproblems.
2.3.1 Computing Offloading. Computation offloading was originally proposed in cloud com-
puting. The definition is that the terminal devices with limited computing power delegates part
or all of the computing tasks to the cloud for execution. Similarly, computing offloading in EC
refers to the problem that terminal devices with limited computing power delegate part or all of
its computing tasks to the edge [ 30]. The main considerations are whether terminal devices will
offload, how much they will offload and to which nodes they will offload. Computing offloading
solves theproblemsofinsufficientresourcesand highenergy consumptionin terminaldevices.
Traditional methods of computing offloading applied to cloud computing are based on many
assumptions, including that the default server has sufficient computing power and does not care
about its energy consumption or network condition. However, traditional methods based on
the above assumptions are not suitable for solving the computing offloading in EC where edge
devices and servers have limited computing capabilities [ 31]. Reasonable computing offloading
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.