184:20 H.Huaetal.
through a local differential privacy method [ 126]. This approach ensures that the data is used to
themaximum extentwhile protectingtheprivacyin EC.
3.3.5 Resource Allocation Optimization. DRL has been proven to be capable of handling dy-
namic decision problems with high-dimensional states and action spaces [ 127]. At present, some
studieshave focusedon DRLtosolve theresourceallocationprobleminEC.
The method in Reference [ 77] captures the fact that the EC environment state is constantly
changing. The information about wireless channel conditions, each node’s trust value, the con-
tents in the cache, and the vacant computational capacity is passed to the DNN to estimate the
Q-function. The network operator’s revenue is regarded as the reward, and the agent trains the
DNN through the obtained reward. It avoids local convergence by adjusting the learning rate. Al-
though this method has a good effect, there is still room for improvement in convergence and
performance.
Although the study above proves that DQN has a good performance in optimizing dynamic
decisionproblemswithhigh-dimensionalstatespace,therearestillsomelimitationswhensolving
problemsbasedonhigh-dimensionalactionspace.Therefore,Chenetal.[ 127]proposeanewDRL-
basedresourceallocationdecisionframeworkthatmakesthefollowing two contributions:
•The framework uses DNN to train with a self-supervised training process to predict the
resourceallocationaction,withthetrainingdatageneratedbythe MonteCarlotreesearch
(MCTS)[128] algorithm;
•The authors modify the last layer of the traditional DNN used to estimate Q-function, so
thatit cansupporthigher-dimensionalactionspace.
The experiment proves that compared with the method of directly using DQN, this method has
reducedthedelay by 51.71%.
3.4 Summary
In this section, we first explain the mutual benefit between AI and EC. Then, we introduce AI
algorithms(especiallytraditionalML,DL,RL,andDRL)indetail.Finally,fromtheperspectivesof
taskscheduling,resourceallocation,privacyprotectionandsecurity,theresearchresultsofusing
AIalgorithmstooptimizetheperformanceofECarereviewed.Inthefuture,consideringthatthe
EC is faced with large-scale computing tasks, it would be very important to combine the multi-
dimensional perspectives of network, computing, power allocation, and task scheduling for real-
timejointoptimization.Todealwiththesecomplexoptimizationproblems,itisapotentialresearch
directionthatusesthemodel-free methodofAI algorithms tolearn efficientstrategies[ 11].
4 APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE UNDER EDGE COMPUTING
Inrecentyears,AIhasmademanyachievementsinvariousfields.Amongthem,smartcity,smart
manufacturing, and the IoV usually have more critical requirements for network delay and sta-
bility than other scenarios such as AR/VR, online gaming, or content distribution. Unfortunately,
traditional cloud computing often fails to guarantee these requirements. Some researchers have
started using EC to provide computing and storage resources on edge. To emphasize the advan-
tages of EC in AI applications, this section will focus on summarizing the research results of AI
applicationsinsmart city,smart manufacturing,andtheIoV undertheECframework.
This section summarize the existing research from the perspective of EC hierarchical architec-
ture. The categorization of EC architecture, together with the corresponding target field and AI
(ML)algorithm, aredetailedin Table 2.
In this article, different EC architectures used in AI applications are summarized into three
categories with detailed explanation and analysis. The three modes are: (a) the edge side is only
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.