EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:27
Fig. 6. A typical structure of IoV [ 146]. In this architecture, the edge is composed of roadside units with
certain computing capabilities, so computing tasks on vehicles can be offloaded directly to roadside units
for processinginsteadof offloadingintothedistantcloud [ 146].
algorithm [ 151] for the online optimization of task offloading decision to adapt to the dynamic
changes of the vehicular network. Edge nodes will first distribute the trained decision model to
thesurroundingvehicles,andthenuploadthedecisionmodelonlineaftervehicles’completelearn-
ing. To improve the performance of resource allocation and management, the prediction of wire-
less channel parameters is a very important means. Liu et al. [ 152] use LSTM to excel in spatio-
temporalcorrelationin channelparametersand proposea wirelesschannelparameterprediction
model based on LSTM and EC to optimize resource allocation and task scheduling in vehicular
network.
InIoV,energyconsumptionisahugeobstaclethatrestrictsitsdevelopment.However,thestud-
ies mentioned above fail to consider the issue of energy consumption while making optimal of-
floading decisions. Yang et al. [ 53] put forward a joint optimization problem consisting of power
control,userassociation,andresourceallocationtominimize energyconsumptioninIoV.Finally,
thefeasiblesolutionofthisproblemisobtainedbyanalgorithmbasedonfuzzyc-meansclustering
thatallows onedata pointto join multipleclusters.
4.3.2 Improving On-board Experience. The maturity and application of autonomous driving
technology will bring more free time to passengers and drivers in the future. This will increase
passengersanddrivers’demandforon-boardentertainment,suchaslisteningtomusic,watching
videos,andmore[ 153].Theseon-boardentertainmentactivitieshaveextremelyhighrequirements
for network latency, so implementing these computing-intensive applications in a connected ve-
hiclewithlimitedresourcesisfacinggreatchallenges[ 154].Thesechallengesincludehowtoeffi-
ciently cachenetworkcontentand howtoefficientlyscheduletasksand allocateresources.
Thetraditionalcontentcachingmethodistocachethecurrentpopularcontentinroadsideunits
in advance, but this also causes a waste of storage resources. To coordinate passenger experience
and content caching costs, Hou et al. [ 153] propose a Q-learning-based caching strategy under
the EC architecture. The action of this caching strategy consists of two parts, one is the cache
amount, and the other is the roadside units to which the content is cached. The reward of this
caching strategy is the elapsed time of transmitting the content required by the user. In addition,
thisarticleusesLSTMtopredictthedrivingdirectionofthevehicletobetterselectroadsideunits.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.