184:6 H.Huaetal.
mostsensorsarecorrect[ 23].Puttingtheseworthlessdataintothecloudwillcauseahugewaste
ofcloud serverresourcesanda wasteof networkbandwidth.
2.1.3 PrivacyandSecurity. Cloudcomputinghasoutsourcingfeatures.Usersneedtohostlocal
data to the cloud when using cloud computing. This leads to a series of data security and privacy
issues [21]. The data loss during long-distance transmission between devices and the cloud can
damagetheintegrityandaccuracyofthedata.Inaddition,highlycentralizedcomputingandstor-
age can also become serious problems. When one device in a centralized system goes wrong due
to benign errors or malicious attacks, other devices will be negatively affected. The data privacy
problemreferstothetheftandutilizationbyotherunauthorizedpersons,companiesororganiza-
tions. Actually, data owners have lost control of their data uploaded to the cloud, so it is difficult
toguaranteedataprivacy[ 24].
2.2 The Definition of Edge Computing
TheoriginofECcanbetracedbackto1999whenAkamaiproposed contentdeliverynetworks
(CDN)for web page caching near the clients, aiming to improve the efficiency of web page load-
ing[25].TheconceptofECwasborrowedfromthecloudcomputinginfrastructuretoexpandthe
conceptof CDN[ 26].
EC now has many different definitions. For example, Openstack defines EC as a model that
provides application developers and service providers with cloud services and IT environmental
services at the edge of the network [ 27]. In Reference [ 28], the authors believe that the “edge” in
EC refers to any computing and network resources between the data source and the cloud, such
as smart phones, gateways, micro data center, and cloudnet. It can also be understood that EC
offloadssome cloudresourcesand taskstotheedge nearusersanddata sources.
It should be noted that EC cannot replace the roles and advantages of cloud computing due to
the indispensable computing power and storage capacity of the cloud. The emergence of EC is
to make up for the limitations of cloud computing, and the relationship between EC and cloud
computing should be complementary. Therefore, how to coordinate the relationship between the
cloud and the edge so that the two can cooperate more efficiently and securely is a problem that
needstobestudied.
EC’s general architecture is three-layered, as shown in Figure 2,w h i c ha r ee n d ,e d g e ,a n d
cloud[29].
•End.This layer has two main functions. The first is to perceive the world, which is to ob-
serve, obtain and digitize the information of the physical world. This function is completed
byvarioustypesofsensors,suchasspeedsensorsonsmartcars,orcamerasinsmartcities.
The second is to receive information or data from the edge or cloud and perform the cor-
responding tasks. Data obtained from the end is processed by the edge and the cloud, and
then the results will be fed back to the end according to user needs, such as control signals
in smart driving or video traffic accepted by smartphones. Devices in this layer may have
somebutvery limited computingand storagecapabilities.
•Edge.Theedgelayerisbetweenthecloudandtheend.Thislayercontainscertaincomputing,
storage, and network resources, so some tasks that were originally performed in the cloud
canbedelegatedtothislayerforexecution.Sincethislayerisclosertoenddevices,EChas
the advantages of low latency. Generally, the edge layer is composed of gateways, control
units,storageunits,and computingunits.
•Cloud.This layer actually refers to cloud servers that has been widely used in practice. In
additiontoitspowerfulcomputingandstoragecapabilities,thecloudalsohastheabilityto
macro-controltheentireECarchitecture.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.