184:24 H.Huaetal.
Fig.5. Atypicalstructureofsmartenergymanagementinsmartcity[ 140].Thearchitecturemainlyincludes
threeparts:(1)cloudwithcentralcontrolcapabilityandpowerfulcomputingresources;(2)edgeseverswith
local energy control through data analysis; (3) energy devices deployed at the terminal, including users,
energy-producingand energy-consumingequipment, sensors,andsoon.
Forexample,tomeetthecity’sdemandforenergy,energycompaniesneedtoproduceexcesselec-
tricity to ensure continuous energy supply to the city. This leads to a certain degree of waste of
energy [138]. In the era of big data, a large number of sensors deployed in various corners of the
city can obtain data related to energy consumption in real time. These data include population
density, electricity usage, and a wealth of environmental information that helps predict energy
consumptionandenergymanagement.Inaddition,applyingAIalgorithmtoenergymanagement
has greater advantages than traditional methods [ 139]. Under these conditions, the introduction
of EC and AI can make energy consumption prediction and energy management faster and more
accurate.AtypicalEC-basedsmartcity energymanagement architectureis showninFigure 5.
Real-time energy management decisions require dynamic predictions of energy consumption.
However, the complexity and diversity of energy data and the dynamic nature of IoT data make
it rather difficult to build an effective energy prediction system. In response to this problem, Liu
etal.[140]designanEC-basedenergymanagementframeworkforreducingenergyconsumption
incities.Underthisframework,theauthorsproposetwoDRL-basedenergyschedulingstrategies:
•Edge DRL :modeltrainingandreasoningtasksare executedontheedge;
•Cooperative DRL : model training tasks are executed in the cloud, and dynamic energy man-
agement isimplemented ontheedge sidebasedon modelsobtainedfromthecloud.
The authors prove by experiment that cloud-edge collaboration works best in terms of energy
consumption, followed by the method of deploying AI algorithms only on the edge side, and the
worstisthemethodofdeployingAIalgorithmsonlyonthecloud[ 138].ThisalsoindicatesthatEC
isnotasubstituteforcloudcomputing,andtherelationshipbetweenthetwoshouldbesynergistic
andcomplementary.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.