EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:9
Fig. 3. Mutually beneficial relationship between AI and EC. The right-to-left arrow indicates that the opti-
mization and development of EC require the assistance of AI algorithms (e.g., computation offloading opti-
mization).Theleft-to-rightarrowindicatesthatECneedstobedeployedclosertoterminaldevicestomeet
therequirements of somelatency-sensitiveAI applications (e.g., smart city).
3.1 Motivations of Combining Edge Computing and Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence is a very critical technology in the era of big data. It brings intelligence and
reasoning capabilities to a large number of terminal devices in IoT. At present, many studies and
applicationshavecombinedthetwohotareasofAIandEC,andtheirmotivationscanberoughly
divided intotwo aspects:
•Theoptimization anddeployment of ECrequirestheassistanceof AI algorithms;
•EC provides necessary computing functions for AI applications that need to be deployed
close toterminaldevicesfor low latencyand highnetworkstability[ 47].
ItcanbeseenthatthedevelopmentofAIandECismutuallybeneficial(seeFigure 3forastraight-
forward description), and the combined development of the two has attracted the attention of
many researchers.
3.1.1 Edge Computing Benefits Artificial Intelligence. In detail, EC brings benefits to the appli-
cation of AI. With the advent of the big data era, the widespread application of AI in people’s
daily lives has become an irresistible trend. Of course, this trend still faces challenges. For exam-
ple, AI’s reasoning and training requires strong computing power and sufficient energy support,
but terminal devices often do not meet these two requirements. In recent years, cloud computing
hasfulfilledtheseneedsbyoffloadingAImodeltrainingandreasoningtasksthatterminaldevices
cannot perform to the cloud server. However, relying solely on cloud computing will cause prob-
lemslikeinsufficientbandwidthandhighlatencywhenalargenumberofAImodelsareusedbya
largenumberofterminaldevices[ 48].WiththeadventofEC,AIcanbedeployednearterminalde-
vicesandusersontheedgeandterminalwithcertaincomputingresourcesandstorageresources,
thereforemeetingtheneedsfor low latencyand highnetworkstability[ 11].
Inreturn,ECalsobringsthreeideastotheapplicationofAIinotherfields(visuallyrepresented
by Figure 4).
(a) Massive data are preprocessed and then uploaded to the cloud for AI training and reason-
ing[49].Althoughthisideahasgreatlyreducedthepressureofmassivedataonbandwidth
and transmission costs, it does not meet the requirements of many applications in terms of
latency (e.g.,IoV andAR/VRapplications).
(b) To reduce the latency of applications, AI reasoning tasks are performed on the edge or the
end, whilemodeltrainingtasksarestillperformedinthecloud [ 50].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.