184:10 H.Huaetal.
Fig.4. HierarchicalmodesfordeployingAIinEC.Thefigureisdividedintothreepartsbytwoverticaldotted
lines,whichcorrespondtothreehierarchicalmodes.Neuralnetworksandcylindersrepresenttrainingtasks
andreasoningtasks,respectively.(a)Theleftmostpartdescribesthatbothtrainingandreasoningtasksare
deployedinthecloud.(b)Thebluepartinthemiddledescribesthatthetrainingtasksareperformedinthe
cloud, but the reasoning tasks are performed in both cloud and edge. The red part in the middle describes
that the training tasks are in the cloud, while the reasoning tasks are performed completely on the edge.
(c)Thebluepartintherightmostpartindicatesthatbothtrainingandreasoningtasksaredeployedinboth
cloudand edge. Theredpart describes thetrainingand reasoningtasksperformedonlyonthe edge.
(c) Delegate part or all of AI training and reasoning tasks to the edge [ 51]. With distributed
characteristics,thisideahelpsenhancethelocationawarenessofAImodelswhilereducing
thelatencyandbandwidthpressure[ 33].Notethattherequirementsforenergyconsumption
and computing power of edge devices will also increase as the number of tasks devolved to
theedgeside increases.
Ascanbeseenfromtheabove,thesethreeideashavetheirownadvantagesanddisadvantages,so
existingstudiesare more inclinedto choosethebestidea accordingtothespecificsituation.
3.1.2 ArtificialIntelligenceBenefitsEdgeComputing. AIisplayinganimportantroleintheopti-
mizationofEC[ 52].SinceECisdistributedandtheworkloadofeachedgedevicechangesdynam-
ically with time and location, this uncertainty and unpredictability have brought huge obstacles
to the application of EC. In this sense, EC still needs to be optimized and improved in many as-
pects, such as optimizing computing offloading, optimizing resource allocation, reducing latency
andenergy consumption,and improvinguserexperience.
Many optimization problems in EC are very complex non-convex problems. As the number of
devices and usersincreases,the scale of theseproblems willalso rapidly increase[ 53]. Compared
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.