184:28 H.Huaetal.
Incontrast,themethodofReference[ 155]imposesthetaskofcontentcachingonbothroadside
unitsandvehicles.ItusesacollaborativemodelbasedonQ-learningvehiclesandroadsideunitsfor
contentcachingandcomputationdistribution.Thismodelcanmakefulluseofthelimitedstorage
and computing resources of vehicles. In other words, the system will select vehicles and roadside
units to perform the tasks of caching and computing according to the position and direction of
motion of the car requesting the service. If the vehicles and roadside units around the car cannot
meet their requirements, then the cache and calculation tasks will be handed over to the base
station.
Aiming at the challenges of executing compute-intensive applications on cars with limited re-
sources, Ning et al. [ 154] first use finite-state Markov chains to model vehicle-to-infrastructure
communication and computing states and then express the resource allocation and task schedul-
ingstrategyasa goal to maximize users’ quality of experience (QoE) .
4.3.3 Improving Vehicle Intelligence. In addition to the macro-control of resource allocation, it
isalsoanimportantresearchdirectiontogiveAItechnologytovehicleintelligenceundertheEC
architecture [ 156]. For example, Ferdowsi et al. [ 157] propose an EC architecture that integrates
DL to handle complex vehicle and traffic information. The architecture enables functions such as
vehicleautomaticcontrolanddrivingrouteanalysis.ThisarchitectureusesdifferentDLalgorithms
accordingto thecharacteristicsof different problems:
•RestrictedBoltzmannmachinesareusedtoprocesscomplexdatain intelligenttransporta-
tion systems(ITS) ;
•CNNand LSTMare usedtoperformreal-time analysisof road conditions;
•Bi-RNNisusedto predictdriver behavior;
•LSTMis usedtoensuredatatransmissionsecurity.
The increasing number of vehicles aggravates the problem of traffic jam. Traffic scheduling is a
very effective way to deal with this problem. However, due to the large number of vehicles and
the scale of road network, the number of routes that vehicles can choose increases exponentially.
Therefore,itisnotfeasibletousecentralizedcontrollerforrouteplanning.Basedonthisproblem,
a distributed cooperative routing algorithm based on evolutionary game theory is proposed in
Reference[ 158].Eachedgenodedeploysa roadsideunit(RSU) ,inwhichnormalRSUisrespon-
sible for collecting traffic information, and game RSU controls nearby vehicles through proposed
evolutionarygame strategy.
4.3.4 Challenges. ThecombinationofECandIoVimprovestheresponsespeedofvehiclesched-
uling and control, which further promotes the vehicle intelligence. However, there are still some
challenges [ 159]. For example, when the vehicle is moving at a high speed, its communication
connection needs to be switched between different edge servers, which may lead to a series of
problems, such as disconnection or the degradation of user experience. In addition, one of the
cores of IoV systems is resource sharing between different vehicles. As a result, how to set a rea-
sonableincentivemechanismtoencourageparticipantstoshareresourcesisvital.Finally,resource
sharingwillalsobringsome dataprivacyand securityissues[ 160].
4.4 Summary
Table2summarizes the research works of combining EC with three different AI application sce-
narios. Apparently, these works adopt different AI algorithms and EC architectures in different
scenarios according to their respective requirements for response speed, privacy, and so on, to
maximize theperformanceof theAI models.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.