EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:19
stackedautoencodertoscreentherealvaluablefeaturesandthenusessoftmaxtodoclassification.
This method shows great advantages in the aspects of availability, scalability and effectiveness
compared with traditional ML algorithms. However, the authors fail to take into account the im-
provementofthedetectionrateofnewattacks.Thiscanbesolvedbyunsupervisedlearning.The
DL-based algorithm proposed in Reference [ 120] learns the characteristics of the attack through
the deep belief network and uses the softmax function to identify various attacks on the EC. The
differenceisthatthissolutionincorporatesunsupervisedlearningrestrictedBoltzmannmachines
intotheproposedmodel.SinceunsupervisedlearningrestrictedBoltzmannmachinesisastochas-
ticartificialneuralnetworkwithactivelearningcharacteristics,thismodelenablesactivelearning
to improve therecognitionrateofattacksthathaveneveroccurredbefore.
3.3.4 DataPrivacy. Toacertainextent,ECreducestheriskofprivacyleakagecausedbyupload-
ingdatatocloudserversthatuserscannotcontrol.However,theproblemofdataprivacyleakage
alsoexistsontheedgeside.Ontheonehand,thedistributednatureofECbringsnewchallengesto
privacyprotection.Ontheotherhand,theapplicationofAIontheedgesiderequiresmassivedata
formodeltrainingandreasoning,whichareinevitablymixedwithalargeamountofuserprivacy.
During the training process, some models may save part of the training set with private data, so
an attacker can illegally obtain users’ privacy by analyzing these models [ 121]. Consequently, it
isveryimportanttoensurethedataprivacyandsecurityofedge-sideuserswithoutaffectingthe
performanceofEC.Thistopichasattractedtheattentionofmany researchersin recentyears.
Post-decisionstatelearning. Apost-decisionstate(PDS) learningmethodisproposedinRefer-
ence[122],inwhichthestatetransitionfunctionisfactoredintoknownandunknowncomponents.
This method first uses the Markov decision process to describe EC’s offloading problem and then
solves the problem by combining PDS-learning technique with the traditional deep Q-network
algorithm. This combination can well balance task scheduling and privacy protection. It is worth
noting that compared with the traditional deep Q-network, the new algorithm can speed up the
model training by learning some additional information (such as the energy utilization of edge
devices).
Federatedlearning. Aprivacy-preservingasynchronousFLmechanism(PAFLM) forECis
proposed, which allows multiple edge nodes to realize more efficient FL without sharing private
dataandaffectinginferenceaccuracy[ 81].Becausethelocalmodeltrainingofeachnodedepends
onthedatainsidethenodetoalargeextent,itiseasiertoleadtolocaloptimum.ThroughFL,the
local model can be optimized with the help of the model parameters of other nodes, which can
solve localoptimumproblemandimprove theaccuracyofmodel.
Differentialprivacy. ToprotecttheuserprivacyinthetrainingdatasetunderEC,AIalgorithms
are usually combined with differential privacy, a system where including or excluding any piece
of data will not change the results of related data analysis to a great extent [ 123]. In other words,
by applying differential privacy, observers cannot tell from its output if any particular piece of
information has been used [ 123]. Du et al. [ 124] propose two AI-based algorithms that satisfy
differential privacy: objective perturbation algorithm and output perturbation algorithm. The dif-
ference between the two is that objective perturbation adds Laplace noise to objective functions,
while output perturbation adds the noise to outputs. By injecting Laplace noise, ML algorithms
show better efficiency and accuracy in prediction, and they are more effective in protecting the
privacy of training data used in EC. Similarly, a deep reasoning framework based on differential
privacy,calledEdgeSanitizer,isproposedinReference[ 125].Theframeworkusesasmuchuseful
informationaspossiblewithaDL-baseddataminimizationmethod.Thenitremovesasmuchsen-
sitive private information as possible from data sets by adding random noise to the original data
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.