EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:23
Next, we will summarize existing urban medical and residents’ health works that use EC to
improve AI algorithms in terms of remote diagnosis and early warning of diseases, infectious
diseasepreventionand control,andsmart assessment.
Remotediagnosisandearlywarning. Muhammadetal.[ 133]proposeavoicedisorderassessment
and treatment system. The sound data collected by the system is pre-processed by edge devices
before being uploaded to the cloud. The system configures the CNN model to the edge server, so
thattheedgesidehasthecapabilityofvoicedisorderdetectionandclassification.Comparedwith
the method without EC architecture in Reference [ 134], this method has lower latency and can
effectively reduce the pressure on network bandwidth. However, this system still needs to send
thediagnosis toa humanexpert,andthehuman expertdecidesthetreatmentplan.
Forsomediseasesthatarenoteasytodetectatanearlystageandthosethatcanbebesttreated
in the early stages of the disease (e.g., lung cancer), the patient’s survival can be significantly
extended if a patient is diagnosed and treated early in the disease [ 135]. To improve the early
diagnosisrateandaccuracyoflungcancer,alungcancerdiagnosissystembasedonECandAIis
proposedin Reference [ 135]. This systemcan not only improve the early accuracyof lung cancer
but also improve the efficiency and security of diagnosis. In the future, how to combine EC and
AIalgorithmstodiagnosediseasesandgeneratecorrespondingtreatmentplanswithoutahuman
doctoris avaluable researchdirection.
Infectious disease prevention and control. The use of EC’s powerful location awareness feature
caneffectivelystrengthenthepreventionandcontrolofinfectiousdiseases.Thehealthcareframe-
work proposed in Reference [ 51] can diagnose whether a user has been infected by Kyasanur
forestdiseaseandcanmapoutareaswhereinfectiousdiseasesarelikelytooccuronthemap.The
network edge near the data source in this structure is responsible for data preprocessing, model
trainingandreasoning.Tomoreaccuratelyidentifyinfectedpeopleandoutbreak-proneareas,this
layer incorporates a classifier called EO-NN, which combines hybridization of the extremal op-
timization (EO) and theneural networks (NN) . Once a new infected person is detected,it will
inform the infected person and nearby hospitals immediately. With the distributed nature of EC,
thesystemhastheability toidentify areaspronetoinfectiousdiseases.
Smart assessment. Residents’ daily dietary structure management is also an important part of
urban medical care, which also plays an important role in the prevention of diseases. Based on
foodimagerecognition,Liuetal.[ 49]proposeadietaryassessmentsystemunderanECarchitec-
ture.Theedgelayerbetweenendusersandthecloudcanminimizetheresponsetimeandenergy
consumption, and the CNN algorithm can improve the accuracy of recognition. Compared to the
previous system in Reference [ 136], which is only suitable for small data computing tasks, this
systemhastheability toperformlarge-scale datacomputingtasks.
Challenges. Medicaldiagnosisneedsaccuratejudgment,whichrequiresAIalgorithmstoextract
all useful information from big data. However, the useful information that can be obtained by
existing algorithms is rather limited. For supervised learning, manual labeling of data may also
leadtounknownmistakes.Inaddition,thedataacquisitionsystemofsmartmedicalinthefuture
willbemainlydeployedonwearabledevices.Toquicklyanalyzeandrespondtothecollecteddata,
it is also an important direction to deploy AI model to these wearable devices [ 136], which poses
agreatchallengetotheenergysupplyofdevices.Howtobalancetheaccuracyandlightweightof
AI models is adirectionworthyof studying[ 137].
4.1.3 Urban Energy Management. The trend of urbanization is also prompting the rapid in-
creaseofenergyconsumptionincities.Thisposesmanychallengesforurbanenergymanagement.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.