EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:17
is applied to solve the optimal computing offloading decision to reduce the energy consumption
and latencyof EC.
TheDRL-basedmethodsmentionedaboveuseacentralizedstyleformodellearning.However,
there is a potential assumption in this style that edge devices in EC have sufficient computing
power. In fact, many edge devices do not yet have such powerful computing capabilities. As a
result,Renetal.proposeadistributedcomputingoffloadingstrategycombiningfederatedlearning
andmultipleDRLs[ 96].Itisprovedbyexperimentsthatthismethodoutperformsthecentralized
learning method in reducing the transmission cost in EC. In addition, distributed learning also
has the advantage of fast convergence [ 97]. This is proved in Reference [ 98] by the method of
optimizing computingoffloadingthroughdistributedML.
3.3.2 Non-computation Offloading Methods to Reduce Energy Consumption. EC provides cer-
tain computing capabilities near the data source, so that many computing tasks do not need to
be delivered to the cloud for execution. While this model brings high response speed to people,
it will inevitably cause a surge in energy consumption on the edge side. Moreover, many applica-
tionsinECrequireAIalgorithmstomakereal-timedecisions(suchasintelligentdriving[ 99]and
intelligentmonitoringsystems[ 100]),butAIalgorithmsarecomputationallyintensivetovarying
degrees. This is a huge challenge for devices with limited power. From the perspective of overall
energy consumption, with the gradual popularization and widespread application of AI, how to
controlglobaloverallenergy consumptionor improve energyefficiencyisalso veryimportant.
Apart from computation offloading, there are many other factors that affect the energy con-
sumption of edge devices. For example, different AI algorithms and different hardware structures
adoptedbyedgedeviceswillalsoaffectenergyconsumption[ 101].WewillintroduceAIsolutions
toreduceECenergyconsumptionintermsofoptimizinghardwarestructure,controllingoperating
status,and combiningenergy Internet.
Optimizing hardware structure. Astatic random access memory (SRAM) [102] is able to re-
duce memory data throughput, and it combines parallel CNNs to enable simultaneous access to
different memory blocks. Experiments show that this architecture significantly reduces energy
consumption compared to traditional digital accelerator using small bitwidths. Based on field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) [103], Lammie et al. [ 104] design a binarized DNN accelera-
tor for weed species classification, which reduces energy consumption by 7 times compared with
GPU-basedacceleratorunderthesameconditions.Theauthorsbelievethatwell-cultivatedFPGA-
based accelerator for AI algorithms is an ideal choice for edge devices with limited resources but
needto performlearningandreasoningtasks.
Controlling operating status. Sun et al. propose a method based on DRL to reduce the medium
andlong-termenergyconsumptionofECbycontrollingthecommunicationmodesofuserdevices
and the light-on state of processors [ 105]. This method uses Markov process to model the energy
consumptionofcachestatesandcloudprocessorsandDRLtomakedecisions.Accordingtosome
constraints(qualityofserviceconstraints,transmissionpowerconstraints,andthecomputingca-
pabilityconstraintinthecloud),themethodusesaniterativealgorithmtooptimizetheprecoding
of userdevices.
Combining Energy Internet. EC has distributed characteristics, and the workload of edge-side
deviceswilldynamicallychangewithdifferentgeographicallocationsandtimes,whichmakesthe
energy consumption of each edge node unpredictable and uneven. To deal with the huge energy
demand of EC and its heterogeneity, the combination of energy Internet (including smart grid
and microgrid) with EC can provide renewable energy for EC [ 70,106]. Energy Internet is a dis-
tributed energy production model that achieves local energy self-sufficiency by making full use
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.