184:16 H.Huaetal.
Table 1. Continued
Problem Goal Citation AI Contribution
[122] Deep PDS-Learning Speed up thetraining with
additionalinformation(e.g., the
energy utilizationofedge
devices)
Privacy
protection[124] Generative
adversarial networksAnobjective perturbation
algorithmandanoutput
perturbationalgorithmthat
satisfy differential privacy
[125] Adeep inference
frameworkcalled
EdgeSanitizerDatacan beused tothe
maximumextent,while
ensuring privacyprotection
[77] Deep Q-learning Derive trust valuesusing
uncertainreasoning;avoidlocal
convergence by adjusting the
learningrate
Resource
allocation
optimization[166] Actor-criticRL AnadditionalDNNtorepresent
aparameterizedstochastic
policytofurtherimprove
performanceandconvergence
speed; a naturalpolicygradient
methodtoavoid local
convergence
[76] DRL-basedresource
allocationschemeAdditionalSDNtoimproveQoS
[127] Multi-taskDRL Transform thelastlayerof
DNNthatestimatesQ-function
tosupporthigherdimensional
actionspaces
The curse-of-dimensionality refers to the problem that the complexity of the problem solving
will increase at an exponential speed as the dimensionality increases [ 90,91]. To solve the curse-
of-dimensionality problem, Xu et al. [ 91] propose an algorithm that uses the special structure of
statetransitionsoftheconsideredECsystemtoovercomethecurse-of-dimensionalityproblem.It
is worth noting that the authors use energy harvesting [ 92] to reduce the consumption of tradi-
tionalenergybyfullyutilizingrenewableenergy,butthetransmissiondelaymodelandtheenergy
consumptionmodelarerequiredtobeknown(thisrequirementcanbeeliminatedbythemethod
proposedin Reference[ 93]).
Compared with RL algorithms, DRL algorithms have stronger abilities to deal with high-
dimensional state space. Therefore, Cheng et al. [ 94] propose a model-free DRL-based comput-
ing offloading method based on a space-air-ground integrated network to reduce EC latency and
energy consumption. This method uses Markov decision process to represent the computing of-
floadingdecisionprocess,andusesDRLto learnnetworkdynamics.
YettheabilityofDRLalgorithmstocopewithhigh-dimensionalstatespaceisnotperfectinev-
eryrespect.Chenetal.[ 95]proposeanewDNNmodelbasedonfunctionapproximator,andthey
alsoadoptdoubledeepQ-networksothattheoptimaloffloadingstrategycanbediscoveredwith-
out prior knowledge. Similarly, Lei et al. [ 10] propose a new type of value function approximator
to deal with high-dimensional state equations. The authors also use an infinite-horizon average-
reward continuous-time Markov decision process to represent the optimal problem. Finally, DRL
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.