EdgeComputing withArtificial Intelligence: A MachineLearningPerspective 184:25
Challenges. Therapidgrowthofthenumberofedgedevicesdeployedtocitieshasexacerbated
theglobalenergycrisisandglobalwarming.Onewaytoalleviatethisproblemistouserenewable
energytopoweredgedevices.Consideringthatedgedevicesarescatteredindifferentlocationsof
thecity,theenergyconsumptionoftraditionalenergycanbegreatlyreducedbyusingdistributed
renewable energy generation devices. However, this solution still faces many challenges, such as
how to minimize the consumption of traditional energy while ensuring the normal operation of
edgedevices,andhowtoestablishacomplementarypowersystemfordifferentedgedevices[ 140].
As a control center in EI system, energy router needs certain computing power [ 141,142]. There-
fore,it isalso afeasibleidea tocombine energy routerwithEC infutureresearch.
4.2 Smart Manufacturing
Introducing EC and AI in industrial production can maximize the use of hardware devices and
theuseofdistributedcomputingandstorageresources.Thecombinationofthetwoalsoachieves
efficient and secure resource management and task distribution, thereby greatly improving the
plant’sproductionefficiency,productionqualityand plantsafety[ 143,144].
Dynamic control. To improve the automation and intelligence of the real-time production con-
trolprocess,theauthorsofReference[ 143]proposeanintelligentrobotfactorysystemarchitecture
callediRobot-Factory.WiththeassistanceofEC,thearchitecturecandynamicallyadjustthecon-
figuration of the production line, collect and process a variety of data generated in the factory in
realtime,andidentifyandjudgebyAImeanstoachievemoreefficientfeedbackcontrol.Thearchi-
tecture shows great advantages over the traditional factory using cloud computing with respect
to network communication time delay and recognition rate. Different devices in the factory need
to cooperate with each other through groups to achieve swarm intelligence, not just each device
operatingindependently.Torealizeswarmintelligence,howtouseAIandECtechnologyinsmart
factoryisa new challenge.
Equipment monitoring. In terms of industrial production site safety, it is essential to monitor
the operating status of the machinery in the factory, since the quality issue of the machinery
will inevitably arise during long-term work. To detect the running status of the machine, Wu
et al. [50] propose an EC framework that includes a device layer, a local private edge cloud near
the device layer, and a remote public cloud. The framework uses powerful public cloud to train
the predictive model and then delegates the model to private edge cloud where online diagnostic
and prognosis tasks are performed. This reduces the delay to a certain extent and enhances the
accuracyof diagnosisand prognosis.
To better monitor and manage the equipment in the factory, it is important to clarify the type
and quantity of onsite equipment. In response to the high cost of manual classification methods,
a non-intrusive load monitoring system is proposed based on EC and LSTM [ 65]. In the system
architecture, the edge is responsible for data cleaning and feature selection, while the cloud with
the LSTM algorithm deployed analyzes power features uploaded by edge devices to classify and
countfield devices.
Defective product detection. In addition to ensuring the safety of factory equipment, some re-
searchershavealsoturnedtheirattentiontomonitorthequalityofproductsmoreaccuratelyand
efficiently. Li et al. [ 145] build a DL-based product quality classification system for production
qualitymonitoring,sothatproductswithqualitydefectscanbequicklydetectedontheedgeside.
The system deploys lower-level CNN layers at edge layers to capture defective products that are
moreeasilytoidentifyandhigh-levelCNNinthecloudtocapturedefectiveproductsthataredif-
ficulttoidentifywithedgelayers.Thisdesignimprovestheefficiencyandaccuracyofidentifying
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.