184:18 H.Huaetal.
ofrenewableenergysources[ 107,108].ThisfeatureofenergyInternetisverysuitableforprovid-
ing energy to EC, thereby reducing the consumption of non-renewable energy. Since renewable
energyisinfinite,reducingnon-renewableenergyconsumptionisalsoequivalenttoreducingen-
ergy consumption. However, due to the uncertainty of renewable energy production [ 109], some
studies[70,106]alsoaimtobalancetheenergysupplyanddemandofECthroughDRL-basedcon-
trolstrategies.WiththedeploymentofECdevicesintoenergyInternet,energymanagementwill
alsobecomemorecomplex[ 110].DRLcombinedwithcurriculumlearning[ 111]hasbeenusedto
realizea bottom-upenergy management scheme[ 110].
3.3.3 Security of Edge Computing. Delegating computing and storage tasks from the cloud to
the edge can reduce the security problems caused by network congestion and centralization to
someextent.However,thedistributedenvironmentofECalsobringsnewsecurityproblems,such
asdistributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks and jamming attacks that cause illegal distri-
bution of distributed system resources [ 33,112]. What was previously applicable to a centralized
environment (like cloud computing) is no longer applicable to solving these new security issues.
Inthispart,we willreview thestudieson improvingthesecurityof EC basedon AI algorithms.
Traditionalmachinelearningmethods. TraditionalMLcanhelpwiththeidentificationandclas-
sification of different attacks. In response to jamming attacks that threaten EC security, Wang
et al. [113] propose a stochastic game framework that maximizes the spectral efficiency through-
put by minimax-Q learning, thereby gradually learning the optimal strategy. The disadvantage
of this method is that it needs extra bandwidth to avoid jamming attacks. This can be avoided
by selecting the most reliable server based on online learning to reduce the security risks caused
by jamming attacks [ 114]. To reduce the false alarm rate and data transmission delay of tradi-
tionalintrusiondetectionsystems,analgorithmselectionmechanismcanbedeployedontheedge
side [115]. This enables intelligent selection of the optimal ML algorithm for edge devices to dis-
tinguish false alarms. The experimental results prove that the method based on AI algorithm can
improve thesecurityof ECmore effectivelythanthemethodbasedon non-AIalgorithm.
Amongvariousnetworkattacks,DDoSisarelativelycommonattackmethod.Hypergraphclus-
tering [116] can be adopted to model the relationship between edge nodes and DDoS to improve
the recognition rate [ 117]. Kozik et al. uses a single-layer neural network to build the extreme
learningmachineclassifier[ 112].Inthismethod,thetrainingtaskoftheattackdetectionclassifier
modelisperformedinthecloudwithpowerfulcomputingresources.Thetrainedclassifiermodel
isthenoffloadedtotheedgedevicesforattackdetection.Inaddition,experimentshavealsoproven
that the extreme learning machine classifier has faster convergence speed and stronger general-
ization performance than most traditional classification algorithms (such as SVM, or single-layer
perceptron).
DL methods. Although traditional ML algorithms can improve the accuracy and robustness
of network attack detection and recognition, they lack the ability of automatic feature extrac-
tion [118]. As a result, traditional AI algorithms are not sensitive to known but slightly changed
attacks. At the same time, due to the lack of prior knowledge of unknown vulnerabilities, they
can not effectively detect zero-day attacks [ 119]. Deep learning, however, has been successfully
applied in image processing, computer vision and many other fields in recent years because of
its structure that can automatically mine and learn the hidden features in massive data [ 63]. Re-
searchers begin to focus on DL, since the problem of cyber-security attack identification in EC is
similarto thetasksin thesefields.
Abeshu et al. [ 56] propose a DL-based method for attack detection in EC. To reduce the bur-
den of model training and improve the accuracy of the model, this method uses a pretrained
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 184.Publicationdate:January 2023.