repeat the process mtimes to get a more robust
prediction z. To mitigate the bias of one speciﬁc
f, we average the output of ndifferent prompt
formulas to get the ﬁnal prediction (Equation 4).
y=Pn
i=1zi
n(4)
4 Experimental Setup
Datasets We use the ECB+ dataset (Cybulska
and V ossen, 2014) as our input source, which con-
tains both within- and cross-document coreference
information for both event and entity mentions.
This dataset consists of 984 documents around 43
news topics, among which 196 documents are in
the development set. After preprocessing the data,
as described in Appendix B, our development set
consists of 172 documents.
To generate a preﬁx x0, we experiment with
three data sources: the training sets of WSC
(Levesque et al., 2012) and ECB+ (Cybulska and
V ossen, 2014), and a simple dataset that we man-
ually generated. The WSC dataset was used in
the research most similar to ours, T0 (Sanh et al.,
2021), which we compare against while using
much smaller pretrained LMs (i.e., GPT-2 and GPT-
Neo). As mentioned, ECB+ provides more natu-
ral and comprehensive references than WSC. Our
manually generated dataset uses 10 very simple
examples – allowing one to discern the impact on
performance.
When using the ECB+ dataset, we only consid-
ered pairs of mentions that are within the same
or successive sentences. When evaluating our
model, we considered all mention-pair combina-
tions, [m1;m2], within said sentences. Relying on
the gold mentions, we obtain a dataset with 17832
candidate mention pairs, among which 7:86% are
positive samples. Finally, we apply 5 prompt func-
tions from Sanh et al. to generate the full prompts.
Models We used three traditional CR models as
baselines: Multi-Pass Sieve (Lee et al., 2011), the
seminal end-to-end neural model ( e2e-coref ) (Lee
et al., 2017), and a SOTA extension (the Stream-
lining model) (Cattan et al., 2020). Respectively,
these models represent three categories: a rules-
based model, a supervised model trained on a dif-
ferent dataset, and a supervised model trained on
the same dataset. In terms of implementations, we
use the CoreNLP toolkit for the Multi-Pass Sieve
model (Manning et al., 2014) and AllenNLP (Gard-ner et al., 2018) for e2e-coref . Since there is no
publicly available pre-trained Streamlining model
(Cattan et al., 2020), we fully train the model from
scratch using a V100 GPU on Google Colab. To
fairly compare with other models, we set a 0:5
threshold for the pairwise scorer in the Streamlin-
ing model. We evaluate all models by their mention
pairwise scorers, not their clustering decisions.
Limited by our computational resources, we
choose GPT-2 and GPT-Neo-125M as our pre-
trained LMs1. During inference, the output token
length is set to 1, since our expected output is one
word (i.e., ‘Yes’ or ‘No’). To generate more ro-
bust results, the repetition parameter mis set to 5.
We ran our text generative models with multiple
temperature settings ranging from 0 to 1, none of
which produced signiﬁcant changes. We settled on
using a value of 0:7, to limit the greediness of the
generated responses. In terms of few-shot learning,
we experimented with k2 f0;2;4;10gand display
the results from the 4-shot setting since it produces
the best accuracy. To reduce bias introduced by pre-
ﬁxes, we ensure each preﬁx has equally-balanced
samples. For example, for the 4-shot setting, the
ﬁlled preﬁx will have 2 positive examples and 2
negative examples.
5 Results and Analysis
Yes/No Predictions
0-shot 5%
2-shot 93.7%
4-shot 96.2%
10-shot 98%
Table 1: Percentage of Yes/No predictions by GPT-2
We ﬁrst question if GPT-based models can pro-
duce valid answers. In Figure 1, we observe that
GPT-2 predicts ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ for over 93:7%sam-
ples when at least 2 ﬁlled preﬁxes are provided.
However, although the answers are valid, they
are inaccurate. In Figure 2, we plot the distribution
of predicted labels for each model, where the red
bars denote the distribution of positive examples
(ground truth), and the blue bars denote negative
ones (ground truth). Traditional CR models gen-
erally predict low values for negative examples,
indicated by blue bars being concentrated at 0. As
1Our code can be found at https://github.com/
AwesomeCoref/prompt-coref