Figure 1: An example of prompt-based learning for CR. The green block represents the preﬁx, which serves as the
description of the CR task and remains unchanged throughout an experiment for all inputs x. The purple block
is the unﬁlled prompt, which changes for each input xand serves as the prediction. Moreover, in each block, the
yellow part is the prompting function while the blue and red parts are the original data xandy, respectively.
ous supervised datasets into task-speciﬁc prompts,
including CR. Using the WSC dataset (Levesque
et al., 2012), they achieve over 60% accuracy. Al-
though this result is not comparable with super-
vised state-of-the-art (SOTA) models, it still offers
compelling results and suggests the model might
contain CR knowledge without requiring super-
vised training on the task. However, since the
WSC dataset only focuses on highly ambiguous
pronouns, it is not as complete as the standard CR
task that involves named and nominal mentions.
Traditional CR Models Similar to other NLP
tasks, most CR models can be categorized as being
either unsupervised or supervised. A commonly
used unsupervised model is the Multi-Pass Sieve
model (Lee et al., 2011). This rule-based system
extracts entity mentions and clusters them by ap-
plying 13 “ﬁlters” in successive manner. Amongst
supervised models, e2e-coref (Lee et al., 2017) is
the seminal end-to-end neural model. This model
performs within-document CR and was trained on
the OntoNotes (CoNLL-2012) dataset. Building
on this architecture, Cattan et al. (2020) performs
cross-document CR for entities and events by train-
ing on the ECB+ dataset and using RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019) as an encoder. Although supervised
models offer signiﬁcant improvements over unsu-
pervised models, they are expensive to train; most
SOTA models have O(n4)complexity, where nis
the length of each document.
3 Methodology
This section introduces our prompt-based learn-
ing method for CR. Typically, CR models can be
broken down into three sub-tasks: (1) detecting
mentions; (2) predicting whether two given men-
tions are coreferent or not; (3) and clustering men-tions accordingly. The crux of CR research centers
around the second part, which is also our focus.
Building on the approach introduced by
Sanh et al. (2021), we deﬁne our input xas
[text;m 1;m2]and output yas a binary label.
Speciﬁcally, m1andm2are a pair of gold men-
tions in a document, and the text are the sentences
containing those mentions. For example, in Fig-
ure 1, within each green box, the successive blue
parts aretext,m1,m2, respectively. We deﬁne
a prompting function f, which takes xas input
and produces a question prompt qx(Equation 1).
Further details about fare in Appendix A.
qx=f(x) (1)
Moreover, to allow the model to understand the
task, we use few-shot learning (Triantaﬁllou et al.,
2017) by constructing a ﬁlled preﬁx. In particular,
we selectkexamples,A, from the training dataset
and feed these examples into the same prompting
functionf. Then, we append the true label (‘Yes’
or ‘No’) to the outputs, yielding the ﬁlled preﬁx qA
(Equation 2). To be clear, each individual preﬁx
qi2kconstitutes a single green box in Figure 1.
qA=f(A) (2)
Last, adding the unﬁlled prompt qxto the ﬁlled
preﬁxqAwill give us the full prompt for data point
x. This allows us to get a prediction zwithout
updating any parameters in the pre-trained LM.
z=P(qA+qx;) (3)
Since we use pre-trained LMs directly, without
ﬁne-tuning, we do not have control over its output;
the model can generate invalid answers beyond
our desired outputs, ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. Therefore, we