What GPT Knows About Who is Who
Xiaohan Yang, Eduardo Peynetti, Vasco Meerman and Chris Tanner
Institute for Applied Computational Science
Harvard University
xiaohan yang@g.harvard.edu ,eduardo.peynetti@gmail.com ,
vmeerman@g.harvard.edu ,christanner@g.harvard.edu
Abstract
Coreference resolution – which is a cru-
cial task for understanding discourse and
language at large – has yet to witness
widespread beneﬁts from large language mod-
els (LLMs). Moreover, coreference resolu-
tion systems largely rely on supervised labels,
which are highly expensive and difﬁcult to an-
notate, thus making it ripe for prompt engineer-
ing. In this paper, we introduce a QA-based
prompt-engineering method and discern gen-
erative , pre-trained LLMs’ abilities and limita-
tions toward the task of coreference resolution.
Our experiments show that GPT-2 and GPT-
Neo can return valid answers, but that their ca-
pabilities to identify coreferent mentions are
limited and prompt-sensitive, leading to incon-
sistent results.
1 Introduction
Coreference resolution (CR) aims to identify and
cluster all words (i.e., mentions) that refer to the
same entity or event. Solving this task is essential
for natural language understanding, as mismatched
references will lead to bias. Recent improvements
in CR have been incremental (Lee et al., 2017;
Joshi et al., 2020; Cattan et al., 2020), compared
to other NLP tasks that have demonstrated more
real-world impact. One reason is the limited train-
ing corpora. For example, one of the primary
datasets, ECB+ (Cybulska and V ossen, 2014), con-
tains only 984 documents, including 6,833 men-
tions and 2,741 clusters. Moreover, this dataset
was built around 43 news topics ten years ago, po-
tentially leading to generalization problems for the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models.
When dealing with low-resource tasks, there is
an emerging trend to perform prompt engineering
with pre-trained LMs. Unlike ﬁne-tuning (Brown
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022), prompt engineering
does not update the pre-trained model’s weights
when completing the downstream task. Instead,one transforms the downstream task to match the
original task of the pre-trained model (Liu et al.,
2021). For example, for machine translation, one
can create prompts such as “English: I love bread.
French:” and input them to a generative LM (e.g.,
GPT-2). If the pre-trained model encountered sim-
ilar patterns during training, it should be able to
generate the translated French sentence. Neverthe-
less, to the best of our knowledge, there is scarce
research on applying this approach to coreference
resolution (Sanh et al., 2021).
To better understand if pre-trained LMs can help
resolve coreferences, we construct a QA-based
prompting method and experiment with both GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019) and GPT-Neo (Gao et al.,
2020). By using this prompting methodology, we
measure if these models can predict whether two
mentions are coreferent. For evaluation, we use
the ECB+ dataset, which provides gold mentions
and clustering labels. We compare the results with
unsupervised and supervised coreference resolu-
tion models, including a classic rule-based system
(Lee et al., 2011), the seminal end-to-end neural
model (Lee et al., 2017), and a recent SOTA model
(Cattan et al., 2020).
2 Related Work
Prompt-based learning Prompt-based learning
is a fast-growing area in NLP, as it can reduce
the need to ﬁne-tune models and rely on super-
vised labels. According to the survey by Liu et al.,
over 120 papers have been published since 2019,
which collectively demonstrates effectiveness to-
ward many different tasks: text classiﬁcation (Tam
et al., 2021; Holtzman et al., 2021), factual prob-
ing (Perez et al., 2021), question-answering (Tsim-
poukelli et al., 2021), and more. Nevertheless, to
the best of our knowledge, only one prompt-based
learning paper concerned CR. Speciﬁcally, Sanh
et al. introduces T0, a zero-shot generalization of
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). The authors convert vari-arXiv:2205.07407v1  [cs.CL]  16 May 2022