Lost in Pruning: The Effects of Pruning Neural Networks beyond Test Accuracy
Type Method Data-informed Sensitivity Scope
Unstructured WT: Weight Thresholding (Renda et al., 2020) 7jWijj Global
(Weights) SiPP: Sensitivity-informed Pruning (Baykal et al., 2019b) X/jWijaj(x)j Global
Structured FT: Filter Thresholding (Renda et al., 2020) 7kW:jk1Local
(Neurons/Filters) PFP: Provable Filter Pruning (Liebenwein et al., 2020) X/kW:ja(x)k1Local
Table 1: Overview of the pruning methods evaluated. Here, a(x)denotes the activation of the corresponding layer with
respect to a sample input xto the network.
Weight thresholding (WT) is a simple heuristic, originally
introduced by Han et al. (2015) and re-purposed by Renda
et al. (2020), that deﬁnes the sensitivity of a weight as the
magnitude of the weight. SiPP, on the other hand, is a data-
informed approach with provable guarantees to computing
weight sensitivities (Baykal et al., 2019b). The approach
uses a small batch of input points SP , e.g., from the
validation set, to evaluate the saliency of each network pa-
rameter. This is done by incorporating the corresponding
(sample) activations, a(x); x2S, along with the weight
into the importance computation (see Table 1).
Algorithm 1 PRUNE RETRAIN (ncycles,rprune,ntrain,train)
Input:ncycles: number of prune-retrain cycles; rprune: relative
prune ratio; ntrain: number of train epochs; train: training hyper-
parameters
Output:c: pruning mask, : parameters of the pruned network
1:0 RANDOM INIT()
2: TRAIN(0;ntrain;train)
3:c 1j0j.binary mask for the parameters
4:fori2[ncycles]do
5:c PRUNE (c;r prune).Prunerprune%of the remain-
ing parameters.
6: TRAIN(c;n train;train)
7:end for
8:returnc;
Structured pruning. The ﬁlter/neuron pruning ap-
proaches we consider follow a two-step strategy: (1) allocate
a per-layer prune ratio satisfying the overall prune ratio and
(2) prune the ﬁlters with lowest sensitivity in each layer.
We study Filter Tresholding (FT) as used by Renda et al.
(2020) and PFP (Liebenwein et al., 2020). FT, as originally
introduced by He et al. (2018); Li et al. (2016) and used
here analogous to Renda et al. (2020), uses the ﬁlter norm
to evaluate its sensitivity. Layer allocation is performed
manually and we deploy a uniform prune ratio across layers
to avoid further hyperparameters. PFP (Liebenwein et al.,
2020) is an extension of SiPP that evaluates ﬁlter sensitivity
as the maximum sensitivity of the channel in the next layer
(`1-norm of the corresponding weight sensitivity). PFP
uses the associated theoretical error guarantees to optimally
allocate the layer-wise budget.
Retraining. We retrain the network with the exact train-
ing hyperparameters as is common (Baykal et al., 2019b;
Liebenwein et al., 2020; Renda et al., 2020). Speciﬁcally,
we re-use the same learning rate schedule and retrain for
20.0% 40.0% 60.0% 80.0% 100.0%
Pruned Parameters-2.0%-1.0%0.0%+1.0% Delta Test Accuracy
resnet20, CIFAR10
PFP
FTSiPP
WTFigure 2: The accuracy of the generated pruned models
for the evaluated pruning schemes for various target prune
ratios using iterative ﬁne-tuning.
the same amount of epochs (Line 6 of Algorithm 1). After
retraining, we iteratively repeat the pruning procedure to
obtain even smaller networks (Lines 4-7 of Algorithm 1).
Prune results. Figure 2 shows an exemplary test accuracy
curve of a Resnet20 (CIFAR10) across different target prune
ratios for iterative pruning. The remaining prune results are
summarized in the supplementary material. We note while
PRUNE RETRAIN may be more computationally expensive
than other pruning pipelines, it is network-agnostic and pro-
duces state-of-the-art pruning results (Renda et al., 2020).
3.2 Experiments Roadmap
Our observations stem from multiple experiments that can
be clustered into one set of experiments pertaining to under-
standing the functional similarities (i.e., functional distance)
of pruned networks and one set pertaining to the prune po-
tential on a variety of image-based classiﬁcation tasks. First,
we compare subsets of pixels that are sufﬁciently informa-
tive for driving the network’s decision. For this, we use
the feature-wise (pixel-wise) selection mechanism of Carter
et al. (2019; 2020). We also investigate how pruned net-
works behave under `1-bounded random noise. Second, we
assess the ability of pruned networks to generalize to out-of-
distribution (o.o.d.) test data sets that contain random noise
(`1-bounded) and common corruptions (Hendrycks & Di-
etterich, 2019; Recht et al., 2018; 2019) including weather,
contrast, and brightness changes. In all experiments, we
compare the performance, i.e., the accuracy on the various
test sets, of pruned networks with those of their unpruned
counterparts as well as a separately trained unpruned net-
work. Each experiment is repeated 3 times and we report