LOST IN PRUNING : THEEFFECTS OF PRUNING NEURAL NETWORKS
BEYOND TEST ACCURACY
Lucas Liebenwein1Cenk Baykal1Brandon Carter1David Gifford1Daniela Rus1
ABSTRACT
Neural network pruning is a popular technique used to reduce the inference costs of modern, potentially overparam-
eterized, networks. Starting from a pre-trained network, the process is as follows: remove redundant parameters,
retrain, and repeat while maintaining the same test accuracy. The result is a model that is a fraction of the size of
the original with comparable predictive performance (test accuracy). Here, we reassess and evaluate whether the
use of test accuracy alone in the terminating condition is sufﬁcient to ensure that the resulting model performs well
across a wide spectrum of "harder" metrics such as generalization to out-of-distribution data and resilience to noise.
Across evaluations on varying architectures and data sets, we ﬁnd that pruned networks effectively approximate
the unpruned model, however, the prune ratio at which pruned networks achieve commensurate performance
varies signiﬁcantly across tasks. These results call into question the extent of genuine overparameterization in deep
learning and raise concerns about the practicability of deploying pruned networks, speciﬁcally in the context of
safety-critical systems, unless they are widely evaluated beyond test accuracy to reliably predict their performance.
Our code is available at https://github.com/lucaslie/torchprune .
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (Russakovsky et al., 2015; You et al.,
2019) tend to contain millions or billions of parameters,
necessitating costly computational resources in order to
train and deploy them in practice, and motivating the need
to develop compact networks with fewer parameters (Han
et al., 2015; Liebenwein et al., 2020). Such a reduction
in parameter count alleviates the computational burden on
training and inference, making it easier to deploy high-
capacity models to small devices and use them in resource-
constrained environments (Baykal et al., 2019a; Frankle &
Carbin, 2019; Renda et al., 2020).
To this end, network pruning is a popular technique used
to obtain compact networks that maintain the accuracy of
the original network with orders of magnitude of fewer
parameters (Blalock et al., 2020; Gale et al., 2019). Typical
pruning algorithms either proceed by gradually pruning the
network during training (Gale et al., 2019; He et al., 2018;
Zhu & Gupta, 2017) or by pruning the network after training
followed by a retraining period (Baykal et al., 2019b; Han
et al., 2015; Liebenwein et al., 2020; Renda et al., 2020).
A prune pipeline with retraining usually consists of the
1Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Corre-
spondence to: Lucas Liebenwein <lucasl@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 4thMLSys Conference , San Jose, CA, USA,
2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).following steps:
1.Prune weights (“unstructured pruning”) or ﬁl-
ters/neurons (“structured pruning”) from the trained
network according to some criterion of importance;
2.Retrain the resulting network to regain the full accuracy;
3. Iteratively repeat steps 1 & 2 to further reduce the size.
These approaches are both simple and network-agnostic,
and have been shown to yield state-of-the-art pruning results
for both unstructured (Renda et al., 2020) and structured
pruning (Liebenwein et al., 2020). For example, these tech-
niques enable pruning of 89% of the weights (Renda et al.,
2020) or 84% of the ﬁlters (Liebenwein et al., 2020) of a
ResNet56 trained on CIFAR10.
While the ability to prune large portions of a network is
not obvious at ﬁrst sight, common wisdom attributes the
apparent overparameterization (Arora et al., 2018; Baykal
et al., 2019a; Du et al., 2019; Frankle & Carbin, 2019) of
modern deep learning architectures as one of the key reasons
why pruning such large portions of the network is possible
without harming the performance of the network.
In other words, successfully pruning a network entails iden-
tifying and removing the redundant parameters. Moreover,
starting from a pre-trained, overparameterized network with
good performance (as opposed to a small, randomly initial-
ized network) ensures that the pruned network maintains the
same level of performance as its uncompressed counterpart.
In this paper, we revisit these common assumptions and