Lost in Pruning: The Effects of Pruning Neural Networks beyond Test Accuracy
rigorously assess how pruning using state-of-the-art prune-
retrain techniques (Baykal et al., 2019b; Liebenwein et al.,
2020; Renda et al., 2020) affects the function represented by
a neural network, including the similarities and disparities
exhibited by a pruned network with respect to its unpruned
counterpart.
We formalize the notion of (functional) similarities between
networks by introducing novel types of classiﬁcation-based
functional distance metrics. Using these metrics, we test
the hypothesis that pruned models are (functionally) similar
to their (unpruned) parent network and can be reliably dis-
tinguished from separately trained networks. We term the
network’s ability to be pruned for a particular task without
performance decrease its prune potential , i.e., the maximal
prune ratio for which the pruned network maintains its orig-
inal performance, and test a network’s prune potential under
various tasks. The prune potential provides insights into the
amount of overparameterization the network exhibits for a
particular task and thus serves as a useful indicator of how
much of the network can be safely pruned.
Our ﬁndings. We ﬁnd that the pruned models are func-
tionally similar to the uncompressed parent model, which
enables us to distinguish the parent of a pruned network for
a range of prune ratios. Despite the similarity between the
pruned network and its parent, we observe that the prune
potential of the network varies signiﬁcantly for a large num-
ber of tasks. That is, a pruned model may be of similar
predictive power as the original one when it comes to test
accuracy, but may be much more brittle when faced with out
of distribution data points. This raises concerns about de-
ploying pruned models on the basis of accuracy alone, in par-
ticular for safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving (Schwarting et al., 2020), where unforeseen, out-
of-distribution, or noisy data points commonly arise. Our
insights, which hold even when considering robust training
objectives, underscore the need to consider task-speciﬁc
evaluation metrics during pruning, prior to the deployment
of a pruned network to, e.g., safety-critical systems. These
results also question the common assumption that there ex-
ists a signiﬁcant amount of “redundant” parameters to begin
with and provide a robust framework to measure the amount
of genuine overparameterization in networks.
Guidelines. Based on these observations we formulate a
set of easy-to-follow guidelines to pruning in practice:
1.Don’t prune if unexpected shifts in the data distribution
may occur during deployment.
2.Prune moderately if you have partial knowledge of the
distribution shifts during training and pruning.
3.Prune to the full extent if you can account for all shifts
in the data distribution during training and pruning.
4.Maximize the prune potential by explicitly considering
data augmentation during retraining.
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60
Uniform noise level0.0%20.0%40.0%60.0%80.0%100.0% Prune Potential, =0.5%
resnet20, CIFAR10
PFP
SiPP
WT
FTFigure 1: A network’s ability to be pruned without loss
of accuracy, i.e., its “prune potential”, can be signiﬁcantly
affected by small changes in the input data distribution.
Contributions.
We propose novel functional distance metrics for
classiﬁcation-based neural networks and investigate the
functional similarities between the pruned network and
its unpruned counterpart.
We propose the notion of prune potential , i.e., the max-
imal prune ratio (model sparsity) at which the pruned
network can achieve commensurate performance, as a
quantiﬁable means to estimate the overparameterization
of a network and show that it is signiﬁcantly lower on
challenging inference tasks.
We provide a uniﬁed framework to establish task-
speciﬁc guidelines that help practitioners assess the
effects of pruning during the design and deployment
of neural networks in practice.
We conduct experiments across multiple data sets, archi-
tectures, and pruning methods showing that our obser-
vations hold across common pruning benchmarks and
real-world scenarios.
2 R ELATED WORK
Pruning. Generally, pruning is categorized into unstruc-
tured (Han et al., 2015) and structured (He et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2019) pruning approaches. While the former is bene-
ﬁcial for research, it provides little computational speed-ups
compared to structured pruning (Luo & Wu, 2018). More-
over, pruning can be performed before (Lee et al., 2019;
Tanaka et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), during (Kusupati
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2018; Zhu & Gupta, 2017), or af-
ter training (Baykal et al., 2019b; Liebenwein et al., 2020;
Singh & Alistarh, 2020), and repeated iteratively (Renda
et al., 2020). In this work, we focus on iterative pruning with
retraining after training. While computationally more expen-
sive than other approaches, this pruning pipeline produces
state-of-the-art results, is usually architecture-agnostic, and
requires little hyperparameter tuning, thus providing a sim-
ple and effective baseline for our experiments. A thorough
overview of recent pruning approaches is, e.g., provided by
Blalock et al. (2020); Gale et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019).