Lost in Pruning: The Effects of Pruning Neural Networks beyond Test Accuracy
BROADER IMPACT STATEMENT
In this paper, we study the impact of pruning when deploying neural networks in real-world conditions. This is of particular
importance since the main motivation to prune neural networks lies within training neural networks that are simultaneously
efﬁcient and accurate. Henceforth, these networks can then be deployed in resource-constrained environments, such as
robotics, to achieve tasks that could otherwise only be computed on large-scale compute infrastructure.
However, we show that pruned neural networks do not necessarily perform on par with their unpruned parent but rather
that they exhibit signiﬁcant performance decreases depending on slight variations within their assigned task. This raises
concerns with regards to the ability to ﬁnd effectively pruned architectures with current network pruning techniques. With
the increasing amount of applications for deep learning including on small-scale devices, we have to vigilantly monitor and
consider the effects, brittleness, and potential biasedness of small-scale neural networks at an even higher degree than for
regular deep networks.
A O VERVIEW OF THE APPENDIX
In the main part of the paper, we have focused on representative subsets of each experiment. In the following, we provide
additional experimental details and present the complete set of conducted experiments. Speciﬁcally, the supplementary
material contains the following sections:
Section B : additional experimental details and hyperparameters for how we prune networks
Section C : experiments pertaining to measuring the functional similarities between pruned and unpruned networks
Section D : experiments pertaining to the prune potential and excess error of pruned networks
Section E : experiments pertaining to the prune potential and excess error of pruned networks with robust (re-)training
In addition to the results presented in the main part of the paper, we present further experimental evidence for our claims
across a variety of architectures and data sets.
We provide the code to reproduce our experiments at https://github.com/lucaslie/torchprune .
B P RUNING RESULTS
Our experimental evaluations are based on a variety of neural network architectures including ResNets (He et al., 2016),
VGGs (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), DenseNets (Huang et al., 2017), and WideResNets (Zagoruyko & Komodakis,
2016) trained on CIFAR10 (Torralba et al., 2008) and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). We also conduct experiments
on a DeeplabV3 (Chen et al., 2017) with a ResNet50 backbone trained on the Pascal VOC 2011 segmentation data
set (Everingham et al., 2015). In the following section we outline the experimental details of the experiments on which
we base our observations. All networks were trained and evaluated on a compute cluster with NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti and
NVIDIA Titan RTX, and the experiments were implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017). For each trained network, we
summarize the hyperparameters and the resulting prune results on the nominal test data.
B.1 Experimental Setup for CIFAR10
All hyperparameters for training, retraining, and pruning are outlined in Table 3. For training CIFAR10 networks we used
the training hyperparameters outlined in the respective original papers, i.e., as described by He et al. (2016), Simonyan &
Zisserman (2014), Huang et al. (2017), and Zagoruyko & Komodakis (2016) for ResNets, VGGs, DenseNets, and WideRes-
Nets, respectively. For retraining, we did not change the hyperparameters and repurposed the training hyperparameters
following the approaches of Liebenwein et al. (2020); Renda et al. (2020). We added a warmup period in the beginning
where we linearly scale up the learning rate from 0 to the nominal learning rate. Iterative pruning is conducted by repeatedly
removing the same ratio of parameters (denoted by in Table 3). The prune parameter 
describes the failure probability of
the (provable) randomized pruning algorithms SiPP and PFP. We refer the reader to the respective papers for more details,
see the papers by Baykal et al. (2019b) and (Liebenwein et al., 2020) for SiPP and PFP, respectively.
B.2 Pruning Performance on CIFAR10
Below we provide the results regarding the achievable test accuracy of pruned networks across multiple target prune ratios.
Figure 9 indices the results for various networks trained on CIFAR10 using an iterative schedule to prune them. In Table 4,