Vaccines 2021 ,9, 403 10 of 14
Vaccines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 14 
 
 Figure 4. The induced IgG antibodies against RBD an d Spike protein by AP205-RBM vaccine are 
of high avidity. ( A,B) RBD-specific IgG titer for the groups vaccinated with AP205 control or 
AP205-RBM vaccine using sera from day 49, measured  by ELISA (OD50 in B: given as reciprocal 
dilution values), Plates were incubated in duplic ate, after serum incubation one plate was treated 
with PBS + 0.05% Tween 20 and the other plate with 7 M Urea in PBS + 0.05% Tween 20. Three-
fold serial serum dilution wa s used starting from 1:20. ( C,D) Spike-specific IgG titer for the groups 
vaccinated with AP205 control or AP205-RBM vaccine using sera from day 49,  measured by ELISA 
(OD50 in D: given as recipr ocal dilution values). ( E,F) RBD-specific IgG titer for the groups vac-
cinated with AP205 control or AP205-RBM vaccine using sera from day 49, measured by ELISA 
(OD50 in F: given as reciprocal dilution values), Three-fold serial serum dilution was used starting 
from 1:20. One representative of 2 sim ilar experiments is shown. The value of p < 0.05 was consid-
ered statistically significant (* p < 0.01, ** p < 0.001). 
3.5. The AP205-RBM Vaccine Candidate Induces Antibodies Neutralizing SARS-CoV2  
The best correlates of protection are virus neutralization for most viral infections and 
most likely also for SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, we performed two types of neutralization 
assays, one using pseudotyped Vesicular Stomatitis Virus with SARS-CoV-2 spike, as well as “real” SARS-CoV-2. For the pseudotyped viru s neutralization assay, pseudo-types with 
the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 and lucifera se for quantification were used to evaluated 
serum for neutralizing activity against the spike protein. Neutralization activity of the im-
munized mouse sera were assessed and direct ly demonstrated the anti-viral neutralizing 
activity of the induced antibodies (Figure 5A ). For the neutralization assay with SARS-
CoV-2, we used the CPE neutralization method using 100 TCID50 of SARS-CoV-
2/ABS/NL20. Also, in this assay, the induced antibodies we were neutralizing could com-
pletely inhibit viral replication (Figure 5B).  
 
Figure 5. The AP205-RBM vaccine candidate induces antibodies neutralizing SARS-CoV2. ( A) Neutralization titer of the 
induced antibodies using a SARS-CoV-2 pseudoty ped vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) assay. ( B) Neutralization titer of 
the induced antibodies using CPE method and 100 TCID50 of  SARS-CoV-2/ABS/NL20 virus. One representative of 2 sim-
ilar experiments is shown. The value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant (* p < 0.01, ** p < 0.001). 
4. Discussion 
Our first attempt to generate a COVID-19  vaccine was based on producing a recom-
binant RBD in human eukaryotic cells and chemically coupling the domain to CuMV TT-
VLPs, resulting in a vaccine candidate that bi nds to ACE2 and induces neutralizing anti-
bodies in mice [20]. Chemical coupling techni ques have proven efficacious for the produc-
tion of numerous vaccine candidates [21–25]. However, to facilitate GMP-compatible pro-
Figure 5. The AP205-RBM vaccine candidate induces antibodies neutralizing SARS-CoV2. ( A) Neutralization titer of the
induced antibodies using a SARS-CoV-2 pseudotyped vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) assay. ( B) Neutralization titer of the
induced antibodies using CPE method and 100 TCID50 of SARS-CoV-2/ABS/NL20 virus. One representative of 2 similar
experiments is shown. The value of p< 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant (* p< 0.01, ** p< 0.001).
4. Discussion
Our ﬁrst attempt to generate a COVID-19 vaccine was based on producing a recombi-
nant RBD in human eukaryotic cells and chemically coupling the domain to CuMV TT-VLPs,
resulting in a vaccine candidate that binds to ACE2 and induces neutralizing antibodies
in mice [ 20]. Chemical coupling techniques have proven efﬁcacious for the production of
numerous vaccine candidates [ 21–25]. However, to facilitate GMP-compatible production
at a large-scale, genetic fusion techniques may be considered a better option. Puriﬁcation
of recombinantly produced VLPs may be performed at a large scale using continuous ﬂow,
ultracentrifugation which is currently used for producing 85% of the world’s inﬂuenza
vaccine supplies [ 26]. Hence, the vaccine candidate detailed in this study based on stabi-
lized AP205 VLPs, may offer advantages in terms of large-scale production compared to
the previously described one.
It has recently been shown that in contrast to most parts of the spike protein, RBD
shows minimal glycosylation as it only contains two glycosylation sites, while the RBM is
not glycosylated at all. Furthermore, the two glycosylation sites of RBD are distant from
the RBD-ACE2 interaction interphase (RBM) and do not interfere with the Spike-ACE2
receptor interaction [ 8]. The fact that RBM, which contains the actual ACE2 binding site, is
not glycosylated indicates that the virus cannot exploit glycan shielding to escape immune
response without attenuating its infectivity [ 27]. Importantly, bacterial expression systems
may therefore be suitable for productions of RBM-based vaccines, as glycosylation is not of
importance. Hence, generation of vaccines inducing antibodies against RBD and especially
against RBM in bacteria is a valuable strategy to ﬁght the pandemic [ 7]. Accordingly, we
have chosen RBM as our target and fused it with AP205 stabilized by fusing two capsid
proteins into a covalent dimer. This resulted in the formation of immunogenic VLPs
displaying RBM on the surface of AP205. AP205-RBM vaccine induced a high antibody
titer against both RBD and Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 even after one dose of the vaccine,
a response that could be further enhanced by a booster immunization 4 weeks later.
The vaccine candidate not only induced high levels of antibodies, but they were
also of high avidity. Indeed, washes with 7 M Urea removed only a relatively small
fraction of antibodies, indicating that the overall response was of high avidity. Some
recent studies have shown that antibody responses induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection are
relatively weak and of rather short duration, particularly in individuals who had no or