Vaccines 2021 ,9, 403 2 of 14
human immunity using vaccines against COVID-19. Different vaccines based on RNA
and adenoviral vectors have been developed and several of them have already been
approved for emergency use in many countries. Other traditional vaccine platforms such
as those based on recombinant proteins or subunit vaccines are still in clinical or preclinical
development [ 6]. Despite the achievement of marketed vaccines, there is still a strong need
for more doses as re-vaccinating people into 2022 may be required as well as having a
platform for future emerging coronaviruses. Therefore, investing in the development of
safe, effective, and affordable coronavirus vaccines continues to be of high priority.
The neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 are mostly speciﬁc for the receptor
binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein. Within RBD, the receptor binding motif (RBM)
is considered the most important site which directly interacts with ACE2. As compared
to SARS-CoV , the afﬁnity to ACE2 of the original spike of SARS-CoV-2 is about 4-fold
higher, offering an explanation for the increased infectivity of the latter. Consequently,
generating a vaccine inducing antibodies against spike or RBD is the preferred strategy
of the majority of COVID-19 vaccine candidates [ 7]. It has recently been shown that in
contrast to most parts of the spike protein, RBD shows minimal glycosylation as it only
contains two glycosylation sites, and the RBM is not glycosylated at all. Furthermore,
the two glycosylation sites of RBD are distant from the RBD-ACE2 interaction interphase
(RBM) and do not interfere with the spike-ACE2 receptor interaction [ 8]. This conﬁrms
that the generation of vaccines inducing antibodies against RBD and especially against
RBM is a valuable strategy to ﬁght the pandemic [7].
Virus-like particles (VLPs) represent one of the relatively traditional vaccine platforms
in the sense that they have already proven their clinical usefulness. VLPs consist of
viral structural proteins that upon recombinant expression, self-assemble into particles,
mostly icosahedrons and rarely helical [ 9]. We have previously described the favorable
characteristics of VLPs and the reason they constitute a good vaccine template and have
given rise to highly successful vaccines [ 10–12]. VLPs derived from Leviviridae have
gained considerable attention in the ﬁeld of vaccinology as a versatile platform [ 13]. A
great interest has been directed against the capsid architecture of phage-VLPs such as MS2,
PP7, Q and recently AP205. Such knowledge is crucial to pinpoint the surface reactive
amino acids which are essential to chemically couple or insert foreign epitopes within the
coat protein (CP). AP205 phage infects Acinetobacter bacteria. AP205-VLPs forms stable
particles and have a robust coat protein that can accommodate large insertions into the C or
N termini [ 13]. The crystallographic asymmetric unit of an AP205-VLP contain a single CP
dimer which consists of chains A and B representing two monomers. The dimer structure
feature is special in as much as the C terminus of one monomer is in close proximity with
the N-terminus of the other monomer. In comparison to other phages such as MS2, the CP
of AP205 is missing a beta strand in its N-terminus and has an extra beta strand in the C
terminus. Accordingly, AP205 has N and C-termini in the same location and well-exposed
on the surface which explains the ability of AP205 to tolerate and accommodate long
insertions at either termini without compromising the capsid integrity [14].
In this study, we have shown that the bacteriophage AP205-VLPs can be used as an
effective platform for the development of a COVID-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2. This
system also facilitates large-scale production of the vaccine. The developed platform can
also be optimized to tackle the emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2, an area of research we
are currently exploring.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Mice
Allin vivo experiments were performed using (8–12 weeks old) wild-type female
BALB/cOlaHsd mice purchased from Harlan. All animal procedures were conducted in
accordance with the Swiss Animal Act (455.109.1–5 September 2008) of University of Bern.
All animals were treated for experimentation according to protocols approved by the Swiss
Federal Veterinary Ofﬁce.