Vaccines 2021 ,9, 403 11 of 14
only moderate symptoms [ 28,29]. We have proposed recently that coronaviruses employ a
structural strategy to avoid the induction of strong antibody response [ 30]. Other viruses
can induce optimal neutralizing long-lived antibody responses owing to their repetitive
surface of typically 60 or more rigid epitopes, spaced by 5–10 nm which are recognized as
a pathogen-associated structural pattern (PASP) (AP205 VLPs have this characteristic). In
contrast, SARS-CoV-2 consists of large particles with long spike proteins embedded in a
ﬂuid membrane. Accordingly, recruitment of complement is poor, and stimulation of B
cells remains suboptimal. A typical VLP with a diameter of ~30 nm with epitopes spaced
by 5–10 nm is efﬁciently recognized by natural IgM, activates the classical complement
pathway, enhances B cell activation [ 31,32] and facilitates deposition of VLPs on follicular
dendritic cells, supporting the generation of germinal centers [ 33] and promoting the
formation of long-lived plasma cells resulting in durable antibody responses. As the
antibodies induced by the vaccine candidate were of high avidity for the RBD as well as the
whole spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, it will be interesting to reveal how this high speciﬁcity
will affect recognition of RBDs of the newly emerging mutants, such as the British (B.1.1.7),
the South African (B.1.351) or Brazilian (P .1) variant. Indeed, we have previously shown
that sera from convalescent patients essentially fail to recognize the P .1 variant [ 34], while
the serum from individuals immunized with Pﬁzer’s BNT162b2 showed 10-fold lower
recognition [ 35]. Thus, cross-recognition of RBDs from mutant viruses may be a critical
issue for the future.
Mouse infection with different viruses can trigger an antibody response that is often
dominated by the IgG2a subclass. IgG2a shows several better functional properties in com-
parison to other subclasses [ 36,37]. These properties include: binding to Fc receptors [ 38],
activating complement pathways [ 39] and mediating the process of antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity [ 40]. A prominent example are antibodies against the ectodomain
of inﬂuenza M2 protein, which potently protect mice from inﬂuenza virus if produced as
IgG2a antibodies but fail to do so if produced as IgG1 [41].
We have previously shown that RNA packaged in VLPs is responsible for efﬁcient
isotype switch to IgG2a and this response was dependent on TLR7/8 signaling in B
cells [ 42]. Furthermore, bacterial RNA was found to be the most efﬁcient type of RNA
for generation of IgG2a, rendering bacterial expression systems optimal for this type of
vaccine [ 43]. Hence, the E. coli -based process used here for vaccine production may not
only be highly scalable but also results in the most protective antibody responses.
IgA antibodies may be a potent weapon against SARS-CoV-2, as they are expected
to neutralize the virus locally on mucosal surfaces without enhancing inﬂammation via
Fc receptors. It is, therefore, interesting to note that we observed induction of strong
serum IgA responses by our vaccine candidate. We have previously shown in mice that s.c.
immunization with RNA-loaded VLPs results in a systemic IgA response, again dependent
on TLR7/8 expression in B cells [ 44]. This route of immunization did, however, not result in
mucosal IgA responses. It remains to be seen whether s.c. immunization with RNA-loaded
VLPs results in mucosal IgA responses in humans.
We have not directly measured induction of Th cells responses by our vaccine candi-
date, mostly because the expected effector mechanism is induction of neutralizing antibod-
ies. In addition, the size of the RBM domain of roughly 70 amino acids may be too small to
reliably induce a Th cell response in inbred mice. However, we have previously shown
that VLP-speciﬁc Th cell responses mediate isotype switch for B cells speciﬁc for antigens
displayed on the VLPs. Furthermore, the bacterial RNA packaged in VLPs, such as AP205,
drive CD8 and Th1 responses [ 45–47]. Thus, RNA-loaded VLPs and antigens displayed by
them induce Th cell dependent isotype-switching and Th1 responses.
Taken together, we show in this study that the bacteriophage-derived AP205 VLPs
consisting of dimerized capsid proteins may efﬁciently be used as a vaccine template
for insertion of RBM domain. The resultant vaccine shows high immunogenicity and
induced antibodies were neutralizing and able to block virus replication in two independent
neutralization assays.