JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 16
9.2 Future Directions
We discuss four promising directions for the further devel-
opment of neural network pruning, namely, (1) theories, (2)
techniques, (3) applications, and (4) evaluation.
Theories: Despite the existing works, several funda-
mental questions about pruning still need to be answered.
For example, prior works demonstrate that network layers
contain irreplaceable information as long as redundant ones.
Does a theoretical upper bound of the prune ratio exist
for a given network that still maintains the performance
of its dense equivalent? In other words, how heavily can
a network be pruned theoretically without accuracy loss?
It is a tricky question due to the intricate relationships
between network layers. Besides, is pruning explainable?
A common belief is that deep neural networks are hard
to interpret. As such, making pruning explainable is an
uphill task. However, the interpretability of pruning is vital
for understanding the factors behind pruning (e.g., model
structure and weights) and exploring more effective pruning
methods.
Techniques: To obtain better algorithm designs whose
architectures are learned in an economical, efficient, and
effective manner, it is a trend to extend Automated Ma-
chine Learning ( AutoML ) methods and NAS to pruning.
Furthermore, pruning is also beginning to combine with
various learning contexts, such as lifelong learning [223],
continual learning [233], contrast learning [234], and fed-
erated learning [235], etc. In addition, the rising energy
consumption of networks requires more attention to energy-
aware pruning. However, preliminary efforts mainly focus
on reducing computation and memory costs, which may not
necessarily reduce the most energy consumption. Moreover,
incorporating pruning into hardware to help deploy pruned
networks is also an emerging trend. For example, Sui et al.
[236] propose a hardware-friendly pruning method and
deploy the pruned models on an FPGA platform.
Applications: Pruning has begun to draw attention to
more complex applications such as visual question answer-
ing, natural language understanding, speech recognition,
and content generation than image classification. Foun-
dation models such as GPT-4 [237] might be a possible
way to Artificial General Intelligence ( AGI ). However, its
enormous size hinders its application in many downstream
tasks. Fig. 2 highlights content related to large model prun-
ing. In the future, more pruning methods will enable colos-
sal foundation models to benefit from pruning research,
making them more compact and efficient [17].
Evaluation: With the emergence of many pruning meth-
ods, standardized benchmarks, and metrics are required to
provide a fair evaluation. Different pruning techniques, net-
work architectures, tasks, and experimental settings lead to
incomparable results and make it hard to compare pruning
methods fairly [238]. ShrinkBench [42] takes the first step
and provides a benchmark of pruning methods for image
classification. As pruning is applied to applications beyond
image classification, standardized benchmarks and metrics
for other applications are needed.10 C ONCLUSION
As an essential compression technique, deep neural net-
work pruning has attracted increasing research attention
with the recent emergence of various pruning methods
and applications. This survey conducts a comprehensive
review on the following four scopes: 1) universal/specific
speedup, with a systematic review of unstructured, struc-
tured, and semi-structured pruning; 2) when to prune,
including pruning before/during/after training for static
pruning and run-time pruning; 3) how to prune, including
pruning by criteria and by learning; 4) fusion of pruning
with other compression techniques, such as KD and NAS. A
comprehensive comparative analysis, including eight pairs
of contrast settings for pruning, layer-wise weight density,
and different supervision levels, can help researchers to
efficiently and effectively grasp the characteristics of dif-
ferent pruning methods. In addition, recommendations on
pruning method selection and future research directions are
highlighted and discussed. To facilitate future research, real-
world miscellaneous applications and commonly used re-
sources of datasets, networks, and evaluation metrics in dif-
ferent applications are summarized in Appendix D. To help
researchers and practitioners keep up with the development
of pruning technologies, we continue updating the represen-
tative research efforts and open-source codes for pruning at
https://github.com/hrcheng1066/awesome-pruning.
APPENDIX A
TERMS AND NOTATIONS
This section presents the commonly used terms in pruning
literature. It is worth mentioning that some terms (e.g.,
compression ratio) have different definitions in prior works.
In addition, for better readability, we list the notations used
in the main text in Table 10.
•Prune Ratio : Prune ratio [110] denotes the percent-
age of weights (or filters, neurons, etc.) that are
removed from the dense network and is the com-
plement of Keep Ratio [85]. In general, it can be
determined in two ways: pre-defined or learning-
decided.
•Compression Ratio : Compression ratio in [50, 111] is
defined as the ratio of the original number of weights
to the preserved number of weights, but in [239]
it is defined as the ratio of the preserved number
of weights to the original number of weights. For
example, if 10% of the weights are preserved, the
compression ratio in [111] is 10, but it is 10% in [239].
•Sparsity Ratio : Sparsity ratio denotes the portion of
zero weights (or channels, filters, neurons, etc.) in
networks after pruning [171, 199]. It is equivalent to
compression ratio in [239].
•Speedup Ratio : Speedup ratio is defined as the ratio
of the pruned number of FLOPs in [14], or MACs
in [38] to the original number of FLOPs or MACs,
respectively. In [240], the speedup ratio is calculated
by dividing the pruned number of filters in one layer
by the original number of filters in that layer.
•One-shot Pruning : One-shot pruning, also called
single-shot pruning in [54], scores only once and then
prunes the network to the target prune ratio [48, 76].