JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 15
tensors with fewer parameters. In contrast to pruning, it ex-
plores the original weights’ low-rank structure, while keep-
ing the dimension of the convolutional output unchanged.
CC [158] combines channel pruning and tensor decomposi-
tion to compress CNN models by simultaneously learning
model sparsity and low rankness. Hinge [216] introduces
group sparsity to fuse filter pruning and decomposition un-
der the same formulation. Li et al. [217] propose LoSparse to
prune Transformers by combining low-rank approximations
and pruning.
Pruning & NAS: Neural Architecture Search ( NAS ) pro-
vides a mechanism to automatically discover the best archi-
tecture for the problem of interest, offering a new approach
for pruning to find suitable network depth and width. For
example, for CNNs, NPAS [68] performs a compiler-aware
joint network pruning and NAS, determining the filter type
(different kernel sizes), the pruning scheme, and the rate for
each layer. TAS [218] exploits NAS to search for the depth
and width of a network to obtain pruned networks and
uses knowledge distillation to train these pruned networks.
Klein et al. [219] explore structured pruning of fine-tuned
Transformers via NAS.
Pruning & Knowledge Distillation: Knowledge Distil-
lation ( KD) [214] guides the student to effectively inherit
knowledge from the teacher and mimic the teacher’s output.
Some works ([220, 221]) exploit pruning before KD to boost
KD’s quality. For example, Liu et al. [220] prune unimpor-
tant channels to the contents of interest and focus the distil-
lation on the interest regions. Park and No [221] prune the
teacher network first to make it more transferable and then
distill it to the student. Some works ([148, 222, 223, 224])
use KD to train the pruned networks. The results in [222]
show that the pruned network recovered by KD performs
better than it regained by fine-tuning. Zou et al. [225] pro-
pose a data-free deraining model compression method that
distills the pruned model to fit the pre-trained model. [226]
introduce a multi-stage compression strategy, AntGMM, to
compress large multimodal models by utilizing structured
pruning and knowledge distillation.
Pruning & Multi-compression Techniques: Some works
([227, 228, 229]) explore the fusion of pruning with more
than one compression technique. For example, GS [229]
combines pruning, quantization, and KD for GANs com-
pression. Joint-DetNAS [228] integrates pruning, NAS, and
KD for image translation. LadaBERT [227] merges pruning,
matrix factorization, and KD to compress BERTs [143] for
natural language understanding.
9 S UGGESTIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss how to choose different pruning
methods and provide promising directions for future work.
9.1 Recommendations on pruning method selection
After years of research and exploration, there are many off-
the-shelf pruning methods. However, no golden standard
exists to determine which one is the best. Different suitable
pruning methods exist to compact deep neural networks for
specific application requirements and hardware/software
resources. Here are some general recommendations for
choosing an appropriate pruning method.(1) If you do not have special hardware (e.g., FPGAs or
ASICs) or software (such as sparsity convolutional libraries)
but need actual neural network acceleration and compres-
sion, structured pruning is more suitable than unstructured
pruning because most software frameworks and hardware
cannot accelerate sparse matrices’ computation.
(2) If you have sufficient computational resources during
the pruning stage, consider using iterative PAT methods
that can typically minimize the impact on performance
under the same prune ratio. On the other hand, if you have
limited computational resources during both the pruning
and inference stages, consider using one-shot PBT or one-
shot post-training pruning methods, particularly for LLMs.
(3) If you have enough labeled examples on the target
task, consider using supervised pruning methods. However,
if only a few examples on the target task are labeled, semi-
supervised or transfer pruning methods may be considered.
If the examples on the target task are not labeled, consider
self-supervised, unsupervised, or transfer pruning methods.
(4) If you have a sufficient memory footprint during
pruning for NLP tasks, consider heavily compressing large
models rather than lightly compressing smaller models to
meet the same budgets. Some results in [230] show that for
NLP tasks finding pruned models derived from larger dense
networks outperform small dense networks of comparable
size to pruned models.
(5) If you have enough memory to store the dense neural
network during the inference stage and wish to provide
run-time flexible computational cost allocation for different
inputs, dynamic pruning methods can be considered where
inputs with smaller shapes can allocate less computational
cost to perform the task and if the input shape is bigger
more computational cost can be allocated.
(6) If you need to trim down neural networks in multiple
dimensions, you can comprehensively consider layerwise
pruning (decreasing the model’s depth), channel pruning
(reducing the model’s width), and image resolution pruning
(scaling down the model’s input resolution) or token prun-
ing (selectively removing tokens from text data). In addition,
pruning can be integrated with quantization to further
reduce the memory footprint and the neural networks’ size.
(7) If you want to achieve a better tradeoff between
speed and accuracy, the following settings may help: use a
pre-trained model; set an appropriate learning rate (if any)
for both the pruning and retraining stages; fine-tune the
pruned models for several epochs; integrate pruning with
knowledge distillation, NAS, or other compression methods
to achieve complementarity; and adversarial training may
have some help [122].
(8) If you need to train a subnetwork to recover perfor-
mance, Ma et al. [127] show that subnetworks with residual
connections achieve higher accuracy using a relatively small
learning rate. In contrast, subnetworks without residual
connections benefit from a larger learning rate.
(9) To benefit from large-scale pre-training, adding pa-
rameters is more critical than minimizing FLOPs [231].
By incorporating techniques such as dynamic convolution
[232], models with low FLOPs can increase their capacity
without a substantial rise in computational cost, enhancing
their performance during extensive pre-training.