JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 3
Deep Neural Network Pruning 
Sec. 3
Universal/Specific 
Speedup
Unstructured
Structured
Semi -
structuredSec. 3.1
Sec. 3.2
Sec. 3.3Pruning Criteria
Sensitivity 
and/or Saliency
Loss ChangelpNormMagnitudeSec. 5.1
Sec. 5.2
Sec. 5.3
Sec. 5.4Sec. 5
Learn to Prune
Sparsity Regularization 
based Pruning
Meta Learning based 
Pruning
Graph Neural
Network based Pruning 
Reinforcement Learning 
based PruningSec. 6.1
Sec. 6.2
Sec. 6.3
Sec. 6.4Sec. 6
Pruning&
Quantization
Pruning&Tensor
Decomposition
Pruning&NAS
Pruning&KDFusion of Pruning 
and Other TechniquesSec. 8
When to Prune
Pruning before 
Training
Pruning during 
Training
Pruning after 
TrainingSec. 4.1
Sec. 4.2
Sec. 4.3Sec. 4
Run-time 
PruningSec. 4.4One-shot/
Iterative
Initialized /
Pre-trainedData -Free/
Data -DrivenTraining from 
Scratch/ Fine-tuning
Original Task /
Transfer Learning
Static /Dynamic
Layer -wise 
Weight DensityA Comprehensive Comparative 
AnalysisSec. 7
Sec.7.2
Sec.7.3
Sec.7.4Sec.7.8Sec.7.6
Sec.7.7Unstructured /
StructuredSec.7.1
Sec.7.9
Levels of 
SupervisionSec.7.10 Sec.7.5
Global /LocalSuggestions and 
Future Directions
Sec.9.1
Sec.9.2Recommendations
Future DirectionsSec. 9
Pruning& Multi -
compression Tech.
Fig. 2: An overview of the hierarchical structure of the survey, with sections involving large models highlighted by a pink triangle.
or learn to prune? The answers to the three questions corre-
spond to the three primary aspects of deep neural network
pruning, as depicted in the orange sections of Fig. 2.
The first question is whether speedup depends on
specific hardware/software. It is usually divided into three
types: unstructured ([48, 49, 50]), semi-structured (also
called pattern-based) ([17, 51, 52]) and structured ([20, 39,
53]). Only structured pruning can achieve universal neu-
ral network acceleration without requiring special hard-
ware or software. Conversely, both unstructured and semi-
structured pruning need the support of special hardware
or software. Given that the primary objective of pruning is
acceleration, the first question addresses the most funda-
mental and user-concerned aspect of this process.
The second question particularly concerns the arrange-
ment between pruning weights and training weights of
the neural network for static pruning. Based on whether
pruning is performed before, during, or after training the
network, static pruning can be divided into three categories:
pruning before training ( PBT ) ([50, 54, 55, 56]), pruning dur-
ing training ( PDT ) ([57, 58, 59]), and pruning after training
(PAT ) ([20, 48, 60]). In dynamic pruning, subnetworks are
generated at run-time for each input data.
The third question considers whether to prune neural
networks using specific criteria or by learning. Criteria
rely on a scoring formula to measure the importance of
each weight (or filter, neuron, and so on). Commonly used
pruning criteria include magnitude, norm, loss change, etc.
In addition, it is possible to prune neural networks by learn-
ing, such as through sparsity regularization training [59]
or dynamic sparse training [61]. Whether through criteria
or learning, pruning aims to determine the weights of a
network that should be pruned.
The above three aspects determine the main characteris-
tics of a pruning algorithm. Different combinations of these
three aspects form various pruning methods. We provide a
new taxonomy of deep neural network pruning in Section 3
- 6, and Section 8, as shown in Fig. 2.
3 S PECIFIC OR UNIVERSAL SPEEDUP
This section categorizes pruning into unstructured, semi-
structured, and structured. The first two types correspondto specific speedup, while the third corresponds to universal
speedup.
3.1 Unstructured Pruning
Unstructured pruning, also called non-structured pruning
or weight-wise pruning, is the finest-grained case.
Definition 1 (Unstructured Pruning). Given neural net-
work weights W={w0, w1, ..., w K}, a dataset D=
{(xi,yi)}N
i=1composed of input ( xi), output ( yi) pairs, and
a desired total number of non-zero weights k(less than
K), unstructured pruning can be written as the following
constrained optimization problem [54]:
min
WL(W;D) =min
W1
NNX
i=1ℓ(W; (xi,yi)),
s.t.∥W∥0≤k.(1)
In practice, for small or medium models, unstructured
pruning usually does not directly set the weights to 0
but sets their corresponding masks (or indicators) Mto 0
[56, 62]. In this case, unstructured pruning is regarded as
applying a binary mask to each weight. Consequently, Eq.(1)
is correspondingly changed as:
min
w,mL(W⊙M;D) =min
W,M1
NNX
i=1ℓ(W⊙M; (xi.yi)),
s.t.∥M∥0≤k.(2)
Generally, the network is retrained (i.e., fine-tuning or
training-from-scratch) with fixed masks M, and the masked-
out weights are not involved in retraining. In the case of
large models, such as LLMs, assigning a mask to each
weight poses a challenge due to the immense number of
weights. It is common to directly set the weights that need
to be pruned to zero, as seen in [17, 49]. Fig. 3 is an example
of weight-wise pruning by removing the weights directly (as
shown in Fig. 3 (a)) or masking the weights with their corre-
sponding masks (as shown in Fig. 3 (b)), respectively. Since it
can remove weights anywhere, the irregular replacement of
non-zero weights leads to actual acceleration requiring the
support of special software and/or hardware [13, 58, 63, 64].
Therefore, we classify unstructured pruning as a specific
speedup technique.