professionals in no-limit Texas hold’em poker with six players. The success of Pluribus
is attributed to the following techniques that have appeared in the literature: abstraction
and sub-game decomposition for large-scale imperfect-information games, Monte-Carlo
CFR, self-play, and depth-limited search.
Other Applications
Furthermore, another popular testbed of MARL is the StarCraft II [368], which is an
immensely popular multi-player real-strategy computer game. This game can be for-
mulated as a multi-agent Markov game with partial observation, where each player has
only limited information of the game state. Designing reinforcement learning systems
for StarCraft II is extremely challenging due to the needs to make decisions under un-
certainty and incomplete information, to consider the optimal strategy in the long-run,
and to design good reward functions that elicit learning. Since released, both the full-
game and sub-game versions of StarCraft II have gained tremendous research interest. A
breakthrough in this game was achieved by AlphaStar , recently proposed in [369], which
has demonstrated superhuman performance in zero-sum two-player full-game StarCraft
II. Its reinforcement learning algorithm combines LSTM for the parametrization of pol-
icy and value functions, asynchronous actor-critic [370] for policy updates, and Neural
Fictitious Self-play [25] for equilibrium ﬁnding.
5.3 Mixed Settings
Compared to the cooperative and competitive settings, research on MARL under the
mixed setting is rather less explored. One application in this setting is multi-player poker.
As we have mentioned in §5.2, Pluribus introduced in [8] has demonstrated superhuman
performance in six-player no-limit Texas hold’em. In addition, as an extension of the
problem of learning to communicate, introduced in §5.1, there is a line of research that
aims to apply MARL to tackle learning social dilemmas, which is usually formulated as a
multi-agent stochastic game with partial information. Thus, most of the algorithms pro-
posed under these settings incorporate RNN or LSTM for learning representations of the
histories experienced by the agent, and the performance of these algorithms are usually
exhibited using experimental results; see, e.g., [19, 371, 372], and the references therein.
Moreover, another example of the mixed setting is the case where the agents are di-
vided into two opposing teams that play zero-sum games. The reward of a team is shared
by each player within this team. Compared with two-player zero-sum games, this setting
is more challenging in that both cooperation among teammates and competition against
the opposing team need to be taken into consideration. A prominent testbed of this case
is the Dota 2 video game, where each of the two teams, each with ﬁve players, aims to
conquer the base of the other team and defend its own base. Each player independently
controls a powerful character known as the hero, and only observes the state of the game
via the video output on the screen. Thus, Dota 2 is a zero-sum Markov game played by
45