recognized in the literature [11, 142]. A recent comprehensive survey [40] peculiarly pro-
vides an overview on how it is modeled and addressed by state-of-the-art multi-agent
learning algorithms. We thus do not include any further discussion on this challenge, and
refer interested readers to [40].
3.3 Scalability Issue
To handle non-stationarity, each individual agent may need to account for the joint action
space , whose dimension increases exponentially with the number of agents. This is also
referred to as the combinatorial nature of MARL [20]. Having a large number of agents
complicates the theoretical analysis, especially the convergence analysis, of MARL. This
argument is substantiated by the fact that theories on MARL for the two-player zero-sum
setting are much more extensive and advanced than those for general-sum settings with
more than two agents, see §4 for a detailed comparison. One possible remedy for the
scalability issue is to assume additionally the factorized structures of either the value or
reward functions with regard to the action dependence; see [143, 144, 145] for the original
heuristic ideas, and [146, 147] for recent empirical progress. Relevant theoretical analy-
sis had not been established until recently [148], which considers a special dependence
structure, and develops a provably convergent model-based algorithm.
Another theoretical challenge of MARL that is brought about independently of, but
worsened by, the scalability issue, is to build up theories for deep multi-agent RL. Par-
ticularly, scalability issues necessitate the use of function approximation, especially deep
neural networks, in MARL. Though empirically successful, the theoretical analysis of
deep MARL is an almost uncharted territory, with the currently limited understanding of
deep learning theory, not alone the deep RL theory. This is included as one of the future
research directions in §6.
3.4 Various Information Structures
Compared to the single-agent case, the information structure of MARL, namely, who
knows what at the training and execution, is more involved. For example, in the frame-
work of Markov games, it su ﬃces to observe the instantaneous state st, in order for each
agent to make decisions, since the local policy imapping fromSto(Ai) contains the
equilibrium policy. On the other hand, for extensive-form games, each agent may need
to recall the history of past decisions, under the common perfect recall assumption. Fur-
thermore, as self-interested agents, each agent can scarcely access either the policy or the
rewards of the opponents, but at most the action samples taken by them. This partial
information aggravates the issues caused by non-stationarity, as the samples can hardly
recover the exact behavior of the opponents’ underlying policies, which increases the
non-stationarity viewed by individual agents. The extreme case is the aforementioned
independent learning scheme, which assumes the observability of only the local action and
14