1 Introduction
Recent years have witnessed sensational advances of reinforcement learning (RL) in many
prominent sequential decision-making problems, such as playing the game of Go [1, 2],
playing real-time strategy games [3, 4], robotic control [5, 6], playing card games [7, 8],
and autonomous driving [9], especially accompanied with the development of deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs) for function approximation [10]. Intriguingly, most of the success-
ful applications involve the participation of more than one single agent/player1, which
should be modeled systematically as multi-agent RL (MARL) problems. Speciﬁcally,
MARL addresses the sequential decision-making problem of multiple autonomous agents
that operate in a common environment, each of which aims to optimize its own long-
term return by interacting with the environment and other agents [11]. Besides the
aforementioned popular ones, learning in multi-agent systems ﬁnds potential applica-
tions in other subareas, including cyber-physical systems [12, 13], ﬁnance [14, 15], sen-
sor/communication networks [16, 17], and social science [18, 19].
Largely, MARL algorithms can be placed into three groups, fully cooperative ,fully com-
petitive , and a mix of the two , depending on the types of settings they address. In par-
ticular, in the cooperative setting, agents collaborate to optimize a common long-term
return; while in the competitive setting, the return of agents usually sum up to zero.
The mixed setting involves both cooperative and competitive agents, with general-sum
returns. Modeling disparate MARL settings requires frameworks spanning from opti-
mization theory, dynamic programming, game theory, and decentralized control, see §2.2
for more detailed discussions. In spite of these existing multiple frameworks, several
challenges in MARL are in fact common across the di ﬀerent settings, especially for the
theoretical analysis. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, the learning goals in MARL are multi-dimensional ,
as the objectives of all agents are not necessarily aligned, which brings up the challenge of
dealing with equilibrium points, as well as some additional performance criteria beyond
return-optimization, such as the e ﬃciency of communication/coordination, and robust-
ness against potential adversarial agents. Moreover, as all agents are improving their poli-
cies according to their own interests concurrently, the environment faced by each agent
becomes non-stationary . This breaks or invalidates the basic framework of most theoreti-
cal analyses in the single-agent setting. Furthermore, the joint action space that increases
exponentially with the number of agents may cause scalability issues, known as the com-
binatorial nature of MARL [20]. Additionally, the information structure, i.e., who knows
what , in MARL is more involved, as each agent has limited access to the observations of
others, leading to possibly suboptimal decision rules locally. A detailed elaboration on
the underlying challenges can be found in §3.
There has in fact been no shortage of e ﬀorts attempting to address the above chal-
lenges. See [11] for a comprehensive overview of earlier theories and algorithms on
MARL. Recently, this domain has gained resurgence of interest due to the advances of
1Hereafter, we will use agent and player interchangeably.
2