been designed for this setting, with weak convergence proved by the general stochastic
approximation theory in [212], when agents are connected by a time-varying communica-
tion network. Note that [204] also considers the independent MDP setting, with the same
results established as the actual MARL setting.
Other Learning Goals
Several other learning goals have also been explored for decentralized MARL with
networked agents. [213] has considered the optimal consensus problem, where each agent
over the network tracks the states of its neighbors’ as well as a leader’s, so that the consen-
sus error is minimized by the joint policy. A policy iteration algorithm is then introduced,
followed by a practical actor-critic algorithm using neural networks for function approx-
imation. A similar consensus error objective is also adopted in [214], under the name of
cooperative multi-agent graphical games . A centralized-critic-decentralized-actor scheme is
utilized for developing o ﬀ-policy RL algorithms.
Communication e ﬃciency, as a key ingredient in the algorithm design for this setting,
has drawn increasing attention recently [130, 132, 131]. Speciﬁcally, [130] develops Lazily
Aggregated Policy Gradient (LAPG), a distributed PG algorithm that can reduce the com-
munication rounds between the agents and a central controller, by judiciously designing
communication trigger rules. [132] addresses the same policy evaluation problem as [96],
and develops a hierarchical distributed algorithm by proposing a mixing matrix di ﬀer-
ent from the doubly stochastic one used in [23, 96, 156], which allows unidirectional
information exchange among agents to save communication. In contrast, the distributed
actor-critic algorithm in [131] reduces the communication by transmitting only one scalar
entry of its state vector at each iteration, while preserving provable convergence as in [23].
4.1.3 Partially Observed Model
We complete the overview for cooperative settings by brieﬂy introducing a class of signif-
icant but challenging models where agents are faced with partial observability. Though
common in practice, theoretical analysis of MARL algorithms in this setting is still rela-
tively scarce, in contrast to the aforementioned fully observed settings. In general, this
setting can be modeled by a decentralized POMDP (Dec-POMDP) [36], which shares al-
most all elements such as the reward function and the transition model, as the MMDP/Markov
team model in §2.2.1, except that each agent now only has its local observations of the sys-
tem states. With no accessibility to other agents’ observations, an individual agent cannot
maintain a global belief state, the su ﬃcient statistic for decision making in single-agent
POMDPs. Hence, Dec-POMDPs have been known to be NEXP-complete [104], requiring
super-exponential time to solve in the worst case.
There is an increasing interest in developing planning/learning algorithms for Dec-
POMDPs. Most of the algorithms are based on the centralized-learning-decentralized-execution
scheme. In particular, the decentralized problem is ﬁrst reformulated as a centralized
one, which can be solved at a central controller with (a simulator that generates) the ob-
24