the discounted accumulated reward instantiates the utility at the end of the game. Con-
versely, by simply setting Aj=;at the state sfor agentsj,(s), the extensive-form
game reduces to a Markov game with state-dependent action spaces. See [114] for a more
detailed discussion on the connection.
Remark 2.6 (Other MARL Frameworks) Several other theoretical frameworks for MARL also
exist in the literature, e.g., normal-form and/or repeated games [115, 116, 117, 118], and par-
tially observed Markov games [119, 120, 121]. However, the former framework can be viewed
as a special case of MGs, with a singleton state; most early theories of MARL in this framework
have been restricted to small scale problems [116, 118, 117] only. MARL in the latter frame-
work, on the other hand, is inherently challenging to address in general [104, 119], leading to
relatively scarce theories in the literature. Due to space limitation, we do not introduce these
models here in any detail. We will brieﬂy review MARL algorithms under some of these models,
especially the partially observed setting, in §4, though. Interested readers are referred to the
early review [11] for more discussions on MARL in normal-form/repeated games.
3 Challenges in MARL Theory
Despite a general model that ﬁnds broad applications, MARL su ﬀers from several chal-
lenges in theoretical analysis, in addition to those that arise in single-agent RL. We sum-
marize below the challenges that we regard as fundamental in developing theories for
MARL.
3.1 Non-Unique Learning Goals
Unlike single-agent RL, where the goal of the agent is to maximize the long-term return ef-
ﬁciently, the learning goals of MARL can be vague at times. In fact, as argued in [122], the
unclarity of the problems being addressed is the fundamental ﬂaw in many early MARL
works. Indeed, the goals that need to be considered in the analysis of MARL algorithms
can be multi-dimensional. The most common goal, which has, however, been challenged
in [122], is the convergence to Nash equilibrium as deﬁned in §2.2. By deﬁnition, NE
characterizes the point that no agent will deviate from, if any algorithm ﬁnally converges.
This is undoubtedly a reasonable solution concept in game theory, under the assumption
that the agents are all rational , and are capable of perfectly reasoning and inﬁnite mutual
modeling of agents. However, with bounded rationality , the agents may only be able to
perform ﬁnite mutual modeling [106]. As a result, the learning dynamics that are devised
to converge to NE may not be justiﬁable for practical MARL agents. Instead, the goal may
be focused on designing the best learning strategy for a given agent and a ﬁxed class of the
other agents in the game. In fact, these two goals are styled as equilibrium agenda and AI
agenda in [122].
12