exploit the curvature information so that all the stable limit points of the proposed up-
dates are local NEs. Going beyond Nash equilibria, [33, 311] consider gradient-based
learning for Stackelberg equilibria , which correspond to only the one-sided equilibrium
solution in zero-sum games, i.e., either minimax or maximin, as the order of which player
acts ﬁrst is vital in nonconvex-nonconcave problems. [33] introduces the concept of local
minimax point as the solution, and shows that GDA converges to local minimax points
under mild conditions. [311] proposes a two-timescale algorithm where the follower uses
a gradient-play update rule, instead of an exact best response strategy, which has been
shown to converge to the Stackelberg equilibria. Under a stronger assumption of gradient
dominance , [313, 314] have shown that nested gradient descent methods converge to the
stationary points of the outer-loop, i.e., minimax, problem at a sublinear rate.
We note that these convergence results have been developed for general continuous
games with agnostic cost/reward functions, meaning that the functions may have var-
ious forms, so long as they are diﬀerentiable , sometimes even (Lipschitz) smooth , w.r.t.
each agent’s policy parameter. For MARL, this is equivalent to requiring di ﬀerentiabil-
ity/smoothness of the long-term return , which relies on the properties of the game, as
well as of the policy parameterization. Such an assumption is generally very restrictive.
For example, the Lipschitz smoothness assumption fails to hold globally for LQ games
[34, 315, 306], a special type of MGs. Fortunately, thanks to the special structure of the
LQ setting, [34] has proposed several projected nested policy gradient methods that are
guaranteed to have global convergence to the NE, with convergence rates established. This
appears to be the ﬁrst-of-its-kind result in MARL. The results have then been improved
by the techniques in a subsequent work of the authors [100], which can remove the pro-
jection step in the updates, for a more general class of such games. Very recently, [306]
also improves the results in [34] independently, with di ﬀerent techniques.
4.3 Mixed Setting
In stark contrast with the fully collaborative and fully competitive settings, the mixed
setting is notoriously challenging and thus rather less well understood. Even in the sim-
plest case of a two-player general sum normal-form game, ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium
is PPAD-complete [316]. Moreover, [123] has proved that value-iteration methods fail to
ﬁnd stationary Nash or correlated equilibria for general-sum Markov games. Recently, it
is shown that vanilla policy-gradient methods avoid a non-negligible subset of Nash equi-
libria in general-sum continuous games [32], including the LQ general-sum games [315].
Thus, additional structures on either the games or the algorithms need to be exploited, to
ascertain provably convergent MARL in the mixed setting.
Value-Based Methods
Under relatively stringent assumptions, several value-based methods that extend Q-
learning [48] to the mixed setting are guaranteed to ﬁnd an equilibrium. In particular,
35