Besides, it has also been controversial that convergence (to the equilibrium point) is
the dominant performance criterion for MARL algorithm analysis. In fact, it has been
recognized in [123] that value-based MARL algorithms fail to converge to the stationary
NE of general-sum Markov games, which motivated the new solution concept of cyclic
equilibrium therein, at which the agents cycle rigidly through a set of stationary policies,
i.e., not converging to any NE policy. Alternatively, [116, 124] separate the learning goal
into being both stable and rational , where the former ensures the algorithm to be conver-
gent, given a predeﬁned, targeted class of opponents’ algorithms, while the latter requires
the convergence to a best-response when the other agents remain stationary. If all agents
are both stable and rational, convergence to NE naturally arises in this context. More-
over, the notion of regret introduces another angle to capture agents’ rationality, which
measures the performance of the algorithm compared to the best hindsight static strategy
[116, 125, 126]. No-regret algorithms with asymptotically zero average regret guaran-
tee the convergence to the equilibria of certain games [127, 125, 109], which in essence
guarantee that the agent is not exploited by others.
In addition to the goals concerning optimizing the return, several other goals that are
special to multi-agent systems have also drawn increasing attention. For example, [128,
21, 129] investigate learning to communicate , in order for the agents to better coordinate.
Such a concern on communication protocols has naturally inspired the recent studies on
communication-e ﬃcient MARL [130, 131, 132, 133]. Other important goals include how
to learn without over-ﬁtting certain agents [134, 26, 135], and how to learn robustly with
either malicious/adversarial or failed/dysfunctional learning agents [136, 137, 138]. Still
in their infancy, some works concerning aforementioned goals provide only empirical
results, leaving plenty of room for theoretical studies.
3.2 Non-Stationarity
Another key challenge of MARL lies in the fact that multiple agents usually learn concur-
rently, causing the environment faced by each individual agent to be non-stationary . In
particular, the action taken by one agent a ﬀects the reward of other opponent agents, and
the evolution of the state. As a result, the learning agent is required to account for how
the other agents behave and adapt to the joint behavior accordingly. This invalidates the
stationarity assumption for establishing the convergence of single-agent RL algorithms,
namely, the stationary Markovian property of the environment such that the individual
reward and current state depend only on the previous state and action taken. This pre-
cludes the direct use of mathematical tools for single-agent RL analysis in MARL.
Indeed, theoretically, if the agent ignores this issue and optimizes its own policy as-
suming a stationary environment, which is usually referred to as an independent learner ,
the algorithms may fail to converge [139, 115], except for several special settings [37, 38].
Empirically, however, independent learning may achieve satisﬁable performance in prac-
tice [140, 141]. As the most well-known issue in MARL, non-stationarity has long been
13