Figure 3: Four representative applications of recent successes of MARL: unmanned aerial
vehicles, game of Go, Poker games, and team-battle video games.
One prominent application of MARL is the control of practical multi-agent systems,
most of which are cooperative and decentralized. Examples of the scenarios include robot
team navigation [183], smart grid operation [180], and control of mobile sensor networks
[16]. Here we choose unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339], a
recently surging application scenario of multi-agent autonomous systems, as one repre-
sentative example. Speciﬁcally, a team of UAVs are deployed to accomplish a cooperation
task, usually without the coordination of any central controller, i.e., in a decentralized
fashion. Each UAV is normally equipped with communication devices, so that they can
exchange information with some of their teammates, provided that they are inside its
sensing and coverage range. As a consequence, this application naturally ﬁts in the de-
centralized paradigm with networked agents we advocated in §4.1.2, which is also illus-
trated in Figure 2 (b). Due to the high-mobility of UAVs, the communication links among
agents are indeed time-varying and fragile, making (online) cooperation extremely chal-
lenging. Various challenges thus arise in the context of cooperative UAVs, some of which
have recently been addressed by MARL.
In [334], the UAVs’ optimal links discovery and selection problem is considered. Each
UAVu2U, whereUis the set of all UAVs, has the capability to perceive the local available
channels and select a connected link over a common channel shared by another agent
v2U. Each UAV uhas its local set of channels CuwithCuTCv,;for anyu;v, and a
connected link between two adjacent UAVs is built if they announce their messages on
the same channel simultaneously. Each UAV’s local state is whether the previous mes-
sage has been successfully sent, and its action is to choose a pair ( v;chu), withv2Tuand
chu2Cu, whereTuis the set of teammates that agent ucan reach. The availability of lo-
cal channels chu2Cuis modeled as probabilistic, and the reward Ruis calculated by the
number of messages that are successfully sent. Essentially, the algorithm in [334] is based
on independent Q-learning [139], but with two heuristics to improve the tractability and
convergence performance: by fractional slicing , it treats each dimension (fraction) of the
action space independently, and estimates the actual Q-value by the average of that for all
fractions; by mutual sampling , it shares both state-action pairs and a mutual Q-function
parameter. [335] addresses the problem of ﬁeld coverage , where the UAVs aim to provide
a full coverage of an unknown ﬁeld, while minimizing the overlapping sections among
their ﬁeld of views. Modeled as a Markov team, the overall state sis the concatenation of
39