Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective
Overview of Theories and Algorithms
Kaiqing Zhang\Zhuoran YangyTamer Bas ¸ar\
Abstract
Recent years have witnessed signiﬁcant advances in reinforcement learning (RL),
which has registered tremendous success in solving various sequential decision-making
problems in machine learning. Most of the successful RL applications, e.g., the games
of Go and Poker, robotics, and autonomous driving, involve the participation of more
than one single agent, which naturally fall into the realm of multi-agent RL (MARL),
a domain with a relatively long history, and has recently re-emerged due to advances
in single-agent RL techniques. Though empirically successful, theoretical founda-
tions for MARL are relatively lacking in the literature. In this chapter, we provide a
selective overview of MARL, with focus on algorithms backed by theoretical analy-
sis. More speciﬁcally, we review the theoretical results of MARL algorithms mainly
within two representative frameworks, Markov/stochastic games and extensive-form
games, in accordance with the types of tasks they address, i.e., fully cooperative, fully
competitive, and a mix of the two. We also introduce several signiﬁcant but challeng-
ing applications of these algorithms. Orthogonal to the existing reviews on MARL,
we highlight several new angles and taxonomies of MARL theory, including learning
in extensive-form games, decentralized MARL with networked agents, MARL in the
mean-ﬁeld regime, (non-)convergence of policy-based methods for learning in games,
etc. Some of the new angles extrapolate from our own research endeavors and in-
terests. Our overall goal with this chapter is, beyond providing an assessment of the
current state of the ﬁeld on the mark, to identify fruitful future research directions on
theoretical studies of MARL. We expect this chapter to serve as continuing stimulus
for researchers interested in working on this exciting while challenging topic.
\Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Coordinated Science Laboratory, Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1308 West Main, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA. Email: fkzhang66,
basar1g@illinois.edu. Writing of this chapter was supported in part by the US Army Research Labora-
tory (ARL) Cooperative Agreement W911NF-17-2-0196, and in part by the Air Force O ﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research (AFOSR) Grant FA9550-19-1-0353.
yDepartment of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, 98 Charlton St,
Princeton, NJ, 08540, USA. Email: zy6@princeton.edu.
1arXiv:1911.10635v2  [cs.LG]  28 Apr 2021