two teams, with each agent having imperfect information of the game. For this challeng-
ing problem, in 2018, OpenAI has proposed the OpenAI Five AI system [3], which enjoys
superhuman performance and has defeated human world champions in an e-sports game.
The algorithmic framework integrates LSTM for learning good representations and prox-
imal policy optimization [72] with self-play for policy learning. Moreover, to balance
between e ﬀective coordination and communication cost, instead of having explicit com-
munication channels among the teams, OpenAI Five utilizes reward shaping by having
a hyperparameter, named “team spirit”, to balance the relative importance between each
hero’s individual reward function and the average of the team’s reward function.
6 Conclusions and Future Directions
Multi-agent RL has long been an active and signiﬁcant research area in reinforcement
learning, in view of the ubiquity of sequential decision-making with multiple agents cou-
pled in their actions and information. In stark contrast to its great empirical success, the-
oretical understanding of MARL algorithms is well recognized to be challenging and rel-
atively lacking in the literature. Indeed, establishing an encompassing theory for MARL
requires tools spanning dynamic programming, game theory, optimization theory, and
statistics, which are non-trivial to unify and investigate within one context.
In this chapter, we have provided a selective overview of mostly recent MARL algo-
rithms, backed by theoretical analysis, followed by several high-proﬁle but challenging
applications that have been addressed lately. Following the classical overview [11], we
have categorized the algorithms into three groups: those solving problems that are fully
cooperative, fully competitive, and a mix of the two. Orthogonal to the existing reviews
on MARL, this chapter has laid emphasis on several new angles and taxonomies of MARL
theory, some of which have been drawn from our own research endeavors and interests.
We note that our overview should not be viewed as a comprehensive one, but instead as
a focused one dictated by our own interests and expertise, which should appeal to re-
searchers of similar interests, and provide a stimulus for future research directions in this
general topical area. Accordingly, we have identiﬁed the following paramount while open
avenues for future research on MARL theory.
Partially observed settings: Partial observability of the system states and the actions of
other agents is quintessential and inevitable in many practical MARL applications. In
general, these settings can be modeled as a partially observed stochastic game (POSG),
which includes the cooperative setting with a common reward function, i.e., the Dec-
POMDP model, as a special case. Nevertheless, as pointed out in §4.1.3, even the cooper-
ative task is NEXP-complete [104] and di ﬃcult to solve. In fact, the information state for
optimal decision-making in POSGs can be very complicated and involve belief generation
over the opponents’ policies [119], compared to that in POMDPs, which requires belief
on only states. This di ﬃculty essentially stems from the heterogenous beliefs of agents
46