lished for simultaneous move multistage games with a common (also zero-sum, see §4.2.2)
reward, a special Markov team with initial and absorbing states, and each state being
visited only once.
Markov Potential Games
From a game-theoretic perspective, a more general framework to embrace cooperation
ispotential games [163], where there exits some potential function shared by all agents,
such that if any agent changes its policy unilaterally, the change in its reward equals (or
proportions to) that in the potential function. Though most potential games are state-
less, an extension named Markov potential games (MPGs) has gained increasing attention
for modeling sequential decision-making [92, 22], which includes Markovian states whose
evolution is a ﬀected by the joint actions. Indeed, MMDPs/Markov teams constitute a
particular case of MPGs, with the potential function being the common reward; such
dynamic games can also be viewed as being strategically equivalent to Markov teams, us-
ing the terminology in, e.g., [164, Chapter 1]. Under this model, [93] provides veriﬁable
conditions for a Markov game to be an MPG, and shows the equivalence between ﬁnd-
ing closed-loop NE in MPG and solving a single-agent optimal control problem. Hence,
single-agent RL algorithms are then enabled to solve this MARL problem.
Mean-Field Regime
Another idea toward tackling the scalability issue is to take the setting to the mean-
ﬁeld regime, with an extremely large number of homogeneous agents. Each agent’s e ﬀect
on the overall multi-agent system can thus become inﬁnitesimal, resulting in all agents
being interchangeable/indistinguishable. The interaction with other agents, however, is
captured simply by some mean-ﬁeld quantity, e.g., the average state, or the empirical
distribution of states. Each agent only needs to ﬁnd the best response to the mean-ﬁeld,
which considerably simpliﬁes the analysis. This mean-ﬁeld view of multi-agent systems
has been approached by the mean-ﬁeld games (MFGs) model [165, 166, 167, 168, 169],
the team model with mean-ﬁeld sharing [170, 171], and the game model with mean-ﬁeld
actions [172].7
MARL in these models have not been explored until recently, mostly in the non-
cooperative setting of MFGs, see §4.3 for a more detailed review. Regarding the coop-
erative setting, recent work [175] studies RL for Markov teams with mean-ﬁeld sharing
[170, 176, 171]. Compared to MFG, the model considers agents that share a common
reward function depending only on the local state and the mean-ﬁeld, which encourages
cooperation among the agents. Also, the term mean-ﬁeld refers to the empirical average for
the states of ﬁnite population, in contrast to the expectation and probability distribution of
inﬁnite population in MFGs. Based on the dynamic programming decomposition for the
7The diﬀerence between mean-ﬁeld teams and mean-ﬁeld games is mainly the solution concept: opti-
mum versus equilibrium, as the di ﬀerence between general dynamic team theory [173, 88, 174] and game
theory [82, 84]. Although the former can be viewed as a special case of the latter, related works are usually
reviewed separately in the literature. We follow here this convention.
18