(a) Centralized setting(b) Decentralized setting
with networked agents(c) Fully decentralized setting
Figure 2: Three representative information structures in MARL. Speciﬁcally, in (a), there
exists a central controller that can aggregate information from the agents, e.g., joint ac-
tions, joint rewards, and joint observations, and even design policies for all agents. The
information exchanged between the central controller and the agents can thus include
both some private observations from the agents, and the local policies designed for each
agent from the controller. In both (b) and (c), there is no such a central controller, and
are thus both referred to as decentralized structures. In (b), agents are connected via a
possibly time-varying communication network, so that the local information can spread
across the network, by information exchange with only each agent’s neighbors. (b) is more
common in cooperative MARL settings. In (c), the agents are full decentralized, with no
explicit information exchange with each other. Instead, each agent makes decisions based
on its local observations, without any coordination and/or aggregation of data. The local
observations that vary across agents, however, may contain some global information, e.g.,
the joint actions of other agents, namely the control sharing information structure [149].
Such a fully decentralized structure can also be found in many game-theoretic learning
algorithms.
reward, and su ﬀers from non-convergence in general [139].
Learning schemes resulting from various information structures lead to various lev-
els of di ﬃculty for theoretical analysis. Speciﬁcally, to mitigate the partial information
issue above, a great deal of work assumes the existence of a central controller that can
collect information such as joint actions, joint rewards, and joint observations, and even
design policies for all agents [119, 150, 26, 141, 28, 151, 152, 130, 147]. This structure
gives birth to the popular learning scheme of centralized-learning-decentralized-execution ,
which stemmed from the works on planning for the partially observed setting, namely,
Dec-POMDPs [119, 150, 153], and has been widely adopted in recent (deep) MARL works
[26, 141, 28, 151, 130, 147]. For cooperative settings, this learning scheme greatly sim-
pliﬁes the analysis, allowing the use of tools for single-agent RL analysis. Though, for
non-cooperative settings with heterogeneous agents, this scheme does not signiﬁcantly
simplify the analysis, as the learning goals of the agents are not aligned, see §3.1.
Nonetheless, generally such a central controller does not exist in many applications,
15