tension of Markov games to partially observed case may be applicable, which, however, is
challenging to solve, even under the cooperative setting [36, 104].6
In contrast, another framework, named extensive-form games [105, 106], can hand-
ily model imperfect information for multi-agent decision-making. This framework is
rooted in computational game theory and has been shown to admit polynomial-time al-
gorithms under mild conditions [107]. We brieﬂy introduce the framework of extensive-
form games as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.4 Anextensive-form game is deﬁned by (N[fcg;H;Z;A;fRigi2N;;c;S), where
N=f1;:::;Ngdenotes the set of N > 1agents, andcis a special agent called chance ornature ,
which has a ﬁxed stochastic policy that speciﬁes the randomness of the environment. Besides,
Ais the set of all possible actions that agents can take and His the set of all possible histo-
ries, where each history is a sequence of actions taken from the beginning of the game. Let
A(h) =fajha2Hg denote the set of actions available after a nonterminal history h. Suppose
an agent takes action a2A(h)given history h2H, which then leads to a new history ha2H.
Among all histories, ZH is a subset of terminal histories that represents the completion of
a game. A utility is assigned to each agent i2N at a terminal history, dictated by the function
Ri:Z!R. Moreover,:H!N[fcgis the identiﬁcation function that speciﬁes which agent
takes the action at each history. If (h) =c, the chance agent takes an action aaccording to its
policyc, i.e.,ac(jh). Furthermore,Sis the partition of Hsuch that for any s2Sand
anyh;h02s, we have(h) =(h0)andA(h) =A(h0). In other words, histories handh0in the
same partition are indistinguishable to the agent that is about to take action, namely (h). The
elements inSare referred to as information states .
Intuitively, the imperfect information of an extensive-form game is reﬂected by the
fact that agents cannot distinguish between histories in the same information set. Since
we have(h) =(h0) andA(h) =A(h0) for allh;h02sands2S, for ease of presentation,
in the sequel, for all h2s, we letA(s) and(s) denoteA(h) and(h), respectively. We
also deﬁne a mapping I:H!S by lettingI(h) =sifh2s. Moreover, we only consider
games where both HandAare ﬁnite sets. To simplify the notation, for any two histories
h;h02H, we refer to has a preﬁx ofh0, denoted by hvh0, ifh0can be reached from h
by taking a sequence of actions. In this case, we call h0asuﬃxofh. Furthermore, we
assume throughout that the game features perfect recall , which implies that each agent
remembers the sequence of the information states and actions that have led to its current
information state. The assumption of perfect recall is commonly made in the literature,
which enables the existence of polynomial-time algorithms for solving the game [107].
More importantly, by the celebrated Kuhn’s theorem [108], under such an assumption, to
ﬁnd the set of Nash equilibria, it su ﬃces to restrict the derivation to the set of behavioral
policies which map each information set s2Sto a probability distribution over A(s). For
6Partially observed Markov games under the cooperative setting are usually formulated as decentralized
POMDP (Dec-POMDP) problems. See §4.1.3 for more discussions on this setting.
10