which contains its history collected in previous time steps and the observation received
at timet. With the information Ii
t, agentitakes an action ai
t2Aiand also broadcasts
messagesmi!j
tto all agents jwithi2Nj
t. That is, the policy i
tof agentiis a mapping
fromIi
tto a (random) action eai
t= (ai
t;fmi!j
t:i2Nj
tg), i.e.,eai
ti
t(jIi
t). Notice that the size
of information set Ii
tgrows astgrows. To handle the memory issue, it is common to ﬁrst
embedIi
tin a ﬁxed latent space via recurrent neural network (RNN) or Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) [340] and deﬁne the value and policy functions on top of the embedded
features. Moreover, most existing works in this line of research adopt the paradigm of
centralized learning and utilize techniques such as weight-sharing or attention mecha-
nism [341] to increase computational e ﬃciency. With centralized learning, single-agent
RL algorithms such as Q-learning and actor-critic are readily applicable.
In particular, [21] ﬁrst proposes to tackle the problem of learning to communicate via
deep Q-learning. They propose to use two Q networks that govern taking action ai2A
and producing messages separately. Their training algorithm is an extension of the deep
recurrent Q-learning (DRQN) [342], which combines RNN and deep Q-learning [10]. Fol-
lowing [21], various works [343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353, 354]
have proposed a variety of neural network architectures to foster communication among
agents. These works combine single-agent RL methods with novel developments in deep
learning, and demonstrate their performance via empirical studies. Among these works,
[346, 345, 348, 353, 354] have reported the emergence of computational communication
protocols among the agents when the RL algorithm is trained from scratch with text or
image inputs. We remark that the algorithms used in these works are more akin to single-
agent RL due to centralized learning. For more details overviews of multi-agent commu-
nication, we refer the interested readers to Section 6 of [42] and Section 3 of [20].
5.2 Competitive Setting
Regarding the competitive setting, in the following, we highlight the recent applications
of MARL to the game of Go andTexas hold’em poker , which are archetypal instances of two-
player perfect-information and partial-information extensive-form games, respectively.
The Game of Go
The game of Go is a board game played by two competing players, with the goal of
surrounding more territory on the board than the opponent. These two players have
access to white or black stones respectively, and take turns placing their stones on a 19 19
board, representing their territories. In each move, a player can place a stone to any of
the total 361 positions on the board that is not already taken by a stone. Once placed on
the board, the stones cannot be moved. But the stones will be removed from the board
when completely surrounded by opposing stones. The game terminates when neither of
the players is unwilling or unable to make a further move, and the winner is determined
by counting the area of the territory and the number of stones captured by the players.
41