single-agent RL techniques. Indeed, a huge volume of work on MARL has appeared lately,
focusing on either identifying new learning criteria and/or setups [21, 22, 23, 24], or de-
veloping new algorithms for existing setups, thanks to the development of deep learning
[25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31], operations research [32, 33, 34, 35], and multi-agent systems
[36, 37, 38, 39]. Nevertheless, not all the e ﬀorts are placed under rigorous theoretical
footings, partly due to the limited understanding of even single-agent deep RL theories,
and partly due to the inherent challenges in multi-agent settings. As a consequence, it is
imperative to review and organize the MARL algorithms with theoretical guarantees, in
order to highlight the boundary of existing research endeavors, and stimulate potential
future directions on this topic.
In this chapter, we provide a selective overview of theories and algorithms in MARL,
together with several signiﬁcant while challenging applications. More speciﬁcally, we fo-
cus on two representative frameworks of MARL, namely, Markov/stochastic games and
extensive-form games, in discrete-time settings as in standard single-agent RL. In con-
formity with the aforementioned three groups, we review and pay particular attention to
MARL algorithms with convergence and complexity analysis, most of which are fairly re-
cent. With this focus in mind, we note that our overview is by no means comprehensive.
In fact, besides the classical reference [11], there are several other reviews on MARL that
have appeared recently, due to the resurgence of MARL [40, 20, 41, 42]. We would like
to emphasize that these reviews provide views and taxonomies that are complementary
to ours: [40] surveys the works that are speciﬁcally devised to address opponent-induced
non-stationarity , one of the challenges we discuss in §3; [20, 41] are relatively more com-
prehensive, but with the focal point on deep MARL, a subarea with scarce theories thus
far; [42], on the other hand, focuses on algorithms in the cooperative setting only, though
the review within this setting is extensive.
Finally, we spotlight several new angles and taxonomies that are comparatively un-
derexplored in the existing MARL reviews, primarily owing to our own research endeav-
ors and interests. First, we discuss the framework of extensive-form games in MARL, in
addition to the conventional one of Markov games, or even simpliﬁed repeated games
[11, 40, 20]; second, we summarize the progresses of a recently boosting subarea: de-
centralized MARL with networked agents, as an extrapolation of our early works on this
[23, 43, 44]; third, we bring about the mean-ﬁeld regime into MARL, as a remedy for the
case with an extremely large population of agents; fourth, we highlight some recent ad-
vances in optimization theory, which shed lights on the (non-)convergence of policy-based
methods for MARL, especially zero-sum games. We have also reviewed some of the lit-
erature on MARL in partially observed settings, but without using deep RL as heuristic
solutions. We expect these new angles to help identify fruitful future research directions,
and more importantly, inspire researchers with interests in establishing rigorous theoret-
ical foundations on MARL.
Roadmap. The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In §2, we introduce the
3