background of MARL: standard algorithms for single-agent RL, and the frameworks of
MARL. In §3, we summarize several challenges in developing MARL theory, in addition
to the single-agent counterparts. A series of MARL algorithms, mostly with theoretical
guarantees, are reviewed and organized in §4, according to the types of tasks they address.
In §5, we brieﬂy introduce a few recent successes of MARL driven by the algorithms
mentioned, followed by conclusions and several open research directions outlined in §6.
2 Background
In this section, we provide the necessary background on reinforcement learning, in both
single- and multi-agent settings.
2.1 Single-Agent RL
A reinforcement learning agent is modeled to perform sequential decision-making by
interacting with the environment. The environment is usually formulated as an inﬁnite-
horizon discounted Markov decision process (MDP), henceforth referred to as Markov
decision process2, which is formally deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.1 AMarkov decision process is deﬁned by a tuple (S;A;P;R;
 ), whereSand
Adenote the state and action spaces, respectively; P:SA! (S)denotes the transition
probability from any state s2Sto any states02Sfor any given action a2A;R:SAS!
Ris the reward function that determines the immediate reward received by the agent for a
transition from (s;a)tos0;
2[0;1)is the discount factor that trades o ﬀthe instantaneous and
future rewards.
As a standard model, MDP has been widely adopted to characterize the decision-
making of an agent with full observability of the system state s.3At each time t, the agent
chooses to execute an action atin face of the system state st, which causes the system
to transition to st+1P(jst;at). Moreover, the agent receives an instantaneous reward
R(st;at;st+1). The goal of solving the MDP is thus to ﬁnd a policy :S!(A), a mapping
from the state space Sto the distribution over the action space A, so thatat(jst) and
the discounted accumulated reward
E"X
t0
tR(st;at;st+1)at(jst);s0#
2Note that there are several other standard formulations of MDPs, e.g., time-average-reward setting and
ﬁnite-horizon episodic setting. Here, we only present the classical inﬁnite-horizon discounted setting for
ease of exposition.
3The partially observed MDP (POMDP) model is usually advocated when the agent has no access to the
exact system state but only an observation of the state. See [45, 46] for more details on the POMDP model.
4