generative model, by extending the previous near-optimal Q-learning algorithm for MDPs
[241]. In the online setting, where the learner controls only one of the players that plays
against an arbitrary opponent, [242] has proposed UCSG, an algorithm for the average-
reward zero-sum MGs, using the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty [243, 244].
UCSG is shown to achieve a sublinear regret compared to the game value when compet-
ing with an arbitrary opponent, and also achieve eO(poly(1=)) sample complexity if the
opponent plays an optimistic best response.
Furthermore, when it comes to zero-sum games with imperfect information, [245, 246,
247, 248] have proposed to transform extensive-form games into normal-form games us-
ing the sequence form representation, which enables equilibrium ﬁnding via linear pro-
gramming. In addition, by lifting the state space to the space of belief states, [249,
250, 251, 119, 252] have applied dynamic programming methods to zero-sum stochas-
tic games. Both of these approaches guarantee ﬁnding of a Nash equilibrium but are only
eﬃcient for small-scale problems. Finally, MCTS with UCB-type action selection rule
[51, 52, 53] can also be applied to two-player turn-based games with incomplete informa-
tion [52, 253, 254, 255, 256], which lays the foundation for the recent success of deep RL
for the game of Go [1]. Moreover, these methods are shown to converge to the minimax
solution of the game, thus can be viewed as a counterpart of minimax-Q learning with
Monte-Carlo sampling.
4.2.2 Policy-Based Methods
Policy-based reinforcement learning methods introduced in §2.1.2 can also be extended
to the multi-agent setting. Instead of ﬁnding the ﬁxed point of the Bellman operator, a fair
amount of methods only focus on a single agent and aim to maximize the expected return
of that agent, disregarding the other agents’ policies. Speciﬁcally, from the perspective of
a single agent, the environment is time-varying as the other agents also adjust their poli-
cies. Policy based methods aim to achieve the optimal performance when other agents
play arbitrarily by minimizing the (external) regret , that is, ﬁnd a sequence of actions that
perform nearly as well as the optimal ﬁxed policy in hindsight. An algorithm with neg-
ligible average overall regret is called no-regret orHannan consistent [257]. Any Hannan
consistent algorithm is known to have the following two desired properties in repeated
normal-form games. First, when other agents adopt stationary policies, the time-average
policy constructed by the algorithm converges to the best response policy (against the
ones used by the other agents). Second, more interestingly, in two-player zero-sum games,
when both players adopt Hannan consistent algorithms and both their average overall re-
grets are no more than , their time-average policies constitute a 2 -approximate Nash
equilibrium [126]. Thus, any Hannan consistent single-agent reinforcement learning al-
gorithm can be applied to ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of two-player zero-sum games via
self-play . Most of these methods belong to one of the following two families: ﬁctitious
play [258, 259], and counterfactual regret minimization [109], which will be summarized
29