except the ones that can easily access a simulator, such as video games and robotics.
As a consequence, a fully decentralized learning scheme is preferred, which includes the
aforementioned independent learning scheme as a special case. To address the non-
convergence issue in independent learning, agents are usually allowed to exchange/share
local information with their neighbors over a communication network [94, 154, 155, 23,
43, 44, 156, 96, 95, 157, 158, 131]. We refer to this setting as a decentralized one with net-
worked agents . Theoretical analysis for convergence is then made possible in this setting,
the diﬃculty of which sits between that of single-agent RL and general MARL algorithms.
Three di ﬀerent information structures are depicted in Figure 2.
4 MARL Algorithms with Theory
This section provides a selective review of MARL algorithms, and categorizes them ac-
cording to the tasks to address. Exclusively, we review here the works that are focused
on the theoretical studies only, which are mostly built upon the two representative MARL
frameworks, fully observed Markov games and extensive-form games, introduced in §2.2.
A brief summary on MARL for partially observed Markov games in cooperative settings,
namely, the Dec-POMDP problems, is also provided below in §4.1, due to their relatively
more mature theory than that of MARL for general partially observed Markov games.
4.1 Cooperative Setting
Cooperative MARL constitutes a great portion of MARL settings, where all agents collab-
orate with each other to achieve some shared goal. Most cooperative MARL algorithms
backed by theoretical analysis are devised for the following more speciﬁc settings.
4.1.1 Homogeneous Agents
A majority of cooperative MARL settings involve homogeneous agents with a common re-
ward function that aligns all agents’ interests. In the extreme case with large populations
of agents, such a homogeneity also indicates that the agents play an interchangeable role
in the system evolution, and can hardly be distinguished from each other. We elaborate
more on homogeneity below.
Multi-Agent MDP & Markov Teams
Consider a Markov game as in Deﬁnition 2.2 with R1=R2==RN=R, where the
rewardR:SAS! Ris inﬂuenced by the joint action in A=A1AN. As a result,
the Q-function is identical for all agents. Hence, a straightforward algorithm proceeds by
performing the standard Q-learning update (2.1) at each agent, but taking the max over
the joint action space a02A. Convergence to the optimal/equilibrium Q-function has
been established in [49, 159], when both state and action spaces are ﬁnite.
16