resulting from their own observations obtained from the model, an inherent challenge
of MARL mentioned in §3 due to various information structures. It might be possible to
start by generalizing the centralized-learning-decentralized-execution scheme for solving
Dec-POMDPs [121, 152] to solving POSGs.
Deep MARL theory: As mentioned in §3.3, using deep neural networks for function
approximation can address the scalability issue in MARL. In fact, most of the recent em-
pirical successes in MARL result from the use of DNNs [25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. Nonetheless,
because of lack of theoretical backings, we have not included details of these algorithms in
this chapter. Very recently, a few attempts have been made to understand the global con-
vergence of several single-agent deep RL algorithms, such as neural TD learning [373] and
neural policy optimization [79, 78], when overparameterized neural networks [374, 375]
are used. It is thus promising to extend these results to multi-agent settings, as initial
steps toward theoretical understanding of deep MARL.
Model-based MARL: It may be slightly surprising that very few MARL algorithms in
the literature are model-based , in the sense that the MARL model is ﬁrst estimated, and
then used as a nominal one to design algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, the only
existing model-based MARL algorithms include the early one in [376] that solves single-
controller-stochastic games, a special zero-sum MG; and the later improved one in [377],
named R-MAX, for zero-sum MGs. These algorithms are also built upon the principle
of optimism in the face of uncertainty [243, 244], as several aforementioned model-free
ones. Considering recent progresses in model-based RL, especially its provable advan-
tages over model-free ones in certain regimes [378, 379], it is worth generalizing these
results to MARL to improve its sample e ﬃciency.
Convergence of policy gradient methods: As mentioned in §4.3, the convergence result
of vanilla policy gradient method in general MARL is mostly negative, i.e., it may avoid
even the local NE points in many cases. This is essentially related to the challenge of non-
stationarity in MARL, see §3.2. Even though some remedies have been advocated [312,
321, 322, 311] to stabilize the convergence in general continuous games, these assumptions
are not easily veriﬁed/satisﬁed in MARL, e.g., even in the simplest LQ setting [315], as
they depend not only on the model, but also on the policy parameterization. Due to this
subtlety, it may be interesting to explore the (global) convergence of policy-based methods
for MARL, probably starting with the simple LQ setting, i.e., general-sum LQ games, in
analogy to that for the zero-sum counterpart [34, 306]. Such an exploration may also
beneﬁt from the recent advances of nonconvex-(non)concave optimization [380, 33, 314].
MARL with robustness/safety concerns: Concerning the challenge of non-unique learn-
ing goals in MARL (see §3.1), we believe it is of merit to consider robustness and/or safety
constraints in MARL. To the best of our knowledge, this is still a relatively uncharted
territory. In fact, safe RL has been recognized as one of the most signiﬁcant challenges
47