(a) Markov decision process (b) Markov game (c) Extensive-form game
Figure 1: Schematic diagrams for the system evolution of a Markov decision process,
a Markov game, and an extensive-form game, which correspond to the frameworks for
single- and multi-agent RL, respectively. Speciﬁcally, in an MDP as in (a), the agent ob-
serves the state sand receives reward rfrom the system, after outputting the action a; in
an MG as in (b), all agents choose actions aisimultaneously, after observing the system
statesand receiving each individual reward ri; in a two-player extensive-form game as in
(c), the agents make decisions on choosing actions aialternately, and receive each individ-
ual rewardri(z) at the end of the game, with zbeing the terminal history. In the imperfect
information case, player 2 is uncertain about where he/she is in the game, which makes
the information set non-singleton.
state and the reward received by each agent are inﬂuenced by the joint actions of all
agents. More intriguingly, each agent has its own long-term reward to optimize, which
now becomes a function of the policies of all other agents. Such a general model ﬁnds
broad applications in practice, see §5 for a detailed review of several prominent examples.
In general, there exist two seemingly di ﬀerent but closely related theoretical frame-
works for MARL, Markov/stochastic games and extensive-form games, as to be intro-
duced next. Evolution of the systems under di ﬀerent frameworks are illustrated in Figure
1.
2.2.1 Markov/Stochastic Games
One direct generalization of MDP that captures the intertwinement of multiple agents is
Markov games (MGs), also known as stochastic games [82]. Originated from the seminal
work [83], the framework of MGs4has long been used in the literature to develop MARL
algorithms, see §4 for more details. We introduce the formal deﬁnition as below.
Deﬁnition 2.2 AMarkov game is deﬁned by a tuple (N;S;fAigi2N;P;fRigi2N;
), where
N=f1;;Ngdenotes the set of N > 1agents,Sdenotes the state space observed by all agents,
Aidenotes the action space of agent i. LetA:=A1AN, thenP:SA! (S)denotes
4Similar to the single-agent setting, here we only introduce the inﬁnite-horizon discounted setting for
simplicity, though other settings of MGs, e.g., time-average-reward setting and ﬁnite-horizon episodic set-
ting, also exist [84].
7