wins all the money that the players wager for that hand, which is also known as the pot.
Note that each hand of Texas hold’em terminates after three rounds, and the payo ﬀs of
the player are only known after the hand ends. Also notice that each player is unaware of
the private cards of the rest of the players. Thus, Texas hold’em is an instance of multi-
player extensive-form game with incomplete information. The game is called heads-up
when there are only two players. When both the bet sizes and the amount of allowed
raises are ﬁxed, the game is called limit hold’em . In the no-limit hold’em, however, each
player may bet or raise any amount up to all of the money the player has at the table, as
long as it exceeds the previous bet or raise.
There has been quest for developing superhuman computer poker programs for over
two decades [358, 113]. Various methods have been shown successful for simple varia-
tions of poker such as Kuhn poker [359] and Leduc hold’em [360]. However, the full-
ﬂedged Texas hold’em is much more challenging and several breakthroughs have been
achieved only recently. The simplest version of Texas hold’em is heads-up limit hold’em
(HULHE), which has 3 :91014information sets in total [361], where a player is required
to take an action at each information set. [361] has for the ﬁrst time reported solving
HULHE to approximate Nash equilibrium via CFR+[293, 294], a variant of counterfac-
tual regret minimization [109]. Subsequently, other methods such as Neural Fictitious
Self-Play [25] and Monte-Carlo tree search with self-play [362] have also been adopted to
successfully solve HULHE.
Despite these breakthroughs, solving heads-up no-limit hold’em (HUNL) with artiﬁcial
intelligence has remained open until recently, which has more than 6 10161information
sets, an astronomical number. Thus, in HUNL, it is impossible (in today’s computational
power) to traverse all information sets, making it inviable to apply CFR+as in [361].
Ground-breaking achievements have recently been made by DeepStack [363] and Libra-
tus[364], two computer poker programs developed independently, which defeat human
professional poker players in HUNL for the ﬁrst time. Both of these programs adopt CFR
as the backbone of their algorithmic frameworks, but adopt di ﬀerent strategies for han-
dling the gigantic size of the game. In particular, DeepStack applies deep learning to
learn good representations of the game and proposes deep counterfactual value networks to
integrate deep learning and CFR. Moreover, DeepStack adopts limited depth lookahead
planning to reduce the gigantic 6 10161information sets to no more than 1017informa-
tion sets, thus making it possible to enumerate all information sets. In contrast, Libratus
does not utilize any deep learning techniques. Instead, it reduces the size of the game
by computation of an abstraction of the game, which is possible since many of the infor-
mation sets are very similar. Moreover, it further reduces the complexity by using the
sub-game decomposition technique [365, 366, 367] for imperfect-information games and
by constructing ﬁne-grained abstractions of the sub-games. When the abstractions are
constructed, an improved version of the Monte-Carlo CFR [281, 282, 283] is utilized to
compute the policy. Furthermore, very recently, based upon Libratus , [8] has proposed
Pluribus , a computer poker program that has been shown to be stronger than top human
44