However, convergence of the Q-function does not necessarily imply that of the equilib-
rium policy for the Markov team, as any combination of equilibrium policies extracted at
each agent may not constitute an equilibrium policy, if the equilibrium policies are non-
unique, and the agents fail to agree on which one to select. Hence, convergence to the NE
policy is only guaranteed if either the equilibrium is assumed to be unique [159], or the
agents are coordinated for equilibrium selection. The latter idea has ﬁrst been validated
in the cooperative repeated games setting [115], a special case of Markov teams with a
singleton state, where the agents are joint-action learners (JAL), maintaining a Q-value
for joint actions, and learning empirical models of all others. Convergence to equilib-
rium point is claimed in [115], without a formal proof. For the actual Markov teams, this
coordination has been exploited in [90], which proposes optimal adaptive learning (OAL),
the ﬁrst MARL algorithm with provable convergence to the equilibrium policy. Speciﬁ-
cally, OAL ﬁrst learns the game structure, and constructs virtual games at each state that
areweakly acyclic with respect to (w.r.t.) a biased set. OAL can be shown to converge to
the NE, by introducing the biased adaptive play learning algorithm for the constructed
weakly acyclic games, motivated from [160].
Apart from equilibrium selection, another subtlety special to Markov teams (com-
pared to single-agent RL) is the necessity to address the scalability issue, see §3.3. As
independent Q-learning may fail to converge [139], one early attempt toward developing
scalable while convergent algorithms for MMDPs is [87], which advocates a distributed
Q-learning algorithm that converges for deterministic ﬁnite MMDPs. Each agent main-
tains only a Q-table of state sand local action ai, and successively takes maximization
over the joint action a0. No other agent’s actions and their histories can be acquired by
each individual agent. Several other heuristics (with no theoretical backing) regarding ei-
ther reward or value function factorization have been proposed to mitigate the scalability
issue [143, 144, 145, 146, 147]. Very recently, [161] provides a rigorous characteriza-
tion of conditions that justify this value factorization idea. Another recent theoretical
work along this direction is [148], which imposes a special dependence structure, i.e., a
one-directional tree, so that the (near-)optimal policy of the overall MMDP can be prov-
ably well-approximated by local policies . More recently, [38] has studied common interest
games, which includes Markov teams as an example, and develops a decentralized RL al-
gorithm that relies on only states, local actions and rewards. With the same information
structure as independent Q-learning [139], the algorithm is guaranteed to converge to
team optimal equilibrium policies, and not just equilibrium policies. This is important
as in general, a suboptimal equilibrium can perform arbitrarily worse than the optimal
equilibrium [38].
For policy-based methods, to our knowledge, the only convergence guarantee for this
setting exists in [162]. The authors propose two-timescale actor-critic ﬁctitious play algo-
rithms, where at the slower timescale, the actor mixes the current policy and the best-
response one w.r.t. the local Q-value estimate, while at the faster timescale the critic
performs policy evaluation, as if all agents’ policies are stationary. Convergence is estab-
17