Policy Gradient Methods for the Noisy Linear Quadratic Regulator
over a Finite Horizon
Ben Hambly∗Renyuan Xu∗Huining Yang†∗
June 25, 2021
Abstract
We explore reinforcement learning methods for ﬁnding the optimal policy in the linear quadratic
regulator (LQR) problem. In particular we consider the convergence of policy gradient methods in
the setting of known and unknown parameters. We are able to produce a global linear convergence
guarantee for this approach in the setting of ﬁnite time horizon and stochastic state dynamics under
weak assumptions. The convergence of a projected policy gradient method is also established in
order to handle problems with constraints. We illustrate the performance of the algorithm with two
examples. The ﬁrst example is the optimal liquidation of a holding in an asset. We show results for
the case where we assume a model for the underlying dynamics and where we apply the method to
the data directly. The empirical evidence suggests that the policy gradient method can learn the
global optimal solution for a larger class of stochastic systems containing the LQR framework and
that it is more robust with respect to model mis-speciﬁcation when compared to a model-based
approach. The second example is an LQR system in a higher dimensional setting with synthetic
data.
1 Introduction
The Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) problem is one of the most fundamental in optimal control
theory. Its aim is to ﬁnd a control for a linear dynamical system, that is the dynamics of the state of the
system is described by a linear function of the current state and input, subject to a quadratic cost. It is
an important problem for a number of reasons: (1) the LQR problem is one of the few optimal control
problems for which there exists a closed-form analytical representation of the optimal feedback control;
(2) when the dynamics are nonlinear and hard to analyze, a LQR approximation may be obtained as
a local expansion and provide an approximation that is provably close to the original problem; (3) the
LQR has been used in a wide variety of applications. In particular, in the set-up of ﬁxed time horizon
and stochastic dynamics, applications include portfolio optimization [3] and optimal liquidation [7] in
ﬁnance, resource allocation in energy markets [40, 45], and biological movement systems [34].
Until recently much of the work on the LQR problem has focused on solving for the optimal controls
under the assumption that the model parameters are fully known . See the book of Anderson and Moore
[9] for an introduction to the LQR problem with known parameters. However, assuming that the
controller has access to all the model parameters is not realistic for many applications, and this has lead
to the exploration of learning approaches to the problem. We consider reinforcement learning (RL),
one of the three basic machine learning paradigms (alongside supervised learning and unsupervised
learning). Unlike the situation with full information on the model parameters, RL is learning to make
∗Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford. Email: {hambly, xur, yang}@maths.ox.ac.uk
†Supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Industrially Focused Mathematical Modelling
(EP/L015803/1) in collaboration with BP plc.
1arXiv:2011.10300v2  [cs.LG]  23 Jun 2021