decisions via trial and error, through interactions with the (partially) unknown environment. In RL,
an agent takes an action and receives a reinforcement signal in terms of a numerical reward, which
encodes the outcome of her action. In order to maximize the accumulated reward over time, the agent
learns to select her actions based on her past experiences (exploitation) and/or by making new choices
(exploration). There are two popular approaches in RL to handle the LQR with unknown parameters:
the model-based approach and the model-free approach.
In the paradigm of the model-based approach, the controller estimates the unknown model parame-
ters and then constructs a control policy based on the estimated parameters. The classical approach is
thecertainty equivalence principle [10]: the unknown parameters are estimated using observations (or
samples), and a control policy is then designed by treating the estimated parameters as the truth. In
the ﬁrst step, the unknown model parameters can be estimated by standard statistical methods such
as least-square minimization [20]. The second step is to show that when the estimated parameters
are accurate enough, the policy using the “plug-in” estimates enjoys good theoretical guarantees of
being close to optimal. See [20] and [24] for the optimal gap and sample complexities along this line
and see [22] for the sample complexity with distributed robust learning. Another line of work in the
model-based regime focuses on uncertainty quantiﬁcation. The controller updates their posterior belief
or the conﬁdence bounds on the unknown model parameters and then makes decisions in an online
manner, see [1, 2, 21, 31, 39].
Another recently developed approach is the model-free approach , where the controller learns the
optimal policy directlyvia interacting with the system, without inferring the model parameters. As
the optimal policy in the LQR problem is a linear function of the state, the aim is to determine this
linear function. This is equivalent to learning a set of parameters in matrix form, called the policy
matrix. One natural way to achieve this goal is to apply the gradient descent method in the parameter
space of the policy matrix, also referred to as the policy gradient method . In particular, the policy
gradient method computes the gradient of the cost function with respect to the policy matrix and then
updates the policy in the steepest decent direction to ﬁnd the optimal policy. The paper [23] was the
ﬁrst to show that policy gradients converge to the global optimal solution with polynomial (in the
relevant quantities) sample complexity. However, [23] focuses on the case where the only noise in the
system is in the initial state, and the rest of the state transitions are deterministic. There are other
methods that fall into the category of the model-free approach, including the Actor-Critic method [46]
and least-squares temporal diﬀerence learning [43].
If the true system is indeed linear-quadratic, the model-based approaches (may) outperform the
model-free approaches by fully utilizing the linear-quadratic structure. For example in the setting
that the system transition matrices are unknown and the parameters in the cost function are known,
[42] and [44] showed that model-based methods are (asymptotically) more sample-eﬃcient than some
popular model-free methods. However, we are often uncertain about whether the actual system is
linear-quadratic in the learning setting; for instance there might be some small nonlinear terms in
the system dynamics. Therefore, compared to the model-based approach, which strongly relies on the
assumption that the stochastic system lies within the LQR framework and may, in practice, suﬀer from
model mis-speciﬁcation, the execution of the model-free algorithm does not rely on the assumptions of
the model. It has been shown that the policy gradient method can learn the global optimal solution,
not only for the LQR framework, but also for a more general class of deterministic systems in the
setting of an inﬁnite time horizon [13]. Thus the advantage of the model-free approach is that it is
more robust against model mis-speciﬁcation compared to the model-based approach.
Our Contributions. We now summarize our contributions. Motivated by many real-word decision-
making problems with a ﬁxed deadline and uncertainty in the underlying dynamics, such as the optimal
liquidation problem that we discuss in Section 2, we extend the framework of [23] by incorporating
a ﬁnite time horizon and sub-Gaussian noise (which includes Gaussian noise as a special case). In
2