particular, we provide a global linear convergence guarantee and a polynomial sample complexity
guarantee for the policy gradient method in this setting with both known parameters (Theorem 3.3)
and unknown parameters (Theorem 4.4). The analysis with known parameters paves the way for
learning LQR with unknown parameters. In addition, numerically solving the Riccati equation with
known parameters in high dimensions may suﬀer from computational inaccuracy. The policy gradient
method provides a direct way of searching for the optimal solution with known parameters in this
case, which may be of separate interest. Note that the optimal policy is time-invariant for the LQR
with inﬁnite time horizon, whereas the optimal policy is time-dependent with ﬁnite time horizon and
hence harder to learn in general. With noise in the dynamics, we need more careful choices of the
hyper-parameters to retrieve compatible sample complexities with noisy observations. In addition,
when optimal polices need to satisfy certain constraints, we provide a global convergence result for the
projected policy gradient method in Theorem 4.5. This is required in the context of our application to
the optimal liquidation problem.
We will formulate the optimal liquidation problem over a ﬁxed horizon as a noisy LQR problem
which is essentially the classical Almgren-Chriss formulation [7]. The performance of the algorithm
on NASDAQ ITCH data is assessed. As well as using the method within this modelling approach, we
also consider the performance of the policy gradient method when applied directly to the data with an
appropriate cost function. This improves the performance of the LQR/Almgren-Chriss solution and
shows promising results for the use of the policy gradient method for problems that are ‘close’ to the
LQR framework.
1.1 Related Work
Policy Gradient Methods for LQR Problems. Since the policy gradient method is the main
focus of our paper, here we provide a review of the previous theoretical work on this method in various
LQR settings and extensions. The ﬁrst global convergence result for the policy gradient method to
learn the optimal policy for LQR problems was developed in [23] in the setting of inﬁnite horizon and
deterministic dynamics. The work of [23] was extended in [13] to give global optimality guarantees of
policy gradient methods for a larger class of control problem that includes the linear-quadratic case.
In particular, this class of control problem satisﬁes a closure condition under policy improvement and
convexity of policy improvement steps. The paper [14] considers policy gradient methods for LQR
problems in terms of optimizing a real valued matrix function over the set of feedback gains. The
extension of the policy gradient method to continuous-time can be found in [15]. All of these methods
are in the inﬁnite horizon setting and without the addition of noise in the dynamics.
Therehas been some work onthecase ofnoisydynamics, butall inthe setting ofinﬁnitehorizon. In
[27] the problem with a multiplicative noise was discussed, using a relatively straightforward extension
of the deterministic dynamics considered in the original framework. In the case of additive noise
[32] studies the global convergence of policy gradient and other learning algorithms for the LQR over
an inﬁnite time-horizon and with Gaussian noise. In particular, the policy considered in [32] is a
randomized policy with Gaussian distribution. There is also [35] which studies derivative-free (zeroth-
order) policy optimization methods for the LQR with bounded additive noise. Finally some other
contributions can be found in [16, 47] for zero-sum LQR games and [17, 29] for mean-ﬁeld LQR games.
Compared to [23], our technical diﬃculties are three-fold. First due to the time-dependent nature of
the admissible policies over a ﬁnite-horizon and randomness from the system noise, we need additional
conditions and analysis to guarantee the well-deﬁnedness of the state process, i.e., the non-degeneracy
of the controlled state-covariance matrices. This holds almost for free in the inﬁnite horizon case
with deterministic dynamics. Second, we need to take care of the additional randomness from the
sub-Gaussian noise when developing the perturbation analysis and the gradient dominant condition.
Third, we need more advanced concentration inequalities and tighter upper bounds to provide com-
3