2.4 Evaluation indicators
Three evaluation metrics were used to assess the proposed
model-the precision P, recall R, and F1-score, as shown in the
Equations 7 –9. R represents the ratio of correctly labeled entities to
the total number that should have been labeled, P is the ratio of
correctly labeled entities to the total number labeled, and the F1-
score is the harmonic average of the two. These metrics are
calculated as
P=TP
TP+FP(7)
R=TP
TP+FN(8)
F1=2RP
R+P(9)
where TP (true positive) denotes a true example, signifying
cases where both the predicted and actual results are entities related
to edible fungus information, FP (false positive) represents a
pseudo-positive example, indicating instances where the actual
results are entities unrelated to edible fungus information, but the
predicted results are entities related to edible fungus information,
FN (false negative) denotes a pseudo-negative example, re ﬂecting
situations where the actual result is an entity related to edible
fungus, but the predicted result is an entity unrelated to edible
fungus information.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Ablation experiments
To assess the effectiveness of the IDCNN-CRF model
introduced in this paper, the results of ablation experiments are
now presented.
3.1.1 Performance comparison between XLNet
and XLNet-IDCNN
Pre-trained feature vectors of edible fungus information were
used as inputs to compare the recognition performance of XLNet
and XLNet-IDCNN, as illustrated in Table 3 . The P, R, and F1-
scores of the XLNet-IDCNN model are 0.878, 0.961, and 0.917,
respectively. Notably, P, R, and F1 exhibit improvements of 0.416,
0.166, and 0.333, respectively, in comparison with the XLNet model.
These results indicate that the addition of the IDCNN layer to the
XLNet model effectively enhances the recognition performance of
the model.Figures 3 –5present comparisons of P, R, and F1, respectively,
between XLNet and XLNet-IDCNN in terms of entity recognition
for different entity names. The results reveal that XLNet-IDCNN
outperforms XLNet in terms of P, R, and F1 for the majority of
entities. Speci ﬁc analysis of the identi ﬁcation of each type of entity
found that after adding the IDCNN layer, the following 28 types of
entities were identi ﬁed: the size of the ascus, ascospore size,
ascospore shape, the shape of the ascus, size of the cystic disc,
shape of the cystic disc, color of the cystic disc, sub-entity size, sub-
entity shape, substrate growth cycle, sub-entity color, basidiospore
size, basidiospore sh ape, size of mushroom stipe, shape of
mushroom stipe, color of mus hroom stipe, Chinese common
name of the fungus, Chinese name of fungus, basic substance of
fungus, fungal growth environment, fungus ecology, thickness of
cap, cap size, cap color, cap shape, ﬂesh thickness, texture of
mushroom ﬂesh, and ﬂesh color. The P, R, and F1-scores of these
28 types of entities showed a signi ﬁcant improvement compared to
XLNet. This improvement was especially seen for those entities with
varying lengths and constructed as “value + unit ”or “value +
symbol + value + unit ”.
This performance improvement is mainly attributed to the
introduction of the IDCNN layer, which combines the ideas of
Inception architecture and in ﬂated convolution to give the model
more powerful feature extraction and recognition capabilities: the
Inception architecture captures multiple scales of input data by
processing the input data in parallel with different scales of
convolution kernels, while the in ﬂated convolution enables the
model to capture multiple scales of features by increasing the
number of convolution kernels. kernel ’sr e c e p t i v e ﬁeld, enabling the
model to better capture long-term dependencies in the input sequence.
The IDCNN layer shows its unique advantages for the entities
mentioned above that have different lengths and special ways of
word construction. On the one hand, due to the effect of the
expansion convolution, the model is able to better capture thecontextual information of these entities in the sequence, which
improves the accuracy of recognition; on the other hand, the
parallel processing mechanism of the Inception architecture
enables the model to simultaneously take into account multiple
scale features, which further strengthens the generalization ability
and robustness of the model.
As a result, by introducing the IDCNN layer, our model
demonstrates higher precision and recall in recognizing these
entities with special word formation styles and length variations,
thus achieving an overall perf ormance improvement. This
improvement not only enhances the recognition capability of the
model, but also provides strong support for subsequent related
research and applications.
3.1.2 Performance comparison between
XLNet-IDCNN and XIC
To further enhance the model ’s performance and achieve
globally optimal labeled sequences, a CRF was added on top of
the IDCNN layer. To assess the impact of different epochs on model
performance, experiments were conducted with 10, 20, 30, 40, 50,
and 60 epochs, as detailed in Table 4 . The results indicate that the
model achieves optimal recognition performance with 50 epochs.TABLE 3 Adding IDCNN named entity recognition results.
Model P R F1
XLNet 0.462 0.795 0.584
XLNet-
IDCNN0.878 0.961 0.917Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 07