1 Introduction
Edible fungus is globally recognized as 21st-century health food.
It serves as an important raw material for biopharmaceuticals,
functional foods, washing products, and cosmetics, and is widely
used for clothing bags and green buildings ( Amobonye et al., 2023 ).
China has abundant edible fungus resources, and was the ﬁrst
country to recognize, harvest, consume, and cultivate edible fungus.
Since 2012, edible fungus (i.e., vegetable fungus) has emerged as the
ﬁfth-largest category among agricultural products, following food,
oil, fruits, and vegetables ( Li and Xu, 2022 ). The large number of
edible fungus species and the vast amount of mycological
knowledge pose great challenges to the research, cultivation, and
dissemination of knowledge about edible fungus. In addressing this
challenge, there is an urgent need for a method that can rapidly and
accurately acquire information on edible fungus. The emergence ofquestion and answer (Q&A) systems presents an opportunity to
overcome this issue. Named entity recognition (NER) is now widely
used in the military ( Wang et al., 2018 ;Lu et al., 2020 ;Baigang and
Yi, 2023 ;Li et al., 2023 ), entertainment and culture ( Molina-
Villegas et al., 2021 ;Zhuang et al., 2021 ;Fu et al., 2022 ;Huang
et al., 2022 ), cybersecurity ( Georgescu et al., 2019 ;Simran et al.,
2020;Chen et al., 2021 ;Ma et al., 2021 ), and medicine ( Ji et al., 2019 ;
Li et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2020 ;Liu et al., 2022 ). However, the
application of NER in the agricultural sector is still in the early
stages of development ( Wang et al., 2022 ;Yu et al., 2022a ;Qian
et al., 2023 ). Recognizing named entities related to edible fungus is
fundamental in building an intelligent Q&A system dedicated to
edible fungus. Such a system would play a signi ﬁcant role in
advancing the research, cultivation, and dissemination of
knowledge related to edible fungus.
Initial NER approaches typically employed dictionary- and rule-
based methods. Cook et al. introduced a dictionary-based named
entity tagger called TagIt, which was subsequently enhanced with a
rule-based extension system to improve information extraction from
the corpus ( Cook et al., 2016 ). However, this method relies on a
prede ﬁned dictionary for entity recognition, so an entity may not be
recognized if the corresponding entry in the dictionary is incomplete,
such as when a new word is absent. Additionally, the accuracy may be
impacted if the dictionary has a limited number of entries, and the
operational ef ﬁciency may be hindered is the dictionary contains an
extensive number of words. Traditional machine learning-based NER
methods include hidden Markov models ( Yan et al., 2021 ), maximum
entropy ( Jain et al., 2022 ), support vector machines ( Hamad and
Abushaala, 2023 ), and conditional random ﬁ
elds (CRFs) ( Liang et al.,
2017 ).Traditional machine learning methods are superior to
unlabeled NER, but are heavily dependent on manually selected
features and require substantial amounts of training data to attain
satisfactory performance.
The emergence of deep learning has enhanced the feature
extraction capabilities during model training. Ji et al. and Li et al
(Ji et al., 2018 ;Li et al., 2019 ). proposed models that integrate a
language model with a CRF and a bidirectional long short-term
memory (BiLSTM). They used these models to extract entities fromChinese electronic medical records (EMRs) and drug instructions,
respectively. In 2018, the bidirectional encoder representations
from transformers (BERT) was introduced as an alternative to
Word2Vec. BERT achieved improved accuracy across 11 tasks in
theﬁeld of natural language processing ( Devlin et al., 2019 ). Dai
et al. and Zhang et al. improved the semantic representation of
words by leveraging the BERT pre-trained language model on the
Chinese EMR dataset. They then combined the BiLSTM with a CRF
layer, using the word vectors as inputs for training. Experimental
results show that the BERT-BiLSTM-CRF model outperforms other
baseline models ( Zhang et al., 2019 ;Dai et al., 2019a ). The
implementation of the BERT-BiLSTM-CRF model to agricultural
pests and illnesses by Liu et al. demonstrated its effectiveness for
detecting entities related to citrus pest and disease ( Liu et al., 2023 ).
Although BiLSTM-CRF performs well in NER tasks, its limited
ability to fully utilize GPU parallelism leads to suboptimal
model performance.
Therefore, Strubell et al. proposed the iterated dilated
convolutional neural network (IDCNN) ( Strubell et al., 2017 ),
which has the capability to capture longer contextual information
than traditional CNNs and enabl es better parallelism than
traditional LSTM units. Yu and Wei proposed an entity
recognition method based on character embedding through
IDCNN and CRF, and reported an F1-score of more than 94% in
a test corpus based on military equipment ( Yu and Wei, 2020 ). Cai
et al. introduced a BERT-IDCNN-CRF model that enhanced the
average accuracy, recall, and F1-score by 8.4%, 3.3%, and 6.2%,
respectively, compared with a baseline model. This enhancement
illustrates the model ’s ability to identify medical terms in EMR ( Cai
et al., 2022 ). It can be seen that the introduction of the IDCNN layer
to expand the sensory ﬁeld of the convolutional kernel enhances the
model ’s ability to capture inter-utterance features. In addition,
combining the CRF layer also ensures the logic and global
optimality of the annotation.
Although BERT is acknowledged to have superior performance
in NER tasks, it overlooks the dependency between masked
positions. Thus, Yang et al. introduced XLNet to overcome this
limitation ( Yang et al., 2020 ). Abu-Salih and Alotaibi later
constructed an XLNet-BiLSTM-CRF model, effectively capturing
contextual information and sequential dependencies in customer
engagement data. Their ﬁndings reveal that, in terms of precisely
recognizing brand advocates and designating consumer advocacy
entities, the XLNet-BiLSTM-CRF model performs better than more
basic architectures ( Abu-Salih and Salihah Alotaibi, 2023 ). So in
this paper, we choose to combine XLNET with IDCNN and CRF.
To date, there have been no reports on the application of NER
to edible fungus. Most of the literature in this ﬁeld refers to the
cultivation and application of NER in related ﬁelds ( Carrasco and
Preston, 2020 ;Kumar et al., 2021 ). Thus, there are two problems
facing the NER task in the ﬁeld of edible fungus:
(1) In the current stage of research on edible fungus, there is a
lack of publicly available Chinese datasets suitable for the
NER task.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 02