convolutional kernel size, the receptive ﬁeld increases exponentially
with the expansion width. This rapid expansion enables the sensory
domains to cover all input sequences.
Dilated convolution was originally applied in image processing.
Strubell et al. (2017) later introduced dilated convolution into natural
language processing and proposed the IDCNN model, which has
proven to be effective. The model consists of four dilated CNN blocks,
each with the same size and structure. Within each block, there are
three dilated convolutional layers with dilation widths of 1, 1, and 2.
Sentences are input into the XLNet model and features are extracted
through the convolutional layer of the IDCNN. These features are
then input to the CRF layer through the mapping layer.
The overall IDCNN-CRF model is similar to the classical
BiLSTM-CRF model. Compared with recurrent neural networks,
IDCNN addresses issues related to longer sequence information
and achieves faster model training.
2.2.3 Adding CRFs to XLNet-IDCNN
To prevent sequence labeling errors, such as the beginning of an
entity being labeled with “I-CNF ”or“E-CNF ”instead of following
the BIOES labeling logic, a CRF is introduced to process the feature
recognition results of the IDCNN layer. By learning inter-entity
dependencies through the CRF, the model decodes the optimal label
sequences for sequence labeling.
For a given sequence x=(x1,x2,x3,⋯,xn) and the corresponding
sequence of labels y=(y1,y2,y3,⋯,yn), the IDCNN layer assigns
scores for each label.The calculation formula is the Equation 3 :
Fi=WsOt+bs (3)
where Otrepresents the output corresponding to input data xt
at moment tfrom the previous layer, and Ws,bsare linear
mapping parameters.
The CRF establishes a label transfer score, expressing the score
from the input sequence of the text to the label sequence of the text as
s(x,y)=om
i=1(Wyi−1,yi+Fi,yi) (4)InEquation 4 , W is the transformation matrix, Wi,jrepresents
the label transfer score, and F i,yirepresents the score of the yith
label of the character. The matrix W = ( Wu, j). The maximum
likelihood function for the training set xi,yi fg is as shown in the
Equation 5 .
L=om
i=1logP(yijxi) ðÞ +a
2‖b‖2(5)
where aandbare regularization parameters and P represents
the probability of the original sequence corresponding to the
predicted sequence, as shown in the Equation 6 :
P(yjx)=es(x,y)
oy∈Yxes(x,y) (6)
2.3 Experimental setup
In this study, the dataset was subjected to word splitting using
the Jieba library. The con ﬁguration of the experimental
environment for this paper is as follows: for hardware, we used
an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218R CPU at 2.10 GHz and an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 2080 Ti graphics card. For the operating system, we
chose Windows 10 Professional and con ﬁgured CUDA 12.2 to
support GPU-accelerated computing. For the software
conﬁguration, we used Python 3.8 as the programming language
and installed PyTorch 1.12.1 as the deep learning framework. In
addition, to handle data and matrix operations, we installed the
NumPy 1.23.5 library. Also, we used the Transformers 4.24.0
library, which is a Python library specialized for natural language
tasks. The whole experimental environment provides strong
support and guarantee for us to carry out deep learning and
natural language processing tasks.
The labeled predictions were p artitioned into training,
validation, and test sets with an 8:1:1 ratio. The training set
comprises 19,184 entities, and the validation and test sets each
contain 2,398 entities.
A BC
FIGURE 2
Dilated convolution diagram. (A)Expansion step size is 1 (B)Expansion step size is 2 (C)Expansion step size is 4.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 06