3.3 Generalizability experiment
In order to verify the generality and robustness of the XIC
model proposed in this paper, we compare and analyze the
experimental results of the XLNet model, the XLNet-IDCNN
model, and the XIC model on the public dataset MARS.
First, we recognize that the lack of Chinese datasets applicable
to NER within the fungal domain is a challenge. This not only limits
the direct application of the model, but may also negatively affect
the generalization ability of the model. However, the MARS dataset
we chose, although not directly targeting the edible fungi domain,
provides us with a benchmark to evaluate the model performance as
a generalized dataset contain ing multiple text types and
named entities.
The results of the experiments on the MARS dataset are shown
inTable 7 , which show that the XLNet-IDCNN-CRF modelachieves signi ﬁcant performance. Speci ﬁcally, the model achieves
high scores on key metrics such as F1-scores, P and R. These results
indicate that even though the model was trained and tested on a
non-domain-speci ﬁc dataset, it is still able to accurately recognize
named entities in text, which re ﬂects the good generalization of
the model.
Further analysis shows that the pre-training mechanism of the
XLNet model enables it to capture rich contextual information,
which is crucial for improving the performance of the NER task.
The IDCNN model, on the other hand, effectively captures local
features in the text through its deep convolutional structure. Finally,
the CRF layer, a commonly used structure in sequence labeling
tasks, provides the model with globally optimal labeled sequences,
which further improves the performance of the model.
In addition, we note that the model ’s performance on the MARS
dataset ﬂuctuates less, which re ﬂects the robustness of the model.
FIGURE 6
P-values of XLNet-IDCNN and XIC on different entities.
FIGURE 7
R-values of XLNet-IDCNN and XIC on different entities.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 10