(2) Certain entities within the text of edible fungus information
may be positioned independently at the beginning or end of
the text, posing a challenge in capturing features between
statements and complicating the recognition process.
To tackle these issues, this paper describes the establishment of
a Chinese corpus speci ﬁcally designed for NER in the ﬁeld of edible
fungus. Furthermore, this paper introduces an IDCNN-CRF NER
model called XIC. Using the XLNet model as the foundational
framework, the IDCNN layer enhances the ability to capture
features between utterances by expanding the receptive ﬁeld of
the convolutional kernel. The output of the IDCNN layer is input to
the CRF layer to mitigate labeling logic errors and acquire the
globally optimal labels.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) The “Atlas of Chinese Large Fungus Resources, ”authored
with the participation of academician Li Yu and other
experts in mycology, is transformed into a Chinese
corpus in the ﬁeld of edible fungus. This transformation
involves data cleaning, formatting, and entity annotation
speciﬁcally tailored for the task of NER.
(2) This paper introduces a method for NER in the ﬁeld of
edible fungus. The method addresses the gap in NER of
edible fungus information by incorporating an IDCNN
layer with the XLNet model, enhancing the capture of
features between statements. Additionally, the
introduction of a CRF layer improves the ability to obtain
the globally optimal labeling sequence.
(3) In the domain of edible fungus, the model proposed in this
paper demonstrates excellent performance in the task of
NER and is applicable to related NER tasks.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Dataset collection and labeling
2.1.1 Dataset acquisition and preprocessing
To overcome the absence of publicly available textual data in the
public domain of edible fungus, this study took the “Atlas of Chinese
Macrofungal Resources, ”p u b l i s h e di nD e c e m b e r2 0 1 5a n de d i t e db y
academician Li Yu, Prof. Tuligul, and others, as the primary data
source. This seminal work serves as the foundation for constructing a
dataset tailored for entity r ecognition experiments in the ﬁeld of edible
fungus. The species included in the “Atlas of Chinese Macrofungal
Resources ”are exclusively derived from Chinese resources and
illustrated with meticulously veri ﬁed taxonomic information. This
rigorous taxonomic veri ﬁcation process ensures a comprehensive
and objective representation of the actual situation of Chinese
macrofungal resources, making the dataset a reliable foundation for
our study. The “Atlas of Chinese Macrofungal Resources ”serves as a
comprehensive introduction to Chinese macrofungal resources,documenting 1819 species (or varieties) in 509 genera of macrofungi
known in China. Based on their morphological characteristics, these
species are systematically categorized into 10 groups, each introduced
in a corresponding chapter. These groups include 196 larger
ascomycetes, 21 jelly fungi, 47 coral fungi, 637 polyporoid,
hydnaceous, and thelephoroid fungi, 11 cantharelloid fungi, 653
agarics, 130 boletes, 75 gasteroid fu ngi, 16 larger pathogenic fungi on
crops, and 33 larger myxomycetes.
The raw dataset was subjected to data preprocessing to remove
items such as pictures and tables, which may hinder the extraction
of correct entity information. The process of data preprocessing
encompassed both data cleaning and data formatting. Data cleaning
primarily involved substituting redundant space breaks with nulls
and removing extraneous information from the raw dataset. Given
the presence of excessively lengthy text in the original dataset, which
could potentially impact the entity recognition accuracy, data
formatting was employed to segment the original dataset into
clauses based on punctuation periods.
2.1.2 Entity type classi ﬁcation
Building on the identi ﬁcation of data sources, entity types were
deﬁned according to dataset characteristics. Speci ﬁcally, this study
relied on the record sheet of the mycorrhizal ﬁeld collection found
in the “Atlas of Chinese Macrofungal Resources. ”The entity type of
mycorrhiza was determined through thorough analysis of the
book ’s contents. All species described in the “Atlas of Chinese
Macrofungal Resources ”are complemented by color photographs
illustrating their macro-morphology and/or habitat. The book offers
concise textual descriptions of the macroscopic and microscopic
diagnostic characters, ecological habits, economic signi ﬁcance
(including edibility, medicinal uses, or toxicity), and geographical
range in China for each species. Under the guidance of experts and
considering the characteristics of the literature content, 31 entity
types and their corresponding labels in the NER model were
formulated, as detailed in Table 1 .
2.1.3 Text annotation
Data annotation facilitates the recognition and learning of
unprocessed text by machines. This process typically involves
automatic annotation and manual annotation. Automatic
annotation uses machines and algorithms to identify text content,
whereas manual annotation requires human annotators to identify
and label the text content. Manual labeling is more accurate, but
lags far behind automatic labeling in terms of ef ﬁciency. Due to the
unique characteristics of the original dataset, this study employed
manual annotation for data labeling.
The Chinese corpus in the ﬁeld of edible fungus underwent
manual labeling based on the entity types speci ﬁed in the previous
section. In this study, approximately 370,000 words from the “Atlas
of Chinese Macrofungal Resources ”were textually annotated,
resulting in the identi ﬁcation of 23,980 entities. Existing text
annotation methods encompass the three-digit annotation
method BIO, the four-digit sequence annotation method BEMS,
and the ﬁve-digit annotation method BIOES, which was employedYu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 03