utterances. Furthermore, to obtain optimal labeling sequences, we
used the CRF, as successfully applied in Chinese NER ( Qiu et al.,
2019) and Portuguese NER ( Souza et al., 2019 ).
2.2.1 XLNet model
The construction of the XLNet model ( Yang et al., 2020 )i s
grounded in the BERT architecture, with several improvements.
XLNet deviates from the relatively ﬁxed order of factorization in the
previous autoregressive (AR) model, aiming to maximize the
expected log-likelihood value. Simultaneously, XLNet reduces its
dependence on residual data, effectively mitigating the data
inconsistency issues that occur in BERT.
The primary essence of the XLNet model lies in the effective
reconstruction of input tex t through permutations and
combinations. This facilitates comprehensive analysis of
contextual information for bidi rectional prediction. The main
purpose of introducing the permutation language model is to
maximize the probability of likelihood, as shown in Equation 1 .
MAX qEZ−Qq oT
t=1lgpq(xZtjXZ<t)/C2/C3(1)
Among them, the calculation of P is shown in Equation 2 .
Pq(xZtjXZ<t)=exp e (x)Tgq(XZ<t, Zt) ðÞ
ox0exp e (x0)Tgq(XZ<t, Zt) ðÞ(2)
During the pre-training stage, ﬁne-tuning of the original input
text cannot be achieved through organic arrangement and
combination. Therefore, in the pre-training process, the order of
the input text is often adjusted within the transformer. Uniquely,
XLNet leverages an attention mask to accomplish this function. In
the process of XLNet modeling, gq(XZ<t,Zt) is realized through a
two-stream self-attention mechanism.
To capture the semantic information of long-distance text, the
XLNet model incorporates a recurrent mechanism and relativepositional encoding, building upon the foundation of the
Transformer-XL idea ( Dai et al., 2019b ). The loop mechanism
extracts information from each layer of the previous sequence,serving as a memory cache for predicting the next segment. This
enhances the training ef ﬁciency while effectively handling tasks
involving long documents. Relative positional encoding is employed
to prevent the loss of positional information, which provides a
better characterization of word polysemy and improves text feature
extraction. In this study, the XLNet model is employed to extract
contextual features from a text dataset, facilitating the acquisition of
bidirectional contextual information and the mining of long-range
textual features. This approach proves bene ﬁcial for improving
entity recognition in the ﬁeld of edible fungus.
2.2.2 Adding IDCNN to XLNet
Traditional CNNs typically require greater network depths or
enlarged convolutional kernels to enhance the receptive ﬁeld area.
However, this approach results in the proliferation of network
parameters, leading to computational dif ﬁculties and slow model
convergence. Dilated convolution serves the primary purpose of
expanding the perceptual ﬁeld of view ( Yu and Koltun, 2016 ). In
classical CNNs, the convolution kernel slides over a continuous
region. In contrast, dilated convolution introduces an expansion
width. During the convolution operation, the data in the middle of
the expansion width are skipped, while the size of the convolution
kernel remains unchanged. This allows a convolution kernel of
given size to capture a wider range of data in the input matrix,
effectively increasing the receptive ﬁeld of the convolution kernel.
The process of convolution kernel expansion is illustrated
inFigure 2 .
The three convolutional blocks in Figure 2 have expansion
widths of 1, 2, and 4, resulting in corresponding receptive ﬁelds of
sizes 3 × 3, 7 × 7, and 15 × 15, respectively. With the same
FIGURE 1
Model structure diagram.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 05