Hence, the epoch parameter was set to 50 in all subsequent
simulations. After 50 epochs, the P, R, and F1-scores reached
0.971, 0.986, and 0.979, respectively ( Table 5 ). These results
represent a signi ﬁcant improvement over XLNet-IDCNN (by
0.093, 0.025, and 0.062, respectively).
Figures 6 –8compare the P, R, and F1-scores, respectively,
between XLNet-IDCNN and XIC for entity recognition with
different entity names. The results highlight that the XIC model
achieves higher P, R, and F1-scores than the XLNet-IDCNN model
for most entities. Speci ﬁc analysis of the recognition of each class of
entities revealed that the addition of the CRF layer resulted in the
inclusion of the size of the ascus, ascospore size, ascospore shape,
the shape of the ascus, size of the cystic disc, shape of the cystic disc,
color of the cystic disc, sub-entity size, sub-entity shape, growing
time, size of mushroom stipe, shape of mushroom stipe, color ofmushroom stipe, basic substance of fungus, fungal growth
environment, fungus ecology, thickness of cap, cap size, cap color,
cap shape, ﬂesh thickness, and ﬂesh color. There is a signi ﬁcant
improvement in P for these 22 types of entities compared to XLNet-
IDCNN. Among them, this enhancement is mainly attributed to the
unique advantage of the CRF layer in the sequence annotation task.
The role of the CRF layer, as a key component in the sequence
annotation task, is to combine contextual information to predict
labels for each position in the sequence and ensure that the ﬁnal
predicted label sequence is globally optimal. When dealing with
consecutive and interrelated entities such as cyst size and cyst spore
shape, the CRF layer is able to capture the dependencies between
these entities, thus enhancing the correctness of the prediction.
Speci ﬁcally, the CRF layer enables the model to predict a label
by considering the transfer probability between labels, which makes
FIGURE 3
P-values of XLNet and XLNet-IDCNN on different entities.
FIGURE 4
R-values of XLNet and XLNet-IDCNN on different entities.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 08