however, by considering the transfer probability between labels, can
ensure that the predicted labeled sequence is logically correct, thus
improving the robustness and accuracy of the model.
The XIC model shows good interpretability in the prediction
process. First, due to the introduction of the IDCNN layer, the
model is able to capture more contextual information and give more
accurate prediction results based on this information. This
utilization of contextual information not only improves the
recognition accuracy of the model, but also makes the prediction
results more explanatory. Secondly, the addition of the CRF layer
enables the model to consider the global optimality when predicting
label sequences, thus avoiding the appearance of labeling logic
errors. This global consideration makes the prediction results
more stable and reliable, and also increases the interpretability of
the prediction results.
In summary, the XIC model shows excellent performance in the
edible mushroom information NER task. Its unique model
architecture and ef ﬁcient feature extraction capability enable the
model to accurately identify the key entity information in the text.
Meanwhile, the model also shows good interpretability in the
prediction process, which provides strong support for us to
understand and trust the prediction results of the model.
5 Conclusions
The practical contributions of this study to the research,
cultivation, and popularization of knowledge related to edible
fungus can be summarized as follows. First, we developed a
method for extracting important entities from textual information
related to edible fungus. This method was shown to improve the
extraction ef ﬁciency compared with traditional approaches when
dealing with large amounts of non-standardized data. This
efﬁciency was crucial for processing and extracting valuable
information from diverse and e xtensive datasets. Second, the
proposed approach lays the foundation for constructing a
knowledge graph speci ﬁc to edible fungus. By identifying and
extracting entities from textual information, this study has
contributed to the creation of a structured representation of
knowledge, enabling more organized and systematic information
about edible fungus to be obtained. Third, the entities identi ﬁed
through NER were represented in the form of a knowledge graph.
Knowledge graphs provide an intuitive and visual representation of
the data model and structure. This representation can enhance the
understanding of relationships and connections between different
entities related to edible fungus. Finally, the authors intend to
extend the NER method detailed in this paper to include
relationship extraction in the context of information related to
edible fungus. The ultimate goal is to build an intelligent Q&A
system that leverages the extracted entities and their relationships,
providing valuable insights and information in a user-friendly
manner. In summary, the practical contributions of this study go
beyond the development of the NER model, laying the groundwork
for creating structured knowledge representations such as
knowledge graphs, and envisioning the application of the
proposed method in building intelligent systems for answeringqueries related to edible fungus. These contributions have the
potential to signi ﬁcantly impact the accessibility and usability of
knowledge in the ﬁeld.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.
Author contributions
HY: Data curation, Su pervision, Writing –original draft,
Writing –review & editing. CW: Investigation, Writing –original
draft, Writing –review & editing. MX: Conceptualization,
Supervision, Validation, Writing –original draft, Writing –
review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare ﬁnancial support was received for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The authors
declare that the research, writing and/or publication of this article
was supported by a grant. Supported by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China: Research on Key Technology
and Component Creation for Unmanned Operation of Land
Finishing (2022YFD200160202), and the Key Research and
Development Project of Jilin Provincial Science and Technology
Development Program: Cloud Brain Technology and Platform for
Unmanned Operation of Corn (20220202032NC).
Acknowledgments
The authors would especially like to thank Charlesworth
Author Services for their support and feedback regarding the
proofreading of this work.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential con ﬂict of interest.
Publisher ’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.Yu et al. 10.3389/fpls.2024.1368847
Frontiers in Plant Science frontiersin.org 12