around week 20, a period that typically coincides with corn
planting (May 13). From an agronomic perspective, temperature
is very important at that period because it affects seedgermination and emergence, and typically high temperatureresults in fast and uniform emergence while low temperaturesin slow and non-uniform emergence that affect plant growthyield. The minimum temperature was most sensitive around
weeks 22 (May 30) and 35 (August 26). The importance of week
2 2i st h es a m ea sw i t hm a x i m u mt e m p e r a t u r ef o rs e e demergence. Interestingly, the model picked the importance ofminimum temperature during grain ﬁll period, which is well
known to affect corn yields ( Hatﬁeld and Prueger, 2015 ;
Schauberger et al., 2017 ). The same is also true for soybeans,
and this was captured by the model. Another interesting result
from this analysis is the increasing importance of precipitation
during grain ﬁll period (weeks 30 to 40), which also agrees with
experimental studies ( Hatﬁeld et al., 2011 ;Hatﬁeld et al., 2018 ).
In terms of soil variables (see Figures 6 and7), our analysis
showed several factors to be sensitive to both yield predictions.Explaining all these factors is agronomically beyond the scope of
this paper, but all of these factors are known to affect soil water
and nitrogen supply to the crop and thus crop yields(Archontoulis et al., 2016 ).
In terms of planting dates, corn yield prediction was least
sensitive around April 20th to May 15th, a period that is regardedas the optimum planting date for corn in the Corn Belt region(Baum et al., 2018 ). From an agronomic perspective, corn yield
decreases outside this optimum range and the model was able to
capture this fact by increasing sensitivity to planting date.Opposite results were obtai ned for soybean, whereas the
models were most sensitive during May 15 to end of Mayperiod, which is regarded as the optimum planting time forsoybean ( Egli and Bruening, 1992 ).
To evaluate the performance of the feature selection method,
we obtained prediction results based on a subset of features. Wetrained the CNN-RNN model on the data from 1980 to 2016 andused 2017 data to do feature selection. Finally, we evaluated theperformance of feature selection method on the 2018 yieldprediction. We sorted all the features based on their estimatedeffects and selected the 50% and 75% most important features.
Table 4 shows the yield prediction performance of the CNN-
RNN model using these selected features. The predictionaccuracy of the CNN-RNN model did not drop signi ﬁcantly
compared to the CNN-RNN model using all the features (100%),which suggested that the feature selection method cansuccessfully ﬁnd the important features.
Importance Comparison Between
Environment and Management Practices
To compare the individual importance of weather components,
soil conditions, and management practices, we performed the
yield prediction using the following models:
FIGURE 5 | Bar plot of estimated effects of six weather components on soybean measured for 52 weeks of each year, starting from January. The vertical axes were
normalized across all weather components to make the effects comparable.Khaki et al. CNN-RNN Framework for Yield Prediction
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1750 8