shown in Table 6 , the prediction accuracy of the CNN-RNN
model did not deteriorate considerably compared to the
corresponding results in Tables 1 and 2, which demonstrate
that the CNN-RNN model can successfully generalize the yieldprediction to untested locations. Figure S5 in the
Supplementary Material shows the performance of the CNN-
RNN model on the individual 100 untested locations. As showninFigure S5 in the Supplementary Material , the prediction
errors were consistently low for most of the untested locations.
Yield Prediction Using Predicted Weather
Data
W e a t h e ri so n eo ft h ei m p o r t a n tf a c t o r si nt h ec r o py i e l d
prediction but it is unknown ap r i o r i . As such, weather
prediction is an unavoidable part of crop yield prediction. Toevaluate the impacts of weather prediction on the performance of
the CNN-RNN model, we obtained the 2018 yield predictionresults for state of Iowa using predicted weather data. We took2017 weather data from June to September as the predictedweather data for the corresponding time interval of the year2018. We compared the RMSE and the predicted state average
yield of the CNN-RNN model using perfect weather data with
the RMSE and the predicted state average yield of the CNN-RNNmodel using predicted weather data. To better see the effect ofweather prediction on the yield prediction, we updated thepredicted weather data every week with its correspondingground truth 2018 weather data starting from June until
September, and prediction results were obtained for each week.
As shown in Figure 9 , the more we updated the predicted
weather data with the ground truth weather data every week,the more prediction error decreased, which revealed howsensitive yield prediction is to weather prediction. The resultsalso suggested that a perfect weather prediction model could
considerably improve the yield prediction results.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a deep learning-based approach for
crop yield prediction, which accurately predicted corn andTABLE 6 | 5-fold cross-validation performance of generalization power of the
CNN-RNN model for corn and soybean prediction. The unit of RMSE is bushels
per acre.
Response
VariableTraining
RMSETraining Corre-
lation (%)Validation
RMSEValidation Corre-
lation (%)
Corn yield 14.49 92.0 24.10 75.04
Soybean
yield4.21 91.19 6.35 77.84
FIGURE 9 | Plots of predicted state average yield and RMSE based on the predicted weather data for the state of Iowa. The predicted weather data was updated every
week with its corresponding ground truth 2018 weather data and prediction r esults were obtained for each week. Th e units of yield and RMSE are bushels p er acre.Khaki et al. CNN-RNN Framework for Yield Prediction
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1750 12