A CNN-RNN Framework for Crop
Yield Prediction
Saeed Khaki1*,Lizhi Wang1and Sotirios V. Archontoulis2
1Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering Department, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States,
2Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States
Crop yield prediction is extremely challenging due to its dependence on multiple factors
such as crop genotype, environmental fa ctors, management practices, and their
interactions. This paper presents a deep learning framework using convolutional neuralnetworks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for crop yield prediction based on
environmental data and management practices. The proposed CNN-RNN model, along
with other popular methods such as random forest (RF), deep fully connected neuralnetworks (DFNN), and LASSO, was used to forecast corn and soybean yield across theentire Corn Belt (including 13 states) in the United States for years 2016, 2017, and 2018using historical data. The new model achieved a root-mean-square-error (RMSE) 9% and8% of their respective average yields, substantially outperforming all other methods thatwere tested. The CNN-RNN has three salient features that make it a potentially usefulmethod for other crop yield prediction studies. (1) The CNN-RNN model was designed tocapture the time dependencies of environmental factors and the genetic improvement ofseeds over time without having their genotype information. (2) The model demonstratedthe capability to generalize the yield predi ction to untested environments without
signi ﬁcant drop in the prediction accuracy. (3) Coupled with the backpropagation
method, the model could reveal the extent to which weather conditions, accuracy ofweather predictions, soil conditions, and management practices were able to explain thevariation in the crop yields.
Keywords: crop yield prediction, deep learning, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks,
feature selection
INTRODUCTION
Crop yield is affected by many factors such as crop genotype, environment, and management
practices. Crop genotype has improved signi ﬁcantly over years by seed companies. Environments,
changing spatially and temporally, have huge effects on year-to-year and location-to-location
variations in crop yield ( Horie et al., 1992 ). Under such circumstances, accurate yield prediction is
very bene ﬁcial to global food production. Timely import and export decisions can be made based on
accurate predictions. Farmers can utilize the yield prediction to make knowledgeable managementandﬁnancial decisions. Performances of new hybrids can be predicted in new and untested
locations ( Khaki and Wang, 2019 ). However, successful crop yield prediction is very dif ﬁcult due to
many complex factors. For example, genotype and environmental factors often have interactions
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1750 1Edited by:
Madhuchhanda Bhattacharjee,
University of Hyderabad, India
Reviewed by:
Milind B. Ratnaparkhe,
ICAR Indian Institute of Soybean
Research, India
Hao Wang,
University of Georgia, United States
*Correspondence:
Saeed Khaki
skhaki@iastate.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Plant Science
Received: 21 August 2019
Accepted: 13 December 2019
Published: 24 January 2020
Citation:
Khaki S, Wang L and Archontoulis SV
(2020) A CNN-RNN Framework for
Crop Yield Prediction.
Front. Plant Sci. 10:1750.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01750ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01750