ANALYSIS
Feature Selection
We have predicted the crop yield based on the input variables such
asweather components, soil conditions,andmanagement practices.Toﬁnd the relative importance of each factor, we performed feature
selection based on the trained CNN-RNN model. We performedtwo feature selections, one for corn and one for soybean yieldprediction. We used guided backpropagation method to
backpropagate the positive gradients to ﬁnd input variables,
which maximize the activation of our targeted neurons(Springenberg et al., 2014 ;Khaki and Wang, 2019 ). First, we fed
all validation samples to the CNN-RNN model and computed theaverage activation of all neurons in the output of the RNN cell attime step t. We set the gradient of activated neurons to be 1 and the
other neurons to be 0. Then, we backpropagated the gradients of the
activated neurons to the input space to ﬁnd the important input
variables based on the magnitude of the gradient (the bigger, themore important).
Figures 4 –8illustrate the estimated effects of weather
components, soil conditions measured at the soil surface and
also at different depths, and management practices. The effects
were normalized within each group, namely, weathercomponents, soil conditions, and management practices, to
make the effects comparable.The innovative aspect of our importance analysis is the
temporal resolution that allows identi ﬁcation of critical periods
towards a deeper understanding of how the complex agronomicsystem works ( Figures 4 and5). Among six weather variables
examined here, solar radiation was the most sensitive factor andsnow the least sensitive factor in the corn yield factor. This is
reasonable from an agronomic perspective as radiation is the key
driver of photosynthesis and subsequently biomass productionand grain yield ( Sinclair and Horie, 1989 ). On the other hand,
snow-water has an effect on soil water balance as doesprecipitation and vapor de ﬁcit (Ritchie, 1998 ), which were
more important variables than snow because their effect oncrop yield lasts longer and especially during summer time.
Snow is somewhat important before and after the growing
season, which was well depicted by the current analysis(Figures 4 and5). Radiation showed two picks (very sensitive
periods for yield prediction), one around week 15, which is priorto crop planting, and one around week 30, which coincides withthe most critical corn stage (silking). Around silking time, the
kernel number per plant is determined and literature shows that
there is a very strong relationship between the kernel number(main determinant of grain yield) and the plant growth rate thatis basically driven by photosynthesis ( Andrade et al., 1999 ); thus,
the current analysis captured that phenomenon. Maximumtemperature was found most sen sitive in yield prediction
FIGURE 4 | Bar plot of estimated effects of six weather components on corn measured for 52 weeks of each year, starting from January. The vertical axes were
normalized across all weather components to make the effects comparable.Khaki et al. CNN-RNN Framework for Yield Prediction
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1750 7