with each other, which makes the yield prediction more
challenging. Environmental factors such as weathercomponents often have complex nonlinear effects, which aredifﬁcult to estimate accurately.
Many studies have used machine learning techniques such as
regression tree, random forest, multivariate regression,
association rule mining, and arti ﬁcial neural networks for crop
yield prediction. Machine learning models treat the output, cropyield, as an implicit function of the input variables such asweather components and soil conditions, which could be a verycomplex and nonlinear function. Jeong et al. (2016) applied
random forest and multiple linear regression for yield prediction
of wheat, maize, and potato. They found that random forest was
highly capable of predicting crop yields and outperformedmultiple linear regression. Fukuda et al. (2013) also used
random forest for predicting mango fruit yields in response towater supply under different irrigation regimes, and found thatrandom forest was applicable for mango yield prediction with a
speciﬁc focus on water management. Liu et al. (2001) applied
artiﬁcial neural networks to approximate a nonlinear function to
relate the corn yield to input variables such as weather, soil, andmanagement practices. Ransom et al. (2019) evaluated machine
learning methods for corn nitrogen recommendation tools usingsoil and weather information. Drummond et al. (2003)
investigated stepwise multiple linear regression, projection
pursuit regression, and arti ﬁcial neural networks to predict the
grain yield based on the soil properties. Shahhosseini et al. (2019)
predicted corn yield and nitrate loss using machine learningalgorithms such as random forest and multiple linear regression.Awad (2019) designed a mathematical optimization model to
predict potato yield using the biomass calculated by the model.
Jiang et al. (2004) applied arti ﬁcial neural network and multiple
linear regression for estimating winter wheat yields based on theremotely sensed and climate data, and found that arti ﬁcial neural
network model outperformed the multiple linear regression.Prasad et al. (2006) used piecewise linear regression method
with breakpoint to predict corn and soybean yields based onremote sensing data and other surface parameters. Romero et al.
(2013) applied several machine learning methods such as
decision tree and association rule mining for the classi ﬁcation
of yield components of durum wheat and showed thatassociation rule mining method obtained the best performanceacross all locations.
This paper presents a deep learning framework that takes
advantage of the state-of-the -art modeling and solution
techniques to predict crop yield based on environmental dataand management practices. Deep learning methods belong to theclass of representation learning methods with multiple levels ofrepresentation, each having nonlinear modules to transform therepresentation at the current level (starting with the raw input) toa slightly more abstract level ( LeCun et al., 2015 ). Deep neural
networks also provide a universal approximation framework,
which means that regardless of what function we want to learn,deep neural networks can be used to represent such function(Hornik et al., 1989 ;Goodfellow et al., 2016 ). Deep learning
methods do not require handcrafted features and they learn thefeatures from data, which contribute to the higher accuracy of
results ( LeCun et al., 2015 ).
In comparison with the aforementioned arti ﬁcial neural
network models in the literature, which had a single hiddenlayer, deep learning methods with multiple hidden layers tend toperform better. However, deeper models are more dif ﬁcult to
train and require more advanced hardware and optimization
techniques ( Goodfellow et al., 2016 ). For example, the loss
function of the deep neural n etworks is extremely high
dimensional and non-convex, which makes the optimization ofsuch function more dif ﬁcult due to having many local optima
and saddle points ( Goodfellow et al., 2016 ). Deeper networks
may also have the vanishing gradient problem, which can be
alleviated by using residual shortcut connections or multipleauxiliary heads (loss functions) for the network ( Bengio et al.,
1994 ;Szegedy et al., 2015 ;Goodfellow et al., 2016 ;
He et al.,
2016 ). Some other techniques have also been developed to
improve performance of deep learning models such as batch
normalization ( Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015 ), dropout ( Srivastava
et al., 2014 ), and stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
(Goodfellow et al., 2016 ).
Our proposed hybrid CNN-RNN model consists of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neuralnetworks (RNNs). CNNs process data with multiple arraysformat such as one-dimensional data (signals and sequences),
two-dimensional data (images), and three-dimensional data
(videos). A CNN model is usually composed of multipleconvolutional and pooling layers followed by few fullyconnected (FC) layers. CNNs have some design parameters,including the number of ﬁlters, ﬁlter size, type of padding, and
stride. A ﬁlter is a matrix of weights with which we convolve the
input data. Padding is the process of adding zeroes to the input to
preserve the dimension of the input space. The stride is theamount by which the ﬁlter is moved. RNNs are used for tasks
involving sequential data to capture their time dependencies(LeCun et al., 2015 ;Sherstinsky, 2018 ). RNNs keep the history of
all the past elements of a sequence in their hidden units called astate vector and use this information as they process input
sequence one element at a time ( LeCun et al., 2015 ). RNNs are
very powerful models for sequence modeling, but training themhas proved to be very challenging due to vanishing and explodinggradient problems ( Bengio et al., 1994 ). To solve this problem,
RNNs are improved by long short-term memory (LSTM) cells,which are carefully designed recurrent neurons giving superior
performance in a wide range of sequence modeling applications
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997 ;Pham et al., 2014 ;
Sherstinsky, 2018 ). LSTM cells use a special unit called the
memory cell to remember inputs for a long time and preventthe vanishing gradient problem ( LeCun et al., 2015 ).
More recently, deep learning methods have been applied for
the crop yield prediction. Khaki and Wang (2019) designed a
deep neural network model to predict corn yield across 2,247
locations between 2008 and 2016. Their model was found tooutperform other methods su ch as Lasso, shallow neural
networks, and regression tree. You et al. (2017) applied CNNs
and RNNs to predict soybean yield based on a sequence ofKhaki et al. CNN-RNN Framework for Yield Prediction
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 1750 2