Figure 4: Visualization of the t-SNE result of the embedding layer
output on the AUSLAN dataset.
Figure 5: Shapelet discovered by the visualization of the
embedding on each time step.
• The green shapelet indicates a deep Mshape.
• The light blue shapelet is a sharp trending-up sub-
sequence.
• The dark blue shapelet is a plateau followed by a deep
down like 7.
• The magenta shapelet is like a recovering from the deep
down with a bit trending up.
• The red shapelet is a plateau.
By a closer look at the visualization of the embedding on
each time step, the near points that forms some interest-
ing shapelet has relatively smaller distance in the vector
space. Like [Liu and Wang, 2016 ], where the author
discover interesting shapelet by a well designed Markov
transition matrix with the clustering on the transformed
complex network graph, GTN shows the potential by
learning the interesting pattern of some speciﬁc sub-
sequences from scratch, which will be an interesting fu-
ture work.
Figure 6: Visualization of the feature extracted after the gating in
GTN.
4.6 Visualization of the Extracted Feature
lastly, following [Ismail Fawaz et al. , 2019 ], we visualize the
feature vector after gating for a simple sanity check of the fea-
ture quality. We choose the JapaneseVowels dataset and apply
t-SNE to reduce the dimension for visualization, as shown in
Figure 6. Each number in the graph is the label with corre-
sponding color encoding. and labels in the ﬁgure correspond
to the labels of the original data. This ﬁgure shows that GTN
is able to project the data into an easily separable space for
better classiﬁcation results.
5 Conclusion
We presented the Gated Transformer Network (GTN) as a
simple extension of multidimensional time series using gat-
ing. With the gating that merges two towers of transformer
networks which model the channel-wise and step-wise cor-
relations respectively GTN is able to explicitly learn both
channel-wise and step-wise correlations. We conducted com-
prehensive experiments on thirteen dataset and the prelimi-
nary results show that GTN is able to achieve competing per-
formance with current state-of-the-art deep learning models.
The ablation study shows how different modules work to to-
gether to achieve the improved performance. We also qualita-
tively analyzed the attention map and other components with
visualization to better understand the interpretability of out
model. Our preliminary results ground a solid foundation for
the study of Transformer Network on the time series classiﬁ-
cation task in future research.