Figure 2: 1) channel-wise attention map (upper-left) 2)
channel-wise DTW (upper-right) 3) step-wise attention map
(bottom-left) 4) step-wise L2 distance (bottom-right)
on the same time step there is no time axis, thus DTW is not
needed. The visualization is shown in Figure 2
Our ﬁrst analysis focuses on the channel-wise attention
map. In Fig 2, we label four blocks ( b1-b4). In Fig 3, we
draw the raw time series of the corresponding channels. We
usechannel 11(abbreviated as c11, the same below) to rep-
resent channel 11 in the following analysis.
b1andb2have relatively high attention score, that is, both
c6andc7are strongly co-ﬁred with c11. Look at Fig 3, we
can clearly see that c6andc7have relatively similar shapelet
and trend with c11. Similarly, b4have very high attention
score, where c3andc4are also showing very similar trend.
Meanwhile, b3is among the one with very small attention
score. Look at the c11andc3, two time series show pretty
much different even inverse trend. This preliminary ﬁnding
is interesting because like the attention in NLP task where
the attention score indicates the semantic correlation between
different tokens, the channel-wise attention learned from the
time series similarly shows the similar sequences that are co-
ﬁred together to force the learning lean to the ﬁnal labels.
Note that the smaller DTW does not mean two sequence
are similar. Like shown on the channel-wise DTW, block c
indicates very small DTW distance between c3andc11. Ac-
tually c11andc3are very different in trends and shapelet.
Our preliminary analysis shows that the channel-wise atten-
tion also tends to grab the similar sequences where DTW
shows no clear differentiated factors.
As the step is ﬁxed across channel for the step-wise atten-
tion, Euclidean distance is the special case of DTW at the
same step, thus we choose Euclidean distance as the metric.
Through the analysis of step-wise attention map and the Eu-
clidean distance matrix, the distance between the time series
and the similarity of the shapelet have an impact on who GTN
Figure 3: Drawing of the raw time series in different channel pairs.
calculates the attention scores, though the impact are not that
obvious which deserves a deep dive in the future work.
4.4 Analysis on the Gating Weight
GTN has two towers to encode the step-wise and channel-
wise information with self-attention respectively. With the
gating method, the model learns to assign different weights
to attend to these two Transformers. In the ablation study,
we show that gating achieved better results compared with
concatenation.
By observing the gate weights assigned to the two tower
on the AULSAN data set, we found that for different sam-
ple, the gating weights assigned to step-wise and channel-
wise tower are tends to be different, like f0:9899;0:0101g
andf0:0443;0:5557gfor two sample time series respectively.
However, the gating weights overall show the trends to be
skewed towards the step-wise tower, with the average gating
weights off0:7786;0:2214g. As shown in Table 2, the step-
wise Transformer outperforms the channel-wise Transformer,
thus overall the gating learns to assign more weights to the
step-wise tower, the gating behavior and the results in the ab-
lation study are consistent. The gating shows the capability
to learn the weights from the data-driven manner to attend on
each towers for different samples and dataset to improve the
classiﬁcation performance.
4.5 Analysis of the Embedding Output
As each time step are transformed to a dense vector through
the embedding layer, we use the t-SNE [Maaten and Hinton,
2008 ]to reduce the dimension of the output from the embed-
ding layer on AUSLAN . The result is shown in graph 4. The
graph shows that all the points are clustered together on the
speciﬁc manifold. We roughly labeled those clusters with ﬁve
different colors.
As shown in Figure 5, we mapped each color back to the
raw time series. Interestingly, the time step from each clus-
ter are consistent and overall each cluster shows different
shapelet.