cesses data in parallel with self-attention mechanisms to
model the dependencies in the sequence, we showed the
gating that merges two towers of Transformer Networks
that model the channel-wise and step-wise correlations
is very effective for time series classiﬁcation task.
• We evaluated GTN on the thirteen multivariate time se-
ries benchmark datasets and compared with other state-
of-the-art deep learning models with comprehensive
ablation studies. The experiments showed that GTN
achieves competing performance.
• We qualitatively studied the feature learned by the model
by visualization to demonstrate the quality of the feature
extraction of GTN.
• We preliminary explored the interpretability of the at-
tention map of GTN on time series modeling to study
how self-attention helps on channel-wise and step-wise
feature extraction.
2 Related Work
The earlier work like [Yang et al. , 2015 ]preliminary explored
the deep convolutional networks on multivariate time series
for human activity recognition. [Wang et al. , 2017 ]studied
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) and Residual Networks
(ResNet) and achieved the state-of-the-art performance for
univariate time series classiﬁcation. This work also explored
the interpretability of FCN and ResNet with Class Activa-
tion Map (CAM) to highlight the signiﬁcant time steps on
the raw time series for a speciﬁc class. [Serr`aet al. , 2018 ]
proposed the Encoder model, which is a hybrid deep con-
volutional networks whose architecture is inspired by FCN
with a main difference where the GAP layer is replaced with
an attention layer to fuse the feature maps. The attention
weight from the last layer is used to learn which parts of the
time series (in the time domain) are important for a certain
classiﬁcation. [Karim et al. , 2017 ]proposed the two towers
with Long short-term memory (LSTM) and FCN. The authors
merge the feature by simple concatenation at the last layer to
improve the classiﬁcation performance on univariate time se-
ries, though LSTM bears the high computation complexity.
Other earlier works like [Cuiet al. , 2016; Zheng et al. , 2016;
Le Guennec et al. , 2016; Zhao et al. , 2017 ]explored differ-
ent convolutional networks architecture other than FCN and
ResNet and claimed superior results on univariate or multi-
variate time series classiﬁcations, and served as the strong
baselines in our work. Note that [Tanisaro and Heidemann,
2016 ]proposed Time Warping Invariant Echo State Network
as one of the non-convolutional recurrent architectures for
time series forecasting and classiﬁcation, where we also in-
clude it in the study as a baseline.
There are plenty of established works on Transformer Net-
works for NLP and computer vision. The time series com-
munity is also exploring Transformers on forecasting and re-
gression task, like [Liet al. , 2019; Cai et al. , 2020 ]. The stud-
ies on Transformer for time series classiﬁcation is still in the
early stage, like [Ohet al. , 2018 ]explores the Transformer on
clinical time series classiﬁcation. The most recent work we
discovered is from [Rußwurm and K ¨orner, 2020 ], where the
Figure 1: Model architecture of the Gated Transformer Networks.
author studied the Transformer for raw optical satellite time
series classiﬁcation and obtained the latest results comparing
with convolution based solutions. Our work gaps the bridge
as the ﬁrst comprehensive study for Transformer networks on
multivariate time series classiﬁcation.
3 Gated Transformer Networks
Traditional Transformer has encoder and decoder stacking on
the word and positional embedding for sequence generation
and forecasting task. As for multivariate time series classi-
ﬁcation, we have three extension simply to adapt the Trans-
former for our need - embedding, two towers and gating. The
overall architecture of Gated Transformer Networks is shown
in Figure 1.
3.1 Embedding
In the original Transformers, the tokens are projected to a em-
bedding layer. As time series data is continuous, we simply
change the embedding layer to fully connected layer. Instead
of linear projection, we add a non-linear activation tanh .
Following [Vaswani et al. , 2017 ], the positional encoding is
added with the non-linearly transformed time series data to
encode the temporal information, as self-attention is hard to
utilize the sequential correlation of time step.
3.2 Two-tower Transformer
Multivariate time series has multiple channels where each
channel is a univariate time series. The common assump-