Gated Transformer Networks for Multivariate Time Series Classiﬁcation
Minghao Liu1,Shengqi Ren1,Siyuan Ma1,Jiahui Jiao1,Yizhou Chen2,Zhiguang
Wang3and Wei Song1
1Zhengzhou University
2Statistical information center of Henan health commission
3Facebook AI
fliuminghao, 202012172013047, 202012172013065, 202012172013044 g@gs.zzu.edu.cn,
xnhcyz@163.com, zgwang813@gmail.com, iewsong@zzu.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep learning model (primarily convolutional net-
works and LSTM) for time series classiﬁcation has
been studied broadly by the community with the
wide applications in different domains like health-
care, ﬁnance, industrial engineering and IoT. Mean-
while, Transformer Networks recently achieved
frontier performance on various natural language
processing and computer vision tasks. In this
work, we explored a simple extension of the current
Transformer Networks with gating, named Gated
Transformer Networks (GTN) for the multivariate
time series classiﬁcation problem. With the gat-
ing that merges two towers of Transformer which
model the channel-wise and step-wise correlations
respectively, we show how GTN is naturally and
effectively suitable for the multivariate time se-
ries classiﬁcation task. We conduct comprehen-
sive experiments on thirteen dataset with full ab-
lation study. Our results show that GTN is able to
achieve competing results with current state-of-the-
art deep learning models. We also explored the at-
tention map for the natural interpretability of GTN
on time series modeling. Our preliminary results
provide a strong baseline for the Transformer Net-
works on multivariate time series classiﬁcation task
and grounds the foundation for future research.
1 Introduction
We are surrounded by the time series data such as physio-
logical data in healthcare, ﬁnancial records or various signals
captured the sensors. Unlike univariate time series, multi-
variate time series has much richer information correlated in
different channels at each time step. The classiﬁcation task
on univariate time series has been studied comprehensively
by the community whereas multivariate time series classiﬁca-
tion has shown great potential in the real world applications.
Learning representations and classifying multivariate time se-
ries are still attracting more and more attention.
Contact Author:Wei Song.
Email address:iewsong@zzu.edu.cnAs some of the most traditional baseline, distance-based
methods work directly on raw time series with some pre-
deﬁned similarity measures such as Euclidean distance and
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [Keogh, 2002 ]to perform
classiﬁcation. With k-nearest neighbors as the classiﬁer,
DTW is known to be a very efﬁcient approach as a golden
standard for decades. Following the scheme of well designed
feature, distance metric and classiﬁers, the community pro-
posed a lot of time series classiﬁcation methods based on dif-
ferent kinds of feature space like distance, shapelet and recur-
rence, etc. These approaches kept pushing the performance
and advanced the research of this ﬁeld.
With the recent success of deep learning approaches on
different tasks on the temporal data like speech, video and
natural language, learning the representation from scratch to
classify time series has been attracted more and more stud-
ies. For example, [Zheng et al. , 2016 ]proposed a multi-scale
convolutional networks for univariate time series classiﬁca-
tion. The author combines well-designed data augmentation
and engineering approach like down sampling, skip sampling
and sliding windows to preprocess the data for the multiscale
settings, though the heavy preprocessing efforts and a large
set of hyperparameters make it complicated and the proposed
window slicing method for data augmentation is not scalable.
[Wang et al. , 2017 ]ﬁrstly proposed two simple but efﬁcient
end-to-end models based on convolutions and achieved the
state-of-the-art performance for univariate time series classi-
ﬁcation. Thereafter, convolution based models demonstrate
superior performance on time series classiﬁcation tasks [Is-
mail Fawaz et al. , 2019 ].
Inspired by the recent success of the Transformer networks
on NLP [Vaswani et al. , 2017; Devlin et al. , 2018 ], we pro-
posed a transformer based approach for multivariate time se-
ries classiﬁcation. By simply scaling the traditional Trans-
former model by the gating that merges two towers, which
model the channel-wise and step-wise correlations respec-
tively, we show that how the proposed Gated Transformer
Networks (GTN) is naturally and effectively suitable for the
multivariate time series classiﬁcation task. Speciﬁcally, our
contributions are the following:
• We explored an extension of current Transformer net-
works with gating, named Gated Transformer Networks
for the multivariate time series classiﬁcation problem.
By exploiting the strength where the Transformers pro-arXiv:2103.14438v1  [cs.LG]  26 Mar 2021