Thus, we perform an attention mechanism with a two-layer neural
network to extract these users that are important to influence ui,
and model their tie strengths, by relating social attention βiowith
hIoand the target user embedding pi, as below,
hS
i=σ(W· 
Õ
o∈N(i)βiohI
o 
+b) (9)
β∗
io=wT
2·σ(W1·[hI
o⊕pi]+b1)+b2 (10)
βio=exp(β∗
io)
Í
o∈N(i)exp(β∗
io)(11)
where theβiocan be seen as the strengths between users.
Learning User Latent Factor. In order to learn better user
latent factors, item-space user latent factors and social-space user
latent factors are needed to be considered together, since the social
graph and the user-item graph provide information about users
from different perspectives. We propose to combine these two latent
factors to the final user latent factor via a standard MLP where the
item-space user latent factor hI
iand the social-space user latent
factor hS
iare concatenated before feeding into MLP. Formally, the
user latent factor hiis defined as,
c1=h
hI
i⊕hS
ii
(12)
c2=σ(W2·c1+b2) (13)
...
hi=σ(Wl·cl−1+bl) (14)
where lis the index of a hidden layer.
2.4 Item Modeling
As shown in the right part of Figure 2, item modeling is used to learn
item latent factor, denoted as zj, for the item vjby user aggregation.
Items are associated with the user-item graph, which contains
interactions as well as user’s opinions. Therefore, interactions and
opinions in the user-item graph should be jointly captured to further
learn item latent factors.
User Aggregation. Likewise, we use a similar method as
learning item-space user latent factors via item aggregation. For
each itemvj, we need to aggregate information from the set of
users who have interacted with vj, denoted as B(j).
Even for the same item, users might express different opinions
during user-item interactions. These opinions from different users
can capture the characteristics of the same item in different ways
provided by users, which can help model item latent factors. For an
interaction from uttovjwith opinion r, we introduce an opinion-
aware interaction user representation fjt, which is obtained from
the basic user embedding ptand opinion embedding ervia a MLP,
denoted as дu.дuis to fuse the interaction information with the
opinion information, as shown in Figure 2:
fjt=дu([pt⊕er]) (15)
Then, to learn item latent factor zj, we also propose to aggregate
opinion-aware interaction representation of users in B(j)for item
vj. The users aggregation function is denoted as Aддreusers , which
is to aggregate opinion-aware interaction representation of usersin
fjt,∀t∈B(j)	
as:
zj=σ(W·Aддreusers(
fjt,∀t∈B(j)	
)+b) (16)
In addition, we introduce an attention mechanism to differentiate
the importance weight µjtof users with a two-layer neural attention
network, taking fjtandqjas the input,
zj=σ(W· 
Õ
t∈B(j)µjtfjt 
+b) (17)
µ∗
jt=wT
2·σ(W1·[fjt⊕qj]+b1)+b2 (18)
µjt=exp(µ∗
jt)
Í
t∈B(j)exp(µ∗
jt)(19)
This user attention µjtis to capture heterogeneous influence from
user-item interactions on learning item latent factor.
2.5 Rating Prediction
In this subsection, we will design recommendation tasks to learn
model parameters. There are various recommendation tasks such
as item ranking and rating prediction. In this work, we apply the
proposed GraphRec model for the recommendation task of rating
prediction. With the latent factors of users and items (i.e., hiand
zj), we can first concatenate them
hi⊕zjand then feed it into
MLP for rating prediction as:
g1=
hi⊕zj
(20)
g2=σ(W2·g1+b2) (21)
...
gl−1=σ(Wl·gl−1+bl) (22)
r′
ij=wT·gl−1 (23)
where lis the index of a hidden layer, and r′
ijis the predicted rating
from uitovj.
2.6 Model Training
To estimate model parameters of GraphRec, we need to specify an
objective function to optimize. Since the task we focus on in this
work is rating prediction, a commonly used objective function is
formulated as,
Loss=1
2|O|Õ
i,j∈O(r′
ij−rij)2(24)
where|O|is the number of observed ratings , and rijis the ground
truth rating assigned by the user ion the item j.
To optimize the objective function, we adopt the RMSprop [ 31]
as the optimizer in our implementation, rather than the vanilla
SGD. At each time, it randomly selects a training instance and
updates each model parameter towards the direction of its negative
gradient. There are three embedding in our model, including
item embedding qj, user embedding pi, and opinion embedding
er. They are randomly initialized and jointly learned during the
training stage. We do not use one-hot vectors to represent each
user and item, since the raw features are very large and highly
sparse. By embedding high-dimensional sparse features into a
low-dimensional latent space, the model can be easy to train [ 11].