User Latent Factor
…r'
ConcatenationConcatenation
…
Opinion EmbeddingItem Embedding
User Embedding
… …
Attention Network α1
α2
α3
Item-space
Item-space
 Item-space
 Item-space
Social-space
Attention Network
… …β2
β3β1… …
Attention Network 
μ1μ2μ3
Item Latent Factor
User Modeling Item Modeling 
Item Aggregation  Social  AggregationUser Aggregation
Rating Prediction 
Item-space:  Item-space User Latent Factor
Social-space: Social-space User Latent Factor
Figure 2: The overall architecture of the proposed model. It contains three major components: user modeling, item modeling,
and rating prediction.
andT=
ui,vj
|rij=0	
be the set of unknown ratings. Let N(i)
be the set of users whom uidirectly connected with, C(i)be the
set of items which uihave interacted with, and B(j)be the set of
users who have interacted with vj. In addition, users can establish
social relations to each other. We use T∈Rn×nto denote the user-
user social graph, where Tij=1ifujhas a relation to uiand zero
otherwise. Given the user-item graph Rand social graph T, we aim
to predict the missing rating value in R. Following [ 11], we use an
embedding vector pi∈Rdto denote a user uiand an embedding
vector qj∈Rdto represent an item vj, where dis the length
of embedding vector. More details will be provided about these
embedding vectors in the following subsections. The mathematical
notations used in this paper are summarized in Table 1.
2.2 An Overview of the Proposed Framework
The architecture of the proposed model is shown in Figure 2. The
model consists of three components: user modeling, item modeling,
and rating prediction. The first component is user modeling, which
is to learn latent factors of users. As data in social recommender
systems includes two different graphs, i.e., a social graph and a
user-item graph, we are provided with a great opportunity to
learn user representations from different perspectives. Therefore,
two aggregations are introduced to respectively process these two
different graphs. One is item aggregation, which can be utilized tounderstand users via interactions between users and items in the
user-item graph (or item-space). The other is social aggregation,
the relationship between users in the social graph, which can help
model users from the social perspective (or social-space). Then, it
is intuitive to obtain user latent factors by combining information
from both item space and social space. The second component is
item modeling, which is to learn latent factors of items. In order to
consider both interactions and opinions in the user-item graph, we
introduce user aggregation, which is to aggregate users’ opinions in
item modeling. The third component is to learn model parameters
via prediction by integrating user and item modeling components.
Next, we will detail each model component.
2.3 User Modeling
User modeling aims to learn user latent factors, denoted as hi∈Rd
for user ui. The challenge is how to inherently combine the user-
item graph and social graph. To address this challenge, we first
use two types of aggregation to learn factors from two graphs, as
shown in the left part in Figure 2. The first aggregation, denoted as
item aggregation, is utilized to learn item-space user latent factor
hI
i∈Rdfrom the user-item graph. The second aggregation is
social aggregation where social-space user latent factor hS
i∈Rdis
learned from the social graph. Then, these two factors are combined
together to form the final user latent factors hi. Next, we will