our model considers these difference among users and items
by using two different attention mechanisms ( αandµ). From
the results, we can observe that GraphRec- αand GraphRec-
µobtain worse performance than GraphRec. These results
demonstrate the benefits of the attention mechanisms on
item aggregation and user aggregation.
•As mentioned before, users are likely to share more sim-
ilar tastes with strong ties than weak ties. The attention
mechanism βat social aggregation considers heterogeneous
strengths of social relations. When the attention mechanism
βis removed, the performance of GraphRec- βis dropped
significantly. It justifies our assumption that during social
aggregation, different social friends should have different
influence for learning social-space user latent factor. It’s
important to distinguish social relations with heterogeneous
strengths.
To sum up, GraphRec can capture the heterogeneity in ag-
gregation operations of the proposed framework via attention
mechanisms, which can boost the recommendation performance.
3.3.3 Effect of Embedding Size. In this subsection, to analyze the
effect of embedding size of user embedding p, item embedding q,
and opinion embedding e, on the performance of our model.
Figure 5 presents the performance comparison w.r.t.the length
of embedding of our proposed model on Ciao and Epinions datasets.
In general, with the increase of the embedding size, the performance
first increases and then decreases. When increasing the embedding
size from 8 to 64 can improve the performance significantly.
However, with the embedding size of 256, GraphRec degrades the
performance. It demonstrates that using a large number of the
embedding size has powerful representation. Nevertheless, if the
length of embedding is too large, the complexity of our model
will significantly increase. Therefore, we need to find a proper
length of embedding in order to balance the trade-off between the
performance and the complexity.
4 RELATED WORK
In this section, we briefly review some related work about social
recommendation, deep neural network techniques employed for
recommendation, and the advanced graph neural networks.
Exploiting social relations for recommendations has attracted
significant attention in recent years [ 27,28,37]. One common
assumption about these models is that a user’s preference is similar
to or influenced by the people around him/her (nearest neighbours),
which can be proven by social correlation theories [ 20,21]. Along
with this line, SoRec [ 17] proposed a co-factorization method, which
shares a common latent user-feature matrix factorized by ratings
and by social relations. TrustMF [ 37] modeled mutual influence
between users, and mapped users into two low-dimensional spaces:
truster space and trustee space, by factorizing social trust networks.
SoDimRec [ 30] first adopted a community detection algorithm
to partition users into several clusters, and then exploited the
heterogeneity of social relations and weak dependency connec-
tions for recommendation. Comprehensive overviews on social
recommender systems can be found in surveys [29].
In recent years, deep neural network models had a great impact
on learning effective feature representations in various fields,such as speech recognition [ 12], Computer Vision (CV) [ 14] and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) [ 4]. Some recent efforts have
applied deep neural networks to recommendation tasks and shown
promising results [ 41], but most of them used deep neural networks
to model audio features of music [ 32], textual description of
items [ 3,33], and visual content of images [ 40]. Besides, NeuMF [ 11]
presented a Neural Collaborative Filtering framework to learn the
non-linear interactions between users and items.
However, the application of deep neural network in social
recommender systems is rare until very recently. In particular,
NSCR [ 35] extended the NeuMF [ 11] model to cross-domain
social recommendations, i.e., recommending items of information
domains to potential users of social networks, and presented a
neural social collaborative ranking recommender system. However,
the limitation is NSCR requires users with one or more social
networks accounts (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Instagram), which
limits the data collections and its applications in practice. SMR-
MNRL [ 42] developed social-aware movie recommendation in social
media from the viewpoint of learning a multimodal heterogeneous
network representation for ranking. They exploited the recurrent
neural network and convolutional neural network to learn the
representation of movies’ textual description and poster image, and
adopted a random-walk based learning method into multimodal
neural networks. In all these works [ 35] [42], they addressed the
task of cross-domain social recommendations for ranking metric,
which is different from traditional social recommender systems.
Most related to our task with neural networks includes DLMF [ 6]
and DeepSoR [ 8]. DLMF [ 6] used auto-encoder on ratings to learn
representation for initializing an existing matrix factorization. A
two-phase trust-aware recommendation process is proposed to
utilize deep neural networks in matrix factorization’s initialization
and to synthesize the user’s interests and their trust friends’
interests together with the impact of community effect based on
matrix factorization for recommendations. DeepSoR [ 8] integrated
neural networks for user’s social relations into probabilistic matrix
factorization. They first represented users using pre-trained node
embedding technique, and further exploited k-nearest neighbors to
bridge user embedding features and neural network.
More recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been proven
to be capable of learning on graph structure data [ 2,5,7,15,25].
In the task of recommender systems, the user-item interaction
contains the ratings on items by users, which is a typical graph data.
Therefore, GNNs have been proposed to solve the recommendation
problem [ 1,22,39]. sRMGCNN [ 22] adopted GNNs to extract
graph embeddings for users and items, and then combined with
recurrent neural network to perform a diffusion process. GCMC [ 1]
proposed a graph auto-encoder framework, which produced latent
features of users and items through a form of differentiable message
passing on the user-item graph. PinSage [ 39] proposed a random-
walk graph neural network to learn embedding for nodes in web-
scale graphs. Despite the compelling success achieved by previous
work, little attention has been paid to social recommendation with
GNNs. In this paper, we propose a graph neural network for social
recommendation to fill this gap.