their advantages, GNNs provide unprecedented opportunities to
advance social recommendation.
…
53
1User-to-item Interaction
Social Relations
Figure 1: Graph Data in Social Recommendation. It contains
two graphs including the user-item graph (left part) and the
user-user social graph (right part). Note that the number on
the edges of the user-item graph denotes the opinions (or
rating score) of users on the items via the interactions.
Meanwhile, building social recommender systems based on
GNNs faces challenges. The social graph and the user-item graph
in a social recommender system provide information about users
from different perspectives. It is important to aggregate information
from both graphs to learn better user representations. Thus, the first
challenge is how to inherently combine these two graphs. Moreover,
the user-item graph not only contains interactions between users
and items but also includes users’ opinions on items. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, the user interacts with the items of “trousers"
and “laptop"; and the user likes “trousers" while disliking “laptop".
Therefore, the second challenge is how to capture interactions
and opinions between users and items jointly. In addition, the low
cost of link formation in online worlds can result in networks
with varied tie strengths (e.g., strong and weak ties are mixed
together) [ 36]. Users are likely to share more similar tastes with
strong ties than weak ties. Considering social relations equally
could lead to degradation in recommendation performance. Hence,
the third challenge is how to distinguish social relations with
heterogeneous strengths.
In this paper, we aim to build social recommender systems based
on graph neural networks. Specially, we propose a novel graph
neural network GraphRec for social recommendations, which can
address three aforementioned challenges simultaneously. Our major
contributions are summarized as follows:
•We propose a novel graph neural network GraphRec, which
can model graph data in social recommendations coherently;
•We provide a principled approach to jointly capture interac-
tions and opinions in the user-item graph;
•We introduce a method to consider heterogeneous strengths
of social relations mathematically; and
•We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
on various real-world datasets.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We introduce
the proposed framework in Section 2. In Section 3, we conduct ex-
periments on two real-world datasets to illustrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. In Section 4, we review work related to ourframework. Finally, we conclude our work with future directions
in Section 5.
2 THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
In this section, we will first introduce the definitions and notations
used in this paper, next give an overview about the proposed
framework, then detail each model component and finally discuss
how to learn the model parameters.
Table 1: Notation
Symbols Definitions and Descriptions
rij The rating value of item vjby user ui
qj The embedding of item vj
pi The embedding of user ui
erThe opinion embedding for the rating level r,
such as 5-star rating, r∈{1,2,3,4,5}
d The length of embedding vector
C(i) The set of items which user uiinteracted with
N(i)The set of social friends who user ui
directly connected with
B(j) The set of users who have interacted the item vj
hI
iThe item-space user latent factor from
item set C(i)of user ui
hS
iThe social-space user latent factor from
the social friends N(i)of user ui
hiThe user latent factor of user ui, combining
from item space hI
iand social space hS
i
xiaThe opinion-aware interaction representation
of itemvafor user ui
fjtThe opinion-aware interaction representation
of user utfor itemvj
zj The item latent factor of item vj
αiaThe item attention of item vain
contributing to hI
i
βioThe social attention of neighboring user uoin
contributing to hS
i
µjtThe user attention of user utin
contributing to zj
r′
ijThe predicted rating value of item vjby user ui
⊕ The concatenation operator of two vectors
T The user-user social graph
R The user-item rating matrix (user-item graph)
W ,b The weight and bias in neural network
2.1 Definitions and Notations
LetU={u1,u2, ...,un}andV={v1,v2, ...,vm}be the sets of
users and items respectively, where nis the number of users, and
mis the number of items. We assume that R∈Rn×mis the user-
item rating matrix, which is also called the user-item graph. If ui
gives a rating to vj,rijis the rating score, otherwise we employ
0to represent the unknown rating from uitovj, i.e., rij=0. The
observed rating score rijcan be seen as user ui’s opinion on the
itemvj. LetO=
ui,vj
|rij,0	be the set of known ratings