introduce item aggregation, social aggregation and how to combine
user latent factors from both item-space and social-space.
Item Aggregation. As user-item graph contains not only
interactions between users and items but also users’ opinions
(or rating scores) on items, we provide a principled approach to
jointly capture interactions and opinions in the user-item graph for
learning item-space user latent factors hI
i, which is used to model
user latent factor via interactions in the user-item graph.
The purpose of item aggregation is to learn item-space user
latent factor hI
iby considering items a user uihas interacted with
and users’ opinions on these items. To mathematically represent
this aggregation, we use the following function as:
hI
i=σ(W·Aддreitems({xia,∀a∈C(i)})+b) (1)
where C(i)is the set of items user uihas interacted with (or ui’s
neighbors in the user-item graph), xiais a representation vector
to denote opinion-aware interaction between uiand an item va,
andAддreitems is the items aggregation function. In addition, σ
denotes non-linear activation function (i.e., a rectified linear unit),
andWandbare the weight and bias of a neural network. Next we
will discuss how to define opinion-aware interaction representation
xiaand the aggregation function Aддreitems .
A user can express his/her opinions (or rating scores), denoted as
r, to items during user-item interactions. These opinions on items
can capture users’ preferences on items, which can help model
item-space user latent factors. To model opinions, for each type of
opinions r, we introduce an opinion embedding vector er∈Rd
that denotes each opinion ras a dense vector representation. For
example, in a 5-star rating system, for each r∈{1,2,3,4,5}, we
introduce an embedding vector er. For an interaction between user
uiand itemvawith opinion r, we model opinion-aware interaction
representation xiaas a combination of item embedding qaand
opinion embedding ervia a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). It can
be denoted as дvto fuse the interaction information with the
opinion information as shown in Figure 2. The MLP takes the
concatenation of item embedding qaand its opinion embedding er
as input. The output of MLP is the opinion-aware representation of
the interaction between uiandva,xia, as follows:
xia=дv([qa⊕er]) (2)
where⊕denotes the concatenation operation between two vectors.
One popular aggregation function for Aддreitems is the mean
operator where we take the element-wise mean of the vectors in
{xia,∀a∈C(i)}. This mean-based aggregator is a linear approxi-
mation of a localized spectral convolution [ 15], as the following
function:
hI
i=σ(W· 
Õ
a∈C(i)αixia 
+b) (3)
whereαiis fixed to1
|C(i)|for all items in the mean-based aggregator.
It assumes that all interactions contribute equally to understand the
user ui. However, this may not be optimal, due to the fact that the
influence of interactions on users may vary dramatically. Hence,
we should allow interactions to contribute differently to a user’s
latent factor by assigning each interaction a weight.To alleviate the limitation of mean-based aggregator, inspired by
attention mechanisms [ 3,38], an intuitive solution is to tweak αi
to be aware of the target user ui, i.e., assigning an individualized
weight for each(va,ui)pair,
hI
i=σ(W· 
Õ
a∈C(i)αiaxia 
+b) (4)
whereαiadenotes the attention weight of the interaction with
vain contributing to user ui’s item-space latent factor when
characterizing user ui’s preference from the interaction history C(i).
Specially, we parameterize the item attention αiawith a two-layer
neural network, which we call as the attention network . The input
to the attention network is the opinion-aware representation xia
of the interaction and the target user ui’s embedding pi. Formally,
the attention network is defined as,
α∗
ia=wT
2·σ(W1·[xia⊕pi]+b1)+b2 (5)
The final attention weights are obtained by normalizing the
above attentive scores using Softmax function, which can be
interpreted as the contribution of the interaction to the item-space
user latent factor of user uias:
αia=exp(α∗
ia)
Í
a∈C(i)exp(α∗
ia)(6)
Social Aggregation. Due to the social correlation theories [ 20,
21], a user’s preference is similar to or influenced by his/her
directly connected social friends. We should incorporate social
information to further model user latent factors. Meanwhile, tie
strengths between users can further influence users’ behaviors from
the social graph. In other words, the learning of social-space user
latent factors should consider heterogeneous strengths of social
relations. Therefore, we introduce an attention mechanism to select
social friends that are representative to characterize users social
information and then aggregate their information.
In order to represent user latent factors from this social per-
spective, we propose social-space user latent factors, which is to
aggregate the item-space user latent factors of neighboring users
from the social graph. Specially, the social-space user latent factor
ofui,hS
i, is to aggregate the item-space user latent factors of users
inui’s neighbors N(i), as the follows:
hS
i=σ(W·Aддreneiдbhors(n
hI
o,∀o∈N(i)o
)+b) (7)
where Aддreneiдbhors denotes the aggregation function on user’s
neighbors.
One natural aggregation function for Aддreneiдbhors is also the
mean operator which take the element-wise mean of the vectors in
hIo,∀o∈N(i)	
, as the following function:
hS
i=σ(W· 
Õ
o∈N(i)βihI
o 
+b) (8)
whereβiis fixed to1
|N(i)|for all neighbors for the mean-based
aggregator. It assumes that all neighbors contribute equally to the
representation of user ui. However, as mentioned before, strong
and weak ties are mixed together in a social network, and users are
likely to share more similar tastes with strong ties than weak ties.