humans, despite having lost interest in man-versus-machine chess contests, have not lost
interest in either the game or the machine. In fact, the encounter with the Deep Blue was a
catalyst for people like Kasparov to pioneer the concept of man + machine matches, in which
a chess player equipped with AI assistance (a “centaur” player) competes against AI. Up
to today the centaur keeps an upper hand against machines; and even more encouragingly,
there have been more and better human chess players with the advent of aﬀordable AI-
engineered chess programs.1If AI can help more humans become better chess players, it
stands to reason that it can help more of us become better at many skilled jobs, from pilots,
medical doctors, to investment advisors. In this study, we zoom into the profession of stock
analysis, whose data availability allows us to calibrate both man vs. machine and man +
machine. Stock analysts are among the most important information intermediaries in the
market place (e.g., Brav and Lehavy, 2003;Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, and Lee, 2005;Crane
and Crotty, 2020). Their job, which require both institutional knowledge and data analytics,
has not been spared by AI as more and more investors start to heed to recommendations
about stock picking and portfolio formation made by AI-powered tools.2
To trace out the path from “man v. machine” to “man + machine,” we decided to
build our own AI model for year-end stock predictions so that we have a consistent and
time-adapted benchmark for AI performance which we understand and are able to explain.3
Target prices and earnings are the two primary subjects of analyst forecasts, we choose the
former as the latter are subject to managerial discretion, which a large body of accounting
literature on earnings management manifests. Our “AI analyst” is built on training a com-
1Source of information: The Inevitable, by Keven Kelly, Penguin Publishing Group, 2016. See also
“Defeated Chess Champ Garry Kasparov Has Made Peace With AI,” Wired, February 2020.
2Sources: “What Machine Learning Will Mean for Asset Managers,” Robert C. Pozen and Jonathan
Ruane,Havard Business Review, December 3, 2019. “How Startup Investors Can Utilize AI To Make
Smarter Investments,” Jia Wertz, Forbes, January 18, 2019.
3We focus on year-end prices because these are a typical focal point for investors and corporations for
tax and reporting reasons. For example, “Credit Suisse Raised Its SP 500 Target – Earnings Are Too Good
to Ignore,” Jacob Sonenshine, Barron’s, April 30, 2021.
2