the requirement that the AI Hiring be observable.
[Insert Table 7here]
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7show that analysts associated with brokerage houses with
greater AI capabilities generally perform better against our AI model, a piece of direct evi-
dence that humans complemented by AIs enjoy a step up in predictive capabilities. Columns
(3) and (4) show that post alternative data, analysts covering aﬀected ﬁrms improve their
performance relative to the AI model, but only signiﬁcantly so when interacting with AI
Hiring. In other words, the improvement of predictive performance post alternative data
concentrates in the subset of analysts who are aﬃliated with brokerage ﬁrms with strong AI
capabilities. Overall results suggest that augmenting humans with new technologies consti-
tutes a promising direction for the analyst profession.
6. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we build an AI analyst to digest corporate disclosure and other and infor-
mation (qualitative and quantitative), and perform forecast tasks similar to those of stock
analysts. Our AI analyst is able to beat the majority of human analysts in stock forecasts.
A portfolio following the diﬀerence between AI and analyst’s forecasts generates a monthly
excess return of more than 60 basis points. In the contest of “Man vs Machine,” we ﬁnd
that the relative advantage of such an AI Analyst is stronger when when information is more
transparent and voluminous. Human analysts remain competitive when critical information
requires institutional knowledge (such as the nature of intangible assets). The edge of the
AI analyst over human analysts declines over time, especially when analysts gain access to
alternative data and to in-house AI resources. Combining AI and the art of human experts
produce the highest potential in generating accurate forecasts in settings when the two skills
are complementary, suggesting a future of “Man + Machine” in high-skilled professions.
The complementarity between humans and machines documented in this study also
23