Figure 3 plots the relative performance of the hybrid analyst (Man + Machine) vs. the
plain AI (Machine). Interestingly, Man + Machine outperforms plain Machine in every
single year. Such outperformance, which captures the incremental value of human analysts
tomachines, increasessubstantiallywithtime. Thecombinedresultsportraysabrightfuture
for Man + Machine: not only the combination attains better performance than either side
alone, but also the incremental value of human does not weaken with the technology.
[Insert Figure 3 here]
4. Man vs Machine: Relative Advantage of Analyst vs AI
In this section, we strive to understand when human analysts perform better than the
AI and when otherwise. Such understanding will help to “unbox” the black box associated
with AI or machine learning, and provides intuition and guidance on the applicability of AI
for researchers and investors.
We consider a number of variables at the analyst, ﬁrm, and industry levels that are
potentially relevant for the performance of human analysts and AI, which are deﬁned in
Section 2.4. We group these variables into several classes. First, we consider a number of
proxies for information asymmetry or opacity, including Amihud Illiquidity, Stock Volatility ,
Log Market Cap , and# Institutional Owners . Second, we include variables representing the
volume of information ( # 8K Reports ) and the tangibility of information ( Intangible Assets ).
Third, we examine several variables that aﬀect the information and resources available to the
analyst, e.g., Forecast Horizon, # Analysts in Brokerage Firm , and# Previous Predictions .
Finally, we consider Industry Distress , highlighting the uncertainties at the industry level
(Opler and Titman, 1994), and ﬁnally Time Trend , which can help to capture temporal
patterns.
For each target price forecast, we deﬁne two variables that measure the relative per-
formance of humans vs AI. First, the indicator variable Analyst Beats AI equals one if the
absolute forecast error of the analyst is smaller than that of the AI, and zero otherwise.
18