mean predictor of all the trees.
Random forests perform better than simple trees for several reasons. First, through ag-
gregating predictions over bootstrapped samples, it reduces the variance and non-robustness
of single trees. Second, the random feature selection in the second step above ensures that
the estimated trees are not too correlated, avoiding relying only on a few prominent features
and further reducing the variance of the model.
B.2.3. Gradient Boost
Boosting also combines a number of weak models to generate a stronger model. In
boosting of trees, a number of trees are constructed sequentially, i.e., each tree is constructed
using information based on the previously constructed trees. In gradient boosting, each
decision tree is ﬁt to the residuals of the model, not to the outcome. Once a new tree is
obtained, it is added to the predictive function to update it, usually with a learning weight
multiplied to the tree predictor to adjust the rate of learning new information. Then new
residuals are obtained from the updated predictive function and the process is repeated for a
number of times to obtain the ﬁnal ensemble predictor. Because boosting models aggregate
results of decision trees sequentially, each component tree does not need to be very precise
and can be simple, i.e., having a low depth.
In a sense, gradient boosting is similar to the Newton’s gradient algorithm in optimiza-
tion. Itapproximatesthetrueunderlyingfunctionsequentiallybyimprovingonthepredicted
residuals/errors gradually. This allows the ﬁnal predictive function to have a much richer
and more ﬂexible structure and thus much better performance than single decision trees. It
also reduces the non-robustness of single trees through using an ensemble of trees. For these
reasons, gradient boosting is one of the best oﬀ-the-shelf machine learning methods.
B.3. Deep Learning Model: Long-Short Term Memory Neural Networks
The neural networks models, initial motivated by the neuron structures in the brains
of humans and animals, blossomed after breakthroughs in algorithms and computing power
(LeCun, Bengio and Hinton, 2015). Neural networks models, also called deep learning mod-
els, have become some of the most powerful models and achieved near- or super-human
capabilities in a wide variety of applications, such as natural language processing, speech
recognition, computer vision, game playing, and autonomous driving.
There are many diﬀerent architechtures of neural networks, such as the simplest Feed-
49