using the Burning Glass U.S. job posting data8and the classiﬁcation algorithm developed
in Babina, Fedyk, He, and Hodson (2020).
Overall, results support the hypothesis that analyst capabilities could be augmented
by AI, and moreover, analysts’ work possesses incremental value such that they, with the
assistance of AI, can still beat a machine model without human inputs, analogous to the
centaur chess players’ out-performing machines as we discussed earlier. If there is some
external validity from chess and stock analysis to skilled workers in general, the inference
from our study is encouraging news for humans in the age of AI.
Our work is related to the rapidly growing literature on the competition and threat to
human workers posed by new technology including robots and AI.9The literature overall
ﬁnds that when low- or intermediate-skill jobs are replaced by machines, humans tend to
move to high-skill jobs that are more diﬃcult to replace. However, the most recent wave of
AI innovations disrupt many of the high-skill jobs. Our study focuses on humans’ relative
advantage over machines and, more importantly, the potential synergies between humans
and machines.10We envision a future in which AI and machines can assist humans with the
more tedious and quantitative tasks and democratize access to information, allowing humans
to be more creative and productive.11
A few contemporaneous papers also study the impact of big data and AI in the ﬁnancial
industry. Abis(2020) studies how quantitative investment strategies inﬂuence mutual fund
8Burning Glass is currently the leading data vendor in job postings in the U.S. The postings are scraped
fromwebsites,newsletters,andagencyreports, andcovertheperiodof2007,andthen2010-2019. Acemoglu,
Autor, Hazell, and Restrepo (2020) show that Burning Glass data cover 60-80% of all U.S. job vacancies.
9An incomplete list of recent papers include Aghion, Jones and Jones (2017),Acemoglu and Restrepo
(2018),Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019),Brynjolfsson, Mitchell and Rock (2018),Webb(2020),Ray and
Mookherjee (2020),Cao, Cong, and Yang (2019),Acemoglu, Autor, Hazell, and Restrepo (2020), and Jiang,
Tang, Xiao, and Yao (2021).
10An example in a non-ﬁnance setting comes from Sports. After trying Video Assistant Referee (VAR)
for a few seasons, the English Premier League decided not to let VAR over-power referee judgment. One
main reason is that players will reverse-engineer the rules underlying the VAR decisions and play to their
advantage, such as committing more “low-trade” (to the machine) but atrocious (to humans) fouls. This
can be remedied by having a human referee having the ﬁnal say. See “Why Has The Introduction Of Video
Technology Gone So Badly In Soccer?” James Reade, Forbes, December 10, 2020.
11Due to the complementary nature of AI and humans, the advent of AI technologies can potentially
create more jobs than they destroy. See “Artiﬁcial Intelligence To Create 58 Million New Jobs By 2022, Says
Report,” Amit Chowdry, Forbes, September 18, 2018.
6