with ﬁrm and industry information from CRSP and Compustat, textual information from
ﬁrms’ SEC Filings, including annual reports (10-K), quarterly reports (10-Q), ad hoc dis-
closure of material corporate news and developments (8-K), and other reports, as well as
macroeconomic data from the Federal Reserve Economic Data at Fed at St. Louis.
To operationalize time adaptation, we adopt the following rolling-window approach. For
a given forecast made by a (human) analyst on date tin yearu, all forecasts in the previous
ﬁve yearsu−5,u−4,...,u−1form the training sample. That is, inputs data up to the dates
of those forecasts (but excluding the forecasts themselves) and the corresponding realized
prices were used to train our machine learning models. Move to the estimation sample, we
then feed inputs data available up to date t−1in yearuinto the trained model to make the
prediction at time tfor the year-end price. Because our sample starts in 1996, our AI Analyst
makes its ﬁrst prediction in 2001 given the requirement of ﬁve years as the training period.
Though we allow (public) information to be updated till t−1, most of the information inputs
came from disclosed quarterly data from the previous eight quarters.17
2.3. Information and variables as inputs to machine learning
Firm Characteristics The ﬁrm characteristics fed into machine learning models are re-
trieved or processed based on information from standard databases accessed via WRDS,
especially CRSP/Compustat and Thomson Reuters Ownership Databases. The ﬁrst set of
predictors include annual returns and end-of-year stock prices for the past ﬁve years, as well
as the realized earnings within the past 3, 6, 9, 12, 24 and 36 months. We also include
a number of ﬁrm characteristics known to predict cross-sectional diﬀerences of the stock
prices. In particular, we include anomalies from each of the six broad categories of anoma-
lies considered in Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2020), i.e., the momentum, value versus growth,
17Data that come in diﬀerent frequencies, e.g., corporate news releases (8-K), are aggregated at the
quarterly level.
9