Appendix B. Details of the Machine Learning Models
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the basic structure and strengths of machine learning
models considered in our paper. Interested readers are referred to representative references
for more details, such as Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman (2009) and Goodfellow, Bengio,
and Courville (2016).
B.1. Quasi-linear Models
Quasi-linearmachinelearningmodelsgeneralizelinearregressionsandclassiﬁcationmod-
els, and are more ﬂexible and can accommodate a larger number of variables than the tra-
ditional linear regressions, by their built-in dimension-reduction capabilities. Quasi-linear
models are typically eﬃcient in model training because they are typically associated with
fast algorithms, such as linear and quadratic programming techniques.
B.1.1. Elastic-Net
TheElastic-NetmodelisageneralizationoftheOLSlinearregressionmodel. Whenthere
is a large number of predictors, the OLS tends to have good in-sample performance (small
biasin the terms of machine learning) and bad out-of-sample performance ( large variation
in the terms of machine learning). Furthermore, the OLS can generate signiﬁcant loadings
on a large number of independent variables, making the interpretation of the model diﬃcult.
One class of models, the shrinkage models, generalize the OLS by imposing a penalty on the
number and size of non-zero coeﬃcients in the estimation, eﬀectively limiting the model to
focus on a subset of the independent variables and achieving dimension reduction.
The Elastic-Net model, introduced by Zou and Hastie (2005), is a shrinkage model in
which the penalty function is a linear combination of L1andL2norms of the coeﬃcients.
In particular, the Elastic-Net model minimizes the following objective function,
min
βN/summationdisplay
i=1(yi−β0−p/summationdisplay
j=1xijβj)2+λ1p/summationdisplay
j=1|βj|+λ2p/summationdisplay
j=1|βj|2. (A1)
TheElastic-Netmodelisalsoageneralizationofthewell-knownLASSOandRidgeregression
models. When the hyperparameter λ2= 0in (A1), we recover the LASSO model. When
λ1= 0, werecovertheRidgemodel. Ingeneral, theLASSOmodeltendstoselectafewstrong
predictors while setting the coeﬃcients of other predictors to essentially zero, but can make
random choices among several strong and correlated variables. The Ridge model usually
46