bination of current machine-learning (ML) tool kits4using timely publicly available data
and information. More speciﬁcally, we collect ﬁrm-level, industry-level, and macro-economic
variables, as well as textual information from ﬁrms’ disclosure (updated to right before the
time of an analyst forecast) as inputs or predictors, but deliberately exclude information
from analyst forecasts (past and current) themselves. We resort to machine learning models,
instead of traditional economics models (such as regressions) due to the advantages to the
former in managing high dimensional unstructured data, and in their ﬂexibility in optimizing
and ﬁtting unspeciﬁed functional forms. More recent development in the area also allows us
to mitigate over-ﬁtting and to improve out-of-sample performance.
We kept training and improving the model until we were conﬁdent that our AI analyst
is able to beat human analysts as a whole: The AI analyst based on the ﬁnal “ensemble”
model outperforms 53.7% of the target price predictions made by all IBES analysts during
the sample period of 2001-2016.5Moreover, a monthly rebalanced long-short portfolio based
on the diﬀerences in the opinions of AI and human analysts6is able to generate a monthly
alpha of 0.84% to 0.92% using the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model. Though building
anAIanalystisnottheultimategoalofthisstudyandthoughwedonotclaimourAIanalyst
to be the best of the kind, its performance already suggests that the profession of ﬁnancial
analysts is subject to technology disruption as our model is a lower bound of the state-of-
the-art. To the extent that we have, at our disposal, an AI analyst that beats the average
of its human counterparts, we are able to explore the relative advantages of, and potential
synergies between, the two sides.
First, we examine the circumstances under which human analysts retain their advantage,
in that a forecast made by an analyst beats the concurrent AI forecast in terms of lower
4We start with two versatile quasi-linear ML models, Elastic-Net and Support Vector Regressions, that
are adept at tasks with a large number of variables. We then add on three highly nonlinear ML models,
Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Neural Networks. Random
Forest and Gradient Boosting can both capture complex and hierarchical interactions among the input
variables while the LSTM model is designed to model time-series patterns in the data.
5In comparison, the predictions by an OLS model only outperform 19.3% of analyst forecasts.
6Such a portfolio would long a stock if the AI forecasts a higher target price than the median analyst
forecast over a time horizon and short a stock if otherwise.
3