being linear.
B.2. Decision-Tree Based Models
The quasi-linear models considered above may not work well if there are nonlinear re-
lationships among the predictive variables. In this section, we discuss a class of versatile
nonlinear models – decision trees and derived models.
B.2.1. Decision Trees
Decision trees are modeled after human decisions. A decision tree is a series of binary
decisions based on cutoﬀs of independent variables at each branching point. The tree thus
will divide the rectangular feature space into smaller rectangular blocks. The decision tree
regression then use the sample mean of the dependent variable in each block as the prediction
for any point in the block.
Decision trees have the beneﬁt of being easily interpretable because it is modeled after
humandecisions(similartoastep-by-stepinstructions)andcanalsobedisplayedgraphically
(as binary trees). Trees are also a ﬂexible non-linear model that can model a variety of
nonlinear patterns given the large degree of freedom in specifying the sequences of branching
rules.
However, trees do not have a high level of accuracy by themselves because of the restric-
tiveformofthebinarybranchingprocess, whichforcesthesampletobesplitintorectangular
regions and may not approximate the real underlying patterns (whether linear or nonlinear)
well. Trees are also non-robust. In addition, a small change in the data can lead to large
changes in the structure of the estimated tree because the tree structure is discrete, not
continuous. Several methods, including random forest and gradient boosting, use trees as
basic building blocks to form ensemble predictors and achieve superior performance.
B.2.2. Random Forest
A random forest (introduced by Breiman, 2001) proceeds in the following way. First, it
involves drawing a bootstrapped sample (drawing with repetition) from the original sample.
Second, on the bootstrapped sample, one builds a decision tree, selecting a splitting predictor
among only a random mfeatures of the total ppredictors. Third, one repeats the above two
steps to build a number of decision trees, and form the ensemble predictor by taking the
48