(10-Q), corporate news (8-K), and other reports. The new developments allow researchers
to quantify information which was considered qualitative or “soft," commonly termed “sen-
timents.”
Two diﬀerent sets of sentiment variables from textual data serve as inputs to our AI
analyst. The ﬁrst set of sentiment variables is based on the Loughran and McDonald (2011)
sentiment, which has been widely used in the academic literature. We calculate the fre-
quency of positive and negative sentiment words from the ﬁrm-issued SEC ﬁlings follow-
ingLoughran and McDonald (2011). The second set of machine-learning-based sentiment
variables follow Cao, Kim, Wang, and Xiao (2020), where a deep-learning neural network
model to incorporate contextual information and syntactic relations between words that are
performance-related. The second approach aims to isolate managerial sentiment related to
the ﬁrm’s future performance from sentiment regarding other issues (such as location and
weather).
2.4. Potential factors for the relative performance of AI and human analysts
A main objective of the study is to assess the factors that contribute to the relative
performance of AI vs. human, as well as the synergy between the two. We hypothesize that
these factors are related to the information environment of the ﬁrm, industry, and analysts.
We ﬁrst consider the following ﬁrm-level variables: the Amihud Illiquidity measure which
is the ratio of absolute daily stock return to the daily trading volume (in dollars); Stock
Volatility (the total return volatility); Log Market Cap (the logarithm of market capital-
ization); # 8K Reports , which is the number of 8K reports ﬁled each year and represents
the volume of available information about the ﬁrm; and Intangible Assets, deﬁned as the
average of three proxies: one minus the ratio of PP&E to assets, organization capital scaled
by assets, and knowledge capital scaled by assets. The last two measures, derived from the
accumulation of SG&A and R&D expenditures, are constructed following Ewens, Peters,
and Wang (2020).
11