2. Information Sources, Data Construction, and Machine Learning
Models
2.1. Sample of forecasts
Our sample of analyst target price forecasts builds on the Thomson Financial I/B/E/S
analyst database, over the period from 1996 to 2016.15After merging I/B/E/S with CRSP
and Compustat, the ﬁnal sample consists of 685,888 analyst target price forecasts on 6,118
ﬁrms, issued by 10,287 analysts from 755 brokerage ﬁrms.
We choose to analyze analysts’ price forecasts instead of earning forecasts because earn-
ings are subject to managerial discretion or even manipulation. Earnings could be endoge-
nous to analyst forecasts due to the well-documented feedback loop due to managerial in-
centive to meet and beat analyst consensus (Abarbanell and Lehavy, 2003;Doyle, Jennings,
and Soliman, 2013). Prices are more diﬃcult to control by insiders and thus provide a more
objective benchmark to assess performance of human analysts and machines.
2.2. Building the information set for AI analyst
Given our goal to build an AI analyst to compete with professional analysts, we need to
deﬁne the information set available to such a professional whenever a price forecast is made.
The unit of analysis in our main set up is a forecast on the year-end stock price for ﬁrm i
by (human) analyst kon datet(in yearu). We focus on year-end prices because these are
a focal point for performance evaluation, tax, and corporate reporting purposes. The infor-
mation set,It, would, in an ideal setting, include all publicly available data and information
up tot−. We assume that professional analysts do not have access to material non-public
information, which is essentially the requirement of Regulation FD.16We approximate It
15The I/B/E/S coverage prior to 1996 was limited, with fewer than 2,000 in total of target price forecasts.
16Regulation FD (“fair disclosure”), implemented in 2000, generally prohibits public companies from
disclosing previously nonpublic, material information to certain parties unless the information is distributed
to the public ﬁrst or simultaneously.
8