performance. Abis and Veldkamp (2020) examine the change in labor shares in the ﬁnancial
industry driven by the new data management and AI jobs. Coleman, Merkley, and Pacelli
(2020) compare the performance of robot analysts from FinTech companies with human
analysts. Grennan and Michaely (2020) study how analysts perform and adjust in response
to the advent of AI-processed recommendations in the markets. Rossi and Utkus (2021)
compare human asset managers with robot advisors. Our paper diﬀers from the existent
literature in that we are able to explore the internal mechanism of machines we constructed
ourselves, and to identify its relative advantages to humans more directly. More importantly,
our set-up allows us to integrate human and machines so that we are able to investigate the
incremental value of humans relative to machines in such a cooperation.12
Finally, we contribute to the literature of building and assessing the performance of ma-
chine learning models in ﬁnancial applications, e.g., in predicting asset prices (Gu, Kelly,
and Xiu, 2020), robo-advising (D’Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi (2019)), portfolio manage-
ment (Chen, Pelger, and Zhu, 2020;Cong, Tang, Wang, and Zhang, 2020), estimating values
of artwork (Aubry, Kraeussl, Manso, and Spaenjers, 2020), earnings forecast (van Binsber-
gen, Han, andLopez-Lira, 2020), lendingdecisions(Liu, 2019), innovationevaluation(Zheng,
2021) and estimating bank risk (Hanley and Hoberg, 2019). While we also employ machine
learning models to build our AI analyst, we focus more on understanding the diﬀerence
between humans and machines, and the complementary value humans can oﬀer in the age
of AI. Our study is one of the ﬁrst to study the implications of the combination of humans
and machines in the ﬁnancial markets.13Given the increasing presence of machines and AI,
understanding how they can best complement and improve humans will bring to fruition the
original mission of AI development.14
12To make sure our AI model is consistent with those in industry practice, we communicated with invest-
ment companies who also develop AI analyst models and found that they reachedmany similar conclusions
regarding the incremental value of human to AI.
13Armour, Parnham, and Sato (2020) study the impact of AI and the associated digital technologies on
the law profession. They ﬁnd that AI-enabled services will augment the capabilities of human lawyers and
also generate new roles for legal experts to produce such services.
14This echoes the mission of the Stanford Human-Centered AI Institute, “to advance AI research, educa-
tion, policy and practice to improve the human condition.” See https://hai.stanford.edu/about.
7