To put the performance comparison in perspective and to illustrate progressive improve-
ment of the AI models, Table 2compares various models, from the simple OLS model to
a variety of machine learning algorithms, in their ability to beat analyst forecasts. As the
starting line, the simple OLS model only beats analysts in 19.3% of the cases, suggesting that
analysts’ job is indispensable with the availability of standard statistics tools such as linear
regression models. The performance of quasi-linear machine learning models is better than
the plain OLS, at 23.3% (Elastic Net) and 27.2% (Support Vector Machines), respectively.
As explained in Appendix B, the quasi-linear models are better at identifying the most im-
portant factors among a large number of independent variables, or at dimension-reduction
tasks, resulting in better out-of-the-sample performance compared to the OLS. However,
the quasi-linear models are still decidedly inferior to the average analyst, suggesting that hu-
mans are capable of processing ﬂexible (nonlinear) relations and interactions among diﬀerent
informative signals better than quasi-linear and non-linear models.
[Insert Table 2here]
We next apply the LSTM neural networks model, a model that is known for capturing
nonlinear and time-series dynamics (Chen, Pelger, and Zhu, 2020).19The LSTM model
outperforms just about half, or 50.1%, of the analyst forecasts, indicating that the neural
network model is indeed helpful in capturing nonlinear patterns in our sample.
Finally, we progress to two other nonlinear machine-learning models that themselves are
ensemble models built on decision trees, the random forest model and gradient boost models
(seeAppendix B for details). These two models are known to be especially proﬁcient at
capturing complicated interactions of multiple independent variables. The random forest
and gradient boost models perform better than 51.7% and 52.0% of analysts, respectively.
Given that the LSTM, random forest, and gradient boost models capture important but
19The LSTM model involves random factors in the optimization process; therefore, one run of LSTM
model cannot predict precisely given the randomness. To alleviate this concern, we form an ensemble LSTM
model that aggregates the results of 20 runs of the LSTM model by taking the mean prediction. We also
examine the ensemble methods using 10 runs and 60 runs and the performance of these models stays the
same.
14