absolute forecast error relative to the ex post realization (i.e., the actual year-end stock
price). We ﬁnd human analysts perform better for more illiquid, smaller ﬁrms, and ﬁrm
with asset-light business models (i.e., higher intangible assets), consistent with the notion
that such ﬁrms are subject to higher information asymmetry and require better institutional
knowledgeorindustryexperiencetodecipher. Analystsaﬃliatedwithlargebrokeragehouses
also stand a higher chance of beating the machine, a combination of their abilities and the
research resources available to them. Moreover, analysts are more likely to have the upper-
hand when the associated industry is experiencing distress, suggesting that the AI has yet
to catch up on relatively infrequent changes such as an industry recession. This is consistent
withthelimitationofcurrentmachinelearningandAImodelswhichlackreasoningfunctions
and thus cannot learn eﬀectively from infrequent events.7As expected, AI enjoys a clear
advantage in its capacity to process information, and is more likely to out-smart analysts
when the volume of public information is larger.
Just like the “centaur” chess player which Kasparov pioneered, the superior performance
of an AI analyst does not rule out the value of human inputs. If human and machine have
relative advantage in information processing and decision making, then human analysts may
still contribute critically to a “centaur” analyst, i.e., an analyst who makes forecasts that
combine their own knowledge and the outputs/recommendations from AI models. After we
addanalystforecaststotheinformationsetofthemachinelearningmodelsunderlyingourAI
analyst, the resulting “man + machine” model outperforms 57.3% of the forecasts made by
analysts, and outperforms the AI-only model in all years. Thus, AI analyst does not displace
human analysts yet; and in fact an investor or analyst who combines AI’s computational
power and the human art of understanding soft information can attain the best performance.
We are thus interested in knowing when the incremental value of human to a man +
machinemodelisthehighest,asmanifestedintherelativeperformanceoftheman+machine
model versus the pure AI model. Similar to previous ﬁndings, we ﬁnd inputs from analysts
7Source: “What AI still can’t do,” Brian Bergstein, MIT Technology Review , February 19, 2020
4