includes more predictors and shrink the coﬃcients of correlated variables together. The
Elastic-Net model strikes a balance between these charateristics, allowing both a selection
of strong features and the averaging of correlated features.
B.1.2. Support Vector Regression
The support vector regression (SVR) is motivated by support vector machines (SVM)
for classiﬁcation problems. Consider a classiﬁcation problem with 2 classes and npredictors,
i.e., each observation belongs to one of two classes and is a point in the n-dimensional
space. Given a training sample, i.e., a set of labeled n-dimensional points, a linear classiﬁer
is equivalent to a (n−1)-dimensional hyperplane that separates the two classes of points
in then-dimesional space. The linear SVM searches for the maximum separating (n−1)-
dimensional hyperplane such that it maximizes the distance from the hyperplane to the
closest data points. To deal with the case that separating hyperplanes may not exist, the
SVM also tolerates misclassiﬁed points within some bounds. The SVM thus focuses on
points close to the separating hyperplane, i.e., observations that are on the boundary of the
two classes. In fact, the results the SVM do not depend on observations far away from the
boundary. One key advantage of the SVM is that it performs well when there is a large
number of features relative to the sample size, e.g., in the case of texual and image analysis.
The SVM is regarded as one of the best out-of-the-box machine learning algorithms and has
been widely applied in the classiﬁcation of text, image, hand-writing, and proteins.
The support vector regression optimizes the following objective function.
min
βN/summationdisplay
i=1V(yi−β0−xT
iβ) +λp/summationdisplay
j=1|βj|2. (A2)
where the cost function V(·)is given by
V(z) =

0, if|z|</epsilon1,
|z|−/epsilon1,otherwise.(A3)
The cost function is insensitive to the signs/sizes of errors if the error size is less than /epsilon1, i.e.,
it is more sensitive to points where the estimation error is larger. These marginal points, in
turn, are instrumental in determining the estimated coeﬃcients. The beneﬁt of the support
vector regression is that it allows eﬃcient dimension reduction even with a very large number
of features. However, it may not perform well if the underlying pattern is far away from
47