AI forecasts contain no average directional bias, we conﬁrm that the median analyst price
forecast in our sample contains a 5.2% positive bias In such a scenario, signals are not as
informative when analysts are more optimistic than the AI.21
3.4. Combined wisdom of Man and Machine
Results from the previous sections suggest that the analyst profession could be seriously
disrupted by AI technology. However, the superior performance of the AI Analyst does not
rule out the possibility that analyst forecasts contain information that is incremental to AI-
produced forecasts. In other words, if analysts are able to possess information that is not
picked up by the AI, then AI forecast is not suﬃcient for the analyst forecast, even though
analysts lose to AI in forecasting accuracy. An investor who combines the wisdom of both
should attain even better performance.
To assess the performance of combined power, we consider adding the analyst forecasts
to the information set to our machine learning model. That is, the information set Itnow
includes the analyst forecasts, Fi,j,t, made on the same ﬁrm iduring the 90-day window
ending on date t. In particular, we obtain the consensus and mean square error of the
forecasts by analysts in the previous 90 days, and build a “Man + Machine” hybrid analyst.
We ﬁnd that the hybrid analyst outperforms 57.3% of all human analysts, and 56.6% of the
AI-alone forecasts. Figure 2plots the relative performance of the hybrid analyst against
human analysts in the time-series. We ﬁnd that the hybrid analyst beats more than 50% of
analysts for almost all years. Furthermore, the average performance of the hybrid analyst
vs. human analysts is now relatively stable over time with a slight decline. Thus, the hybrid
model continues to provide substantial beneﬁts even in recent years.
[Insert Figure 2here]
21As Lim (2002) pointed out, analyst forecast bias is related to analyst and company characteristics as
analystsmaytradeoﬀbiastoimprovemanagementaccessandforecastaccuracy. Assuch, simply“debiasing”
analyst forecasts lead to even worse performance.
17