are more valuable when covering ﬁrms that are more illiquid and ﬁrms with more tangible
assets. Moreover, analyst inputs have more incremental value in long-horizon forecasts, and
during the time period an industry is experiencing diﬃculty. Importantly, the incremental
value of human does not decrease as the volume of information (hence demand for processing
capacity) increases, though this constitutes a human disadvantage when alone. Similarly,
analystsfromsmallbrokeragehousesmakesimilarlevelofcontributiontotheman+machine
modelcomparedtotheircounterpartsfromlargerbanks, suggestingthatAIcouldpotentially
help level the disparity in institutional resources.
Finally, we resort to an event study to sharpen the inference of the impact of integrating
man and machine in stock analyses. In recent years, the infrastructure of “big data” has cre-
atedanewclassofinformationaboutcompaniesthatiscollectedandpublishedoutsideofthe
ﬁrms, and such information provides unique and timely clues into investment opportunities.
An important and popular type of alternative data captures “consumer footprints,” often
times in the literal sense such as satelliteimages on retail parking lots. Such data, which have
to be processed by machine learning models, have been shown to contain incremental infor-
mation for stock prices (Zhu, 2019; Katona, Painter, Patatoukas, and Zeng, 2020). We build
on data from Katona, Painter, Patatoukas, and Zeng (2020) on the staggered introduction
of several important alternative data bases, and conduct a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences test of
analysts’ performance versus our own AI model before and after the availability of the alter-
native data. The underlying premise is that analysts who cover ﬁrms that are served by the
alternative data could be in the situation of man + machine, as they have the opportunity
to use the additional, AI-processed, information. Indeed, we ﬁnd that post alternative data,
analysts covering aﬀected ﬁrms improve their performance relative to the AI-only forecast
model we build. Furthermore, such improvement concentrates in the subset of analysts who
are aﬃliated with brokerage ﬁrms with strong AI capabilities, measured by AI-related hiring
5