diﬀerent nonlinear and interactive patterns and features, we form another layer of ensemble
of these three models to obtain synergistic beneﬁts of the three models. The resulting “AI
analyst” outperforms 53.7% of analysts.
The progression of forecast accuracy demonstrated by Table 2 signiﬁes the relentless
upgrading of AI technologies over time, to the point that AI reaches or even beats human
intelligence in one after another skilled task. Financial analysts are thus vulnerable, espe-
cially considering that our model, which already beats the average analyst, is a lower bound
of what state-of-art AI technology could accomplish.
3.2. AI vs. Analysts with Persistent Performance
Analysts are a large group with heterogeneous skill levels such that forecast performance
would to be persistent if skills are innate. Moreover, the market recognizes, at least par-
tially, the relatively more skilled analysts by responding more strongly to their forecasts or
recommendations (Mikhail, Walther, and Willies, 2007;Li,2005). Thus, a higher hurdle is
for our AI analyst to beat the subset of skilled analysts. We assess the relative performance
withe respect to the higher hurdle with two tests. First, we sort all analysts into the top
and bottom halves based on their average prediction error (normalized by stock prices) over
the past one, two, three, four, and ﬁve years. We then track the percentage of their future
forecasts during the one year horizon that are beat by our AI analyst. In the second test,
we repeat the same procedure except selecting the analysts that are among top and bottom
quantiles in each of the past one, two, three, four and ﬁve years. Table 3reports the results.
[Insert Table 3here]
Results in Table 3show that the AI comfortably beats the analysts in the low skill
quantiles. It is basically neck-to-neck to the more successful analysts, and is almost even
with analysts (beat ratio of 49.2%) who demonstrated ﬁve years’ superior performance in
the recent past, which constitutes only 3.9% of all the analysts.
15