3.3. Performance of portfolio following AI Recommendations
Analysts make forecasts as a way to advise portfolio formation or turnover. The perfor-
mance of a portfolio following the analyst advice is a natural metric for analyst skill. For
the same reason, we can form portfolios based on the diﬀerent opinions between the AI and
human analysts. The performance of the resulting portfolio is testament of their relative
proﬁciency.
In each month, we gather all predictions made by all analysts and the corresponding
AI forecasts in past 30, 60, 90 and 360 days. For each pair of predictions, if AI predicts a
higher (lower) price, it is considered as a buy (sell) signal. If analysts predicts a higher price.
During the given time horizon, the portfolio will long the stock if there are more buy than
sell signals; and short the stock otherwise. The portfolio is equal weighted. In a monthly-
(or six month-) rebalanced portfolio, we hold the position for one month (six months), or
till the signals reverse. The portfolio contains 400 to 1100 stocks with signals from past 30
days to 360 days, and long/short positions are roughly even.20
Table 4 Panel A reports the performance of the monthly rebalanced long-short portfolio,
in terms of average return and alpha estimated using Fama-French three factor, Carhart
four factor, Fama-French ﬁve factor and Fama-Fench six factor models. Panel B reports the
same statistics for the semi-annually rebalanced portfolio.
[Insert Table 4here]
Results in Table 4are highly encouraging in that AI is able to generate superior re-
turns/alpha, relative to analysts, on the order of 65 to 91 basis points monthly, signiﬁcant at
less than the 5% levels in all cases. When we separately examine the long and short portions
of the portfolio, we discover that the superior returns are signiﬁcant (all at the 1% level)
only on the long-side (for which the transaction costs are lower). Such an asymmetry could
be driven by the well-documented positive bias in analyst forecasts (Lim (2002)). While
20The average monthly turnover rate of the monthly-rebalanced portfolios ranges from 10% to 58%; and
that for the six-month rebalanced portfolio is 6% to 12%.
16