6). Such a contrast in the results highlight that democratizing AI technology levels the
playground: When we let all analysts (from large and small brokerage houses) be equipped
with AI assistance in the Man + Machine model, disparity in institutional resources does not
signiﬁcantly aﬀect the incremental value of human inputs. In a similar vein, the incremental
value of human does not decrease as the volume of information (hence demand for processing
capacity) increases, though this constitutes a human disadvantage when forecasting alone
without AI inputs.
5.2. Impact of Man + Machine: An event study
In this section, we resort to an event study to sharpen the inference of the impact of
integrating man and machine in stock analyses. In recent years, the infrastructure of “big
data” has created a new class information about companies that is collected and published
outside of the ﬁrms, which can provide unique and timely clues into market demand, proﬁt
prospects, and investment opportunities. An important and popular type of such alternative
data captures “consumer footprints,” often times in the literal sense such as satellite images
on retail parking lots. Such data, which have to be processed by machine learning models,
have been shown to contain incremental information for earnings and stock prices conditional
on corporate disclosure and news coverage (Zhu, 2019;Katona, Painter, Patatoukas, and
Zeng,2020).
Webuildondatafrom Katona,Painter,Patatoukas,andZeng (2020)onthestaggeredin-
troductionofseveralimportantalternativedatabases, andconductadiﬀerence-in-diﬀerences
test of analysts’ performance versus our AI model before and after the availability of the
alternative data on speciﬁc ﬁrms. The underlying premise is that analysts who cover ﬁrms
that are served by the alternative data are potentially in the situation of Man + Machine, as
they have the opportunity to use the additional, AI-processed, information. We deﬁne two
variables based on the staggered introduction of alternative data coverage. The ﬁrst is Alt
Data Covered, which is one if satellite imaging data are available for the ﬁrm at any point
21