1. Introduction
Since its inception and as it rises, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) constantly makes human
beings to rethink their own roles. While AI is meant to be intelligence augmentation for
humans, concerns abound that AI could replace human tasks and increasingly skilled ones,
and thus displace jobs by those currently performed by the better-paid and better-educated
workers (Muro, Maxim, and Whiton, 2019). Such a concern and the associated debates have
motivated a quickly growing literature. Recent work by Webb(2020),Acemoglu, Autor,
Hazell, and Restrepo (2020),Babina, Fedyk, He, and Hodson (2020), and Jiang, Tang, Xiao,
and Yao (2021) have all conducted large-sample analyses on the extent of job exposure
and vulnerability to AI-related technology as well as the consequences on employment and
productivity.
The existing literature has been mostly focusing on characterizing the type of jobs that
are vulnerable to disruption by, as well as those that could be created due to, AI evolution.
In other words, the sentiment of the existent studies mostly involves a theme of “man-
versus-machine,” i.e., to characterize the contest between human and AI, to explore ways
human adapts, and to predict the resulting job redeployment. In such settings, human
beings are often rendered passive or reactive – dealing with disruptions and looking for new
opportunities deﬁned by the AI landscape. There has been relatively little research devoted
to prescribing how skilled human workers could tap into a higher potential with enhancement
from AI technology, presumably the primary goal for human beings to design and develop
AI in the ﬁrst place. This study aims to connect the contest of “man-versus-machine” (“man
v. machine” hereafter) to a potential equilibrium of “man-plus-machine” (“man + machine”
hereafter).
Our study could be motivated by the experience of chess grand master Garry Kasparov.
The story that IBM’s Deep Blue beat the then reigning grand master Kasparov in 1997 was
well-known. Multiple contests repeated in a similar setting afterwards killed any remaining
suspense for the outcome of man v. machine in chess playing. What is far less known is that
1