26 
 personalization of marketing contents and offerings) are unique to marketing, others (e.g., 
enhancing efficiency and productivity) (Figure 1) might be more general and also applicable to 
other functional areas. A comparison of t he effects of GAI on marketing with other 
organizational functions thus might be worthwhile target of study.   
6.3 Implications for practice and policy  
The above discussion makes it clear that GAI offers great  opportunities  to marketers  and is likely 
to have a positive effect on marketing's bottom line. As noted above, GAI’ benefits have been 
especially apparent in functions and activities that require high -quality written materials 
(Fintechnews Switzerland, 2023) as well as images and videos  (Anisin, 2023), which are a key 
part of the marketing function. Unsurprisingly recent surveys conducted among organizations 
have shown that GAI’s use in marketing has been more common compared to more other 
organizational functions. For instance, FreshBooks’  survey of North American small -business 
owners discussed above viewed analytics, sales and marketing, and customer communications as 
the areas that are most likely to be impacted by GAI (Grothaus, 2023).   Feely available GAI 
tools such as ChatGPT and Goo gle Bard can provide even small firms with opportunities to 
boost effectiveness in digital marketing tasks, such as keyword research and content generation 
(DeBois, 2023).  There are various mechanisms by which GAI’s use in marketing activities may 
drive fi rms' financial performance. Scholars (e.g., Grewal et al., 2017) and practitioners (e.g., 
Accenture 2015; Marketing Science Institute, 2016) have emphasized that improving customer 
experience is a key goal for companies. Customer experience is regarded as the foundation for 
customer engagement with products and brands (Grewal et al., 2017). Prior research has 
suggested that customer engagement is positively related to customer loyalty, customer 
satisfaction, positive word of mouth and the firm’s financial p erformance (Barari et al., 2021;