13 
 ChatGPT Plus . While ChatGPT can be used for free, its training data goes up until 2021 only. 
This means that , as of September 2023, it could not ac cess real -time content and it d id not search 
the internet for answers. Companies thus cannot rely on the app to get timely insig hts such as 
consumers ’ current perception about a brand  and current trends impacting a market . However, on 
September 27, 2023, OpenAI made the Internet b rowsing feature available to its Plus and 
Enterprise users and announced that the br feature will be ex pand to “all users soon” 
(https://twitter.com/OpenAI/status/1707077713490854127 )  
 Second, marketers are worried about data security and privacy in GAI tools  (The 
Conference Board , 2023 ). There are privacy concerns if marketers enter sensitive customer dat a 
as a part of their prompts.  The ability of these tools to collect and store date from consume rs’ 
online interactions  also raises privacy concerns (Eliot,  2023 ). Surveys have reported 
many  instances of  companies’ employees putting confidential client data into GAI tools such as 
ChatGPT (Kshetri, 2023b) . Newer offerings such as ChatGPT Enterprise provide companies 
with protection against revealing confidential data through prompts.  
 Further, there  are significant trust issues, with surveys showing  that consumers are 
increasingly concerned about organizations’ data protection measures, and they are less likely to 
do business with a company that fails to protect their sensitive data  (Kshetri, 2021) . For these 
reasons, several companies have banned ChatGPT to prevent a worst -
case scenario  of an employee uploading sensitive data into the chatbot while seeking help at 
work  (Telford & Verma , 2023 ). 
 Third, perceived risks and costs associated with transi tioning to a new  way of performing 
marketing tasks may lead to businesses’ and employees’  unwillingness  to use GAI for such 
tasks. There are often substantial immediate costs involved in learning new ways of doing things