29 
 customers. The case of WPP discussed above suggests that GAI can significantly reduce content 
creation costs (NDTV , 2023 ). Market ers are also required to pay attention to a wide range of 
GAI tools that are rapidly evolving and are providing them with the ability to generate high 
quality content at a low cost. For instance, image editing app Lensa, which is one of the most 
common too ls among marketers, makes it possible to generate unique artwork at minimal cost, 
which was not possible a few years ago ( Wong, 2023) .  
7. Conclusion   
In this article, we provided an overview of how GAI is transforming key areas and activities in 
marketing. We have focused our attention on the current top three marketing applications of 
GAI: personalization, insight generation and content creation. It sh ould be noted that these uses 
are interrelated. For instance, insight generated by GAI can be used as a basis to develop better 
marketing content that enhances user engagement. Likewise, personalization is a key part of 
content creation. We discussed the r oles of GAI in achieving personalization of content and 
offerings. Indeed, about a third of respondents in the Conference Board survey used GAI to 
personalize customer/user content (Table 1). Overall, GAI is effective personalization tool, 
which can help m arketers establish a powerful form of customer experience and engagement. 
Marketers are also using GAI as a tool to  cut costs and boost efficiency and productivity of 
marketing activities. GAI can also improve marketers’ lead generation process.    
While G AI tools cannot completely replace human teams’ skills and experiences, as the 
above discussion suggests, these tools can perform a number of marketing tasks at a lower cost, 
higher speed and more effectively than human teams or other tools. For instance, on the 
personalization front, past algorithms were less effective. Likewise, past AI models performed 
poorly in terms of scalability. GAI can help develop a marketing automation program which can