20 
 Proposition 2:  Marketing content generated by GAI is likely to be more  personally relevant than 
that produced by earlier generations of digital technologies.  
 
6.1.2 Efficiency and productivity of marketing activities  
Prior researchers have noted that the use of digital technologies can help reduce costs and 
enhance marketing efficiency and productivity in marketing activities (Buttle and Stan 2015).  
For instance, Parveen et al. ’s (2015) study of Malaysian organizations  found that social media 
helped reduce the costs of marketing and customer service.  
Compared to pr evious generations of digital technologies, GAI can help organizations 
achieve even  more dramatic impact s on efficiency and productivity in marketing activities.  
Management consulting firm McKinsey & Company’s estimate suggests that GAI could increase 
the productivity of the marketing function, potentially saving  between 5% and 15% of total 
marketing spending (McKinsey & Company , 2023 ). In Salesforce's May 2023 survey, a part of 
its Generative AI Snapshot Series, it was found that GAI can enable a marketin g professional to 
save roughly 32.5 days per year, equating to more than a month's worth of time annually  (5 
hours *52 weeks in one year) / 8 -hour working day = 32.5 days) (Salesforce, 2023 , Table 2 ).  For 
instance, GAI can be used for tasks such as analyzi ng customer reviews, social media comments, 
or any other text data and provide a summary of positive and negative comments (Graham, 
2023). GAI can even easily detect and classify sarcasm in customer sentiment, which previous 
versions of sentiment analysis were unable to do with accuracy (IEEE Spectrum, 2021). This 
accurate sentiment analysis allows marketing professionals to shift their attention to more 
strategic tasks.   
More importantly, GAI can drastically reduce the costs and time to create marketing 
content. As noted, GAI tools can generate personalized, contextually relevant and sophisticated 
content quickly and thus drastically cut the time to produce marketing content. With appropriate