25 
 need for deeper understanding on issues related to  deskilling, reskilling and new skills et that may 
be needed when working with GAI.   
Table 3: Some potential  future  research  directions  
 
 Future research direction  Research question s 
1 GAI applications in marketing not 
covered in detail in this editorial 
article ( e.g., customer service)  How do LLMs perform compared to traditional chatbots in the 
delivery of customer service ? 
2 Develop ing value propositions  What are the various mechanisms by which GAI can help firms 
develop  value propositions?  
3 Emotional and cognitive customer 
experience  How do the effects of GAI -led personalization efforts on 
emotional customer experience compare with cognitive 
customer  experience?  
4 Response of different units of 
adoption to GAI  How do psychographic and perceptual factors affect  the use of 
GAI in marketing?  
How are organizational characteristics related to the adoption 
of GAI in marketing?  
5 Fostering creativity in GAI era  How can GAI enable marketing professionals to become more 
creative?  
How can marketing professionals  work alongside GAI in order 
to promote creativity?  
6 Comparison of the effects of GAI 
on marketing with other 
organizational functions  How are the effects of GAI on marketing similar to and 
different from the effects on other organizational functions?  
 
Fifth, given that marketing as a function is expected to generate creative out comes , there 
is a need to examine the role of GAI in fostering creativity within this context. A related theme is 
to examine how marketing professionals can work alongside GAI in order to promote creativity. 
Understanding these issues has implications on organizations and specifically in how they manage 
their marketing function  and in how they train and develop marketing professionals . There are also 
implications o n marketing educators and how they  teach creativity formally within the marketing 
curriculum in the era of GAI.  Future studies therefore should also take an interest in marketing 
management and marketing pedagogy and consider GAI -driven transformation in these areas.  
Finally, as noted above, GAI has been transforming multiple organizational functions, not 
only marketing (Dwivedi et al., 2023a; 2023b; Kshetri, 2023a).  However, these effects are likely 
to vary across different organizational functions. While some of eff ects discussed above (e.g.,