19 
 Contextualizing the experience is an important way to improve p ersonalization. GAI 
tools can generate contextually relevant marketing content. For instance, marketing efforts and 
recommendations can be specifically tailored towards local conditions (Bernard, 2023).   A key 
use of GAI could be in image  and video genera tion. For instance, GAI can help automate image 
generation process es using deep learning algorithms and generative adversarial networks 
(GANs). Image s generated through these tools can be used in marketing in for different 
purposes. For instance, marketers  can create highly realistic images of products that can be used 
in online stores, social media channels and other outlets. They can also create engaging and 
visually appealing advertising. GAI -based video tools can be used to create high -quality 
marketing  videos and product demo videos (Gill, 2023), which can be personalized to enhance 
engagement and facilitate conversions.  GAI thus can be used to create images and videos and 
show products in real -time in locations and situations that are relevant for pot ential customer. 
Going back to the lawnmower shopper example above, GAI can create backyard pictures, which 
can be uploaded on the product page. The vend or can show how the lawnmower could work 
there or show a product that has been designed to the shopper’ s use case (Bernard, 2023). This 
means that a user shopping for a lawnmower in Denver, Colorado in the U.S. is delivered a 
different experience compared to one in Dusseldorf, Germany.     
The information -processing perspective of customer experience, also referred to as the 
cognition, affect and behavior (CAB) approach, suggests that customers are often engaged in 
goal-directed activities such as searching for relevant information, evaluating available 
alternatives and making decisions about purchasing a pa rticular product or service (Frow & 
Payne, 2007).  The above examples make it clear that GAI tools can help deliver relevant content 
and customer experience. It is thus proposed that: