3 
 In general, utilization of digital technologies  helps organizations deliver perso nalized, 
timely and relevant communications via the chosen platform, thus contributing to an enhanced 
customer experience (Buttle & Stan, 2015).  A better customer experience drives engagement 
with products and brands (Grewal et al., 2017) , which in turn positively impacts  customer 
loyalty, and firm performance (Barari et al., 2021). Preliminary evidence indicates that GAI has a 
more powerful impact than previous generations of digital technologies on marketing processes 
and outcomes (Kshetri, 2023a).  Prima rily, this is due to GAI’s ability to generate human -like and 
easily customized text, images and videos, offer ing marketing professionals  a wide range of 
powerful tools for optimizing content creation processes (Anisin, 2023) .  
Marketers view GAI as a major productivity booster. For instance, in a survey conducted 
by the non -profit business membership and research gr oup organization Conference Board 
(Table 2), more than four -fifths (82%) of respondents expected that productivity will improve 
with the further adoption of GAI , compared to just 4% who expected the productivity to decline 
(The Conference Board , 2023). The  benefits of GAI in marketing, however, go far beyond their 
roles as just cost -cutting or time -saving tools. GAI can be used to do things that are not otherwise 
possible to do.  For instance, GAI enables brands to take marketing and sales to the next level  
and deliver truly one -to-one personalized experiences in a way that is not possible by humans 
alone. GAI brings benefits such as dynamic messaging capabilities by leverag ing personalization 
to send the right message at the right time to customers based on  detailed and valuable data. For 
instance, relevant real -time imagery, customized text, and predictive recommendations can help 
scale personalization across key moments in a cost -effective way (Bernard, 2023).  
While  some  studies  have been conducted to exam ine the use of GAI tools in marketing 
(e.g., Huh et al., 2023; Kunz & Wirtz, 2023; Paul, et al., 2023; Peres et al., 2023; Polonsky &