6 
 OpenAI ’s DALL -
E2 Creating custom images and 
art based on a prompt  https://chat.open
ai.com/  Toy company Mattel : came up with a 
new Hot Wheels model car. 
GAI advertising platform Omneky : 
create d visuals for ads for social 
platforms ( Mehta, 2023)  (Efficiency 
and productivity of marketing 
activities)  
Meta’s AI 
Sandbox  Creating different variations 
of a copy, generating 
background through text 
prompts, image cropping  https://www.face
book.com/busine
ss/new s/introduci
ng-ai-sandbox -
and-expanding -
meta -advantage -
suite  Jones Road Beauty used the solution to 
generate more versions of ads faster. 
(Adams, 2023).  This can lead to faster 
creative cycle by shortening the time 
requi red to develop, refine, and revise 
ideas, designs, or concepts to achieve 
the desired outcome  (Efficiency and 
productivity of marketing activities) .  
Midjourney  Creating images  based on 
text prompts.  https://www.midj
ourney.com/   Elder care management service 
platform PrimeCare  uses Midjourney -
generated  art for blog  posts . 
Jasper .ai Generating marketing 
content such as blog posts, 
product descriptions, 
company bios and ad copy  https://www.jasp
er.ai/   Goosehead Insurance :  create s and 
disseminate s a marketing content such 
as blog articles for the company's 
online learning center, email 
campaigns for potential and existing 
clients. It also repurposed social media 
content to maximize reach and 
engagement  (Personalization of 
content, Efficiency and productivity of 
marketing activities)  
Peppertype.ai  Creating  short -form,  
contextual  copies  and 
generating product  
descriptions  https://www.pep
percontent.io/pe
ppertype -ai/ As of October 2021, over 800 
businesses, including Meta  Adobe, and 
Amazon used it for content creation.  
Copy.ai  Crafting ad  copy and other 
marketing  content.  https://www.cop
y.ai/  Cloud -based collaborative platform 
and database service  provider  Airtable 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k
WrFKhhszmQ)  
GPT -4’s enhanced language generation capabilities would allow marketers to create 
higher -quality content than is possible with ChatGPT  (currently based on GPT -3.5). Thus, GPT -
4-created content is likely to be more engaging and more relevant to audiences. GPT -4’s 
enhanced fine -tuning capabilities are expected to assist digital marketers in customizing content 
and messaging for individual users, thereby fostering a more personalized customer experience.  
While many GAI systems used by marketing professionals such as Copy.ai, Jasper .ai, 
Peppertype.ai mainly help to create text -based marketing content, others such as DALL -E2 are