16 
 recommendation systems rely on generic algor ithms such as collaborative filtering, which 
predicts a user’s preference and filters out items based on reactions by similar users. This 
technique involves search ing a large group of people and identifying a smaller set of users with 
preferences similar t o a particular user. Such algorithms , however,  often fail to capture an 
individual’s preferences (AI & Insights, 2023).  Prior research has also noted that AI such as 
natural language processing chatbots can help make decisions related to products and bran ds that 
can lead to increase personalization.  Such tools can recognize patterns from data using 
techniques such as text mining, speech recognition, a nd facial recognition to provide 
personalized contents and offerings to diverse groups of customers. Marke ters also benefit from 
personalized outcomes such as personalized recommendation systems (Huang  & Rust, 2021).  
Marketers can utilize GAI tools to generate sophisticated responses at the individual 
level, which can be used to develop and automate an effective personalized marketing strategy at 
scale (Bennett, 2023b). These tools can help deliver hyper -personalized c ontent, and product 
recommendations, experience and offers at just the right time. As section 3 makes clear, 
unsurprisingly, one of the foremost applications of GAI is personalization (Table 2).  We 
illustrate this with an example of a lawnmower shopper. GA I such as ChatGPT can analyze a 
user’s language patterns, behavior, and other data points to make recommendations that are 
highly tailored to a potential shopper (AI & Insights, 2023). For instance, when the shopper starts 
to search for a lawnmower, ads ca n be personalized and delivered based on their profile. A trend 
that has been evident in marketers’ interaction with customers across all stages is that the 
personalization of content and offerings is key to deliver a good consumer experience (Gupta et 
al., 2020). Personalization involves using data collected from customers to  deliver customized 
content and offers to meet their unique needs (Adomavicius & Tuzhilin, 2005; Lemke et al.,