11 
 Third, while not all GAI tools used in ma rketing are  freely available, the costs  to use most of 
them are not prohibitive. Most do not need costly software (Chen, 2023).  Likewise, until April 
2023, OpenAI provided new users of DALL -E with 50 complimentary credits during their initial 
month of use . Following that period, they would receive only 15 free credits for subsequent 
months.  Despite OpenAI's decision to discontinue the free trial feature, the costs associated with 
using DALL -E remain reasonably affordable. With a pricing structure of $15 fo r 115 prompts, 
each generating four image variations, the cost equates to approximately $0.13 per prompt or 
roughly $0.035 per generated image  (Broadway, 2023) . Stable Diffusion also offers monthly 
subscription plans for developers and businesses that need  more advanced uses. As of May 2023, 
the basic plan cost $9/month, the standard plan $49/month and the premium plan $149/month 
(Chen, 2023). Consequently, GAI tools are diffusing rapidly not only among large companies  
but also among small and medium enter prises (SMEs). For instance, accounting software 
company FreshBooks’ May 2023 survey of more than 1,000 North American small -business 
owners regarding the usefulness and impact of GAI found that 25% of small -business owners 
had already tested GAI tools suc h as ChatGPT, Google Bard, and Microsoft Bing in their 
business and two -thirds had plans to test them in their business within the next year  (Grothaus, 
2023) .  
 
A fourth facilitating factor is the availability of a large variety of GAI tools for marketing 
purposes. While ChatGPT  has been the most commonly used GAI tool for marketing, a number 
of similar tools are being used for such purpose (Figure 1). For instance, Jasper.ai, which 
provides an AI writing tool to generate marketing copy (e.g., blog posts, p roduct descriptions, 
company bios, ad copy), offers a wide range of GAI models to its customers that are tailored to 
their needs. It works with GAI providers such as OpenAI, Google, Meta and AI safety startup