24 
 Previous researchers have noted that LLMs such as ChatGPT can expand a company’s 
value pr oposition by helping them develop personalized solutions that can potentially help 
customers solve new problems in a way that complements the current offering (Cromwell et al., 
2023) . Researchers could thus examine various other mechanisms by which GAI can  help firms 
develop value propositions.  Prior researchers have suggested that personalization has a positive 
effect on emotional (e.g., moods, feelings, and emotions) as well as on cognitive (e.g., 
enjoyment, involvement, and concentration) customer exper ience (Tyrväinen et al., 2020). In this 
regard, a third area of future research might be to compare the effects of GAI -led personalization 
efforts on emotional and cognitive customer experience.    
Fourth, different units of adoption differ in their times of adoption of an innovation 
(Rogers, 1963). As noted above, in the case of the adoption of GAI tools in marketing, mid -level 
and junior marketers have a higher propensity to use such tools compared to senior marketers 
(The Conference Board, 2023). In addi tion to factors such as job title and level of seniority, 
future researchers also need to consider how psychographic and perceptual factors such as 
comfort with technology can affect the use of GAI in marketing. In addition, research in this area 
should al so be extended from individual level to organizational level. Prior researchers have 
suggested that firm specific factors such as firm’s characteristics such as size, type of business 
and past experience with and attitude towards technology impact the adop tion decision of ICTs 
(Dholakia  & Kshetri, 2004). Another intriguing avenue for future research is thus to examine 
how organizational characteristics are related to the adoption of GAI in marketing.  In relation to 
this, researchers may also want to compare the impact of GAI across different organi zations  
especially those with established marketing departments , and examine the impact on marketing 
professionals , their roles in the department and effect on marketing skills. In this area, there i s a