7 
 capable of generating realistic visuals and artworks based on text -to-image prompts. In addition, 
digital advertising giants such as Meta have made GAI tools available to their clients.  For 
instance, in May 2023, Meta announced a GAI Sandbox that offered advertisers access to three 
tools. The first tool would help advertisers create different variations of a copy of an ad in the 
company’s F acebook or Instagram platform. When advertisers enter an ad copy, GAI will 
suggest several variations of the copy to test. The second tool would help generate background 
through text prompts. An advertiser can use text prompts to describe the background ap pearance 
or style. The GAI tool offers various images and advertisers can test their impact on 
performance. The third tool involves an image cropping feature to create visuals in different 
aspect ratios for various media such as social posts, stories, or s hort videos (IBL News, 2023).   
3. The  current  state  of GAI use in marketing  
Recent surveys have shown that there is widespread use of GAI among marketers and a growing 
demand of this innovation (Table 2). Especially mid -level and junior marketers are repor ted to 
have higher GAI adoption rates compared to senior marketers (The Conference Board, 2023). 
The characteristics of marketing professionals using GAI are consistent with the broader 
population. For instance, a new Pew Research Center survey conducted i n July 2023 found that a 
significantly higher proportion of younger adults used ChatGPT compared to  older adults.  
Table 2:  GAI use among marketers: Some representative surveys  
Survey conducted by  Conducted/released 
in (respondents)  Key findings  Additional findings  
Salesforce in partnership 
with YouGov ( Salesforce. 
202)  Conducted from 
May 18 – 25, 2023 
(1,029 marketers)  
  51% using GAI. An 
additional 22% had 
plans to use the tools 
“very soon”.  GAI saves marketers over five 
hours of work per week  
Boston Consulting Group  
(Ratajczak et al., 2023)  Conducted in April 
2023 ( >200 CMOs  
from several sectors 
in 8 countries in 
North America, 
Europe, and  Asia).  70% using  GAI and 19% 
were testing. Only 3% 
had no plans to use the 
technology  Top 3 uses: p ersonalization 
(67%), insight generation (51%) 
and content creation (49%).