9 
 personalization at scale will require close integration of a GAI system with customer relationship 
manage ment (CRM) or marketing automation systems.   
 As Table 2 makes it clear, insight generation has been another key use of GAI in 
marketing. Companies are using GAI to conduct market and consumer research in a reliable 
manner to gain insights, which can be used to improve products and services (Ratajczak et al., 
2023). In general, AI has reduced the time taken to generate insights from raw data  and respond 
in (near) real -time ( Dwivedi et al., 2021). ). AI solutions can produce insights in seconds that 
often take human teams days or even weeks.  However, a large prop ortion of data in the past was 
illegible for the existing AI solutions. This means that organizations could not make use of such 
data. The recent developments in GAI have changed this dramatically. Leading software vendors 
such as Microsoft and Salesforce have incorporated GAI capab ilities in their products, which can 
be used to gain customer insight. Note that customer insight is knowledge about the customer 
that is valuable for a company (Smith et al., 2006). For instance, Copilot feature in Microsoft’s 
Dynamics 365 Customer Insigh ts has added GPT -4 to popular Office products such as Word, 
Excel, Teams, PowerPoint and Outlook. Marketers can use Copilot's GAI capabilities to gain 
insights from their customer data platform (Reines, 2023). ChatGPT Plus’ Advanced Data 
Analysis GAI offer ing can, with only a short prompt, address missing data issues, analyze data 
with machine learning models, create visualizations of data, and interpret results (Horsey, 2023) .  
 GAI is also being used to improve content marketing. The Content Marketing Ins titute 
defines content marketing as “a strategic marketing approach focused on creating and 
distributing valuable, relevant, and consistent content to attract and retain a clearly defined 
audience — and, ultimately, to drive profitable customer action” (Th e Content Marketing 
Institute, 2015). Content marketing focuses on creating and distributing marketing content such