4 
 Rotman, 2023 ), there is little research on how these tools  are being used and the effects they 
have on marketing activitie s and outcomes and a firm’s financial performance.  The purpose of 
this editorial article is to fill this void. A central question addressed in this article is: What are the 
mechanisms by which GAI impacts marketing activities and outcomes? While GAI plays a 
critical role in numerous areas of marketing, we specifically focus on the top three marketing 
applications of GAI as identified by Boston Consulting Group’s April 2023 survey: 
personalization, insight generation and content creation.   
This editorial ar ticle is structured as follows. We proceed by first discuss ing some 
generative AI examples and their marketing applications. In the section following these 
examples, we provide an overview of the current state of GAI uses in marketing. Next, we 
discuss the facilitators for the use of GAI in marketing . Then, we highlight key barriers hindering 
the use of GAI in marketing. It is followed by a section that develops some propositions related 
to the effect of GAI on marketing p rocess es and marketing outcome s and discusses implications 
for research and practice. The final section provides conclusions.  
2. Generative AI Examples and their Marketing Applications  
A wide variety of GAI tools have been  built to  facilitate marketing activities (Table 1  and Figure 
1). It is worth noting that the U.S. start -up OpenAI's ChatGPT has been  the most popular GAI 
tool with the  general public as well as marketing  professionals . In a June 2023 survey conducted 
by Bank of America  among a group of 1,100 US Internet users aged 18 to 55 , ChatGPT emerged 
as the favored AI chatbot among respondents, with 59% utilizing the tool. Bank of America also 
reported that 51% of those surveyed were using Microsoft's Bing, while Google's Bard was  being 
used by 31%  (Quarles, 2023) . Likewise, a ccording to a survey conducted by Botco.ai, a provider