1 
 Generative Artificial Intelligence in Marketing: Applications, 
Opportunities, Challenges, and Research Agenda  
 
Nir Kshetri  
(Corresponding Author)  
Bryan School of Business and Economics  
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA  
Email: nbkshetr@uncg.edu    
 
Yogesh K Dwivedi  
Digital Futures for Sustainable Business & Society Research Group, School of Management, 
Swansea University, Bay Campus, Fabian Bay, Swansea, Wale s, UK  
Email: y.k.dwivedi@swansea.ac.uk  
 
Department of Management, Symbiosis Institute of Business Management, Pune & Symbiosis 
International (Deemed University), Pune, Maharashtra, India  
 
Thomas H. Davenport  
Distinguished Professor of IT and Management, B abson College, USA  
Senior Advisor, Deloitte Analytics and AI Practice  
Digital Fellow, MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy  
Email: tdavenport@babson.edu  
 
Niki Panteli  
Department of Management Science  
Lancaster University Management School, Lancaster Unive rsity, UK  
Email: n.panteli1@lancaster.ac.uk  
 
 
Highlights:  
• Marketing has been affected  positively by the recent developments in GAI .  
• Insights generated by GAI are more effective in personaliz ation.  
• GAI’s use in content creation leads to higher efficiency.  
• GAI can help generate insights to improve the sales lead generation process.  
• GAI can help improve sales lead generation .  
• Further research is needed to understand the impact of GAI on marketing . 
Abstract  
While all functional areas in organization s are benefiting  from the recent development in 
generative artificial intelligence  (GAI) , marketing has been particularly affected positively by this 
breakthrough innovation. However, scholars have not paid attention to the transformative impacts 
GAI has on marketing activities.  This editorial article aims to fill this void. It outlines the current 
state of generative artificial intelligence in marketing. The article discusses the facilitators and 
barrier s for the use of gen erative artificial intelligence in marketing. It highlights the effectiveness 
of insights generated by GAI in personalizing content and offerings and argues that marketing