22 
 tools can also use the insights gained from various data sources to facilitate the cold outreach 
process , which involves reaching out to potential customers that have not yet expressed interest 
in the company’s products. A company can target a large number of potential customers at the 
same time. GAI tools can be used to automate cold outreach campaigns (Moulton, 2023).  Large 
language model ( LLMs ) such as ChatGPT can also help in the process of lead qualification, 
which is a key step in in the lead generation process. Lead qualification involves checking out 
the quality of leads to assess the probability that they convert into customers. This proce ss helps 
to identify the leads that have the highest probability of making a purchase. The sales team can 
focus their efforts on promising leads (Moulton, 2023). It is thus proposed that:  
Proposition 4: Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, GAI can help generate 
better market and customer insights to improve the sales lead generation process.     
 
Prior researchers have suggested that content marketing plays a key role in lead generati on 
(Järvinen & Taiminen, 2016). Drawing from insights in the Chief Outsiders' survey, it is evident 
from Section 3 and Table 2 that content creation and management represent areas where GAI 
tools are well -positioned to provide exceptional value . Especially , digital tools are effective in 
content personalization, which can help generate high -quality sales leads (Järvinen & Taiminen, 
2016).   Compared to previous generations of digital technologies GAI tools can create more 
effective and engaging content. GAI  tools can be used to craft personalized and well -researched 
messages that resonates with the target audience (Moulton, 2023).  For instance, Salesforce’s 
Einstein GPT can write a letter to the prospective customer acknowledging a new sales plan. It 
can be  asked to rewrite the letter in a different tone. Einstein Assistant can also create a message 
for another salesperson in Slack who had dealt with the prospect company in the past (Sullivan, 
2023).  Based on above discussion, the following proposition is p resented: