28 
 can lead to higher customer engagemen t (Hameed, 2023). In this way, GAI tools such as  
ChatGPT can help increase sales and customer loyalty (PYMNTS, 2023).  
Prior researchers have suggested that in order to help potential shoppers learn more about 
a company’s products, find precisely what they  are looking for and inspire them to make 
purchases, they should be offered various digital touchpoints on their path to purchase and 
opportunity to engage with the company (Blom et al., 2017). The above lawnmower shopper 
example illustrated that GAI provi des firms with great opportunities to deliver rich, contextually 
relevant and highly personalized content at various touchpoints. This will also allow the 
company to collect information regarding their needs and preferences (Blom et al., 2017). It is 
thus imperative for firms to use these powerful tools to transform their marketing.  
This does not , however , mean that LLM -based chatbots can completely replace 
conventional chatbots or human teams. LLM -based chatbots differ from conventional chatbots in 
terms of the purposes they serve.  Some argue that LLMs’ open nature make the m inappropriate 
for many custome r experience applications. It is important to build a chatbot that can specifically 
answer questions about a company's products or services and help users with challenges they are 
facing. Thus, in order to provide a better customer experience , it is critical to appropriately 
combin e LLMs such as ChatGPT with conventional chatbots (Albrecht, 2023). Likewise, human 
teams’ skills and experiences are still needed in most marketing activities , and thus it is 
unreasonable to think that GAI will comp letely replace them.  
As discussed above, firms can take advantage of opportunities offered by GAI to enhance 
efficiency and productivity by cutting costs. However,  it is important to note that GAI’s cost -
cutting mechanisms in marketing might be different f rom other digital technologies. For 
instance, as noted above, some companies use social media as a lower cost channel to reach