21 
 prompts, it is possible to create different 10 ad angles for a p roduct based on customer reviews or 
other factors (Graham, 2023). This has been suggested by anecdotal evidence from companies. 
For instance, the British advertising company WPP is reported to be working with consumer 
goods companies such as Nestle and Mon delez to use GAI in advertising campaigns. Shooting a 
commercial with GAI is estimated to cost only one -twentieth to one -tenth of what it normally 
costs. For instance, since everything can be created virtually, the company does not have to fly a 
film crew to Africa. In India, WPP worked with Mondelez on a GAI -driven Cadbury campaign 
with Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan.  Ads were produced that 'featured' the actor asking 
customers to shop at 2,000 local stores during the Hindu festival of lights , Diwali. Sma ll 
businesses selling Cadbury generate versions of the ads that featured their own store, which 
could be posted on social media and other platforms. About 130,000 ads were reported to be 
created that featured 2,000 stores. As of mid -August 2023, t he ads had been viewed 94 million 
times on YouTube and Facebook (NDTV , 2023 ). Thus, we propose that:  
Proposition 3: Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, GAI’s use in the 
creation of marketing content leads to higher efficiency and productivity of marketing activities.  
 
6.1.3 Impact on the  sales  lead generation  process  
Prior researchers have suggested that marketing automation can help generate high -quality sales 
leads through behavioral targeting (Järvinen  & Taiminen, 2016). In this regard,  Section 3 and 
Table 2 emphasize the vital role of GAI in marketing, particularly in generating high -quality  
sales leads through insight generation.  Compared to previous generations of digital technologies, 
GAI tools can offer  higher quality insights into customers and thus enables better behavioral 
targeting. For instance, using Microsoft’s Dynamics 365 Customer Insights, which has added 
GPT -4 to popular Office products, companies can learn about new customer groups to ta rget 
(Reines, 2023). The case of Salesforce’s Einstein GPT discussed above makes it clear that GAI