Optimized U-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation
Micha l Futrega, Alexandre Milesi, Micha l Marcinkiewicz, Pablo Ribalta
NVIDIA, Santa Clara CA 95051, USA
fmfutrega,alexandrem,michalm,pribalta g@nvidia.com
Abstract. We propose an optimized U-Net architecture for a brain
tumor segmentation task in the BraTS21 challenge. To nd the optimal
model architecture and the learning schedule, we have run an extensive
ablation study to test: deep supervision loss, Focal loss, decoder attention,
drop block, and residual connections. Additionally, we have searched
for the optimal depth of the U-Net encoder, number of convolutional
channels and post-processing strategy. Our method won the validation
phase and took third place in the test phase. We have open-sourced
the code to reproduce our BraTS21 submission at the NVIDIA Deep
Learning Examples GitHub Repository1.
Keywords: U-Net ·Brain Tumor Segmentation ·Deep Learning ·MRI
1 Introduction
One of the most challenging problems in medical image processing is automatic
brain tumor segmentation. Obtaining a computational model capable of sur-
passing a trained human-level performance would provide valuable assistance to
clinicians and would enable a more precise, reliable, and standardized approach
to disease detection, treatment planning and monitoring. Gliomas are the most
common type of brain tumors in humans [1]. Their accurate segmentation is a
challenging medical image analysis task due to their variable shape and appear-
ance in multi-modal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Manual segmentation of
such brain tumors requires a great deal of medical expertise, is time-consuming,
and prone to human error. Moreover, the manual process lacks consistency and
reproducibility, which negatively aects the results and can ultimately lead to
incorrect prognosis and treatment.
The rapid progress in development of deep learning (DL) algorithms shows
great potential for application of deep neural networks (DNNs) in computer-
aided automatic or semi-automatic methods for medical data analysis. The dras-
tic improvements of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) resulted in models
being able to approach or surpass the human level performance in plethora of ap-
plications, such as image classication [2] or microscope image segmentation [3],
among many others. DL-based models are great candidates for brain tumor seg-
mentation, as long as sucient amount of training data is supplied. The Brain
1https://github.com/NVIDIA/DeepLearningExamples/blob/master/PyTorch/
Segmentation/nnUNet/notebooks/BraTS21.ipynbarXiv:2110.03352v2  [eess.IV]  24 Dec 2021