6 Micha l Futrega, Alexandre Milesi, Micha l Marcinkiewicz, Pablo Ribalta
SegResNetVAE [10] is a residual U-Net with autoencoder (shown in the
Fig. 3) regularization that has won the BraTS 2018 challenge and modies U-
Net by designing new architecture for encoder blocks and by adding a variational
autoencoder (VAE) [23] branch in the decoder, which reconstructs the input and
has a regularization eect.
The encoder part uses ResNet like blocks, where each block consists of two
convolutions with group normalization and ReLU activation, followed by additive
identity skip connection. The decoder structure is similar to the encoder, but
only with a single block per each spatial level. Each decoder block begins with
reducing the number of channels by a factor of 2 (with 1x1x1 convolution) and
doubling the spatial dimension (using 3D bilinear), followed by an addition with
encoder feature map from the equivalent spatial level.
In the VAE branch in the decoder, rst the feature map from the bottleneck
is reduced into a low dimensional space of 256 (128 to represent mean, and 128
to represent std). Then, a sample is drawn from the Gaussian distribution with
the given mean and std, and reconstructed into the input image dimensions
following the same architecture as the decoder.
Fig. 3. SegResNetVAE architecture. Each green block is a ResNet-like block with the
group normalization. The VAE branch reconstructs the input image into itself, and is
used only during training to regularize the shared encoder. Image from [10].
UNETR [19] architecture (shown in the Fig. 4) is a generalization of Vision
Transformer (ViT) [24] to the 3D convolutions|it replaces the 3D convolutions
in the encoder with multi-head self-attention [25]. To convert a 3D input volume
into an input for a multi-head self-attention it is divided into a sequence of
uniform non-overlapping patches (with 16x16x16 shape) and projected into an
embedding space (with 768 dimensions) using a linear layer, and added with
a positional embedding. Such input is then transformed by a multi-head self-
attention encoder.