Optimized U-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation 5
U-Net [9] architecture (shown in the Fig. 2) is characterised by a symmetric
U-shape, and can be divided into two parts, i.e., encoder and decoder. The rst
part is the contracting path (encoder) which is transforming the input volume
into lower dimensional space. The encoder has a modular structure consisting
of repeating convolution blocks. Each block has two smaller blocks of transfor-
mations (dark and light blue blocks on the Fig. 2). The rst smaller block is
reducing the spatial dimensions of the input feature map by a factor of two
via convolutional layer with kernels 3x3x3 and stride 2x2x2, then instance nor-
malization and Leaky ReLU activation with negative slope if 0.01 are applied
(dark blue block). Next feature map is transformed with almost the same set of
operations except that the convolutional layer has stride 1x1x1 (light blue).
After the spatial dimensions of the feature map are transformed to the size of
2x2x2, then the decoder part starts. The decoder also has a modular structure,
but its goal is to increase the spatial dimensions by reducing the encoder feature
map. The block in the decoder is built from three smaller blocks. The rst one is
transposed convolution with kernels 2x2x2 and stride 2x2x2, which is increasing
the spatial dimensions of the feature map by a factor of two. Then upsampled
feature map is concatenated with encoder feature map from the equivalent spa-
tial level and then transformed by two identical blocks with convolutional layer
with kernels 3x3x3 and stride 1x1x1, instance normalization and Leaky ReLU
activation with negative slope if 0.01 are applied (light blue). Additionally, deep-
supervision (Subsection 2.4) can be used, which is computing loss functions for
outputs from lower decoder levels.
Fig. 2. U-Net architecture. The encoder is transforming the input by reducing its
spatial dimensions, and then the decoder is upsampling it back to the original input
shape. Additional two output heads are used for deep supervision loss (green bars).