Optimized U-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation 9
Deep supervision [20] is a technique that helps with a better gradient 
ow by
computing loss function on dierent decoder levels. In this work, we added two
additional output heads, marked by green bars on Fig. 2. To compute the deep
supervision loss, labels were rst downsampled using nearest neighbor interpo-
lation to the (64 ;64;64) and (32 ;32;32) spatial shapes such that they match
the shapes of additional outputs. For labels yiand predictions pifori= 1;2;3,
where i= 1 corresponds to the last output head, i= 2 is the output head on the
penultimate decoder level and i= 3 is before the penultimate, nal loss function
is computed as follows:
L(y1; y2; y3; p1; p2; p3) =L(y1; p1) +1
2L(y2; p2) +1
4L(y3; p3): (1)
2.5 Inference
During inference, the input volume can have arbitrary size, instead of the xed
patch size (128 ;128;128) as during the training phase. Thus, we used a sliding
window inference2, where the window has the same size as the training patch,
i.e., (128 ;128;128) and adjacent windows overlap by half the size of a patch.
The predictions on the overlapping regions are then averaged with Gaussian
importance weighting, such that the weights of the center voxels have higher
importance, as in the original nnU-Net paper [12].
One of the known ways to improve robustness of predictions is to apply
test time augmentations. During inference, we have created eight versions of the
input volume, such that each version corresponds to one of eight possible 
ips
along the x; y; z axis combination. Then we run inference for each version of the
input volume and transform the predictions back to the original input volume
orientation by applying the same 
ips to predictions as were used for the input
volume. Finally, the probabilities from all predictions were averaged.
By optimizing the three overlapping regions (ET, TC, WT) we had to convert
them back to the original classes (NCR, ED, ET). The strategy for transforming
classes back to the original one is the following: if the WT probability for a
given voxel is less than 0 :45 then its class is set to 0 (background), otherwise if
the probability for TC is less than 0 :4 the voxel class is 2 (ED), and nally if
probability for ET is less than 0 :45 voxel has class 1 (NCR), or otherwise 4 (ET).
Furthermore, we applied the following post-processing strategy: nd ET con-
nected components, for components smaller than 16 voxels with mean probability
smaller than 0 :9, replace their class to NCR (such that voxels are still considered
part of the tumor core), next if there is overall less than 73 voxels with ET and
their mean probability is smaller than 0 :9 replace all ET voxels to NCR. With
such post-processing we avoided the edge case where the model predicted a few
voxels with enhancing tumor, but there were not any in the ground truth. Such
post-processing was benecial to the nal score as if there were no enhancing
tumor voxels in the label, then the Dice score for zero false positive prediction
was 1, and 0 otherwise.
2MONAI sliding window implementation was used.