4 Micha l Futrega, Alexandre Milesi, Micha l Marcinkiewicz, Pablo Ribalta
D-depth). Then redundant background voxels (with voxel value zero) on the bor-
ders of each volume were cropped, as they do not provide any useful information
and can be ignored by the neural network. Subsequently, for each example, the
mean and the standard deviation were computed within the non-zero region for
each channel separately. All volumes were normalized by rst subtracting the
mean and then divided by the standard deviation. The background voxels were
not normalized so that their value remained at zero. To distinguish between
background voxels and normalized voxels which have values close to zero, an ad-
ditional input channel was created with one-hot encoding for foreground voxels
and stacked with the input data.
Data augmentation is a technique that alleviates the overtting problem by
articially extending a dataset during the training phase. To make our method
more robust, the following data augmentations were used during training phase:
1.Biased crop : From the input volume, a patch of dimensions (5 ;128;128;128)
was randomly cropped. Additionally, with probability of 0 :4 the patch se-
lected via random biased crop is guaranteed that some foreground voxels
(with positive class in the ground truth) are present in the cropped region.
2.Zoom : With probability of 0 :15, a random value is sampled uniformly from
(1:0;1:4) and image size is resized to its original size times the sampled
value with the cubic interpolation, while the ground truth with the nearest
neighbour interpolation.
3.Flips : With probability of 0 :5, for each x; y; z axis independently, volume
was 
ipped along that axis.
4.Gaussian Noise : With probability of 0 :15, random Gaussian noise with
mean zero and standard deviation sampled uniformly from (0 ;0:33) is sam-
pled for each voxel and added to the input volume.
5.Gaussian Blur : With probability of 0 :15, Gaussian blurring with standard
deviation of the Gaussian Kernel sampled uniformly from (0 :5;1:5) is applied
to the input volume.
6.Brightness : With probability of 0 :15, a random value is sampled uniformly
from (0 :7;1:3) and then input volume voxels are multiplied by it.
7.Contrast : With probability of 0 :15, a random value is sampled uniformly
from (0 :65;1:5) and then input volume voxels are multiplied by it and clipped
to their original value range.
2.3 Model architecture
In order to select the most optimal neural network architecture, we have run ab-
lation studies for the following models: U-Net [9], Attention U-Net [14], Residual
U-Net [15], SegResNetVAE [10] and UNETR [19]. Below, we present a short de-
scription of each model.