8 Micha l Futrega, Alexandre Milesi, Micha l Marcinkiewicz, Pablo Ribalta
Residual U-Net [15] is inspired by a ResNet model [15] where residual con-
nections were proposed. Adding residual connections is helping with training a
deep neural network due to better gradient 
ow. The only dierence between ba-
sic U-Net and Residual U-Net is the computation within a convolutional block,
which is shown in the Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Dierence between blocks in basic U-Net (a) and Residual U-Net (b). Conv
block (orange) corresponds to a convolutional layer with 3x3x3 kernels, IN (green) is
instance normalization and ReLU (blue) is a Rectied Linear Unit activation.
Based on our experiments (the detailed results are shown in subsection 3.3),
a basic U-Net achieves the best results, and was selected for further exploration.
The next optimization was adjusting the encoder depth and optimal selection
of the convolution channels. As a baseline, a default U-Net architecture from
the nnU-Net framework was used, i.e., the depth of the network was 6, and the
convolution channels at each encoder level were: 32 ;64;128;256;320;320. Our
experiments have demonstrated that increasing the depth of the encoder to 7,
and modifying the number of channels to: 64 ;96;128;192;256;384;512, further
improves the baseline score.
2.4 Loss function
Based on the nnU-Net for Brain Tumor Segmentation [13] paper, the classes
present in the label were converted to the three partially overlapping regions:
whole tumor (WT) representing classes 1, 2, 4; tumor core (TC) representing
classes 1, 4; and enhancing tumor (ET) representing the class 4. The contest
leaderboard is computed based on those overlapping regions instead of classes
present in the labels. It is benecial to construct the loss function based on
classes used for ranking calculation, thus we designed the output feature map to
have three channels (one per class) which at the very end are transformed via
the sigmoid activation.
Each region was optimized separately with a sum of binary cross-entropy or
Focal loss [26] (with gamma parameter set to 2) with the Dice loss [27]. For Dice
loss, its batched variant was used, i.e., Dice loss was computed over all samples
in the batch instead of averaging the Dice loss over each sample separately.