BayesNAS: A Bayesian Approach for Neural Architecture Search
Hongpeng Zhou1 *Minghao Yang1 *Jun Wang2Wei Pan1
Abstract
One-Shot Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
is a promising method to signiﬁcantly reduce
search time without any separate training. It
can be treated as a Network Compression prob-
lem on the architecture parameters from an over-
parameterized network. However, there are two
issues associated with most one-shot NAS meth-
ods. First, dependencies between a node and its
predecessors and successors are often disregarded
which result in improper treatment over zero op-
erations. Second, architecture parameters pruning
based on their magnitude is questionable. In this
paper, we employ the classic Bayesian learning
approach to alleviate these two issues by mod-
eling architecture parameters using hierarchical
automatic relevance determination (HARD) pri-
ors. Unlike other NAS methods, we train the over-
parameterized network for only oneepoch then
update the architecture. Impressively, this enabled
us to ﬁnd the architecture on CIFAR-10 within
only0:2GPU days using a single GPU. Competi-
tive performance can be also achieved by transfer-
ring to ImageNet. As a byproduct, our approach
can be applied directly to compress convolutional
neural networks by enforcing structural sparsity
which achieves extremely sparse networks with-
out accuracy deterioration.
1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), the process of automat-
ing architecture engineering, is thus a logical next step in au-
tomating machine learning since (Zoph & Le, 2017). There
are basically three existing frameworks for neural archi-
tecture search. Reinforcement learning based NAS (Baker
et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2017; Zhong et al., 2018; Zoph
*Equal contribution1Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft
University of Technology, Netherlands2Department of Computer
Science, University College London, UK. Correspondence to: Wei
Pan <wei.pan@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2018) methods take the generation
of a neural architecture as an agent’s action with the action
space identical to the search space. More recent neuro-
evolutionary approaches (Real et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018b;
Real et al., 2019; Miikkulainen et al., 2019; Xie & Yuille,
2017; Elsken et al., 2019a) use gradient-based methods for
optimizing weights and solely use evolutionary algorithms
for optimizing the neural architecture itself. However, these
two frameworks take enormous computational power when
compared to a search using a single GPU. One-Shot based
NAS is a promising approach to signiﬁcantly reduce search
time without any separate training, which treats all architec-
tures as different subgraphs of a supergraph (the one-shot
model) and shares weights between architectures that have
edges of this super-graph in common (Saxena & Verbeek,
2016; Brock et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018; Bender et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019a;b). A comprehensive survey on Neural
Architecture Search can be found in (Elsken et al., 2019b).
Our approach is a one-shot based NAS solution which treats
NAS as a Network Compression/pruning problem on the
architecture parameters from an over-parameterized net-
work. However, despite it’s remarkable less searching time
compared to reinforcement learning and neuro-evolutionary
approaches, we can identify a number of signiﬁcant and
practical disadvantages of the current one-shot based NAS.
First, dependencies between a node and its predecessors and
successors are disregarded in the process of identifying the
redundant connections. This is mainly motivated by the im-
proper treatment of zero operations. On one hand, the logit
ofzero may dominate some of the edges while the child
network still has other non-zero edges to keep it connected
(Liu et al., 2019b; Xie et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2019b), for example, node 2 in Figure1a. Similarly,
as shown in Figure 1 of (Xie et al., 2019), the probability
of invalid/disconnected graph sampled will be511
1024when
there are three non-zero plus one zero operation. Though
post-processing to safely remove isolated nodes is possible,
e.g., for chain-like structure, it demands extensive extra com-
putations to reconstruct the graph for complex search space
with additional layer types and multiple branches and skip
connections. This may prevent the use of modern network
structure as the backbone such as DenseNet (Huang et al.,
2017), newly designed motifs (Liu et al., 2018b) and com-
plex computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation