IMPROVING RNN TRANSDUCER MODELING FOR END-TO-END SPEECH RECOGNITION
Jinyu Li, Rui Zhao, Hu Hu, and Yifan Gong
Speech and Language Group, Microsoft
ABSTRACT
In the last few years, an emerging trend in automatic speech recog-
nition research is the study of end-to-end (E2E) systems. Connec-
tionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC), Attention Encoder-Decoder
(AED), and RNN Transducer (RNN-T) are the most popular three
methods. Among these three methods, RNN-T has the advantages to
do online streaming which is challenging to AED and it doesn’t have
CTC’s frame-independence assumption. In this paper, we improve
the RNN-T training in two aspects. First, we optimize the training
algorithm of RNN-T to reduce the memory consumption so that we
can have larger training minibatch for faster training speed. Second,
we propose better model structures so that we obtain RNN-T mod-
els with the very good accuracy but small footprint. Trained with
30 thousand hours anonymized and transcribed Microsoft produc-
tion data, the best RNN-T model with even smaller model size (216
Megabytes) achieves up-to 11.8% relative word error rate (WER) re-
duction from the baseline RNN-T model. This best RNN-T model is
signiﬁcantly better than the device hybrid model with similar size by
achieving up-to 15.0% relative WER reduction, and obtains similar
WERs as the server hybrid model of 5120 Megabytes in size.
Index Terms —RNN Transducer, LSTM, GRU, layer trajectory,
speech recognition
1. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in automatic speech recognition (ASR) have been
mostly due to the advent of using deep learning algorithms to build
hybrid ASR systems with deep acoustic models like Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). However, one problem with
these hybrid systems is that there are several intermediate models
(acoustic model, language model, lexicon model, decision tree, etc.)
which either need expert linguistic knowledge or need to be trained
separately. In the last few years, an emerging trend in ASR is the
study of end-to-end (E2E) systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The
E2E ASR system directly transduces an input sequence of acoustic
features to an output sequence of tokens (phonemes, characters,
words etc). This reconciles well with the notion that ASR is in-
herently a sequence-to-sequence task mapping input waveforms
to output token sequences. Some widely used contemporary E2E
approaches for sequence-to-sequence transduction are: (a) Con-
nectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC) [11, 12], (b) Attention
Encoder-Decoder (AED) [13, 14, 15, 16, 3], and (c) RNN Trans-
ducer (RNN-T)[17]. These approaches have been successfully
applied to large-scale ASR systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 18, 19, 20].
Among all these three approaches, AED (or LAS: Listen, Attend
and Spell [3, 8]) is the most popular one. It contains three compo-
nents: Encoder which is similar to a conventional acoustic model;
Attender which works as an alignment model; Decoder which is
The work was done as an intern at Microsoft.analogous to a conventional language model. However, it is very
challenging for AED to do online streaming, which is an important
requirement for ASR services. Although there are several studies
towards that direction, such as monotonic chunkwise attention [21]
and triggered attention [22], it’s still a big challenge. As for CTC,
it enjoys its simplicity by only using an encoder to map the speech
signal to target labels. However, its frame-independence assump-
tion is most criticized. There are several attempts to improve CTC
modeling by relaxing or removing such assumption. In [23, 24], at-
tention modeling was directly integrated into the CTC framework to
relax the frame-independence assumption by working on model hid-
den layers without changing the CTC objective function and training
process, hence enjoying the simplicity of CTC training.
A more elegant solution is RNN-T [17], which extends CTC
modeling by incorporating acoustic model with its encoder, language
model with its prediction network, and decoding process with its
joint network. There is no frame-independence assumption anymore
and it is very natural to do online streaming. As a result, RNN-T
instead of AED was successfully deployed to Google’s device [20]
with great impacts. In spite of its recent success in industry, there is
less research in RNN-T when compared to the popular AED or CTC,
possibly due to the complexity of RNN-T training [25]. For example,
the encoder and prediction network compose a grid of alignments,
and the posteriors need to be calculated at each point in the grid
to perform the forward-backward training of RNN-T. This three-
dimension tensor requires much more memory than what is required
in AED or CTC training. Given there are lots of network structure
studies in hybrid systems (e.g., [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34]),
it is also desirable to explore advanced network structures so that we
can put a RNN-T model into devices with both good accuracy and
small footprint.
In this paper, we use the methods presented in the latest work
[20] as the baseline and improve the RNN-T modeling in two as-
pects. First, we optimize the training algorithm of RNN-T to re-
duce the memory consumption so that we can have larger train-
ing minibatch for faster training speed. Second, we propose better
model structures than the layer-normalized long short-term memory
(LSTM) used in [20] so that we obtain RNN-T models with better
accuracy but smaller footprint.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy de-
scribe the basic RNN-T method. Then, in Section 3, we propose
how to improve the RNN-T training by reducing the memory con-
sumption which constrains the training minibatch size because of
the large-size tensors in RNN-T. In Section 4, we propose several
model structures which improve the baseline LSTM model used in
[20] for better accuracy and smaller model size. We evaluate the
proposed models in Section 5 by training them with 30 thousand
hours anonymized and transcribed production data, and evaluating
with several ASR tasks. Finally, we conclude the study in Section 6.arXiv:1909.12415v1  [cs.CL]  26 Sep 2019