computation of backward propagation occupies more time
than that of forward propagation. So accelerating the train-
ing utilizing low-bit quantization has greater potential when
considering the backward process. There has existed 16-bit
ﬂoating-point (FP16) training, which proves the feasibility
of low-bit training [ 41,9,33]. But it is restricted to lim-
ited advanced GPUs based on Turing or V olta architecture.
Compared with FP16, the 8-bit integer (INT8) operation is
widely supported by general GPUs based on Turing, V olta
and even low-end Pascal architectures. Besides, the 8-bit
integer arithmetic is theoretically and practically 2 ×faster
than FP16 and 4 ×faster than FP32. Therefore, INT8 train-
ing enjoys better efﬁciency, lower power consumption and
better versatility on off-the-shelf hardware.
Despite the attractive beneﬁts, when quantizing gradi-
ents to 8-bit, the normal training tends to become unsta-
ble, since the distortion of gradients easily misleads the di-
rection of training and causes crash of optimization. This
deﬁnitely makes INT8 training very difﬁcult, especially for
the deep networks. Currently only a few studies have at-
tempted to solve this problem [ 64,56,60,2,53,48]. Unfor-
tunately, all of them just tested limited quantization-friendly
networks with high redundancy, and usually require com-
plex structure adjustment or introduce additional operation
to reduce quantization error, while signiﬁcantly increasing
the computational complexity. Besides, most of these works
lack the theoretical analysis on the ad-hoc tricks, and even
worse, none of them reports the practical speedup in the
real-world case. All these reasons make the existing INT8
training methods stay far away from the practicality without
the universal design.
To build a robust and uniﬁed INT8 training framework,
we conduct deeper explorations in the challenges of gradi-
ent quantization. We empirically ﬁnd that the distribution of
gradients owns four special characteristics: sharp and wide,
evolutionary, depth-speciﬁc and structure-speciﬁc. These
unique characteristics make gradient quantization quite dif-
ferent from the naive quantization on weights or activations,
and INT8 training more difﬁcult to be stabilized. It is im-
portant to understand the behaviors and effects of quantized
gradient in the convergence of the training. Therefore, we
theoretically establish the convergence bound with respect
to the gradient quantization error and the learning rate.
Based on the special characteristics and the theoretical
analysis, we propose two universal techniques: Direction
Sensitive Gradient Clipping and Deviation Counteractive
Learning Rate Scaling to stabilize the INT8 training. The
Direction Sensitive Gradient Clipping minimizes the direc-
tion deviation by pursuing an appropriate clipping as the
training process evolves. Sometimes even if the clipping
helps reduce the quantization error, it may still suffer from
the accumulated gradient deviations across deep layers. To
eliminate this effect, the Deviation Counteractive LearningRate Scaling is further devised to promise stable parameter
updating. The fundamental idea of our method is shown in
Figure 1. Extensive experiments on a variety of network
structures and tasks prove the superiority and versatility of
our method.
Our contribution can be summarized as below:
•We observe four special characteristics on the gradi-
ent distribution: sharp and wide, evolutionary, depth-
speciﬁc and structure-speciﬁc, which cause the larger
quantization error of gradients.
•We theoretically provide the convergence bound of
INT8 training, and respectively devise two universal
techniques that can stabilize the INT8 training.
•We are the ﬁrst to achieve stable INT8 training of var-
ious networks such as MobileNetV2/InceptionV3 and
various tasks such as object detection, with compara-
ble accuracy to full-precision training.
•We build a ﬂexible and uniﬁed INT8 training frame-
work for various tasks using various networks, which
can easily replace the original full-precision training.
•We are the ﬁrst to complete practical acceleration of
INT8 training on low-end GPUs with Pascal architec-
ture, i.e., NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080Ti, achieving
about 22% speedup without too much optimization.
2. Related Work
Compared to huge amount of studies on accelerating
inference by model quantization [ 45,62,7,52,11,40],
there are few works exploring quantized training including
backward propagation comprehensively. DoReFa-Net [ 64]
quantizes gradients to 4 and 6 bits, but only experiments
AlexNet with low precision gradient. WAGE [ 56] and
WAGEUBN [ 60] quantize gradient to 8-bit integer, but they
both incur considerable loss of accuracy (greater than 5%).
RangeBN [ 2] and FP8 training [ 53] achieve accuracy com-
parable to full-precision models, but they both use ﬂoating-
point number in gradients, which is not beneﬁcial for hard-
ware optimization to boost the speed. Besides quantized
training, most low-precision training research keeps gra-
dient precision in 16-bit ﬂoating-point. Flexpoint [ 33],
MPT [ 41] and DFP [ 9] all use 16-bit ﬂoating-point to train
DNNs with accuracy comparable to full-precision model.
To perform more efﬁcient training of neural networks, INT8
training has more advantages over FP16 training.
3. Uniﬁed INT8 Training
In this paper, we aim to build a uniﬁed INT8 training
framework, which utilizes 8-bit integer arithmetic to accel-
erate the expensive training process of deep neural networks
including both the forward and backward propagation.
1970