ists. Therefore, the distribution curve is very sharp
with small values taking the majority of gradients, but
the range is relatively very wide. This makes many
gradients quantized to zero and the quantization error
signiﬁcantly large when using uniform quantization.
C2: Evolutionary. Figure 3(b) depicts how the gradient
distribution of the same layer evolves with respect to
the training iterations. We can ﬁnd that as the train-
ing goes on, the shape of gradient distribution becomes
much sharper and narrower, which means it is impossi-
ble to ﬁx the quantization settings throughout the train-
ing process, as we usually do for weights and activa-
tions, such as assuming the same clipping range in the
whole training.
C3: Depth-Speciﬁc. Figure 3(c) compares the distribution
of gradients in different layers at the same epoch. It is
obvious that the distributions at the shallow layers are
sharper with larger extreme values than the deeper lay-
ers. This means that the preceding layers of the neural
networks often face more severe quantization loss.
C4: Structure-Speciﬁc. As can be seen in Figure 3(d),
the gradients of layers with different structures at the
same epoch present apparently different patterns. For
MobileNetV2, the second convolutional layer in each
block is of depth-wise structure. Its gradients own
larger range and sharper shape even in the deeper
block, making MobileNetV2 harder to quantize from
the aspect of gradients.
Based on the above observations, we can conclude that
the gradients differ from weights and activations largely,
which inevitably causes an unstable training, when simply
adopting the common quantization techniques for weights
and activations. This means that we need certain tech-
niques to take care of distinctiveness in gradient quantiza-
tion, which brings great challenges to the real and uniﬁed
INT8 training in practice.
Before turning to devise the desired techniques consider-
ing the speciality of gradients, we ﬁrst attempt to understand
the gradient’s effect on the training stability, by theoretically
revealing the connections between training convergence and
gradient quantization. This will provide us a reliable clue to
build the robust and uniﬁed INT8 training framework.
3.3. Stabilize Training: A Theoretical Perspective
As commonly used in the analysis of deep learning opti-
mizers [ 12,28,46,39], the ability of convergence is usually
evaluated by the regret R(T).
R(T) =T/summationdisplay
t=1(ft(wt)−ft(w∗)), (4)whereTindicates the number of iterations. wt∈Sis the
parameter at time tin the convex compact set S, andft(wt)
denotes the corresponding loss function. The optimal pa-
rameter is represented by w∗. If the average regretR(T)
T
approaches zero quickly as Tincreases, the speed and abil-
ity of convergence can be guaranteed.
Due to the complexity of the DCNNs, it is very difﬁcult
to directly analyze its behaviors. As the prior studies [ 1,34,
22,61] do, we ﬁrst make the following assumptions:
Assumption 1. ftis convex;
Assumption 2. ∀wi,wj∈S,/⌊ard⌊lwi−wj/⌊ard⌊l∞≤D∞.
Although the convexity assumption may not hold for
deep networks, analysis based on this can provide reason-
able and valuable insights for us, which has been proved in
previous studies [ 12,39,22,61].
Taking the standard stochastic gradient descent algo-
rithm into consideration, the optimization based on quan-
tized gradient ˆ gtand learning rate ηtcan be formulated as:
wt+1=wt−ηtˆ gt. (5)
Then we have the following theoretical ﬁnding (see the sup-
plementary materials for detailed proof):
Theorem 1. If deﬁne the error of quantized gradients as
ǫt=gt−ˆ gtand the dimension of weights as d, then with
assumption 1and2, we have:
R(T)
T≤dD2
∞
2TηT
/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
(1)+D∞
TT/summationdisplay
t=1/⌊ard⌊lǫt/⌊ard⌊l
/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
(2)+1
TT/summationdisplay
t=1ηt
2/⌊ard⌊lˆ gt/⌊ard⌊l2
/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
(3).(6)
We can ﬁnd that the bound of average regret is dominated
by three terms. Term (1) approaches zero as Tincreases
and thus can be ignored in gradient quantization. Term (2)
indicates the quantization error of gradients greatly affects
the ability to converge, and it is usually large, as analyzed
in Section 3.2. For term (3), its magnitude is mainly inﬂu-
enced by the learning rate and l2-norm of quantized gradi-
ents. Based on the theoretical analysis, to stabilize INT8
training, we have two basic principles for designing better
quantization techniques: (1) reduce the quantization error
of gradients; (2) scale down the learning rate. They are also
very intuitive since, on the one hand, a lower quantization
error means small deviation of optimization direction and
thus avoids the training crash, on the other hand, it is a
common sense that decreasing the learning rate gradually
promises a better solution in the optimization.
Now with the design principles, the question is how to
devise the universal techniques for INT8 training, mean-
while take the characteristics of gradients into considera-
tion. We respectively present two novel techniques: Direc-
1972