Towards Uniﬁed INT8 Training for Convolutional Neural Network
Feng Zhu1Ruihao Gong1,2Fengwei Yu1Xianglong Liu2∗Yanfei Wang1
Zhelong Li1Xiuqi Yang1Junjie Yan1
1SenseTime Group Limited
2State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
{zhufeng1, yufengwei, wangyanfei, lizhelong, yangxiuqi, yanjunjie }@sensetime.com
{gongruihao, xlliu }@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
Recently low-bit (e.g., 8-bit) network quantization has
been extensively studied to accelerate the inference. Be-
sides inference, low-bit training with quantized gradients
can further bring more considerable acceleration, since the
backward process is often computation-intensive. Unfortu-
nately, the inappropriate quantization of backward propa-
gation usually makes the training unstable and even crash.
There lacks a successful uniﬁed low-bit training framework
that can support diverse networks on various tasks. In this
paper, we give an attempt to build a uniﬁed 8-bit (INT8)
training framework for common convolutional neural net-
works from the aspects of both accuracy and speed. First,
we empirically ﬁnd the four distinctive characteristics of
gradients, which provide us insightful clues for gradient
quantization. Then, we theoretically give an in-depth anal-
ysis of the convergence bound and derive two principles
for stable INT8 training. Finally, we propose two universal
techniques, including Direction Sensitive Gradient Clipping
that reduces the direction deviation of gradients and Devi-
ation Counteractive Learning Rate Scaling that avoids ille-
gal gradient update along the wrong direction. The experi-
ments show that our uniﬁed solution promises accurate and
efﬁcient INT8 training for a variety of networks and tasks,
including MobileNetV2, InceptionV3 and object detection
that prior studies have never succeeded. Moreover, it enjoys
a strong ﬂexibility to run on off-the-shelf hardware, and re-
duces the training time by 22% on Pascal GPU without too
much optimization effort. We believe that this pioneering
study will help lead the community towards a fully uniﬁed
INT8 training for convolutional neural networks.
∗corresponding author𝐠𝐱
𝐠#𝐱𝛼𝛽
Clipping
Learning rate scaling𝐠#𝐱Convergence boundary
𝐠𝐱Convergence boundary
𝛽
Figure 1. The fundamental idea of our uniﬁed INT8 training. gx
andˆ gxrepresent the original ﬂoat gradient and the quantized one,
respectively. αandβrepresent different direction deviations that
quantization brings. The red lines present crash cases when the di-
rection deviation is large. The left subﬁgure indicates that clipping
gradient properly to reduce direction deviation within the conver-
gence boundary can avoid crash. The right subﬁgure points out
that controlling learning rate (step size) could promise a stable pa-
rameter updating by counteracting negative effect of deviation.
1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in many ﬁelds, such as com-
puter vision, natural language processing, etc. However,
training and deploying DCNNs usually require a large
amount of time cost and power consumption, which is
greatly challenging the extensive applications in industry.
As a result, many recent studies have been focusing on how
to accelerate the inference of neural networks by ﬁxed-point
quantization on weights or activations [ 6,3,24,29,27,64,
42,52,63,54,21,44,57], and design dedicated hardware
utilizing the efﬁcient integer arithmetic [ 17,5,26,23]. The
successful progress surprisingly shows that the bit-width
can be reduced to extremely low such as 4-bit while bring-
ing quite little hurt to the accuracy for inference [ 15,59,13].
Besides inference, low-bit training can also promise con-
siderable acceleration, which further quantizes gradients
and utilizes low-bit efﬁcient compute kernel for both the
forward and backward propagation. As analyzed in [ 25], the
1969