Figure 19: Defense layer architecture [85]
that classify the examples based on several pre-dened categories, which referred to as open set con-
ditions. In particular, in several forensic tasks and security-oriented tools, the open set problem has
been investigated so far in [86]. Wang et al., [86] considered SVMs multi-class and 1C to recognize
dierent camera models. This technique is more robust against DJPEG images. In image security,
1C classiers have also been developed in association with GAN to design detectors when malicious
examples in training exist. Yarlagadda et al., [87] considered this methodology for satellite images to
evaluate their authenticity. In this architecture, GAN learns pristine satellite features, and 1C (SVM)
is trained with those features. As illustrated in Figure 20, the rational idea behind discriminator is to
distinguish patches from a generator and pristine satellite images accurately. In contrast, the generator
intends to deceive the discriminator by generating data near a pristine one.
Figure 20: Architecture satellite Image foorgery detection [87]
•Ensemble Method
Multiple architecture combination (1.5C) is another strategy to improve the security and robustness
against PK attacks in image manipulation detection, which decreases damage caused by an attacker
[48]. The 1.5C architecture is achieved by a combination of 2C and 1Cs classiers, runs simultaneously,
and outputs of each classier feed to the nal 1C classier. The logical idea behind scenario 1.5C is as
follows. 2C classiers always generalize entirely to the samples that were not represented correctly in
training but achieved high accuracy and performance, especially in the absence of attacks. Therefore,
based on this problem, an intelligent attacker can use this property and applied the attack and fall
into 'unseen' regions, which is illustrated in Figure 21 [81]. In Figure 21, the attacker aims to take
manipulation samples (red triangles) and transfer to a pristine unseen region (blue dots). By enclosing
only one class, the system will become robust and secure against adversarial attacks. This behavior
is depicted in Figure 22. We see that moving samples from manipulated to the pristine region need
a more distortion because of the adjacency of pristine samples to the decision region. To achieve a
25