4.3.1. Adversary-aware detectors
This is the most common approach in Adversarial Image Forensics, particularly in ML approaches. The
analyst assumed to be aware of the CF attack; therefore, design a new method to expose the attack by
looking at specic CF footprints. Then the new algorithm Ais devised within conjunction with the original
algorithm.
Barni et al., [33] proposed a detector based on adversary-aware training to detect dangerousness CF
attacks and other processing in the presence of DJPEG compression. They considered the Most Powerful
Attacks (MPAs), which degrade the classier performance in an unaware case. Then, a detector retrained
to identify images subject to MPAs should recognize milder processing and double compressed images. The
example of this scenario is depicted in Figure 18. In other suited cases to ML-based is when the new algorithm
Figure 18: Rened the decision margin with attacked samples (red dots) and close more to pristine samples (blue dots) [33].
is obtained by employing an adversary-aware version of Aand is utilized in place of , indicating that the
algorithm can be retrained by attack samples [33, 35, 34]. In this way, the detector achieves the rened
version ofA=(L;X;D[DA) by retraining the set of attacked examples DA. In general, this method
works properly whenever the classier can distinguish enough between pristine, manipulated, and adversarial
examples. To provide an example, the authors in [34] proposed a system capable of detecting contrast
enhancement in the presence of JPEG compression. In this system, dierent SVM classiers (unaware case),
trained with the compressed images. The second approach is to estimate QFs by utilizing the idempotency
of JPEG images whenever QF cannot extract from the JPEG header. Hence, dierent classiers trained
with dierent QFs separately, and based on the idempotency approach, the nearest QFs selected as a
detector. Then, Barni et al., [35] improved the approach in [34] based on CNN detector for generic contrast
adjustment against JPEG compression. In this system, robustness achieved by retraining unaware cases with
JPEG examples with dierent QFs. Experimental results prove this system also can work under unseen tonal
adjustments.
Furthermore, recently, forensic analysts extensively start to study how they can improve the robustness of
DL based on adversary-aware training against adversarial attacks [4]. Want et al., [76] proposed a technique
to prevent adversarial dangerousness attacks on DL based on multi-source and multi-cost schemes for im-
proving defense performance, called Adversarially Trained Model Switching (AdvMS). Based on the AdvMS
scheme, the rst component multi-source alleviates the performance problem, and the second component
multi-cost enhances the robustness.
The advent of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) develops many challenges in image forensics.
GANs have been extensively employed to generate fake images. Identication of GANs-generated images is a
signicant forensics challenge, particularly for Image-to-Image translation and DeepFakes. Nataraj et al., [77]
proposed a new method for identifying GAN images using a combination of dierent co-occurrence matrices.
They consider matrices on three color channels RGB and train a model using CNN. The challenging task in
this scenario is that the proposed methodology intrinsically is not robust against JPEG compression leading
to the network being re-trained with dierent JPEG quality factors. In this work, they obtained 93.78%,
91.61%, and 87.31% for quality factors of 95, 85, and 75, respectively.
23