at hand (e.g., to detect double JPEG compression (DJPEG) and recompression). For example, Chen
et al. [25] considered a set of features to improve DJPEG traces to discriminate between double and
single JPEG images, which can then be used to train an SVM-based classier. Nowroozi et al. [19]
considered the traces left by DJPEG image in the mean, variance, and entropy, by training the SVM
classier using these collective statistical features. Milani et al. [26] presented a statistic derived from
the DCT histograms based on rst signicant digits (FSD), in order to distinguish single from double
JPEG compression.
Islam et al. [27] introduced a technique for splicing and copy-move detection that utilizes SVM classi-
cation of Local Binary Patterns (LBP) descriptors derived from the block DCT of chroma channels.
SVMs have often been used for camera model identication, to fulll multi-class classication based
on high order features derived from the images or from the PRNU noise pattern generated by dierent
cameras [28]. A summary of the dierent SVM-based image forensics techniques is shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Existing SVM-based image forensics techniques: A comparative summary
Reference Pros Cons
[25] Double JPEG detection.1) Some cases failed (N/D).
2) Performance degrades when SD is applied.
[26] Distinguish between SJPEG and DJPEG.Other CF strategies could deceive
this approach.
[27] Splicing and copy-move detection.AUC decreases when window size
is 44.
•CNN-based image forensics Deep learing (DL) methods such as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have also been used in steganalysis purposes, and generally the performance of these new
CNN-based techniques exceeds those of classical model-based and standard ML-based techniques con-
siderably.
The rst task in image forensics utilizing CNNs for detecting median ltering is to apply feature
representations with high accuracy compared with hand-crafted features methods [29]. The authors in
[30] studied a binary and a multi-class CNN, which is eective for the dierent manipulation operations
such as blurring, median ltering, and resizing. This approach was later extended in [31]. In each image
patch, they found a strong dierence between dierent camera models. However, these networks are
partly shallow, consisting of only three or four convolutional layers. Besides, a pre-processing ltering
step is employed to the rst layer to force the network to look for the traces in the residual domain
high-pass image, hence facilitating its job.
Niu et al. [32] computed a primary quantization matrix using DCT coecients based on CNNs, which
can work under a variety of situations. Also, they achieved good performance on small image patches.
In summary, the method of considering completely self-learned features, without forcing the initial
layers, has been shown to be useful, as long as sucient training data is available. A summary of the
dierent CNN-based image forensics techniques and ML-based approaches is presented in Tables 6 and
7, respectively.
3. Review of image forensics literature
Here, we will focus on addressing the following research questions:
6