A Survey of Machine Learning Techniques in Adversarial Image Forensics
Ehsan Nowroozia, Ali Dehghantanhab, Reza M. Parizic, Kim-Kwang Raymond Chood
aDepartment of Information Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy
bSchool of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
cCollege of Computing and Software Engineering, Kennesaw State University, GA, USA
dDepartment of Information Systems and Cyber Security, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA
Abstract
Image forensic plays a crucial role in both criminal investigations (e.g., dissemination of fake images to
spread racial hate or false narratives about specic ethnicity groups) and civil litigation (e.g., defamation).
Increasingly, machine learning approaches are also utilized in image forensics. However, there are also a
number of limitations and vulnerabilities associated with machine learning-based approaches, for example
how to detect adversarial (image) examples, with real-world consequences (e.g., inadmissible evidence, or
wrongful conviction). Therefore, with a focus on image forensics, this paper surveys techniques that can be
used to enhance the robustness of machine learning-based binary manipulation detectors in various adver-
sarial scenarios.
Keywords : Image forensics, Adversarial machine learning, Adversarial learning, Adversarial setting,
Image manipulation detection, Cyber security.
1. Introduction
As consumer technologies (e.g., image acquisition and editing tools) and articial intelligence techniques
advance, editing digital images and creating fake images are becoming easier and cheaper. Deliberate ma-
nipulation of digital images can be innocuous (e.g., to improve the quality and appearance of an image)
or carried with malicious intent (e.g., to alter the semantic content of the image, or to establish an alibi).
The diusion of fake images has implications on judicial systems, global economy, nancial health, and even
homeland and national security. Not surprisingly, there have been interest from the digital forensics, and
more specically image forensics, community in recent years to detect deliberate manipulation of digital
images. There have also been interest from the commercial market, as suggested in a recent study [1].
Image forensics, an emerging forensic discipline, seeks to determine the history of an image (e.g., its
origin), the processing it underwent, etc, in order to determine the authenticity of the images [2]. In other
words, key image forensic tasks include source classication (to reveal the source image produced from
an image acquisition device, such as scanner and camera), source identication (to identify the acquisition
device used to take the image), reverse engineering of processing operators (to identify the chain of processing
operators, and processing includes deliberate manipulation), and authenticity verication (to determine
whether the image has been manipulated).
In recent years, there have also been attempts to utilize machine learning (ML)-based techniques to both
support dierent image forensics tasks and to defeat ML-based image forensics [3, 4, 5, 6]. This reinforces
the importance of developing techniques to protecting ML systems (also referred to as adversarial ML (Adv-
ML)). Both ML and deep learning algorithms can be vulnerable to adversarial attacks that hinder their
applications in security-sensitive domains, such as image forensics. For example, a deep neural network
may report high condence in a wrong prediction or can be circumvented by image perturbation techniques.
Therefore, there have been attempts to design eective adversarial counter forensics (CF) techniques.
Email addresses: ehsan.nowroozi@diism.unisi.it (Ehsan Nowroozi), adehghan@uoguelph.ca (Ali Dehghantanha),
rparizi1@kennesaw.edu (Reza M. Parizi), raymond.choo@fulbrightmail.org (Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo)
Preprint submitted to Computers & Security (Elsevier) on 14, June 2020 and accepted on 19, October 2020.October 20, 2020arXiv:2010.09680v1  [cs.CR]  19 Oct 2020