Figure 5: Keyword count in the included articles
tasks such as blurring, noise addition, resizing, rotation, etc.
Besides DL, in many complex tasks, researchers considered ML methods to address dierent forensics tasks,
e.g., SVM. SVM-based in image forensics was recently utilized for detecting dierent forensics tasks, such as
align and not-align DJPEG [19], global and local contrast enhancement [34], and so on.
Therefore, RQ1 plays a pivotal role in knowing new methodologies in adversarial image forensics, e.g., such
as counter-forensics and anti-counter forensics.
3.2.2. RQ2: how anti-CF techniques can improve the security of ML against adversarial attacks?
Anti-forensics or counter-forensics are methods to make forensics algorithms fail by altering the image
content or changing some forensic algorithm. The main aim of the forensic community is to develop more
robust forensic schemes. Recent studies in DL led to the development of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [4] that conrmed to be more eective for misleading many current image forensics approaches,
referred to as adversarial examples. Adversarial examples employ small perturbations on the image to indue
a system to make a wrong decision. The perturbation can be obtained by estimating the input image's
loss function, such as the FGSM method [4], Deepfool [44], JSMA [45], and so forth. Guera et al., [46]
considered FGSM and JSMA adversarial attacks to mislead CNN camera model identication. Tondi [47]
also considered a gradient attack on the pixel domain to create adversarial examples in the integer domain
against CNN-based detection. According to the study, Most of the DL methods are fragile and vulnerable
against adversarial attacks. The researchers report that even if the robustness of DL based method can be
improved by retraining the classier with adversarial examples, the resulting networks are still vulnerable
against most powerful attacks.
Anti-counter forensics or counter-counter forensics have been extended as a defense methodology versus
counter-forensics methods by developing image forensics' security in counter-forensics attacks. While with
the advent of adversarial attacks, various techniques have newly been developed in image forensics to de-
fend versus adversarial attacks. Barni et al., [33] proposed a secure method to react against dierent
post-processing by retraining unaware classiers with the most powerful attacks (MPAs). Therefore, by
understanding most CF attacks, the analyst can be developed a secure system to react against the most
powerful CFs.
10