Table 11: Summary of dierent counter-forensic techniques
Knowledge Reference Pros Cons
Perfect [57] Modifying the FSD histogram1) limit on distortion.
2) Histogram reconstruction phase.
Perfect [58]Optimal attack against histogram
where detection region is non-convex.Considered only the MSE.
Perfect [59] Conceal traces of median ltering.Degrade the performance against
JPEG compression.
Perfect [60]Attack against SVM of global image
manipulation based on gradient descent.With JPEG compression attacker
needs to apply more distortion.
Limited [61]Attacks on surrogate detector:
adversarial sample transfer across MLs.Transferability can be improved by
increasing the attack strength.
Limited [62]Attacks on surrogate detector:
Apply the scenario [61] in image forensics.Integer domain.
Limited [63]Universal attacks:
fool a histogram-based forensics detector.Can not applicable to other histogram
based detectors.
Limited [50]Laundering attacks:
overcome resampling detection.Proposed methods are not detectable
with other existing forensic methods.
Limited [52]Laundering attacks:
remove JPEG artifacts.Designed for specic scenario.
4.2.5. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
With adversarial examples, CF scholars in the image forensics community have started studying Genera-
tive Adversarial Networks (GANs) [73]. GANs are developed to generate generative models by imitating the
distribution of training data. This is employed iteratively to make a min-max game between two-players,
that is to say, discriminator train iteratively to distinguish between real and generated examples to deceive
the discriminator. Newly, GANs have been employed as a CF attacks. For instance, Kim et al., [74] present
median ltering CF attacks by considering GAN network, which can eectively erase the traces of median
lter images. Bonettini et al. [75] considered Benford's law to discriminate generated images from pristine
ones. Benford's law shows the distribution of the most important digit for DCT coecients.
4.2.6. Summary of counter-forensics attacks
We summarize the dierent CF methods applied to an image to bypass the forensic analysis. Particularly,
the problem of CF is discussed, and the related prior art is shown. As shown in Table 11, an attacker with a
perfect knowledge can make the attack by relying on the knowledge of the forensic algorithm. One the other
hand, in a limited knowledge scenario, the attacker knows only some parts about the forensic algorithm,
which means that it does not know the specic algorithm or maybe parameters.
4.3. Anti-Counter Forensics (Anti-CF)
Anti-CF methods have been extended to react to CF attacks and restore the validity of the forensic
analysis. Most of the anti-CF methods are tailored against specic CF methods. Anti-CF methods can be
classied into two categories: adversary-aware detectors which is the most common case in image forensics,
and generally more secure detectors [49] when the attacker designs a secure system which is intrinsically
dicult to attack.
22