forensic analysis techniques can be broadly categorized into those based on image acquisition ,image coding ,
and image processing [2].
•Remnants of Acquisition-based Activities Every step of the image acquisition process leaves some
traces within an image (e.g., traces for instance of the particular Color Filter Array (CFA) pattern
and the type of lter used for color interpolation) [15]. Thus, the digital image produces evidence for
interpolation lter and CFA pattern [16]. Furthermore, a camera sensor, by default, leaves a particular
noise in each captured image, which is known as Photo-Response-Non-Uniformity (PRNU). In other
words, two dierent image acquisition devices of the same make and model are likely to leave dierent
patterns and the analysis of the traces will allow us to detect the image acquisition device used to
acquire the image. Khanna et al. [16] detect footprints of digital tampering in lossless and lossy
in compressed images. Table 1 summarizes existing forensic analysis methods designed to identify
remnants of image acquisition activities.
•Remnants of Coding-based Activities Modern-day digital cameras generally utilize JPEG com-
pression as a standard format for ecient storage and transmission, which partly explains the interest
in the study of an image's compression history [17, 18, 19]. Since various imaging software applications
generally consider dierent compression parameters and employ dierent quantization tables [17], the
analysis of inconsistencies in quantization matrices can also be used for source and forgery detection.
Ferrara et al. [15] proposed a method to distinguish aligned from not-aligned DJPEG compression by
identifying the DCT coecients of the rst compression. Table 2 summarizes existing forensic analysis
methods designed to identify remnants of image coding activities.
•Remnants of Editing-based Activities The use of image and video editing software will also result
in the presence of digital footprints. For example,the application of a geometric transformation, such as
a rotation or a resizing, requires interpolation of pixel values that leaves detectable traces in the image
[2]. By employing a resizing and rotation geometric transformation, the software leaves detectable
artifacts on the image due to value interpolation. Moreover, by altering the subpart of the image in
terms of applying blurriness, contrast, saturation, etc, the software leaves artifacts in dierent areas of
the image [20]. Median ltering in image processing, plus denoising and smoothing, can additionally be
used to hide footprints of previous processing attempts [21]. Yuan et al. [21], for example, proposed a
novel techniques for detecting median lter images through block-wise method by considering median
lter between the blocks.
2.2. Image Forensics Tools
Now, we will review three widely used image analysis tools (see also Table 4).
2.2.1. Forensically
Forensically is a free tool in digital image forensics that oers features such as clone detection and
metadata extraction [22]. The tool's magnier or zoom factor helps analysts to nd hidden features in an
image by magnifying the pixels' size and color. Magnier for detection uses the following three items based on
histogram equalization ,auto contrast , and auto contrast by channel .Clone detector in Forensically identies
manipulated areas of two or more image les. Similar areas are illustrated with blue and connected with
red and overlapping areas with white color. Several options can be selected in this tool based on minimal
similarity, minimal detail, minimal cluster size, block size, maximal image size, and show a quantized image.
Error level analysis compares the pristine image with a compressed version to identify possible features
lost during compression. Therefore, manipulated areas can stand out in various ways. This tool compares
dierent features of image les such as color quality, error scale, magnier enhancement, and opacity. Noise
analysis is another part of Forensically, which is utilized as a median lter to identify noises in an image
le that can be used for manipulation detection like airbrushing and wrapping. Level sweep in Forensically
helps analysts detect copy-pasting areas by considering sweep through an image histogram. Furthermore,
the copy-pasting areas are more visible due to the use of magniers. With the JPEG analysis tool, analyzers
can extract metadata from JPEG les, such as quantization tables.
3