experimental ndings of the approaches described in Table 13.
Table 12: Summary of dierent anti-counter-forensic (anti-CF) techniques
Method Reference Pros Cons
Adv-aware
detectors[33]Detect dangerousness attacks and
other processings in the presence of
DJPEG compression.1) Degrade performance when QF1>QF 2.
2) Localization detection.
Adv-aware
detectors[76]Prevent adversarial dangerousness attacks
on DL by employing multi-source and
multi-cost schemes.Reduce the performance with large .
Adv-aware
detectors[77]Identifying fake GAN images using
combination of dierent co-occurrence matrices.Performance degrade on high quality images
such as StyleGAN1 or 2.
Generally more
secure detectors[78]Contrast enhancement detection by employing
second-order statistics.Performance degrade against JPEG compression.
Generally more
secure detectors[79]Countering SJPEG, DJPEG, and
local tampering anti-forensics.Localization detection.
Generally more
secure detectors[80]Fusing the outputs of dierent forensic
algorithms.QF1<QF 2.
Generally more
secure detectors[81] Detecting DJPEG compression. Works only with SVM.
Generally more
secure detectors[83]Data randomization:
improve the security in dierent
forensic scenarios.Adversarial examples can be transferable
by increasing strength of attacks.
Generally more
secure detectors[85]Defense layer:
Counter adversarial attacks.It cannot work in a white-box scenario.
Generally more
secure detectors[48]Ensemble Method:
Protect detectors against PK attacks.Not to much robust against:
1) Noise addition
2) JPEG compression.
Generally more
secure detectors[89]GAN Defence :
Robust against adversarial examples using
a GAN.Problem with deep network.
4.3.3. Summary of Anti-Counter Forensics
In this part, we summarize dierent anti-CF techniques into two categories adversary-aware detectors
andgenerally more secure detectors . Particularly, we compare existing techniques in terms of pros and cons,
as shown in Table 12. Table 12 shows that dierent techniques have their pros and cons in terms of the
capability of detection, robustness, eciency, and so on. Specically, in adversary-aware detectors , are good
to react only against a specic case of attacks. On the other hand, in generally more secure detectors , are
more resistant versus CF attacks and then, more dicult to attack, particularly even in the PK scenario.
5. Concluding remarks
This article reviewed existing ML-based approaches for image manipulation detection in an adversarial
setting, such as those based on binary manipulation classication. While a number of these approaches may
be ecient in dierent forensic scenarios, they may be vulnerable or less eective against adversarial attacks.
There have also been attempts to design image forensic tools for retrieving information and manipulation
detection, as well as CF techniques to defeat ML-based image forensic approaches.
We also observed that anti-CF approaches are generally tailored for specic CF attacks. For example, in
the context of the Most Powerful Attacks (MPAs), MPA-aware detectors are designed to enhance the security
of ML-based image manipulation against a specic class of attacks. In practice, when the MPA cannot be
found analytically, a possible approach is to try to determine the MPAs experimentally, by looking at which
attack degrades the performance [33].
27