Figure 7: Classify the attacks in ML
{Explorative : The attacker feeds malicious input to the test data and never attempts to mod-
ify trained classiers. The attacker tries to make a misclassication error through adversarial
examples or seeks to obtain information from models.
•Specicity:
{Targeted : When the attacker attempts to decrease the performance of the classier by the decep-
tion of a specic algorithm or specic group of samples.
{Indiscriminate : When the attack has a more 
exible goal, or when the attack is targeted to a
class of algorithms rather than a specic algorithm.
•Security violation:
{Integrity : When the attack aims at letting malevolent samples be classied as normal, there-
fore attacker tries to increase false negatives error when classifying adversarial examples on the
classiers.
{Availability : When the attack aims at causing a classication error of any type, i.e., both a false
negative and a false positive error, thus causing a Denial of Service (DoS) concerning pristine
samples.
Dierent kinds of attacks to the general ML system can be employed based on the above taxonomy, as done
in [48].
In the following, we study the general adversarial model utilized for CF attacks. Then, we address some
examples of several attack models based on perfect and limited knowledge attacks. Moreover, we review
dierent adversarial attacks against DL forensic techniques.
4.2.1. Counter-forensic attack model
By following the terminologies in [48], an adversarial model is represented by specifying the assumptions
about an attacker's goal, knowledge, and capability to corrupt the data or system.
•Attacker's goal
In this category, the attacker denes the kind of security violation . The attacker aims to apply integrity
attacks that induce false-negative error of the classiers or employ an availability attack to induce errors
of classiers such as false-negative and false-positive error. We can classify CF into violation attacks or
evasion attacks whenever the attacker modies the manipulated images so that they are misclassied
by the detector, either assumed as pristine ones or become misclassication errors. In doing so, the
13