The optimum attack can be a gradient-based attack applied based on gradient-descent solutions when
the detector is more complicated. To provide an example, Chen et al., [60] proposed a gradient-based attack
employed on the pixel domain to counter SVM manipulation detectors on residual features. Similarly in
[47], a gradient analysis is introduced to counter forgery detection. When small perturbations applied to
an image, the existing techniques tend to be canceled by pixels rounding, thus causing an attack useless.
Therefore, the attack in [47] generates adversarial images with small perturbations to cause the classier for
the wrong decision.
The main challenge with many PK scenarios is that most of the CF attacks are utilized in the feature
domain. In this case, controlling the distortion will become a challenging task since the relationship among
the pixel and feature domain is usually non-invertible [57] (see Figure 9). Generally speaking, a suboptimum
Figure 9: Complex non-invertable between pixel and feature domain
strategy is performed in two steps: First of all, it minimizes the distortion in the feature domain. Secondly,
a new minimization is implemented in the pixel domain until it reaches a close desire attack [59].
4.2.3. Limited knowledge attacks
We consider the taxonomies were introduced in [49], already employed to classify CF attacks based on
universal attacks ,attacks on a surrogate detector , and laundering-type attacks .
•Attacks on surrogate detector
In this case, the knowledge of the attacker for the algorithm is limited, and maybe he/she is aware
of theX, the feature space, but the attacker does not know all the parameters of the algorithm L
and also training set Din the case of ML-based techniques. The concept is shown in Figure 10. In
Figure 10: Scheme of the attack on the surrogate model
this case, the attacker creates a surrogate detector ( ^) and tries to guess the parameters he/she does
not know based on whatever information that is available to him/her. Afterward, the attacker applies
the CF by performing the attack versus ( ^), expecting the attack will work against the real detector,
which is commonly referred to as attack transferability [61, 62]. Recently, researchers prove that most
of the MLs are fragile and vulnerable against adversarial attacks. Papernot et al., [61] conrm that
the attack on the source network entirely transferable to target networks. Whereas, Barni et al., [62]
argues that adversarial attacks are not transferable from source to target in image forensics application.
15