A number of literature surveys and reviews on the applications of ML-techniques in image forensics has
been published in the literature [7, 8, 9, 10] and in image forensics [11, 12, 13, 14], although adversarial image
forensics is generally not discussed. Amodei et al., [7], for example, reviewed the general security concerns
in articial intelligence, particularly reinforcement learning and supervised learning algorithms. A general
review of security implications on the use of ML approaches and their countermeasures was presented in
[8, 10]. Akhtar et al. [9] focused on adversarial attacks on deep learning approaches in computer vision.
However, there have been limited studies focusing on ML-security issues in (adversarial) image forensics, a
gap we seek to address in this paper.
Specically, in this paper we survey existing ML techniques for image forensics, including those that can
be utilized in the adversarial setting (e.g., image manipulation), and CF. In the survey, we also reviewed
the various approaches that can be used to enhance the security of binary manipulation detectors based on
ML and defensive techniques during the testing stage. Figure 1 shows a graphical abstract concerning the
application of machine learning techniques in adversarial image forensics.
Figure 1: Graphical abstract of adversarial image forensics
We will now explain the layout of the remaining of this paper. Section 2 introduces the reader to relevant
background materials. In Section 3, we present the survey on ML-based image forensics, prior to reviewing
adversarial image forensics in Section 4. In the latter section, we also revisit ML-based CF challenges
and potential mitigation approaches (commonly referred to as anti-CF). Moreover, a classication of ML
techniques in the presence of the adversary is presented. In Section 5, we conclude this paper.
2. Background
Here, we will revisit popular image forensics approaches such as Support-Vector- Machines (SVM) and
Convolutional-Neural-Networks (CNNs), followed by ML-based image forensic techniques.
2.1. Image Forensic Analysis Approaches
The primary goal of image forensics is to identify remnants of any activities over an image le, which can
be utilized by a forensic analyst in timeline or relational analysis and event reconstruction. Existing image
2