In anti-CF, an aware-training technique is considered as a way to improve the robustness of the forensic
tools against the JPEG laundering attack. We observed that image forensics tools may have poor resilience
against JPEG compression. Compared to more complicated attacks, the JPEG laundering attack is easy
to perform and does not require any information about the target detector. With reference to the contrast
enhancement (CE) detection, the eectiveness of the JPEG-aware training has been evaluated for both ML
(SVM-based) and DL (CNN-based) approaches in the literature [98, 35, 34]. There have also been attempts
to design anti-CF systems that are generally dicult to attack by improving the security of ML-based image
manipulation detectors [48], for example using randomization of the feature set [83].
Recent investigations in DL have conrmed that adversarial examples present a certain degree of trans-
ferability, especially in the computer vision. Additionally, applying adversarial attacks can be ecient in
Limited Knowledge (LK) scenarios. For example, Barni et al., [62] showed that adversarial examples against
CNN-based detectors are not transferable between matched and mismatched architectures. Random feature
selection (RFS) method is one possible approach to improve the robustness of forensic detectors to targeted
attacks, particularly in DL. In CNN, the RFS approach includes the selection of a random feature set derived
from the network. Thus, the RFS strategy helps to alleviate the dangerousness of adversarial examples [83].
There remain a number of potential research directions, such as the following.
•Vulnerability and fragility of DL methods against adversarial attacks The reviewed literature
shows that most DL techniques in image forensics can easily fool against various adversarial attacks.
Although most of the current works focus on misleading DL on the task of classication, based on the
studied literature, we can undoubtedly observe that DL techniques are fragile to adversarial attacks
in general. Improving the robustness of the DL-based engines against adversarial learning techniques
plays a pivotal role in image forensics. Newly, random selection approaches employes to increase the
robustness of the forensic image detectors to targeted attacks. This approach extended based on DL
features can help prevent attack transferability by modifying the detector's architecture or retraining
the detector with random features. On the other hand, increasing the approach's eectiveness of this
approach must be examined against a wide range of adversarial attacks. Moreover, identifying the
robustness of the random deep feature selection scenarios when the adversary is aware of the defensive
mechanism is another interesting avenue in future research.
•Adversarial samples generalize well The reviewed literature proves that one of the most common
features in adversarial examples is that they transfer considerably between similar and dierent archi-
tectures. In contrast, the authors in [62] prove that majority of the dierent cases, the attacks are not
transferable in image forensics particularly between dierent neural networks. Therefore, additional
study is required on the attacker's side to know if and how the transferability can be improved, for
example, by improving the attack strength or proposing the most powerful attack. We expect that by
increasing the strength of attacks, adversarial attacks can be transferred to the target network even in
mismatch networks (see Figure 24). We expect that future work will concentrate more on improving
attacks' strength to increase adversarial examples' transferability. Given the complexity of the decision
margin learned by the CNNs, controlling the amount of distortion applied by the attacker on the image,
is not an easy task.
Another direction for future research is related to randomization-based defense when attackers aware
of the mechanism, such as feature selection and the architecture. Therefore, we expect that the use of
dierent FC layers or dierent kernels in SVM can improve the security mechanism on the defender
side.
•GAN-CF detection need more investigation In recent years with advancements in DL, several
techniques have been extended to create fake image contents, e.g., such as GANs [73, 74]. GANs
have extensively been utilized to generate synthetic images visually indistinguishable from real ones.
Therefore we need to develop mechanisms to dierentiate fake from realistic images. Most of the
existing methods mainly focus on improving GAN image detection with high detection performance
without consideration of anti-forensics. Anti-forensics are also recently utilized for these kinds of
detection tools, aiming to attack forensic techniques where the attacker might apply GANs to train a
generator to counterfeit forensic traces.
To expose these detection method's weaknesses, an attacker can devise a generator anti-forensically to
30