Figure 24: Increasing strength of the attack when adversarial example enters more inside the decision boundary
deceive most detection techniques without applying artifacts into the image. Further research in image
forensics is needed to understand how GAN-CF can be detected with innovative approaches.
•Defense against backdoor attacks Another new class of attacks against DL architectures is back-
door attacks [92].. Backdoor attacks are in the category of causative attacks when training sets are
poisoned by introducing a backdoors signal to a portion of the training les that cause misclassication
of a payload during a testing time, which poses a new and realistic threat, particularly in image foren-
sic applications. Although several works have been done, diculties still exist due to the problems'
complexity and forensic applications' wideness.
Investigating solutions to enhance the security of ML techniques facing such attacks in image forensics
plays an important role. For instance, randomized smoothing is one of the strategies newly considered
against backdoor attacks, which was extended to verify robustness versus adversarial attacks but still
have limited eectiveness. Another challenges is related to semantic and physical backdoor attacks,
and researches are left far behind. Therefore, a better perception of those areas would be an essential
step towards defeating the backdoor threat in practice.
•Developing security class of ML Machine learning (ML) techniques have proved remarkable per-
formance in numerous application elds, particularly in image forensics. Traditionally, most of ML
methods are trained in a benign setting with identical statistical characteristics in training and testing.
Whereas, this assumption usually in ML does not work against adversarial attacks, where some sta-
tistical features of the samples can be tampered with by an intelligent adversary. Therefore, one way
is to design an ML model in an adversarial setting. The susceptibility of ML techniques in adversarial
environments and corresponding countermeasures need to investigate more.
Future research on ML security, in particular reference to image forensics, may involve the following
aspects. The defense strategy facing adversarial attacks for DL techniques should include more stud-
ies. Many studies proved that DNNs are inherently fragile to subtle perturbations that aect output
results. Although numerous defense approaches have recently been proposed so far to counter such
attacks, we can not nd a primary solution to these diculties. Thus, generating a secure ML/DL
under adversarial settings will likely represent a signicant challenge for the years to come.
•Deep learning interpretability Interpretability in deep learning-based methods is another hot issue,
particularly in image forensic tools. Understanding the nature of the black-box generally is dicult
and how the network makes a decision. To clarify more, in pattern recognition, DL can accurately
classify cats from dogs, but we can not understand which specic features lead to this decision. This
problem also happens in most forensic applications. Hence, tracking DL's reasoning would enable to
improve most of the forensic networks in terms of security and robustness against adversarial attacks.
•Multiple adversarial attacks to ML This problem happens in most ML/DL image forensic appli-
cations. The challenge considerably dierent when the ML system has to face multiple adversaries.
Based on the synthesization of knowledge (SoK) in the survey, only a few papers have studied models
with multiple adversaries. Thus, colluding attacks within Adversarial Image Forensics is a hot issue
that can be studied further.
31