3.2.3. RQ3: what methods are available to improve the security of ML engines used in image forensics?
One of the hot topics in image forensics is developing methods for improving ML against dierent adver-
sarial attacks. Most of the methods are tailored versus particular CF attacks. In this survey, we study the
solutions suggested so far to counter CF attacks. Moreover, we distinguish the methods based on adversary-
aware system and generally more secure detectors.
In the rst category, the analyst thought to be aware of the CF method the system is subject to and tries
to develop a new algorithm to reveal the attack by looking at specic traces left by the tool. For instance,
Barni et al. [33] proposed a detector based on a support-vector-machine (SVM) that fed with a large number
of features to identify the traces left by D-JPEG in the presence of attacks. With the advent of DL archi-
tectures, adversary-aware training has been widely used to improve DL models' robustness to adversarial
examples [4]. Although these approaches eectively improve the security of ML in image forensics, it still
works only against specic attacks.
In the second category, generally more secure detectors, most anti-CF methods are developed without con-
sidering developing a technique that analysts react appropriately against various kinds of attacks. Barni et
al. [48] proposed a detector against PK attacks through multiple-classier architecture. The architecture is
also known as a 1.5C classier, consisting of one 2C classier, two 1C classiers, and a nal 1C classier.
They access the performance of the 1.5C against three dierent manipulation tasks resizing, median ltering,
and contrast enhancement.
In this survey, we study dierent methodologies proposed so far based on the above categories, and we
address the pros and cons of methodologies.
4. Adversarial Image Forensics
With the advancement of forensics methods for retrieving information and tampering detection, in recent
years, CF methods have been developed to prevent a correct detection. CF tools are usually eective due
to the defects of forensic tools (most CF attacks take advantage of the weakness of the traces), which most
of the time are not though to work under adversarial conditions. In real-world situations, the behavior of
an adversary intending to stop the analysis cannot be ignored. Therefore, forensics analysis needs to up its
game by improving its detection methods capable of working in an adversarial condition.
The task of improving forensics methods in an adversarial setting is even more challenging when ML-
based, and in particular DL-based, forensic tools are adopted for the analysis. This challenge can be at-
tributed to the inherent vulnerability of these tools, and the performance decreased on the dierent conditions
during the testing phase, concerning those used for the training. This calls for the improvement of more
reliable ML-based forensic tools, which is called a new class of tools that can eciently counter-CF attacks
(referred to as anti-CF) while keeping the advantages of modern ML methods [49]. The security of ML
systems in the adversarial conditions is a common problem in comparison with many other security-sensitive
applications. Hence, the use of comparable solutions should be considered to secure image forensic methods.
Some useful symbols used throughout this section are listed in Table 9.
4.1. Counter-Forensics and Anti-Counter-Forensics
CF or Anti-Forensics, refers to all the solutions proposed so far to bypass the forensic analysis. Early
proposed models of CF methods were fairly simple, including applications of basic processing operators
[50, 51, 52]. By adding noise dithering, the gaps in the histograms of DCT coecients are decreased, and the
blocking artifacts are concealed by employing a smoothing operation, to hide traces of JPEG compression
[52]. For instance, the most harmful attacks in image forensics related to the geometrical and CF attacks
to eliminate the traces from previously JPEG images [53] (see Figure 6). In this case, the detector, in an
unaware case, totally fails to detect.
To conceal traces of contrast enhancement operation, the authors in [51] proposed a method that removes
picks and gaps in the pixel histograms through dithering. To hide artifacts of resampling, image high
frequencies are perturbed with noise while being resampled [50]. Such techniques can be easily circumvented
by dedicated methods.
The eective CF techniques can be devised by an attacker whenever he knows some information con-
cerning the forensic algorithm. Such methods are assigned to as targeted attacks and tailored to a particular
algorithm. CF methods are not perfect and leave traces on their own, that can be exploited by an informed
11