4.3.2. Generally more secure detectors
Most of the current anti-CF methods do not take into account the possibility of predicting the movement
of the analyst and determining the probable course of action for each attack. When the attacker predicts
that CF footprints are left by themselves, they devise more robust CF methods that leave less evidence,
leading to a loop between CF and anti-CF techniques.
A possible solution concerning this problem is to devise a system that resists against PK attack and
inherently dicult to attack. In compered with adversary-aware training , the analyst makes a system to
counter several CF attacks, for instance, one possible approach is to consider higher-order statistics. In this
case,Xis the set of features from the original algorithm, and ^Xis a larger feature space that estimates
by the algorithm, where ^X X . This method was implemented by Rosa et al., [78] by applying second-
order statistics for contrast enhancement detection. The security of the proposed system in [78] evaluated
the universal CF scheme [55]. They achieved three interesting facts: 1) This system is slightly better
than the rst-order detector; 2) CF attack methods recently applied against rst-order statistics detectors
are not functional versus second-order statistics; 3) Evaluate traces that left by an attack; it is easy in
second-order statistics. Furthermore, a similar approach was proposed for countering S-JPEG, DJPEG, and
local tampering anti-forensics in [79, 25]. Considering second-order statistics reveal CF attacks, helping
the analyst to perform a more correct analysis. Another strategy to design a generally more secure system
based on fusing the outputs of dierent forensic algorithms by looking at traces [80]. Researchers borrowed
this scenario based on Dempster-Shafer and investigated how Counter-Anti-Forensics (CAF) tools can be
embedded in this system for classifying CAF traces from image forensic traces.
General speaking approaches referring to the category of generally more secure detector look for solutions
in the presence of the worst-case, for a given class of attacks. An example of such a technique can be found
in [81] for detecting DJPEG compression by re-training on D[DA, whereAis considered as an optimum
attack. In the following, we present an overview of recent works developed for improving the security of
detectors.
•Data Randomization
Randomization strategy is another method in this category that can be employed to enhance the
robustness for forensic detectors on DL for general models and standard-based forensics [82, 83]. Zhang
et al., [82] they optimized the feature sets, which intrinsically become secure against a PK attack by
considering feature selection method on adversarial samples that increase the security versus attacks at
test time. Therefore, feature randomization plays an important role in the security-related application
when a small set of features are considered to overcome the complexity or even enhance the performance
of classication to tackle adversarial attacks. Barni et al., [83] considered random feature selection
strategy that can improve the security and robustness of forensic detectors for the general model and
standard ML-based to mitigate the adversarial dangerousness attacks. The experiments prove that
feature randomization strategy reducing the transferability of attacks, and increase the security of
detection even in the presence of mismatch architectures. Moreover, such techniques also have been
conrmed to be eective against PK attacks [84].
•Defense Layer
In another strategy adding a new defense layer in a network helps to counter adversarial attacks in
the back-box setting. In this approach, the defense layer parameters assist in gaining protection versus
adversarial attacks (see Figure 19) [85].
•One Class Classier
One class classier (1C) has been recently used by the forensic community to improve the security
and robustness of image forensics, particularly in security applications. The main idea behind using
autoencoders in image forensics is that they play as a role of 1C classiers, which forgery data can
be dened as an anomaly. More in general, in many dierent applications, 1C modeling is famous for
anomaly detection, when a statistical characterization under abnormal situations is not feasible. 1C
combinations were devised for improving the security versus evasion attacks for adversarial anomaly
detection. Moreover, 1C classication is an alternative approach for conventional multiclass algorithms
24