attacker normally wants to introduce a small distortion into the image to cross the boundary of a
decision to minimize visual distortion while maximizing the loss function.
•Attacker's knowledge
The knowledge of the attacker can be classied based on Perfect Knowledge (PK) or Limited Knowl-
edge (LK), by examining the attacker knows features, training data, classier architecture, learning
parameters, and decision functions [54]. In the PK scenario, an attacker has the full knowledge regard-
ing the forensic algorithm. This is the most convenient case for the attacker. Conversely, in the LK
scenario, an attacker has only a few bits of information concerning the forensic algorithm, e.g., may
not be aware of the exact algorithm or some of the parameters of the algorithm li2L. In ML-based
techniques, the attacker knows only somewhat of information about the training data D. Based on
the available knowledge, the forensic algorithm species the specicity of attack based on targeted or
indiscriminate. Recently, universal approaches are developed in such a way to be useful versus a whole
class of forensic classiers [55]. Barni et. al, [55] proposed a CF method that performs multiple com-
pression undetectable based on investigating the histogram DCT coecients. This approach removes
double and multiple compression artifacts, while the visual quality of the image keeps high.
•Attacker's capability
In this case, the attacker can be controlling training or testing data, which referred to as in
uence
of the attack. We can interpret the impact of the attacker's capability whenever applied based on
causative orexplorative attacks. In the exploratory attack, an adversary may modify test data, but
can not alter training data. On the other hand, in a causative attack scenario, the training process can
be modied by an attacker, which referred to poisoning attacks. Moreover, most of the CF attacks in
nature are exploratory [54].
The above explanation of the attack lets the attacker employ the threat model. Thus helps the analyst
to design proper methods that can work in an adversarial situation.
4.2.2. Perfect knowledge attacks
The attacker in the PK scenario can employ his/her attack by relying on a forensic algorithm, denoted as
, and then lunch the attack to the target [56] (see Figure 8). To keep a visual quality of the attack image,
Figure 8: Scheme of Perfect Knowledge Attacks. The attacker knows = 1
the attacker must induce an integrity violation , which causes to false-negative decision error. Particularly,
the attacker requires to solve an optimization problem by looking at the image which is closest to the image
under the attack. Generally, an attacker needs to look at the image, which is resembling more to the image
under the attack by solving an optimization problem. Pasquini et al., [57] employed a CF method to counter
DJPEG compression detection by relying on First Signicant Digits (FSD). Particularly, Comesana et al.,
[58] shown the optimal attack against Benford's law-based detectors. Fontani et al., [59] considered a method
for hiding the median ltering artifacts and, in another case, counter SIFT-based copy-move detection, which
is close to CF attacks.
14