Table 3: Editing-based forensic analysis methods: A comparative summary
Category Reference Results
contrast
enhancement[20]In this scenario, the detection algorithm's performance increases with high parameter c.
They achieved best performance when c= 112. The performance degrades
when they consider c= 32. This scenario applies to contrast enhancement detection
with
= 1:1.
median
ltering[21]No-JPEG and JPEG Images: ROC curves for MMF and finuncompressed
scenario demonstrates that features are more robust to detect median ltering. In JPEG scenario
they consider 33 blocks and QF= [100, 90, 80, 70]. The performance degrades
withQF > 80 but the performance improves when QF < 70.
Table 4: Image forensics tools: A comparative summary
Tools Pros Cons
ForensicallyDetect clone detection, metadata extraction,
magnier, error level analysis, noise analysis.Localization detection
Assembler Image enhancement and splicing detect only a few processings.
JPEGsnoopextract the hidden details of the
compressed image and motion JPEG.Detect only one specic compression method
e.g. JPEG not TIFF.
2.2.2. Assembler
Recently on 5 January 2020, Google published Assembler which is a tool designed for journalists to
detect forged images [23]. Assembler uses several existing methods to recognize common image manipulation
detection (e.g., image enhancement, copy-move, and splicing). This tool also includes a detector to identify
deepfakes, which is generated through StyleGAN. Assembler can help one identify which part of the image
has been manipulated, determining copy-move and splicing in the presence of image brightness. While
Assembler can help journalists spot manipulated images, it does not include other existing manipulation
methods for detecting video and audio les. Moreover, this system needs to be real-time when used.
2.2.3. JPEGsnoop
JPEGsnoop [24] is a free software that can assess and extract hidden details of a compressed image,
motion JPEG, and Photoshop les. JPEGsnoop is also capable of analyzing the image's source to obtain
information from compressed images such as quality factor, and reporting on information such as chrominance
and luminance quantization matrix, estimation of JPEG quality factors, Human tables, and histogram for
RGB images.
2.3. ML-based Image Forensics
Unlike traditional image forensic tools, such as those discussed in Section 2.1, ML algorithms can be used
to learn complex patterns from a set of hand-crafted features and facilitate classication.
•SVM-based image forensics SVM is widely used, partly due to its simplicity and accuracy outcomes
in many classication tasks. In most of the earlier SVM-based forensic approaches, the features are
hand-crafted, extracted from the image based on some heuristics, and very specic for the problem
5