Chinchilla LM layers [ 42] and adding learnable layers within the frozen LM. We differ from prior
work by introducing the first LM that can ingest arbitrarily interleaved images, videos, and text.
Web-scale vision and language training datasets. Manually annotated vision and language datasets
are costly to obtain and thus relatively small (10k-100k) in scale [ 3,15,69,122,129,139]. To
alleviate this lack of data, numerous works [ 14,50,98,110] automatically scrape readily available
paired vision-text data. In addition to such paired data, we show the importance of also training on
entire multimodal webpages containing interleaved images and text as a single sequence. Concurrent
work CM3 [ 1] proposes to generate HTML markup from pages, while we simplify the text prediction
task by only generating plain text. We emphasize few-shot learning and vision tasks while CM3 [ 1]
primarily evaluates on language-only benchmarks in a zero-shot or fine-tuned setup.
5 Discussion
Limitations. First, our models build on pretrained LMs, and as a side effect, directly inherit their
weaknesses. For example, LM priors are generally helpful, but may play a role in occasional
hallucinations and ungrounded guesses. Furthermore, LMs generalise poorly to sequences longer
than the training ones. They also suffer from poor sample efficiency during training. Addressing
these issues can accelerate progress in the field and enhance the abilities of VLMs like Flamingo.
Second, the classification performance of Flamingo lags behind that of state-of-the-art contrastive
models [ 82,85]. These models directly optimize for text-image retrieval, of which classification is
a special case. In contrast, our models handle a wider range of tasks, such as open-ended ones. A
unified approach to achieve the best of both worlds is an important research direction.
Third, in-context learning has significant advantages over gradient-based few-shot learning methods,
but also suffers from drawbacks depending on the characteristics of the application at hand. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of in-context learning when access is limited to only a few dozen
examples. In-context learning also enables simple deployment, requiring only inference, generally
with no hyperparameter tuning needed. However, in-context learning is known to be highly sensitive
to various aspects of the demonstrations [ 80,148], and its inference compute cost and absolute
performance scale poorly with the number of shots beyond this low-data regime. There may be
opportunities to combine few-shot learning methods to leverage their complementary benefits. We
discuss the limitations of our work in more depth in Appendix D.1.
Societal impacts. In terms of societal impacts, Flamingo offers a number of benefits while carrying
some risks. Its ability to rapidly adapt to a broad range of tasks have the potential to enable non-expert
users to obtain good performance in data-starved regimes, lowering the barriers to both beneficial
and malicious applications. Flamingo is exposed to the same risks as large language models, such
as outputting offensive language, propagating social biases and stereotypes, as well as leaking
private information [ 42,126]. Its ability to additionally handle visual inputs poses specific risks
such as gender and racial biases relating to the contents of the input images, similar to a number
of visual recognition systems [ 12,21,37,97,147]. We refer the reader to Appendix D.2 for a
more extensive discussion of the societal impacts of our work, both positive and negative; as well
as mitigation strategies and early investigations of risks relating to racial or gender bias and toxic
outputs. Finally we note that, following prior work focusing on language models [ 72,81,111], the
few-shot capabilities of Flamingo could be useful for mitigating such risks.
Conclusion. We proposed Flamingo, a general-purpose family of models that can be applied to image
and video tasks with minimal task-specific training data. We also qualitatively explored interactive
abilities of Flamingo such as “chatting” with the model, demonstrating flexibility beyond traditional
vision benchmarks. Our results suggest that connecting pre-trained large language models with
powerful visual models is an important step towards general-purpose visual understanding.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding. This research was funded by DeepMind. We would
like to thank many colleagues for useful discussions, suggestions, feedback, and advice, including:
Samuel Albanie, Relja Arandjelovi ´c, Kareem Ayoub, Lorrayne Bennett, Adria Recasens Continente,
Tom Eccles, Nando de Freitas, Sander Dieleman, Conor Durkan, Aleksa Gordi ´c, Raia Hadsell,
Will Hawkins, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Felix Hill, Jordan Hoffmann, Geoffrey Irving, Drew Jaegle,
Koray Kavukcuoglu, Agustin Dal Lago, Mateusz Malinowski, So ˇna Mokrá, Gaby Pearl, Toby Pohlen,
Jack Rae, Laurent Sifre, Francis Song, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Gregory Wayne, and Boxi Wu.
10