Vision 
Encoder 
❄Perceiver 
Resampler 1st LM block a very serious cat. Pretrained and frozen ❄ 
Vision 
Encoder 
❄Perceiver 
Resampler 
1st GATED XATTN-DENSE 
Interleaved visual/text data 
          This is a very cute dog.       This is 
Trained from scratch 
n-th GATED XATTN-DENSE n-th LM block ❄ … Output: text 
❄ 
 <image> This is a very cute dog.<image> This is Processed text Figure 3: Flamingo architecture overview. Flamingo is a family of visual language models (VLMs)
that take as input visual data interleaved with text and produce free-form text as output.
mixture of complementary large-scale multimodal data coming only from the web, without using any
data annotated for machine learning purposes . After this training, a Flamingo model can be directly
adapted to vision tasks via simple few-shot learning without any task-specific tuning.
Contributions. In summary, our contributions are the following: (i)We introduce the Flamingo
family of VLMs which can perform various multimodal tasks (such as captioning, visual dialogue,
or visual question-answering) from only a few input/output examples. Thanks to architectural
innovations, the Flamingo models can efficiently accept arbitrarily interleaved visual data and text
as input and generate text in an open-ended manner. (ii)We quantitatively evaluate how Flamingo
models can be adapted to various tasks via few-shot learning. We notably reserve a large set of held-
out benchmarks which have not been used for validation of any design decisions or hyperparameters
of the approach. We use these to estimate unbiased few-shot performance. (iii)Flamingo sets a new
state of the art in few-shot learning on a wide array of 16 multimodal language and image/video
understanding tasks. On 6 of these 16 tasks, Flamingo also outperforms the fine-tuned state of the
art despite using only 32 task-specific examples, around 1000 times less task-specific training data
than the current state of the art. With a larger annotation budget, Flamingo can also be effectively
fine-tuned to set a new state of the art on five additional challenging benchmarks: VQAv2, V ATEX,
VizWiz, MSRVTTQA, and HatefulMemes.
2 Approach
This section describes Flamingo: a visual language model that accepts text interleaved with im-
ages/videos as input and outputs free-form text. The key architectural components shown in Figure 3
are chosen to leverage pretrained vision and language models and bridge them effectively. First,
the Perceiver Resampler (Section 2.1) receives spatio-temporal features from the Vision Encoder
(obtained from either an image or a video) and outputs a fixed number of visual tokens. Second,
these visual tokens are used to condition the frozen LM using freshly initialised cross-attention
layers (Section 2.2) that are interleaved between the pretrained LM layers. These new layers offer
an expressive way for the LM to incorporate visual information for the next-token prediction task.
Flamingo models the likelihood of text 𝑦conditioned on interleaved images and videos 𝑥as follows:
𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) =𝐿∏︁
ℓ=1𝑝(𝑦ℓ|𝑦<ℓ, 𝑥≤ℓ), (1)
where 𝑦ℓis the ℓ-th language token of the input text, 𝑦<ℓis the set of preceding tokens, 𝑥≤ℓis the set
of images/videos preceding token 𝑦ℓin the interleaved sequence and 𝑝is parametrized by a Flamingo
model. The ability to handle interleaved text and visual sequences (Section 2.3) makes it natural
to use Flamingo models for in-context few-shot learning, analogously to GPT-3 with few-shot text
prompting. The model is trained on a diverse mixture of datasets as described in Section 2.4.
4