Flamingo -80B. For brevity, we refer to the last as Flamingo throughout the paper. While increasing
the parameter count of the frozen LM and the trainable vision-text GATED XATTN -DENSE modules,
we maintain a fixed-size frozen vision encoder and trainable Perceiver Resampler across the different
models (small relative to the full model size). See Appendix B.1.1 for further details.
2.3 Multi-visual input support: per-image/video attention masking
The image-causal modelling introduced in Equation (1)is obtained by masking the full text-to-image
cross-attention matrix, limiting which visual tokens the model sees at each text token. At a given text
token, the model attends to the visual tokens of the image that appeared just before it in the interleaved
sequence, rather than to all previous images (formalized and illustrated in Appendix A.1.3). Though
the model only directly attends to a single image at a time, the dependency on all previous images
remains via self-attention in the LM. This single-image cross-attention scheme importantly allows
the model to seamlessly generalise to any number of visual inputs, regardless of how many are
used during training. In particular, we use only up to 5 images per sequence when training on our
interleaved datasets, yet our model is able to benefit from sequences of up to 32 pairs (or “shots”) of
images/videos and corresponding texts during evaluation. We show in Section 3.3 that this scheme is
more effective than allowing the model to cross-attend to all previous images directly.
2.4 Training on a mixture of vision and language datasets
We train the Flamingo models on a mixture of three kinds of datasets, all scraped from the web: an
interleaved image and text dataset derived from webpages, image-text pairs, and video-text pairs.
M3W: Interleaved image and text dataset. The few-shot capabilities of Flamingo models rely on
training on interleaved text and image data. For this purpose, we collect the MultiModal MassiveWeb
(M3W ) dataset. We extract both text and images from the HTML of approximately 43 million
webpages, determining the positions of images relative to the text based on the relative positions of
the text and image elements in the Document Object Model (DOM). An example is then constructed
by inserting <image> tags in plain text at the locations of the images on the page, and inserting a
special<EOC> (end of chunk ) token (added to the vocabulary and learnt) prior to any image and at the
end of the document. From each document, we sample a random subsequence of 𝐿= 256 tokens and
take up to the first 𝑁= 5images included in the sampled sequence. Further images are discarded in
order to save compute. More details are provided in Appendix A.3.
Pairs of image/video and text. For our image and text pairs we first leverage the ALIGN [ 50]
dataset, composed of 1.8 billion images paired with alt-text. To complement this dataset, we collect
our own dataset of image and text pairs targeting better quality and longer descriptions: LTIP (Long
Text & Image Pairs) which consists of 312 million image and text pairs. We also collect a similar
dataset but with videos instead of still images: VTP (Video & Text Pairs) consists of 27 million short
videos (approximately 22 seconds on average) paired with sentence descriptions. We align the syntax
of paired datasets with the syntax of M3W by prepending <image> and appending <EOC> to each
training caption (see Appendix A.3.3 for details).
Multi-objective training and optimisation strategy. We train our models by minimizing a weighted
sum of per-dataset expected negative log-likelihoods of text, given the visual inputs:
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1𝜆𝑚·E(𝑥,𝑦)∼𝒟𝑚[︃
−𝐿∑︁
ℓ=1log𝑝(𝑦ℓ|𝑦<ℓ, 𝑥≤ℓ)]︃
, (2)
where𝒟𝑚and𝜆𝑚are the 𝑚-th dataset and its weighting, respectively. Tuning the per-dataset weights
𝜆𝑚is key to performance. We accumulate gradients over all datasets, which we found outperforms a
“round-robin” approach [17]. We provide further training details and ablations in Appendix B.1.2.
2.5 Task adaptation with few-shot in-context learning
Once Flamingo is trained, we use it to tackle a visual task by conditioning it on a multimodal
interleaved prompt. We evaluate the ability of our models to rapidly adapt to new tasks using in-
context learning , analogously to GPT-3 [ 11], by interleaving support example pairs in the form
of(𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒, 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 )or(𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜, 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 ), followed by the query visual input, to build a prompt (details in
6