Page 4 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
Additionally, AI can reduce the risk of human errors and 
provide more accurate results in less time. In the future, 
AI technology could be used to support medical deci -
sions by providing clinicians with real-time assistance 
and insights. Researchers continue exploring ways to use 
AI in medical diagnosis and treatment, such as analyzing 
medical images, X-rays, CT scans, and MRIs. By leverag -
ing ML techniques, AI can also help identify abnormali -
ties, detect fractures, tumors, or other conditions, and 
provide quantitative measurements for faster and more 
accurate medical diagnosis.
Clinical laboratory testing provides critical informa -
tion for diagnosing, treating, and monitoring diseases. 
It is an essential part of modern healthcare which con -
tinuously incorporates new technology to support clini -
cal decision-making and patient safety [ 20]. AI has the 
potential to transform clinical laboratory testing by 
improving the accuracy, speed, and efficiency of labora -
tory processes. The role of AI in clinical microbiology is 
currently progressing and expanding. Several ML sys -
tems were developed to detect, identify, and quantify 
microorganisms, diagnose and classify diseases, and pre -
dict clinical outcomes. These ML systems used data from 
various sources to build the AI diagnosis such as genomic 
data of microorganisms, gene sequencing, metagenomic 
sequencing results of the original specimen, and micro -
scopic imaging [ 21]. Moreover, gram stain classification 
to gram positives/negatives and cocci/rods is another 
essential application of using deep convolutional neural 
networks that reveal high sensitivity and specificity [ 22]. 
A published systematic review showed that numerous 
MLs were evaluated for microorganism identification 
and antibiotic susceptibility testing; however, several lim -
itations are associated with the current models that must 
be addressed before incorporating them into clinical 
practice [ 23]. For malaria, Taesik et al. found that using 
ML algorithms combined with digital in-line holographic 
microscopy (DIHM) effectively detected malaria-infected 
red blood cells without staining. This AI technology is 
rapid, sensitive, and cost-effective in diagnosing malaria 
[24].
The projected benefits of using AI in clinical laborato -
ries include but are not limited to, increased efficacy and 
precision. Automated techniques in blood cultures, sus -
ceptibility testing, and molecular platforms have become 
standard in numerous laboratories globally, contributing 
significantly to laboratory efficiency [ 21, 25]. Automa -
tion and AI have substantially improved laboratory effi -
ciency in areas like blood cultures, susceptibility testing, 
and molecular platforms. This allows for a result within 
the first 24 to 48  h, facilitating the selection of suitable 
antibiotic treatment for patients with positive blood 
cultures [ 21, 26]. Consequently, incorporating AI in 
clinical microbiology laboratories can assist in choosing appropriate antibiotic treatment regimens, a critical fac -
tor in achieving high cure rates for various infectious dis -
eases [ 21, 26].
ML research in medicine has rapidly expanded, which 
could greatly help the healthcare providers in the emer -
gency department (ED) as they face challenging difficul -
ties from the rising burden of diseases, greater demand 
for time and health services, higher societal expectations, 
and increasing health expenditures [ 27]. Emergency 
department providers understand that integrating AI into 
their work processes is necessary for solving these prob -
lems by enhancing efficiency, and accuracy, and improv -
ing patient outcomes [ 28, 29]. Additionally, there may be 
a chance for algorithm support and automated decision-
making to optimize ED flow measurements and resource 
allocation [ 30]. AI algorithms can analyze patient data to 
assist with triaging patients based on urgency; this helps 
prioritize high-risk cases, reducing waiting times and 
improving patient flow [ 31]. Introducing a reliable symp -
tom assessment tool can rule out other causes of illness 
to reduce the number of unnecessary visits to the ED. A 
series of AI-enabled machines can directly question the 
patient, and a sufficient explanation is provided at the 
end to ensure appropriate assessment and plan.
Moreover, AI-powered decision support systems can 
provide real-time suggestions to healthcare providers, 
aiding diagnosis, and treatment decisions. Patients are 
evaluated in the ED with little information, and physi -
cians frequently must weigh probabilities when risk 
stratifying and making decisions. Faster clinical data 
interpretation is crucial in ED to classify the serious -
ness of the situation and the need for immediate inter -
vention. The risk of misdiagnosing patients is one of 
the most critical problems affecting medical practitio -
ners and healthcare systems. Diagnostic mistakes in the 
healthcare sector can be expensive and fatal. A study 
found that diagnostic errors, particularly in patients who 
visit the ED, directly contribute to a greater mortality 
rate and a more extended hospital stay [ 32]. Fortunately, 
AI can assist in the early detection of patients with life-
threatening diseases and promptly alert clinicians so the 
patients can receive immediate attention. Lastly, AI can 
help optimize health care sources in the ED by predicting 
patient demand, optimizing therapy selection (medica -
tion, dose, route of administration, and urgency of inter -
vention), and suggesting emergency department length 
of stay. By analyzing patient-specific data, AI systems can 
offer insights into optimal therapy selection, improving 
efficiency and reducing overcrowding.
AI in genomic medicine
The fusion of AI and genotype analysis holds immense 
promise in the realms of disease surveillance, prediction, 
and personalized medicine [ 33]. When applied to large