Page 3 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
to detect; this has led to breakthroughs in fields such as 
genomics and drug discovery. AI has been used in health -
care settings to develop diagnostic tools and personalized 
treatment plans. As AI continues to evolve, it is crucial to 
ensure that it is developed responsibly and for the benefit 
of all [ 5–8].
The rapid progression of AI technology presents an 
opportunity for its application in clinical practice, poten -
tially revolutionizing healthcare services. It is impera -
tive to document and disseminate information regarding 
AI’s role in clinical practice, to equip healthcare provid -
ers with the knowledge and tools necessary for effective 
implementation in patient care. This review article aims 
to explore the current state of AI in healthcare, its poten -
tial benefits, limitations, and challenges, and to provide 
insights into its future development. By doing so, this 
review aims to contribute to a better understanding of 
AI’s role in healthcare and facilitate its integration into 
clinical practice.
Materials and methods
Search strategy and inclusion
Indexed databases, including PubMed/Medline (National 
Library of Medicine), Scopus, and EMBASE, were inde -
pendently searched with notime restrictions, but the 
searches were limited to the English language.
Databases search protocol and keywords
In the review article, the authors extensively examined 
the use of AI in healthcare settings. The authors ana -
lyzed various combinations of keywords such as NLP in 
healthcare, ML in healthcare, DL in healthcare, LLM in 
healthcare, AI in personalized medicine, AI in patient 
monitoring, AI ethics in healthcare, predictive analytics 
in healthcare, AI in medical diagnosis, and AI applica -
tions in healthcare. By imposing language restrictions, 
the authors ensured a comprehensive analysis of the 
topic.
Data extraction
Publications were screened through a meticulous review 
of titles and abstracts. Only those that met the specific 
criteria were included. Any disagreements or concerns 
about the literature or methodology were discussed in 
detail among the authors.
AI assistance in diagnostics
Diagnosis accuracy
With all the advances in medicine, effective disease diag -
nosis is still considered a challenge on a global scale. 
The development of early diagnostic tools is an ongo -
ing challenge due to the complexity of the various dis -
ease mechanisms and the underlying symptoms. AI can 
revolutionize different aspects of health care, including diagnosis. ML is an area of AI that uses data as an input 
resource in which the accuracy is highly dependent on 
the quantity as well as the quality of the input data that 
can combat some of the challenges and complexity of 
diagnosis [ 9]. ML, in short, can assist in decision-making, 
manage workflow, and automate tasks in a timely and 
cost-effective manner. Also, deep learning added lay -
ers utilizing Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and 
data mining techniques that help identify data patterns. 
These are highly applicable in identifying key disease 
detection patterns among big datasets. These tools are 
highly applicable in healthcare systems for diagnosing, 
predicting, or classifying diseases [ 10].
AI is still in its early stages of being fully utilized for 
medical diagnosis. However, more data are emerging for 
the application of AI in diagnosing different diseases, 
such as cancer. A study was published in the UK where 
authors input a large dataset of mammograms into an AI 
system for breast cancer diagnosis. This study showed 
that utilizing an AI system to interpret mammograms 
had an absolute reduction in false positives and false neg -
atives by 5.7% and 9.4%, respectively [ 11]. Another study 
was conducted in South Korea, where authors compared 
AI diagnoses of breast cancer versus radiologists. The AI-
utilized diagnosis was more sensitive to diagnose breast 
cancer with mass compared to radiologists, 90% vs. 78%, 
respectively. Also, AI was better at detecting early breast 
cancer (91%) than radiologists 74% [ 12].
Furthermore, a study utilized deep learning to detect 
skin cancer which showed that an AI using CNN accu -
rately diagnosed melanoma cases compared to derma -
tologists and recommended treatment options [ 13, 14]. 
Researchers utilized AI technology in many other dis -
ease states, such as detecting diabetic retinopathy [ 15] 
and EKG abnormality and predicting risk factors for car -
diovascular diseases [ 16, 17]. Furthermore, deep learn -
ing algorithms are used to detect pneumonia from chest 
radiography with sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 
64% compared to radiologists 50% and 73%, respectively 
[18]. Also, a study was done on a dataset of 625 cases 
to diagnose acute appendicitis early to predict the need 
for appendix surgery using various ML techniques; the 
results showed that the random forest algorithm achieved 
the highest performance, accurately predicting appendi -
citis in 83.75% of cases, with a precision of 84.11%, sensi -
tivity of 81.08%, and specificity of 81.01%. The improved 
method aids healthcare specialists in making informed 
decisions for appendicitis diagnoses and treatment. Fur -
thermore, the authors suggest that similar techniques can 
be utilized to analyze images of patients with appendici -
tis or even to detect infections such as COVID-19 using 
blood specimens or images [ 19].
AI tools can improve accuracy, reduce costs, and 
save time compared to traditional diagnostic methods.