Page 7 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
reduce healthcare costs, and enhance the accuracy and 
efficiency of drug dosing. As this technology continues to 
evolve, AI will likely play an increasingly important role 
in the field of TDM.
AI assistance in population health management
Predictive analytics and risk assessment
Population health management increasingly uses predic -
tive analytics to identify and guide health initiatives. In 
data analytics, predictive analytics is a discipline that sig -
nificantly utilizes modeling, data mining, AI, and ML. In 
order to anticipate the future, it analyzes historical and 
current data [ 61, 62]. ML algorithms and other technolo -
gies are used to analyze data and develop predictive mod -
els to improve patient outcomes and reduce costs. One 
area where predictive analytics can be instrumental is in 
identifying patients at risk of developing chronic diseases 
such as endocrine or cardiac diseases. By analyzing data 
such as medical history, demographics, and lifestyle fac -
tors, predictive models can identify patients at higher 
risk of developing these conditions and target interven -
tions to prevent or treat them [ 61]. Predicting hospital 
readmissions is another area where predictive analytics 
can be applied. By analyzing patient demographics, med -
ical history, and social health factors, predictive models 
can identify patients at higher risk of hospital readmis -
sions and target interventions to prevent readmissions 
(Fig.  3) [62–64]; this can help reduce healthcare costs and improve patient outcomes which is the reason behind 
launching new companies such as “Reveal ®” [ 65].
AI can be used to optimize healthcare by improv -
ing the accuracy and efficiency of predictive models. AI 
algorithms can analyze large amounts of data and iden -
tify patterns and relationships that may not be obvious 
to human analysts; this can help improve the accuracy 
of predictive models and ensure that patients receive the 
most appropriate interventions. AI can also automate 
specific public health management tasks, such as patient 
outreach and care coordination [ 61, 62]. Which can help 
reduce healthcare costs and improve patient outcomes 
by ensuring patients receive timely and appropriate care. 
However, it is pivotal to note that the success of predic -
tive analytics in public health management depends 
on the quality of data and the technological infrastruc -
ture used to develop and implement predictive models. 
In addition, human supervision is vital to ensure the 
appropriateness and effectiveness of interventions for at-
risk patients. In summary, predictive analytics plays an 
increasingly important role in population health. Using 
ML algorithms and other technologies, healthcare orga -
nizations can develop predictive models that identify 
patients at risk for chronic disease or readmission to the 
hospital [ 61–64].
Furthermore, AI is needed to address these challenges 
regarding vaccine production and supply chain bottle -
necks. Testing algorithms on real-time vaccine supply 
Fig. 3  Unlocking the Power of Patient Data with AI-Driven Predictive Analytics