Page 8 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
chains can be challenging. To overcome this, investing 
in research and development is essential to create robust 
algorithms that can accurately predict and optimize vac -
cine supply chains. Edge analytics can also detect anoma -
lies and predict Disease X events and associated risks to 
the healthcare system [ 66].
From a Saudi perspective, Sehaa, a big data analytics 
tool in Saudi Arabia, uses Twitter data to detect diseases, 
and it found that dermal diseases, heart diseases, hyper -
tension, cancer, and diabetes are the top five diseases in 
the country [ 67]. Riyadh has the highest awareness-to-
afflicted ratio for six of the fourteen diseases detected, 
while Taif is the healthiest city with the lowest number of 
disease cases and a high number of awareness activities. 
These findings highlight the potential of predictive ana -
lytics in population health management and the need for 
targeted interventions to prevent and treat chronic dis -
eases in Saudi Arabia [ 67]. AI can optimize health care by 
improving the accuracy and efficiency of predictive mod -
els and automating certain tasks in population health 
management [ 62]. However, successfully implementing 
predictive analytics requires high-quality data, advanced 
technology, and human oversight to ensure appropriate 
and effective interventions for patients.
Establishment of working groups, guidelines, and 
frameworks
AI is transforming how guidelines are established in vari -
ous fields. In healthcare, guidelines usually take much 
time, from establishing the knowledge gap that needs to 
be fulfilled to publishing and disseminating these guide -
lines. AI can help identify newly published data based on 
data from clinical trials and real-world patient outcomes 
within the same area of interest which can then facili -
tate the first stage of mining information. Then, under 
the supervision of scientists and experts in the field, AI 
algorithms can analyze vast amounts of data to identify 
patterns and trends that can inform the development of 
evidence-based guidelines in real-time, which allows for 
a fast exchange of information with essential supervision 
clinicians for its clinical and ethical implications [ 68–73].
Several professional organizations have developed 
frameworks for addressing concerns unique to develop -
ing, reporting, and validating AI in medicine [ 69–73]. 
Instead of focusing on the clinical application of AI, 
these frameworks are more concerned with educating 
the technological creators of AI by providing instruc -
tions on encouraging transparency in the design and 
reporting of AI algorithms [ 69]. Additionally, regulatory 
regulation of AI is still in its infancy. The US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) is now developing guide -
lines on critically assessing real-world applications of AI 
in medicine while publishing a framework to guide the 
role of AI and ML in software as medical devices [ 74]. The European Commission has spearheaded a multidis -
ciplinary effort to improve the credibility of AI [ 75], and 
the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has deemed 
the regulation of AI a strategic priority [ 76]. These leg -
islative efforts are meant to shape the healthcare future 
to be better equipped to be a technology-driven sector. 
Overall, the role of AI in establishing guidelines is to pro -
vide data-driven insights and recommendations based 
on vast amounts of information, which can lead to more 
efficient and effective decision-making, better outcomes, 
and reduced costs. However, it is crucial to ensure that 
AI-based guidelines are transparent, fair, unbiased, and 
informed by human expertise and ethical considerations 
[68].
AI in drug information and consultation
AI would propose a new support system to assist prac -
tical decision-making tools for healthcare providers. 
In recent years, healthcare institutions have provided 
a greater leveraging capacity of utilizing automation-
enabled technologies to boost workflow effectiveness and 
reduce costs while promoting patient safety, accuracy, 
and efficiency [ 77]. By introducing advanced technolo -
gies like NLP , ML, and data analytics, AI can significantly 
provide real-time, accurate, and up-to-date informa -
tion for practitioners at the hospital. According to the 
McKinsey Global Institute, ML and AI in the pharma -
ceutical sector have the potential to contribute approxi -
mately $100 billion annually to the US healthcare system 
[78]. Researchers claim that these technologies enhance 
decision-making, maximize creativity, increase the effec -
tiveness of research and clinical trials, and produce new 
tools that benefit healthcare providers, patients, insurers, 
and regulators [ 78]. AI enables quick and comprehen -
sive retrieval of drug-related information from differ -
ent resources through its ability to analyze the current 
medical literature, drug databases, and clinical guidelines 
to provide accurate and evidence-based decisions for 
healthcare providers. Using automated response systems, 
AI-powered virtual assistants can handle common ques -
tions and provide detailed medical information to health -
care providers [ 79]. AI-powered chatbots help reduce the 
workload on healthcare providers, allowing them to focus 
on more complicated cases that require their expertise. 
Also, AI algorithms can generate specific recommen -
dations for individual patients, considering factors like 
health conditions, past medical and medication history, 
and social/lifestyle preferences, allowing healthcare pro -
fessionals to optimize medication choices and dosages 
[80, 81].