Page 10 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
feedback and encouragement, and answer their ques -
tions [ 102]. AI technology can also be applied to rewrite 
patient education materials into different reading lev -
els. This suggests that AI can empower patients to take 
greater control of their health by ensuring that patients 
can understand their diagnosis, treatment options, and 
self-care instructions [ 103]. However, there are also some 
challenges and limitations that need to be addressed, 
such as ensuring the accuracy, reliability, and transpar -
ency of the information provided by AI, respecting the 
privacy and confidentiality of the patients’ data, and 
maintaining a human touch and empathy in the commu -
nication [ 104]. The use of AI in patient education is still 
in its early stages, but it has the potential to revolutionize 
the way that patients learn about their health. As AI tech -
nology continues to develop, we can expect to see even 
more innovative and effective ways to use AI to educate 
patients.
Are individuals more inclined towards AI than human 
healthcare providers
Public perception of the benefits and risks of AI in 
healthcare systems is a crucial factor in determining 
its adoption and integration. People’s feelings about AI 
replacing or augmenting human healthcare practitio -
ners, its role in educating and empowering patients, and 
its impact on the quality and efficiency of care, as well as 
on the well-being of healthcare workers, are all important 
considerations. In medicine, patients often trust medical 
staff unconditionally and believe that their illness will be 
cured due to a medical phenomenon known as the pla -
cebo effect. In other words, patient-physician trust is vital 
in improving patient care and the effectiveness of their 
treatment [ 105]. For the relationship between patients 
and an AI-based healthcare delivery system to succeed, 
building a relationship based on trust is imperative [ 106].
Research on whether people prefer AI over healthcare 
practitioners has shown mixed results depending on the 
context, type of AI system, and participants’ characteris -
tics [ 107, 108]. Some surveys have indicated that people 
are generally willing to use or interact with AI for health-
related purposes such as diagnosis, treatment, moni -
toring, or decision support [ 108–110]. However, other 
studies have suggested that people still prefer human 
healthcare practitioners over AI, especially for complex 
or sensitive issues such as mental health, chronic dis -
eases, or end-of-life care [ 108, 111]. In a US-based study, 
60% of participants expressed discomfort with providers 
relying on AI for their medical care. However, the same 
study found that 80% of Americans would be willing to 
use AI-powered tools to help manage their health [ 109]. 
In another survey, responders’ comfort with AI varied 
based on clinical application, and most patients felt that 
AI would improve their healthcare, which suggests that people are generally willing to use AI for healthcare-
related purposes and that patient education, concerns, 
and comfort levels should be accounted for when plan -
ning for integration of AI [ 110]. Moreover, people’s trust 
and acceptance of AI may vary depending on their age, 
gender, education level, cultural background, and previ -
ous experience with technology [ 111, 112].
Future directions and considerations for clinical 
implementation
Obstacles and solutions
AI has the potential to revolutionize clinical practice, but 
several challenges must be addressed to realize its full 
potential. Among these challenges is the lack of quality 
medical data, which can lead to inaccurate outcomes. 
Data privacy, availability, and security are also potential 
limitations to applying AI in clinical practice. Addition -
ally, determining relevant clinical metrics and selecting 
an appropriate methodology is crucial to achieving the 
desired outcomes. Human contribution to the design 
and application of AI tools is subject to bias and could 
be amplified by AI if not closely monitored [ 113]. The 
AI-generated data and/or analysis could be realistic 
and convincing; however, hallucination could also be a 
major issue which is the tendency to fabricate and cre -
ate false information that cannot be supported by exist -
ing evidence [ 114]. This can be particularly problematic 
regarding sensitive areas such as patient care. Thus, the 
development of AI tools has implications for current 
health professions education, highlighting the necessity 
of recognizing human fallibility in areas including clini -
cal reasoning and evidence-based medicine [ 115]. Finally, 
human expertise and involvement are essential to ensure 
the appropriate and practical application of AI to meet 
clinical needs and the lack of this expertise could be a 
drawback for the practical application of AI.
Addressing these challenges and providing construc -
tive solutions will require a multidisciplinary approach, 
innovative data annotation methods, and the develop -
ment of more rigorous AI techniques and models. Cre -
ating practical, usable, and successfully implemented 
technology would be possible by ensuring appropriate 
cooperation between computer scientists and healthcare 
providers. By merging current best practices for ethical 
inclusivity, software development, implementation sci -
ence, and human-computer interaction, the AI commu -
nity will have the opportunity to create an integrated best 
practice framework for implementation and maintenance 
[116]. Additionally, a collaboration between multiple 
health care settings is required to share data and ensure 
its quality, as well as verify analyzed outcomes which 
will be critical to the success of AI in clinical practice. 
Another suggestion is to provide appropriate training 
and education that starts from the undergraduate level of