Page 9 of 15
Alowais et al. BMC Medical Education           (2023) 23:689 
AI-powered patient care
AI virtual healthcare assistance
With continuously increasing demands of health care 
services and limited resources worldwide, finding solu -
tions to overcome these challenges is essential [ 82]. 
Virtual health assistants are a new and innovative tech -
nology transforming the healthcare industry to sup -
port healthcare professionals. It is designed to simulate 
human conversation to offer personalized patient care 
based on input from the patient [ 83]. These digital assis -
tants use AI-powered applications, chatbots, sounds, and 
interfaces. Virtual assistants can help patients with tasks 
such as identifying the underlying problem based on the 
patient’s symptoms, providing medical advice, remind -
ing patients to take their medications, scheduling doctor 
appointments, and monitoring vital signs. In addition, 
digital assistants can collect information daily regarding 
patients’ health and forward the reports to the assigned 
physician. By taking off some of these responsibilities 
from human healthcare providers, virtual assistants 
can help to reduce their workload and improve patient 
outcomes.
Furthermore, these tools can always be available, 
making it easier for patients to access healthcare when 
needed [ 84]. Another medical service that an AI-driven 
phone application can provide is triaging patients and 
finding out how urgent their problem is, based on the 
entered symptoms into the app. The National Health 
Service (NHS) has tested this app in north London, and 
now about 1.2 million people are using this AI chatbot to 
answer their questions instead of calling the NHS non-
emergency number [ 85]. In addition, introducing intel -
ligent speakers into the market has a significant benefit 
in the lives of elderly and chronically ill patients who are 
unable to use smartphone apps efficiently [ 86]. Overall, 
virtual health assistants have the potential to significantly 
improve the quality, efficiency, and cost of healthcare 
delivery while also increasing patient engagement and 
providing a better experience for them.
AI mental health support
AI has the potential to revolutionize mental health sup -
port by providing personalized and accessible care to 
individuals [ 87, 88]. Several studies showed the effec -
tiveness and accessibility of using Web-based or Inter -
net-based cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) as a 
psychotherapeutic intervention [ 89, 90]. Even though 
psychiatric practitioners rely on direct interaction and 
behavioral observation of the patient in clinical prac -
tice compared to other practitioners, AI-powered tools 
can supplement their work in several ways. AI-powered 
mental health applications can assist in the early detec -
tion and diagnosis of mental health conditions, as well 
as provide tailored treatment and support [ 88–91] These applications can also offer round-the-clock sup -
port, reducing the need for in-person appointments and 
wait times. Furthermore, these digital tools can be used 
to monitor patient progress and medication adherence, 
providing valuable insights into treatments’ effectiveness 
[88].
The current published studies addressing the appli -
cability of AI in mental health concluded that depres -
sion is the most commonly investigated mental disorder 
[88]. Moreover, AI-powered apps prove their benefits 
in patients with substance use disorder. A recent study 
evaluated the utility of a mental health digital app called 
Woebot in patients with substance use disorders. This 
study found that using Woebot was significantly associ -
ated with improved substance use, cravings, depression, 
and anxiety [ 92]. While AI-powered mental health diag -
nosis holds promise, some significant limitations must be 
addressed. One of the main limitations is the risk of bias 
in the data and algorithms used in AI-powered diagnosis. 
If the data used to train AI algorithms does not represent 
diverse populations, it can lead to biased and inaccurate 
results. Additionally, AI-powered diagnosis may not take 
into account the complexity of mental health conditions, 
which can present differently in different people. Finally, 
there is a risk that AI-powered diagnosis may lead to a 
lack of personalization and empathy in mental health 
care, which is an important aspect of successful treat -
ment [ 93]. Therefore, while AI-powered diagnosis can be 
a valuable tool in mental health care, it should be used 
as a supplement to, rather than a replacement for, profes -
sional diagnosis and treatment.
AI in enhancing patient education and mitigating 
healthcare provider burnout
One of the emerging applications of AI is patient educa -
tion [ 94]. AI-powered chatbots are being implemented 
in various healthcare contexts, such as diet recom -
mendations [ 95, 96], smoking cessation, and cognitive-
behavioral therapy [ 97]. Patient education is integral to 
healthcare, as it enables individuals to understand their 
medical diagnosis, treatment options, and preventa -
tive measures [ 98]. Informed patients are more likely to 
adhere to their treatment regimens and achieve better 
health outcomes [ 99]. AI has the potential to play a sig -
nificant role in patient education by providing personal -
ized and interactive information and guidance to patients 
and their caregivers [ 100]. For example, in patients with 
prostate cancer, introducing a prostate cancer com -
munication assistant (PROSCA) chatbot offered a clear 
to moderate increase in participants’ knowledge about 
prostate cancer [ 101]. Researchers found that ChatGPT, 
an AI Chatbot founded by OpenAI, can help patients 
with diabetes understand their diagnosis and treatment 
options, monitor their symptoms and adherence, provide