Neuroevolution-Based Generation of Tests and Oracles for Games
Patric Feldmeier
University of Passau
GermanyGordon Fraser
University of Passau
Germany
ABSTRACT
Game-like programs have become increasingly popular in many
software engineering domains such as mobile apps, web appli-
cations, or programming education. However, creating tests for
programs that have the purpose of challenging human players is a
daunting task for automatic test generators. Even if test generation
succeeds in finding a relevant sequence of events to exercise a pro-
gram, the randomized nature of games means that it may neither
be possible to reproduce the exact program behavior underlying
this sequence, nor to create test assertions checking if observed
randomized game behavior is correct. To overcome these problems,
we propose Neatest , a novel test generator based on the Neu-
roEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) algorithm. Neatest
systematically explores a program’s statements, and creates neural
networks that operate the program in order to reliably reach each
statement—that is, Neatest learns to play the game in a way to
reliably cover different parts of the code. As the networks learn the
actual game behavior, they can also serve as test oracles by evaluat-
ing how surprising the observed behavior of a program under test
is compared to a supposedly correct version of the program. We
evaluate this approach in the context of Scratch , an educational
programming environment. Our empirical study on 25 non-trivial
Scratch games demonstrates that our approach can successfully
train neural networks that are not only far more resilient to ran-
dom influences than traditional test suites consisting of static input
sequences, but are also highly effective with an average mutation
score of more than 65%.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and debug-
ging ;•Computing methodologies →Reinforcement learning .
KEYWORDS
Neuroevolution, Game Testing, Automated Testing, Scratch
ACM Reference Format:
Patric Feldmeier and Gordon Fraser. 2022. Neuroevolution-Based Genera-
tion of Tests and Oracles for Games. In 37th IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’22), October 10–14, 2022,
Rochester, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3551349.3556939
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9475-8/22/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3556939
(a) FruitCatching example game.
PunkteH18Right Left
BH21Wait
Apple
XH20
Apple
YApple
DirApple
SizeAppleBowl
DistXAppleBowl
DistYBowl
XH19
Bowl
YBowl
DirBowl
Size
(b) Example of an optimized network with excluded regression head.
The width and brightness of connections represent their impor-
tance.
Figure 1: FruitCatching game and corresponding neural net-
work that is capable of winning the game.
1 INTRODUCTION
Game-like programs allow players to interact with them using spe-
cific input actions, and challenge them to solve dedicated tasks
while enforcing a set of rules. Once a player successfully completes
the task of a game, the game usually notifies the player of his/her
victory, leading to an advanced program state ( winning state ). Nowa-
days, game-like programs can be found in many software engineer-
ing domains. For example, the most common category of mobile
apps in Google’s Playstore1as well as in Apple’s App Store2are
games by far, and games are equally common in web and desk-
top applications. Programming education is also heavily reliant on
learners building game-like programs in order to engage them with
the challenges of programming. Fig. 1a shows the FruitCatching
game, a typical program created by young learners of the Scratch
programming language [ 39]: The player has to control a bowl at
1[August 2022] https://www.statista.com/statistics/279286/google-play-android-app-
categories/
2[August 2022] https://www.businessofapps.com/data/app-stores/arXiv:2208.13632v1  [cs.SE]  29 Aug 2022