ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor Patric Feldmeier and Gordon Fraser
•ClickStage : Clicks on the stage.
•TypeText : Types text using the keyboard.
•MouseMove : Moves the mouse to a parameterized position.
•MouseMoveTo : Moves the mouse to a position inferred by
static analysis (e.g., location of another sprite).
•MouseDown : Presses the left mouse button for a parame-
terized amount of time.
•Sound : Sends simulated sound to the program.
•Wait : Waits for a parameterized amount of time.
Neatest analyzes the source code of all actively running scripts for
a given program state in order to select the subset of event types
for which active event handlers exist. After minimizing the set of
event types, we create one output node for each remaining event.
In case there are parameterized events, such as MouseMove events
requiring coordinates where the mouse pointer should be moved to,
the classification problem is further extended to a combination of a
classification and regression problem. These parameters are pro-
duced via a multi-headed network model [ 27] in which regression
nodes are mapped to parameterized events. Similar to input fea-
tures, the set of feasible output features and the number of required
output nodes may change throughout the course of a game.
3.2.2 Network Activation & Event Selection. The problem of de-
ciding which action to take at the current state of a game is cast
to a multi-class single-label classification problem. Classification
steps start by loading the input features of the current program
state into the corresponding input nodes. Then, the neural net-
work is activated in order to produce an output based on the fed
input features. During network activation, values residing in the
input nodes flow through the network in several timesteps. In ev-
ery timestep, each node adds up all the activation values from the
previous timestep and calculates the result of its own activation
using the tanh function [26] on the summed-up values.
To not perturb values gathered during feature extraction , all input
nodes send the normalized input features directly into the network
without activation functions. In a single timestep, activation only
flows from one neuron to the next, thus several network activations
are required for the input nodes’ signals to reach the output nodes.
After the input signal has reached the output nodes, a probability
distribution is calculated over the set of available events using the
traditional softmax function [15]. The classification task is extended
into a regression problem whenever a network selects a parame-
terized event. Parameters for the selected event are gathered by
querying the responsible nodes in the network’s regression head.
Selected events are passed on to the Scratch VM, where they
may trigger the activation of previously inactive scripts. Upon
receiving an input event, the Scratch VM executes a Scratch step
by sequentially executing blocks of currently active scripts until
either a block that halts the program execution or the end of the
script are reached. The Scratch step finishes by updating the state
of the VM to match the effects of the executed blocks. The playing
loop then starts anew by extracting the input and output features
of the updated VM.
3.3 Network Evaluation
Given a selected target statement 𝑠𝑡, the evolution of networks is
guided by a fitness function 𝑓which estimates how close a networkis to reaching 𝑠𝑡and, once reached, how reliably it is executed. We
first calculate the objective function 𝑓𝑠𝑡[11] that guides the search
towards reaching 𝑠𝑡using a linear combination of:
•Approach level (AL) : Integer defining the number of con-
trol dependencies between the immediate control depen-
dency of the target and the closest covered statement.
•Branch distance (BD) : Indicates how close a network is to
satisfying the first missed control dependency. Zero if the
control location has been passed towards the target state-
ment. Scratch often allows for a precise definition of the
branch distance. For example, in Fig. 3b, the branch distance
for the if:touching statement is defined as the normalized
distance between the corresponding sprites.
•Control flow distance (CFD) : As execution may stop in
the middle of a sequence of blocks (e.g., because of timed
statements), the CFG counts the number of blocks between
the targeted statement and the nearest covered statement.
To avoid deceiving fitness landscapes, we normalize the branch
distance and the control flow distance in the range [0, 1] using
the normalization function 𝛼(𝑥)=𝑥/(1+𝑥)[2], and multiply the
approach level with a factor of two:
𝑓𝑠𝑡=2×𝐴𝐿+𝛼(𝐵𝐷)+𝛼(𝐶𝐹𝐷)
In case𝑓𝑠𝑡>0, the target statement was not covered and we set
the fitness to 𝑓=1/𝑓𝑠𝑡to create a maximization objective towards
covering𝑠𝑡. Otherwise ( 𝑓𝑠𝑡=0), the network managed to cover
the target once and we evaluate whether it can also cover the
same target in randomized program scenarios. For this purpose, we
generate up to 𝑟𝑑−1random seeds, count for how many seeded
executions𝑟𝑐the network is able to reach the target statement again,
and finally set the fitness function to 𝑓=1+𝑟𝑐. We decrement the
desired robustness count 𝑟𝑑and increment the fitness value 𝑓by
one to account for the first time 𝑠𝑡was covered due to 𝑓𝑠𝑡=0.
The fitness function ensures that networks that are closer or
more robust in covering a specific statement are prioritized during
the evolution. If a network eventually passes the robustness check
(𝑓=𝑟𝑑), the network is added to the dynamic test suite as test
for target statement 𝑠𝑡and the next target is selected by querying
the CDG as described in Section 3.1. Since covering one statement
usually leads to reaching other related statements as well, we si-
multaneously evaluate whether the network may also satisfy the
robustness check for other yet uncovered program statements.
3.4 Neural Networks as Test Oracles
In order to determine whether a test subject is erroneous, we ob-
serve how surprised a network behaves when confronted with the
program under test and regard highly surprising observations as
suspicious. As a metric, we use the Likelihood-based Surprise Ad-
equacy (LSA) [ 30], which uses kernel density estimation [ 65] to
determine how surprising the activations of selected neurons are
when the network is presented with novel inputs. In the application
scenario of regression testing, node activations originating from
a supposedly correct program version serve as the ground truth
and will be compared to activations occurring during the execu-
tion of the test subject. To incorporate many randomized program
scenarios, we collect the ground truth activations by executing the
networks on the sample program using a series of different random