ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor Patric Feldmeier and Gordon Fraser
approach randomly selects input events from a subset of process-
able events and saves the chosen events as static test cases. Neatest
maintains a population of 300 networks, and both methods generate
tests until a search budget of 23 hours has been exhausted.
The combination of 300 networks per population and the search
budget of 23 hours allows the framework to conduct a reasonable
amount of evolutionary operations in order to sufficiently explore
the search space of the most challenging test subjects in the dataset.
However, for some test subjects, satisfying results may already be
found using a population size of 100 and a search budget of only
one hour. In general, the easier a winning state can be reached and
the fewer control dependencies a Scratch program has, the fewer
resources are required.
We set the number of non-improving generations after which
a target is switched to five because this value provides the evolu-
tion enough time to explore the search space while also avoiding
wasting too much time on difficult program states. To distribute
the 300 networks of a population across the species such that each
species can meaningfully evolve the weights of its networks, we
set the targeted species number to ten. For both test generators,
the maximum time for a single playthrough was set to ten sec-
onds, which translates to a play duration of up to 100 seconds due
to the acceleration factor of ten. The remaining neuroevolution
hyperparameters are set according to the original NEAT study [ 61].
As a metric of comparison, we consider coverage values across
30 experiment repetitions with the Vargha & Delaney (ˆ𝐴12) effect
size [ 64] and the Mann-Whitney-U-test [40] with𝛼=0.05to de-
termine statistical significance. To evaluate whether Neatest can
train networks to reach challenging program states, we manually
identified statements representing a winning state for each pro-
gram and report how often this winning state was reached within
the 30 experiment repetitions. Since we are interested in tests that
are robust against randomized program behavior, we treat a state-
ment only as covered if a given test passes the robustness check
(Section 3.3) for ten randomly seeded program executions.
RQ2. In order to explore if the generated dynamic test suites are
truly robust against diverging program behavior, we randomly
extract for each program ten dynamic and static test suites that were
produced during RQ1. For the purpose of eliminating differences
originating from the test generation process, both test suite types
are extracted from the Neatest approach. The static test suites
correspond to the input sequences successful networks produced
when they entered the robustness check. All extracted test suites are
then executed on the corresponding programs using seeds different
from those during the test generation phase.
We evaluate the robustness of both test suite types by reporting
the difference in coverage between the test generation and test
execution phase and investigate the effectiveness of dynamic test
suites against static test suites by comparing the achieved coverage
and ˆ𝐴12values. Similar to RQ1, we use the Mann-Whitney-U-test
to report statistically significant results. To match the application
scenario of test suites, we do not use robustness checks and treat a
statement as covered if it has been reached at least once. Within RQ2,
we compensate for random influences by applying every extracted
test suite to ten new random seeds, which results in 100 test runs
for each test suite type on every dataset project.Table 2: Mutation operators.
Operator Description
Key Replacement Mutation (KRM) Replaces a block’s keylistener.
Single Block Deletion (SBD) Removes a single block.
Script Deletion Mutation (SDM) Deletes all blocks of a given script.
Arithmetic Operator Replacement (AOR) Replaces an arithmetic operator.
Logical Operator Replacement (LOR) Replaces a logical operator.
Relational Operator Replacement (ROR) Replaces a relational operator.
Negate Conditional Mutation (NCM) Negates boolean blocks.
Variable Replacement Mutation (VRM) Replaces a variable.
RQ3. To answer the question if networks can serve as test oracles,
we extended Whisker with a mutation analysis feature implement-
ing the eight different mutation operators shown in Table 2, and
applied mutation analysis to all 25 projects. These mutation opera-
tors were selected based on the traditional set of sufficient mutation
operators [ 44]. After generating mutant programs, we execute the
dynamic test suites of RQ2 on the respective mutants and measure
how surprised the networks are by the modified programs. The
ground truth activation traces required for calculating the LSA are
generated by executing each test suite 100 times on the unmodified
program using randomly generated seeds. A program is marked
as mutant if the LSA value of a single node activation surpasses
an experimentally defined threshold of 30. Besides calculating the
LSA value, mutants are also killed if the network structure changes
while being executed on the mutant.
We answer RQ3 by reporting the distribution of killed mutants
across the eight applied operators. Furthermore, we verify that
the networks do not simply mark every program as a mutant by
calculating the false-positive rate on unmodified programs. Similar
to RQ2, we account for randomness within the mutant generation
and network execution process by repeating the experiment for
all extracted test suites ten times using varying seeds. To avoid an
explosion of program variations, each experiment repetition was
restricted to 50 randomly selected mutants per operator.
4.3 Threats to Validity
External Validity: The dataset of 25 projects covers a broad range
of game types and program complexities. Even though high prior-
ity was given to establish a dataset of games with many different
objectives and ways to interact with them, we cannot guarantee
that the results generalize well to other Scratch applications or
games developed in different programming languages.
Internal Validity: Randomized factors within the experiments
pose another threat to validity since repeated executions of the same
experiments will, by definition, lead to slightly different outcomes.
However, we expect 30 experiment repetitions for RQ1 and 100 test
results for each project in RQ2 and RQ3 to suffice for assuming
robust experiment results. The threshold that determines at which
surprise value a program is marked as a mutant was determined
experimentally and may not work well for other programs.
Construct Validity: For evaluating the effectiveness of Neatest
in generating robust test suites, we used block coverage which is
similar to statement coverage in text-based programming languages.
However, coverage is not always a good indicator because Scratch
programs may often already be covered by sending arbitrary inputs