ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor Patric Feldmeier and Gordon Fraser
Testing and dynamic analyses are important for Scratch pro-
grams: Even though the Scratch blocks ensure syntactic correct-
ness, functional errors are still feasible, raising the need for tests to
validate the desired behavior of programs. In particular, tests are a
prerequisite for effective feedback [ 6,23,28,70] and hints [ 29] to
learners, as well as for automated assessment [ 1,25].Whisker [58]
is a framework that automates testing of Scratch programs by
sending inputs to Scratch programs and comparing the system’s
observed behavior against a predefined specification.
In order to discover as many system states as possible and thereby
enhance the chances of finding violated properties, it is crucial to
have a widespread set of test inputs. The Scratch inputs used to
stimulate the given program under test are assembled in the so-
called test harness .Whisker offers two types of test harnesses: a
manually written test harness and an automatically generated test
harness using search-based test generation approaches [11].
Conventional search-based test generation is often not powerful
enough to cover advanced program states, especially in game-like
projects [ 11]. In order to increase the effectiveness of automatic
test generation, we introduce a novel test generation approach by
extending the Whisker testing tool. The proposed test generator
uses neuroevolution to produce neural networks that are capable
of extensively exercising game-like programs.
3 TESTING WITH NEUROEVOLUTION
Traditional tests of static input sequences cannot react to deviating
program behavior properly and therefore fail to test randomized
programs reliably. As a robust alternative to static test suites, we
introduce Neatest , an extension of the Whisker test generation
framework [ 58] that is based on the NEAT [ 61] algorithm. Neatest
generates dynamic test suites consisting of neural networks that
are able to withstand and check randomized program behavior.
Algorithm 1 shows the test generation approach of Neatest ,
which starts in line 5 with the selection of a target statement 𝑠𝑡
based on the CDG and a list of yet uncovered program statements
(Section 3.1). Next, a new population of networks is created depend-
ing on the search progress: If no statements have been covered
yet, the first population consists of networks where each sprite’s
feature group (Section 3.2.1) is fully connected to a single hidden
node that is connected to all output nodes. Otherwise, a new popu-
lation is produced by cloning and mutating networks that proved
to be viable solutions for previously targeted statements. By se-
lecting prior solutions, we focus on networks already capable of
reaching interesting program states, which may be prerequisites for
reaching more advanced states. To avoid unnecessary complex net-
work structures, a certain share (e.g., 10%) of every new population
consists of freshly generated networks. We require hidden layer
neurons to determine the correctness of a program (Section 3.4).
The following loop over all networks in line 9 starts with the play
loop in which a network simulates a human player by repeatedly
sending input events to a given Scratch program (Section 3.2.2).
The inputs for the networks are extracted from the current state
of the program, while the possible outputs are determined by the
actions a player can take in the game (Section 3.2.1).
After a network has finished its playthrough, lines 11 to 16 evalu-
ate how reliably the network can cover the current target statementAlgorithm 1: Neatest
input : control dependence graph 𝐶𝐷𝐺
input : list of uncovered program statements 𝑆
input : desired robustness count 𝑟𝑑
output: dynamic test suite 𝐷
1function Neatest (𝐶𝐷𝐺 ,𝑆,𝑟𝑑):
2𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ←𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒;
3 while stopping condition not reached do
4 if𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 then
5 𝑠𝑡←selectTargetStatement( 𝐶𝐷𝐺 ,𝑆);
6 𝑃←generatePopulation( 𝐷);
7 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ←𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 ;
8 end
9 foreach network𝑛∈𝑃do
10 initiatePlayLoop( 𝑛);
11 𝑓←calculateFitness( 𝑛);
12 if𝑓==1then // Statement was covered
13 𝑟𝑐←robustnessCheck( 𝑛,𝑟𝑑);
14 𝑓←𝑓+𝑟𝑐
15 end
16 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘.𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠←𝑓;
17 if𝑓==𝑟𝑑then
18 𝐷←𝐷+𝑛;
19 𝑆𝑢←𝑆𝑢−𝑠𝑡;
20 𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ←𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒
21 end
22 end
23 if!𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑁𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 then
24 𝑃←NEAT(𝑃);
25 end
26 end
27 return𝐷
28end
𝑠𝑡(Section 3.3). If no network manages to cover 𝑠𝑡with sufficient
robustness (line 17), the algorithm executes line 24 and evolves a
new generation of networks using the NEAT algorithm (Section 2.2).
This new generation is then the starting point for the next iteration
of the algorithm. Once a network has been optimized to cover 𝑠𝑡
reliably for a user-defined number of times 𝑟𝑑, the network is added
as a test to the dynamic test suite, and the next target statement
is selected (lines 18–20). This process is repeated until the search
budget is exhausted or all statements have been covered, and the dy-
namic test suite is returned to the user. The dynamic tests serve not
only to exercise the programs, but also as test oracles for validating
the functionality in a regression testing scenario (Section 3.4).
3.1 Explorative Target Statement Selection
Neatest iteratively selects increasingly more difficult target state-
ments to guide the creation of incrementally more complex net-
works. In order to achieve this, targets are selected from the test
program’s control dependence graph (CDG) [ 9], a directed graph
that shows which program statements depend on which control