ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor Patric Feldmeier and Gordon Fraser
the bottom of the screen using the cursor keys to catch as much
dropping fruit with the bowl as possible within a given time limit.
Games are intentionally designed to be challenging for human
players in order to keep them hooked and entertained. Unfortu-
nately, precisely this aspect also makes game-like programs very
difficult to test, and classical approaches to automated test genera-
tion will struggle to interact with games in a successful way [ 11]. In
Fig. 1a, a test generator would need to successfully catch all apples
for 30 seconds without dropping a single one in order to win the
game and reach the winning state.
While winning the game is out of question for a traditional auto-
mated test generator, it may nevertheless succeed in producing tests
for partial aspects of a game, such as catching an individual banana
or apple for the game shown in Fig. 1a. Such tests typically consist
of static, timed input sequences that are sent to the program under
test to reproduce a certain program execution path. This causes a
problem: Games are inherently randomized, and playing the same
game twice in a row may lead to entirely different scenarios. It may
be possible to instrument the test execution environment such that
the underlying random number generator produces a deterministic
sequence [ 38]. The Whisker [58] test framework for Scratch , for
example, allows setting the random number generator to a fixed
seed, such that the fruit in Fig. 1a always appears at the same loca-
tion in the same program. However, even the slightest change to the
program may affect the order in which the random number genera-
tor is queried, thus potentially invalidating the test. For example, if
the banana sprite is removed from the game in Fig. 1a, even though
the code of the apple sprite is unchanged the position at which the
apple spawns changes, as the order in which the random numbers
are consumed in the program is different, and as a result a test
intended to catch the apple sprite would likely drop the apple. Even
if by chance the test would succeed in catching the apple despite
the randomness, the exact program state would likely be different,
and an assertion on the exact position of the apple or bowl in Fig. 1a
would fail, rendering the use of classical test assertions impossible.
To tackle the test generation and oracle problem for game-like
programs, we propose the use of neural networks as dynamic tests.
For instance, Fig. 1b shows a network structure adapted to reaching
code related to winning the FruitCatching game (Fig. 1a). It uses
aspects of the program state such as sprite positions as input fea-
tures, and suggests one of the possible ways to interact with the
program. The architecture of this example network puts strong
emphasis on the horizontal distance between the bowl and the
apple which reflects that catching apples rather than bananas is
necessary to win the game, and indeed the network is able to win
theFruitCatching game by catching all apples for 30s. In contrast to
conventional test suites consisting of static input sequences, such
dynamic tests are capable of reacting to previously unseen program
states, which is particularly useful for game-like programs that are
heavily randomized. The same dynamic tests can also serve as test
oracles in a regression testing scenario by comparing node activa-
tions of a supposedly correct program version against a modified
one. For instance, Fig. 2 shows the activation distribution of node
H20 from Fig. 1b at time-step 50 when executed 100 times on a
correct version of FruitCatching . Since the most influential input
of node H20is the horizontal distance between the bowl and the
apple, the network’s effort to catch the fruit can clearly be observed
0.8
 0.6
 0.4
 0.2
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Node Activation Values0123Density
Incorrect ProgramFigure 2: Activation distribution of node H20from Fig. 1b at
time-step 50 after 100 FruitCatching execution. Orange dots
correspond to activations from two faulty program versions.
from the high density around the node activation of zero. The two
example incorrect program versions (mutants) depicted as orange
dots disallow the player to move to the left or right, respectively,
resulting in suspicious activation values that will be reported as
invalid program behavior.
In this paper we introduce Neatest , an approach that imple-
ments this idea using neuroevolution [18] to automatically gener-
ate artificial neural networks that are able to test games reliably,
such as the network shown in Fig. 1b. Neatest targets games
created in Scratch [39], a popular block-based programming en-
vironment with over 90 million registered users and even more
shared projects at the time of this writing3and is implemented on
top of the Whisker [58] testing framework for Scratch . Given a
Scratch program, Neatest iteratively targets statements based
on the control dependence graph of the program, and evolves net-
works (i.e., dynamic tests) to reach those statements guided by an
adapted reachability-related fitness function. Notably, by including
statements related to the winning state of a game, the networks
implicitly learn to meaningfully play and eventually win those
games without requiring any domain-specific knowledge about the
games. Using the dynamic tests it produces, Neatest introduces
a novel test oracle approach based on Surprise Adequacy [30] to
detect incorrect program behavior by analyzing the networks’ node
activations during the execution of a program under test.
In detail, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
•We propose Neatest , a novel test generation approach that
uses the NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) [ 61]
technique to evolve artificial neural networks capable of test-
ing game-like programs reliably.
•Our testing tool implements this approach in the context
of the Scratch educational programming environment and
theWhisker test generator for Scratch .
•We empirically demonstrate that the proposed framework
is capable of producing tests for 25 Scratch games that are
robust against randomized program behavior.
•We empirically show through mutation analysis on 25 Scratch
games that the behavior of neural networks can serve as a
test oracle and detect erroneous program behavior.
3[August 2022] https://scratch.mit.edu/statistics