Neuroevolution-Based Generation of Tests and Oracles for Games ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor
whenright arrowkeypressedmove10stepswhenclickedgotox-130y0foreveriftouchingBearthensayHello Bear!stopall
(a) Two Scratch scripts that implement the movement of the host-
ing sprite and a check if the hosting sprite touches a bear sprite.
Entry
flagClickedkeyPressed:rightforever goToxy
if:touchingsaystopmoveSteps
(b) CDG for the depicted script with squared green and oval red
nodes representing covered and uncovered Scratch statements.
Figure 3: Example of a Scratch script and the correspond-
ing CDG.
locations. Since Scratch programs typically contain many small
scripts that communicate via events and messages, we combine the
scripts of a Scratch program into an interprocedural CDG that
covers the control flow of the entire program. For example, Fig. 3a
shows a Scratch program consisting of two scripts, which are
combined into one interprocedural CDG (Fig. 3b) by introducing
an artificial Entry node.
Target statements 𝑠𝑡are selected from children of already cov-
ered program statements, as advanced states can only be reached if
previous control locations can be passed appropriately. If no state-
ments have been covered yet, the root node of the CDG ( Entry )
is selected. In case more than one viable child exists, Neatest fa-
vors program statements that have accidentally been reached while
focusing on other program states but have not yet passed the ro-
bustness check. Considering the example of Fig. 3b and assuming
that the search was able to trigger the right key-press once without
covering the corresponding event handler reliably, the next target
statement would be set to the keyPressed:right statement. Other-
wise, if none of the three statements that have a directly covered
parent ( say,stop,keyPressed:right ) had been reached once, 𝑠𝑡would
be randomly set to one of these three statements. To avoid gettingstuck trying to cover hard-to-reach statements while other, perhaps
easier-to-reach states are still present, Neatest changes its cur-
rently selected target after a user-defined number of consecutive
generations without improvement of fitness values.
3.2 Play Loop
Within the Play Loop, the networks govern the execution of a pro-
gram by repeatedly sending input events until the execution halts,
a pre-defined timeout has been reached, or the targeted statement
𝑠𝑡was covered. To make a decision on which user event to select
at a given moment, we provide the networks with input features
extracted from the current program state. The selected event is then
sent to the Scratch program to advance the program execution.
3.2.1 Feature Extraction. Input features are fed to the input neu-
rons of networks and play a crucial role during a playthrough by
serving as the neural networks’ eyes. The features are collected by
filtering attributes of visible sprites by their relevance to the given
Scratch program, as determined by analyzing the source code:
•Position of a sprite on the Scratch canvas is always added
and defined through its x- and y-coordinates in the range
𝑥∈[− 240,240]and𝑦∈[− 180,180].
•Size of a sprite is always added. The size bounds depend on
the currently selected costume (i.e., visual representation).
•Heading direction iff the rotation style is set to all around .
Defined through an angle 𝛼in the range 𝛼∈[− 180,180].
•Selected costume iff the sprite contains code to change its
costume. Defined as 𝑖∈N, indexing the current costume.
•Distance to sensed sprite iff the sprite contains code that
checks for touching another sprite. Defined through the x
and y distance to the sensed sprite in the range [−600,600].
•Distance to sensed color iff the sprite contains code that
checks for touching a given color. Colors are measured by
four rangefinders, which measure the distance on the canvas
to the sensed color in the directions [0,90,180,−90], with
0 representing the current heading direction of the sprite.
Admissible values are again restricted to [−600,600].
In addition to relevant sprite attributes, we also add all program
variables, for example, the current score of a game, to the set of
input features. We add input nodes for all extracted features, and
group them by the sprite they belong to. Since we only include
relevant features for which corresponding code exists, the input
features may not only differ between games but also within the
same game, for example whenever a sprite creates a clone that has
its own attributes. However, neuroevolution allows the framework
to adapt to these input feature changes dynamically by adding
input nodes to the networks whenever a new behavioral pattern
is encountered. Finally, to ensure all extracted input features have
the same weight, they are normalized to the range [−1,1].
Output features of a network resemble the set of user events
a human player can send to the Scratch application at a given
point in time. The framework simulates human inputs using the
following Scratch events:
•KeyPress : Presses a specific key on the keyboard for a pa-
rameterized amount of time.
•ClickSprite : Clicks on a specific sprite.