Neuroevolution-Based Generation of Tests and Oracles for Games ASE 2022, 10-14 October, 2022, Ann Arbor
2 BACKGROUND
In this paper we combine the ideas of search-based software testing
with neuroevolution, considering the application domain of games
implemented in the Scratch programming language.
2.1 Search-based Software Testing
Search-based software testing (SBST) describes the process of ap-
plying meta-heuristic search algorithms, such as evolutionary al-
gorithms, to the task of generating program inputs. The search
algorithm is guided by a fitness function, which typically estimates
how close a test is towards reaching an individual coverage objec-
tive, or achieving 100% code coverage. The most common fitness
function derives this estimate as a combination of the distance be-
tween the execution path followed by an execution of the test and
the target statement in the control dependence graph ( approach
level [66]), and the distance towards evaluating the last missed con-
trol dependency to the correct outcome ( branch distance [34]). The
approach is applicable to different testing problems by varying the
representation used by the search algorithm. For example, SBST has
been used to evolve parameters for function calls [ 36], sequences
of method calls [ 5,19,62], sequences of GUI interactions [ 22,41],
or calls to REST services [ 3]. The search only derives test inputs
to exercise a program under test, and test oracles are typically
added separately as regression assertions , which capture and assert
the behavior observed on the program from which the tests are
derived [ 20,69]. Since the tests derived this way cannot adapt to
different program behavior, we call them static tests.
2.2 Neuroevolution
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are computational models com-
posed of several interconnected processing units, so-called neurons .
An ANN can be interpreted as a directed graph where each node
corresponds to a neuron model , which usually implements a non-
linear static transfer function [14]. The edges of the graph, which
connect nodes with each other, are represented by weights that de-
termine the connection strength between two neurons. Altogether,
the number and type of neurons and their interconnections form
an artificial neural network’s topology orarchitecture .
Before an ANN can solve specific problems, it has to be trained
in the given problem domain. During training, learning algorithms
are used to find suitable network parameters, such as the weights
of the connections within a network. Learning algorithms com-
monly apply backpropagation [51], which updates the weights by
calculating the gradient for each connection individually. However,
backpropagation on its own is only capable of tuning the weights of
a neural network. Developing an appropriate network architecture
remains a tedious task for the developer. A promising approach
to eliminate these time-consuming tasks is to apply evolutionary
algorithms that can optimize both, the weights of networks and
their architecture.
Instead of using a conventional learning algorithm, neuroevolu-
tionencodes ANNs in genomes and gathers them in a population .
In each iteration, a subset of the current population is selected and
evolved using mutation andmating procedures inspired by the prin-
ciples of Darwinian evolution. Then, each genome’s performance is
evaluated using a fitness function , which reflects how close a givengenome is to solving the problem at hand. Finally, following the
paradigm of survival of the fittest, a new generation of the popula-
tion is formed by selecting the fittest genomes of the population. By
exploring the search space through many generations of mutating
and mating these genomes, it is expected that eventually a neural
network with optimal topology and weights for the given problem
will be found. With this learning approach the weights, the number
of neuron layers, and the interconnections between them, can be
genetically encoded and co-evolved at the same time.
The popular NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies [61] (NEAT)
algorithm solves several challenges of Topology and Weight Evolv-
ing Artificial Neural Networks , such as the competing conventions
problem [ 49]. NEAT solves this problem by introducing innova-
tion numbers that enable the comparison of genes based on their
historical origin. Another crucial aspect of NEAT is the use of
speciation [21] to protect innovative networks. This is necessary
since innovative topologies tend to initially decrease the fitness
of a network, leading to architectural innovations having a hard
time surviving even a single generation. Speciation ensures that
neural networks with similar structures have to primarily compete
against other networks in the same species, which gives them time
to optimize their weights. Two networks are assigned to the same
species if the number of mismatching genes and the average con-
nection weight difference falls below a threshold, which is adjusted
in each generation of the algorithm based on the number of species
that are present in the current generation: if there are fewer species
than desired, the threshold is reduced (e.g., by 0.3) and vice versa.
NEAT’s mutation operators can be divided into two groups: struc-
tural mutations andnon-structural mutations . The former modify
a network’s topological structure, while the latter operate on the
attributes of connection genes. The crossover operator randomly
selects two parents and aligns their connection genes using the
assigned innovation numbers. Then, both connection gene lists
are sequentially traversed, and certain rules are applied to each
gene pair: Similar genes are either inherited randomly from one
parent or combined by averaging the connection gene weights of
both parents. On the other hand, genes with differing innovation
numbers are always inherited from the more fit parent.
2.3 Testing Scratch Programs
The block-based programming language Scratch [39] provides pre-
defined command blocks encoding regular programming language
statements as well as domain-specific programming instructions
that make it easy to create games. Scratch programs are created by
visually arranging these command blocks according to the intended
program behavior. Scratch programs consist of a stage and a col-
lection of sprites . The former represents the application window
and displays a background image chosen by the user. Sprites, on
the other hand, are rendered as images on top of the stage and can
be manipulated by the user. Both the stage and the sprites contain
scripts formed by combining command blocks to define the func-
tional behavior of the program. Besides control-flow structures or
variables, the blocks represent high-level commands to manipulate
sprites. Scratch programs are controlled via user inputs such as
key presses, text, or mouse movement. To engage learners, the
Scratch programs they create are usually interactive games.