Video Action Transformer Network
Rohit Girdhar1*Jo˜ao Carreira2Carl Doersch2Andrew Zisserman2,3
1Carnegie Mellon University2DeepMind3University of Oxford
http://rohitgirdhar.github.io/ActionTransformer
Abstract
We introduce the Action Transformer model for recogniz-
ing and localizing human actions in video clips. We repur-
pose a Transformer-style architecture to aggregate features
from the spatiotemporal context around the person whose
actions we are trying to classify. We show that by using
high-resolution, person-speciﬁc, class-agnostic queries, the
model spontaneously learns to track individual people and
to pick up on semantic context from the actions of others.
Additionally its attention mechanism learns to emphasize
hands and faces, which are often crucial to discriminate an
action – all without explicit supervision other than boxes
and class labels. We train and test our Action Transformer
network on the Atomic Visual Actions (AVA) dataset, out-
performing the state-of-the-art by a signiﬁcant margin us-
ing only raw RGB frames as input.
1. Introduction
In this paper, our objective is to both localize and rec-
ognize human actions in video clips. One reason that hu-
man actions remain so difﬁcult to recognize is that inferring
a person’s actions often requires understanding the people
and objects around them. For instance, recognizing whether
a person is ‘listening to someone’ is predicated on the ex-
istence of another person in the scene saying something.
Similarly, recognizing whether a person is ‘pointing to an
object’, or ‘holding an object’, or ‘shaking hands’; all re-
quire reasoning jointly about the person and the animate and
inanimate elements of their surroundings. Note that this is
not limited to the context at a given point in time: recogniz-
ing the action of ‘watching a person’, after the watched per-
son has walked out of frame, requires reasoning over time
to understand that our person of interest is actually looking
at someone and not just staring into the distance.
Thus we seek a model that can determine and utilize such
contextual information (other people, other objects) when
determining the action of a person of interest. The Trans-
former architecture from Vaswani et al. [43] is one suitable
*Work done during an internship at DeepMind
…
Input Video Clip
!=0 !=$/2 !=−$/2…Context Embeddings Person-specific self-attention
keyframeaction class
Figure 1: Action Transformer in action. Our proposed multi-
head/layer Action Transformer architecture learns to attend to rel-
evant regions of the person of interest and their context (other peo-
ple, objects) to recognize the actions they are doing. Each head
computes a clip embedding, which is used to focus on different
parts like the face, hands and the other people to recognize that the
person of interest is ‘holding hands’ and ‘watching a person’.
model for this, since it explicitly builds contextual support
for its representations using self-attention. This architecture
has been hugely successful for sequence modelling tasks
compared to traditional recurrent models. The question,
however, is: how does one build a similar model for human
action recognition?
Our answer is a new video action recognition network,
theAction Transformer , that uses a modiﬁed Transformer
architecture as a ‘head’ to classify the action of a person
of interest. It brings together two other ideas: (i) a spatio-
temporal I3D model that has been successful in previous
approaches for action recognition in video [ 7] – this pro-
vides the base features; and (ii) a region proposal network
(RPN) [ 33] – this provides a sampling mechanism for local-
izing people performing actions. Together the I3D features
and RPN generate the query that is the input for the Trans-
former head that aggregates contextual information from
other people and objects in the surrounding video. We de-
scribe this architecture in detail in section 3. We show in
section 4that the trained network is able to learn both to
track individual people and to contextualize their actions in
terms of the actions of other people in the video. In addition,
the transformer attends to hand and face regions, which is
reassuring because we know they have some of the most rel-
evant features when discriminating an action. All of this is
1
244