Frame Tx-A Tx-B Frame Tx-A Tx-B Attention
Figure 4: Embedding and attention. For two frames, we show their ‘key’ embeddings as color-coded 3D PCA projection for two of the
six heads in our 2-head 3-layer Tx head. It is interesting to note that one of these heads learns to track people semantically (Tx-A: all upper
bodies are similar color – green), while the other is instance speciﬁc (Tx-B: each person is different color – blue, pink and purple). In the
following columns we show by the average softmax attention corresponding to the person in the red box for all heads in the last Tx layer.
Our model learns to hone in on faces, hands and objects being interacted with, as these are most discriminative for recognizing actions.
I3D
headCls-speciﬁc
bbox-regNo
Data AugFrom
Scratch
Val mAP 21.3 19.2 16.6 19.1
Table 5: Augmentation, pre-training and class-agnostic regres-
sion. We evaluate the importance of certain design choices such
as class agnostic box regression, data augmentation and Kinetics
pre-training, by reporting the performance when each of those is
removed from the model. We use the I3D head model as the base-
line. Clearly, removing any leads to a signiﬁcant drop in perfor-
mance. All performance reported with R= 64 proposals.
object category, it does not make sense in our case as the
‘object’ is always a human. Sharing those parameters helps
classes with few examples to also learn a good person re-
gressor, leading to an overall boost. Finally, we note the
importance of using a sufﬁcient number of proposals in the
RPN. As can be seen in Table 3, reducing the number from
300 to 64 decreases performance signiﬁcantly for the Ac-
tion Transformer model. The I3D head is less affected. It
is interesting because, even for 64, we are using far more
proposals than the actual number of people in the frame.
5. Analysis
We now analyze the Action Transformer model. Apart
from obtaining superior performance, this model is also
more interpretable by explicitly encoding bottom up atten-
tion. We start by visualizing the key/value embeddings and
attention maps learned by the model. Next we analyze
the performance vis-a-vis speciﬁc classes, person sizes and
counts; and ﬁnally visualize common failure modes.
Learned embeddings and attention: We visualize the
128D ‘key’ embeddings and attention maps in Figure 4. Wevisualize the embeddings by color-coding a 3D PCA projec-
tion. We show two heads out of the six in our 2-head 3-layer
Action Transformer model. For attention maps, we visual-
ize the average softmax attention over the 2 heads in the last
layer of our Tx head. It is interesting to note that our model
learns to track the people over the clips, as shown from
the embeddings where all ‘person’ pixels are same color.
Moreover, for the ﬁrst head all humans have the same color,
suggesting a semantic embedding, while the other has dif-
ferent, suggesting an instance-level embedding. Similarly,
the softmax attention maps learn to attend and track faces,
hands and other parts of the person of interest as well as the
other people in the scene. It also tends to attend to objects
the person interacts with, like the vaccum cleaner and cof-
fee mugs. This makes sense as many actions in A V A such
as talking, listening, hold an object etc. require focusing the
faces, hands of people and objects to deduce.
Breaking down the performance: We now break down
the performance of our model into certain bins. We start
by evaluating the performance per class in Figure 5(a). We
sort the performance according the increasing amounts of
training data, shown in green. While there is some corre-
lation between the training data size and performance, we
note that there exist many classes with enough data but poor
performance, like smoking. We note that we get some of the
largest improvement in classes such as sailing boat, watch-
ing TV etc, which would beneﬁt from our Action Trans-
former model attending to the context of the person. Next,
we evaluate the performance with respect to the size of the
person in the clip, deﬁned by the percentage area occupied
by the GT box, in Figure 5(b). For this, we split the valida-
tion set into bins, keeping predictions and GT within certain
size limits. We ﬁnd the size thresholds by sorting all the GT
boxes and splitting into similar sized bins, hence ensuring
250