RPN
Convolutional feature 
map from I3DRPN over center 
frame features
N+1 way 
classificationInput clip
Trunk
RoIPoolTx
Tx⊙Tx
Tx⊙Tx
Tx⊙Multi- head, multi -layer Tx Head I3D base
RoIPool
✪Softmax
Attention 
⨁
Weighted Sum⍉
Dropout+Layer
Norm
⍉+Layer
Norm
FFN
DropoutQPr
Location
embedding
Tx UnitBounding box 
regression
Figure 2: Base Network Architecture. Our model takes a clip as input and generates a spatio-temporal feature representation using a
trunk network, typically the initial layers of I3D. The center frame of the feature map is passed through an RPN to generate bounding box
proposals, and the feature map (padded with location embedding) and each proposal are passed through ‘head’ networks to obtain a feature
for the proposal. This feature is then used to regress a tight bounding box and classify into action classes. The head network consists of a
stack of Action Transformer (Tx) units, which generates the features to be classiﬁed. We also visualize the Tx unit zoomed in, as described
in Section 3.2. QPr and FFN refer to Query Preprocessor and a Feed-forward Network respectively, also explained Section 3.2.
set of convolutional layers, and refer to this network as the
trunk. In practice, we use the initial layers of an I3D net-
work pre-trained on Kinetics-400 [ 7]. We extract the feature
map from the Mixed4flayer, by which the T×H×W
input is downsampled to T′×H′×W′=T
4×H
16×W
16.
We slice out the temporally-central frame from this fea-
ture map and pass it through a region proposal network
(RPN) [ 33]. The RPN generates multiple potential person
bounding boxes along with objectness scores. We then se-
lectRboxes (we use R= 300 ) with the highest objectness
scores to be further regressed into a tight bounding box and
classiﬁed into the action classes using a ‘head’ network, as
we describe next. The trunk and RPN portions of Figure 2
illustrate the network described so far.
3.2. Action Transformer Head
As outlined in the Introduction, our head architecture
is inspired and re-purposed from the Transformer architec-
ture [ 43]. It uses the person box from the RPN as a ‘query’
to locate regions to attend to, and aggregates the informa-
tion over the clip to classify their actions. We ﬁrst brieﬂy
review the Transformer architecture, and then describe our
Action Transformer head framework.
Transformer: This architecture was proposed in [ 43] for
seq2seq tasks like language translation, to replace tradi-
tional recurrent models. The main idea of the original ar-
chitecture is to compute self-attention by comparing a fea-
ture to all other features in the sequence. This is carried out
efﬁciently by not using the original features directly. In-
stead, features are ﬁrst mapped to a query ( Q) and memory
(key and value, K&V) embedding using linear projec-
tions, where typically the query and keys are lower dimen-
sional. The output for the query is computed as an attention
weighted sum of values V, with the attention weights ob-
tained from the product of the query Qwith keys K. Inpractice, the query here was the word being translated, and
the keys and values are linear projections of the input se-
quence and the output sequence generated so far. A location
embedding is also added to these representations in order to
incorporate positional information which is lost in this non-
convolutional setup. We refer the readers to [ 43] and [ 31]
for a more detailed description of the original architecture.
Action Transformer: We now describe our re-purposed
Transformer architecture for the task of video understand-
ing. Our transformer unit takes as input the video feature
representation and the box proposal from RPN and maps
it into query and memory features. Our problem setup has
a natural choice for the query ( Q), key (K) and value ( V)
tensors: the person being classiﬁed is the query, and the clip
around the person is the memory, projected into key and val-
ues. The unit then processes the query and memory to out-
put an updated query vector. The intuition is that the self-
attention will add context from other people and objects in
the clip to the query vector, to aid with the subsequent clas-
siﬁcation. This unit can be stacked in multiple heads and
layers similar to the original architecture [ 43], by concate-
nating the output from the multiple heads at a given layer,
and using the concatenated feature as the next query. This
updated query is then used to again attend to context fea-
tures in the following layer. We show this high-level setup
and how it ﬁts into our base network highlighted in green
in Figure 2, with each Action Transformer unit denoted as
‘Tx’. We now explain this unit in detail.
The key and value features are simply computed as lin-
ear projections of the original feature map from the trunk,
hence each is of shape T′×H′×W′×D. In practice, we
extract the RoIPool-ed feature for the person box from the
center clip, and pass it through a query preprocessor (QPr)
and a linear layer to get the query feature of size 1×1×D.
The QPr could directly average the RoIpool feature across
246