Proposals
BackboneRPN
RCNN HeadInputsForward Flow
Gradient Flow
Conventional Faster R- CNN Architecture
Proposals
BackboneRPN
RCNN HeadInputsStop  Gradient
Scale Gradient
Decoupled Faster R-CNN(DeFRCN ) Architecture××Box Classifier
Box Regressor
Box Classifier
Box RegressorDecouple TaskTasks ConflictFigure 2: Comparison of Faster R-CNN and our motivation.
We performs stop-gradient between RPN and backbone,
meanwhile, scale-gradient between RCNN and backbone,
as well as decouple conflict tasks between classifier and re-
gressor. The yellow blocks are trainable during fine-tuning.
on the one hand, as a classic two-stage stacking architecture,
(i.e., backbone, RPN and RCNN, see Fig.2), Faster R-CNN
may encounter an intractable conflict when it performs joint
optimization end-to-end between class-agnostic RPN and
class-relevant RCNN through the shared backbone. On the
other hand, as a multi-task learning paradigm ( i.e., classifi-
cation and localization), RCNN needs translation-invariant
features for box classifier whereas translation-covariant fea-
tures for box regressor. These mismatched goals potentially
generate so many low-quality scores and then further lead to
the reduced classification power. Moreover, since there are
only a few samples available during learning, these above
contradictions will be further exacerbated.
Motivated by the above observations, we extend Faster
R-CNN for few-shot scenario from two orthogonal perspec-
tives: (1) multi-stage view. As shown in Fig.2, the Faster
R-CNN contains three components, i.e., backbone, RPN
and RCNN, which interact with each other through feature-
forward and gradient-backward. Due to the contradiction
mentioned above between RPN and RCNN, we present to
alleviate the entire model from being dominated by one
of them with tailoring the degree of decoupling between
three modules through gradient. (2) multi-task view. The
task conflict between classification and regression affects
the quality of features, which in turn damages the perfor-
mance of box head outputs, i.e., category scores and box
coordinates. We employ an efficient score calibration mod-
ule only on the classification branch to achieve the purpose
of decoupling the above two tasks.
This paper proposes a simple yet effective approach,
named Decoupled Faster R-CNN (DeFRCN), to perform
both multi-stage decoupling and multi-task decoupling for
few-shot object detection. The overall architecture is very
straightforward as demonstrated in Fig.3. Compared to thestandard Faster R-CNN [36], DeFRCN additionally con-
tains two Gradient Decoupled Layer (GDL) and an offline
Prototypical Calibration Block (PCB). The former ones are
inserted between the shared backbone and RPN, mean-
while, between the backbone and RCNN to adjust the de-
gree of decoupling among three modules, and the latter
is parallel to the box classifier for further score calibra-
tion. Specifically, during the forward-backward propaga-
tion, GDL performs a learnable affine transformation on
the forward feature maps and simply multiplies the back-
ward gradient by a constant, which decouples the subse-
quent module and preceding module efficiently. Moreover,
PCB is initially equipped with a well pre-trained classifi-
cation model ( e.g.ImageNet Pretrain) and a set of novel
support prototypes. Then it takes the region proposals from
few-shot detector as input and boosts the original softmax
scores with additional prototype-based pairwise scores. As
an interesting by-product, we find that just adopting PCB
only in the inference phase can greatly improve the perfor-
mance of few-shot detectors, with no extra training effort,
which makes the PCB data-efficient and plug-and-play.
The main contributions of our approach are three-folds:
• We look closely into the conventional Faster R-CNN and
propose a simple yet effective architecture for few-shot
detection, named Decoupled Faster R-CNN, which can
be learned end-to-end via straightforward fine-tuning.
• To deal with the data-scarce scenario, we further present
two novel modules, i.e. GDL and PCB, to perform de-
coupling among multiple components of Faster R-CNN
and boost classification performance respectively.
• DeFRCN is remarkably superior to SOTAs on various
benchmarks, revealing the effectiveness of our approach.
2. Related Work
2.1. General Object Detection
General object detection based on deep neural networks
are currently divided into two main branches, i.e., two-
stage proposal-based paradigm [4, 8, 14, 15, 16, 23, 36] and
one-stage proposal-free one [3, 25, 33, 34, 35], which both
have witnessed fantastic progress on numerous large-scale
benchmarks. The R-CNN series falls into the former line
of work, which firstly generates a set of potential objects
with region proposal network (RPN) [36] and then performs
category classification and box localization for end-to-end
detection. In contrast, one-stage detectors endeavour to di-
rectly produce final predictions from the feature map with-
out RPN module, usually have the advantages of inference
speed but the detection performance is often not as good as
two-stage approaches. However, all these frameworks uni-
formly assume that a large amount of annotated data from
seen domain can be accessed, which may be stuck in trou-
bles in data-scarce scenarios or novel unseen domains.
8682