3.3.2 Prototypical Calibration Block
In this section, we introduce a novel metric-based score re-
finement module, termed as Prototypical Calibration Block
(PCB), to effectively decouple the classification and local-
ization tasks during the inference time. In general, most of
detectors parallelly deploy a classifier and a regressor on top
of the shared network. However, classification needs trans-
lation invariant features whereas localization needs transla-
tion covariant features. Thus the localization branch may
force the backbone to gradually learn translation covariant
property, which potentially downgrades the performance of
classifier. Due to model complexity, the extreme lack of an-
notated samples will further exacerbate this contradiction.
We notice that the under-explored few-shot classifica-
tion branch generates a large amount of low-quality scores,
which motivates us to eliminate high-scored false positives
and remedy low-scored missing samples by introducing a
Prototypical Calibration Block (PCB) for score refinement.
The overall pipeline is illustrated in Fig.3 (c). Concretely,
our PCB consists of a strong classifier from ImageNet pre-
trained model, a RoIAlign layer and a prototype bank.
Given a M-way K-shot task with support set S, the PCB
first extracts original image feature map and then employs
RoIAlign with ground-truth boxes to produce MK instance
representations. Based on these features, we shrink the sup-
port set Sto a prototype bank P={pc}M
c=1with Eq.10:
pc=1
|Sc|X
(xi, yi)∈Scxi (10)
where Scis a subset which contains samples with the same
label cinS. Given an object proposal ˆyi= (ci, si, bi)pro-
duced by fine-tuned few-shot detector, where biis the box
boundaries, ciis the predicted category and siis the corre-
sponding score, PCB first performs RoIAlign on predicted
boxbito generate object feature xi, and then calculate the
cosine similarity scos
ibetween xiandpcias:
scos
i=xi·pci
∥xi∥∥pci∥(11)
In the end, we perform weighted aggregation between the
scos
ifrom PCB and sifrom few-shot detector for final clas-
sification score s‡
ias follow:
s‡
i=α·si+ (1−α)·scos
i (12)
where αis the trade-off hyper-parameter.
Moreover, we do not share any parameters between the
few-shot detector and PCB module, so that the PCB can
not only preserve the quality of classification-aimed trans-
lation invariance feature, but also better decouple the classi-
fication task and regression task within the RCNN. Further-
more, since the PCB module is offline without any further
training, it can be plug-and-play and easily equipped to any
other architectures to build stronger few-shot detectors.4. Experiments
In this section, we first introduce the experimental set-
tings in Sec.4.1 and then compare our approach with previ-
ous SOTAs on multiple benchmarks in Sec.4.2. Finally, we
provide comprehensive ablation studies in Sec.4.3.
4.1. Experimental Setting
Existing benchmarks. We follow the previous work
[19, 46, 51] and utilize the same data splits with [46] to eval-
uate our approach for a fair comparison. As for PASCAL
VOC, we have three random split groups and each of them
covers 20 categories, which are randomly divided into 15
base classes and 5 novel classes. Each novel category has
K= 1,2,3,5,10objects sampled from the combination of
VOC07 and VOC12 train/val set for few-shot training. And
VOC07 test set is used for evaluation. As for COCO, the
60 categories disjoint with VOC are denoted as base classes
while the remaining 20 classes are used as novel classes
withK= 1,2,3,5,10,30shots. We utilize 5k images from
the validation set for evaluation and the rest for training.
Evaluation setting. We take two popular evaluation pro-
tocols into consideration to access the effectiveness of our
approach, including few-shot object detection ( FSOD ) and
generalized few-shot object detection ( G-FSOD ). The for-
mer protocol is widely adopted by most previous methods
[5, 19, 51, 53] and only focuses on the performance of novel
classes. Yet, the latter presents to not only observe the per-
formance on novel classes, but also base and overall perfor-
mance of the few-shot detector, which is more comprehen-
sive and monitors the occurrence of catastrophic forgetting
[46]. For evaluation metrics, we report AP50for VOC and
the COCO-style mAP for COCO. Moreover, all results are
averaged over multiple repeated runs.
Implementation details. Our approach employs Faster R-
CNN [36] (termed as FRCN) as the basic detection frame-
work and ResNet-101 [17] pre-trained on ImageNet [37] as
the backbone. We adopt SGD to optimize our network end-
to-end with a mini-batch size of 16, momentum of 0.9 and
weight decay of 5e−5. The learning rate is set to 0.02 during
base training and 0.01 during few-shot fine-tuning. More-
over, the λin GDL of RPN is set to 0 for stopping gradient
and the λin GDL of RCNN is set to 0.75 during base train-
ing and 0.01 during novel fine-tuning for scaling gradient.
Theαin PCB is uniformly set to 0.5 in all settings.
4.2. Comparison Results
PASCAL VOC. We present our evaluation results of VOC
on three different data splits in Table 1. It can be seen
that, no matter under the FSOD orG-FSOD setting, our De-
FRCN is significantly superior to the recent state-of-the-art
approaches by a large margin (up to 21.4 %), which demon-
strates the effectiveness of our approach. Based on the re-
8686