3.1. Problem Setting
As in various previous work [11, 19, 46, 51], we follow
the standard problem settings of few-shot object detection
in our paper. Specifically, the whole learning procedure is
organized into the form of two-stage fine-tuning paradigm,
which gradually collects transferable knowledge across a
large base set Dbasewith abundant annotated instances and
performs adaptation quickly on novel support set Dnovelwith
only a few samples per category. Note that the base classes
CbaseinDbaseand the novel classes CnovelinDnovelare non-
overlapping, namely, Cbase∩ C novel=∅. Given a sample
(x, y)∈ D base∪ D novel, where x={oi, i= 1, ..., N}is the
input image with Nobjects and y={(ci, bi), i= 1, ..., N}
denotes the category ci∈ C base∪ C novel and the structured
box annotations bi. Under this setting, the ultimate goal of
our algorithm is to optimize a robust detector Fbased on
theDbaseandDnovel, then classify and localize unlabelled
objects of a novel query set Dquerywith classes Cquery, where
Cquery⊆ C base∪Cnovel. The overall procedure, which follows
the standard transfer learning, can be summarized as follow,
FinitDbase⇝⇝FbaseDnovel⇝⇝Fnovel (1)
where Finit,FbaseandFnovel denote the learned detectors
in initialization, base training and novel fine-tuning stages
respectively. The symbol ⇝indicates model training.
3.2. Revisiting Faster R-CNN
As a two-stage stacking architecture, Faster R-CNN [36]
consists of three function-detached modules for end-to-end
training, i.e., a shared convolutional backbone for extracting
generalized features, an efficient Region Proposal Network
(RPN) for generating class-agnostic proposals and a task-
specific RCNN head [14] for performing class-relevant
classification and localization. The whole learning proce-
dure is illustrated in Fig.2 (a). Concretely, the input image
is first fed into the backbone to generate a high-level feature
map, and then parallelly provided to the next two modules,
i.e., RPN and RCNN. Second, with classifying and regress-
ing a group of scale varying anchors of the feature map si-
multaneously, RPN generates a sparse set of high-quality
region proposals. Finally, on top of the shared feature map
and proposals, RCNN pools each region-of-interest into a
fixed size feature map with RoI pooling [16], and then per-
forms box classifier and regressor for computing the object
category probabilities and fine-tuning the box boundaries
respectively. All these modules are jointly optimized end-
to-end by minimizing an unify objective function, which
follows the multi-task learning paradigm as:
Ltotal= (Lcls
rpn+Lreg
rpn|{z}
rpn task) +η·(Lcls
rcnn+Lreg
rcnn|{z}
rcnn task)(2)
where ηis a balanced hyper-parameter for different tasks.Problem of multi-task learning. It can be seen that the
above-mentioned three modules of Faster R-CNN constitute
an unified multi-task learning (MTL) framework, yet there
is a certain inconsistency among the optimization goals of
these sub-networks. Specifically, with utilizing the feature
maps extracted from hard-parameter shared [42] backbone,
RPN aims at generating class-agnostic region proposals to
tell the network where to look , while RCNN targets to per-
form region-based detection category by category to iden-
tifywhat to look . Furthermore, the classification head needs
translation invariant features whereas the localization head
needs translation covariant features on the contrary. In spite
of multi-task learning generally helps to improve the end-
to-end performance of object detection as shown in Faster
R-CNN [36], the joint optimization with the Eq.2 may lead
to possible suboptimal solution on individual tasks in order
to balance the mismatched goals of them [7, 49].
Problem of shared backbone. According to the arguments
in [36], the ultimate goal of shared backbone is to extract
general features that are as suitable as possible for all down-
stream tasks. In fact, from the perspective of gradient flow
in Fig.2 (a), RPN and RCNN mutually exchange informa-
tion of optimization through the shared backbone. How-
ever, due to the potential contradictions between RPN and
RCNN, we notice that the current architecture may lead to
the reduced few-shot detection power of the entire frame-
work. Moreover, following the setting of Eq.1, the shared
backbone of few-shot novel detector Fnovel is usually fine-
tuned from a base domain detector Fbase. During this
two-stage cross-domain procedure, RPN may suffer from
the foreground-background confusion, which means a pro-
posal that belongs to background in the base training phase
is likely to be foreground in the novel fine-tuning phase.
Through the gradient from RPN, the shared convolutional
layers propagate the tendency of over-fitting on base classes
to backbone and RCNN. Although this is one of the conver-
gence schemes to behave well on base domain, it potentially
damages the ability to transfer to the novel set quickly and
efficiently, especially in the data-scarce scenario.
3.3. Decoupled Faster R-CNN
Motivated by the above arguments, we propose a sim-
ple yet effective approach, named Decoupled Faster R-CNN
(DeFRCN), to tap into more potential of Faster R-CNN
styled detectors in few-shot literature. Based on the idea of
decoupling three functional modules ( i.e., backbone, RPN
and RCNN) and two kinds of tasks ( i.e., classification and
localization), the overall architecture of our method is very
straightforward as demonstrated in Fig.3, which has two
Gradient Decoupled Layers (GDL) to adjust the degree of
decoupling among three modules and an offline Prototyp-
ical Calibration Block (PCB) to improve the classification
power of RCNN during the inference phase.
8684