ROI FeaturesProposals BackboneRPN
RCNN Head GDLGDLPCB
Class Scores
CoordinatesBox Classifier
Box Regressor
Prototypes Support Set
Query Set Box ClassifierFeature 
ExtractorPairwise Scores
Softmax Scores𝛁𝛁GDL
Gradient Decoupled LayerRoIs
RoIs
Prototypical Calibration BlockDecoupled Faster R -CNN Framework for Few -Shot Object Detection
𝒙𝒙
𝝀𝝀⋅𝛁𝛁
Figure 3: The architecture of Decoupled Faster R-CNN (DeFRCN) for few-shot object detection . Compared to the
standard Faster R-CNN, there are two Gradient Decoupled Layers (sky-blue) and an offline Prototypical Calibration Block
(red) are inserted into the framework to perform decoupling for multi-stage and multi-task, respectively. The Ais the affine
transformation layer in GDL and ⊕is score fusion operation in PCB. Moreover, yellow and dark-blue indicate that the block
is trainable and frozen during fine-tuning. The orange solid and black dotted lines represent forward flow and gradient flow.
2.2. Few-Shot Learning
Few-shot learning, which aims at learning to learn gen-
eral knowledge slowly from abundant base data and ex-
tracting novel concepts rapidly from extremely few exam-
ples of new-coming classes, has been recently featured into
the meta-learning based [43] and fine-tuning based [27]
paradigms. As a recognition case of few-shot learning,
few-shot classification has been widely investigated until
now. In the literature, a large amount of studies that fol-
low the idea of meta-learning to alleviate severe over-fitting
can be divided into two streams, namely, optimization ap-
proaches [1, 13, 22, 26, 30, 32] and metric approaches
[21, 29, 38, 40, 44]. The former intents to learn efficient
parameter updating rules [32] or good parameters initial-
ization strategies [13], and the latter focuses on obtaining a
generalizable embedding metric space to perform pairwise
similarity of inputs. In addition to meta-based approaches,
some simple fine-tuning based methods [6, 41] are attach-
ing more and more attention in the few-shot community.
These methods show that just fine-tuning a linear classifier
on top of a pre-trained model surprisingly achieves compet-
itive performance with the meta-based approaches. Com-
pared to classification, the solutions for other tasks, such as
object detection and segmentation, are still underdeveloped.
2.3. Few-Shot Object Detection
Since previous detectors usually require a large amount
of annotated data, few-shot detection has attracted more and
more interest recently [2, 10, 12, 28, 31, 45, 47, 52, 54].
Similar to classification task [38, 39], most of the currentfew-shot detectors focus on the meta-learning paradigm.
FSRW [19] is a light-weight meta-model based on YOLOv2
[34] to re-weight the importance of features with channel-
wise attention, and then adapt these features to promote
novel detection. Yet, instead of employing attention on the
whole feature map, Meta R-CNN [53] focuses on the atten-
tion of each RoI feature. Furthermore, FSDView [51] puts
forward a novel feature aggregation scheme, which lever-
ages on base classes feature information to improve the per-
formance on novel classes. From the perspective of atten-
tion on RPN, FSOD [11] utilizes support information to fil-
ter out most background boxes and those in non-matching
categories. Although meta-based approaches have been ex-
tensively studied recently, there are still some other meta-
free methods. RepMet [20] incorporates a modified proto-
typical network as classification head into a standard object
detector. And TFA [46] proposes a simple approach based
on transfer learning, that only fine-tunes the last layer of
existing detectors on rare classes, which are comparable to
the previous meta-based methods. Instead, our approach,
which also follows the idea of fine-tuning, jointly trains the
almost entire detector with novel gradient decoupled layer
and prototypical calibration block, outperforming all above
meta-based and finetune-based approaches.
3. Methods
In this section, we first introduce the setup of few-shot
object detection in Section 3.1. Then we revisit conven-
tional Faster R-CNN in Section 3.2 and elaborate our De-
coupled Faster R-CNN (DeFRCN) in Section 3.3.
8683