Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
322L. Zhu et al.
6.2. Figurative languages
Analyzing figurative language including ambiguity, irony, and
metaphor remains an inaccurate task in the field of multimodal sen-
timent analysis. Ambiguity and irony pose a major challenge to sen-
timent analysis. For example, comments ostensibly praising an object
may be intended to convey a negative emotion; however, traditional
sentiment analysis methods often misinterpret these expressions, judg-
ing them as positive. Many methods have been proposed to detect irony
in language [97–99]. However, this problem is far from resolved, as
many factors can affect irony, such as tone, situation, background in-
formation, etc., and humor is so culturally specific that it is challenging
for machines to understand unique (and often very specific) cultural
allusions. In the study of Poria et al. [100], it was proposed that by
incorporating voice and facial expressions into multimodal sentiment
analysis, its success rate in recognizing ironic comments could be im-
proved. In addition, machine-based sentiment analysis results can only
be based on external expressions of emotions, but cannot determine
summative information about the thoughts expressed by an individual.
Failure to recognize metaphors in sentences can also have disastrous
effects on the accuracy of sentiment analysis. Because metaphors are
often expressed differently from the conventional meaning of words, it
may lead to the opposite state of the machine’s judgment of sentiment.
In the article [101], Mao et al. proposed a metaphor processing model
called MetaPro, which can identify metaphors in sentences at the
token level, paraphrasing the identified metaphors into their literal
counterparts, and explain metaphorical multi-word expressions.
6.3. Dataset quality
A prominent data source for multimodal sentiment analysis is mul-
timedia content on social media. Social media is a rich data repository
that provides us with a sizable amount of data. However, the recorded
material varies in quality and context, and the data is limited to
statistics on specific groups of people on the Internet. Since this data
is publicly available, it is easy to crowdsource tagging. Another source
of data is private data from lab records, but this limits the tedious task
of labeling to those authorized to access the data. Thus, in addition
to limitations on the amount of data collected, the ability to tag large
amounts of data is also limited. Grosman et al. proposed a new web-
based text annotation tool ERAS. In addition to realizing the main
functions of mainstream annotation systems, it also integrates a series
of mechanisms to improve the annotation process and the quality
of the annotation dataset itself, such as random document selection,
Re-annotate stages, and warm-up annotations [102].
6.4. Ethics
Sentiment is a private state, and mining people’s private states
can raise ethical questions. Machines have incredible potential for
understanding people’s opinions and attitudes, but their use also raises
questions about privacy. Sentiment analysis, as a data-driven technique,
may introduce bias in decisions or higher-level analysis [7]. For exam-
ple, if more Black men expressed strong opinions on Twitter, companies
might pay more attention to their attitudes, since machine learning
tools often treat data agnostically [103]. In addition, automated sen-
timent analysis could also be a tool to limit freedom of speech. What
people say on social networks about policy opposition, partisan choices,
etc. could be identified by sentiment analysis and censored at scale by
an oppressive regime [104]. Other ethical issues that accompany data
acquisition and annotation, such as evaluation in the development and
long-term use of real-life recognition engines, are rarely explored. An
experiment in [105] illustrates that the decision on the material used
to stimulate or induce emotion may be critical, as certain materials
or ways of eliciting responses may not be suitable for all participants
in a database collection. For example, showing participants extreme
violence may have a strong emotion-inducing effect, but may not be
appropriate in many situations.6.5. Spoken language
Another challenge of multimodal sentiment analysis is to effectively
explore the intramodal dynamics of a specific modality. Since multi-
modal sentiment analysis is performed on spoken language, intramodal
dynamic analysis of language is particularly challenging. A verbal
opinion such as ‘‘I think it was alright . . . Hmmm . . . let me think . . .
yeah . . . no . . . ok yeah’’ rarely happens in the written word. That is to
say, this kind of the unstable verbal point of view is different from the
rigorous written expression with good grammatical structure, but will
be mixed with many habits of individual oral expression statements,
and some meaningless modal particles will lead to proper language
Structure is often overlooked, complicating sentiment analysis. Zhang
et al. proposed to employ a deep reinforcement learning mechanism
to select effective sentiment-relevant words and completely remove
invalid words for each modality [106].
6.6. Computational cost
In order to attain higher accuracy and better results, we need to
increase the size of the dataset and design a more efficient model [85].
However, the complexity of the model will lead to an exponential
increase in the computational cost of training it. On the one hand,
high-end GPU equipment is required to train a model with a huge
corpus. On the other hand, high-complexity models have difficulty
matching some specific scenarios. Traditional models such as SVM
and NB are not computationally expensive, but the corresponding
results are not good. Conversely, today’s popular neural networks
and attention models are computationally expensive. As a result, re-
searchers will need to devise new models to balance performance
and efficiency. For example, Han et al. proposed a novel encoder
combining a hierarchical attention mechanism and feed-forward neural
network to detect depressed individuals, which uses fewer training
parameters than classical encoders [107]. Arjmand et al. proposed a
transformer-based speech-prefixed language model with a lightweight
attentive aggregation module to generate efficient spatial encoding. The
model can achieve the same level of performance as taking a long
time to retrain the Transformer without training a full Transformer
model [108].
7. Conclusion and future work
This paper reviews recent advances in the field of multimodal
sentiment analysis. We discuss the most popular datasets and feature
extraction methods in the field. Recently published and cited articles
are categorized and summarized according to the fusion method. The
article further discusses available applications and the challenges faced
by existing methods. Our review of the existing literature shows that
multimodal sentiment analysis is a promising approach to leverage
complementary information channels for sentiment analysis and often
outperforms unimodal approaches. It also has the potential to enhance
other tools that currently benefit from unimodal sentiment analysis,
such as entity recognition and subjectivity analysis. We hope that this
review will encourage further interdisciplinary efforts in this area.
An area worth exploring for future work is understanding sentiment
in conversations. In a conversation, the sentiment one person expresses
affects the others. Related work has demonstrated that discourse con-
text is helpful for understanding human language, and if multimodal
systems can simulate human sentimental dependencies, this will lead
to significant progress in multimodal sentiment research. Further work
is also needed to focus on making models language-independent to be
able to generalize to any language in prediction tasks.