Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
319L. Zhu et al.
Table 9
Characteristics of contextual-based fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
BC-LSTM ∙A LSTM-based framework is developed to extract contextual utterance-level features
∙The model preserves the sequential order of utterances and enables consecutive utterances to
share information∙The importance of each utterance and its specific
contribution to each modality is not considered
CHFusion ∙The hierarchical fusion structure makes every pair of modalities interact and combine into a
trimodal vector, which captures the interrelationship between modalities
∙Each layer uses RNN to extract context-aware utterance features∙The quality of unimodal features could be improved
∙Simple network architecture
MMMU-BA ∙The first work that attempts to employ multi-modal attention block (exploiting neighboring
utterances) for sentiment prediction
∙Focus on contextual utterances by computing correlations among the modalities of the target
utterance and the context utterances, thereby helping to distinguish which modalities of
relevant contextual utterances are more important
∙Apply attention to multi-modal multi-utterance representations in an attempt to learn the
contributing features∙When experimenting on the MOSEI dataset, the
performance of the negative category is poor
CIA ∙An end-to-end Context-aware Interactive Attention (CIA) based recurrent neural network that
identifies and assigns the weights to the neighboring utterances based on their contributing
features
∙Learn the inter-modal interaction among the participating modalities through an auto-encoder
mechanism
∙Two affect analysis tasks were performed on five standard multi-modal affect analysis datasets∙Current work only applies to single-party utterances
Table 10
Characteristics of quantum-based fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Drawbacks
QMSA ∙The first to apply Quantum Theory (QT) to sentiment analysis
∙Images and text are encapsulated into density matrices, which can encode more semantic
information and fill the ‘‘semantic gap’’
∙The multimodal decision fusion process is analogous to a double-slit experiment, and a
Quantum Interference inspired Multimodal Decision Fusion (QIMF) strategy is proposed∙The computation time used for training and classification is
longer than the use of other baselines
∙The change of cos𝜃has a great influence on the
experimental results
QMN ∙Quantum probability theory in the LSTM architecture is used to model both intra- and
inter-utterance interaction dynamics
∙A quantum measurement-inspired strong–weak influence model is proposed to make
better inferences about social influence among speakers
∙A quantum interference-inspired multimodal decision fusion method is proposed to model
decision correlations between different modalities∙The model is largely dependent on the density matrix
representation, how to further accurately capture the
interactions among speakers and naturally incorporate them
into an end-to-end framework is difficult
∙Experiments are performed on emotion recognition
datasets, not sentiment analysis datasets
QMF ∙The interaction within a single modality and the interaction across modalities are
formulated with superposition and entanglement respectively at different stages
∙Sentiment decisions are made via the concept of quantum measurement∙The quality of the extracted visual and acoustic features is
not high
∙Inconsistencies with quantum theory
two representations of each pair of modalities are transferred to a
context-aware attention module (CAM) to extract the correspondences
of adjacent utterances. The attention module helps the network focus
on the contribution features by weighting the current and adjacent
utterances in the video. Finally, the output of CAM is concatenated and
passed to the output layer for prediction.
4.8. Quantum-based fusion
Existing methods are mainly based on neural networks that model
multimodal interactions implicitly and incomprehensibly. Neural archi-
tectures allow models to learn multimodal interactions from large-scale
data in an end-to-end manner, often resulting in satisfactory accuracy.
However, multimodal interactions are implicitly encoded by these mod-
els, working like a black box with few numerical constraints, which
increases the difficulty of understanding multimodal interactions in
human language. As these models bring significant performance gains,
researchers are looking for ways to understand the model to know
if we can trust it and deploy it in real works [77], or if it includes
privacy or security issues [78]. Thus, they began to study quantum-
based multimodal fusion methods. Table 10 summarizes the advantages
and disadvantages of each model.
4.8.1. QMSA (Quantum-inspired Multimodal Sentiment Analysis)
Zhang et al. [79] proposed a Quantum-inspired Multimodal Sen-
timent Analysis (QMSA) framework, which is the first work to applyQuantum Theory (QT) to sentiment analysis. The framework consists
of a Quantum-inspired Multimodal Representation (QMR) model and
a Quantum Interference-inspired Multimodal Decision Fusion (QIMF)
strategy. In the first part, the QMR model, based on the Quantum
Language Model (QLM), represents texts and images through respective
density matrices. For images, pixels are extracted to construct visual
words, which are packed into a density matrix after vector space map-
ping. This density matrix describes the probability distribution of visual
words in the image. A similar approach is used for text. Compared
with traditional vector-based representation models, QMR models can
encode more semantic relations. In the second part, the authors apply
QIMF to fuse decision-making. The QIMF strategy is inspired by the
double-slit experiment, where the sentiment label of multimodal data
is analogous to a photon. The sentiment of text and images is seen as
two slits, and each sentiment score is a location on the detection screen.
4.8.2. QMN (Quantum-like Multimodal Networks)
Building on previous work, Zhang et al. [80] proposed a new
framework for multimodal sentiment analysis, termed quantum-like
multimodal network (QMN), leveraging the formalism of quantum
theory and the LSTM architecture. First, based on QMSA [79], QMN
develops a density matrix-based convolutional neural network (DM-
CNN) to represent the text and images of all utterances in a video and
serve as the input of the whole model. Second, inspired by quantum
measurement theory, a strong–weak influence model is introduced.
This structure measures the influence relationship between speakers