Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
316L. Zhu et al.
Table 7
Characteristics of translation-based fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
MCTN ∙Multimodal cyclic translation
∙The model learns increasingly discriminative joint representations with more input modalities
while maintaining robustness to missing or perturbed modalities
∙Only data from the source modality need to be used at test time for final sentiment prediction∙Cyclic translation between modalities requires a lot of
training resources and time
MulT ∙The cross-modal attention module fuses multimodal information by directly attending to
low-level features in other modalities
∙Can be directly applied to unaligned multimodal streams∙When part of the language information is missing, the
model lacks continuous attention and generalization to the
target modality, and the overall performance is slightly lower
MAG ∙Non-verbal displacement vector
∙MAG makes no change to the original structure of BERT or XLNet, but acts as an attachment
to both models∙Both input-level concatenation and addition of modalities
perform poorly
TCSP ∙Treat the textual modality as the core and use the other non-textual modalities to help enrich
the semantics of the textual modality
∙Shared and private semantics
∙Effectively fuse textual and non-textual features benefiting from unlabeled data∙The performance of cross-modal prediction model greatly
affects the effectiveness of regression model
ICDN ∙The encoder of the traditional Transformer is improved so that it can receive the input of
multimodal information
∙Modify the mapping attention to map the bimodal information to the target modality, so as
to obtain richer modality-related information
∙Improve self-supervised unimodal label generation module (ULGM) and uses unimodal for
multi-task learning to supplement and generalize multimodal fusion∙After using Mapping Transformer, features containing rich
information of the original modality are still required to
further reduce modal differences
DEAN ∙Deep emotional arousal network
∙Model the sentiment congruence by introducing time-dependent interactions into the parallel
structure of Transformer
∙Identify the difference between different modalities by embedding a multimodal gating
mechanism∙Time consumption of transformer-based model
AMOA ∙The first to introduce the global acoustic features to enhance the learning of overall video
features
∙By designing a cross-modal transformer (CMT) that integrates the three modalities in a
certain order, the modality added before can also provide information for the later processes
∙Generalize to sentiment with more complex semantics, achieving SOTA performance on a
widely used sarcasm dataset∙Need to know the importance of each modality in advance
to determine the order of fusion
more transmembrane state information, words assigned higher atten-
tional weights are classified as shared. Since modal-private information
is difficult to predict via text modality, features with higher prediction
loss in non-linguistic modalities are considered private. After obtaining
shared semantics and private semantics, a sentiment regression model
is applied to fuse text features with those of the other two modalities.
The sentiment regression model is mainly composed of three parts:
shared module, private module, and regression layer. In the shared
module, a masked cross-modal attention network is proposed to lever-
age the shared information of non-linguistic modalities to enhance
the representation of words. Meanwhile, in the private module, the
private features are passed through the attention layer to produce
the final private representation. Finally, the obtained representation
is input to the regression layer, which is a two-layer network with
ReLU, to predict the sentiment score. It is worth mentioning that this
work provides a new method for multimodal sentiment analysis using
unlabeled data [69].
4.5.5. ICDN (Integrating Consistency and Difference Networks)
Inspired by the application of the Transformer [70] structure and
Mult [31] in the multimodal domain, Zhang et al. [33] proposed a
method known as Integrating Consistency and Difference Networks
(ICDN). Instead of a sequence-to-sequence structure, the model consists
of multiple mapping attention modules for deeper modality fusion
based on the low-level features of each modality. Firstly, ICDN uses
a Mapping Transformer (MT) to map the low-level features of the
remaining two modalities to a third modality, making up for the loss
caused by the missing parts of that modality. Unlike Mult, the MT mod-
ule abandons the decoder and improves the encoder to obtain richer
modality-related information using self-attention techniques. Second,
Transformers are used to extract modal features, improving long-range
dependencies between modalities and attention to contextual informa-
tion. Finally, the self-supervised method in SELF-MM [58] is improvedto obtain unimodal sentiment labels, and multi-task learning guides the
final fusion of multimodal features.
4.5.6. DEAN (Deep Emotional Arousal Network)
Departing from most other models that focus on considering more
efficient fusion strategies, inspired by the emotional arousal model in
psychology, Zhang et al. [71] proposed a Deep Emotional Arousal Net-
work (DEAN) to simulate the whole process of human communication
at the multimodal input. DEAN consists of three components: a cross-
modal transformer, a multimodal BiLSTM system, and a multimodal
gating module, respectively simulating the functions of the perception
analysis system, cognitive comparator, and activation mechanism in
the psychological emotional arousal in humans. On the input side, the
cross-modal transformer explores the interaction between every two
modalities through an improved multi-head attention mechanism, that
is, DEAN contains a total of 6 cross-modal transformers. Afterward, the
authors adopted a multimodal BiLSTM system to extract the context-
related features of each modality through a Bidirectional LSTM network
and modeled the time series to simulate emotional coherence. The
final module is the Multimodal Gating Block, which implicitly performs
fusion between modalities by selecting the information to be output
according to the importance of the modalities. DEAN attempts to
provide a complete framework and an alternative thought that guides
the learning system along a human-like path to progressively acquire a
complex understanding of human emotions.
4.5.7. AMOA (Acoustic feature en-hanced Modal-Order-Aware network)
To cope with the problem that three modalities are equally treated
by existing methods and the global acoustic information is lost after
the video is divided into frames, Li et al. [34] proposed a global Acous-
tic feature en-hanced Modal-Order-Aware network (AMOA). After the
features of each modality are extracted, a Transformer encoder-based
Cross-Modal Transformer (CMT) is designed for two-stage fusion. In