Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
311L. Zhu et al.
Fig. 2. Effective multimodal fusion models in multimodal sentiment analysis.
Table 3
Characteristics of early fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
THMM ∙The task of trimodal sentiment analysis is proposed for the first time
∙Tri-modal Hidden Markov Model (THMM)∙Small scale dataset
SVM ∙Support Vector Machines (SVM) ∙Difficult to implement for large-scale training samples
MKL ∙Multiple kernel learning (MKL)
∙Use deep CNN to extract features from text∙Small datasets can lead to early overfitting
EF-LSTM ∙Concatenate the inputs from different modalities at each time step and use that as
the input to a single LSTM∙The training process is difficult to parallelize
SELF-MM ∙A unimodal label generation module based on the self-supervised strategy
∙A novel weight self-adjusting strategy is introduced to balance different task loss
constraints∙The generated audio and vision labels are limited by the
preprocessing features
4.2. Late fusion
Late fusion, also known as decision-level fusion, first conducts sen-
timent analysis based on each modality, and then proposes different
mechanisms to incorporate unimodal sentiment decisions into the final
decision, including averaging [ 59], majority voting [ 60], weighted
sum [ 61], or learnable models. This fusion approach is usually strong
in modeling view-specific dynamics, and due to the integration of its
modules, the model is usually lightweight, flexible, and adapts well to
changes in the number of modalities. However, since separate models
are built for each modality, inter-modal interactions are often not
modeled efficiently because the dynamics between these modalities
are often more complex than decision voting. Table 4 summarizes the
advantages and disadvantages of each model.4.2.1. Averaging
Nojavanasghari et al. [ 62] trained a unimodal classifier for each of
the three modalities, then averaged the confidence scores of individual
unimodal classifiers to make the final prediction.
4.2.2. DF (Deep Fusion)
Nojavanasghari et al. [ 62] trained a unimodal classifier for each
of the three modalities, then used the confidence score of each uni-
modal classifier (c); along with the complementary scores (1-c) as
input features to a fusing deep network that was used to make final
predictions.
4.2.3. SAL-CNN (Select-Additive Learning CNN)
Wang et al. [ 20] proposed a SAL-CNN model. After the CNN model
is fully trained, the authors use SAL to improve its generality and pre-
dict sentiment, trying to prevent identity-dependent information from