Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
318L. Zhu et al.
The authors also introduced refinement terms, modality margins, and
pairing selection mechanisms to enhance the performance of the entire
system; details on these additions can be found in the article [37].
4.6.4. HGraph-CL (Hierarchical Graph Contrastive Learning)
Lin et al. [38] believe that existing work mainly focuses on fusing
different modal information through class-driven supervised learning
or multi-task learning, but this approach cannot understand complex
relationships within and across modalities. They proposed a novel
Hierarchical Graph Contrastive Learning (HGraph-CL) framework to
address this difficulty, where highly correlated modal representations
are explicitly linked. For intra-modal dynamics, a unimodal graph is
constructed for each modality, where the text modality graph uses the
grammatical dependency tree of the sentence, and the other two modal-
ities exploit their continuous sequential relationships. Thus, combined
with three modality-specific views, an inter-modal view is constructed
for each multimodal instance by full connection to capture the potential
dispersion of emotions. The authors then employ a graph attention
network to model semantic relationships by assigning different weights
to different nodes in the neighborhood. Following that, two forms of
supervised contrastive learning strategies are applied to the intra- and
inter-modal levels. One is to utilize sentiment labels as supervision
signals and perform a fully supervised loss to capture the similarity of
examples within a class as well as the contrast between classes. The
other is a self-supervised graph contrastive learning strategy based on
graph augmentation, which explores a more suitable graph structure by
adding or removing edges. This hierarchical graph contrastive learning
strategy enhances the learning of graph representations at both the
data level and label level. Compared with pure class-driven methods,
it has better generalization, transferability, and robustness in learning
sentiment cues. More details can be found in the paper if the reader is
interested.
4.6.5. HIS-MSA (Heterogeneous graph convolution based on in-domain
self-supervision for multimodal sentiment analysis)
The inability to make full use of domain knowledge and the lack
of effective integration methods have been the difficulties and key
points of multimodal sentiment analysis, so to solve this problem, Zeng
et al. [73] proposed a heterogeneous graph convolution based on in-
domain self-supervision for multimodal sentiment analysis (HIS-MSA).
First of all, to make the feature encoder better used for embedding text
modality, based on the original BERT, professional knowledge is added,
and different self-supervised training strategies are used for the second
pre-training to obtain domain awareness. In the fusion stage, the au-
thors take the syntactic dependency tree of text modality as the core to
construct a heterogeneous graph, to integrate the features of the other
two modalities. Heterogeneous graph convolutional networks can learn
complementary information among multiple modalities interactively
by driving heterogeneous graphs. Finally, inspired by previous work,
multimodal tasks and unimodal tasks are jointly guided by a unimodal
label generation module to balance independent and complementary
information between modalities.
4.7. Contextual-based fusion
Previous methods treat each utterance as an independent entity and
ignore the dependencies between utterances in the video. Contextual-
based fusion achieves better results by considering the connections
between other utterances in the context and the target utterance.
Among them, recurrent neural network-based models are generally
used to incorporate contextual information. Table 9 summarizes the
advantages and disadvantages of each model.4.7.1. BC-LSTM (Bi-directional Contextual LSTM)
Given some works that treat utterances as independent entities
and ignore the interrelations between utterances, Poria et al. [39]
proposed a BC-LSTM model to capture the contextual information of
utterances in the same video environment. Unimodal features that do
not contain contextual information were first extracted by different
feature extractors, then input into an LSTM network. The authors
replaced the regular LSTM with a bi-directional LSTM so that an utter-
ance could gain information from preceding and following utterances,
naming their system bi-directional contextual LSTM (BC-LSTM) for this
reason. Finally, the obtained unimodal features containing contextual
information were concatenated and passed to a similar independent
BC-LSTM for training, and sentiment classification results were output.
4.7.2. CHFusion (Context-aware Hierarchical Fusion)
Majumder et al. [74] proposed a Context-aware Hierarchical Fusion
(CHFusion) model, which uses a hierarchical structure to continuously
fuse multi-modality information and update the context information
after each layer fusion. First, the unimodal features of each utter-
ance of the three modalities are obtained. Then, a GRU is used to
extract context-aware discourse features. By combining the unimodal
features containing contextual information in pairs through a fully
connected layer, a bimodal feature vector is formed after fusion. As
in the unimodal case, the GRU is also used to sense context. Finally,
three bimodal fusion vectors are combined into a trimodal vector
through a fully connected layer, and a GRU is used to convey contextual
information. The output of the model is generated from a softmax layer.
4.7.3. MMMU-BA (Multi-modal Multi-utterance-Bi-Modal Attention)
Ghosal et al. [40] proposed a Multi-Modal Multi-Utterance-Bi-Modal
Attention (MMMU-BA) framework to leverage contextual information
for utterance-level sentiment prediction. Unlike previous methods that
simply apply attention to contextual utterances for classification, the
authors focus on contextual utterances by computing the correlation
between target utterance patterns and contextual utterances. After
inputting the continuous utterances of three modalities into three inde-
pendent bi-directional gated recurrent units (Bi-GRU [75]) and passing
through a dense layer, three matrices containing the contextual infor-
mation of specific modal utterances are obtained. Multimodal attention
is applied to the output matrix of the dense layer to learn the multi-
modal connections between utterances. The ‘‘bi-modal attention’’ as-
pect of the framework lies in its application of an attention mechanism
to paired modal representations, resulting in three sets of interactions,
namely visual-text, text-acoustic, and acoustic-visual. Finally, the pair-
wise modal attention and the unimodal representation are concatenated
and passed to the softmax layer for sentiment classification.
4.7.4. CIA (Context-aware Interactive Attention)
Chauhan et al. [76] proposed an end-to-end Context-aware Inter-
active Attention (CIA) based recurrent neural network for sentiment
analysis. The authors believe that the encoded representation between
different modalities can learn their interactions, so the interaction
between modalities is learned through an autoencoder-like structure
called the inter-modal interactive module (IIM). IIM encodes a feature
representation for one modality (e.g., text) and aims to decode it
into a feature representation of another modality (e.g., vision). Thus,
a total of 6 modal pairs are generated. The text-acoustic pairs and
the acoustic-text pairs differ because the encoder contains two error
gradients, one from the output of IIM l1, and the other from the task-
specific label l2. Afterward, the sequential patterns of utterances are
extracted by a bi-directional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU), and for
each pair of modality interactions (e.g., text-acoustic and acoustic-text),
an averaging operation is used to reduce the presence of dimension.
In addition, the raw data of the three modalities are also processed
by a separate Bi-GRU, and the outputs are paired and then transmitted
to a fully connected layer to extract the Bimodal Interaction (BI). The