Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
315L. Zhu et al.
which can be divided into three parts: Nonverbal Sub-networks, Gated
Modality-mixing Network, and Multimodal Shifting. First, the non-
verbal sub-network uses two independent LSTMs to encode the fine-
grained structure of non-verbal behaviors, and generate embedding
vectors. The gated modality-mixing network component then com-
putes non-linguistic shift vectors by learning nonlinear combinations
between visual and acoustic embeddings through an attentional gating
mechanism. The significance of this vector is to describe the impact
of non-linguistic context on text words. Finally, the non-linguistic
shift vector is integrated into the original word embeddings to com-
pute multimodal shifted word representations that dynamically capture
contextual changes in different non-linguistic contexts. The final multi-
modal representation can be passed to a word-level LSTM for encoding
and prediction through fully connected layers.
4.4.8. SWRM (Sentiment Word Aware Multimodal Refinement Model)
In the real world, since textual content in videos is generally rec-
ognized by automatic speech recognition (ASR) models, some key
emotional elements may be recognized as other words, resulting in a
sharp drop in the performance of even advanced models. To address
this problem, Wu et al. [29] developed three real-world datasets based
on the existing dataset CMU-MOSI [8], using three widely used ASR
APIs for text recognition, including SpeechBrain, IBM, and iFlytek. The
authors also proposed a Sentiment Word Aware Multimodal Refinement
Model (SWRM), which achieves good results on these datasets. The
proposed model consists of three modules for sentiment word position
detection, multimodal sentiment word refinement, and multimodal
feature fusion respectively.
First, the sentiment word position detection module is used to
obtain the most probable position of the sentiment words in the text.
Since ASR may recognize sentiment words as neutral words, instead
of sentiment word localization, the authors used the strong language
model BERT to generate candidate sentiment words. Then, the multi-
modal sentiment word refinement module is used to refine sentiment
word embeddings dynamically. The refinement process consists of two
parts, filtering and adding. During the filtering process, a non-linear
neural network called the multimodal gating network is applied to filter
out the useless information in the input word embeddings. After the fil-
tering process, a linear layer is used to extract useful information from
candidate sentiment words, which are added to the word embeddings
to produce a multimodal sentiment word attention network. Finally,
the refined embedding data is used as the text input to the multimodal
feature fusion module to predict sentiment labels.
4.5. Translation-based fusion
This category is a method of modeling the interaction between
modalities employing translation. Inspired by the success of sequence-
to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models in machine translation, researchers pro-
pose to convert one modality to another to capture more meaningful
relationships across modalities. Another option is to use a pre-trained
language model to capture word interactions by adjusting the structure
of the transformer encoder. Table 7 summarizes the advantages and
disadvantages of each model.
4.5.1. MCTN (Multimodal Cyclic Translation Network)
Inspired by the unsupervised representation learning of the Seq2Seq
model, Pham et al. [30] proposed a Multimodal Cyclic Translation Net-
work (MCTN) model to learn a robust joint multimodal representation
by transforming modalities. In addition to the forward transformations
from source to target modality, the authors also added a backward
transformation from predicted target to source modality to ensure that
the learned joint representation can capture the maximum information
from both modalities, which is named multimodal cyclic translations.
For the joint representation between the source modality and multi-
ple target modalities, a hierarchical model is also proposed. In the firstlayer, a defined multimodal cyclic translation learning is employed to
learn intermediate representations. After passing to the second layer,
the backward transformation is canceled and only the forward trans-
formation is used to obtain the final representation. Finally, the rep-
resentation is fed into an RNN classifier to produce predictions. The
advantage of MCTN is that once trained with multimodal data, only
the data from the source modality needs to be used at test time to infer
joint representations and labels. Therefore, MCTN is completely robust
to test time perturbations or missing information on other modalities.
4.5.2. MulT (Multimodal Transformer)
Tsai et al. [31] proposed a Multimodal Transformer (MulT), using
directional pairwise crossmodal attention to realize the interactions
between multimodal sequences across distinct time steps and latently
adapt streams from one modality to another. A 1D temporal con-
volutional layer is first used to provide each element in the input
sequence with sufficient knowledge of its neighbors. To carry time
information, the authors also add position embedding (PE) to the
sequence. The highlight of this paper is that a cross-modal trans-
former is proposed, which enables one modality to receive information
from another modality by interacting with cross-modal attention. Each
modality, interacts with the other two modalities, accepting low-level
external information to continuously update its sequence. Finally, a
self-attention transformer is used for cross-modal transformers with the
same target modality to collect temporal information, concatenating
the input to a fully connected layer for prediction.
4.5.3. MAG (Multimodal Adaptation Gate)
With the superior performance of transformer-based contextual rep-
resentations on downstream tasks, Rahman et al. [32] proposed a
method to efficiently fine-tune large pre-trained transformer models
for multimodal languages, termed Multimodal Adaptation Gate (MAG).
MAG can be seen as an add-on to BERT and XLNet, allowing these to
accept multimodal non-linguistic data during fine-tuning.
In the encoding layer, MAG accepts inputs from three modalities.
The language vector is connected with acoustic and visual information
respectively to form two bimodal factors. Furthermore, two gating
vectors are generated, which embody the acoustic and visual informa-
tion based on language. Multiplying the two gating vectors with their
respective modality vectors yields a non-verbal displacement vector.
In other words, MAG exploits the information of non-verbal behavior
to form a vector with trajectory and amplitude to add to the verbal
vector. This non-verbal displacement vector modifies the internal states
of BERT and XLNet during fine-tuning of the pre-trained model, and
finally obtains a multimodal vector. A unique feature of this method is
that the MAG component is merely an add-on to BERT or XLNet without
changing the original structure.
4.5.4. TCSP (Text-Centered Shared-Private)
Departing from previous works that treat the features of the three
modalities equally, Wu et al. [69] proposed a Text-centered Shared-
private framework (TCSP). This model takes the text modality as the
core and enhances the semantics of the text through the other two
modalities. The authors divide the contributions of visual and acoustic
modalities into shared semantics and private semantics. Shared seman-
tics refers to the information common to the three modalities. Although
it cannot provide additional information to text modalities, repeated
information can significantly enhance text semantics. Private semantics
are non-linguistic modality-specific semantics that can complement tex-
tual semantics to help detect the final sentiment more accurately. The
framework consists of a cross-modal prediction task and a sentiment
regression model.
Two cross-modal prediction models, namely text-to-visual and text-
to-acoustic models, are trained to explore shared and private semantics
from non-text modalities. Considering that shared semantics contain