Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
320L. Zhu et al.
and acts as a complement to the output gate of the LSTM unit. Thus,
textual and visual features can be input into two LSTMs respectively,
and local sentiment analysis results can be obtained. Finally, a QIMF
method is designed to derive the final decision based on local results.
This part is similar to the fusion decision in QMSA.
4.8.3. QMF(Quantum-inspired Multimodal Fusion)
Li et al. [ 81] proposed a fundamentally new framework to address
the shortcomings of neural networks inspired by quantum theory,
which incorporates a principled approach to modeling complex in-
teractions and correlations. In this quantum-inspired framework, the
mode-specific dynamics and interactions between different modes are
represented by superposition and entanglement at different stages,
respectively. This framework explains advancing the understanding of
multimodal interactions from both a quantum and a classical perspec-
tive.
4.9. Summary of different fusion methods
Early multimodal sentiment analysis methods are mainly divided
into early fusion and late fusion. These two types of fusion are relatively
simple, without a very complicated fusion framework. Early fusion is
also called feature-level fusion. At the input end, the feature vectors
of the three modalities are spliced together as the input features of
the entire model. The feature is transmitted to a subsequent classifier
for sentiment classification, which can be an SVM or some other deep
learning network. The benefit of this form of fusion is that it only
needs to consider how to design classifiers more efficiently, without any
specific model design. However, there is an obvious drawback, that is,
premature fusion of features from different modalities leads to a lack of
detailed modeling of specific view dynamics, which in turn affects the
modeling of cross-view dynamics and leads to overfitting. The process
of late fusion can be said to be just the opposite. First, sentiment
predictions are made for each modality, and then the results based on
these predictions are integrated into the final result through different
decision-making methods, so it can also be called decision-level fusion.
These decision methods can be average, majority, weighted, or other
statistical strategies. Thus, this form of fusion is strong in modeling
view-specific dynamics. Thanks to the integration of its modules, it can
adapt well to changes in the number of modalities. However, the result
is that dynamic interactions across views cannot be fully explored, and
low-level interactions between different modalities are ignored.
Tensor-based methods take advantage of tensor representation and
interaction. After feature representation for each modality, the tensor
product is computed. Tensors can capture important higher-order inter-
actions across time, feature dimensions, and multiple modalities during
the mapping process, and have strong capabilities in exploring cross-
modal dynamics. However, the tensor-based fusion method requires a
lot of computing resources to calculate the outer dot product, result-
ing in the exponential growth of computational complexity. There is
also no fine-grained word-level interaction during fusion. Therefore,
methods under this framework mainly focus on reducing the computa-
tional complexity and resource consumption of fusion to enable better
generalization.
Since the above three types of fusion methods lack finer-grained
interactions, we classify them into the category of utterance-level fu-
sion methods. The three categories of methods summarized next pay
more attention to the fine-grained interactions of modalities, which
we describe as fine-grained fusion methods, including word-level fu-
sion methods, translation-based fusion methods, and FSM-based fusion
methods.
Word-level fusion method models the interaction relationship at
each time step and extracts useful information through an attention
mechanism. Therefore, the framework generally consists of a temporal
modeling module and an attention module. The temporal modeling
Fig. 3. Applications of multimodal sentiment analysis.
module includes temporal networks such as LSTM and 1D tempo-
ral CNN. This module focuses on exploring modality-specific dynam-
ics. The attention module employs the attention mechanism and its
variants to model important information between modalities to mine
cross-modal interactions. Word-level fusion methods effectively explore
time-dependent interactions, but combining unimodal features with
timestamps would miss an explicit and separate component to handle
intra-modal and inter-modal interactions.
Translation-based fusion method is inspired by the Seq2Seq model
in the field of machine translation. By translating one modality to
another, more meaningful relationships across modalities are mined.
The transformation process can complement the missing information of
the modality, thereby enhancing the meaning. However, the translation
based on the correlation of individual word representations will largely
ignore the word order information. Another form is to capture word
interactions by adjusting the structure of the pre-trained language
model or adding additional components.
The full name of the FSM-based fusion is Feature Space
Manipulation-based fusion. Through a series of mathematical analyses
or learning models, it focuses on exploring the relationship between
features in the feature space. The advantage of this fusion method is
that it has a strong ability to explore the interaction between features,
but the model does not consider an effective fusion strategy.
Contextual-based fusion can also be called multi-utterance fusion,
because it not only considers the target utterance but also combines
other utterances in the context. Generally, models based on recurrent
neural networks are used to focus on contextual information. The target
utterance and other utterances in the context form a context sequence,
which can help judge the polarity of the target utterance more effec-
tively. However, insufficient consideration is given to utterance-level
sentiment analysis, and the extraction of contextual relations can easily
lead to overfitting.
Quantum-based fusion approaches differ from existing neural net-
works in modeling multimodal interactions implicitly and incompre-
hensibly. Modeling multimodal interactions in quantum-inspired ways
such as superposition, entanglement, and interference can resolve the
paradoxes of classical probability theory in modeling human cognition
while having better interpretability. However, there are many para-
doxes in quantum theory, and the analogies in sentiment analysis do
not quite line up.
5. Applications of multimodal sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis, including multimodal sentiment analysis, is
commonly used in business to summarize customers’ opinions about
a product or brand, as is multimodal sentiment analysis. Using au-
tomated sentiment analysis, we can obtain feedback from customers
in a low-cost way. Previously, early-stage companies or organizations