Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
Available online 24 February 2023
1566-2535/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
Multimodal sentiment analysis based on fusion methods: A survey
Linan Zhua, Zhechao Zhua, Chenwei Zhangb, Yifei Xua, Xiangjie Konga,∗
aCollege of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China
bSchool of Faculty of Education, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Multimodal data
Sentiment analysis
Feature extraction
Fusion methodsA B S T R A C T
Sentiment analysis is an emerging technology that aims to explore people’s attitudes toward an entity. It can be
applied in a variety of different fields and scenarios, such as product review analysis, public opinion analysis,
psychological disease analysis, and risk assessment analysis. Traditional sentiment analysis only includes the
text modality and extracts sentiment information by inferring the semantic relationship within sentences.
However, some special expressions, such as irony and exaggeration, are difficult to detect via text alone.
Multimodal sentiment analysis contains rich visual and acoustic information in addition to text, and uses
fusion analysis to more accurately infer the implied sentiment polarity (positive, neutral, negative). The main
challenge in multimodal sentiment analysis is the integration of cross-modal sentiment information, so we focus
on introducing the framework and characteristics of different fusion methods. In addition, this article discusses
the development status of multimodal sentiment analysis, popular datasets, feature extraction algorithms,
application areas, and existing challenges. It is hoped that our work can help researchers understand the
current state of research in the field of multimodal sentiment analysis, and be inspired by the useful insights
provided in the article to develop effective models.
1. Introduction
1.1. From sentiment analysis to multimodal sentiment analysis
Sentiments are people’s inherent attitudes toward a particular topic,
person, or entity. Understanding people’s attitudes is helpful for us to
communicate, learn, and make decisions. For example, a company or
store can make corresponding improvements based on how customers
evaluate their brand or product. The evaluation of netizen voting can
help government agencies guide public opinion. That is why, for the
past two decades, AI researchers have been trying to give machines the
cognitive ability to recognize, interpret, and express sentiments.
Early sentiment analysis mainly focused on text, in which only
the interrelationships of words and phrases are considered to analyze
sentiment [ 1]. However, relying on text data alone is not sufficient to
extract the sentiments expressed by humans, because the meaning of
what a speaker says often changes dynamically based on non-verbal
behaviors. For example, the model’s analysis of the word ‘‘great’’ in
the text is generally positive; but if an exaggerated expression or
sarcastic laughter is added, the expression may turn into a negative
sentiment. Multimodal sentiment analysis has been proposed to address
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: xjkong@ieee.org (X. Kong).this problem, where multimodal refers to the multiple modalities (text,
audio, and video) in which people communicate and express their
feelings. In-depth research and work over the years have shown that
multimodal systems are more effective than unimodal systems in iden-
tifying speakers’ sentiments. A multimodal sentiment analysis survey
published in 2015 reported that multimodal systems were consistently
more accurate than their best unimodal counterparts [ 2].
With the tremendous development of social media, a large number
of videos expressing personal opinions have been released on platforms
such as YouTube or Facebook, which provides excellent resource sup-
port for multimodal sentiment analysis [ 3]. These videos are usually
product reviews, movie reviews, policy critiques, etc. In addition to text
information, videos also provide rich visual and acoustic information,
and the feature fusion analysis of these modalities forms a multimodal
sentiment analysis system [ 4].
The framework of a multimodal sentiment analysis system can be di-
vided into the modeling of intra-modality dynamics and inter-modality
dynamics. Intra-modality dynamics refers to the dynamical analysis of
the interactions within each modality. For text, intra-modality dy-
namics are the interrelationships between words and phrases in a
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.02.028
Received 6 November 2022; Received in revised form 31 January 2023; Accepted 20 February 2023