Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
310L. Zhu et al.
later stages. Tran et al. [46] proposed a simple and efficient deep
three-dimensional convolutional neural network (3D-CNN) for spa-
tiotemporal feature extraction, which can be used in different tasks,
such as action recognition, same action judgment, and dynamic scene
recognition.
Nowadays, most of the features are extracted by neural networks
or public libraries. The most commonly used public libraries include
OKAO, CERT, OpenFace, and Facet. OKAO Vision detects and ex-
tracts facial features at each frame, then returns a smile intensity
(0–100) and eye gaze direction. Computer expression recognition tool-
box (CERT) [47] allows users to automatically extract the following
visual features: smile and head pose estimates, facial AUs, and eight
basic emotions (anger, contempt, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise,
and neutral). The MultiComp OpenFace 2.0 toolkit [48] extracts 68 fa-
cial landmarks, 17 facial action units, head pose, head orientation, and
eye gaze. The Facet library extracts a set of visual features, including
facial action units, facial landmarks, head pose, gaze tracking, and HOG
features.
3.3. Acoustic feature extraction
Deep learning has also attracted more and more attention in audio
classification research. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [49] and bi-
directional LSTM [50] have been widely used for hand-extracted acous-
tic features. Since deep networks are often used to automatically extract
features in computer vision, a research question is whether the network
can be replicated or not. The answer was given by Anand et al. [51],
who used CNN to extract features from audio and then passed them into
the classifier for the sentiment classification task. Deep neural networks
based on generalized discriminant analysis (GDA) are also very popular
for automatic feature extraction from raw audio data.
Recently, most multimodal sentiment analysis models use OpenEAR,
openSMILE, LibROSA, COVAREP, and other open-source libraries to
extract acoustic features. The open source software OpenEAR [52]
automatically computes a set of acoustic features, including prosody,
energy, vocal probability, spectrum, and cepstral features, and uses
z-standardization for speaker normalization. All features and func-
tions can be calculated using the online audio analysis toolkit openS-
MILE [53]. Specifically, the features extracted by openSMILE consist of
several low-level descriptors (LLDs) such as MFCC, pitch, and sound
intensity and their statistical functions. Some of these functions are
amplitude mean, arithmetic mean, root quadratic mean, standard de-
viation, etc. The LibROSA speech toolkit [54] can be used to extract
acoustic features at 22 050 Hz. A total of 33-dimensional frame-level
acoustic features are extracted, including 20-dimensional MFCC and
12-dimensional constant q transform (CQT). These traits are related
to mood and speech intonation. For each opinion utterance audio,
the COVAREP acoustic analysis framework [55] can also be used to
extract acoustic features, including 12 MFCC, glottal source parameters,
peak slope parameters, maximum dispersion quotients (MDQ), and
Liljencrants-Fant (LF).
4. Fusion methods
The use of efficient methods to fuse feature information from differ-
ent modalities is a major challenge for multimodal sentiment analysis.
In this section, we classify 42 methods into 8 categories according to
their fusion methods, as shown in Fig. 2. We describe the framework
of each model in detail and list the advantages and disadvantages of
each model, which can provide inspiration for readers to carry out their
work. At the end of this section, we systematically compare the fusion
methods of each classification and describe the development driven by
the advantages and disadvantages of the models.4.1. Early fusion
Early fusion is also called feature-level fusion. By extracting the
features of each modality and merging them at the input level, a joint
representation is constructed, and sentiment classification is performed
on this basis. The framework of this approach can be simple as it relies
on general models (Support Vector Machine (SVM [56]) or deep neural
networks) to learn view-specific and cross-view dynamics without any
specific model design. However, early-stage fusion results in a lack of
detailed modeling of view-specific dynamics, thereby losing contextual
and temporal dependencies within each modality, which in turn affects
the modeling of cross-view dynamics and leads to an overfitting of the
data. Table 3 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each
model.
4.1.1. THMM (Tri-modal Hidden Markov Model)
Morency et al. [4] first proposed the task of tri-modal sentiment
analysis and designed a model to solve it. After extracting the features
of each modality and concatenating them, a tri-modal HMM classifier
is used to learn the hidden structure of the input signal.
4.1.2. SVM (Support Vector Machine)
Perez-Rosas et al. [13] combined the features collected from all
multimodal streams into a feature vector, thereby generating a vector
for each utterance and using an SVM classifier to decide the sentimental
orientation of the utterance. S. Park et al. [16] used Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) for classification and Support Vector Regressions
(SVRs) for regression experiments with the radial basis function kernel
as the prediction models.
4.1.3. MKL (Multiple Kernel Learning)
Poria et al. [19] used two different feature selectors to reduce the
number of features after extracting tri-modal features. One is based
on the cyclic correlation-based feature subset selection (CFS), and the
other is based on principal component analysis (PCA). In addition
to improving the processing time of the model, the feature selection
method also slightly improves the experimental results. Finally, the
processed feature vectors are concatenated, and the classifier is trained
with a multi-kernel learning (MKL) algorithm. In the following year,
based on previous work, the authors [57] proposed a convolutional
recurrent multiple kernel learning (CRMKL) model, specifically using
a convolutional RNN for visual sentiment detection, which further
improved the experimental results.
4.1.4. EF-LSTM (Early Fusion LSTM)
Zadeh et al. [26] concatenated the inputs from different modalities
at each time step and used it as the input to a single LSTM.
4.1.5. Self-MM (Self-Supervised Multi-task Multimodal sentiment analysis
network)
Yu et al. [58] proposed a Self-Supervised Multi-task Multimodal sen-
timent analysis network (Self-MM) to divide the multimodal sentiment
analysis task into a multimodal task and three independent unimodal
subtasks. The multimodal task is similar to other early fusion methods,
which is why this method is classified in the category of early fusion
methods. A major feature of Self-MM is the design of a label generation
module based on a self-supervised learning strategy to obtain indepen-
dent unimodal supervision. For example, if the multimodal annotation
is closer to the positive center and the unimodal representation is more
negatively centered, the Unimodal Label Generation Module (ULGM)
will impose a negative relative offset value to the multimodal label to
form the Unimodal Label. A hard sharing strategy is adopted to share
the bottom representation learning network between the multimodal
task and different unimodal tasks. The result is that the multimodal
and unimodal tasks are jointly trained to learn their congruence and
dissimilarity, respectively. The experiment results verify the reliability
and stability of the automatically generated unimodal labels.