Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
321L. Zhu et al.
typically assessed customer opinions through survey panels, a relatively
tedious and costly task. With the development of social media and
the trend of people keen to post opinion videos and comments on,
e.g., YouTube, automatic sentiment analysis can become a low-cost job.
Multimodal sentiment analysis has also derived a series of applications
and fields [ 82–84]. Following are some applications of multimodal
sentiment analysis as shown in Fig. 3.
5.1. Business analysis
Multimodal sentiment analysis has many applications in the field
of business intelligence. The most typical application is to analyze
customer evaluations of products or brands. However, these studies are
not only available to product producers; consumers can also use them
to judge the quality of pre-order items and make more informed deci-
sions [ 85]. For example, companies can leverage multimodal sentiment
analysis data to improve products, investigate customer feedback and
develop innovative marketing strategies [ 86]. Multimodal sentiment
analysis can help customers choose better products by defining key-
words for specific topics and training a sentiment analysis framework
that can identify and analyze only the necessary information [ 87].
In addition, multimodal sentiment analysis can be applied to judge
potential competitors and compare marketing methods, and obtain
information on major consumers through user portraits [ 88] and other
methods.
5.2. Predictions and trend analytics
Tracking public opinion through sentiment analysis can help pre-
dict some market scenarios. For example, analyzing video reviews of
movies provides an opportunity to predict the box office performance
of movies. In [ 89], the authors used Weka’s KMeans clustering tool on
Twitter, YouTube, and the IMDB movie database to generate movie box
office predictions. The volatility and uncertainty of the stock market
make stock market forecasting a daunting task, but by analyzing all
the news about the stock market, the overall polarity of a particular
company can be determined, thereby predicting stock price trends.
Xing et al. [ 90] proposed such an analysis in their survey, associating
positive news with an upward trend and negative news with a down-
ward trend. Ma et al. [ 91] proposed a novel Multi-source Aggregated
Classification (MAC) method to predict stock price movements by
combining numerical characteristics and market-driven news sentiment
of target stocks, as well as news sentiment of related stocks.
5.3. Human–machine interactions
The work of Langlet et al. [ 92] suggests that humans are likely
to find an Embodied Conversational Agent (ECA) more likable if the
user and the ECA share a common view of an entity. The field of
human–machine interaction is also a large area of applied sentiment
analysis. During the interaction between the avatars represented by
ECA and the user, the management of the sentimental component of the
dialogue is crucial. For different users, sentiment analysis can extract
expressions of like or dislike. In this way, the trained ECA can better
fit the user’s psychology and provide better service effects. ECAs have
found their way into many different applications, from online education
to customer service.
5.4. Multimedia analysis
Multimedia analysis is a new field of development for sentiment
analysis. The work of Ellis et al. [ 93] builds a system using multimodal
sentiment analysis that can automatically analyze broadcast video news
and create summaries of TV programs. Multimodal sentiment analysis
techniques can also be used to identify politically persuasive content.
Siddiquie et al. [ 94] proposed a solution to detect politically persuasive
Fig. 4. Challenges of multimodal sentiment analysis.
videos posted on social media and develop methods to predict and
analyze comment reaction sentiment. The existence of multimodal
sentiment analysis makes it possible to mine the opinions expressed by
countless broadcast TV channels or online channels on the Internet.
5.5. Recommender systems
Many applications will give corresponding recommendations based
on the user’s historical search experience. For example, Amazon uses
recommendation systems to recommend products on the homepage
for customers, YouTube recommends related videos to play next on
autoplay, and Facebook recommends people and web pages of potential
interest. If a user searches for a specific product, that app will be
suggested in future results. Dang et al. [ 95] proposed that incorpo-
rating sentiment analysis into recommender systems can significantly
improve recommendation quality, especially when only sparse data are
available.
6. Challenges
Combining information from different modalities is a challenging
task, and we need to decide which modality holds more weight. It
is also very important to reduce noise data between heterogeneous
input data, which necessitates the design of better fusion methods and
models. Apart from this, there are some other challenges in the field
of multimodal sentiment analysis, which are introduced in this section
and shown in Fig. 4.
6.1. Domain dependence
Most of the current sentiment analysis models are data-driven, so
the model only learns the knowledge contained in the specific do-
main data. When a model trained in a specific domain is transferred
to other unrelated domains, its performance will often drop signifi-
cantly. Solving the domain-dependent problem requires designing a
domain-dependence sentiment analysis system, for example, adapting
a model trained on sentiment analysis in product reviews to ana-
lyze Weibo posts. Researchers have proposed many possible solutions,
among which the prompt-based approach is a promising research direc-
tion. Pre-trained language models (PLMs) are trained with non-domain-
specific texts, and adding prompts can help adapt to different domains.
Mao et al. conducted a systematic empirical study of prompt-based
sentiment analysis and emotion detection to investigate the bias of
PLMs to affective computing [ 96].