Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
313L. Zhu et al.
4.3.3. MRRF (Modality-based Redundancy Reduction Fusion)
Inspired by TFN [21] and LMF [22], Barezi et al. [64] proposed
a modality-based redundancy reduction fusion (MRRF) model to un-
derstand and modulate the relative contribution of each modality in
multimodal inference tasks. Whereas the factorization in LMF utilizes
a single compression rate across all modalities, MRRF uses Tucker
tensor decomposition, which allows a different compression rate for
each modality, enabling the model to adapt to changes in the amount
of useful information between different modalities. With the same
advantages as the tensor fusion method, the compression method re-
duces model complexity and decreases the number of parameters with
minimal loss of information, so it can be used as a regularizer to avoid
overfitting. Moreover, through the study of sensitivity to modality-
specific compression rate, it is helpful in understanding the relative
amount of non-redundant information in each modality.
4.3.4. T2FN (Temporal Tensor Fusion Network)
Clean multimodal time series often show correlations across time
and modalities, presenting a low-rank tensor representation [65]. How-
ever, the presence of imperfect modalities, missing entries, and noise
corruption can break these natural correlations and lead to high-rank
tensor representations. Therefore, Paul et al. [66] proposed a Temporal
Tensor Fusion Network (T2FN) model based on a tensor rank minimiza-
tion regularization method, which learns tensor representations of true
correlations and latent structures in multimodal data and effectively
normalizes their rank. T2FN extends the TFN model by adding a
temporal component that enhances the ability to capture high-rank
tensor representations, which in itself leads to improved prediction
performance. The adaptation to imperfect data reflects the robustness
of the model.
4.3.5. HFFN (Hierarchical Feature Fusion Network)
Also inspired by TFN [21], in order to solve the problem brought
by high-rank tensors, Mai et al. [23] proposed a Hierarchical Feature
Fusion Network (HFFN) to improve efficiency through a hierarchical
fusion framework. The whole model can be divided into three stages:
‘‘divide’’, ‘‘conquer’’ and ‘‘combine’’. The ‘‘divide’’ and ‘‘conquer’’ stages
focus on local fusion, and the ‘‘combine’’ stage focuses on global fusion.
In the ‘‘divide’’ stage, the trimodal feature vectors are aligned to
form a multimodal embedding and segmented into local parts using a
sliding window to explore intermodal dynamics. In the ‘‘conquer’’ stage,
the outer product is applied to fuse the features within each local block
to explore the interactive state dynamics. Compared with other models
that employ outer products, the efficiency is significantly improved
due to the characteristics of the local model. In the ‘‘combine’’ stage,
global interactions are modeled by exploring the interconnections and
contextual dependencies between locally fused tensors. In response
to the lack of connection between local fusion vectors, the authors
proposed Attentive Bi-directional Skip-connected LSTM (ABS-LSTM),
an RNN variant. ABS-LSTM introduces bidirectional skip connections of
memory cells and hidden states into LSTM, and integrates an attention
mechanism to transfer information more efficiently and learn holistic
representations to obtain a holistic view of multimodal information. Fi-
nally, the global interaction is input to the emotional inference module
to obtain the final prediction.
4.3.6. LMFN (Locally Confined Modality Fusion Network)
In the second year of proposing HFFN [23], Mai et al. [24] presented
a new multimodal fusion framework called the locally confined modal-
ity fusion network (LMFN). For intra-modal interactions, each modality
has a specific unimodal context-dependent learning network UC-LSTM.
Similar to BC-LSTM, UC-LSTM consists of a bidirectional LSTM layer
and a dense layer, which can model the temporal relationship between
consecutive utterances in a video to help better understand the current
utterance. As in HFFN, the authors divided the fusion into local and
global stages. In local fusion, the feature vector corresponding to eachmodality is divided into multiple segments, and each local interaction
is learned through a tensor fusion process. The local vectors are then
passed to the global fusion stage, where dependencies are learned
by a Bidirectional Multiconnected LSTM (BM-LSTM) to model global
interactions, establishing direct connections between cells and local
tensor states that are several time steps apart. Finally, the output is
connected to the decision layer to arrive at sentiment predictions.
4.4. Word-level fusion
The word-level fusion approach takes into account both view-
specific and cross-view interactions, and efficiently explores time-
dependent interactions by modeling interactions at each time step.
The model framework of this fusion method generally consists of two
modules: a temporal modeling module and an attention module.
In the temporal modeling module, modality-specific dynamics are
modeled through a temporal modeling network (LSTM, LSTHM, 1D
temporal CNN, etc.).
The attention module receives the output of the temporal modeling
module and uses the attention mechanism and its variants to model
important information in dynamic cross-modal interactions.
Table 6 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each
model.
4.4.1. GME-LSTM(A) (Gated Multimodal Embedding LSTM with Temporal
Attention)
Diverging from previous multimodal sentiment analysis work that
focused on the overall information of speech fragments, Chen et al. [25]
proposed a Gated Multimodal Embedding LSTM with Temporal At-
tention (GME-LSTM(A)) model. This is the first method to perform
multimodal fusion at the word level. The model is divided into two
modules: the Gated Multimodal Embedding Layer and the LSTM with
Temporal Attention module.
Gated multimodal embedding learns local interactions between
modalities at each time step (word level). Since previous models have
shown that noise in visual and acoustic modalities can impair the
performance of the textual modality, the authors used an on/off input
gate controller on the acoustic/visual features for selective multimodal
fusion, which alleviates the difficulty of fusion in noisy modalities.
Features from the three modalities are concatenated and then fed
into the next layer. LSTM with temporal attention captures temporal
interactions on multimodal embedding layers and adaptively focuses on
the most important time steps. This module learns global interactions
between modalities, enabling the model to account for both local and
global interactions.
4.4.2. MARN (Multi-Attention Recurrent Network)
Zadeh et al. [26] proposed a Multi-attention Recurrent Network
(MARN), which consists of two key components: Long-short Term
Hybrid Memory and Multi-attention Block. Long-short Term Hybrid
Memory (LSTHM) is an extension of LSTM that redesigns its memory
components so that mixed information can be carried. This hybrid
memory can store not only intra-modal information for a specific
modality but also important cross-view dynamics related to that modal-
ity. Among them, the component that discovers the interactive infor-
mation of the transmembrane state is the Multi-attention Block (MAB),
which is the uniqueness and advantage of this model. At time step t,
the MAB accepts hidden states from all LSTHMs to outline the multiple
cross-view dynamics that exist. The authors posit the K largest cross-
view dynamics at each timestamp and use a deep neural network to
obtain these K attention coefficients. Then, according to these coeffi-
cients, the output dimensions are weighted to form the dynamic code
z𝑡of the LSTHM at time t, which is passed to the next time step.