Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
312L. Zhu et al.
Table 4
Characteristics of late fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
Averaging ∙Average the output of unimodal classifiers ∙If a modality is noisy, it may affect the final prediction
DF ∙The model learns the importance of each modality and assigns weights to the final
model accordingly∙Cannot handle noisy training data
SAL-CNN ∙Select-Additive Learning
∙Force the original model to discard confounding elements to improve the generality
of the trained neural network∙Added Gaussian noise may impair normal model predictions
Majority ∙Do majority voting for classification tasks and predict expected labels for regression
tasks∙Some close key outputs may be ignored
Table 5
Characteristics of tensor-based fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
TFN ∙Learn both the intra-modality and inter-modality dynamics end-to-end
∙The tensor fusion layer uses a 3-fold Cartesian product of the three output vectors of the
embedding layer∙The resulting representation has a very large
dimensionality and thus a large number of parameters
LMF ∙Similar to TFN, but adds an additional low-rank factor to reduce computational memory
∙Can perform robustly in a wide range of low-rank settings and be more efficient in training
and inference∙Modeling of local interactions neglected
MRRF ∙Tuckers tensor decomposition method allows different compression ratios for each modality
∙Redundant information repeated across modalities can be eliminated and lead to less
information loss and minimal parameters∙Require training and testing on larger datasets
T2FN ∙Temporal Tensor Fusion Network (T2FN)
∙Regularization method based on tensor rank minimization∙Imperfect data increases tensor rank
HFFN ∙Divide, Conquer and Combine
∙Local fusion by exploring the interaction of partially aligned feature vectors of different
modalities within a sliding window
∙Explore the attention mechanism between local interactions through an Attentive
Bi-directional Skip-connected LSTM∙It may not be optimal for all three modalities to be
treated equally
∙There may be a lot of redundant information in the
feature vector
LMFN ∙The feature vector corresponding to each modality is divided into multiple segments, and
each local interaction is learned through a tensor fusion procedure
∙Model global interactions using a Bidirectional Multiconnected LSTM
∙The calculation cost is linearly related to the dimension of the feature vector∙Performance on CMU-MOSEI is weaker than on other
datasets
∙Dividing the feature vectors into segments of equal size
may not be optimal
being learned in a deep neural network. The SAL method consists of a
two-stage process (selection and addition). During the selection phase,
SAL identifies the confounding factors from the latent representation
learned by neural networks. During the addition phase, SAL forces the
original model to discard the confounding elements by adding Gaussian
noises to these representations. SAL nearly maintains the clustering
structure of identity, but greatly improves the clustering structure of
the category of sentiment.
4.2.4. Majority
Zadeh et al. [26] performed majority voting for classification tasks,
and predicted the expected label for regression tasks.
4.3. Tensor-based fusion
Tensor-based methods mainly compute the tensor product of uni-
modal sentence representations to obtain multimodal sentence repre-
sentations. This requires first converting the input representation into
a high-dimensional tensor, then mapping it back to a low-dimensional
output vector space, which is a typical non-concatenated feature fu-
sion method. Tensors are powerful because they capture important
higher-order interactions across time, feature dimensions, and multiple
modalities [63]. However, a drawback of this approach is that the
computational complexity grows exponentially and there is no fine-
grained word-level interaction between cross-modalities. The method
first embeds the three modalities of text, vision, and audio to explore
the dynamics within the modalities, then fuses multimodal embedding
representations to explore dynamic interactions between modalities.
Table 5 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each model.4.3.1. TFN (Tensor Fusion Network)
Zadeh et al. [21] proposed a Tensor Fusion Network (TFN) model,
which learns both the intra-modality and inter-modality dynamics end-
to-end. The model is divided into three parts: Modality Embedding
Subnetworks, Tensor Fusion Layer, and Sentiment Inference Subnet-
work.
The Modality Embedding Subnetworks use an LSTM network with
forget gates to learn time-dependent language representations, which
are then joined to a fully connected network to obtain language em-
beddings. For acoustic and visual features, FACET and COVAREP are
used to extract features, and after average pooling, they are respectively
connected to deep neural networks to obtain embeddings. In the Tensor
Fusion Layer, a triple Cartesian product is used for the three output
vectors of the embedding layer, which fully combines the unimodal,
bimodal, and trimodal interactions in tensor fusion. The resulting mul-
timodal tensor is passed to a fully connected deep neural network
called the Sentiment Inference Subnetwork, and the prediction result
is obtained.
4.3.2. LMF (Low-rank Multimodal Fusion)
To address the problem of exponential increase in computational
complexity introduced when converting inputs to tensors, Liu et al. [22]
proposed a Low-rank Multimodal Fusion (LMF) method, which uses
low-rank tensors to perform multimodal fusion, greatly reducing the
computational complexity. The model is similar to TFN, but decom-
poses the weights into low-rank factors, reducing the number of pa-
rameters. Moreover, the experimental results show that the proposed
model can perform robustly in a wide range of low-rank settings, and
it is more effective in training and reasoning than other methods using
tensor representation.