Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
314L. Zhu et al.
Table 6
Characteristics of word-level fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
GME-LSTM(A) ∙The first to use word level modality fusion
∙Gated multimodal embedding filters out noise from acoustic and visual data
∙LSTM with temporal attention performs word-level fusion at a finer fusion
resolution between input modalities∙The temporal correlation of the individual modality is
ignored
∙Obtaining the word-level features needs to perform the
force-alignment, which is time-consuming
MARN ∙Long-short Term Hybrid Memory (LSTHM)
∙Multi-attention Block (MAB)
∙Discover interactions between modalities over time and store them in the hybrid
memory of the recurrent component∙Cannot learn the correlations across different modalities
MFN ∙Multi-view sequential learning
∙Delta-memory Attention Network (DMAN)
∙Memorize long-term interactions and internal behaviors across modalities, and store
and update them in LSTM∙Cross-view dynamics are not explored
DFG ∙Replace the original fusion component DMAN in MFN with DFG ∙Useless visual modality can sometimes hurt model
performance
RMFN ∙Recurrent Multistage Fusion Network (RMFN)
∙Decompose the fusion problem into multiple stages, each of which focuses on a
subset of multimodal signals for specialized and efficient fusion
∙The multistage fusion method can be easily extended to memory-based fusion
methods∙Lack of representational power to accurately model the
structure of nonverbal behavior at the subword level
HED ∙A hierarchical encoder–decoder framework
∙The encoder learns word-level features from each modality that are then
formulated into conversation-level features
∙The decoder decodes features to each time instance, further decomposing them into
attributes for sentiment prediction∙Not suitable for small datasets
∙Decoding the entire conversation into time instances with
equal length results in the inability to make sentence-level
predictions
RAVEN ∙Nonverbal sub-networks
∙Model the fine-grained structure of nonverbal subword sequences
∙Use an attention gating mechanism to yield the nonverbal shift vectors which
characterizes the extent and direction of word changed due to nonverbal context∙Only a simple LSTM is used for making predictions
SWRM ∙Sentiment word position detection
∙Apply multimodal gating network to filter out useless information from the input
word embeddings
∙Utilize useful information from candidate sentiment words as a supplement to the
filtered word embeddings
∙Can be adapted for other multimodal feature fusion models easily∙Only text is used to detect the position of sentiment words,
no other modalities are exploited
4.4.3. MFN (Memory Fusion Network)
Zadeh et al. [27] proposed a novel neural model for multi-view
sequence learning, named the Memory Fusion Network (MFN). The
sequential interactions of each modality over time are encoded using
LSTMs. The output of the LSTM system is then concatenated into
an attention layer to identify cross-view interactions by associating a
relevance score with the memory dimension of each LSTM, called the
Delta-memory Attention Network (DMAN). The outputs of the DMAN at
time steps t-1 and t are passed to multi-view gated memory to indicate
what dimensions in the memory system of LSTMs constitute cross-view
interactions. The module then updates its content based on the output
of the DMAN and its previously stored content, controlled by two sets
of gates, both controlled by a neural network. At each time step, the
retention gate assigns how much of the current state of the Multi-view
Gated Memory to remember and the update gate assigns how much of
the Multi-view Gated Memory to update based on the updated proposal.
The output is the final state of the multi-view gated memory and the
vector concatenation of the LSTMs representing the information of a
single sequence.
4.4.4. DFG (Dynamic Fusion Graph)
In addition to proposing CMU-MOSEI, Zadeh et al. [9] defined
the establishment of n-modal dynamics as a hierarchical process and
proposed a new fusion model called the Dynamic Fusion Graph (DFG).
The original fused DMAN in MFN [27] is replaced by DFG, and the final
result model is called the Graph Memory Fusion Network (Graph-MFN).
4.4.5. RMFN (Recurrent Multistage Fusion Network)
Liang et al. [67] proposed a Recurrent Multistage Fusion Network
(RMFN), which decomposes the multimodal fusion problem into mul-
tiple recursive stages, each focusing on a subset of multimodal signalsfor specialized and efficient fusion. Multistage fusion mainly consists of
three modules: Highlight, Fuse, and Summarize. First, each modal se-
quence is modeled with an intra-modal recurrent neural network [26].
At time step t, each intra-modal recurrent network will output a uni-
modal representation. Then in the multistage fusion process, the two
modules of Highlight and Fuse are repeated at each stage, where
the Highlight module identifies subsets of multimodal signals, and
the Fuse module fuses the highlighted features locally and combines
them with the previous stage. Finally, the Summarize module converts
the multimodal representation of the last stage into a transmembrane
state representation, which is passed to the next time step. The final
representation integrates the last output of the LSTHMs and the last
transmembrane state representation. By combining this fusion method
with a recurrent neural network system, interactions within time and
patterns are simulated.
4.4.6. HED (Hierarchical Encoder-Decoder)
Gu et al. [68] proposed a hierarchical encoder–decoder structure
with an attention mechanism for conversation analysis. The system
consists of two modules: the hierarchical encoder and the hierarchical
decoder. The hierarchical encoder first synchronizes and combines the
extracted feature-shared representations, then uses a temporal atten-
tion mechanism to select important word vectors to form a single
feature vector. In the hierarchical decoder, features are decoded to each
temporal instance, and finally multi-label predictions are obtained.
4.4.7. RAVEN (Recurrent Attended Variation Embedding Network)
Considering that previous work [22,26,67] used a simple averaging
strategy to summarize subword information during each word span and
lacked the representational ability to accurately model the structure
of nonverbal behaviors at the subword level, Wang et al. [28] pro-
posed a Recurrent Attended Variation Embedding Network (RAVEN)