Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
307L. Zhu et al.
Fig. 1. General framework of a typical multimodal sentiment analysis system.
sentence. On the other hand, inter-modality dynamics refers to the
interaction between different modalities, which can be further di-
vided into synchronous and asynchronous according to whether the
modalities are aligned or not. Synchronous inter-modal interaction
means that the modalities have been aligned, and different modal-
ities with the same timestamp appear simultaneously. For example,
when a speaker expresses his opinion on the screen, the text can
be well-matched. Asynchronous inter-modal interaction means that
there is no alignment between modalities, and different modalities
may not appear simultaneously. For example, the speaker’s voice may
be heard after they are shown speaking. Existing datasets are often
unaligned but can be aligned using alignment tools such as P2FA [ 5].
Since the intra-modality representation must be obtained accurately
and the interaction between modalities is very complex, the biggest
challenge of multimodal sentiment analysis is how to create the intra-
modality representation and find the best fusion method to explore the
inter-modality interaction.
1.2. Scope of this survey
As more and more articles on multimodal sentiment analysis are
published, survey papers are needed to summarize the latest research
methods and forecast future research trends in this field. As early as
2017, Poria et al. [ 6] proposed a review of affective computing from
unimodal to multimodal fusion. Their survey elaborates on some basic
feature extraction methods and model frameworks for emotion recog-
nition and sentiment analysis. In the same year, Soleymani et al. [ 7]
also summarized the current situation of multimodal sentiment analysis
and offered an outlook on existing applications and future develop-
ment trends. Although these survey papers provided a comprehensive
overview of the current development at that time, many rich datasets
and advanced models have been proposed in the past few years. For
example, two of the most popular datasets in the field (CMU-MOSI [ 8]
and CMU-MOSEI [ 9]) are not present in these earlier surveys; nor are
models based on attention mechanisms.
In 2021, Gkoumas et al. [ 10] conducted detailed experiments and
analyses on 11 state-of-the-art models using CMU-MOSI and CMU-
MOSEI. The authors found that models that use attention mechanisms
often achieve better results. However, the number of experimental
models in this paper is too small to offer a more detailed generalization
about the field. Chandrasekaran et al. [ 11] investigated the application
of multimodal sentiment analysis to social media and proposed a large
number of methods and applications. Based on the modules used by the
models, Abdu et al. [ 12] divided 35 models into 8 categories and gave
an overview. However, none of these survey papers provide a detailed
description of the models that exist in the field from the perspective of
fusion methods.
Our work focuses on the sentiment analysis of three modalities (text,
audio, and video) and does not address other tasks such as bimodal
sentiment analysis or emotion recognition. According to the process of
multimodal sentiment analysis, we first list some popular datasets inthe field and analyze the commonly used feature extraction methods for
each modality. Then the fusion forms of existing models are analyzed,
and a taxonomy framework of fusion methods with eight classifications
is established. The fields where multimodal sentiment analysis can be
applied and the main challenges of the current model will be given
later. Finally, we summarize the content and contributions of the full
paper and illustrate several possible future research trends.
Our work aims to:
1. Provide an overview of existing work which will help researchers
gain a detailed understanding of available methods and resources for
multimodal sentiment analysis.
2. Classify existing model frameworks from the perspective of fusion
methods and give detailed descriptions of each method.
3. Summarize the application fields, expound on the existing chal-
lenges and identify future research directions.
1.3. Multimodal sentiment analysis process
Fig. 1 shows the general framework of a typical multimodal senti-
ment analysis system. The framework can be divided into two parts:
unimodal data processing and multimodal data fusion. First, feature
extractors are applied to textual, visual, and acoustic data respectively
to extract features. Then, the extracted features are transferred to
the fusion model to predict sentiment. Both of these components are
important for the performance of the whole model. The poor uni-
modal analysis leads to an insufficient understanding of intra-modal
interactions and degrades the performance of multimodal systems;
inefficient multimodal fusion leaves the interaction between modalities
incompletely utilized, which affects the stability of the multimodal
system.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the most
popular datasets in multimodal sentiment analysis. Section 3 discusses
commonly used feature extraction techniques and related articles. Sec-
tion 4 classifies advanced models in multimodal sentiment analysis into
eight categories according to their fusion methods, and analyzes their
advantages and disadvantages while introducing the models in detail.
Section 5 discusses possible applications, and Section 6 illustrates some
of the challenges of existing models. Finally, the conclusions and future
research trends are discussed in Section 7.
2. Popular datasets in multimodal sentiment analysis
Table 1 presents popular datasets in the field of multimodal senti-
ment analysis. The first three columns show, respectively, the name,
publication year, and number of videos in the dataset. The fourth
column is the task type targeted by the dataset, including review videos,
news videos, and movies. The fifth column shows the language used
in the dataset, and the sixth column shows the sources of the dataset,
mostly mainstream social media and some movies. The seventh column
is the sentiment label annotated by the dataset, represented by the