Information Fusion 95 (2023) 306–325
317L. Zhu et al.
Table 8
Characteristics of feature space manipulation-based fusion methods.
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
ICCN ∙Learn correlations between all three modalities via Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis
(DCCA)
∙Based on the text, two outer-product matrices are built for representing the interactions
between text-video and between text-audio∙The dynamic intra-actions in each model and the
inter-actions between different modalities are for further
study
∙There needs to be a trade-off between maximum
canonical correlation and optimal downstream task
performance
MISA ∙Each modality is decomposed into modality-invariant and modality-specific features, so as to
learn its common and private attributes respectively
∙Stress the importance of representation learning before fusion
∙Effort made in exploring the feature space reduce the need for complex fusion mechanisms∙Not much contribution in exploring more efficient
fusion solutions
HyCon ∙The first to leverage contrastive learning in a hybrid manner to learn cross-modal
embeddings
∙Pair selection mechanism
∙Inter-class and inter-sample relationships are explored for a more discriminative joint
embedding
∙The designed loss function introduce no additional parameters, which reduces the possibility
of overfitting and improves the generalization ability∙Lack of exploring potential relationships within and
between modalities
∙The model takes slightly longer to run than most
baselines
∙Little attention has been paid to the design of new
fusion methods
HGraph-CL ∙Hierarchical Graph Contrastive Learning (HGraph-CL) framework
∙The construction of intra- and inter-modality graphs is explored to exploit potential sentiment
relationships within and across modalities
∙Better generalizability, transferability, and robustness in learning sentiment cues compared
with pure class-driven methods∙Experimental results are sensitive to deleting/adding
ratio
HIS-MSA ∙Adopt different self-supervised pre-training strategies to fully mine the unique knowledge of
the in-domain corpus
∙A unimodal label generation module is used to jointly guide multimodal tasks and unimodal
tasks to balance independent and complementary information between the modalities
∙Heterogeneous graphs are introduced in the modality fusion phase to efficiently fuse
information from multiple modalities∙Rely heavily on the quality of the parser
∙There exists noise in the visual and audio features
learned by the model
the first stage, the text modality is the core, the acoustic modality is
integrated, and then the visual modality is added in the second stage.
One of the benefits of using CMT is that previously added modalities
can provide information for later. In this way, the textual features
are continuously enhanced while also reducing the noise in the visual
modality. Since the resulting multimodal features are composed of the
features of a single frame and lack overall acoustic information to
reflect the overall change in tone, the authors add a Global Acoustic
Feature (GAF). The GAF extracted with open SMILE is in a different
space from the multimodal fusion feature, so the authors use contrastive
learning to align the two features and concatenate them. Finally, the
contrastive loss and the classification loss are added together to guide
the model training, and a multilayer perceptron layer is used for
classification.
4.6. Feature space manipulation-based fusion
This type of fusion method focuses on mapping features into feature
space after feature extraction and learning the relationship between fea-
tures through a series of mathematical analyses or operations. Table 8
summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each model.
4.6.1. ICCN (Interaction Canonical Correlation Network)
Sun et al. [35] proposed an Interaction Canonical Correlation Net-
work (ICCN) model to learn the correlations between all three modal-
ities through Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis (DCCA). Canonical
Correlation Analysis (CCA) is a well-known method to find the linear
subspace with the largest correlation between two inputs [72]. On
its basis, DCCA uses a pair of neural networks to learn nonlinear
transformations, which solves the limitation of considering only linear
transformations. After extracting audio and video through 1D convo-
lution and LSTM, the outer product operation is performed with the
text embedding. The resulting two representations are fed into a DCCA
consisting of two CNNs and CAA layers to learn useful features in
the outer product matrix. Finally, the output of DCCA is concatenated
with the original text sentence embedding as the final multimodal
embedding for sentiment classification.4.6.2. MISA (Modality-Invariant and -Specific Subspaces)
Complex fusion methods are easily challenged by morphological
gaps between different modalities. To solve this problem, Hazarika
et al. [36] proposed a new framework, MISA, which considers different
modal subspaces to improve the fusion effect. The framework can be
divided into modal representation learning and modal fusion, where the
former is the main contribution of the paper. After extracting the fea-
tures of the three modalities, each modality is projected to two different
subspaces. The first subspace is modality-invariant, and the distribution
similarity constraint is applied to minimize the heterogeneity gap and
learn their commonality. The second subspace is modality-specific and
learns feature information private to each modality. After projecting the
modalities into the corresponding subspace, a transformer-based self-
attention is used to concatenate all 6 transformed mode vectors to make
predictions. Despite the inclusion of simple feedforward layers, MISA’s
efforts to explore the feature space reduce the need for complex fusion
mechanisms.
4.6.3. HyCon (Hybrid Contrastive Learning)
Trapped by the gaps in cross-modal information, most previous
work has focused on exploring the interactions within and between
modalities, while ignoring the learning of inter-sample and inter-class
relationships. To address these issues, Mai et al. [37] proposed a
new framework, HyCon, to learn trimodal representations using hybrid
contrasts. After obtaining unimodal representations for each modal-
ity, the authors used three different contrastive learning models to
learn inter-modality interactions and inter-class relationships. Semi-
Contrastive Learning (SCL) only considers positive samples and learns
the interactions between different modalities of the same sample in an
unsupervised form. Intra-modality Contrastive Learning (IAMCL) and
Inter-modal Contrastive Learning (IEMCL) both operate in a supervised
manner; the former learns the intra-modality dynamics among differ-
ent samples, and the latter learns the inter-modality dynamics. Both
IAMCL and IEMCL explore inter-class relationships. Finally, various
fusion strategies (including simple ones such as concatenation) are
adopted to verify the effectiveness and generalizability of the model.