26         Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)  
 
 
Figure 13 . Accuracy Comparison between YOLOv5m, YOLOR -p6, YOLOXm and YOLOv7  
 
5. FUTURE WORK 
 
Further improvements are expected to result in an improved accuracy and faster frames per 
second rate while detecti ng players of both teams distinctly.  This method could be refined  more  
by also considering to track players and their movement s which can be a great help in detecting 
off-sides too on real time, as offside detection is still one of the most challenging  decisions  in 
soccer at the moment, a goal ruled out wrongly because of error in offside detection by referee 
can chang e the game r esult. Furthermore, an application can be built on top of this model to 
distinguish the substitute players from the spectators so their movements can also be tracked 
closely. Semantics and instance segmentation can be used for that. The performance analysi s of 
the models in this paper are being compared after training them  on MS COCO dataset. These 
models can be trained on the custom data and then  the FPS comparison between them  can be 
observed . These custom trained model  can be implemented on the embed ded devices like Jetson 
Nano for various uses. T he change in the FPS in those devices  and the use of quantization 
techniques to deal with the FPS drop is yet another discussion . Additionally,  a user friendly 
dashboard to interpret  the information about game tr end, insight and likelihood of goal by teams 
can be created . 
 
6. CONCLUSION  
 
Over the past few years, YOLO family has seen some tremendous research work as it has been 
proved to be a great resource for real -time object detection. Due to its fast & accurate detection, 
YOLO algorithm has huge potential for being used in the commercia l applications. In this paper, 
different variants of the YOLO algorithms are analyzed for the accuracy and speed  to yield the 
best performing model . YOLOv5, YOLO -X, YOLO -R and YOLOv7 models  were applied  to a 
soccer game play video to track the moving ball and the players in the playground. All the 
models performed well however YOLOv7 proved to be state of the art in terms of the accuracy  
showing 58% AP whereas YOLOR -p6 which comes right after the former model and shows 56% 
AP. On the other hand, YOLOv7 perf orms very poorly in terms of FPS demonstrating only 17 
frames per second coming last against YOLO -R, YOLO -X and YOLOv5. Our work proves that 
where YOLOv7 is not the fastest on our data however due to its accuracy, it can be used in