Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        21 
With a DarkNet53 backbone, YOLOX is a single -stage object detector that makes a number of 
changes to YOLOv3. In particular, YOLO's head is replaced with a decoupled on e. Prior to 
adding two parallel branches with two 3 x 3 conv layers each for the classification and regression 
tasks, we adopt a 1 x 1 conv layer for each level of FPN features to minimize the feature channel 
to 256  [8]. 
 
To solve the conflict between classification and regression in object detection, this model uses 
Decoupled head architecture which means that classification and localization processes on the 
images are separated. This decoupled head architecture can be imp lemented on both regression 
and classification based models, one -stage and two -stage respectively.    
 
 
  
Figure 5. Comparison between YOLOX and YOLOv5  [8] 
 
3. METHOD USED 
 
In this paper,  the YOLOv7 trained on MS COCO model was utilized on a soccer game play, 
detecting all the players in r eal-time and football movement. T he inference time and accuracy of 
the model was carefully observed and then  was compared with other models.  
 
3.1. Major Improvements in Yolov7  
 
YOLOv7 is the latest state of the art  detector to this date among all known object detectors. Few 
architectural reforms have been introduced to the model that have improved the speed and the 
accuracy significantly. Just similar to scaled YOLOv4, this model  also uses COCO dataset. The 
architectural reforms include E -ELAN (Extended Efficient Layer Aggregation Network) along 
with Model Scaling for concatenation based Models  to enhance learning ability . Additionally, 
planned re -parameterized convolution and coa rse for auxiliary with Fine for lead loss are aliased 
as the bag of freebies that also compliment the model for better learning without actual ly 
increasing the training cost  [1]. 
 
Expand, shuffle, and merge cardinality is used in  the proposed E -ELAN to continuously improve 
the network's capacity for learning while preserving the original gradient path.  This block in 
YOLOv7 is based on the previously developed ELAN computational block (Figure 6) .