David C. Wyld et al. (Eds): AIFZ, SIGPRO, NWCOM, CLSB, MLNLP, DTMN, BDIOT, CSITY  - 2022  
pp. 17-28, 2022. CS & IT  - CSCP 2022                                                           DOI: 10.5121/csit.2022.1216 02  
YOLOV 5, YOLO-X, YOLO-R, YOLOV 7 
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON : A SURVEY  
 
Ismat Saira Gillani1, Muhammad Rizwan Munawar2,  
Muhammad Talha3, Salman Azhar4, Yousra Mashkoor5,  
Muhammad Sami uddin6 and Usama Zafar7 
 
1Department of Computer Science, Columbus State University, USA  
2Department of Computer Science , COMSAT University Pakistan  
3Department of Electrical Engineeri ng, GC University  Faisalabad , Pakistan  
4Department of Creative Tech nology, Air University Pakistan  
5Department of Computer Science, NED University Pakistan  
6National University of Techn ology (NUTECH) Islamabad, Pakistan  
7Department of Computer Science, GC University  Faisalabad , Pakistan
ABSTRACT  
 
YOLOv7 algorithm have taken the object detection domain by the storm as its real -time object 
detection cap abilities out ran all other previous  algorithms bot h in accuracy and speed [1]. 
YOLOv7 advances the state of the art results  in object detection by inferring more quickly and 
accurately than its contemporaries.  In this paper, we are going to present  our work of 
implementing this SOTA  deep learning model  on a soccer game play video to detect the players 
and football. As the result, it detected the players, football and their movement  in real time. We 
also analyze d and compare d the YOLOv7 results against  its previous versions  including 
YOLOv4,  YOLOv5 and YOLO -R. The code is available at:  
https://github.com/RizwanMunawar/YOLO -RX57 -FPS-Comparision  
 
KEYWORDS : 
 
Deep Learn ing, Object detection, Image segmentation,  Instance segmentation,  Network 
Architecture . 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Real-time prediction of the presence of one or more objects, along with their classes and 
bounding boxes, is the task of computer vision that has taken the industry by storm. Object 
detection can  use a neural network to classify and localize an object in the image. Benefitting 
from this capability, there is a tremendous amount of work that is being done in the different 
streams of life from facial recognition to autonomous driving cars , security a pplications  and 
robotics  [2]. Modern detectors have been in the development to i dentify the objects in higher 
frame rate . Recently, it has been seen how vehicles candrive on their own once put on the auto -
pilot mode. However, their applications are not limited to these fields only.  In this paper,  state of 
the art  YOLOv7 model  will be utilized  for real -time detection of the players and football 
movement. The results of this implementation were quite fascinating as there was high est 
accuracy seen along with speed.  Generally, object detection methods are of two types; a. single -
stage detectors, b. multi -stage detectors (Figure 1). The former methods directly deal with the 
execution speed whereas the latter focus more on the accurac y of the model and are evaluated in