Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                        23 
parameterization has exploded. This approach divides the model training process into a number 
of modules. To create the final model, the outputs are ensemble . (Figure 8)  
 
The Y OLO architecture usually contains a neck, a head and backbone and the outputs are 
obtained in the head. YOLOv7 has made few changes here as well. It is not constrained by a 
single head. It contains multiple heads to achieve whatever it wants. Earlier this method has also 
been used in Deep Supervision technique that is used by DL models to utilize multi heads.  
 
There are two heads that. Firstly, t he lead head in YOLOv7 is referred to as the final output head 
and secondly, the Auxiliary Head is the head that helps with middle -layer training.  With the 
assistance of am assistant loss, auxiliary heads’ weights are updated that allows the Deep 
Supervision  [17] and the model’s learning ability gets uplifted. This approach is closely related to 
Lead Head and the Label A ssigner . Label Assigner is a method that assigns soft labels after 
taking the ground truth and network prediction outcomes into account. It's vita l to notice that the 
label assigner creates coarse and soft labels rather than hard labels  (Figure 9) . 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Best ways to perform module -level ensemble  [18] 
 
The YOLOv7 network's Lead Head makes predictions about the outcome. These final results are 
used to generate soft labels. The crucial aspect is that the identical soft labels that are generated 
are used to calculate the loss for both the lead head and the auxiliary head. In the end, the soft 
labels are used to tra in both heads. This is necessary because the lead head has a somewhat robust 
learning potential, which means that the soft label that results from it should be more accurate in 
capturing the distribution and correlation betwee n the source and target data. The lead head will 
be better able to concentrate on learning residual information that has not yet been learnt by 
enabling the shallower auxiliary head immediately study the information that the lead head has 
learned.