Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 9, No. 4, 20 19 , 4377 -4383  4380   
  
www.etasr.com  Eli -Chukwu : Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Agricult ure  
 sesame crops accounts them to about 50%-75% [56]. T he 
fluctuation in yield losses may be attributed to th e length of 
exposure of the crops to the weeds [57, 58] and spa tial 
heterogeneity of weeds [59]. Beyond these, weed has  both 
positive and negative effects to the ecosystem. Acc ording to the 
relative Weed Science Society of America (WSSA) rep ort, 
weed effects include flooding during hurricane, som e species 
of weeds can pave their way during rampant fire, so me cause 
irreparable liver damage if consumed, and they musc le out 
plants or crops by competing for water, nutrients a nd sunlight. 
Some weeds are poisonous and cause allergic reactio ns or even 
may threat public health. Table IV lists a summary of the AI in 
weed managements uses.  
TABLE IV.  AI IN WEED MANAGEMENT SUMMARY  
Application Technique Strength Limitation 
[61] ANN, GA High 
performance. 
Reduces trial and 
error. Requires big data. 
[62] Optimization 
using invasive 
weed 
optimization 
(IVO), ANN Cost effective, 
enhanced 
performance. Adaptation 
challenge with 
new data. 
[63]. Mechanical 
Control of Weeds. 
ROBOTICS. 
Sensor machine 
learning Saves time and 
removes resistant 
weeds. Expensive. 
Constant use of 
heavy machine 
will reduce soil 
productivity. 
[64] UAV, GA Can quickly and 
efficiently 
monitor weeds. Has little or no 
control on weeds. 
Expensive. 
[65] Saloma expert 
system for 
evaluation, 
prediction & 
weed 
management. High adaptation 
rate and 
prediction level. Requires big data 
and usage 
expertise. 
[66] Support Vector 
Machine (SVM), 
ANN Quickly detects 
stress in crop that 
will prompt 
timely site–
specific remedies.  Only detects low 
levels of nitrogen. 
[67] Digital Image 
Analysis (DIA), 
GPS Has above 60% 
accuracy and 
success rate. Its success was 
achieved after 4 
years and as such, 
it is really time 
consuming. 
[68] UAV High rate of weed 
detection within a 
short period of 
time. It is really 
expensive and 
requires vast 
human expertise. 
[69] Learning Vector 
Quantization 
(LVQ), ANN High weed 
recognition rate 
with short 
processing time. The method of 
data input used 
affected the AI’s 
perfromance. 
 
An intensive management with herbicides has been 
deployed over the past decades to reduce its effect  on crops. 
However, even with this management pattern, it was predicted 
that crop losses due to weed in western Canada fiel d crops are 
estimated to exceed $500 million annually [60], hen ce the need 
for a more expert weed management technique to comp ensate 
for this loss emerges [51]. A system can utilize an  unmanned 
aerial vehicle (UAV) -imagery to divide image, comp ute and convert to binary the vegetation indexes, detect cr op rows, 
optimize parameters and learn a classification mode l. Since 
crops are usually organized in rows, the use of a c rop row 
detection algorithm helps to separate properly weed  and crop 
pixels, which is a common handicap given the spectr al 
similitude of both [64]. Weed control in sugar-beet , maize, 
winter wheat, and winter barley, can be done by app lying 
online weed detection using digital image analysis taken by an 
UAV (drone), computer ‐based decision making and global 
positioning system (GPS) ‐controlled patch spraying [67]. The 
drone in [68] travelled at a speed of 1.2km/h, with  58.10ms and 
37.44ms execution time to find the tomato and weed locations 
to the spray controller respectively  
VII.  CURTAILING CHALLENGES OF AI IN AGRICULTURE  
Expert systems are tools for agricultural managemen t since 
they can provide site-specific, integrated, and int erpreted 
advices. However, the development of expert systems  for 
agriculture is fairly recent, and the use of these systems in 
commercial agriculture is rare to date [70]. Althou gh AI has 
made some remarkable improvement in the agricultura l sector, 
it still has a below the average impact on the agri cultural 
activities when compared to its potentials and impa cts in other 
sectors. More still need to be done to improve agri cultural 
activities using AI as there are many limitations t o its 
implementation.  
A.  Limitation: Response Time and Accuracy 
A major attribute of an intelligent or expert syste m is its 
ability to execute tasks accurately in very short t ime. Most of 
the systems fall short either in response time or a ccuracy, or 
even both. A system delay affects a user's selectio n of task 
strategy. Strategy selection is hypothesized to be based on a 
cost function combining two factors: (1) the effort  required to 
synchronize input system availability, and (2) the accuracy 
level afforded. People seeking to minimize effort a nd maximize 
accuracy, choose among three strategies: automatic 
performance, pacing, and monitoring [71].  
B.  Limitation 2: Big Data Required 
The strength of an intelligent agent is also measur ed on the 
volume of input data. A real-time AI system needs t o monitor 
an immense volume of data. The system must filter o ut much 
of the incoming data. However, it must remain respo nsive to 
important or unexpected events [72]. An in-depth kn owledge of 
the task of the system is required from a field exp ert and only 
very relevant data should be used improving the sys tem’s speed 
and accuracy. The development of an agricultural ex pert 
system requires the combined efforts of specialists  from many 
fields of agriculture, and must be developed with t he 
cooperation of the growers who will use them [70].  
C.  Limitation 3: Method of Implementation 
The beauty of any expert system lies on its executi on 
methodology. Since it uses big data, the method of looking-up 
and training should be properly defined for speed a nd accuracy. 
D.  Limitation 4: High Data Cost 
Most AI systems are internet-based which in turn re duces 
or restricts their usage, particularly in remote or  rural areas.