Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 9, No. 4, 20 19 , 4377 -4383  4377   
  
www.etasr.com  Eli -Chukwu : Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Agricult ure  
 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Agricult ure: 
A Review 
 
Ngozi Clara Eli-Chukwu 
Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering 
Alex Ekwueme Federal University Ndufu Alike, 
Ebonyi, Nigeria 
ngozieli@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract —The application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) ha s been 
evident in the agricultural sector recently. The se ctor faces 
numerous challenges in order to maximize its yield including 
improper soil treatment, disease and pest infestati on, big data 
requirements, low output, and knowledge gap between  farmers 
and technology. The main concept of AI in agricultu re is its 
flexibility, high performance, accuracy, and cost-e ffectiveness. 
This paper presents a review of the applications of  AI in soil 
management, crop management, weed management and di sease 
management. A special focus is laid on the strength  and 
limitations of the application and the way in utili zing expert 
systems for higher productivity. 
Keywords-artificial intelligence; agriculture; soil  management; 
crop management; disease management; weed managemen t; yield 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Agriculture is the bedrock of sustainability of any  economy 
[1]. It plays a key part in long term economic grow th and 
structural transformation [2-4], though, may vary b y countries 
[5]. In the past, agricultural activities were limi ted to food and 
crop production [6]. But in the last two decades, i t has evolved 
to processing, production, marketing, and distribut ion of crops 
and livestock products. Currently, agricultural act ivities serve 
as the basic source of livelihood, improving GDP [7 ], being a 
source of national trade, reducing unemployment, pr oviding 
raw materials for production in other industries, a nd overall 
develop the economy [8-10]. With the global geometr ic 
population rise it becomes imperative that agricult ural practices 
are reviewed with the aim of proffering innovative approaches 
to sustaining and improving agricultural activities . The 
introduction of AI to agriculture will be enabled b y other 
technological advances, including big data analytic s, robotics, 
the internet of things, the availability of cheap s ensors and 
cameras, drone technology, and even wide-scale inte rnet 
coverage on geographically dispersed fields. By ana lyzing soil 
management data sources such as temperature, weathe r, soil 
analysis, moisture, and historic crop performance, AI systems 
will be able to provide predictive insights into wh ich crop to 
plant in a given year and when the optimal dates to  sow and 
harvest are in a specific area, thus improving crop  yields and 
decrease the use of water, fertilizers, and pestici des. Via the 
application of AI technologies the impact on natura l 
ecosystems can be reduced, and worker safety may in crease, which in turn will keep food prices down and ensure  that the 
food production will keep pace with the increasing population. 
II.  CONSIDERATION OVERVIEW  
Farming entails a great deal of choices and uncerta inties. 
From season to season the weather varies, the price s of farming 
materials fluctuate, soil degrades, crops are not v iable, weeds 
suffocate crops, pests damage crops, and the climat e changes. 
Farmers must cope with these uncertainties. Althoug h 
agricultural practice is broad, this research consi ders soil, crop, 
disease and weeds as major contributors to agricult ural 
production. It is paramount to review the applicati on of AI to 
agriculture in respect to soil, crop, diseases and pest 
management. 
• Soil is a critical part of successful agriculture a nd is the 
original source of the nutrients used to grow crops . Soil is 
the basis of all production systems in agriculture,  forestry 
and fishery. Soil stores water, nutrients and prote ins in 
order to make them available for proper crop growth  and 
development.  
• Crop production plays a crucial role in Nigeria’s e conomy. 
It does provide food, raw materials, and employment . In 
modern times, marketing, processing, distribution a nd after-
sales service are also accepted as parts of crop pr oduction. 
In places where the real income per capital is low,  emphasis 
is being laid on crop production and other primary 
industries. It is seen that increased crop producti on output 
and productivity tend to contribute substantially t o the 
overall economic development of a country. It will hence be 
appropriate to place greater emphasis on further cr op 
production development. 
• As agriculture struggles to support the rapidly gro wing 
population, plant diseases reduce crop production q uantity 
and quality. Agricultural losses due to post-harves t diseases 
can be disastrous. 
• Weeds consist one of the major threats to all agric ultural 
activities. Weeds reduce farm and forest productivi ty, 
invade crops, smother pastures, and in some cases h arm 
livestock. They aggressively compete with the crops  for 
water, nutrients and sunlight, resulting in reduced  crop yield 
and poor crop quality.  
Corresponding author: Ngozi Clara Eli-Chukwu