Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 9, No. 4, 20 19 , 4377 -4383  4378   
  
www.etasr.com  Eli -Chukwu : Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Agricult ure  
 III.  SOIL MANAGEMENT  
Soil management is an integral part of agricultural  
activities. A sound knowledge of various soil types  and 
conditions will enhance crop yield and conserve soi l resources. 
It is the use of operations, practices and treatmen ts to improve 
soil performance. Urban soils may contain pollutant s which can 
be investigated with a traditional soil survey appr oach [11]. 
The application of compost and manure improve soil porosity 
and aggregation. A better aggregation indicates the  addition of 
organic materials that play an important role in pr eventing soil 
crust formation. It is possible to adopt alternativ e tillage 
systems to prevent soil physical degradation. The a pplication of 
organic materials is essential to improve soil qual ity [12]. 
Production of vegetables and other edible crops is often 
significantly affected by several soil-borne pathog ens that 
require control through soil management [13]. Sensi tivity to 
soil degradation is implicit in the assessment of t he 
sustainability of land management practices, with r ecognition 
of the fact that soils vary in their ability to res ist change and 
recover [14]. 
A summary in AI soil management techniques is shown  in 
Table I. Management-oriented modeling (MOM) minimiz es 
nitrate leaching as it consists of a set of generat ed plausible 
management alternatives, a simulator that evaluates  each 
alternative, and an evaluator that determines which  alternative 
meets the user-weighted multiple criteria. MOM uses  “hill-
climbing” as a strategic search method that uses “b est-first| as a 
tactical search method to find the shortest path fr om start nodes 
to goals [15]. Knowledge of engineering for constru cting the 
Soil Risk Characterization Decision Support System (SRC-
DSS) involves three stages: knowledge acquisition, conceptual 
design and system implementation [16]. An artificia l neural 
network (ANN) model predicts soil texture (sand, cl ay and silt 
contents) based on attributes obtained from existin g coarse 
resolution soil maps combined with hydrographic par ameters 
derived from a digital elevation model (DEM) [21]. The 
dynamics of soil moisture are characterized and est imated by a 
remote sensing device embedded in a higher-order ne ural 
network (HONN) [22].  
IV.  CROP MANAGEMENT  
The crop management techniques are summarized in Ta ble 
II. Crop management starts with sowing, and continu es with 
monitoring growth, harvesting, and crop storage and  
distribution. It is summarized as the activities th at improve the 
growth and yield of agricultural products. In-depth  
understanding of class of crops according to their timing and 
thriving soil type will certainly increase crop yie ld. Precision 
crop management (PCM) is an agricultural management  system 
designed to target crop and soil inputs according t o field 
requirements to optimize profitability and protect the 
environment. PCM has been hampered by lack of timel y, 
distributed information on crop and soil conditions  [26]. 
Farmers must combine various crop management strate gies to 
cope with water deficit resulting from soil, weathe r or limited 
irrigation. Flexible crop management systems based on 
decision rules should be preferred. Timing, intensi ty, and 
predictability of drought are important features fo r choosing 
among cropping alternatives [27]. TABLE I.  AI IN SOIL MANAGEMENT SUMMARY  
Application Technique Strength Limitation 
[15] MOM Minimizes nitrate 
leaching, maximizes 
production. Takes time. Limited 
only to nitrogen. 
[16] Fuzzy Logic: 
SRC-DSS Can classify soil 
according to associated 
risks. Needs big data. 
Only a few cases 
were studied. 
[17] DSS Reduces erosion and 
sedimentary yield. Requires big data 
for training. 
[18] ANN Can predict soil 
enzyme activity. 
Accurately predicts and 
classifies soil structure. Only measures a 
few soil enzymes. It 
considers more 
classification than 
improving the 
performance of the 
soil. 
[19] ANN Can predict monthly 
mean soil temperature Considers only 
temperature as a 
factor for soil 
performance. 
[20] ANN It predicts soil texture Requires big data 
for training. Has 
restriction in areas 
of implementation. 
[21] ANN Able to predict soil 
moisture. The prediction will 
fail with time as 
weather conditions 
are hardly 
predictable. 
[22] ANN Successfully reports 
soil texture. It does not improve 
soil texture or 
proffers solution to 
bad soil texture.  
[23] ANN Cost-effective, saves 
time, has 92% accuracy  Requires big data. 
[24] ANN Can estimate soil 
nutrients after erosion. Its estimate is 
restricted to only 
NH /g2872/uni0009. 
 
Proper understanding of weather patterns helps in t he 
decision-making process that will result in high an d quality 
crop yield [28]. PROLOG utilizes weather data, mach inery 
capacities, labor availability, and information on permissible 
and prioritized operators, tractors, and implements  for 
evaluating the operational behavior of a farm syste m. It also 
estimates crop production, gross revenue, and net p rofit for 
individual fields and for the whole farm [30]. Crop  prediction 
methodology is used to predict the suitable crop by  sensing 
various soil parameters and parameter related to th e 
atmosphere. Parameters like soil type, PH, nitrogen , phosphate, 
potassium, organic carbon, calcium, magnesium, sulf ur, 
manganese, copper, iron, depth, temperature, rainfa ll, humidity 
[31]. Demeter is a computer-controlled speed-rowing  
machine, equipped with a pair of video cameras and a global 
positioning sensor for navigation. It is capable of  planning 
harvesting operations for an entire field, and then  executing 
its plan by cutting crop rows, turning to cut succe ssive rows, 
repositioning itself in the field, and detecting un expected 
obstacles [32]. The use of AI in harvesting cucumbe r 
comprises of the individual hardware and software 
components of the robot including the autonomous ve hicle, 
the manipulator, the end-effector, the two computer  vision 
systems for detection and 3D imaging of the fruit a nd the 
environment and, finally, a control scheme that gen erates