9
quick progress recently. To test continual learning capabilities,
Mankowitz et al. [87] consider an implicit sequence of tasks
with sparse rewards in DeepMind lab. The novel agent archi-
tecture called Unicorn, demonstrates strong continual learning
and outperforms several baseline agents on the proposed
domain. Schmitt et al. [88] present a method which uses
teacher agents to kickstart the training of a new student agent.
On a multi-task and challenging DMLab-30 suite, kickstarted
training improves new agents’ sample efﬁciency to a great
extend, and surpasses the ﬁnal performance by 42%. Jaderberg
et al. [89] focus on Quake III Arena Capture the Flag, which is
a popular 3D ﬁrst-person multiplayer video game, and demon-
strates that DRL agents can achieve human-level performance
with only pixels and game points as input. The agent uses
population based training to optimize the policy. This method
trains a large number of agents concurrently from thousands
of parallel matches, where agents plays cooperatively in teams
and against each other on randomly generated environments.
In an evaluation, the trained agents exceed the winrate of self-
play baseline and high-level human players both as teammates
and opponents, and are proved far stronger than existing DRL
agents.
D. Real-time strategy games
Real-time strategy games are very popular among players,
and have become popular platforms for AI research.
1)StarCraft :In StarCraft, players need to perform actions
according to real-time game states, and defeat the enemies.
Generally speaking, designing an AI bot have many chal-
lenges, including multi-agent collaboration, spatial and tem-
poral reasoning, adversarial planning, and opponent model-
ing. Currently, most bots are based on human experiences
and replays, with limited ﬂexibility and intelligence. DRL is
proved to be a promising direction for StarCraft AI, especially
in micromanagement, build order, mini-games and full-games
[90].
Recently, micromanagement is widely studied as the ﬁrst
step to solve StarCraft AI. Usunier et al. [91] introduce the
greedy MDP with episodic zero-order optimization (GMEZO)
algorithm to tackle micromanagement scenarios, which per-
forms better than DQN and policy gradient. BiCNet [92] is
a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning method to play
StarCraft combat games. It bases on actor-critic reinforcement
learning, and uses bi-directional neural networks to learn
collaboration. BiCNet successfully learns some cooperative
strategies, and is adaptable to various tasks, showing better
performances than GMEZO. In aforementioned works, re-
searchers mainly develops centralized methods to play mi-
cromanagement. Foerster et al. [93] focus on decentralized
control for micromanagement, and propose a multi-agent
actor-critic method. To stabilize experience replay and solve
nonstationarity, they use ﬁngerprints and importance sampling,
which can improve the ﬁnal performance. Shao et al. [94]
follow decentralized micromanagement task, and propose pa-
rameter sharing multi-agent gradient descent SARSA( ) (PS-
MAGDS) method. To resue the knowledge between various
micromanagement scenarios, they also combine curriculumtransfer learning to this method. This improves the sample
efﬁciency, and outperforms GMEZO and BiCNet in large-scale
scenarios. Kong et al. [95] bases on master-slave architecture,
and proposes master-slave multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MS-MARL). MS-MARL includes composed action represen-
tation, independent reasoning, and learnable communication.
This method has better performance than other methods in
micromanagement tasks. Rashid et al. [96] focus on sev-
eral challenging StarCraft II micromanagement tasks, and
use centralized training and decentralized execution to learn
cooperative behaviors. This eventually outperforms state-of-
the-art multi-agent deep reinforcement learning methods.
Researchers also use DRL methods to optimize the build
order in StarCraft. Tang et al. [97] put forward neural network
ﬁtted Q-learning (NNFQ) and convolutional neural network
ﬁtted Q-learning (CNNFQ) to build units in simple StarCraft
maps. These models are able to ﬁnd effective production
sequences, and eventually defeat enemies. In [68], researchers
present baseline results of several main DRL agents in the
StarCraft II domain. The fully convolutional advantage actor-
critic (FullyConv-A2C) agents achieve a beginner-level in
StarCraft II mini-games. Zambaldi et al. [98] introduce the
relational DRL to StarCraft, which iteratively reasons about
the relations between entities with self-attention, and uses
it to guide a model-free RL policy. This method improves
sample efﬁciency, generalization ability, and interpretability of
conventional DRL approaches. Relational DRL agent achieves
impressive performance on SC2LE mini-games. Sun et al. [99]
develop the DRL based agent TStarBot, which uses ﬂat action
structure. This agent defeats the built-in AI agents from level
1 to level 10 in a full game ﬁrstly. Lee et al. [100] focus
on StarCraft II AI, and present a novel modular architecture,
which splits responsibilities between multiple modules. Each
module controls one aspect of the game, and two modules are
trained with self-play DRL methods. This method defeats the
built-in bot in ”Harder” level. Pang et al. [101] investigate
a two-level hierarchical RL approach for StarCraft II. The
macro-action is automatically extracted from expert’s data, and
the other is a ﬂexible and scaleable hierarchical architecture.
More recently, DeepMind proposes AlphaStar, and defeats
professional players for the ﬁrst time.
2)MOBA and Dota2 :MOBA (Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena) is originated from RTS games, which has two teams,
and each team consists of ﬁve players. To beat the opponent,
ﬁve players in a team must cooperate together, kill enemies,
upgrade heros, and eventually destroy the opponent base. Since
MOBA research is still in a primary stage, there are fewer
works than conventional RTS games. Most works on MOBA
concentrate on dataset analysis and case study. However, due
to a series of breakthroughs that DRL achieves in game AI,
researchers start to pay more attention to MOBA recently.
King of Glory (a simpliﬁed mobile version of Dota) is the most
popular mobile-end MOBA game in China. Jiang et al. [102]
apply Monte-Carlo Tree Search and deep neural networks to
this game. The experimental results indicate that MCTS-based
DRL method is efﬁcient and can be used in 1v1 MOBA
scenario. Most impressive works on MOBA are proposed by
OpenAI. Their results prove that DRL method with self-play