5
trust region to optimize the actor and the critic. ACKTR is
sample efﬁcient compared with other actor-critic methods.
2)Deterministic policy :Apart from stochastic policy, deep
deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) [45] is a kind of deter-
ministic policy gradient method which adapts the success of
DQN to continuous control. The update rule of DDPG is
Q(st;at) =r(st;at) +
Q(st+1;(st+1)): (11)
DDPG is an actor-critic, off-policy algorithm, and is able
to learn reasonable policies on various tasks. Distributed
Distributional DDPG (D4PG) [46] is a distributional update to
DDPG, combined with the use of multiple distributed workers
all writing into the same replay table. This method has a much
better performance on a number of difﬁcult continuous control
problems.
3)Entropy-regularized policy gradient :Soft Actor Critic
(SAC) is an off-policy policy gradient method, which estab-
lishes a bridge between DDPG and stochastic policy optimiza-
tion. SAC incorporates the clipped double-Q trick, and the
objective function of maximum entropy DRL is
J() =TX
t=0E(st;at)[r(st;at) +H((:jst))]; (12)
SAC uses an entropy regularization in its objective function.
It trains the policy to maximize a trade-off between entropy
and expected return. The entropy is a measure of randomness
in the policy. This mechanism is similar to the trade-off
between exploration and exploitation. Increasing entropy can
encourage more exploration, and accelerate learning process.
Moreover, it can also prevent the learning policy from con-
verging to a poor local optimum.
C. Model-based DRL methods
Combining model-free reinforcement learning with on-line
planning is a promising approach to solve the sample efﬁ-
ciency problem. TreeQN [47] is proposed to address these
challenges. It is a differentiable, recursive, tree-structured
model that serves as a drop-in replacement for any value
function network in DRL with discrete actions. TreeQN dy-
namically constructs a tree by recursively applying a transition
model in a learned abstract state space and then aggregating
predicted rewards and state-values using a tree backup to esti-
mate Q-values. ATreeC is an actor-critic variant that augments
TreeQN with a softmax layer to form a stochastic policy
network. Both approaches are trained end-to-end, such that
the learned model is optimized for its actual use in the plan-
ner. TreeQN and ATreeC outperform n-step DQN and value
prediction networks on multiple Atari games. Vezhnevets et
al. [48] presents STRategic Attentive Writer (STRAW) neural
network architecture to build implicit plans. STRAW purely
interacts with an environment, and is an end-to-end method.
STRAW model can learn temporally abstracted high-level
macro-actions, which enables both economic computation and
structured exploration. STRAW employs temporally extended
planning strategies and achieves strong improvements on Atari
games. The world model [49] uses an unsupervised manner
to train a generative recurrent neural network, which canmodel RL environments through compressed spatiotemporal
representations. It feeds extracted features into simple and
compact policies, achieving impressive results in several en-
vironments. Value propagation (VProp) [50] bases on value
iteration, and is an efﬁcient differentiable planning module. It
can successfully be trained to learn to plan using reinforcement
learning. As a general framework of AlphaZero, MuZero
[54] combines MCTS with a learned model, and predicts
the reward, the action-selection policy, and the value function
to make planning. It extends model-based RL to a range of
logically complex and visually complex domains, and achieves
superhuman performance.
A general review of various DRL methods from 2017 to
2019 is presented in Table I.
IV. DRL IN VIDEO GAMES
Playing video games like human experts is challenging for
computers. With the development of DRL, agents are able
to play various games end-to-end. Here we focus on game
research platforms and competitions, and impressive progress
in various video games, from 2D to 3D, and from single-agent
to multi-agent, as shown in Fig. 3.
A. Game research platforms
Platforms and competitions make great contributions to
the development of game AI, and help to evaluate agents’
intelligence, as presented in Table II. Most platforms can be
described by two major categories: General Platforms and
Speciﬁc Platforms.
General Platforms: Arcade Learning Environment (ALE)
[55] is the pioneer evaluation platform for DRL algorithms,
which provides an interface to plenty of Atari 2600 games.
ALE presents both game images and signals, such as player
scores, which makes it a suitable testbed. To promote the
progress of DRL research, OpenAI integrates a collection of
reinforcement learning tasks into a platform called Gym [56],
which mainly contains Algorithmic, Atari, Classical Control,
Board games, 2D and 3D robots. After that, OpenAI Universe
[57] is a platform for measuring and training agents’ general
intelligence across a large supply of games. Gym Retro [58]
is a wrapper for video game emulator with a uniﬁed interface
as Gym, and makes Gym easy to be extended with a large
collection of video games, not only Atari but also NEC,
Nintendo, and Sega, for RL research. The OpenAI Retro
contest aims at exploring the development of DRL that can
generalize from previous experience. OpenAI bases on the
Sonic the HedgehogTMvideo game, and presents a new DRL
benchmark [59]. This benchmark can help to measure the
performance of few-shot learning and transfer learning in
reinforcement learning. General Video Game Playing [60] is
intended to design an agent to play multiple video games
without human intervention. The General Video Game AI
(GVGAI) [61] competition is proposed to provide a easy-to-
use and open-source platform for evaluating AI methods, in-
cluding DRL. DeepMind Lab [62] is a ﬁrst-person perspective
learning environment, and provides multiple complicated tasks
in partially observed, large-scale, and visually diverse worlds.