11
close to the shared policy, while the shared policy is trained by
distillation. This approach shows efﬁcient transfer on complex
tasks, with more robust and more stable performance. Mix &
Match is a training framework that is designed to encourage
effective and rapid learning in DRL agents [116]. It allows to
automatically form a curriculum over agent, and progressively
trains more complex agents from simpler agents.
D. Multi-agent learning
Multi-agent learning is very important in video games,
such as StarCraft. In a cooperative multi-agent setting, curse-
of-dimensionality, communication, and credit assignment are
major challenges.
Team learning uses a single learner to learn joint solutions
in multi-agent system, while concurrent learning uses multiple
learners for each agent. Recently, the centralised training
of decentralised policies is becoming a standard paradigm
for multi-agent training. Multi-agent DDPG considers other
agents’ action policy and can successfully learn complex
multi-agent coordination behavior [117]. Counterfactual multi-
agent policy gradients uses a centralized critic to estimate
the action-value function and decentralized actors to opti-
mize each agents’ policies, with a counterfactual advantage
function to address the multi-agent credit assignment problem
[118] . In addition, communication protocols is important
to share information to solve multi-agent tasks. Reinforced
Inter-Agent Learning (RIAL) and Differentiable Inter-Agent
Learning (DIAL) use deep reinforcement learning to learn end-
to-end communication protocols in complex environments.
Analogously, CommNet is able to learn continuous communi-
cation between multiple agents.
E. Imperfect information
In partially observable and ﬁrst-perspective games, DRL
agents need to tackle imperfect information to learn a suitable
policy. Making decisions in these environments is challenging
for DRL agents.
A critical component of enabling effective learning in these
environment is the use of memory. DRL agents have used
some simple memory architectures, such as several past frames
or an LSTM layer. But these architectures are limited to only
remember transitory information. Model-free episode control
learns difﬁcult sequential decision-making tasks much faster,
and achieves a higher overall reward [119]. Differentiable
neural computer uses a neural network to read from and
write to an external memory matrix [120]. This method can
solve complex, structured tasks which can not access to neural
networks without external read and write memory. Neural
episodic control inserts recent state representations paired
with corresponding value functions into the appropriate neural
dictionary, and learns signiﬁcantly faster than other baseline
agents [121].
F . Delayed spare rewards
The sparse and delayed reward is very common in many
games, and is also one of the reasons that reduce sample
efﬁciency in reinforcement learning.In many scenarios, researchers use curiosity as an intrinsic
reward to encourage agents to explore environment and learn
useful skills. Curiosity can be formulated as the error that
the agent predicts its own actions’ consequence in a visual
space [122]. This can scale to high-dimensional continuous
state spaces. Moreover, it leaves out the aspects of environment
that cannot affect agents. Curiosity search for DRL encourages
intra-life exploration by rewarding agents for visiting as many
different states as possible within each episode [123].
VI. C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Game AI with deep reinforcement learning is a challenging
and promising direction. Recent progress in this domain has
promote the development of artiﬁcial intelligence research. In
this paper, we review the achievements of deep reinforcement
learning in video games. Different DRL methods and their
successful applications are introduced. These DRL agents
achieve human-level or super-human performances in various
games, from 2D perfect information to 3D imperfect infor-
mation, and from single-agent to multi-agent. In addition to
these achievements, there are still some major problems when
applying DRL methods to this ﬁeld, especially in 3D imperfect
information multi-agent video game. A high-level game AI
requires to explore more efﬁcient and robust DRL techniques,
and needs novel frameworks to be implemented in complex
environment. These challenges have not been fully investigated
and could be opened for further study in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Qichao Zhang, Dong Li and
Weifan Li for the helpful comments and discussions about this
work.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Y . Georgios and T. Julian, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Games . New
York: Springer, 2018.
[2] Y . Lecun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[3] D. Zhao, K. Shao, Y . Zhu, D. Li, Y . Chen, H. Wang, D. Liu, T. Zhou,
and C. Wang, “Review of deep reinforcement learning and discussions
on the development of computer Go,” Control Theory and Applications ,
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 701–717, 2016.
[4] Z. Tang, K. Shao, D. Zhao, and Y . Zhu, “Recent progress of deep
reinforcement learning: from AlphaGo to AlphaGo Zero,” Control
Theory and Applications , vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 1529–1546, 2017.
[5] J. Niels, B. Philip, T. Julian, and R. Sebastian, “Deep learning for video
game playing,” CoRR , vol. abs/1708.07902, 2017.
[6] A. Kailash, P. D. Marc, B. Miles, and A. B. Anil, “Deep reinforcement
learning: A brief survey,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 34,
pp. 26–38, 2017.
[7] L. Yuxi, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1701.07274, 2017.
[8] R. Dechter, “Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction-
problems,” pp. 178–183, 1986.
[9] J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks,” Neural Networks ,
vol. 61, pp. 85–117, 2015.
[10] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[11] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[12] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction .
MIT Press, 1998.