1
A Survey of Deep Reinforcement Learning in Video
Games
Kun Shao, Zhentao Tang, Yuanheng Zhu, Member, IEEE , Nannan Li, and Dongbin Zhao, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has made great
achievements since proposed. Generally, DRL agents receive
high-dimensional inputs at each step, and make actions according
to deep-neural-network-based policies. This learning mechanism
updates the policy to maximize the return with an end-to-
end method. In this paper, we survey the progress of DRL
methods, including value-based, policy gradient, and model-based
algorithms, and compare their main techniques and properties.
Besides, DRL plays an important role in game artiﬁcial in-
telligence (AI). We also take a review of the achievements of
DRL in various video games, including classical Arcade games,
ﬁrst-person perspective games and multi-agent real-time strategy
games, from 2D to 3D, and from single-agent to multi-agent.
A large number of video game AIs with DRL have achieved
super-human performance, while there are still some challenges
in this domain. Therefore, we also discuss some key points
when applying DRL methods to this ﬁeld, including exploration-
exploitation, sample efﬁciency, generalization and transfer, multi-
agent learning, imperfect information, and delayed spare re-
wards, as well as some research directions.
Index Terms —reinforcement learning, deep learning, deep
reinforcement learning, game AI, video games.
I. I NTRODUCTION
ARTIFICIAL intelligence (AI) in video games is a long-
standing research area. It studies how to use AI tech-
nologies to achieve human-level performance when playing
games. More generally, it studies the complex interactions be-
tween agents and game environments. Various games provide
interesting and complex problems for agents to solve, making
video games perfect environments for AI research. These
virtual environments are safe and controllable. In addition,
these game environments provide inﬁnite supply of useful data
for machine learning algorithms, and they are much faster than
real-time. These characteristics make games the unique and
favorite domain for AI research. On the other side, AI has
been helping games to become better in the way we play,
understand and design them [1].
Broadly speaking, game AI involves the perception and
the decision-making in game environments. With these com-
ponents, there are some crucial challenges and proposed
solutions. The ﬁrst challenge is that the state space of the
game is very large, especially in strategic games. With the rise
K. Shao, Z. Tang, Y . Zhu, N. Li, and D. Zhao are with the State Key
Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Au-
tomation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Beijing 100190, China. They are also
with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China (e-mail:
shaokun2014@ia.ac.cn; tangzhentao2016@ia.ac.cn; yuanheng.zhu@ia.ac.cn;
linannan2017@ia.ac.cn, dongbin.zhao@ia.ac.cn).
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grants No.61573353, No.61603382, No.6180337, and
No.61533017.of representation learning, the whole system has successfully
modeled large-scale state space with deep neural networks.
The second challenge is that learning proper policies to make
decisions in dynamic unknown environment is difﬁcult. For
this problem, data-driven methods, such as supervised learn-
ing and reinforcement learning (RL), are feasible solutions.
The third challenge is that the vast majority of game AI is
developed in a speciﬁed virtual environment. How to transfer
the AI’s ability among different games is a core challenge. A
more general learning system is also necessary.
For a long time, solving these challenges with reinforcement
learning is widely used in game AI. And in the last few
years, deep learning (DL) has achieved remarkable perfor-
mance in computer vision and natural language processing
[2]. The combination, deep reinforcement learning (DRL),
teaches agents to make decisions in high-dimensional state
space in an end-to-end framework, and dramatically improves
the generalization and scalability of traditional RL algorithms.
Especially, DRL has made great progress in video games,
including Atari, ViZDoom, StarCraft, Dota2, and so on. There
are some related works to introduce these achievements in this
ﬁeld. Zhao et al. [3] and Tang et al. [4] survey the development
of DRL research, and focus on AlphaGo and AlphaGo Zero.
Justesen et al. [5] reviews DL-based methods in video game
play, including supervised learning, unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, evolutionary approaches, and some
hybrid approaches. Arulkumaran et al. [6] make a brief intro-
duction of DRL, covering central algorithms and presenting
a range of visual RL domains. Li [7] gives an overview of
recent achievements of DRL, and discusses core elements,
important mechanisms, and various applications. In this paper,
we focus on DRL-based game AI, from 2D to 3D, and from
single-agent to multi-agent. The main contributions include
the comprehensive and detailed comparisons of various DRL
methods, their techniques, properties, and the impressive and
diverse performances in these given video games.
The organization of the remaining paper is arranged as
follows. In Section II, we introduce the background of DL and
RL. In Section III, we focus on recent DRL methods, including
value-based, policy gradient, and model-based DRL methods.
After that, we make a brief introduction of research platforms
and competitions, and present performances of DRL methods
in classical single-agent Arcade games, ﬁrst-person perspective
games, and multi-agent real-time strategy games. In Section
V , we discuss some key points and research directions in this
ﬁeld. In the end, we draw a conclusion of this survey.arXiv:1912.10944v2  [cs.MA]  26 Dec 2019