10
can not only be successful in a 1v1 and 2v2 Dota2 scenarios
[103], but also in 5v5 [104] [105]. The model architecture is
simple, using a LSTM layer as the core component of neural
network. Under the support of massively distributed cloud
computing and PPO optimization algorithm, OpenAI Five can
master the critical abilities of team ﬁghting, searching forest,
focusing, chasing, and diversion for team victory, and defeat
human champion OG with 2:0. Their works truly open a new
door to MOBA research with DRL method.
V. C HALLENGES IN GAMES WITH DRL
Since DRL has achieved large progress in some video
games, it is considered as one of most promising ways to
realize the artiﬁcial general intelligence. However, there are
still some challenges should be conquered towards goal. In this
secition, we discuss some crucial challenges for DRL in video
games, such as tradeoff between exploration and exploitation,
low sample efﬁciency, dilemma in generalization and overﬁt-
ing, multi-agent learning, incomplete information and delayed
sparse rewards. Though there are some proposed approaches
have been tried to solve these problems, as presented in Fig.
4, there are still some limitations should be broken.
A. Exploration-exploitation
Exploration can help to obtain more diversity samples,
while exploitation is the way to learn the high reward policy
with valuable samples. The trade-off between exploration and
exploitation remains a major challenge for RL. Common meth-
ods for exploration require a large amount of data, and can not
tackle temporally-extended exploration. Most model-free RL
algorithms are not computationally tractable in complicated
environments.
Parametric noise can help exploration to a large extend in
the training process [106] [107]. Besides, randomized value
functions become an effective approach for efﬁcient explo-
ration. Combining exploration with deep neural networks can
help to learn much faster, which greatly improves the learning
speed and ﬁnal performance in most games [51].
A simple generalization of popular count-based ap-
proach can reach satisfactory performance on various high-
dimensional DRL benchmarks [108]. This method maps states
to hash codes, and counts their occurrences via a hash table.
Then, according to the classic count-based method, we can use
these counts to compute a reward bonus. On many challenging
tasks, these simple hash functions can achieve impressive
performance. This exploration strategy provides a simple and
powerful baseline to solve MDPs requiring considerable ex-
ploration.
B. Sample efﬁciency
DRL algorithms usually take millions of samples to achieve
human-level performance. While humans can quickly master
highly rewarding actions of an environment. Most model-
free DRL algorithms are data inefﬁcient, especially for a
environment with high dimension and large explore space.
They have to interact with environment in a large time costfor seek out high reward experiences in a complex sample
space, which limits their applicability to many scenarios. In
order to reduce the exploration dimension of environment and
ease the expenditure of time on interaction, some solutions
can be used for improving data efﬁciency, such as hierarchy
and demonstration.
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) allows agents to
decompose the task into several simple subtasks, which can
speed up training and improve sample efﬁciency. Temporal
abstraction is key to scaling up learning, while creating
such abstractions autonomously has remained challenging. The
option-critic architecture has the ability to learn the internal
policies and the options’ termination conditions, without any
additional rewards or subgoals [109]. FeUdal Networks (FuNs)
include a Manager module and a Worker module [110]. The
Manager sets abstract goals at high-level. The Worker receives
these goals, and generates actions in the environment. FuN
dramatically outperforms baseline agents on tasks that involve
long-term credit assignment or memorization. Representation
learning methods can also be used to guide the option discov-
ery process in HRL domain [111].
Demonstration is a proper technique to improve sample
efﬁciency. Current approaches that learn from demonstration
use supervised learning on expert data and use reinforcement
learning to improve the performance. This method is difﬁcult
to jointly optimize divergent losses, and is very sensitive to
noisy demonstrations. Leveraging data from previous control
of the system can greatly accelerate the learning process even
with small amounts of demonstration data [24]. Goals deﬁned
with human preferences can effectively solve complicated RL
tasks without the reward function, while greatly reducing the
cost of human oversight [112].
C. Generalization and Transfer
The ability to transfer knowledge across multiple environ-
ments is considered as a critical aspect of intelligent agents.
With the purpose of promoting the performance of generaliza-
tion in multiple environments, multi-task learning and policy
distillation have been focus on these situations.
Multi-task learning with shared neural network parameters
can solve the generalization problem, and efﬁciency can be
improved through transfer across related tasks. Hybrid reward
architecture takes a decomposed reward function as input and
learns a separate value function for each component [113].
The whole value function is much smoother, which can be
easily approximated with a low-dimensional representation,
and learns more effectively. IMPALA shows the effectiveness
for multi-task reinforcement learning, using less data and ex-
hibiting positive transfer between tasks [40] . PopArt-IMPALA
combines PopArt’s adaptive normalization with IMPALA, and
allows a more efﬁcient use of parallel data generation, showing
impressive performance on multi-task domain [114].
To successfully learn complex tasks with DRL, we usually
need large task-speciﬁc networks and extensive training to
achieve good performance. Distral shares a distilled policy
which can learn common knowledge across multiple tasks
[115]. Each worker is trained to solve individual task and to be