8
Players must navigate through a number of different rooms,
avoid obstacles and traps, climb ladders up and down, and then
pick up the key to open new rooms. It requires a long sequence
of actions before reaching the goal and receiving a reward,
and is difﬁcult to explore an optimal policy to tackle tasks.
Efﬁcient exploration is considered as a crucial factor to learn
in a delayed feedback environment. Then, Ostrovski et al. [72]
provide an improved version of count-based exploration with
PixelCNN as a supplement for pseudo-count, also reveals the
importance of Monte Carlo return for effective exploration.
In addition to improve the exploration efﬁciency, learning
from human data is also a proper method to reach better
performance in this problem. Le et al. [73] leverage imitation
learning from expert interaction and hierarchical reinforcement
learning at different levels. This method learns obviously
faster than original hierarchical reinforcement learning, and
also signiﬁcantly more efﬁciently than conventional imitation
learning. Other than gameplay, the demonstration is also a
valuable kind of sample for agent to learn. DQfD utilizes
a small set of demonstration data to speed up the learning
process [24]. It combines prioritized replay mechanism with
temporal difference updates and supervised classiﬁcation, and
ﬁnally achieves a better and impressive result. Further, Aytar
et al. [74] only use YouTube video as a demonstration sample
and invests a transformed Bellman operator for learning from
human demonstrations. Interestingly, these two works both
claim being the ﬁrst to solve the entire ﬁrst level of Mon-
tezuma’s Revenge. Go-explore [75] makes further progress,
and achieves scores over 400,000 on average. Go-Explore sep-
arates learning into exploration and robustiﬁcation. It reliably
solves the whole game, and generalizes well.
C. First-person perspective games
Different from Atari games, agents in ﬁrst-person perspec-
tive video games can only receive observations from their own
perspectives, resulting from imperfect information inputs. In
RL domain, this is a POMDP problem which requires efﬁcient
exploration and memory.
1)ViZDoom :First-person shooter (FPS) games play an
important role in game AI research. Doom is a classical
FPS game, and ViZDoom is presented as a novel testbed
for DRL [66]. Agents learn from visual inputs, and interact
with the ViZDoom environment in a ﬁrst-person perspective.
Wu et al. [76] propose a method that combines A3C and
curriculum learning. The agent learns to navigate and attack
via playing against built-in agents progressively. Parisotto et
al. [77] develop Neural Map, which is a memory system
with an adaptable write operator. Neural Map uses a spatially
structured 2D memory image to store the environment’s in-
formation. This method surpasses other DRL memories on
several challenging ViZDoom maze tasks and shows a capable
generalization ability. Shao et al. [78] show that ACKTR can
successfully teach agents to battle in ViZDoom environment,
and signiﬁcantly outperform A2C agents by a signiﬁcant
margin.
2)TORCS :TORCS is a racing game where actions are ac-
celeration, braking and steering. This game has more realisticgraphics than Atari games, but also requires agents to learn the
dynamic of the car. FIGAR-DDPG can successfully complete
the race task and ﬁnish 20 laps of the circuit, with a 10 total
reward against that obtained by DDPG, and much smoother
policies [53]. Normalized Actor-Critic (NAC) normalizes the
Q-function effectively, and learns an initial policy network
from demonstration and reﬁne the policy in a real environment
[79]. NAC is robust to suboptimal demonstration data, learns
robustly and outperforms existing baselines when evaluated
on TORCS. Mazumder et al. [80] incorporate state-action
permissibility (SAP) and DDPG, and applies it to tackle the
lane keeping problem in TORCS. The proposed method can
speedup DRL training remarkably for this task. In [81], a
two-stage approach is proposed for the vision-based vehicle
lateral control problem which includes an multi-task learning
perception stage and an RL control stage. By exerting the
correlation between multiple learning task, the perception
module can robustly extract track features. Additionally, the
RL agent learns by maximizing the geometry-based reward
and performs better than the LQR and MPC controllers. Zhu
et al. [82] use DRL to train a CNN to perceive driving data
from images of ﬁrst-person view, and learns a controller to get
driving commands, showing a promising performance.
3)Minecraft :Minecraft is a sandbox construction game,
where players can build creative creations, structures, and
artwork across various game modes. Recently, it becomes a
popular platform for game AI research, with 3D inﬁnitely
varied data. Project Malmo is an experimentation platform [83]
that builts on the Minecraft for AI research. It supports a large
number of scenarios, including navigation, problem solving
tasks, and survival to collaboration. Xiong et al. [84] propose
a novel Q-learning approach with state-action abstraction and
warm start using human reasoning to learn effective policies in
the Microsoft Malmo collaborative AI challenge. The ability to
transfer knowledge from source task to target task in Minecraft
is one of the major challenges. Tessler et al. [85] provides a
DRL agent which can transfer knowledge by learning reusable
skills, and then incorporated into hierarchical DRL network
(H-DRLN). H-DRLN exhibits superior performance and low
learning sample complexity compared to regular DQN in
Minecraft, and the potential to transfer knowledge between
related Minecraft tasks without any additional learning. To
solve the partial or non-Markovian observations problems,
Jin et al. [86] propose a new DRL algorithm based on
counterfactual regret minimization that iteratively updates an
approximation to a cumulative clipped advantage function. On
the challenging Minecraft ﬁrst-person navigation benchmarks,
this algorithm can substantially outperform strong baseline
methods.
4)DeepMind lab :DeepMind lab is a 3D ﬁrst-person
game platform extended from OpenArena, which is based
on Quake3. Comparable to other ﬁrst-person game platforms,
DeepMind lab has considerably richer visuals and more re-
alistic physics, making it a signiﬁcantly complex platform.
On a challenging suite of DeepMind lab tasks, the UNREAL
agent leads to a mean speedup in learning of 10 over A3C
and averaging 87% expert human performance. As learning
agents become more powerful, continual learning has made