Information 2019 ,10, 390 4 of 36
to differentiate the evaluating and the ﬁtness valuing as applied in GA. Evaluation
function or objective function rates performance based on particular deﬁned aspects.
The performance measurement of the ﬁtness function is transformed into a range of
reproductive opportunities. [30].
3. New population: Steps 4, 5 and 6 are repeated to create a new population up to completion.
4. Selection (Reproduction): The selection process ascertains the chromosomes that are
chosen for mating and reproduction as well as the number of offspring each chosen
chromosome produces. The main purpose of the selection process is “the better an
individual is; the higher its chance of being a parent” [ 31]. There exist various traditional
selection mechanisms and user-speciﬁed-selection mechanisms that are applied in line
with the problem in question. [32]. Selection strategies examples consist of:
(a) Tournament Selection: This is arguably the most common selection technique in GA
because of its efﬁciency and ease in implementation [ 33]. In tournament selection,
the selection of individuals is done in a random manner starting with the larger
population. Thereafter there is a competition amongst the selected individuals.
The competition is used to determine the individual with the highest ﬁtness value
to be used in the generation of the new population. The individuals competing are
usually set to two also called binary tournament or tournament size. Diversity is
ensured in tournament selection as all the individuals have an equal chance to be
chosen even though this may reduce the convergence speed. Some of tournament
selection advantage includes proper time utilization mostly when the implementation
is parallel with low susceptibility to being taken by dominant individuals, and no
need for ﬁtness scaling or sorting. [34].
(b) Proportional Roulette Wheel Selection: Also called ﬁtness proportionate. Fitness
values are used to choose Parents where the best chromosome stands a higher chance
of selection [35,36].
(c) Rank Selection: Parent selection is done using a rank. Here, ﬁtness value is used to
rank individuals in the population where the best is ranked (n) and the worst-ranked
(1). Every chromosome has a rank depending on its expected value [31].
5. Crossover: The use of the selection process determines the parents used in the crossover
to produce a new offspring. Crossover is implemented by selecting a random point on the
chromosome where the parents’ parts exchange happens. The crossover then brings up a
new offspring based on the exchange point chosen with particular parts of the parents.
Figure 2a depicts a crossover process [37].
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 2. Examples of ( a) crossover, ( b) one-point crossover, ( c) mutation operator [38].
There are different types of crossover namely: one-point crossover, two-point crossover,
and multi-point crossover [39].
There are some evolving techniques used to accommodate some situations. A brief
deﬁnition of the two types are as follows: