Information 2019 ,10, 390 8 of 36
zones for population size. The ﬁrst test was conducted using the 0.9crossover rates, the population
size was in the range of ( 2–500), and a selection operator with (zero) mutation rate. The second test
was conducted using the (zero) crossover rate with a population size in the range of ( 2–500), and with
mutation rate of [1, 0.5, 0.1 ]. The last test combined the two parameters in various values where the
mutation rates were [1, 0.5, 0.1 ], the two values of crossover rates were [0.9, 0.0 ]. The conclusion of
their experiment showed that the selection operators and mutation operators could perform well if
accompanied with moderate population size. The selection operators and crossover operators without
mutation performed well enough at larger population size than needed for GAs population with
selection and mutation operators. In small population size, the researcher concluded that there is
a need to use both crossover and mutation parameters as it is shown in Figure 4 [26].
Figure 4. Performance of GAs using different GA parameter settings for “onemax” problem [26].
Hong et al. suggested an evolution algorithm called the Dynamic Genetic Algorithm (DGA)
to automatically match the crossover and mutation rates according to each individual evaluation
results in the new generation. More than one crossover and mutation rates are used simultaneously.
The algorithm automatically chose the appropriate crossover and appropriate mutation types.
The algorithm is a possible development of GAs performance although the GAs used a one-point
crossover process as well a single process of mutation [56].
The population size and its impact on the genetic algorithm were extensively studied. Some
researchers seem to agree that small population size could guide the (GA) to poor solutions [ 57–59].
Large population size necessitated that more computation search time was needed in ﬁnding an
optimal or near optimal solution [ 59,60]. Rylander and Stanley [ 61] proposed a new methodology to
determine the optimal population size in (GA). They did so by monitoring the difference in the results
in each generation in different experiments. The experiments used two types of problems to test,
namely the sort problem, and the maximum problem. They used ( 0.1) mutation rates, ( 0.5) crossover
rates and several population sizes ( 100,300,400,600). The results of the experiments showed the
following: First, increasing the population size leads to an increase in the accuracy of the (GA), also
the large population size provided a greater chance that the initial state population would contain an
individual representing the optimal solution. Second, the large population size resulted in an increase
in the number of generations’ convergence [61].
Diaz-Gomez, and Hougen [ 62] proposed a new approach to ﬁnd a good initial state population
for each small and large populations. The initial population encoded a possible solution to identify the
problem. After creating the initial population individuals, each individual was evaluated by ﬁtness
value according to the ﬁtness function for the sake of ﬁnding a good initial population. The method
adopted dealt with small population for the sake of measuring diversity in a small portion of a large size