Information 2019 ,10, 390 3 of 36
proposed approach compared with other methods, along with time complexity. Finally, Section 6
concludes this paper with future works.
2. Review of GA Representations
Figure 1 shows a typical GA as described in [27]. The common problem-dependent constituents
of genetic algorithm include the following: the encoding and the evaluation functions. The researcher
started with problem encoding (representation of the problem) as a ﬁrst step to translate the problem
to computer language [ 21]. The nature of the problem to be solved usually dictates the representation
of the problem. There are various representation methods such as:
Figure 1. Flow chart of a typical GA [27].
1. Binary encoding: Each chromosome in this technique is represented using strings of bits 0’s and
1’s. An example of the use of binary encoding is the knapsack problem.
2. Permutation encoding: Each chromosome in this technique is represented as a string of numbers
that represent a position in a sequence. This method is useful in ordering problems such as
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).
3. Value encoding: chromosomes are represented by using a sequence of some values such as real
numbers, characters or objects. These values are possibly characters, real numbers, etc. [28].
4. Tree encoding: Each chromosome is treated as a tree of certain items such as commands or functions.
Tree encoding is good for evolving programs [ 28] used in genetic programming. The following
outline summarizes how the GA works after the chromosomes are encoded [29].
1. Start: Generation of the beginning population of random individuals is the ﬁrst step of
any genetic algorithms. Each generated individual is then represented as a chromosome
in a sequence of string with the length L, that aligns with the problem encoding. The step
ends with creating a random population in “genotype” [1].
2. Fitness: Next is to compute the ﬁtness value f(x)of each individual in the present
population. The evaluation process consists of choosing individuals for mating based on
their ﬁtness value (parents) and according to the desired values of each. The terms
evaluation and ﬁtness are usually used to mean the same thing but it is important