Information 2019 ,10, 390 5 of 36
(a) One-point crossover: One-point crossover works when a crossover point along the
chromosome is selected where genes are exchanged between the parents create two
offspring (see Figure 2b).
(b) Two-point crossover: Here, two points are selected on the parent chromosomes.
There is then the exchange of genes between the two points for the production of two
offspring. The crossover operator is used to avoid the exact duplication of the parents
from the old population in the new offspring. This ensures that the new population
being produced through crossover operation is able to survive in the next generation
and also has the desirable parts or qualities of the parents [40].
5. Mutation: Normally, mutation takes place after crossover is done. This operator applies the
changes randomly to one or more “genes” to produce anew offspring, so it creates new adaptive
solutions good avoid local optima. For example, in binary encoding, one or more randomly
chosen bits can be switched from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0; Figure 2c shows an example.
Using the crossover operator alone to produce an offspring makes the GA stuck in the local
optima, thus, the good parts of the parents survive in each generation, and the local optimal ones
are to be found. This problem is called as the local-optima problem. The mutation operator is used
to alleviate this problem by proving new offspring different from parents, and this encourages
diversity in the population [41].
6. Termination (stopping) criteria: GA at the end must stop to announce the best solution in hand,
there are several termination conditions that are used [42], those include:
1. Fixed number of generations reached.
2. The variance of the ﬁtness evolves in the whole population is less than a predeﬁned small
quantity (ﬁtness level has been reached [42].
3. No improvement in the best ﬁtness value [21].
2.1. GA Parameters
Determining the interactions that occur among different GA parameters has a direct impact on
the quality of the solution, and keeping parameters values "balanced" improves the solution of the GA.
There are four basic and important parameters used by GA, those include:
1. Crossover rate (probability): the number of times a crossover occurs for chromosomes in one
generation, i.e., the chance that two chromosomes exchange some of their parts), 100% crossover
rate means that all offspring are made by crossover. If it is 0%, then the complete new generation
of individuals is to be exactly copied from the older population, except those resulted from the
mutation process. Crossover rate is in the range of [0, 1][43].
2. Mutation rate (probability): this rate determines how many chromosomes should be mutated
in one generation; mutation rate is in the range of [0, 1]. The purpose of mutation is to prevent
the GA from converging to local optima, but if it occurs very often, GA is changed to random
search [38,44].
3. Population size: the size of the population indicates the total number of the population’s
inhabitants. Selection of population size is a sensitive issue; if the size of the population (search
space) is small, this means little search space is available, and therefore it is possible to reach a
local optimum. although, if the population size is very large, the area of search is increased and the
computational load becomes high [45], therefore, the size of the population must be reasonable.
4. Number of generations: It refers to the number of cycles before the termination. In some cases,
hundreds of loops are sufﬁcient, but in other cases we might need more, this depends on the
problem type and complexity. Depending on the design of the GA, sometimes this parameter is
not used, particularly if the termination of the GA depends on speciﬁc criteria.