Information 2019 ,10, 390 16 of 36
consumed. Next, we provide detailed experimental results and discussion of our proposed dynamic
approaches for the parameter selection in GAs.
5. Experimental Results and Discussion
Six sets of experiments were conducted to evaluate the proposed methods based on on the
population size on different TSP problems; each set of experiments used four types of parameter
settings, the proposed deterministic approaches; which are DHM/ILC and ILM/DHC. In addition,
two parameter tuning approaches; namely FFMCR and 0.03MR 0.9CR. Different sizes of the population
used to investigate the effect of the population size on the results using different parameter setting
approaches. Population sizes used:
(1) Small population size (25 and 50); sets 1 and 2.
(2) Moderate population size (100 and 200); sets 3 and 4.
(3) Large population size (300 and 400); sets 5 and 6.
According to all the experiments, GA applied the reinsertion technique that is essentially
sampling [ 63], where desirable qualities from both the new and the old generation individuals are
chosen to be the population for the next generation. That is there is competition between the old and
the new individuals.
The initial population seeding in all algorithms is random, and the selection strategy is a roulette
wheel. The ﬁtness function used by GA is a problem dependent; here we used the total distance of the
TSP route, i.e., the summation of the distances between the sequence instances along the chromosome,
the “best” solution is characterized by the minimum total distance, since the TSP is a minimization
problem. The mutation operator used for all experiment sets is the exchange mutation [ 108]: which
selects two genes randomly and switch between their positions. The crossover operator used is the
Modiﬁed Crossover [ 109]. This crossover operator is an extension of the one-point crossover, which
chooses the cut point at random from the ﬁrst parent; then, the ﬁrst child is created by appending
genes (before cutting point) in the second parent to the ﬁrst part. Finally, it repairs the rest of the gene
to prevent duplicates. The termination criteria are based on a ﬁxed number of generations reached, for
all our experiments, the maximum number of generations was set to 1600. We used Path representation
for encoding the TSP , where there is a natural representation for the tour [ 110], for example: a tour of
city1 -> city3 -> city4 -> city2 -> city1 is represented in an integer array containing the cities’ indexes:
(1, 3, 4, 2).
The data set used for all sets of experiments includes 10 real TSP data; namely a280, u159, ch130,
kroA100, pr76, berlin52, att48, eil51, pr144 and rat783, which were taken from the TSPLIB [ 111].
The number at the end of the name of each TSP indicates the number of instances (cities), each city
is identiﬁed by its (x, y) location and a sequence number as shown in Figure 8. The chromosome,
in this case, has random sequential numbers meaning that the chromosome length depends on the
problem size nthat is the size of each TSP problem. The result of the GA is the best solution that can be
obtained, which is (in our case) the minimum total tour length, the word “result” and the “minimum
total tour length” will be used interchangeably in this paper.