Information 2019 ,10, 390 7 of 36
3. Self-Adaptive Parameter Control. The GA here is allowed to develop its own parameters.
The parameter values to be used are included in the individuals and go through mutation
and crossover.
Those types of parameter setting are used by many researchers who attempt to ﬁnd optimal or
near-optimal solutions by using the best rates for crossover and mutation operators. This work ﬁlls in
this gap, which is ﬁnding new strategies for controlling mutation and crossover rates. The proposed
methods can be classiﬁed as deterministic parameter control.
3. Literature Review for Parameter Selection in GAs
Performance indicators to be used in rating of crossover and mutation are an important aspect in
the designing of a GA. The key values of these parameters include; the appropriation of parameters
and regulation of parameters. Therefore, over the years, many related works have been proposed
to choose the best parameters for GA. In this section, a summary of the most important research
conducted in the area is presented. In addition, we review some work related to the traveling salesman
problem (TSP), as our proposed methods will be experimented to solve the TSP using GA.
3.1. Crossover and Mutation Rates with Population Size
Since the ﬁrst mathematically formulated deﬁnition of GAs proposed by John Holland in 1975 in
his book [1], many studies and pieces of research have been conducted in this ﬁeld such as [51–53].
The crossover and mutation rates was proofed as key elements to success in the search in the
GAs [ 51]. DeJong [ 54] suggested optimal range values for population size to be in the range of [50–100],
mutation parameter rate to be ( 0.001 ), and high mutation rates leads the search to be random, the
crossover used was based on one single point crossover to be around the rate of ( 0.6). Those parameters
have been used in many GA implementations [54].
Grefenstette [ 32] designed a Meta-GA provided optimal parameters value for the simple GAs,
and showed that small population size ranging from ( 20) to ( 40) is associated with high crossover rates
went in harmony with low mutation rates. In general, his ﬁndings revealed that mutation rates above
0.05 were not useful for the optimal performance of (GAs). Accordingly, the researcher suggested
another set of parameters with population size value of 30individuals, a mutation rate of 0.01 and
two-point crossover with 0.95 rates [32].
Schlierkamp-Voosen [ 55] investigated the dynamic behavior of mutation and crossover rates on
GA regarding the binary functions. The GA parameter mutation and crossover rates were compared to
their optimal solution performance. The mutation rates were most effective in small size populations.
While the Crossover rates were depending on the size of the population, and mutation rates were the
most robust search in small population size. Nevertheless, the (GA) combined the two operators in
such a way that the performance was better than when using a single operator. The (DECEPTION)
function showed that increasing the size of the population above to a certain number decreased the
quality of the solutions obtained. The analysis of the interaction between mutation and crossover rates
showed that the mutation rates normally increased with the size of population. Furthermore, it showed
that the mutation rate = 1/n (where nwas the size of problem) works efﬁciently. Using crossover and
mutation together, achieved better results than using one of them alone. The crossover appeared to be
more efﬁcient than the mutation in larger population size, on the other hand, the mutation was more
efﬁcient in small populations [55].
Deb and Agrawal [ 26] investigated the performance of GA using several experiments that
included simple to complex tests for the “onemax” problem. In their work, the researchers compared
different (GAs) for several functional evaluations based on calculations and simulation results.
The results of the test revealed that for solving simple problems such as “unimodal” or small modality
problems, mutation operator played an important role despite crossover rates operator could also solve
these problems. However, crossover and mutation rates (when applied alone) had two different effect