Information 2019 ,10, 390 6 of 36
These GA parameters are determined whether the GA ﬁnds an optimal or near-optimal solution,
and whether it ﬁnds an efﬁcient solution [ 24]. Any change in the value of these parameters (increasing
or decreasing) affects the result of GA negatively or positively [ 46,47]. Choosing the right parameters
is a nontrivial task.
2.2. Crossover and Mutation Ratios
GA involves a process of complex interaction between its parameters, for example: using selection
operators alone causes the GA to be stuck in copies of initial population without any new recreation of
individuals. However, using selection and crossover operators converges the algorithm to better
solutions, but does not guarantee optimality, more likely local optimal (sub-optimal) solutions.
Therefore, mutation operator is needed to skip the local search space. Hence, parameters value
in GA greatly determines the quality of the ﬁnal solution [ 48]. Each operator of GA has a special
and different inﬂuence. The impact of these factors is inﬂuenced by their probabilities, i.e., 100%
probability for crossover gives totally different results from the 50%. The same applies to mutation
probability. Therefore, the GA’s design is limited to a choosing strategy for these parameters [ 38,48,49].
Keeping a balance between crossover and mutation rates is an issue of controlling parameters in GA.
As a matter of fact, controlling values is one of the most important areas of research in GA that has
been researched under a main topic known as (parameter setting) [ 50]. Parameter setting for GA is
shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Global taxonomy of parameter setting [50].
There are two main types of setting parameter values, which are classiﬁed according to the
parameter values behavior during the run: (i) The ﬁrst one is parameter tuning (common approach),
which depends on experimenting the different values for crossover and mutation, and then selecting
the ones that give the best results before the ﬁnal run of the algorithm. This operation is done without
any change of the value during the run (ﬁxed value) [ 50]. (ii) The second type is parameter control,
which depends on initial parameter values for crossover and mutation that are changed in somehow
in the run process. The techniques for changing the value of a parameter can be categorized to include
the following:
1. Deterministic Parameter Control: used when the value of the parameter requires certain
modiﬁcations using the same outcome rule. The parameter value is tuned to produce the
same output without any results from the search process.
2. Adaptive Parameter Control: applied when there is a particular kind of feedback required from
the search option that assists in altering the parameter.