Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 9 of 23
explored what makes a model explainable for clinicians through exploratory interviews
and found the following:
• Clinicians view explainability as a means of justifying their clinical decision-making
(e.g., to patients and colleagues) in the context of a model’s decision.
• The implemented system/model needs to provide information about the context within
which the model operates and promote awareness of situations where the model may
fall short (e.g., model did not use specific history or did not have information around
certain aspects of a patient’s context). Models that fall short in accuracy were deemed
acceptable provided there is clarity around why the model under-performs.
• Familiar metrics such as reliability, speciﬁcity, and sensitivity were important for the
initial uptake of an AI tool. However, a critical factor for continuing use was whether
the tool was repeatedly successful in prognosticating their patient’s condition in their
personal experience. Real-world application was crucial to developing “a sense of
when it’s working and when it’s limited” which meant “alignment with expectations
and clinical presentation”.
• Clinical thought processes for acting on predictions of any assistive tool appear to consist
of two primary steps following presentation of the model’s prediction: (i) understanding
and (ii) rationalizing the predictions. Thus, classes of explanations for clinical ML
models should be designed with the purpose of facilitating the understanding and
rationalization process. Clinicians believe that carefully designed visualization and
presentation can facilitate further understanding of the model.
• A well designed explanation should augment or supplement clinical ML systems to
(a) recalibrate clinician (stakeholder) trust of model predictions, (b) provide a level of
transparency that allows users to validate model outputs with domain knowledge, (c)
reliably disseminate model prediction using task specific representations (e.g., confidence
scores), and (d) provide parsimonious and actionable steps clinicians can undertake.
3. Materials and Methods
This review aims to explore the literature surrounding the use of XAI in CDSS by
identifying publications that are of interest to the ML/AI and medical communities, the con-
tributions of these publications, and the evidence for ﬁndings reported. We conducted
a systematic literature review by adapting the guidelines proposed by Kitchenham [ 94].
In this review, we followed a structured process that involved the following:
1. Specifying research questions
2. Conducting searches of speciﬁed databases
3. Selecting studies by criterion
4. Filtering studies by evaluating their pertinence
5. Extracting data
6. Synthesizing results.
3.1. Research Questions
The research questions that we aim to address are as follows:
• RQ1: What AI-based CDSS have been developed that incorporate XAI?
• RQ2: What aspects/methods of the use of XAI in CDSS have been the focus of the literature ?
• RQ3: What beneﬁts have been reported when addressing different aspects of the use
of XAI in CDSS?
• RQ4: What open problems, challenges, and needs of explainable CDSS are expressed
in literature?
3.2. Conducting Searches
Selecting search terms for a broad and inclusive review of XAI in CDSS proved chal-
lenging. Terms that were too general resulted in an unwieldy set of many irrelevant papers,
while terms that were too specific were likely to miss relevant studies. After some trial and