Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 15 of 23
stakes decisions are being made [ 127], which is the key factor for the success of the model
in the practical use stage [122,124].
4.4. RQ4: What Open Problems, Challenges, and Needs of Explainable CDSS Are Expressed
in Literature?
The development of XAI-based CDSS still faces a series of challenges. There is no
universal deﬁnition of explainability [ 48,98] nor a well-recognized equivalence or dis-
tinction between “interpretable” and “explainable” ML [ 98]. Furthermore, the concept
of interpretability is often highly subjective [ 115]. Richard et al. [48] proposed a deﬁni-
tion stating that a transparent classiﬁcation system should be understandable, use an
interpretable type of classiﬁer and learning system, produce traceable results, and use
a revisable classiﬁer. Moreover, Wang et al. [118] believe that what constitutes a good
explanation should draw from social science instead of depending on researchers’ intuition,
and justiﬁcation is required for choosing different explanation types or representations.
Furthermore, Luz et al. [97] argue that a thorough reasoning is required for choosing be-
tween transparent and black-box ML algorithms, because post-hoc interpretation methods
that develop a mirror model of the original one to add explainability could provide an
inaccurate representation of the original model.
In addition, there are some challenges associated with the clinical implementation of
XAI-based CDSS. Cai et al. [127] interviewed pathologists and found that beyond local
interpretations, clinicians also require insights of models’ overall properties, for instance,
their capacities, limitations, functionality, medical perspectives, characteristics, and design
objectives. This information enriches the explainability of CDSS and is desired prior to the
adoption of these systems in routine practice. Liao et al. [111] interviewed user experience
and design practitioners of AI products, finding that users recognized the importance of
a comprehensive transparency of the training data, in particular: their limitations; expla-
nations of how to best utilize the output; global interpretation with an appropriate level
of detail; and local interpretations; understanding of the changes and adaptation of AI
and social explanations. However, it was uncovered that users give low rankings to the
explainability needs of the performance and counterfactual explanations. The authors agree
with the human–computer interaction community that interdisciplinary cooperation and
user-centered approaches to explainability are required to close the gaps between XAI and
practices. They also discovered that identifying the motivation of explainability helps to
select XAI techniques, foresee their limitations, and fill in the gaps occurring while de-
signing user experiences. XAI needs to be interactive and human-like with customized
explanations for different users. User experience of XAI design is challenged by the current
availability of XAI techniques and other goals. Additionally, guidance for explainability
needs specification and creating explainability solutions are desired. Tan et al. [124] argue
that a CDSS should have high tractability, which requires human like reasoning, step by step
inference, explanation capacity, and user-familiar terms, to gain user acceptance. Moreover,
Jin et al. [99] reported that there is a lack of evaluation of XAI techniques on glioma imaging
due to lack of focus on practical challenges relating to clinical implementation of XAI. As to
testing the systems, Lamy et al. [126] raised the need to confirm their results on a larger user
study, in addition to the lack of user studies for some XAI-based approaches as discussed in
Section 4.3 (RQ3).
5. Discussion
The massive amounts of data generated and increasing availability of computational
resources in healthcare systems make many clinical problems ripe for the development of
AI applications. These systems will make diagnosis, treatment, prognostic efforts, follow-
up, and decision-making more straightforward, precise, and efﬁcient. This is aided by the
fact that physicians worldwide are becoming more receptive towards, and accepting of, AI
solutions [ 12]. However, medical experts struggle with the gap between what is output by
an ML-based solution and human explanations. To close the gap requires interdisciplinary