Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 16 of 23
work that studies how humans explain, formalizes the patterns in algorithmic forms,
and explains outputs in a transparent, easy to interpret manner [67].
A rapid advancement of XAI is evident, and the recent study by Linardatos et al. [132]
has identiﬁed four main areas of focus: methods for explaining complex black-box models,
methods for creating white-box models, methods that promote fairness and restrict the
existence of discrimination, and methods for analyzing sensitivity of model predictions.
The authors noticed a signiﬁcant amount of work on explaining complex black-box models,
especially on neural networks [ 132], probably due to the fact that there is great potential
in terms of complex analyses and performance. On the other hand, white-box models
are described as more challenging to create and, as a result, they seem to have lost their
popularity among developers, while despite the progress in methods to promote fairness,
the studies that have addressed this issue are also limited.
However, there is an open debate on whether or not XAI in these contexts is necessary
and/or worth the substantial overall cost [ 19]. Nevertheless, XAI may lead to greater
uptake and use of CDSS, and may become a requirement in the future due to societal,
regulatory, and ethical pressures [ 18], which could make the difference between success
and failure of the system [ 19]. In some scenarios, explainability of AI output will be a
requirement for the output to be used at all, in particular in high-stakes or high-pressure
scenarios [ 3]. Currently, most of the decisions made by AI-based CDSS cannot be interpreted
in a transparent way potentially limiting the uptake, trust, and usability of these systems in
practice [ 20,133]. On the other hand, there are some studies supporting that XAI is not always
necessary [ 46,134,135]. London [134] defends the ability to produce results and empirically
verify their accuracy as more important than the ability to explain how such results are
produced. Baldi [135] explains this argument using examples of the lack of explainability of
many processes in our daily lives, for example, how cars, computers, cell phones, or even our
brains work. Lipton [46] argues that the short-term goal of building trust with doctors by
developing transparent models might clash with the longer-term goal of improving health
care. Note that Sullivan [136] states that the opaqueness of models such as deep neural
networks is not what is limiting our understanding, but rather the “link uncertainty”,
meaning the empirical link between the model’s features and the phenomenon studied.
Additionally, Bruckert et al. [137] shed light on the difﬁculties that are presented when
rendering ML models explainable for healthcare purposes, highlighting that the imple-
mentation of such systems requires overlap between different disciplines and professions.
The “right” level of explainability required depends on many factors and is context and
resource speciﬁc [ 138]. However, explanations should be at least potentially actionable,
parsimonious, and timely [ 69], warranting further research [ 19]. Ultimately, it is presumed
that explainable CDSS will build trust with clinicians leading to increased adoption of
ML-based systems in clinical practice [12,21,69,139].
Guidelines for Implementing Explainable Models in CDSS: Opportunities, Challenges, and Future
Research Needs
Developing ML-based CDSS is a multidisciplinary process that should include the
needs of all stakeholders. This is especially true when incorporating XAI into these systems.
Consideration should be given to the designers of the system, the decision-makers using
the systems, and those ultimately impacted by the consequences of those decisions [ 18,20].
Models should be built in collaboration with input from those with expertise from the ﬁelds
of social and behavioral science, philosophy, psychology, and cognitive science [19,20,64] .
Although XAI can assist with identifying issues with the data, the problem with unstruc-
tured medical data remains a challenge for the development of usable AI-based systems.
Angehrn et al. [103] discuss the problem and propose solutions that include (a) data ex-
change between different sources, provided that appropriate safeguards for data privacy
are in place; (b) considering the use of data mining techniques to extract crucial clinical
information which might have been captured in free text; and (c) a controlled design
process that uses AI to develop and collect data during clinical use. Additionally, we might
surpass the problem of data availability and heterogeneity by using the least amount of