Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 17 of 23
data available and the easiest-to-collect information to initiate the development of the
system [140].
Domain-specific needs must be taken into account including a thorough understanding
of the purpose of the system, the performance and interpretability of existing systems, and the
level and nature of the explanations that are required [ 18]. Additionally, Arrieta et al. [18]
recommend that those black-box models should be selected only when necessary and,
when possible, the use of interpretable or transparent by design algorithms should be
prioritized over complex algorithms that require the application of post-hoc XAI techniques.
Additionally, ethics, fairness, and safety-related implications, as well as the cognitive
skills and limitations of the audience must be considered when deciding what type of
explanations should be provided [18].
Metrics to evaluate the performance of XAI techniques require further study [ 18].
According to Arrieta et al. [18], the majority of studies are focused on subjective mea-
surements, for example, user satisfaction, the goodness of an explanation, acceptance,
and trust in the system [ 18]. Subjective measurements can provide valuable insight into
the user’s experience, however, there is an overall lack of validated and reliable evaluation
metrics. A summary of many quantitative metrics for the evaluation of explainability
properties (i.e., clarity, broadness, parsimony, completeness, and soundness) for different
explanation types, is presented in the work of Zhou et al. [141] . They found that some
properties (clarity, broadness, and completeness) are still in shortage of appropriate metrics,
and so is the class of explanations that are example-based. The authors have also discussed
human-grounded experiments for the evaluation of ML-explanations. They conclude their
survey by stating that “the evaluation of ML explanations is a multidisciplinary research
topic. It is also not possible to deﬁne an implementation of evaluation metrics, which can
be applied to all explanation methods.” Holzinger et al. [142] introduced the “System
Causability Scale” as means to measure explanation quality. This metric is based on “how
useful an explanation is”.
Finally, there is a need for more robust user studies [66,143]. Bussone et al. [75] found
that giving clinicians a fuller explanation of the facts that led to the system’s proposed
diagnosis had a positive effect on trust but caused over-reliance issues. On the other hand,
less detailed explanations had the opposite effect, as this made participants question the sys-
tem’s reliability and caused self-reliance issues [ 75]. Through a case study, Jacobs et al. [144]
found that incorrect ML recommendations may affect clinicians and lower the accuracy
of decisions, while explanations were found insufficient for addressing over-reliance on a
model that suggests erroneous decisions. They found that explanation strategies ought to
be selected according to the clinicians’ prior experience with ML and that those with prior
experience perceived a higher utility from the ML recommendations. However, there are
very few studies like this that give insight into what clinicians want or need. Similarly, there
is little discussion on the impact of XAI on patients from the patients perspective. These are
areas that will benefit from future research.
6. Conclusions
In order for Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) to be used effectively in practice,
they need to be trustworthy, easy to understand, and, most of all, positively augment the
human decision-making process. Explainability is a critical component in achieving these
goals. Explainability allows developers to identify shortcomings in a system and allows
clinicians to be confident in the decisions they make with CDSS assistance. While there are
many studies on XAI in medicine, there is a limited number that focus on the context of CDSS.
In this review of XAI in CDSS, we focused on the “where” and “how” of XAI use in CDSS,
and were able to gauge some realized benefits as well as identify future needs in this area.
However, despite some user studies reporting positive views on CDSS, especially in light
of explainability, there is still skepticism around their use in practice. A lack of research in
general is likely both a symptom and cause of this. A main challenge remains the selection of
methods used to present explanations in an informative and efficient—and therefore clinically