Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 14 of 23
to bridge the spaces of user needs for AI explainability and technical capabilities provided
by XAI work. They interviewed 20 participants to identify gaps between the current XAI
algorithmic work and practices to create explainable AI products. The results showed
that XAI could gain further insights or evidence, and thus enhance decision conﬁdence
or generate the hypothesis about causality. In some cases, users also believed that the
interpretation of AI decisions might alleviate their own decision-making biases. XAI can
also adapt usage or interaction behaviors to utilize the AI better [111].
Xie et al. [116] developed CheXplain that enables physicians to explore and understand
AI-enabled chest X-ray analysis. They asked 39 referring physicians and 38 radiologists
to summarize how CheXplain changed their understanding of the underlying AI and
how such systems can be integrated into their existing workflow. They showed that XAI
provides implications for how physicians can explore and understand data-driven, AI-
enabled medical imaging analysis to assist physicians in the medical decision-making
process. Cai et al. [127] introduced the critical type of information needs of medical experts
to an AI Assistant. They interviewed 21 pathologists to learn about the type of information
they desired from the AI assistant. Their findings revealed that users seeking a second
opinion compare their information needs to the collaborative mental models they have
developed and their compatibility with their diagnostic models. This suggests that AI
transparency in collaborative decision making could allow experts to integrate AI assistants
into daily practice and gain a richer understanding of the key issues they find.
Lamy et al. [126] presented a visual and interpretable case-based reasoning system.
The system displays the dimension names and their associated values to explain why similar
cases are similar to the query case and on which dimensions and values the similarities are
contained. Such a visual interface can explain the reasoning process to the user, the user
can consider their own personal knowledge to enrich the reasoning process, and automatic
algorithms can better formalize the visual reasoning process. Lamy et al. [126] reporting that
a visual approach could explain why cases are similar via the visualization of shared patient
characteristics. This was useful to medical experts, as the physician needs to be aware of
the recommendations and conﬁdent in their application and use. They presented their
interface to 11 medical experts for usability and acceptability validation, demonstrating
that XAI could provide the user with a good indication of the conﬁdence level of their
choice [126].
Even though some other XAI-based approaches have not yet been tested on users,
the benefits of the XAI presented in these works still seem likely to be useful in practice.
Kunapuli et al. [128] indicated that XAI could support specific rational reasoning processes,
enabling CDSS to support their decisions with understandable interpretations to users
with/without ML expertise. Wang et al. [118] identified that XAI could support different
explanation types by articulating how people understand events or observations through ex-
planations and can be leveraged to mitigate decision biases and cognitive biases [98,103,112] .
Moreover, XAI facilities do support specific rational reasoning processes and can be de-
signed to target decision errors. They could help organize explanations, identify gaps to
develop new explanations given an unmet reasoning need, and identify appropriate mitiga-
tion strategies to select specific XAI facilities [ 118]. As discussed in Section 2.2.1, in 2016
the European Union passed the GDPR which has been interpreted as a requirement for any
decision made based on an algorithm to be explainable to the user [ 106]. XAI could help the
user understand when to trust a model and why an error may occur [ 97,116]. Therefore,
XAI can support compliance with the GDPR [98,103,106].
Moreover, Hu et al. [120] supported that XAI could provide a description of the
cumulative importance of domain-speciﬁc features, and a visual explanation of their
importance would enable the physicians to understand the critical features in the model
intuitively. Therefore, explainability of the support system can improve the acceptability
of CDSS by clinicians [ 48] increase the chances of the complex AI systems’ adoption and
clinical feasibility of a novel CDSS [ 105,121]. XAI therefore could greatly enhance the
effectiveness of decision-support and clinician conﬁdence [ 128] especially when high-