Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 8 of 23
changes in the input data. As XAI provides insight into the functionality of the CDSS,
it can allow for more effective attacks. Solutions for DL models, SVM models, or even
unsupervised ML models have been proposed [ 18]. Others have deployed explainable
techniques such as SHAP to discriminate between normal and adversarial inputs in Deep
Neural Networks [91]. Techniques such as a “goodness checklist, explanation satisfaction
scales, elicitation methods for mental models, computational measures for explainer ﬁdelity,
explanation trustworthiness and model reliability” have been suggested as appropriate
methods of evaluation [18].
2.5. Trade-off between Interpretability and Performance
There is often a perceived trade-off between the performance (predictive accuracy) of
a model and explainability [ 3,18,19]. The algorithms that currently often perform the best
(e.g., deep learning) are the least explainable, creating a demand for explainable models
which can achieve high performance [ 18]. Simple models are often preferred for their ease
of interpretation despite a general trade-off between model performance and explainability
that is often assumed [ 68,69]. However, linear models, for example, are not strictly more
interpretable than, for example, neural networks, especially when high-dimensional or
heavily engineered features are used. In these cases, the interpretability or the explainability
of the model can be lost [46]. Likewise, more complex models may not be more accurate.
One could argue that it would not be ethical to apply in clinical practice a model that
does not have the best possible performance, as the ultimate goal is to provide the best
possible assistance to patients [ 92]. Amann et al. [93] provided an example comparing
advanced laboratory testing and AI-based CDSS, which are similar in terms of the fact
that they support clinical decisions and that accuracy is important. In the case of the ﬁrst,
there is some general understanding on behalf of clinicians but not for each result. Some
level of understanding for AI-based CDSS is also possible in terms of “the agent view of
AI, i.e., what it takes as input, what it does with the environment, and what it produces as
output, and (2) explaining the training of the mapping which produces the output by letting
it learn from examples, which encompasses unsupervised, supervised, and reinforcement
learning” [ 93] and might sufﬁce for certain scenarios. The authors also consider the fact that
the ﬁrst requirement of AI systems in medicine is clinical validation, while explainability is
a second aspect. Medical certiﬁcation comes after the system is compliant with regulatory
standards and prediction accuracy is usually the main measurement of clinical validation.
However, as perfect performance is not possible, while from a patient perspective there
is more trust towards clinicians and less tolerance for “machine” error, explainability is
required, making this a difﬁcult dilemma for developers. With the availability of larger
datasets there are increasing beneﬁts of using more complex models which allow for
more complex functions to be approximated [ 18,46,79] and future developments in XAI
may allow for an optimal balance between the explainability and performance of more
complex models.
2.6. What Do Clinicians Want?
The needs of clinicians are critically important for the success of XAI in medicine
and extend far beyond better, more accurate, cheaper, or faster decisions. Clinicians are
the primary users (if not beneﬁciaries) of XAI-enabled CDSS and their requirements must
be met. Different clinicians will have different views, but all clinicians share a common
ground—that of explainability through the eyes of patients [69]. Bussone et al. [75] found
that clinicians wanted better explanations from the CDSS to help them interpret the system’s
conﬁdence, to verify that the clinical disorder ﬁt the CDSS suggestion, to better understand
the reasoning chain of the system, and to make different diagnoses in order to help them
make an assessment of the reliability of the system’s decisions. Tonekaboni et al. [69]
found that the model’s overall accuracy was not sufﬁcient on its own to allow clinicians
to make an informed decision, clinicians wanted to know the subset of features driving a
prediction to allow them to compare the model decision to their clinical judgment. They