Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 5 of 23
used in policy-making systems have led to skewed predictions [ 53]. Another example of
bias in AI concerns search engines that tend to favor certain sites over others revealing
a political bias [ 54], and hiring algorithms tainted by “societal noise” tend to perpetuate
discriminatory behaviors impacting certain individuals or groups [ 55]. This algorithmic
discrimination is also observed in systems such as targeted advertisements where gender
discrimination occurred in the display of STEM career ads [ 56,57]. Moreover, some vision
detection systems have demonstrated a bias toward subject skin tone. This predictive
inequity has been characterized by higher performance for lower Fitzpatrick skin tones [ 58].
These cases, to mention but a few, illustrate how such systems deployed in a real-world
context can become “Weapons of Math Destruction” reinforcing inequalities [59].
Similarly issues arise when tools built on biased data are used in precision medicines [ 60]
and there are many examples of medical datasets where the lack of inclusion of minorities
has led to the development of biased models. For example, European populations were
found to be significantly over-represented, while the other races were underrepresented in
genomic studies in US [ 61]. Another example concerns the Framingham Heart Risk functions
used to assess the risk of coronary heart diseases which suffered from an overestimation of
risk for the German population [ 62]. This bias was due to the Caucasian sample the initial
study was based on. This reveals the particular attention needed in order to implement
AI-based models developed on medical datasets.
Slack et al. [63] determined that existing XAI techniques cannot provide explanations
that adequately identify discriminatory behavior in some sensitive applications. Although,
giving explanations can increase understanding of and trust in a system [ 19,46,64], simple
explanations can hide undesirable attributes of the system and may mislead users into
coming to dangerous or unfounded conclusions that could ultimately be unethical [ 21].
Additionally, an awareness of the dangers of blindly embracing explanations that may
disguise racial or gender discrimination [ 46] or provide fair-washing, i.e., “promoting the
false perception that a ML model respects some ethical values” [ 65] is needed in all medical
areas where such systems may be utilized.
In this paper, we focus on XAI as a technician solution that can help to expose systemic
bias in CDSS; however, this does not address underlying deep-rooted discriminatory
assumptions [ 8]. XAI can be used to help us evaluate if predictions are biased and defend
algorithmic decisions as being fair and ethical [ 18,19,46,66]. Additionally, XAI can help to
shed some light onto causality [ 18,46,67] although, there is a recognized need to go beyond
causality/correlation to true “causability” [3].
Furthermore, there are now regulations in the EU which give subjects the right to
obtain an explanation of the decision made using their data which need to be considered in
the development of CDSS. To ensure that the processing of data is conducted in a manner
that respects the rights of the data subjects and leads to the development of fair systems,
different regions have adopted regulations governing the use of data. The General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [ 6] protects the personal data of all EU residents, irrespective
of the processing location. GDPR gives EU residents the right to access rectiﬁcation, erasure,
and restriction of processing of their personal data. Speciﬁcally, data subjects who will
be affected by a decision have a “right to nondiscrimination” and should be able to be
informed of the reasons for the automated decision. According to the GDPR, data subjects
have “the right not to be subject solely on automated processing” (Article 22). More
speciﬁcally, according to Article 22(3) and Recital 71 “such processing should be subject
to suitable safeguards, which should include speciﬁc information to the data subject and
the right to obtain human intervention, to express his or her point of view, to obtain an
explanation of the decision reached after such assessment and to challenge the decision”.
2.3. XAI in Medicine
The use of XAI in medicine is rooted in demand for the added value that comes from
medical professionals being able to understand how and why a machine-based decision has
been made. Thus, there is growing demand for AI approaches that not only perform well,