Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 6 of 23
but are trustworthy, transparent, interpretable, and explainable for a human expert. This
also has important implications for the public, policy, and governance as the explainability
of AI tools will enhance the trust of medical professionals [ 3]. In many ways, medical
professionals act as translators for patients—translating knowledge that is too complex
for patients themselves to understand and act on. Having CDSS which assist medical
professionals in this task makes sense, provided the CDSS aid, not hinder, that translation.
Translating ML models effectively to clinical practice requires establishing clinicians’
trust in the system. However, there have been a number of high-proﬁle cases that have
undermined trust in the use of AI in medicine. For example, many of the recommendations
for treatment by “Watson for Oncology” (IBM) have been shown to be incorrect and
potentially harmful [ 30]. In another famous example by Caruana et al. [68], it was found
that a ML-based system that was trained to predict which patients with pneumonia should
be admitted to hospital identiﬁed patients with asthma as being at lower risk of dying from
pneumonia. This reﬂected a true pattern in the training data—patients with asthma were
less likely to die from pneumonia—but this was because they tended to be admitted directly
to the Intensive Care Units (ICU) and received more aggressive treatments. However, if this
model was deployed in a real-world clinical environment without understanding why
this prediction was being made, and without human/expert intervention, it is possible
that patients with asthma would not be admitted to hospital, and would not receive the
aggressive treatment required to prevent death. The use of explainable models could help
to prevent such mistakes being made.
However, there is a lack of consensus upon which usable explanations can be used in
different settings [ 69]. Monteath and Sheh [70]proposed a novel XAI approach to incremental
decision support for medical diagnosis using decision trees; their approach allows AI systems
to work alongside human experts, each informing the other and coming to a decision together.
Their system is able to guide physicians in determining which test results are most useful
given existing data. The system is also able to explain how a particular decision was made,
tracing right back to the underlying training data. This provides the transparency that
is crucial for patient confidence, regulation compliance, detecting and correcting errors,
and improving patient outcomes. Another example of humans and AI systems working
alongside is the work by Wu et al. [71]who proposed an expert-in-the-loop interpretation
method to label the behavior of internal units in Convolutional Neural Networks. They
demonstrate that several Convolutional Neural Networks models can produce explanatory
descriptions to support the final classification decisions. Their findings are an important first
step towards XAI in classification of diseased tissue.
Developers of ML-based models in medicine are increasingly focusing on explainabil-
ity, and their results are promising. Zheng et al. [72] proposed a novel and explainable
method to classify cardiac pathology by extracting image-derived features to characterize
the shape and motion of the heart. Their proposed model achieves 95% classiﬁcation
accuracy, a performance comparable to that of the state-of-the-art that enables explanations
and transparency to become more trustworthy. Tosun et al. [73] described an initial XAI
enabled software application, HistoMapr-Breast, for breast core biopsies. HistoMapr-Breast
automatically previews breast core whole slide images and recognizes the regions of inter-
est to rapidly present the key diagnostic areas in an interactive and explainable manner.
HistoMapr-Breast can work for pathologists in a trustworthy fashion using its explanation
interface. They believe that the concept of XAI system must be integrated in pathology
workﬂows promoting safety, reliability, and accountability in addressing issues with bias,
transparency, safety, and causality. They also highlight that an XAI system augments
pathologists and works with them but does not replace them. Hicks et al. [74] introduced
Mimir, an automated multimedia reporting software dissecting the neural network to learn
the intermediate analysis steps, which directly adds explainability to Deep Neural Network
models in medical problems by producing structured and semantically correct reports,
composed of text and images. Mimir enables investigation, explainability, and understand-
ing of the deep learning algorithms decision processes. Ultimately, better explanations