Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 5088 3 of 23
Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) are computer systems designed to assist in
the delivery of healthcare, and ML is being exploited for their development. The explain-
ability of such systems is a relatively new area of study and this work aims to present its
application, beneﬁts, gaps, and future opportunities by conducting a systematic literature
review. Our hypothesis is that despite the plethora of ML-based CDSS, there is only a
limited number of systems that have been speciﬁcally developed with explainability as
one of their features, and that there are still challenges that need to be addressed. Future
systems should be created according to current reported beneﬁts and gaps. As a result, this
study aims to ﬁrst identify the state-of-the-art in explainable ML-based CDSS, in terms of
the area of use and current prevalent methodologies, and then discover what beneﬁts have
been reported as a result of this combination and what the areas for improvement are.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a background of
CDSS, XAI, and the considerations of applying XAI to CDSS including the need for explain-
ability, its application in medicine, types of explanations, the matter of interpretability vs.
performance, and the needs of clinicians in terms of explainability. Section 3 describes our
materials, methodology, and research questions. Section 4 presents ﬁndings and answers
to the research questions. Section 5 discusses these ﬁndings, along with guidelines for the
future implementation of explainable ML-based CDSS. Section 6 presents our conclusions.
2. Fundamental Concepts and Background
2.1. Clinical Decision Support Systems
Clinical Decision Support Systems are computer systems that “provide clinicians, staff,
patients, or other individuals with knowledge and person-speciﬁc information, intelligently
ﬁltered, or presented at appropriate times, to enhance health and health care” [ 22]. CDSSs
are designed for a variety of purposes such as diagnosis, treatment response prediction,
treatment recommendation (personalization), prognosis, and the prioritization of patient
care according to their level of risk. They can be helpful in clinical practice as a “second set
of eyes” for clinicians, combining their human knowledge with the “knowledge” that is
embedded in the system. CDSS can help to improve patients’ safety, quality of care, and
healthcare efﬁciency [ 23–25], as well as reducing the costs of healthcare [ 26]. They can
improve patient safety not only by reducing medical errors but also through reminders for
medications or other medical events for patients or clinicians [ 25]. Additionally, CDSS can
be useful in low-resource settings where the number of medical institutions, equipment,
and qualiﬁed clinicians is limited.
CDSS can be classiﬁed as knowledge-based and non-knowledge-based [ 27]. CDSS that
are knowledge-based depend on medical guidelines and knowledge while non-knowledge-
based CDSS typically use ML. ML-based CDSS ﬁnd patterns in historical clinical data and
develop predictive models that are able to predict clinical outcomes based on new inputs.
These outcomes can then be used as recommendations for clinicians to help them in their
practice. ML-based CDSS have great potential in clinical practice. They can help to enhance
the accuracy of clinical decisions and minimize medical errors because they are objective,
depending only on the input data, and the inner decision-making logic. However, they
rely on the quality and quantity of data provided [ 28]. When the data used to train an ML
model are biased, this bias is captured by the model and consequently can make biased or
incorrect predictions. This can ultimately lead to a biased or incorrect human decision.
Companies such as IBM, Elsevier, Intermedica, and Microsoft have developed or are
currently developing such systems. IBM’s “Watson Health” [ 29] aims to help in treatment-
related decisions for patients. However, signiﬁcant challenges still remain as Watson Health
does not perform as well in the clinical world as it did in the game show Jeopardy! [ 30].
Elsevier’s “Via Pathways”, rebranded “ClinicalPath” [ 31] provides evidence-based care
maps for the treatment of patients with cancer, and ClinicalKey [ 32] is a search engine that
provides clinical decision support using research-based recommendations. Infermedica
has developed a mobile application called Symptomate [ 33] which is a popular symptom
checker, recently updated to perform a COVID-19 checkup. Finally, Microsoft is developing