Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
(2017); Xie et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2018a) advocate going beyond initialization and forcing
the weight matrices to be orthogonal throughout the entire learning process. However, some of
these approaches come with signiﬁcant computational overhead and reportedly hinder representation
power of these models (V orontsov et al., 2017). Moreover, orthogonal weight matrices alone do not
prevent exploding and vanishing gradients, due to the nonlinear nature of deep neural networks as
shown in (Pennington et al., 2017).
Here we offer a new perspective on the trainability of RNNs from the dynamical system view-
point. While exploding gradient is a manifestation of the instability of the underlying dynamical
system, vanishing gradient results from a lossy system, properties that have been widely studied in
the dynamical system literature (Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Laurent & von Brecht, 2017). The main
contributions of the work are:
We draw connections between RNNs and the ordinary differential equation theory and
design new recurrent architectures by discretizing ODEs.
The stability of the ODE solutions and the numerical methods for solving ODEs lead us to
design a special form of RNNs, which we name AntisymmetricRNN , that can capture long-
term dependencies in the inputs. The construction of the model is much simpler compared
to the existing methods for improving RNN trainability.
We conduct extensive simulations and experiments to demonstrate the beneﬁts of this new
RNN architecture. AntisymmetricRNN exhibits well-behaved dynamics and outperforms
the regular LSTM model on tasks requiring long-term memory, and matches its perfor-
mance on tasks where short-term dependencies dominate with much fewer parameters.
2 R ELATED WORK
Trainability of RNNs. Capturing long-term dependencies using RNNs has been a long-standing
research topic with various approaches proposed. The ﬁrst group of approaches mitigates the ex-
ploding or vanishing gradient issues by introducing some forms of gating. Long short-term memory
networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al.,
2014) are the most prominent models along this line of work. Parallel efforts include designing
special neural architectures, such as hierarchical RNNs (El Hihi & Bengio, 1996), recursive neural
networks (Socher et al., 2011), attention networks (Bahdanau et al., 2014), dilated convolutions (Yu
& Koltun, 2015), recurrent batch normalization (Cooijmans et al., 2017), residual RNNs (Yue et al.,
2018), and Fourier recurrent units (Zhang et al., 2018b). These, however, are fundamentally different
networks with different tradeoffs.
Another direction is to constrain the weight matrices of an RNN so that the back-propagated error
signal is well conditioned, in particular, the input-output Jacobian having unitary singular values.
Le et al. (2015); Mikolov et al. (2014); Mishkin & Matas (2015) propose the use of identity or
orthogonal matrix to initialize the recurrent weight matrix. Followup works further constrain the
weight matrix throughout the entire learning process either through re-parametrization (Arjovsky
et al., 2016), geodesic gradient descent on the Stiefel manifold (Wisdom et al., 2016; V orontsov
et al., 2017), or constraining the singular values (Jose et al., 2017; Kanai et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018a). It is worth noting that, orthogonal weights by themselves do not guarantee unitary Jaco-
bians. Nonlinear activations still cause the gradients to explode or vanish. Contractive maps such as
sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent lead to vanishing gradients. Chen et al. (2018a) offer an initializa-
tion scheme taking into account the nonlinearity. However, the theory developed relies heavily on
the random matrix assumptions, which only hold at the initialization point of training. Although it
has been shown to predict trainability beyond initialization.
Dynamical systems view of recurrent networks. Connections between dynamical systems and
RNNs have not been well explored. Laurent & von Brecht (2017) study the behavior of dynamical
systems induced by recurrent networks, and show that LSTMs and GRUs exhibit chaotic dynamics
in the absence of input data. They propose a simpliﬁed gated RNN named the chaos free network
(CFN), that has non-chaotic dynamics and achieves comparable performance to LSTMs and GRUs
on language modeling. Tallec & Ollivier (2018) formulate RNNs as a time-discretized version of
ODE and show that time invariance leads to gate-like mechanisms in RNNs. With this formulation,
2