Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
Figure 2: Mean and standard deviation of eigenvalues of the end-to-end Jacobian matrix in Antisym-
metricRNNs with different diffusion constants and LSTMs, trained on the noise padded CIFAR-10.
To verify that AntisymmetricRNNs indeed mitigate the exploding/vanishing gradient issues, we
conduct an additional set of experiments varying the length of noise padding so that the total time
stepsT2f100;200;400;800g. LSTMs and AntisymmetricRNNs with different diffusion con-
stants
2f0:001;0:01;0:1;1;5;10gare trained on these tasks. Figure 2 visualizes the mean and
standard deviation of the eigenvalues of the end-to-end Jacobian matrices for these networks. Uni-
tary eigenvalues, i.e., mean close to 1 and standard deviation close to 0, indicate non-exploding and
non-vanishing gradients. As shown in the ﬁgure, the eigenvalues for LSTMs quickly approaches
zero as time steps increase, indicating vanishing gradients during back-propagation. This explains
why LSTMs fail to train at all on this task. AntisymmetricRNNs with a broad range of diffusion
constants
, on the other hand, have eigenvalues centered around 1. It is worth noting though as
the diffusion constant increases to large values, AntisymmetricRNNs run into vanishing gradients
as well. The diffusion constant 
plays an important role in striking a balance between the stability
of discretization and capturing long-term dependencies.
5.4 A BLATION STUDY
For the CIFAR-10 experiments, we have also conducted an ablation study to further demonstrate
the effect of antisymmetric weight matrix. The ablation model in Table 2 refers to the model that
replaces the antisymmetric weight matrices in Equation 13 with unstructured weight matrices. As
shown in Table 2, without the antisymmetric parametrization, the performance on both pixel-by-
pixel and noise padded CIFAR-10 is worse.
It is worth mentioning that the antisymmetric formulation is a sufﬁcient condition of stability, not
necessary. There are possibly other conditions that lead to stability as well as suggested in Chen
et al. (2018a), which could explain the modest degradation in the ablation results.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a new perspective on the trainability of RNNs from the dynamical system
viewpoint. We draw connections between RNNs and the ordinary differential equation theory and
design new recurrent architectures by discretizing ODEs. This new view opens up possibilities
to exploit the computational and theoretical success from dynamical systems to understand and
improve the trainability of RNNs. We also propose the AntisymmetricRNN, which is a discretization
of ODEs that satisfy the critical criterion. Besides its appealing theoretical properties, our models
have demonstrated competitive performance over strong recurrent baselines on a comprehensive set
of benchmark tasks.
By establishing a link between recurrent networks and ordinary differential equations, we anticipate
that this work will inspire future research in both communities. An important item of future work
is to investigate other stable ODEs and numerical methods that lead to novel and well-conditioned
recurrent architectures.
9