Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3Tutun ( 2021 ) and Tutun et al., ( 2017 ). It is important to note 
that the NEPAR algorithm is transparent and explainable as 
it generates a network diagram providing insights regard -
ing the observations and their relationships in the dataset. 
Thus, it is possible for the creator of the AI-based DSSs to 
easily identify issues regarding fairness and bias. We devel -
oped two NEPAR models, NEPAR-Q and NEPAR-P. The 
Q and P stand for questions and participants, respectively. 
The nodes in the NEPAR-Q model indicate the questions, 
while the nodes in the NEPAR-P model represent the par -
ticipants. The links in both models depict similarities among 
the nodes. NEPAR-Q was used in the present research to 
reduce the number of questions on the SCL-90-R (i.e., vari -
able selection), while NEPAR-P was utilized for feature 
engineering (i.e., variable creation) because it generates and 
incorporates similarities among patients as new variables. 
The NEPAR algorithm employs the similarity measures of 
closeness, betweenness, and degree centrality to compute 
the abovementioned links. We used all of these similarity 
measures and combined them, since choosing one over 
another might have caused bias in either model.
For variable selection through the NEPAR-Q model, three 
mental health experts determined the threshold values for 
each similarity measure, based on their experience. These 
threshold values were 36% for betweenness centrality and their responses to the SCL-90-R test. Figure 1 shows the 
registration GUI for Psikometrist, which was created as a 
part of this research.
3.2 Phase II: variable selection and creation 
through NEPAR
We utilized a social network analysis technique called the 
Networked Pattern Recognition (NEPAR) algorithm to 
reduce the number of SCL-90-R questions and identify 
similarities among individuals taking the test (i.e., partici -
pants). Through NEPAR, we calculated similarities among 
the questions and participants, built undirected network 
graphs, and extracted three centrality measures (i.e., close -
ness, degree, and betweenness centralities). We then com -
pared these centrality measures to decrease the number 
of questions from 90 to 28, without reducing the number 
of disorders the SCL-90-R could detect. Additionally, we 
applied NEPAR to compute similarities among participants 
by obtaining three centrality measures, namely closeness, 
betweenness, and degree centrality. The NEPAR algorithm 
extracts similarities and relationships among variables. It 
creates a network diagram with nodes and links, using the 
responses given by the participants to the SCL-90-R ques -
tions. For more information about NEPAR, see Khan & 
Fig. 2  Centrality graphs 1266