Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3the SCL-90-R test on the Psikometrist platform by sending 
an encrypted link to the participant. The questions appear -
ing via the Psikometrist platform have time thresholds, 
establishing the minimum amount of time necessary to read 
and answer them. The Psikometrist platform compares the 
time that patients spend answering an SCL-90-R question 
with the minimum threshold and excludes patients who 
answer in a time frame less than that. Using the encrypted 
link, participants can securely access the SCL-90-R ques -
tions. Before answering the questions. Participants or their 
guardians sign an informed consent indicating that their 
answers to the SCL-90-R questions can be anonymously 
used to develop a decision support system. Additionally, 
patients are informed that they can skip or refuse to answer 
questions. After data collection, personal identifiers (e.g., 
name, date of birth, address) are masked and remain con -
fidential in the system and are only visible to the mental 
health professional who administered the test to satisfy the 
ethical AI guidelines mentioned in Sect. 2.3. The system 
generates a unique identifier for each participant and uses it 
instead of personal identification to ensure anonymity. This 
ensures that the information collected from patients is kept 
strictly confidential. Additionally, participants are informed 
that the data collected will be utilized to improve their men -
tal health diagnosis. Each participant’s responses are tabu -
lated and stored in the system. Respondents also receive a 
copy of their tabulated responses. Following this procedure, 
more than 6,000 participants have taken the SCL-90-R test 
since 2019. We established a close cooperative relationship 
with three mental health experts (i.e., psychiatrists) who 
plan to use the proposed DSS to ensure greater impact and 
address concerns regarding the social and responsible use 
of AI, as discussed by Dennehy et al., ( 2021 ) and Morley 
et al., ( 2019 ). These three mental health experts (i.e., psy -
chiatrists) evaluated the participants’ responses to identify 
potential mental disorders. To integrate ethics into our AI 
solution and ensure that the predictions of mental disorders 
remain within given moral bounds, we removed variables 
related to the participants’ demographic information (e.g., 
race, gender, and insurer information). We only considered an ad-hoc post-model analysis process (i.e., SHAP, LIME) 
to further understand the decisions made by these Blackbox 
models.
As many research studies stated, there is a need for a 
methodology for integrating ethics into the design of AI-
based DSSs from the start of the project. For instance, Mor -
ley et al., ( 2019 ) emphasized that the ethical challenges 
raised by implementing AI in healthcare settings are tackled 
proactively rather than reactively. This brings up the con -
cept called “Ethics by Design” which is concerned with 
algorithms and tools needed to endow AI-based DSSs with 
the ability to reason about the ethical aspects of their deci -
sions, to ensure that their behavior remains within given 
moral bounds (D’Aquin et al., 2018 ; Dignum et al., 2018 ; 
Iphofen & Kritikos, 2019 ).
In this study, the “Ethics by Design” approach was uti -
lized to create an AI-based DSS that can diagnose mental 
disorders. Throughout the design process, a close coopera -
tive relationship between IS researchers designing AI-based 
DSSs and the practitioners using the AI-based DSSs (i.e., 
mental health professionals) was established for ensuring 
greater impact and addressing concerns regarding the social 
and responsible use of AI, as addressed by Dennehy et al., 
(2021 ) and Morley et al., ( 2019 ). Furthermore, various pro -
cedures were embedded in the design of the DSS to ensure 
the fairness, transparency, and trustworthiness of the pro -
posed DSS, as discussed in the methodology section.
3 Methodology and application
3.1 Phase I: data collection and preprocessing
We developed a web portal called Psikometrist that digi -
tally collects participants’ responses to the SCL-90-R and 
saves them in a database. Mental health professionals such 
as counselors, psychologists, and psychiatrists seeking to 
use this platform must register and obtain preauthorization. 
After registration and obtaining access to the Psikometrist 
platform, these mental health professionals can implement 
Fig. 1  GUI of the Psikometrist 
platform 1265