Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3are the Diagnostic and Statistical Manuel of Mental Dis -
orders (DSM) and International Classification of Diseases 
(Americans et al., 2013 ; Fabiano & Haslam, 2020 ; Fellmeth 
et al., 2021 ). These tools, despite their frequent use, have 
certain limitations. For instance, the criteria used to identify 
diseases are common to many diagnoses; thus, diagnostic 
groups cannot be clearly separated from one another (Lin et 
al., 2006 ; Ogasawara et al., 2017 ; Park & Kim, 2020 ; Sleep 
et al., 2021 ). Moreover, these tools do not consider addi -
tional factors such as demographic and biochemical data, 
information obtained during a patient interview, mental 
illness history for the family, or the individual’s response 
to medications. They also examine patients according to a 
binary structure (i.e., patient vs. not-patient), resulting in 
misdiagnoses and inappropriate treatment plans (Garcia-
Zattera et al., 2010 ; Pechenizkiy et al., 2006 ; Sleep et al., 
2021 ).
Due to these limitations, mental health professionals 
often use other diagnostic guidelines, particularly the Symp -
tom Checklist 90-Revised (SCL-90-R), which has become 
the most common assessment tool used around the world 
(Akhavan, Abiri, & Shairi, 2020 b; Hildenbrand et al., 2015 ; 
Li et al., 2018 ). This tool includes 90 questions that are 
employed to assess 10 primary mental disorders, including 
somatization, obsessive-compulsive disorder, interpersonal 
sensitivity, depression, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, 
paranoid ideation, psychoticism, and additional items (i.e., 
sleep, appetite, and feelings of guilt) (Gallardo-Pujol & 
Pereda, 2013 ).
Despite the availability of various diagnostic guidelines 
and tools, many mental health professionals still struggle 
to diagnose patients accurately and efficiently. Conse -
quently, recent literature has called for more research on 
the use of cutting-edge technologies (i.e., artificial intel -
ligence) to develop decision support systems (DSSs) that 
can help mental health professionals make evidence-based 
treatment decisions and guide policymakers with the digi -
tal mental health implementation (Balcombe & Leo, 2021 ; 
D’Alfonso, 2020 ). This study precisely responds to this call 
and addresses the challenges regarding the guidelines and 
tools used to diagnose mental disorders. This study mainly 
aims to build a mental health assessment tool and develop 
an AI-based DSS for mental health professionals to accu -
rately diagnose mental disorders.
The remainder of the research is organized as follows. 
First, Sect. 2 summarizes the relevant literature regarding 
the standard mental health assessment tools and the use of 
AI to detect mental disorders and ethical guidelines regard -
ing AI to design such tools. Next, Sect. 3 explains the 
research framework and applies it to a real-world dataset to 
demonstrate the use of AI to build a mental health assess -
ment tool and develop an efficient DSS that accurately (WHO, 2018 ). According to recent estimates (Ritchie, 
2018 ; WHO, 2020 ), approximately one billion individuals 
suffer from mental health disorders (e.g., depression, anxi -
ety, bipolar disorder), costing the global economy trillions 
of dollars in disability payments and lost productivity. How -
ever, a significant proportion of individuals with mental ill -
nesses do not receive treatment or the quality of care they 
need, often due to resource shortages (Docrat et al., 2019 ; 
Petersen et al., 2019 ; Wainberg et al., 2017 ; Wang & Cheung, 
2011 ). For example, in many countries, there is fewer than 
one psychiatrist for every 100,000 people (Hanna et al., 
2018 ; Jenkins et al., 2010 ). Moreover, certain tools and 
methods used by mental health professionals to make care-
related decisions (e.g., formulating accurate diagnoses) are 
inadequate (Kilbourne et al., 2018 ; Wang & Cheung, 2011 ). 
Additionally, recent pandemics (e.g., COVID-19) and epi -
demics (e.g., opioid overdose) have exacerbated the mental 
health crisis worldwide (Johnson et al., 2021 ; Khanal et al., 
2020 ; Ransing et al., 2020 ). Thus, there is a need for inno -
vative tools that can help mental health professionals (e.g., 
psychiatrists, counselors) make more efficient and accurate 
diagnostic decisions Casado-Lumbreras et al., 2012 ; Per -
kins et al., 2018 ; Thieme Anja et al., 2020 ).
The primary diagnostic guidelines used by mental 
health professionals to detect and classify mental disorders 
according to the type, intensity, and duration of symptoms 
Table 1  Mental Disorders Diagnosable using the SCL-90-R (Exclud -
ing “Other”)
Mental Disorder Definition
Anxiety (ANX): A disorder that causes feelings of apprehension, 
dread, terror, and panic.
Depression 
(DEP):A disorder that leads to painful symptoms that 
negatively affect daily activities such as eating 
and sleeping.
Hostility (HOS): A disorder wherein patients have thoughts, feel -
ings, and actions that cause a negative state of 
anger (e.g., aggression, rage).
Interpersonal sen -
sitivity (INT):A disorder wherein patients feel inadequate and 
inferior when they compare themselves to others 
(e.g., feelings of self-deprecation, uneasiness).
Obsessive-com -
pulsive (OC):A disorder in which patients have repeated 
unwanted thoughts or desire to do something 
continually and urgently.
Paranoid ideation 
(PAR):A disorder wherein patients have a mode of 
thinking featuring hostility, suspiciousness, 
grandiosity, or fear of loss of autonomy.
Phobic anxiety 
(PHOB):A disorder wherein patients have a persistent 
feeling of fear of a specific person, place, object, 
or situation that becomes irrational.
Psychoticism 
(PSY):A disorder epitomized by aggressiveness and 
interpersonal hostility (e.g., lack of empathy).
Somatization 
(SOM):A disorder caused by bodily perceptions and 
complaints related to cardiovascular, gastroin -
testinal, respiratory, and other body systems.
Additional items 
(ADI)Includes items such as sleep and appetite prob -
lems and feelings of guilt.1262