Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3circles) the models without NEPAR-P. These models were 
powerful for diagnosing anxiety, depression, hostility, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and somatization. It appears 
that the models built both with and without NEPAR-P had 
some minor issues with diagnosing PAR and ADI. This 
was mainly because the numbers of individuals with these 
two disorders are relatively low. We believe that the DSS 
will perform significantly better once we collect more data 
and increase the sample size of individuals with these two 
disorders.
4 Discussions, implications and Future 
Research
This study was conducted in response to several calls for 
research on the use of cutting-edge technologies to develop 
decision support systems (DSSs) to help mental health pro -
fessionals make evidence-based ethical treatment decisions 
and guide policymakers with digital mental health imple -
mentation (Balcombe & Leo, 2021 ; D’Alfonso, 2020 ). 
Because many mental health professionals use cumber -
some standardized assessment tools such as the SCL-90-R 
for mental disorder diagnosis, previous studies emphasized 
the importance of developing less complex diagnostic tools 
with fewer questions (Kruyen et al., 2013 ). To this extent, 
this study mainly focused on techniques to reduce the length 
of the SCL-90-R for faster competition times and better 
completion rates. Also, various studies stated the need for 
DSS to diagnose mental disorders automatically and accu -
rately (Chekroud et al., 2017 ; Rovini et al., 2018 ; Stewart et 
al., 2020 ; Zhang et al., 2020 ). Therefore, this study explored 
how to utilize AI and ML to develop DSS for mental health 
diagnosis. This study has various implications and makes 
several contributions to the pertinent literature and practice 
as follows.
4.1 Theoretical implications
How an ethics framework is implemented in an AI-based 
healthcare application is not widely reported in the pre -
vious literature. Thus, there is a need for examples of AI 
implementations that satisfy the three principles of ethical 
AI, particularly in the healthcare field. As mentioned in 
Sect. 2.3, these principles are fairness, transparency, and 
trustworthiness. Therefore, this study focused on techniques 
as developed and described in Fig. 5 in the various phases 
of AI-based DSS creation and contributed to the theory of 
developing ethical AI solutions.
First, the study emphasized the importance of establish -
ing close cooperation between the creators of AI-based 
DSSs and the practitioners. Second, this close collaboration only diagnose three to four mental disorders (Derogatis & 
Fitzpatrick, 2004 ; Prinz et al., 2013 ). Thus, mental health 
professionals can now use the SCL-28-AI instead of the 
SCL-90-R without compromising the number of mental 
disorders diagnosed or diagnostic accuracy. Furthermore, 
the SCL-28-AI has fewer questions; hence, it is much faster 
to complete and will yield a better response rate. Moreover, 
the performance measures obtained via NEPAR-P were 
higher than those obtained without, indicating that includ -
ing participants’ similarities as additional features improved 
mental disorder diagnosis. The L-LR model with NEPAR-P 
yielded the highest performance measures; therefore, it was 
selected as the final model and deployed as part of the DSS.
Figure 4 shows each model’s accuracy, sensitivity, and 
specificity with NEPAR-Q, at the mental disorder level. As 
seen from the plots in Fig. 4, the models with NEPAR-P 
(i.e., the three additional features accounting for similari -
ties among participants) outperformed (seen in the yellow 
Fig. 5  Core elements of designing ethical AI solutions 
Fig. 4  Performance of the AI and ML models with NEPAR-
Q, by mental disorder 1270