Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3Abdullah Albizri  is currently an Assistant Professor of Information 
Management and Business Analytics at the Feliciano School of Busi -
ness, Montclair State University. He received his Ph.D. in Manage -
ment Information Systems from Sheldon B. Lubar School of Business, 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, in August 2014. Dr. Albizri’s 
research focuses on using AI solutions and machine learning tech -
niques for financial fraud detection, blockchain applications, and the 
role of Information Systems in sustainability. Before joining academia, 
Dr. Albizri worked as an IT business consultant in the banking indus -
try. Dr. Albizri has published articles in the International Journal of 
Information Management, Journal of Information Systems, Communi -
cations of the Association for Information Systems, and others.
Sedat Irgil  is a practicing psychiatrist at his private practice in Turkey 
as well as the co-founder of and the main psychiatric consultant for 
DNB Analytics, a company focusing on AI Applications in the fields 
of psychiatry and behavioral science. Dr. Irgil completed his medical 
residency at Gulhane Military Medical Academy, focusing on group 
psychodynamic therapies and psychoanalytic therapies. Dr. Irgil’s 
research interests psychometric testing, graph analysis, and AI appli -
cations in psychiatry. Dr. Irgil has contributed to conference presenta -
tions and book chapters on the field of AI applications in behavioral 
sciences, including a conference paper that was published in Recent 
Advances in Intelligent Manufacturing and Service Systems.
Ilker Yesilkaya  is an independent researcher in risk assessment and 
data analytics. İlker Yeşilkaya has completed his B.Sc degree in Busi -
ness Administration from Anatolian University and M.Sc Degree in 
Occupational Health and Safety Management from Balıkesir Univer -
sity. He worked on various projects in the mining industry, health care, 
and education as a software and data architect and data analyst. It has 
also been the finalist at the IISE 2020 and IISE 2021 Cup Competitions.
Esma Nur Ucar  is currently having her master’s degree in Experi -
mental Psychology at Dokuz Eylül University. She completed her 
undergraduate education in the Department of Psychology at Ege 
University and worked as a psychologist in the psychiatry clinic and 
centers on psychometric assessment in the past. Her research inter -
est includes neuropsychology, the neurological basis of psychiatric 
diseases, and the measurement and evaluation of neuropsychological 
disorders.
Tanalp Sengun  is a Business Analyst working at McKinsey&Company. 
He graduated from Koc University with a double-major in Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering and Business Administration. He worked 
at Wecurex AI research lab and Optical Microsystems and Biofluids 
and Cardiovascular Mechanics Labs at Koc University. His research 
focuses on artificial intelligence, machine learning, image processing, 
and their medical applications, such as the classification of cataract 
disease from retinal images and the classification of prosthetic hand 
gestures based on neural signals.
Antoine Harfouche  is an Associate Professor of Information Sys -
tems (IS) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) at University Paris Nanterre 
where he teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in various areas, 
including IS, AI, Big Data, and Quantitative Methods. Dr. Harfouche’s 
research primarily examines how IS and AI impact individuals, organi -
zations, countries, and societies in general. His publications appeared 
in peer-reviewed journals (e.g., the Annals of Operation Research, 
Trends in Biotechnology, Information Technology and People, Lec -
ture Notes in Information Systems and Organization) and renowned 
conference proceedings (e.g., ICIS, PACIS, MCIS). Throughout his 
career, Dr. Harfouche has obtained a considerable amount of fund -
ing—above 2 million dollars—from the French Research Council 
(ANR) and the European ERANSMUS +.1276