Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3non-directional graphs. This tool’s questions and corre -
sponding mental disorders are given in Table 2.
Figure 3 displays the network graph of participants 
(nodes) obtained using NEPAR-P and degree centrality. It 
is important to note that the other centrality measures (i.e., 
closeness and betweenness) provided similar graphs for 
various sets of communities. For example, as seen in Fig. 3, 
there were five communities of individuals related to one 
another via links. This fact underscores that the similarities 
among participants provide critical information and should 
be used in the AI models as new variables to improve diag -
nostic accuracy. Figure 3.a and Fig. 3.b shows that there is 
high connections among nodes and these connections can 
give new information about the participants.
3.3 Model training
In this phase, we built various AI and ML using two different 
training sets: one including only participants’ responses to 
the 28 questions and one with their responses and three cen -
trality measures. These AI and ML models were designed to 
determine the probability of participants’ having a particu -
lar type of mental disorder (e.g., depression, anxiety). The 
prediction models were determined based on our prelimi -
nary analysis and included logistic regression-based ridge 
regression (R-LR), lasso regression (L-LR), RF, and SVM. 
To ensure the AI-based DSS is explainable and transpar -
ent, we particularly, selected three Whitebox explainable AI 
algorithms (i.e., R-LR, L-LR, and RF) and compared their 
performance measures to a Blackbox algorithm (i.e., SVM).
Logistic regression (LR) is a statistical approach that 
explains the relationship between multiple input variables 
and one output variable. The input variables can be of any tool comprised of 28 questions in total. Figure 2 represents 
the network diagrams based on three centrality measures 
obtained from the NEPAR-Q model. The red nodes in the 
figure represent questions with a similarity value above the 
threshold, and the green nodes are questions with similarity 
values below the threshold. The intersection of the red nodes 
in the three graphs represents the remaining 28 questions.
Figure 2.a shows the questions (nodes) located further 
away from the densely populated nodes, with fewer inter -
connections. These nodes (seen in the blue circles) were 
1: Somatization, 5: Interpersonal Sensitivity, 9: OCD, 20: 
Depression, and 45: Obsessive Compulsive. Therefore, 
these questions were most likely the weakest and could be 
removed from the SCL-90-R, since they provided informa -
tion that could be obtained from other questions.
The top 10 questions (seen in the orange circle) convey -
ing the most information on the SCL-90-R are indicated as 
augmented nodes in Fig. 2.b. These top 10 questions were 
56: Somatization, 78: Anxiety, 41: Interpersonal Sensitivity, 
58: Somatization, 33: Anxiety, 80: Anxiety, 7: Psychoticism, 
51: Obsessive-Compulsive, 10: Obsessive-Compulsive, and 
43: Paranoid Thoughts. Additionally, Fig. 2.b shows that 
some questions were not necessary and could be predicted 
using other questions, as seen yellow lines of Fig. 2.b. For 
example, we could infer that “Question 6: Feeling critical 
of others” was highly correlated with “Question 37: Feel -
ing that people are unfriendly or dislike you.“ Moreover, 
the response to “Question 33: Feeling fearful” was highly 
correlated to the response to “Question 57: Feeling tense or 
keyed up.“ The SCL-90-R was reduced to a tool called the 
Symptom Checklist 28-Artificial Intelligence (SCL-28-AI), 
which features 28 questions and threshold values, as well 
as a correlation comparison of the centrality values in the 
Fig. 3  Network graph of 
individuals obtained through 
NEPAR-P, using the degree 
centrality measure 1268