1 3Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-022-10282-5
mental health as a state of wellbeing in which individuals 
can realize their abilities, cope with the everyday stresses of 
life, work productively, and contribute to their community 1 Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) has described 
 
Antoine Harfouche
antoine.h@parisnanterre.fr
Salih Tutun
salihtutun@wustl.edu
Marina E. Johnson
johnsonmari@montclair.edu
Abdulaziz Ahmed
aahmed2@uab.edu
Abdullah Albizri
albizria@montclair.edu
Sedat Irgil
sedatirgil@dnbanalytics.com
Ilker Yesilkayailkeryesilkaya@dnbanalytics.com
Esma Nur Ucar
esmanurucar@dnbanalytics.com
Tanalp Sengun
tsengun16@ku.edu.tr
1 Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
2 Montclair State University, NJ, USA
3 University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA
4 Guven Private Health Laboratory, Guven, Turkey
5 WeCureX Lab, DNB Analytics, Turkey, Turkey
6 University Paris Nanterre, Nanterre, FranceAbstract
Approximately one billion individuals suffer from mental health disorders, such as depression, bipolar disorder, schizo -
phrenia, and anxiety. Mental health professionals use various assessment tools to detect and diagnose these disorders. 
However, these tools are complex, contain an excessive number of questions, and require a significant amount of time to 
administer, leading to low participation and completion rates. Additionally, the results obtained from these tools must be 
analyzed and interpreted manually by mental health professionals, which may yield inaccurate diagnoses. To this extent, 
this research utilizes advanced analytics and artificial intelligence to develop a decision support system (DSS) that can 
efficiently detect and diagnose various mental disorders. As part of the DSS development process, the Network Pattern 
Recognition (NEPAR) algorithm is first utilized to build the assessment tool and identify the questions that participants 
need to answer. Then, various machine learning models are trained using participants’ answers to these questions and other 
historical data as inputs to predict the existence and the type of their mental disorder. The results show that the proposed 
DSS can automatically diagnose mental disorders using only 28 questions without any human input, to an accuracy level 
of 89%. Furthermore, the proposed mental disorder diagnostic tool has significantly fewer questions than its counterparts; 
hence, it provides higher participation and completion rates. Therefore, mental health professionals can use this proposed 
DSS and its accompanying assessment tool for improved clinical decision-making and diagnostic accuracy.
Keywords  Mental Disorder · Artificial Intelligence · Machine learning · Network Science · Feature selection · SCL-
90-R · Network Pattern Recognition · Healthcare Analytics · Disease Prediction · DiagnosisAccepted: 21 April 2022 / Published online: 28 May 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2022An AI-based Decision Support System for Predicting Mental Health 
Disorders
Salih Tutun1 · Marina E. Johnson2 · Abdulaziz Ahmed3 · Abdullah Albizri2 · Sedat Irgil4 · Ilker Yesilkaya5 ·  
Esma Nur Ucar4 · Tanalp Sengun5 · Antoine Harfouche6