Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3tools proposed by several previous studies (Barker-Collo, 
2003 ; Bernet et al., 2015 ; Chen et al., 2020 ; Kim & Jang, 
2016 ; Olsen et al., 2004 ; Rytilä-Manninen et al., 2016 ; 
Schmitz et al., 2000 ; Sereda & Dembitskyi, 2016 ; Urbán et 
al., 2016 ), the SCL-28-AI can diagnose all the mental dis -
orders that the SCL-90-R was intended to diagnose but with 
fewer questions. Therefore, it provides significantly higher 
participation and completion rates.
Previous studies have never considered the similarities 
among patients. In other words, previous studies did not 
consider the fact that similar patients in terms of demo -
graphics and other various metrics may have similar mental 
disorders (Akhavan, Abiri, & Shairi, 2020 a; Imperatori et 
al., 2020 ; Lundqvist & Schröder, 2021 ). Using NEPAR, this 
study utilizes the similarities among participants as an input 
to determine their mental disorders. Another important 
practical implication of this study is that it eliminated the 
manual analysis of participants’ answers to the SCL-90-R 
test. Because the DSS is used to diagnose disorders, mental 
health professionals can use their valuable time to develop 
treatment plans and effective interventions to improve their 
patients’ wellbeing instead of manually analyzing the test 
results (Chekroud et al., 2017 ; Rovini et al., 2018 ; Stewart 
et al., 2020 ; Zhang et al., 2020 ). This is the first study using 
the NEPAR algorithm along with major AI algorithms to 
develop a transparent DSS. Additionally, the proposed DSS 
can generate the likelihood of a person having a particular 
mental disorder, instead of binary decisions (i.e., whether 
having a disorder), which can help mental health profes -
sionals to determine the severity of the diagnosis.
There are also economic and social implications of this 
research too. For example, accurate diagnosis for mental 
disorders through this proposed DSS can reduce the over -
all healthcare cost due to misdiagnosis, overdiagnosis, and 
unnecessary treatment. Additionally, accurate and faster 
diagnosis of patients through this proposed DSS can help 
them start their treatment early, improving their overall qual -
ity of life. Finally, mental health professionals can increase 
their panel size (i.e., number of patients that they see) as it is 
easier to administer and diagnose mental disorders through 
the proposed DSS. This can provide a greater population 
with access to mental health services.
4.3 Limitations and Future Research
This study is not without limitations. The proposed research 
is implemented using a dataset obtained from a web por -
tal called Psikometrist. This web portal is currently used by 
specific mental health professionals. Future research should 
obtain data from different mental health professionals and 
apply the framework to other datasets collected from a 
larger population. The dataset contained approximately ensured that the practitioners (i.e., mental health profession -
als) were included in the design process and the proposed 
DSS is used to aid their decision making and augment their 
capabilities, not replacing them. The decisions made by the 
proposed DSS were examined by the mental health practi -
tioners before model deployment to address issues regard -
ing DSS fairness and liability.
Additionally, this study used transparent algorithms. 
Most AI algorithms used to develop DSSs, such as ANN, 
are not transparent and may have internal biases (Buh -
mann & Fieseler, 2021 ). For example, recommendations 
and decisions made by a Blackbox-based DSS can yield 
unintended adverse consequences when certain variables 
and features are utilized in the training dataset (e.g., gen -
der and race) (Crawford & Calo, 2016 ; Mittelstadt et al., 
2016 ). For instance, Nie et al., ( 2012 ) and Hao et al., ( 2013 ) 
developed used SVM and ANN models to diagnose men -
tal disorders. Unfortunately, these models have a Blackbox 
nature and do not provide information about their internal 
structure. Therefore, mental health professionals using this 
kind of Blackbox DSS do not know how certain factors and 
variables affect the final diagnosis. Thus, this study made a 
unique contribution by using explainable and transparent AI 
models when diagnosing mental disorders.
There were various steps undertaken to ensure that the 
proposed DSS did not generate biased predictions. For 
instance, several variables (e.g., gender and race) were 
removed from the analysis to ensure the predictions are 
not biased towards a certain group of people. Furthermore, 
the study used the NEPAR algorithm for feature selection 
because it is an interpretable algorithm showing how fea -
tures are related to one another, thus reducing model bias, 
and making it transparent. Furthermore, the three different 
functions were applied to calculate similarities among ques -
tions and participants because integrating different func -
tions improved the robustness and reliability of the NEPAR 
models.
4.2 Practical implications
Various studies have proposed using statistical techniques to 
shorten the SCL-90-R test (Akhavan, Abiri, & Shairi, 2020 a; 
Imperatori et al., 2020 ; Lundqvist & Schröder, 2021 ). For 
example, Derogatis ( 2017 ) developed the BSI-18, which 
features 18 questions and is used to diagnose somatiza -
tion, anxiety, and depression. Prinz et al., ( 2013 ) created 
the SCL-14 to diagnose somatization, phobic anxiety, and 
depression. However, these shorter tools cannot be used to 
diagnose all ten mental health disorders that the original 
SCL-90-R can detect because they feature fewer questions. 
This study addresses this major issue by creating a new 
symptoms checklist tool called the SCL-28-AI. Unlike the 1271