Information Systems Frontiers (2023) 25:1261–1276
1 3& Fieseler, 2021 ). For example, AI-based DSSs can yield 
unintended negative consequences if certain variables and 
features are utilized in the training dataset (e.g., gender and 
race) (Crawford & Calo, 2016 ; Mittelstadt et al., 2016 ). For 
example, HireVue – a recruiting-technology firm – designed 
an AI-based DSS to hire employees. But according to AI 
researchers, the HireVue AI application penalized nonna -
tive speakers, visibly nervous interviewees, and anyone else 
who does not fit the model for look and speech. Another 
example is the AI application called COMPAS designed to 
determine recidivism risk. As a result, the algorithm’s pre -
diction assigns a higher probability of recidivism to black 
and brown men than to all other person (Kirkpatrick et al., 
2017 ). Thus, there have been proposals to create guidelines 
for integrating ethics into the process of AI-based DSS 
design to prevent their misuse and potential biases, spe -
cifically in the healthcare field (Borgesius, 2020 ; Floridi & 
Cowls, 2021 ; Johnson et al., 2021 ).
Gerke et al., ( 2020 ) and Chandler et al., ( 2020 ) proposed 
a theoretical framework for the ethical implementation of 
AI models in the health care industry. Their framework has 
three major principles, including fairness, trustworthiness, 
and transparency. Fairness (i.e., AI system without biases) 
particularly deals with data collection and variable types 
when training AI models. Biases result from the datasets 
themselves or from how researchers choose and analyze the 
data (Price, 2019 ). For instance, including various variables 
such as race, gender, and insurance payer type as a proxy 
for socioeconomic status when training AI-based DSS in the 
healthcare field introduces biases (Chen et al., 2019 ). Trust -
worthiness indicates the users’ confidence in the AI systems 
and has three core elements (IBM, 2020 ). First, the purpose 
of AI is to augment human intelligence and help decision-
making, not completely replace it. Second, creators of the 
AI-based DSSs own the data and the insights; thus, they are 
liable for the decisions that the AI makes. Third, AI sys -
tems must be transparent and explainable. Transparency 
stands for the knowledge regarding the infernal structure 
of AI-based DSSs. In other words, transparency indicates 
that the predictions of the AI model used within the DSS 
can be properly explained (Fosso Wamba et al., 2021 ; Fosso 
Wamba & Queiroz, 2021 ). Transparency allows practitio -
ners to see whether the AI models have been thoroughly 
tested and make sense and that they can understand why 
particular decisions are made. Issues related to the trustwor -
thiness of AI-based DSSs arise with the use of “Blackbox” 
algorithms because users cannot provide a logical explana -
tion of how the algorithm arrived at its given output (Schön -
berger, 2019 ). Therefore, explainable and Whitebox AI 
algorithms are recommended over complex Blackbox mod -
els. However, there are cases when these Blackbox models 
need to be used (i.e., image data). Then, there needs to be DSS built through deep learning to screen and score demen -
tia patients. Zhang et al., ( 2020 ) employed biological mark -
ers and genetic data to propose a deep learning framework 
for recognizing and diagnosing mental disorders early on.
Despite these previous efforts to develop an AI-based 
DSS to detect and diagnose mental disorders, there are still 
various gaps in the literature. First, most diagnostic tools 
are provided to individuals on paper instead of digitally. 
This necessitates the individual visiting the clinic in person. 
Also, mental health professionals must expend a significant 
amount of effort to manually analyze the answers and derive 
an accurate diagnosis. Additionally, mental health profes -
sionals do not investigate the relationships among various 
variables used to assess mental health. Many of these previ -
ous studies focus on a particular set of disorders, instead of 
assessing multiple disorders at the same time. Additionally, 
these studies did not consider ethical design elements when 
creating AI-based DSSs. To the best of our knowledge, our 
study is the first study that aims to detect 10 disorders using 
the same set of variables.
2.3 Ethical issues related to AI and mental disease 
diagnosis
Several researchers indicated that many information sys -
tems (IS) researchers do not consider the practitioners’ 
needs when designing DSSs (Dennehy et al., 2021 ). On 
the other hand, these practitioners mostly rely on vendors 
and consultants to solve IS-related problems rather than IS 
researchers. (Dennehy et al., 2021 ). In addition, many stud -
ies emphasized that the IS researchers should integrate ethi -
cal guidelines obtained from IS practitioners when creating 
AI-based DSSs, particularly in the healthcare area where 
patients’ health and wellbeing are at stake (Fosso Wamba 
& Queiroz, 2021 ). Therefore, there is a growing need to 
forge alliances and improve the collaboration between IS 
researchers and practitioners when designing ethical and 
socially responsible AI-based DSSs.
The primary problem with AI-based DSSs is that they can 
be unfair and biased in their decision-making, specifically if 
they are developed via Blackbox algorithms and using vari -
ous variables (Akter et al., 2021 ; Parra et al., 2021 ; Tsama -
dos et al., 2021 ). There has been evidence in the literature 
that AI-based DSSs can perpetuate and exacerbate gender 
and racial biases and discriminate against some members of 
society more than others (Gupta et al., 2021 ; Mittelstadt et 
al., 2016 ; Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016 ). These research stud -
ies noted that AI solutions are value-laden and have biases 
that are “specified by developers and configured by users 
with desired outcomes in mind that privilege some values 
and interests over others.” Additionally, most AI algorithms 
are not transparent and are difficult to explain (Buhmann 1264