VideoGPT
Figure 1. 6464and128128video samples generated by VideoGPT
vector quantized V AE (VQ-V AE) (Van Den Oord et al.,
2017; Razavi et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021), and lately
diffusion and score matching models (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020). These different
generative model families have their tradeoffs across various
dimensions: sampling speed, sample diversity, sample qual-
ity, optimization stability, compute requirements, ease of
evaluation, and so forth. Excluding score-matching models,
at a broad level, one can group these models into likelihood-
based (PixelCNNs, iGPT, NV AE, VQ-V AE, Glow), and
adversarial generative models (GANs). The natural ques-
tion is: What is a good model class to pick for studying and
scaling video generation?
First, we make a choice between likelihood-based and adver-
sarial models. Likelihood-based models are convenient to
train since the objective is well understood, easy to optimize
across a range of batch sizes, and easy to evaluate. Given
that videos already present a hard modeling challenge due to
the nature of the data, we believe likelihood-based models
present fewer difﬁculties in the optimization and evaluation,
hence allowing us to focus on the architecture modeling1.
Next, among likelihood-based models, we pick autoregres-
sive models simply because they have worked well on dis-
crete data in particular, have shown greater success in terms
of sample quality (Ramesh et al., 2021), and have well es-
tablished training recipes and modeling architectures that
take advantage of latest innovations in Transformer archi-
tectures (Vaswani et al., 2017; Child et al., 2019; Ho et al.,
2019b; Huang et al., 2019).
Finally, among autoregressive models, we consider the fol-
lowing question: Is it better to perform autoregressive mod-
eling in a downsampled latent space without spatio-temporal
redundancies compared to modeling at the atomic level of all
1It is not the focus of this paper to say likelihood models are
better than GANs for video modeling. This is purely a design
choice guided by our inclination to explore likelihood based gener-
ative models and non-empirically established beliefs with respect
to stability of training.pixels across space and time? Below, we present our reasons
for choosing the former: Natural images and videos contain
a lot of spatial and temporal redundancies and hence the
reason we use image compression tools such as JPEG (Wal-
lace, 1992) and video codecs such as MPEG (Le Gall, 1991)
everyday. These redundancies can be removed by learning
a denoised downsampled encoding of the high resolution
inputs. For example, 4x downsampling across spatial and
temporal dimensions results in 64x downsampled resolu-
tion so that the computation of powerful deep generative
models is spent on these more fewer and useful bits. As
shown in VQ-V AE (Van Den Oord et al., 2017), even a lossy
decoder can transform the latents to generate sufﬁciently
realistic samples. This framework has in recent times pro-
duce high quality text-to-image generation models such as
DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021). Furthermore, modeling in
the latent space downsampled across space and time instead
of the pixel space improves sampling speed and compute
requirements due to reduced dimensionality.
The above line of reasoning leads us to our proposed model:
VideoGPT2, a simple video generation architecture that is
a minimal adaptation of VQ-V AE and GPT architectures
for videos. VideoGPT employs 3D convolutions and trans-
posed convolutions (Tran et al., 2015) along with axial at-
tention (Huang et al., 2019; Ho et al., 2019b) for the autoen-
coder in VQ-V AE, learning a downsampled set of discrete
latents from raw pixels of the video frames. These latents
are then modeled using a strong autoregressive prior using
a GPT-like (Radford et al., 2019; Child et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2020) architecture. The generated latents from the au-
toregressive prior are then decoded to videos of the original
resolution using the decoder of the VQ-V AE.
2We note that Video Transformers (Weissenborn et al., 2019)
also employ generative pre-training for videos using the Subscale
Pixel Networks (SPN) (Menick & Kalchbrenner, 2018) architec-
ture. Despite this, it is fair to use the GPT terminology for our
model because our architecture more closely resembles the vanilla
Transformer in a manner similar to iGPT (Chen et al., 2020).