VideoGPT
Figure 5. VQ-V AE reconstructions for BAIR Robot Pushing. The original videos are contained in green boxes and reconstructions in
blue.
Figure 6. BAIR Robot Pushing samples from a single-frame conditioned VideoGPT model. Frames highlighting in red are conditioning
frames. Although all videos follow the same starting frame, the samples eventually diverge to varied trajectories.
Axial-attention in VQ-VAE increases reconstruction
and generation quality.
Table 3. Ablation on attention in VQ-V AE. R-FVD is with recon-
structed examples
VQ-V AE Architecture NMSE ( #) R-FVD (#)
No Attention 0.0041 15.3
With Attention 0:0033 14 :9
We compare VQ-V AE with and without axial attention
blocks as shown in Table 3. Empirically, incorporating axial
attention into the VQ-V AE architecture improves reconstruc-
tion (NMSE) performance, and has better reconstruction
FVD. Note that in order to take into account the added pa-
rameter count from attention layers, we increase the number
of convolutional residual blocks in the ”No Attention” ver-
sion for better comparability. Fig 5 shows samples of videos
reconstructed by VQ-V AE with axial attention module.
Larger prior network capacity increases performance.Table 4. Ablations comparing the number of transformer layers
Transformer Layers bits/dim FVD ( #)
2 2:84 120:46:0
4 2:52 110:02:4
8 2:39 103:32:2
16 2:05 103:62:0
Computational efﬁciency is a primary advantage of our
method, where we can ﬁrst use the VQ-V AE to downsam-
ple by space-time before learning an autoregressive prior.
Lower resolution latents allow us to train a larger and more
expressive prior network to learn complex data distributions
under memory constraints. We run an ablation on the prior
network size which shows that a larger transformer network
produces better results. Table 4 shows the results of training
transformers of varied number of layers on BAIR. We can
see that for BAIR, our method beneﬁts from training larger
models, where the bits per dim shows substantial improve-
ment in increasing layers, and FVD and sample quality show
increments in performance up until around 8 layers.