ControlV AE: Controllable Variational Autoencoder
through the latent channels per data sample (Burgess et al.,
2018). Artiﬁcially decreasing KL-divergence (e.g., by in-
creasing its weight in a V AE’s objective function, which is
known as the -V AE) therefore imposes a stricter informa-
tion bottleneck, which was shown to force the learned latent
factors to become more independent (i.e., non-redundant),
leading to a better disentangling. The above examples sug-
gest that a useful extension of V AEs is one that allows users
to exercise explicit control over KL-divergence in the objec-
tive function. ControlV AE realizes this extension.
We apply ControlV AE to three different applications: lan-
guage modeling, disentangling, and image generation. Eval-
uation results on real-world datasets demonstrate that Con-
trolV AE is able to achieve an adjustable trade-off between
reconstruction error and KL-divergence. It can discover
more disentangled factors and signiﬁcantly reduce the re-
construction error compared to the -V AE (Burgess et al.,
2018) for disentangling. For language modeling, it can not
only completely avert the KL vanishing problem, but also
improve the diversity of generated data. Finally, we also
show that ControlV AE improves the reconstruction quality
on image generation task via slightly increasing the value
of KL divergence compared with the original V AE.
2. Preliminaries
The objective function of V AEs consists of two terms: log-
likelihood and KL-divergence. The ﬁrst term tries to recon-
struct the input data, while KL-divergence has the desirable
effect of keeping the representation of input data sufﬁciently
diverse. In particular, KL-divergence can affect both the
reconstruction quality and diversity of generated data. If
the KL-divergence is too high, it would affect the accuracy
of generated samples. If it is too low, output diversity is
reduced, which may be a problem in some applications such
as language modeling (Bowman et al., 2015) (where it is
known as the KL-vanishing problem).
To mitigate KL vanishing, one promising way is to add an
extra hyperparameter (01)in the V AE objective
function to control the KL-divergence via increasing from
0until to 1with sigmoid function or cyclic function (Liu
et al., 2019). These methods, however, blindly change 
without sampling the actual KL-divergence during model
training. Using a similar methodology, researchers recently
developed a new -V AE ( > 1) (Higgins et al., 2017;
Burgess et al., 2018) to learn the disentangled represen-
tations by controlling the value of KL-divergence. How-
ever,-V AE suffers from high reconstruction errors (Kim
& Mnih, 2018), because it adds a very large in the V AE
objective so the model tends to focus disproportionately on
optimizing the KL term. In addition, its hyperparameter is
ﬁxed during model training, missing the chance of balancing
the reconstruction error and KL-divergence.
∑+Controller−#(%)DesiredKL'((%))(%)*+(,|.)log(2(3|4)−)(%)'((543||24)VAE objective
334EncoderDecoder5(4|3)2(3|4)VAE
FeedbackFigure 1. Framework of ControlV AE. It combines a controller with
the basic V AE framework to stabilize the KL divergence to a
speciﬁed value via automatically tuning the weight (t)in the
objective.
The core technical challenge responsible for the above ap-
plication problems lies in the difﬁculty to tune the weight
of the KL-divergence term during model training. Inspired
by control systems, we ﬁx this problem using feedback
control. Our controllable variational autoencoder is illus-
trated in Fig. 1. It samples the output KL-divergence at
each training step t, and feeds it into an algorithm that tunes
the hyperparameter, (t), accordingly, aiming to stabilize
KL-divergence at a desired value, called the set point .
We further design a non-linear PI controller, a variant of
the PID control algorithm ( ˚Astr¨om et al., 2006), to tune
the hyperparameter (t). PID control is the basic and most
prevalent form of feedback control in a large variety of
industrial ( ˚Astr¨om et al., 2006) and software performance
control (Hellerstein et al., 2004) applications. The general
model of PID controller is deﬁned by
(t) =Kpe(t) +KiZt
0e()d+Kdde(t)
dt;(1)
where(t)is the output of the controller; e(t)is the error
between the actual value and the desired value at time t;
Kp;KiandKddenote the coefﬁcients for the P term, I term
and D term, respectively.
The basic idea of the PID algorithm is to calculate an er-
ror,e(t), between a set point (in this case, the desired KL-
divergence) and the current value of the controlled variable
(in this case, the actual KL-divergence), then apply a correc-
tion in a direction that reduces that error. The correction is
applied to some intermediate directly accessible variable (in
our case,(t)) that inﬂuences the value of the variable we
ultimately want to control (KL-divergence). In general, the
correction computed by the controller is the weighted sum
of three terms; one changes with error (P), one changes with
the integral of error (I), and one changes with the derivative
of error (D). In a nonlinear controller, the changes can be de-
scribed by nonlinear functions. Note that, since derivatives
essentially compute the slope of a signal, when the signal is
noisy, the slope often responds more to variations induced