ControlV AE: Controllable Variational Autoencoder
Huajie Shao1Shuochao Yao1Dachun Sun1Aston Zhang2
Shengzhong Liu1Dongxin Liu1Jun Wang3Tarek Abdelzaher1
Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (V AE) and their vari-
ants have been widely used in a variety of applica-
tions, such as dialog generation, image generation
and disentangled representation learning. How-
ever, the existing V AE models may suffer from
KL vanishing in language modeling and low re-
construction quality for disentangling. To address
these issues, we propose a novel controllable vari-
ational autoencoder framework, ControlV AE, that
combines a controller, inspired by automatic con-
trol theory, with the basic V AE to improve the per-
formance of resulting generative models. Specif-
ically, we design a new non-linear PI controller,
a variant of the proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) control, to automatically tune the hyperpa-
rameter (weight) added in the V AE objective us-
ing the output KL-divergence as feedback during
model training. The framework is evaluated using
three applications; namely, language modeling,
disentangled representation learning, and image
generation. The results show that ControlV AE
can achieve much better reconstruction quality
than the competitive methods for the comparable
disentanglement performance. For language mod-
eling, it not only averts the KL-vanishing, but also
improves the diversity of generated text. Finally,
we also demonstrate that ControlV AE improves
the reconstruction quality for image generation
compared to the original V AE.
1Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA.2AWS Deep Learning,
CA, USA.3Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA. Correspondence
to: Tarek Abdelzaher <zaher@illinois.edu >, Huajie Shao
<hshao5@illinois.edu >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).1. Introduction
This paper proposes a novel controllable variational autoen-
coder, ControlV AE1, that leverages automatic control to
precisely control the trade-off between data reconstruction
accuracy bounds (from a learned latent representation) and
application-speciﬁc constraints, such as output diversity or
disentangled latent factor representation. Speciﬁcally, a con-
troller is designed that stabilizes the value of KL-divergence
(between the learned approximate distribution of the latent
variables and their true distribution) in the V AE’s objective
function to achieve the desired trade-off, thereby improving
application-speciﬁc performance metrics of several existing
V AE models.
The work is motivated by the increasing popularity of V AEs
as an unsupervised generative modeling framework that
learns an approximate mapping between Gaussian latent
variables and data samples when the true latent variables
have an intractable posterior distribution (Sohn et al., 2015;
Kingma & Welling, 2013). Since V AEs can directly work
with both continuous and discrete input data (Kingma &
Welling, 2013), they have been widely adopted in various
applications, such as image generation (Yan et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2017), dialog generation (Wang et al., 2019; Hu et al.,
2017), and disentangled representation learning (Higgins
et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018).
Popular V AE applications often involve a trade-off be-
tween reconstruction accuracy bounds and some other
application-speciﬁc goal, effectively manipulated through
KL-divergence. For example, in (synthetic) text or image
generation, a goal is to produce new original text or images ,
as opposed to reproducing one of the samples in training
data. In text generation, if KL-divergence is too low, out-
put diversity is reduced (Bowman et al., 2015), which is
known as the KL-vanishing problem. To increase output
diversity, it becomes advantageous to artiﬁcially increase
KL-divergence . The resulting approximation was shown to
produce more diverse, yet still authentic-looking outputs.
Conversely, disentangled representation learning (Denton
et al., 2017) leverages the observation that KL-divergence in
the V AE constitutes an upper bound on information transfer
1Source code is publicly available at https://github.
com/shj1987/ControlVAE-ICML2020.git