1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreportsEnvironmental sound classification 
using temporal‑frequency 
attention based convolutional 
neural network
Wenjie Mu1, Bo Yin1,2*, Xianqing Huang2, Jiali Xu2 & Zehua Du1
Environmental sound classification is one of the important issues in the audio recognition field. 
Compared with structured sounds such as speech and music, the time–frequency structure of 
environmental sounds is more complicated. In order to learn time and frequency features from 
Log‑Mel spectrogram more effectively, a temporal ‑frequency attention based convolutional neural 
network model (TFCNN) is proposed in this paper. Firstly, an experiment that is used as motivation in 
proposed method is designed to verify the effect of a specific frequency band in the spectrogram on 
model classification. Secondly, two new attention mechanisms, temporal attention mechanism and 
frequency attention mechanism, are proposed. These mechanisms can focus on key frequency bands 
and semantic related time frames on the spectrogram to reduce the influence of background noise 
and irrelevant frequency bands. Then, a feature information complementarity is formed by combining 
these mechanisms to more accurately capture the critical time–frequency features. In such a way, the 
representation ability of the network model can be greatly improved. Finally, experiments on two 
public data sets, UrbanSound 8 K and ESC ‑50, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
In recent years, the research on environmental sound classification (ESC), which is dedicated mainly to identify 
specific sound events, such as identifying dog barking, gunshots, and air conditioning sounds, has received 
increasing attention. The study result has been used in many practical applications, including robotic  hearing1, 
smart  home2, audio monitoring  system3 soundscape  assessment4 and so on. Compared with regular and struc -
tured sounds such as speech and music, the environmental sound has neither static time patterns like melodies 
or rhythms nor semantic sequences like phonemes. Hence, it is difficult to find universal features that can 
represent various temporal patterns. Besides, the environmental sound contains a lot of noise and some sounds 
unrelated to the sound event, which lead to complicated composition structure with variability, diversity, and 
unstructured characteristics.
To deal with the above problems, various signal processing methods and machine learning techniques have 
been used for ESC tasks. In traditional ESC  methods5–7, appropriate feature representation and efficient classifi-
cation model are usually regarded as two separate problems. Most of the methods are first to make appropriate 
feature representations through manual operation, including the Mel frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC)8, 
Mel spectrum  feature9, and wavelet  transforms10. Then, machine learning algorithms such as support vector 
machines (SVM)11, K-nearest neighbors (KNN)12, matrix  factorization13 and extreme learning  machines14 are 
used to deal with the generated features. Although these methods improve recognition performance to a certain 
extent, they also have obvious shortcomings. It takes a lot of time to construct feature representations through 
manual operation, and to find the best combination of functions, a lot of experiments are often required, the 
process is very cumbersome. However, with the development of deep learning theory, deep neural networks have 
been proven to have a strong ability to automatically extract features, making more deep network  models15–18 
used to solve the ESC problem. In particular, the convolution neural network (CNN) has been proved to have 
a strong ability to capture time–frequency  features19,20, which can perfectly solve the limitations of traditional 
methods, so it is considered very suitable for solving ESC tasks.
Recently, research based on attention mechanism has also been applied to related fields of audio recogni-
tion, including speech  recognition20 and speech sentiment  analysis22. In the field of ESC, there have also been 
documents that have proposed a classification model based on the attention  mechanism23–25. By using neural OPEN
1College of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China. 2Pilot National 
Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China. *email: ybfirst@126.com