11
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/For exterior/urban noises and natural soundscapes sounds, it is obvious that it can show high accuracy after 
frequency attention is applied because it contains most continuous sound events, such as "wind", "hand saw" 
and "helicopter". This result echoes the situation in the UrbanSound8k dataset, which once again illustrates the 
effectiveness and reliability of the attention mechanism.
Figure  10 intuitively shows the changes in the features distribution before and after using temporal-frequency 
attention for several different sound events. It can be clearly seen that after using attention weighting, the time 
frame part and active frequency band containing more useful information get more attention, and the back-
ground noise and irrelevant frequency band are suppressed, so that the feature distribution of sound events 
becomes clearer and more distinguishable.
Comparison to state‑of‑the‑art methods. As shown in Table  5, the proposed model is compared with 
other models in the Urbansound8K and ESC-50 dataset.
(1) Compared with single feature models: Piczak-CNN19, SB-CNN26, M18-CNN27,1D-CNN  Gamma28, 
 EnvNet232,  SoundNet35, Pyramid  CNN36,  DCNN39 all use a single feature representation. For Piczak-
CNN19, SB-CNN26, Pyramid-Conmbined  CNN36,  DCNN39 use a two-dimensional feature map as input to 
extract deep features in a way similar to image classification tasks.  EnvNet232, M18-CNN27,  SoundNet35 
and 1D-CNN  Gamma28 use the original waveform as input and extract feature from it. Compared with 
most of the methods described in the above-mentioned literature, the models proposed in this paper have 
achieved absolute improvements.
(2) Compared with multi-feature models: DS-CNN37, M-LM-C  CNN38, Two-Stream  CNN40 and TSCNN-DS41 
all use many different types of feature representations. M-LM-C  CNN38 uses a single network architecture, 
which improves the classification performance of the model by providing more discriminatory and comple-
mentary feature representations. DS-CNN37, Two-Stream  CNN40 and TSCNN-DS41 use ensemble models. 
Among them, DS-CNN37 and TSCNN-DS41 belong to the scoring ensemble, and they input different types 
of feature representations into two separate sub-networks for training, and finally ensemble the predicted 
results of each sub-network through DS evidence theory. Two-Stream  CNN40 belongs to feature ensemble, 
the original audio and Log-Mel spectrogram is respectively input into two separate sub-networks of the 
model to extract feature representation, and then these features are merged to jointly train the model. As 
can be seen from Table  5, our model has better performance than DS-CNN37 and can compete with M-LM-
C  CNN38. Although compared with the best models such as Two-Stream  CNN40 and TSCNN-DS41, the 
performance of the proposed models cannot be exceeded. But in addition to classification performance, 
another indicator for judging the pros and cons of the ESC method is the model complexity, which can 
be evaluated by comparing the number of trainable parameters. Considering that this paper uses a single 
feature representation and a single network architecture, and only uses a simple CNN to calculate the weight 
in the attention mechanism, the overall parameters are only slightly increased. While ensuring accuracy, it 
also has the advantages of low network structure complexity and simple feature processing, so our method 
is still competitive.
Conclusion
In this paper, a new temporal-frequency attention based convolutional neural network model (TFCNN) is 
proposed for environmental sound classification. By introducing the developed temporal-frequency attention 
mechanism on the basic CNN architecture, the calculations used for representation learning can be concentrated 
on specific areas with discriminative information, thereby effectively capture critical time–frequency features. 
Figure 9.  The classification accuracy of the TFCNN model on the ESC-50 datasets.