6
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/tured sound, the composition structure of environmental sound is more complex and usually contains non-har -
monic and non-percussion sound segments. Hence, the HPSS algorithm proposed by  Driedge31 is used to divide 
the audio signal into two parts, harmonic and percussive components. It will introduce a new type of separation 
factor to make the separated harmonics and percussive components more standardized.
In this paper, the HPSS algorithm is introduced to process the input Log-Mel spectrograms, which can be 
separated to obtain Harmonic Spectrograms and Percussive Spectrograms. In this way, the harmonic spectrogram 
can clearly illustrate the frequency distribution and frequency band activity of the audio data, shown in Fig.  4. 
In contrast, the impact component in percussive spectrograms has a very intuitive vertical structure, which can 
reflect the difference between the semantic related time frame part (gunshot) and other noise frames.
Generate temporal‑frequency attention mechanism. Environmental sound has complex time–fre-
quency structure. In time structure, in addition to the semantic related time frame part, it also contains many 
silent or noisy parts. And since audio recording is usually in a polyphonic environment, there will inevitably be 
multiple sound sources, which makes it difficult to have a definite local relationship in the frequency domain. 
Therefore, the function of the proposed temporal attention mechanism is used to focus on the semantic related 
time frame part and suppress noise or silent frames. On the other hand, the frequency attention mechanism is 
introduced to assign more weight to the active frequency bands with distinguishing information, while to de-
weighted for irrelevant frequency bands with less information.
As shown in Fig.  5, after standardizing the Log-Mel spectrogram X , the harmonic spectrogram and percus -
sion spectrogram are separated by using the HPSS algorithm. Then, the convolution kernels with sizes of (1 × 3) 
and (5 × 1) are used to perform convolution operation on harmonic spectrograms and percussive spectrograms 
respectively to extract nonlinear features, until the time dimension of harmonic spectrograms and the frequency 
dimension of percussive spectrograms are reduced to 1, and then (1 × 1) convolution is used to compress channel 
information. In this way, two one-dimensional matrices AF and AT with sizes ( F, 1) and (1, T) can be obtained. 
Finally, we use the Softmax function to normalize these two matrices to generate the frequency weight matrix 
Fw and the temporal weight matrix Tw.
Figure 3.  The overall architecture of the proposed TFCNN classification model.
Figure 4.  Harmonic Spectrograms and Percussive Spectrograms separated from the Log-Mel Spectrogram of 
the gunshot category using the HPSS algorithm.