4
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/category, one or more continuous segments of length l  active or inactive frequency bands can be masked. We 
assume that the activation value on the activation matrix A of a sample is greater than λ, then the frequency 
band corresponding to the position is considered to be an active frequency bands, otherwise it is regarded as an 
inactive frequency band. MN is the number of masks.
As can be seen from Fig.  1, since the active frequency bands of different types of sound events are basically 
different, this is not only reflected in the length and position, but also in the number. Corresponding to the three 
elements of position, length, and quantity, respectively, are the three parameters λ, l , and MN in algorithm 1, so 
they need to be set according to the specific conditions of each class. Refer to the parameters shown in Table  1, 
we perform active frequency band masking and inactive frequency band masking for each audio sample in 
the UrbanSound8k dataset, and construct two datasets according to the different masking strategies–-masking 
the active frequency band dataset and mask the inactive frequency band dataset. The experimental results are 
shown in Table  2. As expected, the classification accuracy of the model trained with the masked active fre-
quency band dataset is only 78.3%, which is significantly lower than that of the original dataset for almost all 
categories. In contrast, the classification accuracy of the model trained with the masked inactive frequency band 
data set dropped by 3.4%, but it can still maintain most of the performance. Although the artificial definition 
of active frequency band will inevitably lead to some deviation, but through the above experiments, it can still 
be explained that those active frequency bands with high activation values will be more important than other 
Figure 2.  Mask the two active frequency bands of length 2 in the Log-Mel Spectrogram.