9
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/and uses the Adam optimizer for optimization. The learning rate, batch size and training epoch are set to 0.001, 
100 and 200 respectively.
To evaluate the experimental results, this paper uses classification accuracy as a metric:
Experimental analysis and visualization. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the methods proposed 
in this paper, we evaluated the baseline system and three combination strategies on the UrbanSound8K dataset. 
Based on the experimental results in Table  3, the following conclusions can be drawn: (1) Using the attention 
mechanism can indeed improve classification performance of the model. Compared with the model without 
the attention mechanism, the accuracy rate has been significantly improved. (2) The classification performance 
of the model after using the frequency attention mechanism is better than that of applying temporal atten-
tion mechanism. Considering the unstructured nature of environmental sound, it is obviously more effective to 
enhance the frequency features. (3) The proposed combination strategy has a further improvement in perfor -
mance. Among the three combination strategies, the performance of weight combination is significantly better 
than the other two strategies. This illustrates that the time and frequency features of sound events do not play an 
equal role for model classification, but have certain emphasis.
We compare the attention mechanism generated by the spectrogram separated by the HPSS algorithm with 
that generated by the original log-Mel spectrogram. The experimental results are shown in Table  4. Although 
the two methods can improve the classification performance of the model, the harmonic spectrogram and the 
percussion spectrogram have clearer horizontal and vertical structure, the effect of promotion is better.
To further explore the impact of different attention mechanisms on the classification performance of the 
proposed model, Fig.  7 provides a difference of the classification accuracy of each sound event after using dif-
ferent attention mechanisms. It can be shown that after applying the attention mechanism, although the overall 
performance of the model has been significantly improved, for each sound event, the promotion effects of dif -
ferent attention mechanisms are not consistent. After using the temporal attention mechanism, it can greatly 
enhance the accuracy of transient sound, such as the "gunshot", "dog bark". For a frequency attention machine, 
the promotion effect is more obvious for continuous sounds such as "siren" and "air conditioner". This behavior 
is to be expected. For a transient sound, the semantic related time frame part in the audio sequence is usually 
discrete and contains a lot of silence and noise, while temporal attention mechanism focuses on specific time 
part, thereby reducing the influence of background noise on it. For continuous sound, the concentrated areas of 
active frequency bands become more prominent and have a strong distinction after applying frequency atten -
tion mechanism.
In addition, after using the weight combination strategy, the accuracy of most sound categories has been fur -
ther improved, but there are still some categories ("air conditioner", "car horn", "children play" and "gunshot") that 
performance has not been enhanced and even have a negative impact. Considering that different sound events 
often have different time–frequency characteristics. This may mean that just setting a pair of learning parameters 
can lead to more outliers in individual categories, which is difficult to satisfy all categories.
In Fig.  8, we provide the confusion matrix generated by the TFCNN model on the UrbanSound8K dataset. 
It shows that "children play" is the most difficult category to distinguish, and the categories of "siren" can be well 
recognized. In particular, "gunshot" and "car horn" are almost hard to be misclassified. Since the sample size 
of these two categories is much smaller than that of other categories, this phenomenon may be caused by the (9) Acc=the number of correctly classiﬁed
Total number of test dataTable 3.  Classification accuracy after using different attention mechanisms.Attention mchanism ESC-50 UrbanSound8K
No attention 79.30% 90.77%
Temporal attention 81.90% 92.11%
Frequency attention 82.90% 92.34%
T-F attention(average) 83.80% 92.91%
T-F attention (weight) 84.40% 93.08%
T-F attention (channel) 82.20% 92.68%
Table 4.  Comparison of attention mechanisms generated by different spectrograms.Dataset Method No attention T-attention F-attention
ESC-50HPSS
79.30%81.90% 82.90%
Log-Mel 81.10% 82.40%
UrbanSound8KHPSS
90.77%92.11% 92.34%
Log-Mel 91.65% 92.18%