2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |        (2021) 11:21552  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01045-4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/network to predict the importance of each time step and assigned corresponding weights to each time step based 
on the prediction results, achieved better performance on some public datasets. However, as the spectrogram is 
a two-dimensional signal representation of time and frequency, its features in the time–frequency domain have 
different nature and importance. Although the audio signal conversion in time domain does not have much effect 
on model classification, the difference between across frequency bands in the frequency domain will greatly affect 
the classification performance. The above studies only used the attention mechanism to focus on feature vectors 
at different time steps, but ignored the importance of features in different frequency bands.
Hence, an experiment is designed to analyze the frequency band characteristics to obtain more insights 
about the influence of different frequency bands on the model classification. After that, a new frequency atten -
tion mechanism is then proposed to pay different degrees of attention to each frequency band, so as to focus 
on learning the feature representation with distinguishing information. Finally, by combining with other tem -
poral attention mechanisms, a novel temporal-frequency attention based convolutional neural network model 
(TFCNN) is proposed. The model has strong representation ability, and can more effectively capture the critical 
time–frequency features in sound events. Experiments on the UrbanSound8K and ESC-50 dataset show that the 
accuracy of the proposed classification model is 93.1% and 84.4%, respectively, which fully proves the advanced 
nature of the proposed method.
The rest of this paper is set up as follows. Section 2 discusses and reviews previous related work. Section 3 
analyzes the frequency band characteristics through experiments, and use as the motivation for the proposed 
frequency attention mechanism. Section 4 introduces our proposed classification model architecture and atten-
tion mechanism. Section 5 reports and analyzes the experimental results. Section 6 summarizes the full text.
Related work
ESC networks. This sub-section focuses on the development of deep learning theory utilized in the ESC 
field.  Piczak19 first applied the CNN model to solve the ESC problem, and utilized Log-Mel and its deltas spectro-
gram as a two-dimensional feature representation to input into the network for learning and classification. Com-
pared with the previous traditional methods, the performance has been significantly improved. The modeling 
capabilities of deep neural networks often require a huge amount of data as support. To solve the problem of the 
scarcity of labeled environmental sound data,  Salamon26 proposed several data augmentation strategies. Time 
stretching, adding background noise, pitch shift, and other means to form new training samples. Compared with 
the method proposed by  Piczak19, its accuracy is improved by 6%.  Dai27 et al. used utilized the original audio 
waveform as input to train CNN, and conducted a large number of experimental comparisons with the number 
of CNN layers as the independent variable, the results show that when the number of CNN layers reaches 18 
layers, its performance can compete with 2D-CNN using two-dimensional spectrogram as feature input.  In28, 
Abdoli et al. proposed an end-to-end classification model based on 1D-CNN, which can directly extract features 
from raw audio waveforms of any length. They initialized the first layer of the 1D-CNN model as a Gammatone 
filter bank to simulate the response mechanism of human hearing, which can achieve an accuracy of up to 89%, 
which is the best performance of the current 1D-CNN model.
Attention mechanism. The attention mechanism was first proposed in the field of image  recognition29, 
mainly used to improve the effect of Encoder and Decoder based on RNN model. In recent years, with the 
deepening of deep learning research, by combining the attention mechanism with the deep neural network, 
the importance metric is calculated through the neural network and automatically assigned the corresponding 
weight for each frame-level feature, breakthroughs have been made in the fields of speech  recognition21 and 
machine  translation30.
To further improve the classification performance of the model, the research based on the attention mecha -
nism has also been carried out in the field of ESC.  Guo23 et al. first proposed an temporal attention mechanism 
and extended it to the CLDNN model. The mechanism can evaluate each time step in an attempt to find the 
most critical time step in the sequence and assign it a higher weight score.  Li24 et al. proposed a multi-stream 
network model based on temporal attention. The attention weight is calculated by the degree of energy change 
in the spectrogram.  In25, Zhang et al. considered that not all frame-level features can contribute equally to the 
performance of environmental sound. Except for time frames related to semantic features, others such as silent 
frames, noise frames, etc. both will reduce the robustness of the classification model and lead to classification 
errors. Based on this assumption, a frame-level temporal attention mechanism is proposed and extended it to the 
RNN model to capture the most important time frame part of the sound sequence. Although the above methods 
improve the classification performance to some extent, the impact of different frequency bands on classification 
is ignored. Therefore, this paper proposes a frequency attention mechanism that can give different degrees of 
attention to each frequency band. Combined with temporal attention mechanism, the environmental sound 
spectrogram with complex time–frequency structures could be well processed.
Analysis of frequency band characteristics
To clarify the response of each frequency band on the spectrogram and the impact on the model classification, 
we designed the following experiment. We first resample the original audio samples at 22050 Hz, use a Ham-
ming window with a size of 1024, and a hop length of 512 to perform a short-time Fourier transform (STFT) 
on the down-sampled data to extract the amplitude spectrogram. Then, the amplitude spectrogram is passed 
through 128-Mel filter bank of bands and converted to a logarithmic scale to obtain a Log-Mel spectrogram. 
After normalizing the Log-Mel spectrogram, connect all samples of the same type on the UrbanSound8k dataset 
are connected in time dimension, and take the average value in the time direction to obtain 10 frequency activa-
tion matrices X  of size (128, 1), as shown in Fig.  1. It can be observed that the activation values of different Mel