1
Automatically Designing CNN Architectures Using
Genetic Algorithm for Image Classiﬁcation
Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE, Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE,
Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE, and Jiancheng Lv, Member, IEEE,
Abstract —Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have gained
a remarkable success on many image classiﬁcation tasks in
recent years. However, the performance of CNNs highly relies
upon their architectures. For most state-of-the-art CNNs, their
architectures are often manually-designed with expertise in both
CNNs and the investigated problems. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
for users, who have no extended expertise in CNNs, to design
optimal CNN architectures for their own image classiﬁcation
problems of interest. In this paper, we propose an automatic
CNN architecture design method by using genetic algorithms,
to effectively address the image classiﬁcation tasks. The most
merit of the proposed algorithm remains in its “automatic”
characteristic that users do not need domain knowledge of
CNNs when using the proposed algorithm, while they can still
obtain a promising CNN architecture for the given images.
The proposed algorithm is validated on widely used benchmark
image classiﬁcation datasets, by comparing to the state-of-the-art
peer competitors covering eight manually-designed CNNs, seven
automatic+manually tuning and ﬁve automatic CNN architecture
design algorithms. The experimental results indicate the proposed
algorithm outperforms the existing automatic CNN architecture
design algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, parameter
numbers and consumed computational resources. The proposed
algorithm also shows the very comparable classiﬁcation accuracy
to the best one from manually-designed and automatic+manually
tuning CNNs, while consumes much less of computational re-
source.
Index Terms —Convolutional neural networks, genetic algo-
rithms, neural network architecture optimization, evolutionary
deep learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
CONVOLUTIONAL Neural Networks (CNNs), as the
dominant technique of deep learning [1], have shown
remarkable superiority in various real-world applications over
most machine learning approaches [2]–[5]. It has been known
that the performance of CNNs highly relies upon their ar-
chitectures [2], [6]. To achieve promising performance, the
architectures of state-of-the-art CNNs, such as GoogleNet [7],
ResNet [8] and DenseNet [9], are all manually designed by
experts who have rich domain knowledge from both investi-
gated data and CNNs. Unfortunately, such domain knowledge
is not necessarily held by each interested user. For example,
users who are familiar with the data at hand do not necessarily
have the experience in designing the architectures of CNNs,
and vice versa. As a result, there is a surge of interest in
automating the design of CNN architectures, allowing tuning
skills of the CNN architectures to be transparent to the users
This paper has been accepted by IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
DOI:10.1109/TCYB.2020.2983860who have no domain knowledge on CNNs. On the other hand,
CNN architecture design algorithms can also spread the wide
adoption of CNNs, which in turn promotes the development
of machine intelligence.
Existing CNN architecture design algorithms can be di-
vided into two different categories, based on whether domain
knowledge is required or not when using them. The ﬁrst is
the “automatic + manually tuning” CNN architecture designs,
which implies that the manual tuning based on the expertise
in designing CNN architectures is still required. This category
covers the genetic CNN method (Genetic CNN) [10], the hier-
archical representation method (Hierarchical Evolution) [11],
the efﬁcient architecture search method (EAS) [12], the block
design method (Block-QNN-S) [13], and the advanced neu-
ral architecture search method (NSANet) [14]. The other
is the “automatic” CNN architecture designs, which do not
require any manually-tuning from users when using them. The
large-scale evolution method (Large-scale Evolution) [15], the
Cartesian genetic programming method (CGP-CNN) [16], the
neural architecture search method (NAS) [17], and the meta-
modelling method (MetaQNN) [18] belong to this category.
Owing to the extra beneﬁts of manual expertise in CNNs, it
is natural that the “automatic+manually tuning” designs often
show slightly better performance than the “automatic” de-
signs. However, the signiﬁcant superiority of the “automatic”
designs is their manually-tuning-free characteristic, which is
much preferred by users without any domain knowledge of
CNNs. For example, the NASNet and the Large-scale Evo-
lution algorithms, which are from the “automatic+manually
tuning” and the “automatic” categories, respectively, achieved
the classiﬁcation accuracies of 96.27% and 94.60% on the
CIFAR10 benchmark dataset [19], respectively. However, a
CNN framework architecture must be provided to NSANet be-
cause NSANet only automated partial cells of the framework.
Obviously, if the framework architecture is not well-designed,
the resulted CNN will not have promising performance. When
using the Large-scale Evolution method, the users just directly
perform it on the given data, and ﬁnally a promising CNN
architecture is obtained. To this end, the “automatic” CNN
architecture designs should be more welcomed because the
majority of CNN users have no extensive domain knowledge
of CNN architecture design.
On the other hand, based on the adopted techniques, CNN
architecture designs can also be classiﬁed into the evolutionary
algorithm-based ones and the reinforcement learning-based
ones. Speciﬁcally, Genetic CNN, Large-scale Evolution, Hier-
archical Evolution and CGP-CNN are based on evolutionaryarXiv:1808.03818v3  [cs.NE]  27 Mar 2020