8
(lines 3-7). This selection is known as the binary tournament
selection [51], which is popular in GAs for single-objective
optimization. Once the parents are selected, a random number
is generated (line 8), determining whether the crossover will
be done or not. If the generated number is not below the
predeﬁned crossover probability, these two parent individuals
are put into Qtas the offspring (line 16). Otherwise, each
parent individual is randomly split into two parts, and the two
parts from the two parent individuals are swapped to formulate
two offspring (lines 10-14). During the mutation operation, a
random number is generated ﬁrst (line 20), and the mutation
operation is performed on the current individual if the gener-
ated number is below than pm(lines 21-25). When mutating an
individual, a position (denoted as i) is randomly selected from
the current individual, and one particular mutation operation
(denoted as m) is selected from the provided mutation list
based on the probabilities deﬁned in pl. Then, mis performed
on the position i. In the proposed algorithms, the available
mutation operations deﬁned in the mutation list are:
Adding a skip layer with random settings;
Adding a pooling layer with random settings;
Remove the layer at the selected position; and
Randomly changing the parameter values of the building
block at the selected position.
Next, the motivation of designing such a crossover operator
and selecting a mutation operation based on a provided prob-
ability list is given. Firstly, the designed crossover operator is
inspired by the one-point crossover [39] in traditional GAs.
However, the one-point crossover was designed only for the
individuals with the equal lengths. The designed crossover
operator is used for the individuals with unequal lengths.
Although the designed crossover operator is simple, it dose
improve the performance in discovering the architectures of
CNNs, which will be experimentally proved in Section V.
Secondly, existing algorithms use an equal probability for
choosing the particular mutation operation. In the proposed
algorithm, the provided mutation operations are selected with
different probabilities. Speciﬁcally, we provide a higher prob-
ability for the “adding a skip layer” mutation, which will have
a higher probability to increase the depths of CNNs. For other
mutation operations, we still employ the equal probabilities.
The motivation behind this design is that a deeper CNN will
have a more powerful capability, as mentioned previously.
Although the “adding a pooling layer” is also capable of
increasing the depth of CNNs, the dimension of input data
will be reduced to half by using one pooling layer, which
results in the unavailability of the discovered CNN. To this
end, we do not put a higher probability on it.
Please note that the optimal depth of the CNN is achieved
by the proposed mutation operators. As shown above, there
are four different types of mutation operators designed in the
proposed algorithm. The optimal depth can be found through
the ﬁrst three mutation operators. Particularly, the ﬁrst two
operators provide a chance to increase the depth of the CNN
(denoted both as the “depth-increasing operator”), while the
third mutation operator provides a chance to decrease the
depth (denoted it as the “depth-decreasing operator”). Forexample, if the optimal depth of the CNN is N, after the
random initialization, some individuals may have the length
(denoting the depth of the CNNs) smaller than N, while
others are with length greater than N. During evolution, each
individual has a chance to be mutated. If the individual whose
length is greater than Nand the depth-decreasing operator is
selected, the individuals’ length will be decreased towards N,
and vice versa. In summary, the optimal depth is obtained
by performing the mutation operations on the individuals
randomly initialized with different lengths.
E. Environmental Selection
Algorithm 6: Environmental Selection
Input: The parent population Pt, the offspring
population Qt
Output: The population for the next generation Pt+1.
1Pt+1 ;;
2whilejPt+1j<jPtjdo
3 p1; p2 Randomly select two individuals from
Qt[Pt;
4 p Select the one who has a better ﬁtness from
fp1; p2g;
5 Pt+1 Pt+1[p;
6end
7pbest Find the individual with the best ﬁtness from
Qt[Pt;
8ifpbestis not in Pt+1then
9 Replace the one who has the worst ﬁtness in Pt+1by
pbest;
10end
11Return Pt+1.
Algorithm 6 shows the details of the environmental selec-
tion. Firstly,jPtjindividuals are selected from the current
population ( Qt[Pt) by using the binary tournament selection,
and then these selected individuals are placed into the next
population (denoted Pt+1) (lines 2-6). Secondly, the best
individual is selected and to check whether it has been placed
intoPt+1. If not, it will replace the worst individual in Pt+1
(lines 7-10).
In principle, only selecting the top jPtjbest individuals
for the next generation easily causes the premature phe-
nomenon [52], which will lead the algorithm trap into a
local optimum [23], [53]. If we do not explicitly select the
best individuals for the next generation, the algorithm will
not convergence. In principle, a desirable population should
contain not only good but also the relatively bad ones for
enhancing the diversity [54], [55]. To this end, the binary
tournament selection is typically used for such a purpose [51],
[56]. However, only using the binary tournament selection may
miss the best individual, resulting in the algorithm not towards
a better direction of the evolution. Hence, we explicitly add
the best individual to the next population, which is a particular
elitism strategy in evolutionary algorithms [57].
Note that the binary tournament selection, used in the
proposed algorithm (they are used in the offspring generating