6
Algorithm 3: Fitness Evaluation
Input: The population Ptof the individuals to be
evaluated, the image dataset for classiﬁcation.
Output: The population Ptof the individuals with their
ﬁtness values.
1ift == 0 then
2 Cache ;;
3 SetCache to a global variable;
4end
5foreach individual in Ptdo
6 ifthe identiﬁer of individual in Cache then
7 v Query the ﬁtness by identifier from
Cache ;
8 Setvtoindividual ;
9 else
10 while there is available GPU do
11 asynchronously evaluate individual in an
available GPU (details shown in
Algorithm 4);
12 end
13 end
14end
15Return Pt.
C. Fitness Evaluation
Algorithm 3 details the ﬁtness evaluation of the individuals
in the population Pt. Brieﬂy, given the population, Pt, con-
taining all the individuals for evaluating the ﬁtness, and the
image classiﬁcation dataset on which the best architecture of
a CNN is to discover, Algorithm 3 evaluates each individual
ofPtin the same manner, and ﬁnally returns Ptcontaining
the individuals whose ﬁtness have been evaluated. Speciﬁcally,
if the ﬁtness evaluation is for the initialized population, i.e.,
P0, a global cache system (denoted as Cache ) is created,
storing the ﬁtness of the individuals with unseen architectures
(lines 1-4). For each individual (denoted by individual ) in
Pt, ifindividual is found in Cache , its ﬁtness is directly
gotten from Cache (lines 6-8). Otherwise, individual is
asynchronously placed on an available GPU for its ﬁtness
evaluation (lines 9-13). Note that, querying an individual from
Cache is based on the individual’s identiﬁer. Theoretically,
arbitrary identiﬁers can be used, as long as they can dis-
tinguish individuals encoding different architectures. In the
proposed algorithm, the 224-hash code [43], which has been
implemented by most programming languages, in terms of the
encoded architecture is used as the corresponding identiﬁer.
Furthermore, the individual is asynchronously placed on an
available GPU, which implies that we don’t need to wait
for the ﬁtness evaluation for the next individual until the
ﬁtness evaluation of the current one ﬁnishes, but place the
next individual on an available GPU immediately.
The details of evaluating the ﬁtness of one individual are
shown in Algorithm 4. Firstly, a CNN is decoded from
individual , and a classiﬁer is added to this CNN (line 1)
based on the given image classiﬁcation dataset. In the proposed
algorithm, a softmax classiﬁer [44] is used, and the particularAlgorithm 4: Individual Fitness Evaluation
Input: The individual individual , the available GPU,
the number of training epochs, the global cache
Cache , the training data Dtrain and the ﬁtness
evaluation data Dfitness from the given image
classiﬁcation dataset.
Output: The individual individual with its ﬁtness.
1Construct a CNN with a classiﬁer based on the
information encoded in individual and the given image
classiﬁcation dataset;
2vbest 0;
3foreach epoch in the given training epochs do
4 Train the CNN on Dtrain by using the given GPU;
5 v Calculate the classiﬁcation accuracy on
Dfitness ;
6 ifv > v bestthen
7 vbest v;
8 end
9end
10Setvbestas the ﬁtness of individual ;
11Put the identiﬁer of individual andvbestintoCache ;
12Return individual .
number of classes is determined by the given image dataset.
When decoding a CNN, a rectiﬁer activation function [45]
followed by a batch normalization [46] operation is added to
the output of the convolutional layer, which is based on the
conventions of modern CNNs [8], [9]. In addition, when the
spatial number of the skip layer differs from that of the input
data, a convolutional layer, which is with the unit ﬁlter and
the unit stride but the special number of the feature maps, is
added to the input data [8], [9]. After that, the CNN is trained
by the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm [47] on
the training data by using the given GPU (line 4), and the
classiﬁcation accuracy is calculated on the ﬁtness evaluation
data (line 5). Note that, the use of the softmax classiﬁer and
SGD training method are based on the conventions of the deep
learning community. When the training phase is ﬁnished, the
best classiﬁcation accuracy on the ﬁtness evaluation data is set
as the ﬁtness of individual (line 10). Finally, the identiﬁer
and ﬁtness of individual are associated and put into Cache
(line 11).
Next, the reasons for designing such an asynchronous and a
cache components are given. In summary, because the training
on CNNs is very time-consuming, varying from several hours
to even several months depending on the particular architec-
ture, they are designed to speed up the ﬁtness evaluation in the
proposed algorithm. Speciﬁcally, the asynchronous component
is a parallel computation platform based on GPUs. Due to
the computational nature of calculating the gradients, deep
learning algorithms are typically placed on GPUs to speed up
the training [48]. Indeed, existing deep learning libraries, such
as Tensorﬂow [49] and PyTorch [50], support the calculation
on multiple GPUs. However, their parallel calculations are
based on the data-parallel and model-parallel pipelines. In the
data-parallel pipeline, the input data is divided into several