5
of the second convolutional layer. As introduced above, the
parameters of a convolutional layer are the number of feature
maps, the ﬁlter size, the stride size and the convolutional
operation type. In the proposed encoding strategy, we use the
same settings for the ﬁlter sizes, stride sizes and convolutional
operations, respectively. Particularly, the ﬁlter and stride sizes
are set to 33and11, respectively, and only the same
convolutional operation is used. To this end, the parameters
encoded for a skip layer are the numbers of the feature
maps for the two convolutional layers (denoted as F1and
F2, respectively). In addition, the pooling layers used in the
proposed encoding strategy are set to be 22for the kernel
sizes and the stride sizes. To this end, the parameter encoded
for a pooling layer is only the pooling type (denoted as P1).
Note that, the reasons for this design and adopting the settings
for such a design will be explained later in this subsection.
Algorithm 2: Population Initialization
Input: The population size T.
Output: The initialized population P0.
1P0 ; ;
2whilejP0j< T do
3 L Randomly generate an integer greater than zero;
4 list Create a linked list contains Lnodes;
5 foreach node in the linked list do
6 r Uniformly generate a number from (0;1);
7 ifr <0:5then
8 node:type 1;
9 node:F 1 Randomly generate an integer
greater than zero;
10 node:F 2 Randomly generate an integer
greater than zero;
11 else
12 node:type 2;
13 q Uniformly generate a number from
(0;1);
14 ifq <0:5then
15 node:P 1 max;
16 else
17 node:P 1 mean ;
18 end
19 end
20 end
21 P0 P0[list;
22end
23Return P0.
Algorithm 2 shows the details of the population initial-
ization. Brieﬂy, Tindividuals are initialized with the same
ways, and then they are stored into P0. During the individ-
ual initialization process, the length (denoted as L) of an
individual, representing the depth of the corresponding CNN,
is randomly initialized ﬁrstly (line 3). Then, a linked list
containing Lnodes is created (line 4). After that, each node is
conﬁgured (lines 5-20), and then the linked list is stored into
P0(line 21). During the conﬁguration of each node, a number,
r, is randomly generated from (0;1)(line 6). If r <0:5, thetype of this node is marked as a skip layer by setting its type
property to 1. Otherwise, this node represents a pooling layer
by setting type to2. In the case of a skip connection layer, the
numbers of the feature maps are randomly generated and then
assigned to node:F 1andnode:F 2, respectively (lines 7-10).
Otherwise, the pooling type is determined by the probability
of tolling a coin. Particularly, the pooling type, node:P 1, is set
tomax when the probability is below 0:5, and mean otherwise
(lines 11-19).
An example of the proposed encoding strategy encoding
a CNN is shown in Fig. 3. This CNN is composed of four
skip layers and two pooling layers. The code representing
one skip layer is the string of the feature map numbers of
the corresponding convolutional layers within the same skip
layer; while that for a pooling layer is a number representing
the pooling type. Particularly, a random number between
(0;0:5)represents a max pooling layer, while that between
[0:5;1)represents a mean pooling layer. The code representing
the whole CNN is the sequential string connection of codes
representing the layers. As shown in this example where the
code of each layer is listed above itself, the code of the whole
CNN is “32-64-0.2-64-256-0.8-512-256-256-512” to represent
a CNN with a depth of 10.
Next, we will detail the reasons why discarding the fully-
connected layers, using two convolutional layers in a skip
layer and the settings for the skip and pooling layers in
the proposed algorithm. Speciﬁcally, multiple fully-connected
layers are typically added to the tail of a CNN. However,
the fully-connected layer easily results in the over-ﬁtting
phenomenon [40] due to its dense connection [41]. To reduce
the over-ﬁtting, the dropout [41] randomly removing a part of
the connections is commonly used. However, each dropout will
introduce one parameter. Only a properly speciﬁed parameter
can lead to the promising performance of the corresponding
CNN. Meanwhile, the number of fully-connected layers and
the number of neurons in each fully-connected layer are
also two parameters hard to tune. If the fully-connected
layers are incorporated into the proposed encoding strategy,
the search space will substantially enlarge, increasing the
difﬁculty of ﬁnding the best CNN architecture. The use of
two convolutional layers in a skip layer is inspired by the
design of ResNet, and the effectiveness of such skip layers
have been experimentally proved in literature [9], [11], [15],
[42]. However, the sizes of feature maps in each skip layer of
ResNet are set to be equal. In the proposed encoding strategy,
the sizes of feature maps can be unequal, which is more
ﬂexible. Furthermore, setting the convolutional operation to
same and using the 11stride are to make the dimension of
the input data remain the same, which is more ﬂexible for such
an automatic design because 11stride does not change the
image size. As the settings of ﬁlter and kernel sizes as well as
the stride size in the pooling layers, they are all based on the
designs of existing hand-crafted CNNs [9], [42]. Moreover,
another important reason for specifying such settings is based
on our expertise in manually tuning the architectures of CNNs.
The effectiveness of such settings will be shown in Section V.