4
Initial 
PopulationFitness 
EvaluationSelectionCrossover 
&MutationOffspring 
PopulationEnvironmental 
Selection
Criterion is 
 satisfied NoEndYes
Fig. 2. The ﬂowchart of a genetic algorithm.
Code:32-64Code:0.2Code:64-256Code:0.8Code:512-256Code:256-512Input  32x32x3Conv@32Max PoolingConv@64Conv@128Mean PoolingConv@256Conv@512Conv@256Conv@256Output  8x8x512Conv@512
Fig. 3. An example of the proposed encoding strategy representing a CNN. This CNN is composed of four skip layers and two pooling layers. The code
encoding this CNN is composed of the codes representing each layer. For each skip layer, its codes are the number of feature maps of the two convolutional
layers within this skip layer; while the code for each pooling layer is the pooling type. We use a number between (0;0:5)to represent the max pooling
type, and a number between [0:5;1)to represent the mean pooling type. The numbers above each layer are the code of the corresponding layer. So the code
representing this CNN is “32-64-0.2-64-256-0.8-512-256-256-512”.
A. Algorithm Overview
Algorithm 1: The Proposed Algorithm
Input: A set of predeﬁned building blocks, the
population size, the maximal generation number,
the image dataset for classiﬁcation.
Output: The discovered best architecture of CNN.
1P0 Initialize a population with the given population
size using the proposed variable-length encoding
strategy ;
2t 0;
3while t <the maximal generation number do
4 Evaluate the ﬁtness of each individual in Ptusing
the proposed acceleration components ;
5 Qt Generate offspring from the selected parent
individuals using the proposed mutation and the
crossover operators ;
6 Pt+1 Environmental selection from Pt[Qt;
7 t t+ 1;
8end
9Return the individual having the best ﬁtness in Pt.
Algorithm 1 shows the framework of the proposed algo-
rithm. Speciﬁcally, by giving a set of predeﬁned building
blocks of CNNs, the population size as well as the maximal
generation number for the GA and the image classiﬁcation
dataset, the proposed algorithm begins to work, through a
series of evolutionary processes, and ﬁnally discovers the best
architecture of the CNN to classify the given image dataset.
During evolution, a population is randomly initialized with
the predeﬁned population size, using the proposed encoding
strategy to encode the predeﬁned building blocks (line 1).
Then, a counter for the current generation is initialized to zero
(line 2). During evolution, the ﬁtness of each individual, which
encodes a particular architecture of the CNN, is evaluated on
the given dataset (line 4). After that, the parent individuals are
selected based on the ﬁtness, and then generate new offspring
by the genetic operators including the crossover and mutationoperators (line 5). Then, a population of individuals surviving
into the next generation is selected by the environmental
selection from the current population (line 6). Speciﬁcally,
the current population is composed of the parent population
and the generated offspring population. Finally, the counter
is increased by one, and the evolution continues until the
counter exceeds the predeﬁned maximal generation. As shown
in Fig. 2, the proposed algorithm follows the standard pipeline
of a GA (the phases of selection, crossover and mutation,
and the offspring population shown in Fig. 2 are collectively
described in line 5 of Algorithm 1).
Please note that GAs only provide a uniﬁed framework
to solve optimization problems with their inherent biological
mechanism. When GAs are used in practice, their compo-
nents regarding the biological mechanism must be speciﬁcally
designed based on the particular problems to be solved. In
the proposed algorithm, we carefully design the variable-
length encoding strategy, acceleration components and genetic
operators (they are also highlighted in bold in Algorithm 1),
to assure the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed
algorithm in designing CNN architectures.
B. Population Initialization
As introduced in Section II, a CNN is composed of the
convolutional layers, pooling layers and occasionally fully-
connected layers. The performance of a CNN highly relies on
its depth, and the skip connections could turn the deep depth
to be a reality. In the proposed encoding strategy, we design
a new building block by directly using the skip connections,
named the skip layer, to replace the convolutional layer when
forming a CNN. In addition, the fully-connected layers are
discarded in the proposed encoding strategy (the reason will
be given later in this subsection). In summary, only the skip
layers and the pooling layers are used to construct a CNN in
the proposed encoding strategy.
Speciﬁcally, a skip layer is composed of two convolutional
layers and one skip connection. The skip connection connects
from the input of the ﬁrst convolutional layer to the output