10
In the experiments, the training set is split into two parts.
The ﬁrst part accounts for 90% to serve as the training set for
training the individuals, while the remaining images serve as
the ﬁtness evaluation set for evaluating the ﬁtness. In addition,
the images are augmented during the training phases. In order
to do a fair comparison, we employ the same augmentation
routine as those often used in peer competitors, i.e., each
direction of one image is padded by four zeros pixels, and
then an image with the dimension of 3232is randomly
cropped. Finally, a horizontal ﬂip is randomly performed on
the cropped image with a probability of 0.5 [8], [9].
To date, most architecture discovering algorithms do not
perform experiments on the CIFAR100 dataset due to its large
number of classes. In order to show the superiority of our
proposed algorithm over the peer competitors, we perform
experiments on CIFAR100 and report the results.
C. Parameter Settings
As have been discussed, the main objective of this paper
is to design an automatic architecture discovering algorithm
for researchers without domain expertise in CNNs. To further
improve the applicability of the proposed algorithm, we design
it in a way that potential users are not required to have
expertise in evolutionary algorithms either. Hence, we simply
set the parameters of the proposed algorithm based on the
conventions. Speciﬁcally, the probabilities of crossover and
mutation are set to 0:9and0:2, respectively, as suggested
in [20]. During the training of each individual, the routine
in [8] is employed, i.e., the SGD with the learning rate
of0:1and the momentum of 0:9are used to train 350
epochs and the learning rate is decayed by a factor of 0:1
at the 1-st,149-th and 249-th epochs. Indeed, most peer
competitors are also based on this training routine. When the
proposed algorithm terminates, we choose the one with the
best ﬁtness value, and then train it up to 350 epochs on the
original training set. At last, the classiﬁcation accuracy on
the testing set is tabulated to compare with peer competitors.
In addition, the available numbers of feature maps are set to
f64;128;256gbased on the settings employed by the state-
of-the-art CNNs. As for the probabilities of the four mutation
operations shown in Subsection III-D, we set the normalized
probability of increasing the depth to 0:7, while others share
the equal probabilities. Theoretically, any probability can be
set for the adding mutation by keeping it higher than that
of others. In addition, the population size and the number of
generations are all set to 20, and the similar settings are also
employed by the peer competitors. Ideally, a larger population
size and a larger maximal generation number should result
in a better performance, but expectedly also consume more
computational resources. However, such optimal settings are
not within the scope of this paper since the current settings, as
commonly adopted by other papers, have easily outperformed
most of the peer competitors based on the results shown in
Table I. Noting that, the experiments of the proposed algorithm
are performed on three GPU cards with the same model of
Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti.V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we ﬁrstly show an overview of the compar-
ison results between the proposed algorithm and the chosen
peer competitors. Then, the evolutionary trajectories of the
proposed algorithm are shown, which helps readers to better
understand the proposed algorithm during the process of
discovering the best CNN architecture and the appropriateness
of setting to the generation number.
A. Overall Results
Because the state-of-the-art CNNs in the ﬁrst category of
peer competitors are manually-designed, we mainly compare
the classiﬁcation accuracy and the number of parameters.
For the algorithms in the other two categories, we compare
the “GPU days” used to discover the corresponding CNN,
in addition to the classiﬁcation accuracy and the number
of parameters. Particularly, the unit GPU day means the
algorithm has performed one day on one GPU when the
algorithm terminates, which reﬂects the computational re-
source consumed by these algorithms. For the convenience
of summarizing the comparison results, we use the name of
the architecture discovering algorithm as the name of the
discovered CNN when comparing the classiﬁcation accuracy
and the number of parameters between peer competitors. For
example, the proposed algorithm is named CNN-GA which is
an architecture discovering algorithm, so its discovered CNN
is titled as CNN-GA when comparing it to the chosen state-
of-the-art CNNs.
The comparison results between the proposed algorithm and
the peer competitors are shown in Table I. In Table I, the peer
competitors are grouped into three different blocks based on
the categories, and the ﬁrst column shows the category names.
As a supplement, the last column also provides the information
regarding how much manual assistance the corresponding
CNN requires during discovering the architectures of CNNs.
Additionally, the second column denotes the names of the peer
competitors. The third and fourth columns refer to the classi-
ﬁcation accuracies on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets,
while the ﬁfth column displays the numbers of parameters in
the corresponding CNNs. The sixth column shows the used
GPU days which are only applicable to the semi-automatic
and automatic algorithms. The symbol “–” implies there is
no result publicly reported by the corresponding algorithm.
For ResNet (depth=110), ResNet (depth=1,202), DenseNet,
VGG, All-CNN, EAS and Block-QNN-S, they have the same
number of parameters on both the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100
datasets, which is caused by the similar CNNs achieving
the best classiﬁcation accuracy on both datasets. Note that,
the results of the peer competitors shown in Table I are
all from their respective seminal papers2. For the proposed
algorithm, the best CNN discovered by CNN-GA is selected
from the population in the last generation, and then trained
independently for ﬁve times. The best classiﬁcation accuracy
is selected from the ﬁve results to show in Table I, which
2It is exceptional for VGG because it does not perform experiments on
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 in its seminal paper. Its results displayed in Table I
is derived from [16].