2
algorithms [20], following the standard ﬂow of an evolutionary
algorithm to heuristically discover the optimal solution; while
NAS, MetaQNN, EAS, Block-QNN-S and NASNet are based
on reinforcement learning [21], resembling those based on
evolutionary algorithms, in addition to the employed heuristic
nature utilizing the reward-penalty principle of reinforcement
learning. Experimental evidence shows that the reinforcement
learning-based designs often require more intensive compu-
tational resources than the ones based on the evolutionary
algorithms [22]. For example, the NAS method consumed
800 Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) in 28 days to ﬁnd the
promising CNN architecture on the CIFAR10 dataset, while
the Genetic CNN consumed only 17 GPUs in one day on the
same dataset providing with similar performance. To this end,
the evolutionary algorithms-based CNN architecture designs
are much preferred because intensive computational resources
are not necessarily available to every interested user.
Evolutionary algorithm [20] is a class of population-based
meta-heuristic optimization paradigms inspired by the bi-
ological evolution. Typical evolutionary algorithms include
genetic algorithms (GAs) [23], genetic programming [24],
evolutionary strategy [25], etc., among which GAs are the most
popular one mainly because of their theoretical evidences [26]
and promising performance in solving different optimization
problems [27]–[31]. It has also been recognized that GAs
are capable of generating high-quality optimal solutions by
using bio-inspired operators, i.e., mutation, crossover and
selection [32]. Commonly, the operators need to be carefully
designed for the speciﬁc problems at hand. For example, Liu
et al. [33] designed a one-point crossover operator and a
novel mutation operator for the WCDMA network planning.
In addition, Kaustuv et al. [34] developed a new mutation
operator to exploit the ﬁtness and the unﬁtness for feature
selection via an ensemble method for feature selection and
classiﬁcation. Considering both characteristics of “automatic”
and evolutionary algorithm-based CNN architecture designs,
we propose an effective and efﬁcient algorithm by using GA,
in short, termed as CNN-GA, to automatically discover the
best architectures of CNNs, so that the discovered CNN can
be directly used without any manual tunings. Obviously, CNN-
GA is an automatic CNN architecture design algorithm. Please
note that the “automatic” and “automatic+manually-tuning”
are discussed from the users’ view but not the developers’
view. In contrast, adequate domain knowledge should be
encouraged in developing high-performance CNN architecture
design algorithms. This effort can be easily understood by
the analogy to the design of Windows Operation System
by scientists from Microsoft: the scientists should use their
professional knowledge as much as possible in designing a
user-friendly operating system so that the users are allowed
to effectively work on the computers, even without extensive
knowledge on the operating system.
The novelty of the proposed algorithm lies in its complete
automation in discovering the best CNN architectures, and
not requiring any manual intervention during the evolutionary
search. The contributions of the proposed CNN-GA algorithm
are summarized as follows:
1) GAs often employ the ﬁxed-length encoding strategybecause of the crossover operators primitively designed
for the individuals having the same lengths. In this case,
the length of the encoding must be speciﬁed beforehand.
Ideally, the length should be the optimal CNN depth
that is mostly unknown in advance. As a result, the
speciﬁed number may be incorrectly estimated, result-
ing in ineffective architecture designed. Although many
researchers have developed the variable-length encoding
strategy independently, the resulted CNN architecture is
not optimal because the crossover operator is not re-
designed accordingly. In this paper, we have proposed a
variable-length encoding strategy and the corresponding
crossover operator to address both issues aforementioned
efﬁciently and effectively.
2) Most existing CNN architecture algorithms are designed
based on the basic components or the well-constructed
blocks of CNNs. In practice, both designs often gener-
ate the ineffective CNN architectures and the complex
CNN architectures having poor generalization ability,
respectively. In this paper, the skip connections are
incorporated into the proposed algorithm to deal with
complex data by avoiding the Vanishing Gradient (VG)
problems [35]. On one hand, this design can reduce
the search space so that the best performance can be
easily identiﬁed. On the other hand, compared to other
algorithms with similar performance, the architectures
evolved by the proposed algorithm are much simpler.
3) In order to speed up the CNN architecture design and
provide the users with an optimal CNN architecture
within an acceptable time, most of the existing al-
gorithms employed extensive computational resource.
Particularly, the algorithms employed the data paral-
lelism strategy which is not efﬁcient. The main reason
is that most architectures are median-scale and do not
need to run on the extensive computational resource.
Otherwise, the communication consumption between
different computational nodes will take up most of
the computational cost. In the proposed algorithm, an
asynchronous computational component is developed to
make full use of the given computational resources to
accelerate the evaluation of the ﬁtness of the individuals,
while a cache component is employed to further reduce
the ﬁtness evaluation time for the whole population.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly,
related works and background are presented in Section II.
Then, the details of the proposed algorithm are documented
in Section III. Next, the experiment designs and experimental
results as well as the analysis are shown in Sections IV and V,
respectively. Finally, conclusions and future works are outlined
in Section VI.
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, CNNs and skip connections which are
considered the background of the proposed algorithm, are
introduced to help readers better understand the related works
and the proposed algorithm. Then, the relevant work in dis-
covering the architectures of CNNs is reviewed.