12
1.76% classiﬁcation accuracy improvement, while still with
the same CNN having 2.9M parameters and consumes 35
GPU days. Although CNN-GA targets at designing promising
CNN architectures without any CNN domain knowledge, it
still shows comparable classiﬁcation accuracy among the peer
competitors in this “automatic+manually tuning” category.
Compared to CNN-GA, the major limitation of the algorithms
in this category is the requirement of extended expertise when
they are used to solve real-world tasks. For example, EAS
requires a manually-tuned CNN on the given dataset, and then
EAS is used to reﬁne the tuned CNN. If the tuned CNN
is not with a promising performance, the developed EAS
would perform not well either at the end. In addition, the
CNNs discovered by Hierarchical Evolution and Block-QNN-
S cannot be directly used. They must be inserted into a larger
CNN manually-designed in advance. If the larger network is
not designed properly, the ﬁnal performance of Hierarchical
Evolution and Block-QNN-S would also perform poorly. In
addition to the CNN framework that is required by all versions
of NASNet, NASNet also employed a revised path-dropping
technique to improve its performance. In addition, as can be
seen in Table I, DARTS achieves the similar performance as
well as the number of parameters as CNN-GA on CIFAR10,
while consumes much fewer GPU days than CNN-GA dose.
However, DARTS requires a manually-designed large CNN as
a building block, and then using the differential method, i.e.,
the SGD, to choose the best path among the large CNNs. If the
provided CNN is smaller than the optimal one, DARTS can
never ﬁnd the optimal CNN architecture. The proposed CNN-
GA bears no such limitations, although it consumes more GPU
days than DARTS dose.
For the peer competitors in the third category, CNN-GA
performs better than Large-scale Evolution and CGP-CNN,
and much better than NAS and Meta-QNN on the CIFAR10
dataset in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy. Meanwhile,
CNN-GA also shows superiority in the classiﬁcation accuracy
over Large-scale Evolution and Meta-QNN on the CIFAR100
dataset. Furthermore, CNN-GA only has 2:9M parameters on
the CIFAR10 dataset, which is almost half of those of Large-
scale Evolution. On the CIFAR100 dataset, CNN-GA has
4:1M parameters, which saves 90% parameters compared to
those of Large-scale evolution which requires 40:4M param-
eters [15]. Furthermore, CNN-GA takes only 35GPU days
on the CIFAR10 dataset and 40GPU days on the CIFAR100
dataset, while Large-scale Evolution consumes 2;750 GPU
days on the CIFAR10 dataset and another 2;750 GPU days
on the CIFAR100 dataset. Even more, NAS employs 22;400
GPU days on the CIFAR10 dataset. Based on the number
of parameters and GPU days taken, it can be summarized
that CNN-GA shows a promising performance by using 90%
simpler architectures on 99% less computational resource than
the average numbers of competitors in this category3.
3The number is calculated by summing up the corresponding number of
each peer competitor in this category, and then normalized by the numbers of
available classiﬁcation results. For example, the total GPU days of the peer
competitors are 28;027, and there are only six available classiﬁcation results.
Hence, the average GPU days are 4;671. In the same way, the average GPU
days took by CNN-GA are found to be 37:5.In summary, CNN-GA outperforms most of the state-of-art
CNNs manually designed and all the automatic architecture
discovering algorithms in terms of not only the classiﬁcation
accuracy, but also the number of parameters and the em-
ployed computational resource. Although the state-of-the-art
“automatic+manually-tuning” architecture discovering algo-
rithms show similar (to slightly better) classiﬁcation accuracy
to that of CNN-GA, CNN-GA is automatic and dose not
require users to have any expertise in CNNs when solving
real-world tasks, which is the main purpose of our work in
this paper.
To make the readers intuitively understand the efﬁcacy
of the proposed one on the image classiﬁcation tasks, the
representative of the conventional image classiﬁcation meth-
ods [67], i.e., the Histograms of Oriented Gradient (HOG)
descriptor with the Support Vector Machine (SVM) (in short,
denoted as HOG+SVM), is used to compare the classiﬁcation
accuracy on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Particularly, we use the
source code of HOG+SVM downloaded from the Github4,
and the resulted classiﬁcation accuracies of CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 are 51.22% and 43.90%, respectively. As compared
with the results of the proposed algorithm, which are 96.78%
and 79.47%, respectively, it is easy to conclude that the
proposed algorithm can outperform the HOG+SVM with the
signiﬁcant improvement.
B. Evolutionary Trajectories
1234567891011121314151617181920
The number of generations0.50.60.70.80.9Classification accuracybest result median result
Fig. 5. The evolutionary trajectory of the proposed algorithm in discovering
the best architecture of CNN on the CIFAR10 dataset.
In order to better understand the details of the proposed
algorithm in discovering the architectures of CNNs and the
appropriateness of setting 20 as the generation number, the
evolutionary trajectory of the proposed algorithm on CIFAR10
dataset is shown in Fig. 5. To achieve this, we ﬁrstly collect
the individuals selected by the environmental selection in each
generation, and then use the boxplot [68] to show the statistics
in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy. Meanwhile, we also
connect the best and median classiﬁcation accuracy during
each generation by using a dashed line and a solid line,
respectively. In Fig. 5, the horizon axis denotes the number of
generations, while the vertical axis denotes the classiﬁcation
accuracy.
As shown in Fig. 5, both the best and median classiﬁcation
accuracy increase as the evolution progresses. By investigating
4https://github.com/subicWang/HOG-SVM-classifer