3
A. Background
1) Convolutional Neural Networks: In this subsection, we
mainly introduce the building blocks of CNNs, i.e., the con-
volutional and pooling layers, which are the basic objects
encoded by GAs to represent CNNs.
Speciﬁcally, the convolutional layer employs ﬁlters to per-
form convolutional operations on the input data. One ﬁlter can
be viewed as a matrix. During the convolutional operation,
the ﬁlter horizontally slides (with a given step size), then
vertically moves (with another step size) for the next horizontal
slide, until the whole image has been scanned. The set of
ﬁlter outputs form a new matrix called the feature map. The
horizontal and vertical step sizes are called the width and
height of a stride. The exact number of feature maps used
is a parameter in the architecture of the corresponding CNN.
In addition, two convolutional operations are applied: the
same convolutional operation which pads zeros to the input
data when there is not enough area for the ﬁlter to overlap,
and the valid convolutional operation which does not pad
anything. Hence, the parameters of a convolutional layer are
the number of feature maps, the ﬁlter size, the stride size and
the convolutional operation type. A pooling layer has common
components of a convolutional layer except that 1) the ﬁlter
is called the kernel which has no value, 2) the output of a
kernel is the maximal or mean value of the area it stops, and
3) the spatial size of the input data is not changed through
a pooling layer. When the maximal value is returned, it is a
pooling layer with the type of max, otherwise of mean . Hence,
the parameters of a pooling layer are the kernel size, the stride
size and the pooling type used. In addition, the fully-connected
layers are usually incorporated into the tail of a CNN. In the
proposed algorithm, the fully-connected layers are discarded,
and the justiﬁcations are given in Subsection III-B.
2) Skip Connections: The skip connections refer to those
connecting the neurons of the layers that are not adjacent.
The skip connection was ﬁrstly introduced in [35] as a gate
mechanism, effectively training a recurrent neural network
with long and short-term memory [36] and avoiding the VG
problems [35]. Speciﬁcally, the VG problems refer to the
gradient becoming either very small or explosion during back
propagation training in a deep neural network, and are the
main obstacle to effectively train deep neural networks. The
skip connections were experimentally proven to be able to
train very deep neural networks [37]. Indeed, the promising
performance of ResNet [8], which was proposed very recently,
also beneﬁts from the skip connections. A simple example of
using a skip connection is shown in Fig. 1, where the dashed
line denotes the skip connection from the input Xto the output
of the N-th building block, and the symbol “ ” refers to the
element-wise addition.
XBuilding Block 
#1
+ Skip connection...Building Block 
#N
Fig. 1. An example of using the skip connection.Over the past few years, an increasing number of researchers
has attempted to theoretically reveal the mechanisms behind
the skip connections. For example, the skip connections have
also been claimed to be able to eliminate singularities [38].
Among the existing theoretical evidence, skip connections
defying the VG problems receives the most recognition [35],
[36]. Because the skip connections shorten the number of lay-
ers of back-propagation, the VG problems should be alleviated.
As discussed above, the deeper the CNN is, the more powerful
capability it would have to process complex data. Combined
with the connections that are not skipped, a CNN with the skip
connections can have the capability that a deep architecture has
and can also be effectively trained.
B. Related Work
As the based work of the proposed algorithm, the Genetic
CNN method [10] is discussed in this subsection.
In Genetic CNN, encoding the whole architecture of a
CNN is composed of multiple stages. In each stage, a small
architecture is encoded, and then multiple, different small
architectures are stacked to give the whole architecture. Just
like the NSANet method, a CNN architecture framework
is provided to Genetic CNN, while the small architectures
replace the convolutional layers in the provided framework
to form the ﬁnal CNN. These small architectures are called
cell in Genetic CNN, and each cell is designed in each
stage of Genetic CNN. In each stage, multiple predeﬁned
building blocks of CNNs are ordered, and their connections are
encoded. For ordering these building blocks, the ﬁrst and the
last building blocks are manually speciﬁed, and the remainings
are all convolutional layers with the same settings. In order to
encode the connections between these ordered building blocks,
a binary string encoding method [39] is used. Suppose there
are four building blocks, a string of “111-10-0” implies that
the ﬁrst building block has the connections to all other building
blocks. The second one has no connection to the fourth build-
ing block, which is the same as the third one. Furthermore,
the number of stages is manually predeﬁned. Clearly observed
from this encoding strategy, multiple manual interventions are
required, such as the numbers of building blocks in each stage
and total stages. Because these numbers are related to the
depth of the discovered CNN, domain expertise in CNNs is
strongly needed to predeﬁne these numbers for proper depth of
the CNN. In addition, the parameters of the building blocks
in each stage cannot be changed in Genetic CNN. Indeed,
this encoding strategy can be viewed at only discovering the
connections of a given CNN, and cannot change the depth
of the given CNN. Note that, no speeding up technique was
designed in Genetic CNN, resulting in the experiments not
applicable to complex datasets such as CIFAR100.
III. T HEPROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, we ﬁrstly present the framework of the
proposed algorithm in Subsection III-A, and then detail the
main steps in Subsections III-B to III-E. To help readers better
understand the proposed algorithm, we will not only document
the details of each main step, but also provide the analysis for
given designs.