7
small groups, and each group is placed on one GPU for the
calculation. The reason is that the limited memory of one
GPU cannot effectively handle the whole data at the same
time. In the model-parallel pipeline, a model is divided into
several small models, and each GPU carries one small model.
The reason is that the limited computational capability on
one GPU cannot run a whole model. However, the designed
parallel pipeline obviously does not fall into either of the
pipelines, but a higher level based on them. Hence, such an
asynchronous component is designed to make full use of the
GPU computational resource, especially for the population-
based algorithms. Furthermore, the asynchronous component
is widely used in solving a large problem, if the problem can
be divided into several independent sub-problems. By paral-
lel performing these sub-problems in different computational
platforms, the total processing time of the whole problem is
consequently shortened. In the past, evolutionary algorithms
are typically used to solve the problems of which the ﬁtness
evaluation is not time-consuming1, and there is no high need
in developing such asynchronous components. Occasionally,
they just use the built-in components based on the adopted
programming languages. However, almost all such built-in
components are based on CPUs, and they cannot effectively
train deep neural networks, mainly because the acceleration
platform for neural networks are based on GPUs. Furthermore,
the ﬁtness evaluation of each individual is independent, which
just satisﬁes the scene of using this technique. Motivated by
the reasons described above, such an asynchronous component
is designed in the proposed algorithm. The cache component is
also used to speed up the ﬁtness evaluation, which is based on
the following considerations: 1) the individuals surviving into
the next generation do not need to evaluate the ﬁtness again if
its architecture is not changed, and 2) the architecture, which
has been evaluated, could be regenerated with the mutation
and crossover operations in another generation. Note that, the
weight inheriting of Large-scale Evolution cannot work for the
second consideration.
Commonly, a cache system should seriously treat its size
and provide the details to discuss the conﬂicting problem
resulted from the duplicate keys. In the proposed algorithm,
none is necessary to be investigated. Firstly, the cache com-
ponent is similar to a map data structure where each record
in this component is a string combining the identiﬁer and the
ﬁtness value of a CNN. For example, a record such as “identi-
ﬁer1=98.12” denotes that the identiﬁer is “identiﬁer1” and its
ﬁtness value is “98.12”. Secondly, as we have highlighted, the
identiﬁer is calculated by the 224-hash code that can generate
2224different identiﬁers. In practice, the CNN architecture
algorithms, including the proposed algorithm, only evaluate
thousands of CNNs. Obviously, we do not need to consider the
conﬂicting problem because the conﬂicting problem will not
happen. Thirdly, the 224-hash code implementation used for
the proposed algorithm will generate the identiﬁer having the
length of 32, and the ﬁtness value is the classiﬁcation accuracy
that is denoted by a string having the length of 4. Totally,
1Although there is a type of computationally expensive problems, their
ﬁtness is commonly calculated by a surrogate model to bypass the direct
ﬁtness evaluation.each record in the cache component is a string having the
length of 37 occupying 37 bytes with the UTF-8 ﬁle encoding.
Obviously, the cache ﬁle will only occupy very little disk space
even though there are thousands of records. Therefore, we do
not need to concern about the size of the cache component.
D. Offspring Generating
Algorithm 5: Offspring Generating
Input: The population Ptcontaining individuals with
ﬁtness, the probabity for crossover operation pc,
the probability for mutation operation pm, the
mutation operation list lm, the probabilities of
selecting different mutation operations pl.
Output: The offspring population Qt.
1Qt ;;
2whilejQtj<jPtjdo
3 p1 Randomly select two individuals from Pt, and
from the two then select the one with the better
ﬁtness;
4 p2 Repeat Line 3;
5 while p2==p1do
6 Repeat Line 4;
7 end
8 r Randomly generate a number from (0;1);
9 ifr < p cthen
10 Randomly choose a point in p1and divide it into
two parts;
11 Randomly choose a point in p2and divide it into
two parts;
12 o1 Join the ﬁrst part of p1and the second part
ofp2;
13 o2 Join the ﬁrst part of p2and the second part
ofp1;
14 Qt Qt[o1[o2;
15 else
16 Qt Qt[p1[p2;
17 end
18end
19foreach individual p in Qtdo
20 r Randomly generate a number from (0;1);
21 ifr < p mthen
22 i Randomly choose a point in p;
23 m Select one operation from lmbased on the
probabilities in pl;
24 Do the mutation mat the point iofp;
25 end
26end
27Return Qt.
The details of generating the offspring are shown in Algo-
rithm 5, which is composed of two parts. The ﬁrst is crossover
(lines 1-18) and the second is mutation (lines 19-26). During
the crossover operation, there will be totally jPtjoffspring
generated, wherejjmeasures the size of the collection. Specif-
ically, two parents are selected ﬁrst, and each is selected from
two randomly selected individuals based on the better ﬁtness