Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 8823 2 of 15
knowledge characteristic of the real-world hackers and accounting for the uncertainty in
the pentesting process. However, the POMDP-based method is computationally expensive
in large-scale network scenarios.
Currently, remarkable success has been achieved by reinforcement learning (RL),
and in some games, the RL-based agents have outperformed human players, such as
AlphaGo [ 7], OpenAI Five [ 8], Alpha Star [ 9], and MOBA AI [ 10]. Similar to many game
rules, pentesting is also a process of dynamic decision making based on the state of the
environment. Expressing the pentesting process in terms of a game is a promising way to
realize autonomous pentesting. The RL-based pentesting agent can be trained to observe
the network environment and learn the optimal policy using the trial-and-error method [ 11].
One of the main advantages of using the reinforcement learning approach is that the agent
can learn without assumed prior knowledge for any given scenario.
Recently reinforcement learning algorithms, such as tabular Q-learning and deep
Q-network (DQN), have been applied to solve the pentesting problem in some researches.
Tabular Q-learning has been applied to solving CTF (capture the ﬂag) problems [ 12] and
exploiting SQL injection vulnerabilities [ 13], proving the feasibility of applying reinforce-
ment learning to simple and particular autonomous pentesting problems. Compared to the
tabular Q-learning, DQN based methods [ 14–16] have a natural advantage in dealing with
large state pace problems using the deep neural network for function approximation. How-
ever, the previous DQN-based methods are still troubled in the sparse reward problem [ 17]
and the large action space caused by the increase in network size. Current research studies
on autonomous pentesting based on reinforcement learning have only been applied in
simple network scenarios, and there is a large room for improvement in convergence and
scaling performance.
On the basis of previous research studies, this paper models pentesting as a Markov
decision process (MDP) problem and analyzes the main challenges of autonomous pentest-
ing in large-scale networks. Then, an improved DQN algorithm is proposed to train the
pentesting agent that can learn the optimal attack policy without prior knowledge. The pro-
posed algorithm has better convergence performance in large-scale networks. Speciﬁcally,
ﬁve improvements of the DQN algorithm are selected reasonably and combined together
to alleviate the sparse reward problem. Then, in order to decrease the large action space,
we decompose the estimator of DQN to separately output the two elements of the attack
vector. In the end, experiments are implemented with NASim [ 18], which is an abstract
and simulated experimentation research platform that can be used as the benchmark to
test the RL-based pentesting agents.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the back-
ground of autonomous penetration testing, including the concept and general process of
pentesting and the main challenges of using RL for autonomous pentesting in large-scale
networks. In Section 3, we describe the detailed improvement methods of the proposed
algorithm for the current challenges. Subsequently, in Section 4, we demonstrate the results
and discussion of our experiments, and in Section 5, we draw conclusions and present
future work.
2. Background
2.1. Penetration Testing
Penetration testing is a network security testing and evaluation method that aims
to identify the vulnerabilities in the computer system and discover the possible attack
path of the hackers. MITRE matrix [ 19] provides a series of tactics and techniques for
pentesting. The process of pentesting can be simply summarized as the information
gathering phase, access gaining phase, and trace erasing phase. Speciﬁcally, attackers
have to use scanning tools to further their knowledge of the target. The information they
gather covers the operating system (OS), running services, and other vulnerability-relevant
information. Then, based on the information gathered before, they use the payload to
exploit the discovered vulnerability in the target system with the aim of gaining control