Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 8823 9 of 15
4. Experiments
We test the performance of algorithms on a range of scenarios with different scales
that are designed based on the NASim [ 18] project. The experiments are divided into two
parts: the ﬁrst is to use a standard scenario as a benchmark to test the performance of
different algorithms, and the second is to investigate the scalability using different scale
scenarios. The experiment uses PyTorch as the framework of algorithms and is conducted
on the following experimental environment: NVIDIA Geforce RTX3090 GPU, Intel Xeon
Gold 6248R CPU, and 64GB RAM .
4.1. Network Scenarios
NASim is an open-source research platform that provides a series of simulated and
abstract network scenarios for testing autonomous pentesting agents using the RL algo-
rithms. It also offers a scenario generator that works as an option to generate networks
automatically, allowing for rapid testing of the agent on different size of networks. The
benchmark scenarios and the scenario generator are based on prior works [3,30].
The benchmark scenario for testing different algorithms is shown in Figure 3. To make
it more complex and realistic, a honeypot is added to one of the benchmark scenarios in
NASim, which is coming from practical commercial experience of [ 3]. This scenario has
7 subnets and 17 hosts, among which subnet 2 and 3 are internal networks and subnet
7 is a honeypot. The ﬁrewalls restrict the communication between subnets: only a small
amount of service trafﬁc is allowed through the ﬁrewalls. Each host can be conﬁgured
with the following properties: address (deﬁned by subnet number and machine number),
OS (operating system), host value (measuring the importance of hosts), services (vulner-
able software), and process (software that can be used to escalate privilege). Detailed
conﬁgurations of scenario 1 are presented in Table 1 .
（2,0）Subnet-2（1,0）Subnet-1
（5,0）（5,1）Subnet-5
（6,0）（6,1）Subnet-6Internet（3,0）（3,1）Subnet-3
（3,2）
（3,4）（3,5）（3,6）（7,0）Subnet-7（1,1）
（2,1）（4,0）（4,1）Subnet-4
RouterFirewall
HoneypotSensitive fileLegend
ServerComputer
Agent
Figure 3. Structure of experimental scenario 1. Sensitive hosts are marked in red font.
The goal of the agent is to get root access to sensitive hosts by lateral movement in
the network. Operations of the agent cover scan (gathering information of hosts), exploit
(EXP , using vulnerable services to get root or user access to hosts ), and privilege escalation
(PE, using processes to elevate the user access to root access). As the reward function is
deﬁned as Equation (5), the aim of the agent is to attack the most valuable hosts and get
root access with the least costly operations as much as possible. Thus, the value of sensitive
hosts is a large positive number, while that of the honeypot host is a negative number. In
addition, each operation has an associated cost that is the comprehensive quantiﬁcation
of time, skills, and money costs. Furthermore, in order to simulate the uncertainty of
attacks in the real world, every operation has a probability of success (POS). Here, we
assume that the POS of the scan and PE operations are 1 and the others are determined
by the CVSS (common vulnerability scoring system) score [ 31], which uses 0.2, 0.6, 0.8 to