236 Apeksha Shewalkar, Deepika Nyavanandi, Simone A. Ludwig
input data by decreasing the dimensionality of the
feature space. In stacked denoising autoencoders,
for example, a partially corrupted output is cleaned,
i.e., de-noised.
Another area where deep learning is success-
fully applied is automatic speech recognition. In
automatic speech recognition, good acoustic and
language models are combined [2, 3]. The speech
recognition problem involves time-series data.
Feedforward neural networks are unidirectional
whereby the outputs of one layer are forwarded
to the following layer. These feedforward net-
works cannot persist past information. Further-
more, when DNNs are used to analyze speech
recognition, certain issues are encountered includ-
ing different speaking rates, and temporal depen-
dencies [4, 5, 6]. DNNs can only model ﬁxed size
sliding window of acoustic frames but cannot han-
dle different speaking rates [6]. Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) is another class of network that
contains loops in the hidden layer to retain the in-
formation at the previous time step to predict the
value of the current time step. This mechanism
helps RNNs to handle different speaking rates [6].
Temporal dependencies could be an issue while
analyzing speech recognition tasks. Temporal de-
pendencies may be present in the short-term or
long-term depending on the speech recognition
problem. RNNs take into account only the short-
term dependencies due to the vanishing/exploding
gradient problem. In the last couple of years, RNNs
are being applied to a variety of problems such as
machine translation, image captioning, and speech
recognition. Speech involves a dynamic process,
and thus, RNN seems a good choice over traditional
feedforward network [7].
However, the applicability of RNN is limited
due to two reasons. The ﬁrst is that RNNs re-
quire pre-segmented training and post-processing
of the output to convert it into labeled sequences.
The Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC)
for labeling sequence data in training with RNN
solves this shortcoming. The CTC method has been
proven to be helpful where alignment between in-
put and output labels is unknown [8]. Second,
for the long-term dependencies in data where the
gap between the relevant information and the place
where it is needed is large, RNNs have only lim-
ited use. Thus, a special type of RNN, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have been intro-
duced. LSTMs are designed to work on long-term
dependencies in data. LSTM prove to be effec-
tive in speech recognition tasks [7] where the spe-
cial memory cells of LSTMs are used to identify
long dependencies. Slightly different than LSTM is
the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) introduced in 2014
[9]. GRUs are also designed for long-term depen-
dencies and work well with sequential data as do
LSTMs.
In this paper, we have evaluated the perfor-
mance of RNN, LSTM, and GRU for speech recog-
nition applied to the reduced TED-LIUM data set
[10] using an appropriate regularization method.
Different parameterized models are trained end-to-
end using CTC for labeling sequence data.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes related work in the area of speech recog-
nition and deep learning. In Section 3 the three
approaches applied are described. Section 4 de-
scribes the experiments conducted and discusses the
results. The conclusion and future work is provided
in Section 5.
2 Related Work
Traditionally, generative models were used for
speech recognition. Generative models are typi-
cally composed of Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP)
estimation, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs),
and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [11, 12].
These traditional models require expert knowledge
(i.e., knowledge of a speciﬁc language) as well
as preprocessing of the text for Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) [12]. Fortunately, an end-to-
end ASR does not require expert knowledge be-
cause it depends on paired acoustics and language
data [12].
Recent advances in deep learning have given
rise to the use of sequence-to-sequence models (dis-
criminative models) for speech recognition [11, 13].
In simple terms, sequence-to-sequence model for
speech recognition takes an acoustic sequence as in-
put and returns a transcript sequence as output [11].
Our work is guided by many previous works
done in this area. In particular, RNNs have achieved
excellent results in language modeling tasks as out-
lined in [14, 15]. Language modeling is based on