237 Apeksha Shewalkar, Deepika Nyavanandi, Simone A. Ludwig
input data by decreasing the dimensionality of the
feature space. In stacked denoising autoencoders,
for example, a partially corrupted output is cleaned,
i.e., de-noised.
Another area where deep learning is success-
fully applied is automatic speech recognition. In
automatic speech recognition, good acoustic and
language models are combined [2, 3]. The speech
recognition problem involves time-series data.
Feedforward neural networks are unidirectional
whereby the outputs of one layer are forwarded
to the following layer. These feedforward net-
works cannot persist past information. Further-
more, when DNNs are used to analyze speech
recognition, certain issues are encountered includ-
ing different speaking rates, and temporal depen-
dencies [4, 5, 6]. DNNs can only model ﬁxed size
sliding window of acoustic frames but cannot han-
dle different speaking rates [6]. Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) is another class of network that
contains loops in the hidden layer to retain the in-
formation at the previous time step to predict the
value of the current time step. This mechanism
helps RNNs to handle different speaking rates [6].
Temporal dependencies could be an issue while
analyzing speech recognition tasks. Temporal de-
pendencies may be present in the short-term or
long-term depending on the speech recognition
problem. RNNs take into account only the short-
term dependencies due to the vanishing/exploding
gradient problem. In the last couple of years, RNNs
are being applied to a variety of problems such as
machine translation, image captioning, and speech
recognition. Speech involves a dynamic process,
and thus, RNN seems a good choice over traditional
feedforward network [7].
However, the applicability of RNN is limited
due to two reasons. The ﬁrst is that RNNs re-
quire pre-segmented training and post-processing
of the output to convert it into labeled sequences.
The Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC)
for labeling sequence data in training with RNN
solves this shortcoming. The CTC method has been
proven to be helpful where alignment between in-
put and output labels is unknown [8]. Second,
for the long-term dependencies in data where the
gap between the relevant information and the place
where it is needed is large, RNNs have only lim-
ited use. Thus, a special type of RNN, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have been intro-
duced. LSTMs are designed to work on long-term
dependencies in data. LSTM prove to be effec-
tive in speech recognition tasks [7] where the spe-
cial memory cells of LSTMs are used to identify
long dependencies. Slightly different than LSTM is
the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) introduced in 2014
[9]. GRUs are also designed for long-term depen-
dencies and work well with sequential data as do
LSTMs.
In this paper, we have evaluated the perfor-
mance of RNN, LSTM, and GRU for speech recog-
nition applied to the reduced TED-LIUM data set
[10] using an appropriate regularization method.
Different parameterized models are trained end-to-
end using CTC for labeling sequence data.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes related work in the area of speech recog-
nition and deep learning. In Section 3 the three
approaches applied are described. Section 4 de-
scribes the experiments conducted and discusses the
results. The conclusion and future work is provided
in Section 5.
2 Related Work
Traditionally, generative models were used for
speech recognition. Generative models are typi-
cally composed of Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP)
estimation, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs),
and Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [11, 12].
These traditional models require expert knowledge
(i.e., knowledge of a speciﬁc language) as well
as preprocessing of the text for Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) [12]. Fortunately, an end-to-
end ASR does not require expert knowledge be-
cause it depends on paired acoustics and language
data [12].
Recent advances in deep learning have given
rise to the use of sequence-to-sequence models (dis-
criminative models) for speech recognition [11, 13].
In simple terms, sequence-to-sequence model for
speech recognition takes an acoustic sequence as in-
put and returns a transcript sequence as output [11].
Our work is guided by many previous works
done in this area. In particular, RNNs have achieved
excellent results in language modeling tasks as out-
lined in [14, 15]. Language modeling is based onPERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS APPLIED ...
a probabilistic model that is ﬁtted to assign proba-
bilities to sentences. This is accomplished by pre-
dicting the next word in a sentence given previous
word data. The experiments were performed on the
popular Penn Tree Bank (PTB) data set [15].
Language modeling is key to many problems
such as speech recognition, machine translation or
image captioning. RNNs and LSTMs have both
been used to map sequences to sequences as well.
Sequence to sequence models are made up of two
RNNs; an encoder to process the input and a de-
coder to generate the output. In [16], multi-layered
RNN cells have been used for the translation tasks
and were evaluated on a popular English to French
translation from the WMT’14 data set [16].
LSTM network architectures have proven to be
better than standard RNNs on learning Context Free
Language (CFL) and Context Sensitive Language
(CSL) as described in [17]. Particularly, in speech
recognition tasks, RNNs and LSTMs have achieved
excellent results. Sequence labeling is an important
task in training RNNs during the speech recogni-
tion process. HMM-RNN frameworks were used in
the past [18, 19], however, they do not perform well
with DNN.
Graves et al. [8] came up with a very efﬁ-
cient Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation (CTC)
method of sequence labeling to train RNNs end-to-
end. This method works very well for problems
where input-output label alignment is unknown,
and the method does not require pre-segmented
training data and post-processing of the outputs. In
addition, Graves et al. also introduced deep LSTM
RNNs and evaluated the framework on speech
recognition. Particularly, RNN with CTC was used
to train the model end-to-end. The authors achieved
the best recorded score on the TIMIT phoneme
recognition benchmark [7].
Sak et al. [20] evaluated and compared the per-
formance of LSTM, RNN and DNN architectures
on a large vocabulary speech recognition problem
- the Google English V oice Search Task. The au-
thors have used an updated architecture compared
to standard LSTM to make better use of the model
parameters.
Several experiments are performed on the
TIMIT speech data set using bidirectional LSTM,
deep bidirectional LSTMs, RNNs, and hybrid ar-chitectures. Bidirectional LSTM networks have
been used for the phoneme classiﬁcation task [21,
22]. Results have shown that bidirectional LSTM
performs better than unidirectional LSTM and stan-
dard RNNs on the frame-wise phoneme classiﬁca-
tion task. These results suggest that bidirectional
LSTM is an effective architecture for speech pro-
cessing where context information is very impor-
tant.
A hybrid bidirectional LSTM-HMM system ap-
plied to phoneme recognition has proved as an
improvement over unidirectional LSTM-HMM as
well as traditional HMM systems. Bidirectional
LSTMs have been experimented on the handwriting
recognition problem, and were evaluated on both
online and ofﬂine data, thus proving to outperform
the state-of-the-art HMM based system [23].
Deep bidirectional LSTMs have been applied
to the speech recognition task whereby each hid-
den layer was replaced by a combination of a for-
ward layer and a backward layer. In this architec-
ture, every hidden layer receives input from both
the forward and backward layer at one level be-
low. This type of deep bidirectional LSTM network
combined with the CTC objective function has been
used for end-to-end speech recognition. The net-
work was evaluated on the Wall Street Journal cor-
pus [24]. The authors’ novel approach with the ob-
jective function has allowed direct optimization of
the word error rate, even in the absence of a lan-
guage model. A hybrid of deep bidirectional LSTM
and HMM system has been used for speech recog-
nition on the TIMIT data [25] outperforming GMM
deep network benchmarks on part of the Wall Street
Journal corpus.
Different DNN architectures have been evalu-
ated on hundreds of hours of speech data in recent
years like Wall Street Journal, Librispeech, Switch-
board, TED-LIUM, Fisher Corpus [26, 27, 28].
Speciﬁcally, the TED-LIUM data set has been used
in a variety of tasks such as in audio augmentation
[28], in modeling probabilities of pronunciation and
silence [29], etc. Furthermore, the TED-LIUM data
set has also been used in automatic speech recog-
nition combined with human correction at the word
level and lattice level [30].
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) recurrent neural
networks were introduced by Cho et al. in 2014
[31]. GRUs are similar to LSTMs, both were de-