JAISCR, 2019, V ol. 9, No. 4, pp. 235
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF DEEP NEURAL
NETWORKS APPLIED TO SPEECH RECOGNITION: RNN,
LSTM AND GRU
Apeksha Shewalkar, Deepika Nyavanandi, Simone A. Ludwig∗
Department of Computer Science, North Dakota State University,
Fargo, ND, USA
∗E-mail: simone.ludwig@ndsu.edu
Submitted: 29th September 2018; Accepted: 10th March 2019
Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) are nothing but neural networks with many hidden lay-
ers. DNNs are becoming popular in automatic speech recognition tasks which combines a
good acoustic with a language model. Standard feedforward neural networks cannot han-
dle speech data well since they do not have a way to feed information from a later layer
back to an earlier layer. Thus, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been introduced
to take temporal dependencies into account. However, the shortcoming of RNNs is that
long-term dependencies due to the vanishing/exploding gradient problem cannot be han-
dled. Therefore, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks were introduced, which are
a special case of RNNs, that takes long-term dependencies in a speech in addition to short-
term dependencies into account. Similarily, GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit) networks are an
improvement of LSTM networks also taking long-term dependencies into consideration.
Thus, in this paper, we evaluate RNN, LSTM, and GRU to compare their performances
on a reduced TED-LIUM speech data set. The results show that LSTM achieves the best
word error rates, however, the GRU optimization is faster while achieving word error rates
close to LSTM.
Keywords: Spectrogram, Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation, TED-LIUM data set
1 Introduction
Deep learning is a term used to describe a spe-
ciﬁc class of artiﬁcial neural networks one that is
composed of many layers. Neural networks for
short, have existed for many decades. However, the
training of deep architectures had failed until Geof-
frey Hinton’s breakthrough work in 2006 [1]. Even
though there are some algorithmic innovations to
these deeper networks, however, the dramatic rise
in computing power using GPUs made the process-
ing of larger data sets possible.Deep learning methods have many application
areas, and many successes have been seen in par-
ticular in the image processing area. For example,
a deep learning architecture called Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) are designed to emulate
the behavior of visual cortex. CNNs perform very
well on any visual recognition tasks. The CNN ar-
chitecture consists of special layers called convolu-
tional layers and pooling layers. These layers allow
the network to encode certain images properties.
Autoencoders is another class of a deep learning
architecture. Autoencoders are used to reduce the – 245 
10.2478/jaiscr-2019-0006