4
FIG. 4.Examples of QNN architectures. a) A classical
feed-forward neural network has input, hidden, and output
layers. This can be generalized to the quantum setting with
a dissipative QNN, where some qubits are discarded and re-
placed by new qubits during the algorithm . Here we shown
a quantum circuit representation for the dissipative QNN. In
a circuit diagram each horizontal line represents a qubit, and
the logical operations, or quantum gates, are represented by
boxesconnectingthequbitlines. Circuitsarereadfromleftto
right. For instance, here the circuit is initialized in a product
statej ji
j 0i
(Nh+No), wherej jiencodes the input data
andNh(No) is the number of qubits in the hidden (output)
layer. As one performs logical operations, the information
forward propagates through the circuit. b) Another possible
QNN strategy is to keep the qubits ﬁxed, without discarding
or replacing them. The circuit represents consecutive appli-
cation of two-qubit gates Ujand controlled-NOT (denoted
by CNOT) gates. c) Quantum convolutional neural networks
(QCNNs) measure and discard qubits during the algorithm.
The QCNN circuit considered here is built with two-qubit
quantum gates Ujand is initialized in j ji.
This has led researchers to refer to certain kinds of
PQCs as Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs). In prac-
tice, the term QNN is used whenever a PQC is employed
for a data science application, and hence we will use the
term QNN in what follows. QNNs are employed in all
three QML paradigms mentioned above. For instance,
in a supervised classiﬁcation task, the goal of the QNN
is to map the states in diﬀerent classes to distinguish-
able regions of the Hilbert space [26]. Moreover, in the
unsupervised learning scenario of [29] a clustering task is
mappedontoaMAXCUTproblemandsolvedbytraining
a QNN to maximize distance between classes. Finally, in
the reinforced learning task of [32], a QNN can be used
as the Q-function approximator, which can be used to
determine the best action for a learning agent given its
current state.
Figure 4 gives examples of three distinct QNN archi-
tectures where at each layer the number of qubits in the
model is increased, preserved, or decreased. In Fig. 4(a)
we show a dissipative QNN [40] which generalizes the
classical feed-forward network. Here, each node corre-
sponds to a qubit, while lines connecting qubits are uni-
tary operations. The term dissipative arises from the fact
that qubits in a layer are discarded after the informationforward-propagates to the (new) qubits in the next layer.
Figure 4(b) shows a standard QNN where quantum data
states are sent through a quantum circuit, at the end of
which some or all of the qubits are measured. Here, no
qubits are discarded or added as one goes deeper into the
QNN.Finally, Fig.4(c)depictsaconvolutionalQNN[11],
where at each layer qubits are measured to reduce the di-
mensionofthedatawhilepreservingitsrelevantfeatures.
Many other QNNs have been proposed [41–45], and con-
structing QNN architectures is currently an active area
of research.
To further accommodate for the limitation of near-
term quantum computers, one can also employ a hy-
brid approach with models that have both classical and
quantum neural networks [46]. Here, QNNs act coher-
ently on quantum states while deep classical neural net-
works alleviate the need for higher-complexity quantum
processing. Such hybridization distributes the represen-
tational capacity and computational complexity across
both quantum and classical computers. Moreover, since
quantum states generally have a mixture of classical
correlations and quantum correlations, hybrid quantum-
classical models allow for the use of quantum computers
as an additive resource to increase the ability for classi-
calmodelstorepresentquantum-correlateddistributions.
Applications of hybrid models include generating [47] or
learninganddistillinginformation[46]frommultipartite-
entangled distributions.
2. Quantum kernels
As an alternative to QNNs, researchers have proposed
quantum versions of kernel methods [26, 28]. A ker-
nel method maps each input to a vector in a high-
dimensional vector space, known as the reproducing ker-
nel Hilbert space. Then, a kernel method learns a linear
function in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space. The
dimension of the reproducing kernel Hilbert space could
be inﬁnite, which enables the kernel method to be very
powerful in terms of the expressiveness. To learn a linear
function in a potentially inﬁnite-dimensional space, the
kernel trick [48] is employed, which only requires eﬃcient
computation of the inner product between these high-
dimensional vectors. The inner product is also known
as the kernel [48]. Quantum kernel methods consider
the computation of kernel functions using quantum com-
puters. There are many possible implementations. For
example, [26, 28] considered a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space equal to the quantum state space, which is ﬁ-
nite dimensional. Another approach [13] is to study
an inﬁnite-dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert space
that is equivalent to transforming classical vector using a
quantum computer. It then maps the transformed clas-
sical vectors to inﬁnite-dimensional vectors.