6
FIG. 5.Challenges for QML. a) There are several ingre-
dients and priors needed to build a QML model: a dataset
(and an encoding scheme for classical data), the choice of pa-
rameterized model, loss function, and classical optimizer. In
this diagram, we show some of the challenges of the diﬀer-
ent components of the model. b-d) The success of the QML
model hinges on an accurate and eﬃcient training of the pa-
rameters. However, there are certain phenomena that can
hinder the QML trainability. These include the abundance
of low-quality local minima solutions shown in b), as well
as the barren plateau phenomenon in c). When a QML ar-
chitecture exhibits a barren plateau, the landscape becomes
exponentially ﬂat (on average) as the number of qubits in-
creases (seen as a transition from dashed to solid line). The
presence of hardware noise has been shown to erase the fea-
tures in the landscape as well as potentially shift the position
of the minima. Here, the dashed (solid) line corresponds to
the noiseless (noisy) landscape shown in d).
A. Embedding schemes and quantum datasets
The access to high-quality, standardized datasets has
played a key role in advancing classical ML. Hence, one
could conjecture that such datasets will be crucial for
QML as well.
Currently, most QML architectures are benchmarked
using classical datasets (such as MNIST, Dogs vs Cats,
and Iris). While using classical datasets is natural due
to their accessibility, it is still unclear how to best en-
code classical information onto quantum states. Several
embedding schemes have been proposed [22, 26, 62], and
there are some desirable properties they must possess.
One such property is that the inner product between out-
putstatesoftheembeddingisclassicallyhardtosimulate
(otherwise the quantum kernel would be classically simu-
lable). In addition, the embedding should be practically
useful, i.e., in a classiﬁcation task, the states should be
in distinguishable regions of the Hilbert space. Unfortu-
nately, embeddings that satisfy one of these properties do
not necessarily satisfy the other [63]. Thus, developingencoding schemes is an active area of research, especially
thosethatareequippedwithaninductivebiascontaining
information about the dataset [49].
Furthermore, some recent results suggest that achiev-
ing a quantum advantage with classical data might not
be straightforward [49]. On the other hand, QML mod-
els with quantum data have a more promising route to-
wards a quantum advantage [64–67]. Despite this fact,
there is still a dearth of truly quantum datasets for QML,
which just a few recently proposed [68, 69]. Hence,
the ﬁeld needs standardized quantum datasets with eas-
ily preparable quantum states, as these can be used to
benchmark QML models on true quantum data.
B. Quantum landscapes
Training the parameters of the QML model corre-
sponds in a wide array of cases to minimizing a loss func-
tion and navigating through a (usually non-convex) loss
function landscape in search for its global minimum [70].
Quantumlandscapetheory[71]aimstounderstandQML
landscape properties and how to engineer them. Local
minima and barren plateaus have received signiﬁcant at-
tention in quantum landscape theory.
1. Local minima in quantum landscapes
As schematically shown in Fig. 5(b), similar to clas-
sical ML, the quantum loss landscape can have many
local minima. Ultimately, this can lead to the over-
all non-convex optimization being NP-hard [72], which
is again similar to the classical case. There have been
some methods proposed to address local minima. For
example, variable structure QNNs [73, 74], which grow
and contract throughout the optimization, adaptively
change the model’s prior and allow some local minima
to be turned into saddle points. Moreover, evidence of
the overparametrization phenomenon has been seen for
QML [75, 76]. Here, the optimization undergoes a com-
putational phase transition, due to spurious local min-
ima disappearing, whenever the number of parameters
exceeds a critical value.
2. Overview of barren plateaus
Local minima are not the only issue facing QML, as it
has been shown that quantum landscapes can exhibit a
fascinating property known as a barren plateau [58, 77–
89]. As depicted in Fig. 5(c), in a barren plateau the
loss landscape becomes, on average, exponentially ﬂat
with the problem size. When this occurs, the valley
containing the global mimimum also shrinks exponen-
tially with problem size, leading to a so-called narrow
gorge[71]. Asaconsequence, onerequiresexponentialre-
sources (e.g., numbers of shots) to navigate through the