3
  
FIG. 3. Classiﬁcation with QML. a) The classical data
x, i.e., images of cats and images of dogs, is encoded into
a Hilbert space via some map x! j (x)i. Ideally, data
from diﬀerent classes (here represented by dots and stars)
is mapped to diﬀerent regions of the Hilbert space . b) Quan-
tum dataj ican be directly analyzed on a quantum device.
Here the dataset is composed of states representing metallic
or superconducting systems. c) The dataset is used to train a
QML model. Two common paradigms in QML are quantum
neural networks and quantum kernels, both of which allow
for classiﬁcation of either classical or quantum data. In Ker-
nel methods one ﬁts a decision hyperplane that separates the
classes. d) Once the model is trained, it can be used to make
predictions.
bers to be speciﬁed. Hence, systems of qubits (and more
generally the quantum Hilbert space) constitute the ul-
timate data representation medium, as they can encode
not only classical information but also quantum informa-
tion obtained from physical processes.
In a QML setting, the term quantum data refers to
data that is naturally already embedded in a Hilbert
spaceH. When the data is quantum, it is already in
the form of a set of quantum states fj jigor a set of
unitariesfUjgthat could prepare these states on a quan-
tum device (via the relation j ji=Ujj0i). On the other
hand, when the data xis classical, it ﬁrst needs to be
encoded in a quantum system through some embedding
mappingxj!j (xj)i, withj (xj)iinH. In this case,
the hope is that the QML model can solve the learning
task by accessing the exponentially large dimension of
the Hilbert space [20–23].
One of the most important and reasonable conjectures
to make is that the availability of quantum data will sig-
niﬁcantly increase in the near future. The mere fact that
people will use the quantum computers that are avail-
able will logically lead to more quantum problems beingsolved and quantum simulations being performed. These
computations will produce quantum data sets, and hence
it is reasonable to expect the rapid rise of quantum data.
Note that, in the near term, this quantum data will be
stored on classical devices in the form of eﬃcient descrip-
tions of quantum circuits that prepare the datasets.
Finally, as our level of control over quantum technolo-
gies progress, coherent transduction of quantum informa-
tion from the physical world to digital quantum comput-
ing platforms may be achieved [19]. This would quan-
tum mechanically mimic the main information acquisi-
tionmechanismforclassicaldatafromthephysicalworld,
that being analog-digital conversion. Moreover, we can
expect that the eventual advent of practical quantum er-
ror correction [24] and quantum memories [25] will allow
us to store quantum data on quantum computers them-
selves.
B. Models
Analyzing and learning from data requires a parame-
terized model, and many diﬀerent models have been pro-
posed for QML applications. Classical models like neu-
ral networks and tensor networks (as shown in Fig. 1)
are often useful for analyzing data coming from quan-
tum experiments. However, due to their novelty, we will
focus our discussion on quantum models using quantum
algorithms, where one applies the learning methodology
directly at the quantum level.
Similar to classical ML, there exists several diﬀerent
QML paradigms: supervised learning (task-based) [26–
28], unsupervised learning (data-based) [29, 30] and re-
inforced learning (reward-based) [31, 32]. While each of
theseﬁeldsisexciting andthrivingon itsown, supervised
learning has recently received considerable attention for
its potential to achieve quantum advantage [26, 33], re-
silience to noise [34], and good generalization proper-
ties [35–37], which makes it a strong candidate for near-
term applications. In what follows we discuss two popu-
lar QML models: quantum neural networks (QNNs) and
quantum kernels, shown in Fig. 3, with a particular em-
phasis on QNNs as these are the primary ingredient of
several supervised, unsupervised, and reinforced learning
schemes.
1. Quantum neural networks
The most basic and key ingredient in QML models are
Parameterized Quantum Circuits (PQCs). These involve
a sequence of unitary gates acting on the quantum data
statesj ji, some of which have free parameters that
will be trained to solve the problem at hand [38]. PQCs
are conceptually analogous to neural networks, and in-
deed this analogy can be made precise, i.e., classical neu-
ral networks can be formally embedded into PQCs [39].