9
vantage would likely be from variational optimization at
the continuous time optimal control level on analogue
quantum simulators.
B. What will quantum advantage look like?
When the data originates from quantum-mechanical
processes, such as from experiments in chemistry, ma-
terial science, biology, and physics, it is more likely to
see exponential quantum advantage in ML. The quan-
tum advantage could be in sample complexity ortime
complexity . An exponential advantage in sample com-
plexity always implies an exponential advantage in time
complexity, but the reverse is not generally true. It was
recentlyshown[64,66,115,116]thatthereisanexponen-
tial quantum advantage in sample complexity when we
can use a quantum sensor, quantum memory, and quan-
tum computer to retrieve, store, and process quantum in-
formation from experiments. Such a sample complexity
advantage can be proven rigorously without the possibil-
ity of being dequantized [12, 65, 117] in the future, i.e., it
is impossible to ﬁnd improved classical algorithms such
that there is no exponential advantage. This signiﬁcant
quantum advantage has recently been demonstrated on
the Sycamore processor [64] raising the hope for achiev-
ing quantum advantage using NISQ devices [118].
The situation for advantage in time complexity is more
subtle. Classical simulation of quantum process is in-
tractable in many cases, hence one would expect expo-
nential advantage in time complexity to be prevalent.
However, one should be cautious about the availability of
data in ML tasks, which makes classical ML algorithms
computationally more powerful [13, 119]. For instance,
Ref. [119] shows that in the worst case , there is no ex-
ponential quantum advantage in predicting ground state
properties in geometrically local gapped Hamiltonians.
Furthermore, the emergence of eﬀective classical theory
in quantum-mechanical processes could enable classical
machines to provide accurate predictions. For example,
density functional theory [120, 121] allows accurate pre-
diction of molecular properties when we have an accurate
approximationtotheexchange-correlationfunctionalsby
conducting real-world experiments. It is still likely that
an exponential advantage is possible in physical systems
of practical interest, but there are no rigorous proofs yet.
When the data is of a purely classical origin, such as
in applications for recommending products to customers
[12], performing portfolio optimization [122, 123], and
processing human languages [124] and everyday images
[125], there is no known exponential advantage [117].
However, it is still reasonable to expect polynomial ad-
vantage. Furthermore, a quadratic advantage can be rig-
orously proven [126, 127] for purely classical problems.
So we likely have a potential impact in the long-term
when we have fault-tolerant quantum computers, albeit
with the speedup signiﬁcantly dampened by the over-
heads of quantum error correction [128] for currentlyknown fault-tolerant quantum computing schemes.
C. Transition to the fault-tolerant era and beyond
While QML has been proposed as a candidate to
achieve a quantum advantage in the near-term using
NISQ devices, one can still pose the question about its
usabilityinthefuture. Here, researchersenvisiontwodif-
ferent chronological eras post-NISQ. In the ﬁrst, which
wecanrefertoas“partialerrorcorrected”, quantumcom-
puters will have enough physical qubits (a couple of hun-
dred of them), and suﬃciently small error rates, to allow
for a small number of fully error corrected logical qubits.
Since one logical qubit is comprised of multiple physical
qubits, in this era one will have the freedom to trade
oﬀ and split the qubits in the device onto a subset of
error corrected qubits, along with a subset of non-error
corrected qubits. The next era, i.e., the “fault-tolerant
era” will arise when the quantum hardware has a large
number of error corrected qubits.
Indeed, one can easily envision QML being useful in
both of these post-NISQ eras. First, in the partial er-
ror corrected era, QML models will be able to execute
high-ﬁdelity circuits and thus have an improved perfor-
mance. Thiswillnaturallyenhancethetrainabilityofthe
models by mitigating noise-induced barren plateaus, and
also reduce noise-induced classiﬁcation errors in QML
models. Most importantly, QML will likely see its most
widespread and critical use during the fault-tolerant era.
Here, quantum algorithms such as those for quantum
simulation [129, 130] will be able to accurately prepare
quantumdata,andtofaithfullystoreitinquantummem-
ories [131]. Therefore QML will be the natural model to
learn, infer, and make predictions from quantum data,
as here the quantum computer will learn from the data
itself directly.
On the further-term horizon, we anticipate it will be
possible to capture quantum data from nature directly
via transduction from its natural analog form to one that
isquantumdigital(e.g.,viaquantumanalog-digitalinter-
conversion [19]). This data will then be able to be shut-
tled around quantum networks for distributed and/or
centralized processing with quantum machine learning
models, using fault-tolerant quantum computation and
error-corrected quantum communication. At this point,
quantum machine learning will have reached a stage sim-
ilar to where machine learning is today, where edge sen-
sors capture data, the data is relayed to a central cloud,
and machine learning models are trained on the aggre-
gateddata. Asthemodernadventofwidespreadclassical
machine learning arose at this point of abundant data,
one could anticipate that ubiquitous access to quantum
data in the fault-tolerant era could similarly propel quan-
tum machine learning to even greater widespread use.