Challenges and Opportunities in Quantum Machine Learning
M. Cerezo,1, 2, 3Guillaume Verdon,4, 5, 6Hsin-Yuan Huang,7, 8Lukasz Cincio,9, 3and Patrick J. Coles10, 9, 3
1Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
2Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
3Quantum Science Center, Oak Ridge, TN 37931, USA
4X, Mountain View, CA, USA
5Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, ON, Canada
6Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Waterloo, ON, Canada
7Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California Institute of Technology, USA
8Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, USA
9Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
10Normal Computing Corporation, New York, New York, USA
At the intersection of machine learning and quantum computing, Quantum Machine Learning
(QML)hasthepotentialofacceleratingdataanalysis, especiallyforquantumdata, withapplications
for quantum materials, biochemistry, and high-energy physics. Nevertheless, challenges remain
regarding the trainability of QML models. Here we review current methods and applications for
QML. We highlight diﬀerences between quantum and classical machine learning, with a focus on
quantumneuralnetworksandquantumdeeplearning. Finally, wediscussopportunitiesforquantum
advantage with QML.
I. INTRODUCTION
The recognition that the world is quantum mechanical
has allowed researchers to embed well-established, but
classical, theories into the framework of quantum Hilbert
spaces. Shannon’s information theory, which is the ba-
sis of communication technology, has been generalized
to quantum Shannon theory (or quantum information
theory), opening up the possibility that quantum eﬀects
could make information transmission more eﬃcient [1].
The ﬁeld of biology has been extended to quantum bi-
ology to allow for a deeper understanding of biological
processes like photosynthesis, smell, and enzyme cataly-
sis[2]. Turing’stheoryofuniversalcomputationhasbeen
extended to universal quantum computation [3], poten-
tially leading to exponentially faster simulations of phys-
ical systems.
One of the most successful technologies of this century
is machine learning (ML), which aims to classify, cluster,
and recognize patterns for large data sets. Learning the-
ory has been simultaneously developed alongside of ML
technology in order to understand and improve upon its
success. Concepts like support vector machines, neural
networks, and generative adversarial networks have im-
pacted science and technology in profound ways. ML
is now ingrained into society to such a degree that any
fundamental improvement to ML leads to tremendous
economic beneﬁt.
Like other classical theories, ML and learning the-
ory can in fact be embedded into the quantum me-
chanical formalism. Formally speaking, this embedding
leads to the ﬁeld known as Quantum Machine Learn-
ing (QML) [4–6], which aims to understand the ultimate
limits of data analysis allowed by the laws of physics.
Practically speaking, the advent of quantum computers,
withthehopeofachievingaso-calledquantumadvantage
(as deﬁned below) for data analysis, is what has madeQMLsoexciting. Quantumcomputingexploitsentangle-
ment, superposition, and interference to perform certain
tasks with signiﬁcant speedups over classical computing,
sometimes even exponentially faster. Indeed while such
speedup has already been observed for a contrived prob-
lem [7], reaching it for data science is still uncertain even
at the theoretical level, but this is one of the main goals
for QML.
In practice, QML is a broad term that encompasses all
of the tasks shown in Fig. 1. For example, one can apply
machine learning to quantum applications like discover-
ingquantumalgorithms[8]oroptimizingquantumexper-
iments [9, 10], or one can use a quantum neural network
to process either classical or quantum information [11].
Evenclassicaltaskscanbeviewed asQMLwhentheyare
quantum inspired [12]. We note that the focus of this ar-
ticle will be on quantum neural networks, quantum deep
learning, and quantum kernels, even though the ﬁeld of
QML is quite broad and goes beyond these topics.
After the invention of the laser, it was called a solu-
tioninsearchofaproblem. Tosomedegree, thesituation
with QML is similar. The complete list of applications
of QML is not fully known. Nevertheless, it is possible
to speculate that all the areas shown in Fig. 2 will be
impacted by QML. For example, QML will likely beneﬁt
chemistry, materials science, sensing and metrology, clas-
sical data analysis, quantum error correction, and quan-
tum algorithm design. Some of these applications pro-
duce data that is inherently quantum mechanical, and
hence it is natural to apply QML (rather than classical
ML) to them.
Whiletherearesimilaritiesbetweenclassicalandquan-
tum ML, there are also some diﬀerences. Because QML
employsquantumcomputers, noisefromthesecomputers
can be a major issue. This includes hardware noise like
decoherence as well as statistical noise (i.e., shot noise)
that arises from measurements on quantum states. BotharXiv:2303.09491v1  [quant-ph]  16 Mar 2023