8
quantum geometric deep learning to provide consistent
methods to create QML model architectures with induc-
tive biases encoding knowledge of the basic symmetries
andprinciplesofthequantumphysicalsystemunderlying
givenquantumdatasets. Thisapproachhasbeenrecently
explored in [93–95]. Moreover, the works of [76, 96] have
also shown that the Lie algebra obtained from the gener-
ators of the QNN can be linked to properties of the QML
landscape such as the presence of barren plateaus or the
overparametrization phenomenon.
D. Eﬀect of quantum noise
The presence of hardware noise during quantum com-
putations is one of the deﬁning characteristics of Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) computing. De-
spite this fact, most QML research neglects noise in the
analytical calculations and numerical simulations while
still promising that the methods are near-term compati-
ble. Accounting for the eﬀects of hardware noise should
be a crucial aspect of QML analysis if one wishes to pur-
sue a quantum advantage with currently available hard-
ware.
Noise corrupts the information as it forward propa-
gates in a quantum circuit, meaning that deeper circuits
with longer run-times will be particularly aﬀected. As
such, noise aﬀects all aspects of the model that make
use of quantum computers. This includes the dataset
preparation scheme as well as circuits used to compute
quantumkernels. Moreover, whenusingQNNs, noisecan
hinder their trainability as it leads to noise-induced bar-
ren plateaus [89, 97]. Here, the relevant features of the
landscape get exponentially suppressed by noise as the
depth of the circuit increases (see Fig. 5(d)). Ultimately,
the eﬀects of noise translate into a deformation of the
inductive bias of the model from its original one, and
an eﬀective reduction of the dimension of the quantum
feature space. Despite the critical impact of quantum
noise, its eﬀects are still largely unexplored, particularly
on its impact on the classical simulability of the QML
model [98, 99].
Addressing noise-induced issues will likely require ei-
ther: (1) reduction in hardware error rates, (2) partial
quantum error correction [100], or (3) employing QNNs
that are relatively shallow (i.e., whose depth grows sub-
linearly in the problem size) [89], such as QCNNs. Error
mitigation techniques [101–103] can also improve perfor-
mance of QML models in the presence of noise, although
they may not solve noise-induced trainability issues [97].
A diﬀerent approach to dealing with noise is to engineer
QML models with noise-resilient properties [34, 104, 105]
(such as the position of the minima not changing due to
noise).IV. OUTLOOK
A. Potential for Quantum advantage
The ﬁrst quantum advantages in QML will likely come
from hidden parameter extraction from quantum data.
This can be for quantum sensing or quantum state clas-
siﬁcation/regression. Fundamentally, we know from the
theory of optimal measurement that non-local quantum
measurements can extract hidden parameters using less
samples. Using QML, one can form and search over a
parameterization of hypotheses for such measurements.
This is particularly useful when such optimal measure-
ments are not known a priori, for example, identifying
the measurement that extracts an order parameter or
identiﬁes a particular phase of matter. As the informa-
tion about this classical parameter is embedded in the
structure of quantum correlations between subsystems, it
is natural that a trained QML model with good inductive
biases can exhibit an advantage over local measurements
and classical representations.
Another area of application where classical parameter
extraction may yield an advantage is in quantum ma-
chine perception [46, 64, 106–109], i.e. quantum sensing,
metrology, and beyond. Here, leveraging the variational
search over multipartite-entangled states for input to ex-
posure to a quantum signal along with the optimization
for optimal control and/or over post-processing schemes
can ﬁnd optimal measurements for the estimation of hid-
den parameters in the incoming signal. In particular, the
variational approach may be able to ﬁnd the optimal en-
tanglement, exposure, and measurement scheme which
ﬁlters signal from the noise [110], akin to variationally
learning the quantum error correcting code which ﬁlters
signal from noise, instead applied to quantum metrology.
Beyond classical parameter extraction embedded in
quantum data, there may be an advantage for the dis-
covery of quantum error correcting codes (QECCs) [111].
QECC’s fundamentally encode data (typically) non-
locally into a subsystem or subspace of the Hilbert space.
As deep learning is fundamentally about the discovery
of submanifolds of data space, identifying and decoding
subspaces/subsystems from a Hilbert space which corre-
spondtoaquantumerrorcorrectionsubspace/subsystem
is a natural place where diﬀerentiable quantum comput-
ing may yield an advantage. This is a barely explored
area, mainly due to the diﬃculty of gaining insights with
small-scale numerical simulations. Fundamentally, it is
akin to a quantum data version of classical parameter
embedding/extraction advantage.
Finally, a quantum advantage for generative modelling
may be achieved when one can generate ground states
[112], equilibrium states [47, 113], or quantum dynamics
[114], using generative models incorporating QNNs, in a
way where the distribution cannot be sampled classically,
and yields more accurate predictions or more extensively
generalizationcomparedtoclassicalMLapproaches. The
nearest-term possibility for demonstrating such an ad-