7
landscape. The latter impacts the complexity of one’s
QML algorithm and can even destroy quantum speedup,
since quantum algorithms typically aim to avoid the ex-
ponential complexity normally associated with classical
algorithms.
3. Barren plateaus from ignorance
or insuﬃcient inductive bias
The barren plateau phenomenon was ﬁrst studied in
deep hardware-eﬃcient QNNs [77], where they arise due
to the high expressivity of the model [81]. By making no
assumptions about the underlying data, deep hardware-
eﬃcient architectures aims to solve a problem by being
able to prepare a wide range of unitary evolutions. In
other words, the prior over hypothesis space is relatively
uninformed. Barren plateaus in this unsharp prior are
caused by ignorance or the lack of suﬃcient inductive
bias, and therefore a means to avoid them is to input
knowledge into the construction of the QNN - making
the design of QNNs with good inductive biases for the
problem at hand a key solution.
Fortunately various strategies have been developed to
address these barren plateaus, such as clever initializa-
tion[90], pre-training, andparametercorrelation[82,83].
These are all examples of adding a sharper prior to
one’s search over the over-expressive parameterizations
of hardware eﬃcient QNNs. Below we further discuss
how QNN architectures can be designed to further intro-
duce inductive bias.
4. Barren plateaus from global observables
Othermechanismshavebeenlinkedtobarrenplateaus.
Simply deﬁning a loss function based on a global ob-
servable (i.e., observables measuring all qubits) leads
to barren plateaus even for shallow circuits with sharp
priors [78], while local observables (those comparing
quantum states at the single-qubit level) avoid this is-
sue [78, 87]. The latter is not due to bad inductive biases
but rather to the fact that comparing objects in exponen-
tially large Hilbert spaces requires an exponential preci-
sion, as their overlap is usually exponentially small.
5. Barren plateaus from entanglement
Whileentanglementisoneofthemostimportantquan-
tum resources for information processing tasks in quan-
tum computers, it can also be detrimental for QML mod-
els. QNNs (or embedding schemes) that generate too
much entanglement also lead to barren plateaus [84, 86,
88]. Here, the issue arises when one entangles the visi-
ble qubits of the QNN (those that one measures at the
QNN’s output) with a large number of qubits in the hid-
den layers. Due to entanglement, the information of thestate is stored in non-local correlations across all qubits,
and hence the reduced state of the visible qubits concen-
trates around the maximally mixed state. This type of
barren plateau can be solved by taming the entanglement
generated across the QNN.
C. QNN architecture design
One of the most active areas is developing QNN archi-
tectures that have sharp priors. Since QNNs are a funda-
mental ingredient in supervised learning (deep learning,
kernel methods), but also in unsupervised learning and
reinforced learning, developing good QNN architectures
is crucial for the ﬁeld.
For instance, it has been shown that QNNs with sharp
priorscanavoidissuessuchasbarrenplateausaltogether.
One such example are Quantum Convolutional Neural
Networks (QCNNs) [11]. QCNNs possess an inductive
bias from having a prior over the space of architectures
that is much sharper than that of deep hardware-eﬃcient
architectures, as QCNNs are restricted to be hierarchi-
callystructuredandtranslationallyinvariant. Thesignif-
icant reduction in the expressivity and parameter space
dimension from this translational invariance assumption
yields the greater trainability [82].
The idea of embedding knowledge about the problem
and dataset into our models (to achieve helpful induc-
tive bias) will be key to improve the trainability of QML
models. Recent proposals use Quantum Graph Neural
Networks [91] for scenarios where quantum subsystems
live on a graph, and potentially have further symmetries.
For instance, the underlying graph-permutation symme-
tries of a quantum communication dataset were taken
into account by a quantum graph convolutional network.
Similarly, a quantum recurrent neural network has been
used in scenarios where temporal recurrence of parame-
ters occurs, e.g., as in the quantum dynamics of a sta-
tionary (time-dependent) quantum dynamical process.
To better understand how to go beyond the aforemen-
tioned inductive biases from temporal and/or transla-
tional invariance in grids and graphs, we can take in-
spiration from recent advances in the theory of classical
deep learning. In classical ML, the study of the group
theory behind graph neural networks, namely the con-
cepts of invariance and equivariance to various group ac-
tions on the input space, has led to a unifying theory of
deep learning architectures based on group theory, called
Geometric Deep Learning theory [92].
In order to have a prescription to create arbitrary ar-
chitectures and inductive biases suitable for a given set of
quantum physical data, a theory of quantum geometric
deep learning could be key to design architectures with
the right prior over the transformation space and induc-
tive biases to ensure trainability and generalization. As
the study of physics is often about the identiﬁcation of
inherent or emergent symmetries in particular systems,
there is great potential for a future unifying theory of