5
3. Inductive bias
For both QNNs and quantum kernels, an important
design criterion is their inductive bias. This bias refers
to the fact that any model represents only a subset of
functions and is naturally biased towards certain types
of functions (i.e, functions relating the input features to
the output prediction). One aspect of achieving quantum
advantagewithQMListoaimforQMLmodelsthathave
an inductive bias that is ineﬃcient to simulate with a
classical model. Indeed, it was recently shown [49] that
quantum kernels with this property can be constructed,
albeit with some subtleties regarding their trainability.
Generallyspeaking,inductivebiasencompassesanyas-
sumptions made in the design of the model or the opti-
mization method which bias the search of the potential
models to a subset in the set of all possible models. In
the language of Bayesian probabilistic theory, we usually
call these assumptions our prior. Having a certain pa-
rameterization of potential models, like QNNs, or choos-
ing a particular embedding for quantum kernel methods
[13, 14, 26] is itself a restriction of the search space, and
hence a prior. Adding a regularization term to the op-
timizer or modulating the learning rate to keep searches
geometrically local also adds inherently a prior and fo-
cuses the search, and thus provides inductive bias.
Ultimately, inductive biases from the design of the ML
model, combined with a choice of training process, are
what make or break an ML model. The main advantage
of QML will then be to have the ability to sample from
and learn models that are (at least partially) natively
quantum mechanical. As such, they have inductive bi-
ases that classical models do not have. This discussion
assumes that the dataset to be represented is quantum
mechanical in nature, and is one of the reasons why re-
searchers typically believe that QML has greater promise
from quantum rather than classical data.
C. Training and Generalization
The ultimate goal of ML (classical or quantum) is to
train a model to solve a given task. Thus, understanding
the training process of QML models is fundamental for
their success.
Consider the training process, whereby one aims to
ﬁnd the set of parameters that lead to the best per-
formance. The latter can be accomplished, for instance,
by minimizing a loss function L()encoding the task at
hand. Some methods for training QML models are lever-
aged from classical ML, like stochastic gradient descent.
However, shot noise, hardware noise, and unique land-
scape features often make oﬀ-the-shelf classical optimiza-
tion methods perform poorly for QML training [50]. This
realization led to development of quantum-aware opti-
mizers, which account for the quantum idiosyncrasies of
the QML training process. For example, shot-frugal op-
timizers [51–54] can employ stochastic gradient descentwhile adapting the number of shots (or measurements)
needed at each iteration, so as not to waste too many
shots during the optimization. Quantum natural gradi-
ent [55, 56] adjusts the step size according to the local
geometry of the landscape (based on the quantum Fisher
information metric). These and other quantum-aware
optimizers often outperform standard classical optimiza-
tion methods in QML training tasks.
For the case of supervised learning, one is not only in-
terested in learning from a training data set but also in
making accurate predictions on (generalize to) previously
unseendata. Thistranslatesintoachievingsmalltraining
and prediction errors, with the second usually hinging on
the ﬁrst. Thus, let us now consider prediction error, also
known as generalization error, which has been studied
only very recently for QML [13, 14, 35, 37, 57, 58]. For-
mally speaking, this error measures the extent to which a
trained QML model performs well on unseen data. Pre-
diction error depends on both the training error as well
as the complexity of the trained model. If the training
error is large, the prediction error is also typically large.
If the training error is small but the complexity of the
trained model is large, then the prediction error is likely
still large. The prediction error is small only if train-
ing error is itself small and the complexity of the trained
model is moderate (i.e., suﬃciently smaller than training
data size) [14, 35]. The notion of complexity depends on
the QML model. We have a good understanding of the
complexity of quantum kernel methods [13, 14], while
more research is needed on QNN complexity. Recent
theoretical analysis of QNNs shows that their prediction
performance is closely linked to the number of indepen-
dent parameters in the QNN, with good generalization
obtained when the amount of training data is roughly
equal to the number of parameters [35]. This gives the
excitingprospectofusingonlyasmallamountoftraining
data to obtain good generalization.
III. CHALLENGES IN QML
Heuristic ﬁelds can face periods of stagnation (or “win-
ters”) due to unforeseen technical challenges. Indeed in
classical ML, there was a gap between introducing a sin-
gle perceptron [59] and the multi-layer perceptron [60]
(i.e., neural network), and there was also a gap between
attempts to train multiple layers and the introduction of
the backpropagation method [61].
Naturally we would like to avoid these stagnations or
winters for QML. The obvious strategy is to try to deter-
mine all of the challenges as quickly possible, and focus
research eﬀort on addressing them. Fortunately, QML
researchers have taken this strategy. Figure 5 showcases
some of the diﬀerent elements of QML models, as well as
the challenges associated with them. In this section we
detail various QML challenges and how one could poten-
tially avoid them.