2327-4662 (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2020.2991416, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
1
Personalized Federated Learning with Differential
Privacy
Rui Hu, Student Member, IEEE, Yuanxiong Guo, Senior Member, IEEE, Hongning Li, Member, IEEE,
Qingqi Pei, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yanmin Gong, Member, IEEE
Abstract —To provide intelligent and personalized services on
smart devices, machine learning techniques have been widely
used to learn from data, identify patterns, and make automateddecisions. Machine learning processes typically require a largeamount of representative data that are often collected throughcrowdsourcing from end users. However, user data could besensitive in nature, and training machine learning models on thesedata may expose sensitive information of users, violating theirprivacy. Moreover, to meet the increasing demand of personalizedservices, these learned models should capture their individualcharacteristics. This paper proposes a privacy-preserving ap-proach for learning effective personalized models on distributeduser data while guaranteeing the differential privacy of userdata. Practical issues in a distributed learning system such asuser heterogeneity are considered in the proposed approach. Inaddition, the convergence property and privacy guarantee of theproposed approach are rigorously analyzed. Experimental resultson realistic mobile sensing data demonstrate that the proposedapproach is robust to user heterogeneity and offers a good trade-off between accuracy and privacy.
I. I NTRODUCTION
SMART devices equipped with sensing, communications,
computing, and/or control capabilities, such as smart-
phones, wearable devices, and in-vehicle sensing devices, arebecoming extremely popular nowadays. These devices gener-ate, collect, store and analyze an unprecedented amount of dataas they interact with the physical world, which can provideintelligent and personalized services to people. For instance,smart watches can record their users’ physical activities andmental conditions for health monitoring at any time, and smartinsoles can track the body temperature, motion and heart rateof their users to help them stay injury-free and run better.
For these smart devices to provide intelligent services,
machine learning techniques need to be applied to learnpowerful predictive models on the collected data. A commonpractice to learn predictive models from these crowdsourceddata is to ﬁrst collect data from all devices in a cloud serverand then train a global model. However, it may be riskyto store the privacy-sensitive data in a cloud server whichmay not be fully trustworthy. Moreover, as the data volumeincreases, the cost and latency of uploading all the raw datato a distant cloud server increase as well. On the other hand,
R. Hu and Y. Gong are with the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas, 78249 (e-mail: {rui.hu,
yanmin.gong}@utsa.edu). Y. Guo is with the Department of Information
Systems and Cyber Security, University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas, 78249(e-mail: yuanxiong.guo@utsa.edu). H. Li and Q. Pei are with the State KeyLaboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,710071 (e-mail: {hnli@, qqpei@mail.}xidian.edu.cn).a device may choose to learn a local model on its own data
without sharing data with other devices. Such local modelsoften perform poorly due to the limited training data size.Hence, how to beneﬁt from data sharing without violating userprivacy in learning predictive models from distributed data is achallenge. Federated learning [1] has been proposed recently
as a promising approach to solve the challenge. In federatedlearning, all devices update the global model downloaded fromthe cloud server with their own data and only send the updatesback to the server for aggregation. By sharing only the learnedupdates rather than the raw data, federated learning bothachieves high communication efﬁciency and reduces privacyrisks while obtaining effective predictive models.
Although promising, there remain several issues in applying
federated learning to the real world. First of all, the modelobtained through federated learning is a shared model thatextracts the common knowledge of all participants withoutcapturing personal inclinations [2]. For instance, when learn-ing the sentiment of users on their personal messages, a singleglobal model cannot capture such differences, since the sameword from different users may convey different sentimentsdue to various personal opinions and language using habits.However, since people with close relationships are likely tohave similar habits, it will be beneﬁcial to allow the learningtasks of all users to learn from each other based on theirrelationships. Also known as multi-task learning, this kind
of method allows personalized models to be learned, whichcould both beneﬁt from the collective data and keep personalcharacteristics. Second, in a federated learning system withlots of participants, the device heterogeneity has a large impacton the learning efﬁciency. The network condition, data sizeand computation capability of different devices are differentand even time-varying, which may result in the delay, dropoutor poor quality of the updates. Third, federated learning doesnot provide a rigorous privacy guarantee for participants. Theaggregation server in federated learning is assumed to be fullytrusted to coordinate the training. However, the server caneasily violate the privacy of participants by observing theirupdates as shown in recent attacks [3], [4].
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel
federated learning scheme that provides an effective personal-ized model for each participant under the device heterogeneitywhile guaranteeing differential privacy of their data. In ourproposed scheme, the personalized model of a participant islearned based on not only its own local data but also the sharedupdates computed from other participants’ data. We providedifferential privacy guarantee for shared updates by adding
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on August 11,2020 at 22:49:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.