==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2010.03978v1  [cs.LG]  7 Oct 2020A B RIEF REVIEW OF DOMAIN ADAPTATION
Abolfazl Farahani
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
a.farahani@uga.eduSahar Voghoei
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Voghoei@uga.eduKhaled Rasheed
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Khaled@uga.edu
Hamid R. Arabnia
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
hra@uga.edu
ABSTRACT
Classical machine learning assumes that the training and te st sets come from the same distributions.
Therefore, a model learned from the labeled training data is expected to perform well on the test data.
However, This assumption may not always hold in real-world a pplications where the training and
the test data fall from different distributions, due to many factors, e.g., collecting the training and
test sets from different sources, or having an out-dated tra ining set due to the change of data over
time. In this case, there would be a discrepancy across domai n distributions, and naively applying
the trained model on the new dataset may cause degradation in the performance. Domain adaptation
is a sub-ﬁeld within machine learning that aims to cope with t hese types of problems by aligning
the disparity between domains such that the trained model ca n be generalized into the domain of
interest. This paper focuses on unsupervised domain adapta tion, where the labels are only available
in the source domain. It addresses the categorization of dom ain adaptation from different viewpoints.
Besides, It presents some successful shallow and deep domai n adaptation approaches that aim to deal
with domain adaptation problems.
Keywords Machine learning ·Transfer learning ·Domain adaptation ·Classiﬁcation ·Risk
Minimization
1 Introduction
Traditional Machine learning aims to learn a model on a set of training samples to ﬁnd an objective function with
minimum risk on unseen test data. To train such a generalized model, however, it assumes that both training and
test data are drawn from the same distribution and share simi lar joint probability distributions. This constraint can
be easily violated in real-world applications since traini ng, and test sets can originate from different feature space s or
distributions. The difﬁculty of collecting new instances w ith the same property, dimension, and distribution, as we
have in the training data may happen due to various reasons, e .g., the statistical properties of a domain can evolve in
time, or new samples can be collected from different sources , causing domain shift. Besides, if possible, it is preferre d
to utilize a related publicly available annotated data as a t raining dataset instead of creating a new labeled dataset,
which is a laborious and time-consuming task. However, when the training data is not an accurate reﬂection of test
data distribution, the trained model will likely experienc e degradation in performance when applying on the test data.
To tackle the above problem, researchers proposed a new rese arch area in machine learning called domain adaptation.
In this setting, training and test sets termed as the source a nd the target domains, respectively. Domain adaptation
generally seeks to learn a model from a source labeled data th at can be generalized to a target domain by minimizing
the difference between domain distributions.

==== Page 2 ====
Domain adaptation is a special case of transfer learning [1] . These two closely related problem settings are sub-
discipline of machine learning which aim to improve the perf ormance of a target model with insufﬁcient or lack of
annotated data by using the knowledge from another related d omain with adequate labeled data. We ﬁrst brieﬂy
review transfer learning and its categories, and then addre ss some existing related works to transfer learning and
domain adaptation. Transfer learning refers to a class of ma chine learning problems where either the tasks and/or
domains may change between source and target while in domain adaptations only domains differ and tasks remain
unchanged. In transfer learning, a domain consists of featu re space and marginal probability distribution, and a task
includes a label space and an objective predictive function . Thus, Various possible scenarios in domains and tasks
create different transfer learning settings. Pan et al. [1], categorizes transfer learning into three main categor ies:
inductive, transductive, and unsupervised transfer learn ing. Inductive transfer learning refers to the situation wh ere
the source and target tasks differ, no matter whether or not d omains are different. In this setting, the source domain
may or may not include annotated data, but a few labeled data i n the target domain are required as training data. In
transductive transfer learning, tasks remain unchanged wh ile domains differ, and labeled data are available only in
the source domain. However, part of the unlabeled data in the target domain is required at training time to obtain
its marginal probability distribution. Finally, unsuperv ised transfer learning refers to the scenario where the task s are
different similar to inductive transfer learning; however , both source and target domains include unlabeled data.
Similar to transfer learning and domain adaptation, Semi-s upervised classiﬁcation addresses the problem of having
insufﬁcient labeled data. This problem setting employs abu ndant unlabeled samples and a small amount of annotated
samples to train a model. In this approach, both labeled and u nlabeled data samples are assumed to be drawn from the
equivalent distributions. In contrast, transfer learning and domain adaptation relax this assumption to allow domain s
to be from distinct distributions [2], [3].
Multi-task learning [4], is another related task that aims t o improve generalization performance in multiple related t asks
by simultaneously training them. Since related tasks are as sumed to utilize common information, Multi-task learning
tends to learn the underlying structure of data and share the common representations across all tasks. There are some
similarities and differences between transfer learning an d multi-task learning. Both of these learning techniques us e
similar procedures, such as parameter sharing and feature t ransformation, to leverage the transferred knowledge to
improve learners’ performance. However, Transfer learnin g aims to boosts the target learner performance by ﬁrst
training a model on a source domain and then transferring the related knowledge to the target learner, while multi-task
learning aims to improve the performance of multiple relate d tasks by jointly training them.
Similarly, multi-view learning aims to learn from multi-vi ew data or multiple sets of distinctive features such as
audio+video, image+text, text+text, etc. E.g., a web page c an be described by the page and hyperlink contents,
which is an example of describing data by two different sourc es of text. The intuition behind this type of learning
is that the multi-view data contains complementary informa tion, and a model can learn more comprehensive and
compact representation to improve the generalization perf ormance. Some real-world application examples of multi-
view learning are video analysis [5], [6], speaker recognit ion [7], [8], natural language processing [9], [10], [11],
and recommender system [12], [13]. Canonical correlation a nalysis (CCA) [14], and co-training [15], are the ﬁrst
representative techniques introduced in the concept of mul ti-view learning which are also used in transfer learning
[16].
Domain generalization [17], also tends to train a model on mu ltiple annotated source domains which can be generalized
into an unseen target domain. In domain generalization, tar get samples are not available at the training time. However,
domain adaptation requires the target data during training to align the shift across domains.
2 Notations and deﬁnitions
In domain adaptation, domains can be considered as three mai n parts: input or feature space X, output or label space
Y, and an associated probability distribution p(x,y), i.e.,D={X,Y,p(x,y)}. Feature space Xis a subset of a
d-dimensional space, X ⊂Rd,Yrefers to either a space of binary {−1,+1}or multi-class {1,...K}, whereKis
the number of classes, and p(x,y)is a joint probability distribution over the feature-label space pair X × Y . We
can decompose the joint probability distribution as p(x,y) =p(x)p(x|y)orp(x,y) =p(y)p(y|x), wherep(.)is a
marginal distribution and p(.|.)is a conditional distribution.
Given a source domain Sand a target domain T, the source dataset samples drawn from the source domain con sist of
feature-label pairs {(xi,yi)}n
i=1, wherenis the number of samples in the source data set. Similarly, th e target data set
can be denoted as {zi,ui}m
i=1, where(zi,ui)refers to the target samples and their associated labels. In unsupervised
domain adaptation where the labels are not available in the t arget domain, uis unknown. When the source and
target domains are related but from different distribution s, naively extending the underlying knowledge contained in
one domain into another might negatively affect the learner ’s performance in the target domain. Therefore, domain
2

==== Page 3 ====
adaptation was proposed to tackle this problem by reducing t he disparity across domains and further training a model
that performs well on the target samples. In other words, dom ain adaptation aims to learn a generalized classiﬁer in
the presence of a shift between source and target domain dist ributions. Classiﬁcation is a machine learning task that
aims to learn a function from labeled training data to map inp ut samples to real numbers h:X − → Y , wherehis a
function or an element of a hypothesis space H, andHrefers to a set of all possible functions. For example, in ima ge
classiﬁcation, a classiﬁer assigns each input image a categ ory such as a dog or a cat. Generally, to obtain the best
predictive function, we learn a model on a given source datas et by minimizing the expected risk of the source labeled
data:
RS(h) =E(x,y)∼PS(x,y)[ℓ(h(x),y)]
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pS(x,y)dx, (1)
where the expectation is taken with respect to the source dis tribution PS,ℓ(h(x),y)is a loss function that denotes
the disagreement between the label predicted by the classiﬁ erhand the true label, and RS(h)is the sum of all the
disagreements or misclassiﬁed samples in the source domain . However, in the supervised learning, the goal is to learn
a model with the lowest risk when applying on the target domai n. Thus, we can rewrite the above equation as follows:
RT(h) =E(x,y)∼PT[ℓ(h(x),y)]
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)dx
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)pS(x,y)
pS(x,y)dx
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)
pS(x,y)pS(x,y)dx
=E(x,y)∼PS/bracketleftBig
pT(x,y)
pS(x,y)ℓ(h(x),y)/bracketrightBig
,(2)
wherePS(x,y)andPT(x,y)are joint probability distribution of source and target dom ains. For more information
about the risk minimization and supervised learning, see [1 8][19]. In classical machine learning,PT(x,y)
PS(x,y)= 1 since
the assumption is that both training and test data are drawn f rom the same distribution. However, domain adaptation
relaxes this assumption, which will be discussed in the foll owing sections.
3 Categorization of Domain Adaptation
Conventional domain adaptation assumes that feature and la bel spaces remain unchanged while their probability dis-
tributions may vary between domains. However, ﬁnding a sour ce and target domains with equivalent label space is
usually arduous or even impossible. When the source and targ et label spaces are not identical, matching the whole
source and target distributions will create a representati on space containing the features of the data belonging to the
source classes which do not exist in the target classes. The t arget domain sees these classes as outlier classes, and
extending their knowledge into the target domain will cause negative transfer, which signiﬁcantly harms the model
performance. Thus, in addition to marginal distribution di sparity, we need to consider different scenarios where labe l
spaces differ across domains. Different marginal distribu tions and different label spaces across domains are termed a s
domain gap and category gap, respectively. Based on the cate gory gap, domain adaptation can be divided into four
main categories; closed set, open set, partial, and univers al domain adaptation.
• Closed set domain adaptation refers to the situation where both source and target domains share the same
classes while there still exists a domain gap between domain s. Traditional domain adaptation falls into this
category.
• In open set domain adaptation, related domains share some l abels in the common label set and also they may
have private labels [20]. Saito et al. [21], introduced new open set domain adaptation in which the data in the
source private classes is removed. In the modiﬁed open set, t he source label set is considered to be a subset
of the target label set. Open set domain adaptation is suitab le when there are multiple source domains where
each includes a subset of target classes. Domain adaptation techniques aim to utilize all the source domain
information contained in the shared classes to boost the mod el’s performance in the target domain.
• In contrast to open set, partial domain adaptation refers t o the situation where the target label set is a subset
of the source label set [22], [23]. In this setting, the avail able source domain can be considered as a generic
domain that consists of an abundant number of classes, and th e target is only a subset of the source label set
with fewer classes.
• Universal domain adaptation (UDA) [24], generalizes the a bove scenarios. In contrast to the above settings,
which require prior knowledge about the source and target la bel sets, universal domain adaptation is not
3

==== Page 4 ====
restricted to any prior knowledge. In this setting, source a nd target domains may share common label sets,
and also each domain may have a private label set or outlier cl asses. Universal domain adaptation ﬁrst tends
to ﬁnd the shared label space across domains and then similar to open set, and partial domain adaptation
aligns the data distributions in the common label set. Ultim ately, a classiﬁer will be trained on the matched
source labeled data to be applied safely to the unlabeled tar get data. In the testing phase, the trained classiﬁer
in both open set and universal domain adaptation is expected to assign accurate labels to the target samples
belonging to the shared label space, and mark the samples in t he outlier classes as unknown.
This overview focuses on closed set unsupervised domain ada ptation. This type of domain adaptation aims to utilize
the labeled source data and the unlabeled target data to lear n an objective predictive function that can perform well
on the target domain where there is a shift between domains. B ased on the deﬁnition of a domain (see section 2),
two domains can be different if at least one of input space, ou tput space, or the probability density function changes
between domains. Closed set domain adaptation considers th e situation where the feature and label spaces are identical
between domains, while the joint probability distribution s may differ. Domain shift mainly can be categorized into
three classes: prior shift, covariate shift, and concept sh ift.
• Prior shift or class imbalance considers the situation whe re posterior distributions are equivalent, ps(y|x) =
pt(y|x), and prior distributions of classes are different between d omains,ps(y)/ne}ationslash=pt(y). To solve a domain
adaptation problem with a prior shift, we need labeled data i n both source and target domains.
• Covariate shift refers to a situation where marginal proba bility distributions differ, ps(x)/ne}ationslash=pt(x), while con-
ditional probability distributions remain constant acros s domains, ps(y|x) =pt(y|x). Sample selection bias
and missing data are two causes for the covariate shift. Most of the proposed domain adaptation techniques
aim to solve this class of domain gap.
• Concept shift, also known as data drift, is a scenario where data distributions remain unchanged, ps(x) =
pt(x), while conditional distributions differ between domains, px(y|x)/ne}ationslash=pt(y|x). Concept shift also requires
labeled data in both domains to estimate the ratio of conditi onal distributions.
4 Approaches
Existing domain adaptation approaches can be broadly categ orized into methods with shallow and deep architectures.
Shallow domain adaptation approaches [25], [26], [27], [28 ], mainly utilize instance-based and feature-based tech-
niques to align the domain distributions. One way of alignin g the distributions is by minimizing the distance between
domains. The mostly used distance measures in domain adapta tion are maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [29],
Wasserstein metric, correlation alignment (CORAL)[30], K ullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [31], and contrastive do-
main discrepancy (CDD) [32]. Deep domain adaptation approa ches [33], [34], [35], [36], on the other hand, utilize
neural networks. This class of approaches usually use convo lutional, autoencoder, or adversarial based networks to
diminish the domain gap. Some of the approaches in this categ ory may also utilize a distance metric in one or multiple
layers of two networks, one for source data and one for target data, to measure the discrepancy between the feature
representations on the corresponding layers.
4.1 Instance-Based Adaptation
Instance-based domain adaptation approaches aim to deal wi th the shift between data distributions by minimizing
the target risk based on the source labeled data. As mentione d in section 3, domain shift is mainly categorized in to
covariate shift, prior shift and concept shift. In unsuperv ised domain adaptation where the labeled data is available
only in the source domain, If the source and target distribut ions are different, pT(x,y)/ne}ationslash=pS(x,y), and the source
and the target posteriors are arbitrary, pT(y|x)/ne}ationslash=pS(y|x), the problem in Eq.2 becomes intractable without labeled
data in the target domain. Hence, we need to assume that both d istributions are different only in marginal distribution
while the posteriors remain unchanged. This setting is call ed covariate shift in which the target risk can be simpliﬁed
as follows:
RT(h) =E(x,y)∼PS/bracketleftbiggpT(x)✘✘✘✘pT(y|x)
pS(x)✘✘✘✘pS(y|x)ℓ(h(x),y)/bracketrightbigg
, (3)
where the ratio of two density functions is considered as imp ortance weight, i.e., w(x) =pT(x)
pS(x). When domains
consist of prior shift, the assumption is that the condition al distributions remain equal while prior distributions of
classes differ across domains. Therefore, we can simplify t he target risk as follows:
RT(h) =E(x,y)∼PS/bracketleftbiggpT(y)✘✘✘✘pT(x|y)
pS(y)✘✘✘✘pS(x|y)ℓ(h(x),y)/bracketrightbigg
, (4)
4

==== Page 5 ====
wherew(y) =pT(y)
pS(y)is known as class weights. To solve the prior shift, we need la beled data in both source and the
target domains which is out of our scope.
A typical solution to the covariate shift problem is to use im portance weighting approaches to compensate for the
bias by re-weighting the samples in the source domain based o n the ratio of target and source domain densities,
w(x) =pT(x)/pS(x), wherew(x)is re-weighting factor for the samples in the source domain. [37], [38], proved that
using the density ratio could remove sample selection bias b y re-weighting the source instances. Thus, this problem
can be viewed as a density ratio estimation (DRE). In this app roach, the key idea is to ﬁnd appropriate weights for
the source samples through an optimization problem, such th at the discrepancy between the re-weighted source data
distribution and the actual target data distribution can be minimized.
To estimate the importance, one can indirectly estimate the marginal data distributions of each domain separately
and then estimate the ratio. However, indirect density esti mation is usually ineffective and a very challenging task,
as the importance is usually unknown in reality, especially when having high dimensional features [39]. A solution
to this problem is to estimate the weights directly in an opti mization procedure in which the model minimizes the
discrepancy between the weighted source and target distrib utions. The disparity between domains can be reduced
using Kernel Mean Matching (KMM)[40], [25]. KMM is a non-par ametric method that directly estimates the weights
by minimizing the discrepancy between domains using Maximu m Mean Discrepancy (MMD) in the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). KMM ﬁrst maps the samples in bot h domains into RKHS using a nonlinear kernel
function such as Gaussian, and then obtains the sample weigh ts by minimizing the means of target data and the
weighted source data.
DMMD[w,pS(x),pT(x)] = min
w/bardblES[w(x)φ(x)]−ET[φ(x)]/bardblH
s.t. w(x)∈[0,W],ES[w(x)] = 1,(5)
whereφ(x)is a non-linear kernel function that maps the data samples in to RKHS, and both constraints on w(x)ensure
that the variance of sample weights are bounded to be low and t he weighted source data distribution is close to the
probability distribution. Similar to many kernel based app roaches, KMM uses quadratic program in the optimization
process which restrict the model to work well only on small da tasets. Kullback-Leibler Importance Estimation Proce-
dure (KLIEP) [41], [42], [43], directly estimates the densi ty ratio using Kl-divergence between target distribution a nd
weighted source distribution. In this setting, KL-diverge nce can be simpliﬁed as follows:
DKL[w(x),pS(x),pT(x)] =/integraldisplay
XpT(x)logpT
pSw(x)dx
=/integraldisplay
XpT(x)logpT
pSdx−/integraldisplay
XpT(x)logw(x)dx
∝m−1m/summationdisplay
jlogw(zj).(6)
In the second line of above equation, the ﬁrst term does not de pend onw(x)which means that it is constant and can be
removed from the objective function since we are optimizing it w.r.tw(x). The above objective function is based on
the weighted samples in the target domain that makes it compu tationally expensive for large scale problems since we
need to compute new weights for each new target data. To solve this problem, [44], proposed a new model that uses a
linear model w(x) =φ(x)α, whereφ(x)is a basis function and αis a set of parameters to be learned. Therefore, the
objective function can be written as:
DKL[φ(x),pS(x),pT(x)] =m−1m/summationdisplay
jlogφ(zj)α. (7)
KLIEP minimizes the KL-divergence between the actual targe t distribution and the importance-weighted source dis-
tribution in a non-parametric manner to ﬁnd the instance wei ghts.
4.2 Feature-Based Adaptation
Feature-based adaptation approaches aim to map the source d ata into the target data by learning a transformation that
extracts invariant feature representation across domains . They usually create a new feature representation by transf orm-
ing the original features into a new feature space and then mi nimize the gap between domains in the new representation
space in an optimization procedure, while preserving the un derlying structure of the original data. Subspace-based,
transformation-based, construction-based are some of the main feature-based adaptation methods. Below, we elaborat e
on each category and address some related approaches.
5

==== Page 6 ====
4.2.1 Subscpace-based.
Subspace-based adaptation aims to discover a common interm ediate representation that is shared between domains.
Many techniques have been proposed to construct this repres entation from the low-dimensional representation of the
source and target data. Most of the adaptation approaches in this category ﬁrst create a low-dimensional representa-
tion of original data in the form of a linear subspace for each domain, and then reduce the discrepancy between the
subspaces to construct the intermediate representation. A dimensionality reduction technique such as principal comp o-
nent analysis (PCA) can be used to construct the subspaces as two points, one for each domain, in a low-dimensional
Grassmann manifold. The distance between the points in Gras smann manifold indicates the domain shift which can
be reduced by applying different methods. Goplan et al. [26], proposed Sampling Geodesic Flow (SGF) that ﬁrst
ﬁnds a geodesic path between the source and target points On a Grassmann manifold and then samples a set of points,
subspaces, including the source and the target points along this path. In the next step, the data from both domains are
projected onto all sampled subspaces along the geodesic pat h and will be concatenated to create a high-dimensional
vector. Finally, A discriminative classiﬁer can learn from the source projected data to classify the unlabeled samples .
Sampling more points from the geodesic path would help to map the source subspace into the target subspace more
precisely. However, sampling more subspaces extends the di mensionality of the feature vector, which makes this
technique computationally expensive. Geodesic Flow Kerne l [45], was proposed to extend and improve SGF. GFK is
a kernel-based domain adaptation method that deals with shi ft across domains. It aims to represent the smoothness
of transition from a source to a target domain by integrating an inﬁnite number of subspaces to ﬁnd a geodesic line
between domains in a low-dimensional manifold space. Ferna ndoet al. [46], proposed a subspace alignment tech-
nique (SA) to directly reduce the discrepancy between domai ns by learning a linear mapping function that projects
the source point directly into the target point in the grassm ann manifold. The projection matrix Mcan be learned by
minimizing the divergence in the Bergman matrix:
M= argmin
M||XSM−XT||2
F=XT
SXT, (8)
whereXS,XTare the low-dimensional representation, basis vectors, of The source and the target data in the Grass-
mann manifold respectively, and ||.||2
Fis the Frobenius norm. SA only aligns the subspace bases and i gnores the differ-
ence between subspace distributions. Subspace distributi on alignment (SDA) [47], extends the work in SA by aligning
both subspace distributions and the bases at the same time. I n SDA the projection matrix Mcan be formulated as
M=XT
SXTQ, whereQis a matrix to align the discrepancy between distributions.
4.2.2 Transformation-based.
Feature transformation transforms the original features i nto a new feature representation to minimize the discrep-
ancy between the marginal and the conditional distribution s while preserving the original data’s underlying structur e
and characteristics. To reduce the domain discrepancy, we n eed some metrics such as Maximum Mean discrepancy
(MMD), Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL-divergence), or B regman Divergence to measure the dissimilarity across
domains. Transfer component adaptation (TCA) [27], was pro posed to learn a domain-invariant feature transformation
in which the marginal distributions between the source and t arget domains are minimized in RKHS using maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) criterion. After ﬁnding the domain- invariant features, we can utilize any classical machine
learning technique to train the ﬁnal target classiﬁer. Join t domain adaptation (JDA) [48], extends TCA by simultane-
ously matching both marginal and conditional distribution s between domains. JDA utilizes PCA as a dimensionality
reduction technique to extract more robust features. Low-d imensional features can then be embedded into a high-
dimensional feature space where the difference between mar ginal distributions are minimized using MMD. To align
conditional distributions, we need labeled data in both dom ains. When labels are unavailable in the target domain, we
can use pseudo labels, which can be estimated by the classiﬁe r trained on the labeled source data. After obtaining the
pseudo labels, the model minimizes the distance between con ditional distributions by modifying MMD. All the above
steps are jointly and iteratively performed to ﬁnd the best m apping function that aligns both marginal and conditional
distributions across domains. The ﬁnal target classiﬁer ca n be trained on domain-invariant features discovered by the
algorithm.
4.2.3 Reconstruction-based.
The feature reconstruction-based methods aim to reduce the disparity between domain distributions by sample recon-
struction in an intermediate feature representation. Jhuo et al. [28], proposed a Robust visual Domain Adaptation with
Low-rank Reconstruction (RDALR) method to reduce the domai n discrepancy. RDALR learns a linear projection ma-
trixWthat transforms the source samples into an intermediate rep resentation where they can be linearly represented
by the samples in the target domain to align the domain shift. The domain adaptation problem can be addressed by
6

==== Page 7 ====
minimizing the following objective function:
min
W,Z,Erank(Z)+α||E||2,1,
s.t. WX S=XTZ+E, WWT=I,(9)
whereXSandXTare sets of samples in the source and target domains respecti vely,WXSdenotes the transformed
source samples, Z is the reconstruction coefﬁcient matrix i ncluding a set of coefﬁcient vectors corresponding to the
projected source samples, Eis a matrix of noise and outlier information of source domain , andαis the regularization
parameter. By minimizing the rank of the coefﬁcient matrix Z, the method tends to reconstruct the different source
samples together, and ﬁnd the underlying structure of sourc e samples. WWT=Iensures to have a basis transforma-
tion matrix by enforcing it to be orthogonal. Besides, the no ises and outliers in the source domain are decomposed
intoE. By Minimizing E, the noises and outliers will be removed from the projected s ource data. However, RDALR
is restricted to the rotation only, and the discriminative s ource domain information may not be transferred to the targe t
domain, causing an unreliable alignment. Shao et al. [49], proposed Low-Rank Transfer Subspace Learning (LTSL)
to resolve the RDALR problem. LTSL intends to discover a comm on low-rank subspace between domains where the
source samples can reconstruct the target samples. Learnin g the common subspace makes LTSL more ﬂexible on data
representation. LTSL performs the adaptation by minimizin g the following objective function:
min
W,Z,EF(W,XS)+λ1rank(Z)+λ2||E||2,1,
s.t. WTXT=WTXSZ+E, WTU2W=I,(10)
where F(.) is a generalized subspace learning function. In c ontrast to RDALR that considers all target samples to
represent the projected source samples, LTSL assumes that e ach sample in the target domain is more related to its
neighborhood. Thus, each datum in the target domain can be re constructed by only a set of source samples. In this
way, the method can transfer both locality and discriminati ve properties of the source domain into the target domain.
4.3 Deep Domain Adaptation
In recent years, deep neural networks have widely employed f or representation learning and achieved remarkable
results in many machine learning tasks such as image classiﬁ cation [50], sentiment analysis [51], speech recognition
[52], [53], object detection [54], [55], and object recogni tion [56], [57]. Deep neural networks are very powerful
techniques to extract the generalized feature representat ion of data. However they require an abundant labeled data
for training while annotating large amount of data is labori ous, costly and sometimes impossible. Besides, neural
networks assume that both source and target domains are samp led from the same distribution, and domain shift can
greatly degrade the performance. Hence, deep domain adapta tion was proposed to address the lack of sufﬁcient
labeled data while boosting the model’s performance by depl oying deep network properties along with adaptation
techniques. Deep network adaptation techniques are mainly categorized into discrepancy-based, reconstruction-bas ed,
and adversarial-based adaptation.
4.3.1 Discrepancy-based.
For the ﬁrst time, Long et al. [33], propose Deep Adaptation Network (DAN) which utilizes the deep neural networks
in the domain adaptation setting to learn transferable feat ures across domains. DAN assumes that there is a shift
between marginal distributions while the conditional dist ributions remain unchanged. Therefore, it tends to match
the marginal distributions across domains by adding multip le adaptation layers for the task-speciﬁc representations .
Adaptation layers utilize multiple kernel variant of MMD (M K-MMD) to embed all the task-speciﬁc representations
into RKHS and align the shift between marginal distribution s. DAN only aligns the marginal distributions and does
not consider the conditional distribution disparity acros s domains. Deep Transfer Network (DTN) [58], was proposed
to match both marginal and conditional distributions simul taneously. DTN is a MMD-based distribution matching
technique and composed of two types of layers. the shared fea ture extraction layer learns a subspace to align the
marginal distributions across domains while discriminati on layer matches the conditional distributions using class iﬁer
transduction. To reduce the difference in the conditional d istributions, the source labels and the target pseudo label s
are used to project the data points into different hyperplan es for different classes. To align the conditional distribu tions,
the data points are ﬁrst projected into different hyperplan es using the source labels and the target pseudo labels and
then the discrepancy between conditional distributions is reduced by measuring and minimizing the conditional MMD
based objective function.
4.3.2 Reconstruction-based
Another category of deep adaptation networks utilizes auto encoder to align the discrepancy between domains by
minimizing the reconstruction error and learning invarian t and transferable representation across domains. The purp ose
7

==== Page 8 ====
of using autoencoder in domain adaptation is to learn the par ameters of the encoder based on the samples in one domain
(source) and adapt the decoder to reconstruct the samples in another domain (target). Glorot et al. [34], proposed a
deep domain adaptation network based on Stacked Auto Encode rs (SDA) [75], to extract high-level representation
to represent both source and target domain data. The propose d model is assumed to have access to various domains
with unlabeled data and only one source labeled data. In the ﬁ rst step, the higher-level feature extraction can be
obtained by learning from all the available domains in an uns upervised manner. In the ﬁrst step, the model obtains
high-level representations from data in all domains by mini mizing the reconstruction error. Next, a linear classiﬁer,
such as linear SVM, is trained on the extracted features of th e source labeled data by minimizing a squared hinge loss.
Finally, this classiﬁer can be used on the target domains. Th e model shows remarkable results; however, using SDAs
make it computationally expensive and unscalable, especia lly when having high-dimensional features. Marginalized
SDA (mSDA) [77], was proposed to extend the work in SDAs and ad dress its limitations. mSDA marginalizes noise
with linear denoisers to induce the model to learn the parame ters in a closed-form solution without using stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) [76]. Ghifary et al. [73], proposed a Deep Reconstruction-Classiﬁcation Netwo rk (DRCN)
that uses an encoder-decoder network for unsupervised doma in adaptation in object recognition. DRCN consists of a
standard convolutional network (encoder) to predict the so urce labels and a deconvolutional networks [74], (decoder)
to reconstruct the target samples. The model jointly utiliz es supervised and unsupervised learning strategies to lear n
the encoder parameters to predict the source labels and the p arameters of the decoder to reconstruct the target data.
The encoder parameters are shared across both label predict ion and reconstruction tasks, while the decoder parameters
are private only for the reconstruction task.
4.3.3 Adversarial-based
The success of adversarial learning as a powerful domain-in variant feature extractor has motivated many researchers t o
embed it into deep networks. Adversarial domain adaptation approaches tend to minimize the distribution discrepancy
between domains to obtain transferable and domain invarian t features. The main idea of adversarial domain adaptation
was inspired by the Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) [61], which tends to minimize the cross-domain discrepancy
through an adversarial objective. GANs are deep learning-b ased generative models composed of a two-player game, a
generator model G, and a discriminator model D. The generato r aims to produce the samples similar to the domain of
interest from the source data, and confuse the discriminato r to make a wrong decision. The discriminator then tends
to discriminate between the true data in the domain of intere st and the counterfeits generated by model G.
Ganin et al. [35], proposed a deep adversarial-based domain adaptation approach to match the domain gap by adding
an effective Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) to the model. Dur ing the forward propagation, GRU acts like an identity
function that leaves the input unchanged. However, it multi plies the gradient by a negative scalar to reverse it during
the backpropagation phase. The proposed model can be traine d on a massive amount of source labeled data and a
large amount of unlabeled target data. The model is generall y decomposed into three parts, feature extractor Gf, label
predictor Gy, and domain classiﬁer Gd.Gfproduces the features for both label predictor and domain cl assiﬁer. The
GRL is inserted between GfandGd. The three parts of the model can learn their corresponding p arameters θf,,θy,
andθdbased on the source labeled data and the unlabeled target dat a. During the learning stage, the model learns the
parameters θfandθyby minimizing the label predictor loss. This process enforc es the feature extractor to produce
the discriminative features for a good label prediction on t he source domain. At the same time, the model learns
the parameters θfandθdby maximizing and minimizing the domain classiﬁer loss, res pectively, to obtain domain-
invariant features. Pei et al. [62], argued that using a single domain discriminator can on ly match the marginal
distributions and ignores the discrepancy between class-c onditional distributions causing negative transfer and fa lsely
aligning the classes across domains. Multi-Adversarial Do main Adaptation (MADA)[62] was proposed to reduce the
shift in the joint distribution between domains and enable ﬁ ne-grained alignment of different class distributions by
constructing multiple class-wise domain discriminators. Such that, each discriminator only matches the source and
target data samples belonging to the same class.
The generator G and discriminator D also can be implemented t hrough a minimax optimization of an adversarial
objective for a domain confusion. This approach was inspire d by theory on domain adaptation [64], [65], suggesting
that the transferable representation across domains does n ot include discriminative information, and thus, an algori thm
is not able to learn the origin of an input sample based on this representation. In other words, the minimax optimization
process aims to match the domain disparity by learning deep i nvariant representation across domains. [63], and [36],
constructed the minimax optimization based adversarial do main adaptation in deep neural networks for the ﬁrst time.
Tzeng et al. [63], introduced an adversarial CNN-based architecture th at tends to align both marginal and conditional
distributions across domains by minimizing the classiﬁcat ion loss, soft label loss, domain classiﬁer loss, and domain
confusion loss. The model ﬁrst computes the average probabi lity distribution, soft label, for the source labeled data
in each category. It can be later ﬁne-tuned over the target la beled data to match the class-conditional distributions to
the soft labels across domains. Unlike hard labels, the soft labels provide more transferable and useful information
8

==== Page 9 ====
about each sample’s category and also the relationship betw een categories, e.g., bookshelves are more similar to ﬁlling
cabinets than to bicycles . The domain confusion loss is the cross-entropy between the uniform distribution over
domain labels, and the output predicted domain labels. Mini mizing this loss enforces the algorithm to extract invarian t
representation across domains that maximally confuses the discriminator.
Visual adversarial domain adaptation also utilizes genera tive adversarial nets (GAN) to reduce the shift between do-
mains. In generative adversarial domain adaptation, gener ator model G aims to synthesize implausible images, while
discriminator model D seeks to identify between synthesize d and the real samples. Visual domain adaptation tech-
niques using generative adversarial networks adopt repres entations in pixel-level, feature-level, or both. The pixe l-
level approaches perform adaptation in the raw pixel space t o directly translate the images in one domain into the
style images of another domain. Bousmal et al. [69], proposed an unsupervised pixel-level domain adaptat ion method
(PixelDA) that utilizes generative adversarial networks t o adopt one domain to another. The model changes source
domain images to appear as if drawn from the target domain dis tribution while preserving their original content. Simu-
lated+Unsupervised learning (SimGAN) [70], aims to genera te synthetic images that are realistic and similar to those
in the domain of interest. A simulator ﬁrst generates synthe tic images from a noise vector. A reﬁner network then
reﬁnes them to resemble the target images by optimizing an ad versarial loss. In contrast to the pixel-level approaches,
the feature-level methods modify the representation in the discriminative feature space to alleviate the discrepancy
across domains. The Domain Transfer Network (DAN) [72], is a feature-level generative-based adaptation that en-
forces the consistency in the embedding space to transforms a source image into a target image. Hoffman et al. [66],
proposed Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Domain Adaptation (CyCADA) that fuses both pixel-level [68], [69], [70],
and feature level [33], [67], adversarial domain adaptatio n methods with cycle-consistent image-to-image translati on
techniques [71], to direct the mapping from one domain to ano ther. The model simultaneously adopts representations
at both pixel-level and feature-level, by minimizing sever al losses, including pixel-level, feature-level, semanti c, and
cycle consistency losses in both domains.
References
[1] SJ PAN. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE) , 22(10):1345–
1359, 2010.
[2] Xiaojin Jerry Zhu. Semi-supervised learning literatur e survey. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-
Madison Department of Computer Sciences, 2005.
[3] Nitin Namdeo Pise and Parag Kulkarni. A survey of semi-su pervised learning methods. In 2008 International
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security , volume 2, pages 30–34. IEEE, 2008.
[4] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine learning , 28(1):41–75, 1997.
[5] Vasili Ramanishka, Abir Das, Dong Huk Park, Subhashini V enugopalan, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Marcus
Rohrbach, and Kate Saenko. Multimodal video description. I nProceedings of the 24th ACM international
conference on Multimedia , pages 1092–1096, 2016.
[6] Du Tran, Lubomir Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torresani , and Manohar Paluri. Learning spatiotemporal
features with 3d convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on comput er
vision , pages 4489–4497, 2015.
[7] Karen Livescu and Mark Stoehr. Multi-view learning of ac oustic features for speaker recognition. In 2009 IEEE
Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition & Understanding , pages 82–86. IEEE, 2009.
[8] Ehsan Asali, Farzan Shenavarmasouleh, Farid Ghareh Moh ammadi, Prasanth Sengadu Suresh, and Hamid R
Arabnia. Deepmsrf: A novel deep multimodal speaker recogni tion framework with feature selection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.06809 , 2020.
[9] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, D zmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk,
and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using r nn encoder-decoder for statistical machine transla-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 , 2014.
[10] Alexander M Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. A neur al attention model for abstractive sentence summa-
rization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.00685 , 2015.
[11] Iulian V Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Bengio, Aa ron Courville, and Joelle Pineau. Building end-to-end
dialogue systems using generative hierarchical neural net work models. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2016.
[12] Chong Wang and David M Blei. Collaborative topic modeli ng for recommending scientiﬁc articles. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages
448–456, 2011.
9

==== Page 10 ====
[13] Hao Wang, Naiyan Wang, and Dit-Yan Yeung. Collaborativ e deep learning for recommender systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages
1235–1244, 2015.
[14] Harold Hotelling. Relations between two sets of variat es. In Breakthroughs in statistics , pages 162–190. Springer,
1992.
[15] Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. Combining labeled and unla beled data with co-training. In Proceedings of the
eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theo ry, pages 92–100. ACM, 1998.
[16] Zhang Bo, Shi Zhong-Zhi, Zhao Xiao-Fei, and Zhang Jian- hua. A transfer learning based on canonical correlation
analysis across different domains chinese [j]. Chinese Journal of Computers , 38(07):1326–1336, 2015.
[17] Krikamol Muandet, David Balduzzi, and Bernhard Schölk opf. Domain generalization via invariant feature rep-
resentation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10–18, 2013.
[18] Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalk ar.Foundations of machine learning . MIT press,
2018.
[19] Vladimir Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for l earning theory. In Advances in neural information process-
ing systems , pages 831–838, 1992.
[20] Pau Panareda Busto and Juergen Gall. Open set domain ada ptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision , pages 754–763, 2017.
[21] Kuniaki Saito, Shohei Yamamoto, Yoshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. Open set domain adaptation by back-
propagation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision ( ECCV) , pages 153–168, 2018.
[22] Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, and Michae l I Jordan. Partial transfer learning with selective
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition ,
pages 2724–2732, 2018.
[23] Jing Zhang, Zewei Ding, Wanqing Li, and Philip Ogunbona . Importance weighted adversarial nets for partial
domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition , pages
8156–8164, 2018.
[24] Kaichao You, Mingsheng Long, Zhangjie Cao, Jianmin Wan g, and Michael I Jordan. Universal domain adapta-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition , pages 2720–2729,
2019.
[25] Arthur Gretton, Alex Smola, Jiayuan Huang, Marcel Schm ittfull, Karsten Borgwardt, and Bernhard Schölkopf.
Covariate shift by kernel mean matching. Dataset shift in machine learning , 3(4):5, 2009.
[26] Raghuraman Gopalan, Ruonan Li, and Rama Chellappa. Dom ain adaptation for object recognition: An unsuper-
vised approach. In 2011 international conference on computer vision , pages 999–1006. IEEE, 2011.
[27] Sinno Jialin Pan, Ivor W Tsang, James T Kwok, and Qiang Ya ng. Domain adaptation via transfer component
analysis. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 22(2):199–210, 2010.
[28] I-Hong Jhuo, Dong Liu, DT Lee, and Shih-Fu Chang. Robust visual domain adaptation with low-rank recon-
struction. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni tion, pages 2168–2175. IEEE, 2012.
[29] Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Malte Rasch, Bernh ard Schölkopf, and Alex J Smola. A kernel method for
the two-sample-problem. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 513–520, 2007.
[30] Baochen Sun, Jiashi Feng, and Kate Saenko. Correlation alignment for unsupervised domain adaptation. In
Domain Adaptation in Computer Vision Applications , pages 153–171. Springer, 2017.
[31] Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufﬁciency. The annals of mathematical statistics ,
22(1):79–86, 1951.
[32] Guoliang Kang, Lu Jiang, Yi Yang, and Alexander G Hauptm ann. Contrastive adaptation network for unsuper-
vised domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition ,
pages 4893–4902, 2019.
[33] Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jor dan. Learning transferable features with deep
adaptation networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02791 , 2015.
[34] Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Doma in adaptation for large-scale sentiment classiﬁcation:
A deep learning approach. In ICML , 2011.
[35] Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised dom ain adaptation by backpropagation. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1180–1189, 2015.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[36] Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Françoi s Laviolette, and Mario Marchand. Domain-adversarial
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.4446 , 2014.
[37] Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inferenc e under covariate shift by weighting the log-likelihood
function. Journal of statistical planning and inference , 90(2):227–244, 2000.
[38] Bianca Zadrozny. Learning and evaluating classiﬁers u nder sample selection bias. In Proceedings of the twenty-
ﬁrst international conference on Machine learning , page 114, 2004.
[39] Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Marlene Müller, Stefan Sperlich , and Axel Werwatz. Nonparametric and semiparametric
models . Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[40] Jiayuan Huang, Arthur Gretton, Karsten Borgwardt, Ber nhard Schölkopf, and Alex J Smola. Correcting sample
selection bias by unlabeled data. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 601–608, 2007.
[41] Masashi Sugiyama and Klaus-Robert Müller. Model selec tion under covariate shift. In International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , pages 235–240. Springer, 2005.
[42] Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robe rt MÃžller. Covariate shift adaptation by importance
weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 8(May):985–1005, 2007.
[43] Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima , Paul V Buenau, and Motoaki Kawanabe. Direct
importance estimation with model selection and its applica tion to covariate shift adaptation. In Advances in
neural information processing systems , pages 1433–1440, 2008.
[44] Masashi Sugiyama and Klaus-Robert Müller. Input-depe ndent estimation of generalization error under covariate
shift. Statistics & Decisions , 23(4/2005):249–279, 2005.
[45] Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geo desic ﬂow kernel for unsupervised domain adapta-
tion. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni tion, pages 2066–2073. IEEE, 2012.
[46] Basura Fernando, Amaury Habrard, Marc Sebban, and Tinn e Tuytelaars. Unsupervised visual domain adaptation
using subspace alignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on comput er vision , pages 2960–
2967, 2013.
[47] Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Subspace distribution ali gnment for unsupervised domain adaptation. In BMVC ,
volume 4, pages 24–1, 2015.
[48] Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Guiguang Ding, Jiaguang Sun, and Philip S Yu. Transfer feature learning with
joint distribution adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on comput er vision , pages
2200–2207, 2013.
[49] Ming Shao, Dmitry Kit, and Yun Fu. Generalized transfer subspace learning through low-rank constraint. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision , 109(1-2):74–93, 2014.
[50] Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation n etworks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 7132–7141, 2018.
[51] Lei Zhang, Shuai Wang, and Bing Liu. Deep learning for se ntiment analysis: A survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 8(4):e1253, 2018.
[52] George E Dahl, Dong Yu, Li Deng, and Alex Acero. Context- dependent pre-trained deep neural networks for
large-vocabulary speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on audio, speech, and language processin g, 20(1):30–
42, 2011.
[53] Li Deng, Michael L Seltzer, Dong Yu, Alex Acero, Abdel-r ahman Mohamed, and Geoff Hinton. Binary coding
of speech spectrograms using a deep auto-encoder. In Eleventh Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association , 2010.
[54] Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, Xingyu Zeng, Shi Qiu, Ping Luo, Yonglong Tian, Hongsheng Li, Shuo Yang,
Zhe Wang, Chen-Change Loy, et al. Deepid-net: Deformable de ep convolutional neural networks for object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pa ttern recognition , pages 2403–2412,
2015.
[55] Zhong-Qiu Zhao, Peng Zheng, Shou-tao Xu, and Xindong Wu . Object detection with deep learning: A review.
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 30(11):3212–3232, 2019.
[56] Andreas Eitel, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Luciano Spin ello, Martin Riedmiller, and Wolfram Burgard. Multi-
modal deep learning for robust rgb-d object recognition. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 681–687. IEEE, 2015.
11

==== Page 12 ====
[57] Soheyla Amirian, Zengyan Wang, Thiab R. Taha, and Hamid R. Arabnia. Dissection of deep learning with appli-
cations in image recognition. In Computational Science and Computational Intelligence; "A rtiﬁcial Intelligence"
(CSCI-ISAI); 2018 International Conference on. IEEE , pages 1132–1138, 2018.
[58] Xu Zhang, Felix Xinnan Yu, Shih-Fu Chang, and Shengjin W ang. Deep transfer network: Unsupervised domain
adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.00591 , 2015.
[59] Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jor dan. Deep transfer learning with joint adaptation
networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machin e Learning-Volume 70 , pages 2208–
2217. JMLR. org, 2017.
[60] Saeid Motiian, Marco Piccirilli, Donald A Adjeroh, and Gianfranco Doretto. Uniﬁed deep supervised domain
adaptation and generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Comput er Vision , pages
5715–5725, 2017.
[61] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets . In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[62] Zhongyi Pei, Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long, and Jianmin Wang. Multi-adversarial domain adaptation. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[63] Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saen ko. Simultaneous deep transfer across domains and
tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Comput er Vision , pages 4068–4076, 2015.
[64] Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernan do Pereira. Analysis of representations for domain
adaptation. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 137–144, 2007.
[65] Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kules za, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning , 79(1-2):151–175, 2010.
[66] Judy Hoffman, Eric Tzeng, Taesung Park, Jun-Yan Zhu, Ph illip Isola, Kate Saenko, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor
Darrell. Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial domain ada ptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.03213 , 2017.
[67] Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darre ll. Adversarial discriminative domain adaptation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pa ttern Recognition , pages 7167–7176, 2017.
[68] Ming-Yu Liu and Oncel Tuzel. Coupled generative advers arial networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pages 469–477, 2016.
[69] Konstantinos Bousmalis, Nathan Silberman, David Doha n, Dumitru Erhan, and Dilip Krishnan. Unsupervised
pixel-level domain adaptation with generative adversaria l networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3722–3731, 2017.
[70] Ashish Shrivastava, Tomas Pﬁster, Oncel Tuzel, Joshua Susskind, Wenda Wang, and Russell Webb. Learning
from simulated and unsupervised images through adversaria l training. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2107–2116, 2017.
[71] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A E fros. Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-
consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on comput er vision , pages
2223–2232, 2017.
[72] Yaniv Taigman, Adam Polyak, and Lior Wolf. Unsupervise d cross-domain image generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02200 , 2016.
[73] Muhammad Ghifary, W Bastiaan Kleijn, Mengjie Zhang, Da vid Balduzzi, and Wen Li. Deep reconstruction-
classiﬁcation networks for unsupervised domain adaptatio n. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages
597–613. Springer, 2016.
[74] Matthew D Zeiler, Dilip Krishnan, Graham W Taylor, and R ob Fergus. Deconvolutional networks. In 2010 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2528–2535. IEEE, 2010.
[75] Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie, Yos hua Bengio, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and Léon Bottou.
Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful represen tations in a deep network with a local denoising crite-
rion. Journal of machine learning research , 11(12), 2010.
[76] Léon Bottou. Stochastic gradient descent tricks. In Neural networks: Tricks of the trade , pages 421–436. Springer,
2012.
[77] Minmin Chen, Zhixiang Xu, Kilian Weinberger, and Fei Sh a. Marginalized denoising autoencoders for domain
adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.4683 , 2012.
12

==== Page 13 ====
[78] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U- net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and co mputer-assisted intervention ,
pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
[79] Sahar V oghoei, Navid Hashemi Tonekaboni, Delaram Yazd ansepas, Saber Soleymani, Abolfazl Farahani, and
Hamid R Arabnia. Personalized feedback emails: A case study on online introductory computer science courses.
InProceedings of the 2020 ACM Southeast Conference , pages 18–25, 2020.
[80] Sahar V oghoei, Navid Hashemi Tonekaboni, Jason G Walla ce, and Hamid R Arabnia. Deep learning at the edge.
In2018 International Conference on Computational Science an d Computational Intelligence (CSCI) , pages 895–
901. IEEE, 2018.
[81] Farzan Shenavarmasouleh and Hamid R Arabnia. Drdr: Aut omatic masking of exudates and microaneurysms
caused by diabetic retinopathy using mask r-cnn and transfe r learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02026 , 2020.
[82] Farid Ghareh Mohammadi, Hamid R Arabnia, and M Hadi Amin i. On parameter tuning in meta-learning for
computer vision. In 2019 International Conference on Computational Science an d Computational Intelligence
(CSCI) , pages 300–305. IEEE, 2019.
[83] F Ghareh Mohammadi and Hedieh Sajedi. Region based imag e steganalysis using artiﬁcial bee colony. Journal
of Visual Communication and Image Representation , 44:214–226, 2017.
[84] Mohammadhossein Toutiaee, Abbas Keshavarzi, Abolfaz l Farahani, and John A Miller. Video contents under-
standing using deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13959 , 2020.
13

