==== Page 1 ====
1
A Comparison of Natural Language
Understanding Platforms for Chatbots in
Software Engineering
Ahmad Abdellatif, Khaled Badran, Diego Elias Costa, and Emad Shihab, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Chatbots are envisioned to dramatically change the future of Software Engineering, allowing practitioners to chat and
inquire about their software projects and interact with different services using natural language. At the heart of every chatbot is a
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) component that enables the chatbot to understand natural language input. Recently, many
NLU platforms were provided to serve as an off-the-shelf NLU component for chatbots, however, selecting the best NLU for Software
Engineering chatbots remains an open challenge.
Therefore, in this paper, we evaluate four of the most commonly used NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Google Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and
Microsoft LUIS to shed light on which NLU should be used in Software Engineering based chatbots. Speciﬁcally, we examine the
NLUs’ performance in classifying intents, conﬁdence scores stability, and extracting entities. To evaluate the NLUs, we use two
datasets that reﬂect two common tasks performed by Software Engineering practitioners, 1) the task of chatting with the chatbot to ask
questions about software repositories 2) the task of asking development questions on Q&A forums (e.g., Stack Overﬂow). According to
our ﬁndings, IBM Watson is the best performing NLU when considering the three aspects (intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence scores, and
entity extraction). However, the results from each individual aspect show that, in intents classiﬁcation, IBM Watson performs the best
with an F1-measure >84%, but in conﬁdence scores, Rasa comes on top with a median conﬁdence score higher than 0.91. Our results
also show that all NLUs, except for Dialogﬂow, generally provide trustable conﬁdence scores. For entity extraction, Microsoft LUIS and
IBM Watson outperform other NLUs in the two SE tasks. Our results provide guidance to software engineering practitioners when
deciding which NLU to use in their chatbots.
Index Terms —Software Chatbots, Natural Language Understanding Platforms, Empirical Software Engineering.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
SOFTWARE chatbots are increasingly used in the Software
Engineering (SE) domain since they allow users to inter-
act with platforms using natural language, automate tedious
tasks, and save time/effort [1]. This increase in attention is
clearly visible in the increase of number of bots related pub-
lications [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], conferences [7], and workshops [8].
A recent study showed that one in every four OSS projects
(26%) on GitHub are using software bots for different tasks
[9]. This is supported by the fact that bots help developers
perform their daily tasks more efﬁciently[1], such as deploy
builds [10], update dependencies [11], and even generate
ﬁxing patches [12].
At the core of all chatbots lie the Natural Language Un-
derstanding platforms—referred hereafter simply as NLU.
NLUs are essential for the chatbot’s ability to understand
and act on the user’s input [13, 14]. The NLU uses machine-
learning and natural language processing (NLP) techniques
to extract structured information (the intent of the user’s
query and related entities) from unstructured user’s input
(textual information). As developing an NLU from scratch
is very difﬁcult because it requires NLP expertise, chatbot
Ahmad Abdellatif, Khaled Badran, Diego Elias Costa, and Emad Shi-
hab are with the Data-driven Analysis of Software (DAS) Lab at the
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia
University, Montr´ eal, Canada.
E-mail: a bdella, k badran, d damasc, eshihab@encs.concordia.cadevelopers resort to a handful of widely-used NLUs that
they leverage in their chatbots [3, 15, 16, 17, 18].
As a consequence of the diversity of widely-used NLUs,
developers are faced with selecting the best NLU for their
particular domain. This is a non-trivial task and has been
discussed heavily in prior work (especially since NLUs
vary in performance in different contexts) [14, 19, 20]. For
instance, in the context of the weather domain, Canonico
and De Russis [19] showed that IBM Watson outperformed
other NLUs, while Gregori [20] evaluated NLUs using fre-
quently asked questions by university students and found
that Dialogﬂow performed best. In fact, there is no shortage
of discussions on Stack Overﬂow about the best NLU to
use in chatbot implementation [21, 22, 23] as choosing an
unsuitable platform for a particular domain deeply impacts
the user satisfaction with the chatbot [24, 25, 26].
An important domain that lacks any investigation over
different NLUs’ performance is SE. Software Engineering is
a specialized domain with very speciﬁc terminology that is
used in a particular way. For example, in the SE domain,
the word ‘ticket’ refers to an issue in a bug tracking system
(e.g., Jira), while in other domains it is related to a movie
(e.g., TicketMaster bot) or ﬂight ticket. Moreover, there is
no consensus amongst SE chatbot developers on the best
NLU to use for the SE domain. For instance, TaskBot [18]
uses Microsoft Language Understanding Intelligent Service
(LUIS) [27] to help practitioners manage their tasks. MSR-
Bot [3] uses Google Dialogﬂow NLU to answer questionsarXiv:2012.02640v2  [cs.SE]  22 Jul 2021

==== Page 2 ====
2
related to the software repositories. MSABot [6] leverages
Rasa NLU to assist practitioners in developing and main-
taining microservices. Given that no study has investigated
which NLU performs best in the SE domain, chatbot devel-
opers can not make an informed decision on which NLU to
use when developing SE-based chatbots.
Hence, in this paper, we provide the ﬁrst study to assess
the performance of widely-used NLUs to support SE tasks.
We evaluate NLUs on queries related to two important
SE tasks: 1) Repository: Exploring projects’ repository data
(e.g.,“What is the most buggy ﬁle in my repository?”), and 2)
Stack Overﬂow: Technical questions developers frequently
ask and answer from Q&A websites (e.g., “How to convert
XElement object into a dataset or datatable?”).
Using the two SE tasks, we evaluate four widely-used
NLUs: IBM Watson [28], Google Dialogﬂow [29], Rasa [30],
and Microsoft LUIS [27] under three aspects: 1) the NLUs’
performance in correctly identifying the purpose of the user
query (i.e., intents classiﬁcation); 2) the conﬁdence yielded
by the NLUs when correctly classifying and misclassifying
queries (i.e., conﬁdence score); and 3) the performance of
the NLUs in identifying the correct subjects from queries
(i.e., entity extraction).
Our results show that, overall (considering NLUs’ per-
formance in intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence score, and en-
tity extraction), IBM Watson is the best performing NLU for
the studied SE tasks. However, the ﬁndings from evaluating
the NLUs on individual aspects show that the best perform-
ing NLU can vary. IBM Watson outperforms other NLUs
when classifying intents for both tasks (F1-measure >84%).
Also, we ﬁnd that all NLUs (except for Dialogﬂow in one
task) report high conﬁdence scores for correctly classiﬁed
intents. Moreover, Rasa proves to be the most trustable NLU
with a median conﬁdence score >0.91. When extracting
entities from SE tasks, no single NLU outperforms the
others in both tasks. LUIS performs the best in extracting
entities from the Repository task (F1-measure 93.7%), while
IBM Watson comes on top in the Stack Overﬂow task (F1-
measure 68.5%).
Given that each NLU has its own strengths in the dif-
ferent SE tasks (i.e., performs best in intent classiﬁcation vs.
entity extraction), we provide an in-depth analysis of the
performance of the different NLU’s features, which are the
list feature, where the NLU extracts entities using an exact
match from a list of synonyms; and the prediction feature,
where the NLU predicts entities that it might not have been
trained on before. Also, we analyze the characteristics of the
intents in each task to better understand the intents that tend
to be harder to classify by all of the evaluated NLUs.
The paper makes the following contributions:
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
to evaluate NLUs on two representative tasks (i.e.,
software repositories data and Stack Overﬂow posts)
from the SE domain.
We evaluate the NLUs using different features for
extracting entities (i.e., list and prediction features).
We explore the impact of selecting different conﬁ-
dence score thresholds on the NLUs’ intent classiﬁ-
cation performance.We provide a set of actionable recommendations,
based on our ﬁndings and experience in conducting
this study, for chatbot practitioners to improve their
NLU’s performance.
We make our labelled dataset publicly available to
enable replication and help advance future research
in the ﬁeld [31].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides an overview about chatbots and explains related
concepts used throughout this paper. Section 3 describes
the case study setup used to evaluate the performance of
the NLUs. We report the evaluation results in Section 4.
Section 5 discusses our ﬁndings and provides a set of
recommendations to achieve better classiﬁcations results.
Section 6 presents the related work to our study. Section 7
discusses the threats to validity, and section 8 concludes the
paper.
2 B ACKGROUND
Before diving into the NLUs’ evaluation, we explain in this
section the chatbot-related terminology used throughout the
paper. We also present an overview of how chatbots and
NLUs work together to perform certain actions.
2.1 Deﬁnitions
Software chatbots are the conduit between their users and
automated services [24]. Through natural language, users
ask the chatbot to perform speciﬁc tasks or inquire about a
piece of information. Internally, a chatbot then uses the NLU
to analyze the posed query and act on the users’ request.
The main goal of an NLU is to extract structured data
from unstructured language input. In particular, it extracts
intents and entities from users’ queries: intents represent
the user intention/purpose of the question, while entities
represent important pieces of information in the query. For
example, take a chatbot like the MSRBot [3], that replies to
user queries about software repositories. In the query “How
many commits happened in the last month of the project?”,
the intent is to know the number of commits that happened
in a speciﬁc period ( CountCommitsByDate ), and the entity
‘last month’ of type DateTime determines the parameter for
the query. The chatbot uses both the intent and entities
to perform the action that answers the user’s question. In
this example, the chatbot searches in the repository for the
number of commits issued in the last month.
Most NLUs come with a set of built-in entities (e.g.,
currencies and date-time), which are pre-trained on general
domain queries. To use an NLU on a specialized domain,
developers should deﬁne a set of custom intents and enti-
ties. For each custom intent, the NLU needs to be trained on
a set of queries that represents different ways a user could
express that intent. Again, taking the former example, “How
many commits happened in the last month?”, this query can
be asked in multiple different ways. For instance, “show
me the number of commits between 1-03-2020 and 31-03-
2020” is an example of a query with the same semantics but
different syntax. Both queries can and should be used to
train the NLU on how to identify the CountCommitsByDate
intent. Similarly to custom intents, NLUs need to be trained

==== Page 3 ====
3
to recognize custom entities. To do that, developers label the
entity types and their values in the queries. For example,
in the following query “what is the ﬁxing commit for bug
HHH-8501?”, the entity ‘HHH-8501’ is labelled as a JiraTicket
type.
The misclassiﬁcation of intents and entities negatively
impacts the user experience, although each in its own way.
When an NLU misclassiﬁes an intent, the chatbot fails to
understand the query in a fundamental manner, leading
the chatbot to reply to a different query or performing
the wrong task. Misclassifying entities, on the other hand,
causes the chatbot to reply about a wrong piece of informa-
tion. For example, in the query “How to convert xml to json
ﬁle in java” there are three entities: ‘XML’, ‘Json’ and ‘Java’.
If the NLU fails to extract the ‘Java’ entity, the chatbot loses
the context of the question and might reply with an answer
for converting XML to Json with code example from any
other programming language (e.g., Python).
The last piece in the picture is the conﬁdence score,
which represents how conﬁdent the NLU is in classifying
the intent [32, 33, 34, 35]. The conﬁdence score is given on
a scale from 0 (i.e., not conﬁdent) to 1 (i.e., fully conﬁdent),
which corresponds to the classiﬁed intent by the NLU. Chat-
bot developers use the conﬁdence score to choose their next
action, either by answering the user’s question/request or
triggering a fallback intent. The fallback intent is a response
issued by the chatbot to give the user a chance to rephrase
or clarify their initial query. Typically, the fallback intent
is triggered when the returned conﬁdence score is lower
than a certain threshold. Choosing a suitable threshold for
a chatbot is not an easy task, as a low value would make a
chatbot answer to unclear questions more often (too conﬁ-
dent), and a high threshold would trigger the fallback intent
too often (insecure chatbot), annoying the user by asking it
to rephrase the question frequently.
In our study, we want to investigate the NLUs’ per-
formance with regards to intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence
score, and entity extractions. All three aspects are critical to
ensure that chatbots return correct and complete responses
to the user.
2.2 Explanatory Example
To demonstrate how chatbots utilize NLUs to answer a
user’s query, we showcase an example of a user asking
a repository related question to a chatbot as shown in
Figure 1. In this example, we use a simpliﬁed architecture
of the chatbot [3] for illustration purposes. The NLU is
trained on the queries (intents) related to mining software
repositories and is trained to extract repository entities from
users’ questions, such as a JiraTicket (e.g., HHH-8593). In this
example, after the costumary greeting from the chatbot, the
user asks the chatbot “Fix ticket 8983?” which is forwarded
to the NLU where it classiﬁes the user’s question as having
aGetMaintainers intent with a conﬁdence score of 0.06. The
low conﬁdence score (lower than a predetermined thresh-
old) triggers the fallback intent, thus, the chatbot asks the
user to rephrase the question in a more understandable way
(i.e., “Sorry, I did not understand your question, could you
please rephrase the question?”). After the user rephrases the
question “Which commit ﬁxed the bug ticket 8983?”, theNLU extracts the entity ‘ticket 8983’ of type JiraTicket and
classiﬁes the intent of the query as GetFixingCommits with
a conﬁdence score of 0.85. Finally, the chatbot performs the
necessary action, querying the database to answer the posed
question (“The bug ticket 8983 was ﬁxed by the commit with
hash 26f55f9baa8f4f34”).
3 C ASESTUDY SETUP
Since the main goal of this paper is to evaluate the perfor-
mance of different NLUs using SE tasks, we need to select
the candidate NLUs that we want to examine and the SE
tasks’ data corpus to train and test those NLUs. In this
section, we detail our selection of the NLUs, SE tasks used
in the evaluation, and our experiment design.
3.1 Evaluated NLUs
There exists several widely-used NLUs that are easily in-
tegrated with third-party applications. To make our study
comprehensive, we choose to examine the performance of
four NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and
LUIS. We select these NLUs since they are popular and
widely used by both researchers and practitioners [15, 18],
and have been studied by prior NLU comparison work in
other domains [14, 20, 36]. Moreover, all selected NLUs can
be trained by importing the data through their user interface
or API calls, which facilitates the training process. In the
following, we provide a description of those NLUs.
Watson Conversation (IBM Watson): An NLU pro-
vided by IBM [28]. IBM Watson has prebuilt models
for different domains (e.g. banking) and a visual
dialog editor to simplify building the dialog by non-
programmers.
Dialogﬂow: An NLU developed by Google [29].
Dialogﬂow supports more than 20 spoken languages
and can be integrated with many chatting platforms
such as Slack [29].
Rasa: The only open-source NLU in our study,
owned by Rasa Technologies [30]. Rasa allows de-
velopers to conﬁgure, deploy, and run the NLU on
local servers. Thus, increasing the processing speed
by saving the network time compared to cloud-based
platforms. In our evaluation, we use Rasa-nlu v0.14,
which was the latest version when conducting the
experiment.
Language Understanding Intelligent Service
(LUIS): An NLU cloud platform from Microsoft
[27]. LUIS has several prebuilt domains such as
music and weather, and supports ﬁve programming
languages: C#, Go, Java, Node.js, and Python.
3.2 SE Tasks and Data Corpora
To evaluate the performance of the NLUs in the Repository
and Stack Overﬂow tasks, we select two representative
data corpora, one for each task 1) Repository corpus [3] used
for the Repository task and includes questions posed to
a chatbot by practitioners looking for information related
to their projects’ software repositories 2) Stack Overﬂow
corpus [37] used for the Stack Overﬂow task and contains

==== Page 4 ====
4
Knowledge BaseResponse GeneratorDB/APIIntent: GetMaintainersEntities:(ticket 8983)[JiraTicket]Confidence Score: 0.06 < ThresholdIntent:GetFixingCommitsEntities:(ticket 8983)[JiraTicket]Confidence Score: 0.85 > ThresholdNatural Language Understanding Platform
User Interface
Hi there, how can I help you?Fix ticket 8983?
Sorry, I did not understand your question, could you please rephrase the question?
Which commit fixed the bug ticket 8983?The bug ticket 8983 was fixed by the commit with hash 26f55f9baa8f4f34
Figure 1: An overview of user-chatbot interaction
Table 1: Intents distribution in the Repository task.
Intent Deﬁnition Train (%) Test (%) Total (%)
BuggyCommitsByDate Present the buggy commit(s) which happened during a speciﬁc time period. 66 (23.8) 13 (10.7) 79 (19.6)
BuggyCommit Identify the bugs that are introduced because of certain commits. 52 (18.8) 9 (7.4) 61 (15.3)
BuggyFiles Determine the most buggy ﬁles in the repository to refactor them. 37 (13.4) 13 (10.7) 50 (12.6)
FixCommit Identify the commit(s) which ﬁx a speciﬁc bug. 31 (11.2) 11 (9.0) 42 (10.6)
BuggyFixCommits Identify the ﬁxing commits that introduce bugs at a particular time 32 (11.6) 7 (5.8) 39 (9.8)
CountCommitsByDates Identify the number of commits that were pushed during a speciﬁc time
period.11 (3.9) 21 (17.4) 32 (8.0)
ExperiencedDevFixBugs Identify the developer(s) who have experience in ﬁxing bugs related to
speciﬁc ﬁle.15 (5.4) 14 (11.6) 29 (7.3)
OverloadedDev Determine the overloaded developer(s) with the highest number of unre-
solved bugs.15 (5.4) 9 (7.4) 24 (6.0)
FileCommits View details about the changes that are occurred on on a ﬁle. 10 (3.6) 12 (10.0) 22 (5.5)
CommitsByDate Present the commit information (e.g., commit message) at a speciﬁc time. 8 (2.9) 12 (10.0) 20 (5.0)
a set of posts from Stack Overﬂow discussion threads. Our
selection of these two tasks was motivated by two main
reasons: Firstly, both tasks reﬂect realistic situations, as in
both, developers are asking questions about issues they face
or to get more information about their projects (e.g., ﬁxing
commit for a bug). In fact, the Repository task also covers
questions that are commonly asked by project managers
to grasp the state of the project repository. Hence, both
tasks make our results more generalizable to the chatbots
practitioners in the SE domain. Secondly, using two tasks
in our evaluation gives us better insights on how each
NLU performs in different sub-contexts of SE. The Stack
Overﬂow task uses a corpus that has a diverse set of posts
from the top 8 tags in Stack Overﬂow, the most popular
Q&A website in the developers community [38, 39]. On the
other hand, the Repository task contains project speciﬁc
information (i.e., “who touched ﬁle x?”) rather than generalTable 2: Entities distribution in the Repository task.
Entity Type Deﬁnition Train Test
FileName Name of the ﬁle (e.g., Transac-
tion.java).35,007 26
JiraTicket Ticket ID number (e.g., KAFKA-
3612).21,012 11
DateTime Speciﬁc/period data (e.g., during
July of 2019).117 52
CommitHash Hash of a certain commit. 15,303 10
programming questions.
Repository Corpus. This corpus was originally used to train
and test the MSRBot [3], a chatbot tailored for answering
users’ questions on project repository data. This corpus
contains a set of 398 queries, with 10 different intents, as
shown in Table 1. Each intent contains a set of different

==== Page 5 ====
5
Table 3: List of the Stack Overﬂow task entities.
Entity Deﬁnition Total
ProgLanguage Types of programming languages (e.g.,
Java) [37].96
Framework Tools/frameworks that developers use
(e.g., Maven) [37].85
Standards “Refers to data formats (e.g., JSON), de-
sign patterns (e.g.,Abstract Factory), pro-
tocols (e.g., HTTP), technology acronyms
(e.g., Ajax)” [37].20
API An API of a library (e.g., ArrayList) [37]. 67
Platform Software/Hardware platforms (e.g., IOS)
[37].13
questions with the same semantic, indicating the different
ways a user could ask the same query. Those intents have
questions related to code repository (e.g., “List me the
changes done in ClassA.java” from the FileCommits intent),
issue tracker (e.g., “Who has the most bug assignments?”
from the OverloadedDev intent), or a combination of both
code and issue tracker (e.g., “Which commits ﬁxed HHH-
10956?” a query from the FixCommit intent). The corpus
includes explicitly deﬁned training and test sets that are
labelled by the developers of the MSRBot. The training set
includes the questions used to train the chatbot, acquired
and curated by three developers involved in the project,
while the test set is composed of questions posed by 12
software developers to test the MSRBot on a speciﬁed set of
10 different tasks. We use the training and test set as deﬁned
by the MSRBot authors in this experiment.
Each entity in the Repository corpus contains a so-called
list feature [40, 41, 42, 43], a list of equivalent synonyms used
by the NLU to recognize entities. With the list feature, the
NLUs are limited to extract the exact match of the entities,
but can use the speciﬁed synonyms in the extraction process.
For instance, the entity ‘HHH-7325’ of type JiraTicket has
a list of synonyms containing ‘bug7325’, ‘issue7325’, and
‘HHH7325’, hence, any of these words can be used by the
NLU to recognize the entity ‘HHH-7325’. The Repository
corpus contains four entity types using the list feature as
shown in Table 2, covering the main artifacts in a repository,
such as ﬁles ( FileName ), commits ( CommitHash ), and tickets
from the JIRA bug-tracker ( JiraTicket ).
Stack Overﬂow Corpus. Stack Overﬂow is a popular Q&A
website among developers and plays an important role in
the software development life cycle [39]. Given its impor-
tance, data from Stack Overﬂow has already been used in
prior work to train chatbots [2]. The titles of the questions
in Stack Overﬂow represent a request for information by
software practitioners (e.g., “How to create an JS object from
scratch using a HTML button?”). Recently, Ye et al. [37]
developed a machine learning approach to extract software
entities (e.g., the programming language name) from Q&A
websites like Stack Overﬂow, and manually labelled entities
from 297 Stack Overﬂow posts as shown in Table 3. We use
the same corpus [37] and extract the title of each post with
its labelled entities. Unlike the Repository corpus, entities in
the Stack Overﬂow corpus do not have a list feature, (list
of entity synonyms), and need to be predicted by the NLUs
(i.e., prediction feature). In other words, we train the NLUsonly on the entities included in the training set. This allows
us to evaluate the NLUs’ ability to extract entities that they
have not been trained on before, which emulates real-life
scenarios where it is difﬁcult for the practitioners to train
the NLUs on all SE entities.
While the original Stack Overﬂow corpus contains man-
ually labelled entities, it lacks the intent behind the posed
questions. Hence, we need to manually label the intents of
the queries before we can use the corpus for the Stack Over-
ﬂow task. To achieve that, the ﬁrst author used thematic
analysis [44] to categorize those queries (titles) according to
their intents. Thematic analysis [45] is a technique to extract
common themes within a corpus via inspection, which was
done manually in our case. This method is frequently used
in qualitative research to identify patterns within collected
data and has been used in prior work in the SE domain
[46, 47]. Initially, the ﬁrst author categorized the queries into
19 intents. Then, we merged the categories that have a small
number of examples (less than 10) but have a very similar
rationale. This is because some NLUs recommend a training
set of at least 10 queries for each intent [48]. For example, the
queries of FacingException and FacingError intents are quite
similar in their goal as developers are looking for a solution
to ﬁx the crash and error.
To validate the manually extracted intents, we asked
two additional annotators - the second author and one
other Ph.D. student - to independently label the queries
using the extracted intents. For each question, we asked the
annotators to evaluate whether the query has a clear intent
or not using the multiple choice (‘Yes’, ‘May be’, and ‘No’).
If the annotators answer the previous question with ‘Yes’ or
‘May be’, then they classify the title using one of the deﬁned
intents shown in Table 4. After both annotators ﬁnished the
labelling process, we merged the labelled queries into one
set to be used in the NLUs evaluation. We then use the
Cohen’s Kappa coefﬁcient to evaluate the level of agreement
between the two authors [49]. The Cohen’s Kappa coefﬁcient
is a well-known statistic that evaluates the inter-rater agree-
ment level for categorical scales. The resulting coefﬁcient is
a scale that ranges between -1.0 and +1.0, where a negative
value means poorer than chance agreement, zero indicates
agreement by chance, and a positive value indicates better
than chance agreement. We ﬁnd that the level of agreement
between the two annotators on the occurrence of intent (i.e.,
whether a title has an intent or not) is +0.74, and the agree-
ment on the intents classiﬁcation is +0.71. Both agreements
are considered to be substantial inter-rater agreements [50].
All three annotators discussed the disagreements and voted
to the best ﬁtting intent. After the merge, we discarded
queries with unclear intent (total of 82), such as “JConsole
Web Application”. The ﬁnal set includes 215 queries [31],
Tables 3 and 4 show the number of entities and intents
included in our evaluation, respectively.
Our manual classiﬁcation led to the creation of 5 in-
tents shown in Table 4 with their deﬁnitions. The intents
in the Stack Overﬂow Corpus represent different types
of questions posted on Stack Overﬂow. For example, the
FacingError intent contains questions asking for a solution
for an encountered error: “PHP mysqli query returns empty
error message” [51]. Table 3 shows entities used in the Stack
Overﬂow corpus that are very speciﬁc to the SE domain. For

==== Page 6 ====
6
Table 4: List of the Stack Overﬂow task intents.
Intent Description Total (%)
LookingForCodeSample Looking for information related to implementation. This includes looking for code snippets, the
functionality of a method, or information speciﬁc to the user’s needs.132 (61.3%)
UsingMethodImproperly A method or a framework is being used improperly causing an unexpected or unwanted behaviour
of the program in hand. This can be related to code bugs or to performance issues.51 (23.7%)
LookingForBestPractice Looking for the recommended (best) practice, approach or solution for a problem. 12 (5.6%)
FacingError Facing an error or a failure in a program, mostly in the form of an error message or a build failure. 10 (4.7%)
PassingData Passing data between different frameworks or method calls. 10 (4.7%)
example, ProgLanguage entity type has a set of different pro-
gramming languages such as Python and JavaScript. Such
entities can be used by code-centric chatbots [6, 52], such as
chatbots that extract ﬁles that call a particular method in the
code [6].
3.3 Performance Evaluation of NLUs
We use the corpora from the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks to train IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and LUIS
and evaluate their performance. As each task has speciﬁc
characteristics, we detail in the following how we train and
test the NLUs for each task.
To evaluate the NLUs on the Repository task, we use
the same training set from the Repository corpus, which
includes 10 intents with their queries and entities with their
lists of synonyms. To set up the NLUs, we conﬁgure the
NLUs to use the list feature for all entities, that is, the
NLU will not attempt to extract any entities that are not
present in the training set. This is thematically in-line with
the nature of the Repository task where a chatbot answers
questions about software repositories. In this context, an
entity that does not exist in the repository (e.g., wrong Jira
ticket number) is not useful for the chatbot and cannot be
used to extract any information for the user. Then, using
the NLUs’ API, we deﬁne the entity types that exist in the
Repository corpus, namely 1) CommitHash 2) JiraTicket 3)
FileName, and use a fourth built-in entity type (DateTime).
In contrast to the Repository task, there is no original
split in the Stack Overﬂow corpus, as this corpus was not
originally intended to be used as training sets for chatbots.
In fact, we augmented the dataset by manually labeling the
intents in all queries, as discussed in Section 3.2. Therefore,
to evaluate the NLUs’ performance on the Stack Overﬂow
task, we use a stratiﬁed tenfold cross validation [53]. The
cross validation randomly divides the corpus into ten equal
folds where nine folds are used for training and one fold
for testing. Since we used the stratiﬁed version, the method
maintains a consistent distribution of intents across all folds.
It is important to note that we use the same process to
train and test all the NLUs, hence, the queries remain
consistent across the NLUs in each run of the tenfold cross
validation. Moreover, we do not use the list feature to train
the NLUs on all entities in the Stack Overﬂow task. Instead,
we train the NLUs to extract the entities using the prediction
feature. This allows us to evaluate the NLUs’ ability to
extract entities that they have not been trained on before,
which better emulates real-life scenarios where practitioners
cannot expect to train their chatbots in all possible entities.
We train Dialogﬂow, LUIS, and Rasa using their APIs,
and train IBM Watson using its user interface. After thetraining process, we send each query in the test set through
all NLU APIs and analyze their response, which includes
the classiﬁed intent, the intent’s conﬁdence score, and the
extracted entities. This response is then compared against
the oracle to evaluate the performance of the NLU. To enable
the replicability of our study, we make the scripts used
to evaluate the NLUs performance and datasets publicly
available [31].
To evaluate the performance of the NLUs in each task,
we calculate the standard classiﬁcation accuracy measures
that have been used in similar work (e.g., [14]) - precision,
recall, and F1-measure. In our study, precision for a class
(i.e., intent or entity) is the percentage of the correctly
classiﬁed queries to the total number of classiﬁed queries
for that class (i.e., Precision =TP
TP+FP). The recall for a
class is the percentage of the correctly classiﬁed queries to
the total number of queries for that class that exist in the
oracle (i.e., Recall =TP
TP+FN). Finally, to present the overall
performance of each NLU, we use the weighted F1-measure.
In particular, we compute the F1-measure (i.e., F1-measure =
2Precision Recall
Precision +Recall) for each class and aggregate all classes
F1-measure using weighted average, with the class’ support
as weights. This approach of calculating the F1-measure has
been used in similar work [54, 55]. While we evaluate all
three metrics, we only showcase the weighted F1-measure
in the paper, whereas the precision, recall, and F1-measure
for each intent and entity are presented in the Appendix.
4 C ASESTUDY RESULTS
In this section, we present the comparison of the NLUs’
performance in terms of intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence
score, and entity extraction on the Repository and Stack
Overﬂow tasks.
4.1 Intents Classiﬁcation
To evaluate the NLUs in intents classiﬁcation, we train and
test each of the NLUs using the corpus from each of the two
SE tasks. When testing the NLUs, we only consider the top
scoring intent as the classiﬁed intent for two reasons. First,
to emulate real life use-cases where chatbots use the intent
with the highest corresponding score, as it is the intent
with the highest probability of being correct [32, 33, 34, 35].
Second, to ensure that the evaluation of all NLUs is
consistent, as Dialogﬂow only returns one intent with the
corresponding conﬁdence score in its response for a single
query.
Results. Figure 2 shows the F1-measure for intent clas-
siﬁcation. The Figure presents the performance for each

==== Page 7 ====
7
Table 5: Intents’ characteristics and classiﬁcation performance as F1-measure of the four NLUs.
Task IntentIntent’s characteristics F1-measure
# Training % Queries w. Distinct Entity IBM
Samples Exclusive Words Types Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS Avg.RepositoryBuggyFile 37 92 - 96.0 96.0 100.0 83.3 93.8
FixCommit 31 10 CommitHash 100.0 91.7 100.0 68.8 90.1
BuggyCommit 52 7 JiraTicket 94.7 94.7 94.7 64.3 87.1
OverloadedDev 15 88 - 94.1 80.0 88.9 58.1 80.3
BuggyCommitByDate 66 39 - 72.7 69.6 80.0 91.7 78.5
CountCommitsByDate 11 97 - 88.4 91.3 80.0 53.3 78.3
BuggyFixCommit 32 74 - 100.0 85.7 63.2 48.0 74.2
ExperiencedDevFixBugs 15 72 - 92.3 88.9 92.3 13.3 71.7
CommitsByDate 8 70 - 70.0 50.0 76.2 0.0 49.1
FileCommits 10 77 - 55.6 80.0 28.6 11.1 43.8Stack
OverﬂowLookingForCodeSample 132 100 Platform 90.9 85.9 84.5 84.0 86.3
LookingForBestPractice 12 92 - 81.3 81.3 78.0 83.3 81.0
UsingMethodImproperly 51 100 - 79.1 66.5 64.4 57.5 66.9
FacingError 10 100 - 80.0 60.0 33.3 10.0 45.8
PassingData 10 70 - 36.7 50.0 36.7 0.0 30.9
Repository Stack Overflow020406080100F1-measure85.584.483.1
78.180.7
74.8
48.870.7
IBM Watson
Dialogflow
Rasa
LUIS
Figure 2: Intent classiﬁcation performance as F1-measure of
the four NLUs.
SE task, per NLU. The ranking is consistent across both
tasks, showing that IBM Watson outperforms other NLUs,
achieving an F1-measure of 85.5% in the Repository task and
84.4% in the Stack Overﬂow task. We also observe that for
both SE tasks, LUIS comes last in intents classiﬁcation.
To obtain a more detailed view of the NLUs’ perfor-
mance, we present the characteristics of all intents (columns
3-5) and the NLUs’ F1-measure values (columns 6-9) in
Table 5. We highlight in bold the best performing NLU
for each intent. Our results show that IBM Watson is the
best performing NLU for 8 intents, followed by Rasa, which
performs best for 5 intents.
Moreover, we observe that some intents are more difﬁ-
cult to classify than others. For example, the CommitsByDate ,
FileCommits ,FacingError , and PassingData intents are difﬁ-
cult to classify, with at least 2 of the four NLUs achieving an
F1-measure <60%.
Given the performance of the NLUs on the different
intents, we inspect the queries of each intent and ﬁnd
three main factors that contribute to the NLUs’ varying
performance. First, NLUs tend to generally perform wellfor intents that have a higher number of training samples
(e.g., the LookingForCodeSample intent). Second, NLUs better
classify intents that contain queries with exclusive words,
that is, words that do not appear in any other intents (see
the column % Queries w. Exclusive words in Table 5). For
example, FacingError is the intent with the highest average
score among all NLUs. This intent contains exclusive words,
such as ‘fail’ and ‘crash’, in all its queries. Conversely, the
NLUs misclassify intents that more frequently share words
with other intents (i.e., those intents have less exclusive
words). For example, PassingData intent has similar # Train-
ing Samples as FacingError intent but less % Queries w. Ex-
clusive words. Third, intents that have distinct entity types
in their queries (e.g., Platform entity type occurs only with
LookingForCodeSample intent queries) are better classiﬁed by
certain NLUs since such NLUs use the extracted entity types
as input for the intent classiﬁcation [56, 57]. This is clearly
shown by the high F1-measure yielded by IBM Watson and
Rasa in the classiﬁcation of the intents FixCommit and Bug-
gyCommit , which have speciﬁc entity types (i.e., CommitHash
and JiraTicket ).
NLUs rank similarly in both tasks in intents classiﬁca-
tion, with IBM Watson outperforming all other NLUs,
followed by Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and LUIS. Aside from
the training sample size, intents that contain exclusive
words and distinct entity types are easier to identify by
all NLUs.
4.2 NLUs Conﬁdence scores
As discussed earlier in Section 2, every intent classiﬁca-
tion performed by the NLU has an associated conﬁdence
score. The conﬁdence score is used to determine how much
trust one can put into the intent classiﬁcation of the NLU.
Typically, NLUs should provide high conﬁdence scores for
intents that are correctly classiﬁed. For example, if a query
is asking “What is the number of commits between 1-July-
2020 to 1-August-2020?” and the NLU provides a high con-
ﬁdence score (e.g., 0.98) when attributing the query to the
CountCommitsByDate intent, then the users of the NLU can

==== Page 8 ====
8
Repository Stack Overflow0.00.20.40.60.81.0Confidence Score
IBM Watson
Repository Stack Overflow
Dialogflow
Repository Stack Overflow0.00.20.40.60.81.0Confidence Score
Rasa
Repository Stack Overflow
LUISClassification
Correct
Incorrect
Figure 3: Conﬁdence score distribution for all NLUs and tasks.
trust these conﬁdence scores. Also, the contrary is true, if an
NLU provides high conﬁdence scores to wrongly classiﬁed
intents, then one would lose trust in the NLUs’ produced
conﬁdence scores.
To compare the performance of the NLUs in terms of
conﬁdence scores, we queried each NLU with questions
from the two tasks - Repository and Stack Overﬂow. For
each query, we considered the highest conﬁdence score to
map to a speciﬁc intent. For example, for the query above
(“What is the number of commits between 1-July-2020 to
1-August-2020?”), an NLU may return a conﬁdence score
of 0.98 for the intent CountCommitsByDate , and a conﬁ-
dence score of 0.80 for the intent BuggyCommitsByDate . If
the correct intent is CountCommitsByDate , then we would
consider this as a correctly classiﬁed instance and record
the conﬁdence score. In cases where the top conﬁdence
score does not indicate the correct intent, we record this
an incorrect classiﬁcation and record the intent conﬁdence
score.
We present the distributions of the conﬁdence scores
and compare these distributions for correctly and incor-
rectly classiﬁed intents. Ideally, NLUs should have high
conﬁdence scores for correctly classiﬁed intents (and vice
versa). In addition, having clearly disjoint distributions of
the conﬁdence scores between the correctly and incorrectly
extracted intents indicates that practitioners can rely on the
conﬁdence score of the NLU.
Results. Figure 3 shows the distributions of conﬁdence
scores returned by IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and LUISin the Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks. From Figure 3,
we observe that all NLUs return higher median conﬁdence
scores for the correctly classiﬁed intents compared to the in-
correctly classiﬁed intents, for both tasks. The sole exception
is Dialogﬂow, which has a higher median conﬁdence score
for incorrectly classiﬁed intents for the Repository task.
Among the evaluated NLUs, Rasa stands out as being
the NLU with the highest corresponding conﬁdence scores
medians (higher than 0.91) in both the Repository and
Stack Overﬂow tasks, for the correctly classiﬁed intents.
Furthermore, Rasa has the most compact distribution of
conﬁdence scores among other NLUs and the least overlap-
ping conﬁdence scores between the correctly classiﬁed and
misclassiﬁed intents. This means that when Rasa returns a
high conﬁdence score, it is highly likely to be correct.
To ensure that the difference in the conﬁdence scores
between the correctly and incorrectly classiﬁed intents
across NLUs is statistically signiﬁcant, we perform the non-
parametric unpaired Mann-Whitney U test on each NLU
results. We ﬁnd that the differences are statistically signif-
icant (i.e., p-value <0:05) in all cases and for both, the
Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks, except for the results
of Dialogﬂow in the Repository task. Generally, our results
show that developers can trust the conﬁdence score yielded
by NLUs to assess if the NLUs have correctly classiﬁed the
intent, or the chatbot needs to trigger the fallback action, an
action that is used when an NLU cannot determine a correct
intent.
As mentioned earlier, the only outlier in our evaluation

==== Page 9 ====
9
is the experiment from Dialogﬂow on the Repository task.
Dialogﬂow returns a higher conﬁdence score median for the
misclassiﬁed intents (1.0) compared to the correctly classi-
ﬁed intents (0.73), in the Repository task (see Figure 3). We
searched the online documentation and forums to see if oth-
ers have faced similar situations. We found multiple posts
where developers raise issues with Dialogﬂow’s high con-
ﬁdence scores for incorrectly classiﬁed intents [58, 59]. This
indicates that our results are not an outlier and there might
be an issue with Dialogﬂow that needs to be addressed.
The developers reported that they rely on workarounds to
overcome such issues, such as combining the conﬁdence
score with other measures (e.g., regular expression) [59].
Overall, NLUs yield higher conﬁdence scores for cor-
rectly classiﬁed intents. IBM Watson, Rasa, and LUIS
provide higher median conﬁdence scores, ranging be-
tween 0.68 - 0.96, for correctly classiﬁed intents.
4.3 Entity Extraction
To correctly answers users’ queries, chatbots need to also
correctly extract the relevant entities. We consider the ex-
tracted entity to be correct only if its type and value exactly
match the type and value of expected entity for that query in
the oracle. The reason behind our criteria is that extracting
entities that are only partially correct (i.e., have only correct
values or correct types), causes the chatbot to incorrectly
reply to the user’s query. Since there can exist a varying
number and types of entities in each query, we need a
mechanism to ensure that our evaluation accounts for such
variance. To mitigate this issue, we calculate the precision,
recall, and weighted F1-measure based on the number of
entities in each entity type, for the entity extraction results.
Results. Figure 4 presents the entity extraction results for
the two tasks. To better interpret the results, we reiterate
that extracting entities in the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks require different NLU features. For the Repository
task, we conﬁgure the NLUs to extract entities using the
list feature (i.e., list of synonyms) and entities are extracted
as an exact match. In the Stack Overﬂow task, however,
we conﬁgure the NLUs to use the prediction feature as
discussed in Section 3.2, that is, requesting the NLUs to
predict the correct entity. Given their differences, we discuss
the results of each task separately, ﬁrst describing the results
for the Repository task and then the Stack Overﬂow task.
Repository. According to Figure 4, LUIS is the best perform-
ing NLU with an average F1-measure of 93.7%, followed
by Rasa (90.3%). Both IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow perform
similarly (70.7%) when extracting entities in the Repository
task.
To better understand the factors inﬂuencing the perfor-
mance, we examine the F1-measure of the NLUs in light
of the different entity types. Table 6 shows the NLU’s
performance per entity type. We highlight, in bold, the best
performing NLU for each entity type. Our results conﬁrm
that LUIS is the best performing NLU when extracting the
CommitHash ,JiraTicket , and FileName entity types from the
Repository task. IBM Watson also performs well in the
CommitHash and JiraTicket entity types, but it falls shortwhen extracting FileName entities (F1-measure of 15.9%).
This is due to IBM Watson’s inability to differentiate be-
tween the normal words (e.g., ‘To’ and ‘A’) and entities of
type FileName (e.g., ‘To.java’ and ‘A.java’). In other words, it
extracts entities based on their exact match with the training
set without considering the entities’ context when using the
list feature [60]. For DateTime entities, Rasa performs best
in extracting all the dates correctly (F1-measure of 100%)
from the given queries. Rasa uses a probabilistic context-
free grammar through their pipeline (Duckling) to extract
the dates from the posed queries [61]. For other NLUs, we
notice two reasons behind the incorrect extraction of the
DateTime entities: 1) the misspelling of the date from the
users (e.g., “what are the commits I submit on 27/5/2018 
31/5/2018”) 2) vague date formats in queries (e.g., “Tell me
about the commits from 05-27 to 05-31 in 2018”).
Repository Stack Overflow020406080100F1-measure70.768.570.7
65.890.3
59.993.7
55.1 IBM Watson
Dialogflow
Rasa
LUIS
Figure 4: Entity extraction performance as avg. F1-measure
of the four NLUs.
Stack Overﬂow. We observe in Figure 4 that IBM Watson
yields the best results (F1-measure of 68.5%), followed by
Dialogﬂow (65.8%), Rasa (59.9%), and LUIS (55.1%). Note
that the performance of the NLUs on the Stack Overﬂow
task is expectedly lower than the performance obtained in
the Repository task, given that NLUs have to predict entities
in a query.
Similar to the case of the Repository task, we also ex-
amine the performance of the NLUs when extracting the
different entity types in the Stack Overﬂow task. Table 6
shows that the performance of the NLUs varies from one
entity type to the other, and that no NLU outperforms
the rest in extracting the majority of entity types. Table 6
shows that, in the Stack Overﬂow task, both IBM Watson
and Dialogﬂow outperform other NLUs in extracting two
different entity types. Furthermore, we observe that some
entity types are more difﬁcult to extract than others. In
particular, entities of type Framework ,Standards , and API
are difﬁcult to extract (i.e., the four NLUs achieve an F1-
measure <60%). Upon closer investigation of the results,
we ﬁnd that more than 60% of the most difﬁcult entities
appear only once in the task, that is, they are unique entities.
For example, the entity ‘DOM’ of type Standards in the
query “How to tell if an element is before another element

==== Page 10 ====
10
Table 6: Entity extraction performance as F1-measure per
entity of the four NLUs.
Task Entity TypeF1- measure
IBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS Avg.RepositoryCommitHash 100.0 100.0 88.9 100.0 97.2
JiraTicket 100.0 91.7 90.0 100.0 95.4
DateTime 86.2 56.3 100.0 98.1 85.2
FileName 15.9 79.2 71.4 80.0 61.6Stack
OverﬂowProgLanguage 92.0 93.7 91.4 86.8 91.0
Platform 67.4 55.9 75.1 43.6 60.5
Framework 65.4 56.0 56.1 54.4 58.0
Standards 54.1 56.9 14.9 17.5 35.9
API 43.3 42.8 29.9 23.5 34.9
in DOM” is a unique entity as it occurs only once in the
Stack Overﬂow task. This entity was not extracted by any of
the evaluated NLUs. Consequently, NLUs tend to perform
well when extracting entities which appear frequently in the
training set (i.e., not unique).
Overall, NLUs perform differently in the two evaluated
tasks, with LUIS and Rasa outperforming others when
using the list feature (Repository task) for entity extrac-
tion, while IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow perform better
when the entities need to be predicted (Stack Overﬂow
task).
4.4 Concluding Remarks
In the previous three sections, we compare the NLUs’ per-
formance in terms of three aspects (intents classiﬁcation,
conﬁdence scores, and entity extraction). We ﬁnd that the
performance of each NLU can vary from one aspect to
another, and between the two tasks. In other words, there is
no NLU that outperforms all others in every aspect. Hence,
in this section, we set up to rank the NLUs on their overall
performance (considering the results from all aspects stud-
ied in the previous sections) in order to ﬁnd the best NLU
for chatbots in the SE domain. Having an overall measure is
challenging since we have different tasks (Repository and
Stack Overﬂow) and are using different entity extraction
features (i.e., list vs. prediction features). Therefore, we use
an approach that has been used in prior work [62] to rank
techniques evaluated against different datasets. In particu-
lar, we use F1-measures of each task for intents classiﬁcation
(Section 4.1) and entity extraction (Section 4.3) aspects. For
the conﬁdence score aspect, we rank the NLUs using the
median conﬁdence scores for the correctly classiﬁed intents
of each task as shown in Section 4.2. To rank the NLUs, we
compute the NLUs’ average rank using their ranks in all
aspects and tasks. The NLU with the lowest average rank is
the best performing NLU.
Table 7 presents the NLUs’ ranks in the different aspects
on both tasks and their overall ranks. We ﬁnd that IBM
Watson is the best performing NLU when considering all
aspects in both tasks, followed by Rasa, Dialogﬂow, and
LUIS. That said, chatbot practitioners need to consider the
most important aspect (i.e., intents classiﬁcation or entity
extraction) and tasks performed by their chatbot when
selecting the NLUs they want to use.5 D ISCUSSION
In this section, we dive into the evaluation results to gain
more insights on the NLUs’ conﬁdence score sensibility as
well as quantifying their abilities to extract unique entities.
Finally, we provide a set of actionable recommendations to
chatbot developers and researchers to achieve better intents
classiﬁcation and entity extraction results.
5.1 Examining the Impact of the Conﬁdence Score
Threshold on NLU Performance
One important impacting factor of the results from these
NLUs is the conﬁdence score threshold, i.e., at what conﬁ-
dence score value would an NLU be conﬁdent in classifying
the returned intent as correct. In some cases, NLUs return
high conﬁdence scores for the incorrectly classiﬁed intents
as shown in Section 4.2. Hence, deﬁning the appropriate
threshold to accept the classiﬁed intent or trigger the fall-
back action is still a challenge for chatbot developers. In
essence, developers have to arbitrarily determine which
conﬁdence score value they will use to determine a correct
classiﬁcation. Given that the conﬁdence score threshold
impacts the NLUs’ performance, an important question is,
how does the conﬁdence score threshold impact the perfor-
mance?
To maintain consistency with the results presented in
Section 4, we use the same experimental settings. We vary
the conﬁdence score used by each NLU to determine the
correct intent and plot its F1-measure performance.
Figure 5 shows the NLUs’ F1-measures at varying con-
ﬁdence score thresholds. We perform this analysis for both
tasks. For the Repository task, our results show that Rasa is
the most robust, achieving consistently high performance
for threshold values between 0-0.7. On the other hand,
IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow start to see a reduction in
performance for threshold values higher than 0.3. LUIS
seems to generally follow a downward trend with higher
conﬁdence score thresholds. In the case of the Stack Over-
ﬂow task, we again observe stable performance by Rasa
for conﬁdence score thresholds between 0-0.8, while IBM
Watson, Dialogﬂow, and LUIS decrease in performance as
the conﬁdence score threshold increases.
From the results obtained, we observe that 1) the NLU’s
performance varies based on the task at hand and 2) that
using lower conﬁdence score threshold values tends to
achieve better performance. This is because the selected
threshold changes the NLU’s performance only when it
surpasses some of the conﬁdence scores returned by that
NLU. For example, Rasa has a high conﬁdence score me-
dian (0.91), and hence, it will only be affected when the
threshold increases signiﬁcantly (threshold >0.7). That said,
one needs to be careful since using a low conﬁdence score
may also lead to the chatbot providing the wrong answer
to the question being asked. Overall, we recommend that
developers should investigate and carefully choose a proper
conﬁdence score threshold since such thresholds can have a
signiﬁcant impact on the chatbot’s performance.
5.2 Unique Entities
The performance of the NLUs in extracting entities from
the Stack Overﬂow task was affected by unique entities, as

==== Page 11 ====
11
Table 7: NLUs’ overall performance ranking.
Ranking in Repository Task Ranking in Stack Overﬂow Task
NLU Intents
ClassiﬁcationConﬁdence
ScoreEntity
ExtractionIntents
ClassiﬁcationConﬁdence
ScoreEntity
ExtractionAvg.
Rank
IBM Watson 1 2 3* 1 2 1 1.7
Rasa 3 1 2 3 1 3 2.2
Dialogﬂow 2 3 3* 2 4 2 2.7
LUIS 4 4 1 4 3 4 3.3
* Same rank
ThresholdF1−measure●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
●IBM Watson
Dialogflow
Rasa
LUIS
(a) Ranking in Repository Task
ThresholdF1−measure●●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
●IBM Watson
Dialogflow
Rasa
LUIS (b) Stack Overﬂow Task
Figure 5: Analysis of theshold sensitivity in terms of F1-measure of the NLUs in the Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks.
shown in Section 4.3. As the name suggests, unique entities
appear just once in the dataset for the Stack Overﬂow task;
thus, the NLUs have to predict their occurrences without
prior training. It is important to note that there are no unique
entities when evaluating the NLUs using the list feature be-
cause the NLUs have been trained on all entities that exist in
the Repository task. To better understand the NLUs’ ability
to extract unique entities, we investigate the results from
the Stack Overﬂow task, examining the NLU performance
on queries containing only unique entities. Hence, queries
containing any non-unique entity were excluded from this
investigation. We ﬁnd 58 queries that ﬁt our criteria, and
they include a total of 75 unique entities that are distributed,
as shown in Table 8. Similarly to the evaluation conducted in
Section 4.3, we calculate the precision, recall, and weighted
F1-measure of the NLUs when extracting unique entities.
Table 9 presents the NLUs’ performance in extracting
unique entities. We ﬁnd that IBM Watson outperforms other
NLUs with an F1-measure of 31.6% in extracting unique
entities. We examine the results of extracting unique entities
and ﬁnd two factors that impact the NLUs’ performance.
First, the NLUs depend on the entities syntax similarity to
recognize the entities in the queries of the testing set. For
example, two NLUs (IBM Watson and LUIS) incorrectly
extracted ‘Receiving 0.0’ as a Framework entity from the
query “Receiving 0.0 when multiplying two doubles in an
array” because ‘Receiving 0.0’ is syntactically similar to
some other Framework entities such as ‘Spring 4.0.2’ andTable 8: Distribution of unique entities by entity type in the
Stack Overﬂow task.
Entity Type Unique Entities (%)
ProgLanguage 1 (1.3)
Framework 36 (48)
Standard 5 (6.7)
API 32 (42.7)
Platform 1 (1.3)
‘CodeIgniter 2.0.3’. Second, we ﬁnd that the NLUs extract
one of the words in the multi-worded entity (e.g., ‘SAP
crystal reports’ is a single entity of type Framework ) as a
separate entity on its own, given that the NLUs are trained
on such separate entities. For example, the multi-worded
entity ‘Python NameError’ with an API type is extracted
by all NLUs as the entity ‘Python’ of type ProgLanguage .
In fact, the multi-worded entities in the Stack Overﬂow
task are all unique entities, except for two entities (i.e.,
‘Internet Explorer’ and ‘WebSphere 8.5.5’). Hence, these
results motivate the need for tools/techniques from the
research community to extract the unique entities. Also, we
encourage the chatbot developers to give special attention
to unique entities by training the NLU on more examples
by including those entities.

==== Page 12 ====
12
Table 9: Precision, Recall, and F1-measure of extracting
unique entities in the Stack Overﬂow task.
NLU Precision Recall F1-measure
IBM Watson 51.4% 28% 31.6%
Dialogﬂow 0% 0% 0%
Rasa 12% 1.3% 2.1%
LUIS 25.3% 5.3% 7.7%
5.3 Recommendations
Based on our ﬁndings and experience in conducting this
study, we provide a set of actionable recommendations to
help chatbot practitioners to improve the performance of
the used NLU. Table 10 summarizes our recommendations
to improve the NLUs’ performance in intents classiﬁcations
and entity extraction. While our results are based on SE
tasks, some of the guidelines can be used to improve the
NLU performance regardless of the domain. We discuss the
recommendations in details in the following.
R1. Train NLUs with multiple queries per intent. Our
results show that the NLUs perform better when classifying
queries with intents that have more training examples.
While more data is typically better in any machine-learning
task, the focus on crafting a good training set needs to
be put in the diversity of queries per intent. In fact, some
NLUs recommend that each intent has 10 training examples
or more [48] that represent different ways of querying
that intent (e.g., having different sentence lengths [63]).
NLUs like Dialogﬂow and LUIS provide an interactive
GUI [64] to allow the chatbot developers to edit and add
training examples using the questions users pose to the
chatbot. Chatbot developers should leverage this feature,
especially at the early stages of the chatbot development,
as a part of the debugging process of the NLU and as a
way of ﬁne-tuning the initial training set of the chatbot.
We plan (and encourage others) to explore semi-supervised
learning [65] and weak supervision [66] approaches to
automate the NLU’s retraining process.
R2. Merge intents with similar words and disambiguate
with a follow-up action. The results show that NLUs better
classify intents that contain exclusive words and distinct
entity types, not shared with other intents. Hence, it is
worth exploring the possibility of merging similar intents
that share many common words and entity types into a
single intent, as the NLUs can misclassify these intents.
The merge of intents can be done in two ways: 1) during
training, combining queries of similar intents into one
intent, or 2) after the intents classiﬁcation as a chatbot
post-processing phase. Option 1 is only recommended
when frequently misclassiﬁed intents have fewer training
examples, as the merging can help boost the initial training
dataset. Otherwise, option 2 is a more generally applicable
solution as it does not introduce any noise by modifying
the training dataset. Once the NLU classiﬁes the merged
intent, chatbot developers can employ some strategies to
disambiguate the merged intent. The disambiguation can
be done using entity extraction, regular expressions, or
even relying on follow-up chatbot questions to help extract
the target intent. For example, if there is a chatbot thatdoes code refactoring, then the intents ‘refactor class’ and
‘refactor method’ have very similar training examples. In
this case, the chatbot developers can merge both intents
into one intent (e.g., ‘refactor’). Then, to identify the target
intent (class or method), the chatbot could ask the user
about the type of refactoring to perform.
R3. Combine multiple factors to aid the conﬁdence
score. While most of the NLUs return high conﬁdence
scores when correctly classifying intents, as we discussed
in Section 4.3, we recommend the chatbot developers to
use other measures to ensure the intent was classiﬁed
correctly. For example, chatbot developers can combine
the conﬁdence scores with regular expressions to check if
speciﬁc keywords appear in the question. Another example
is an intent that has a distinct entity type where developers
can check whether an entity of that type exists in the query
and use that information to make sure that the intent was
correctly classiﬁed (e.g., only queries of ‘ BuggyCommit ’
intent have ‘ JiraTicket ’ entities).
R4. Use different entity features according to the entity
type. Developers should resort to different entity features
(either list feature or prediction feature) together in the
same chatbot, depending on the entities of their domain.
Entities that are enumerable (e.g., months of the year)
and have known ﬁnite values are better identiﬁed with
the features containing all known synonyms. We observe
this when evaluating the entity extraction performance in
the Repository task, where NLUs extracted entities more
accurately. However, in most cases, an entity could be
expressed in various (and unknown) ways and developers
need to resort to the prediction feature (e.g., Framework
entities).
R5. When using the entity prediction feature, focus on in-
cluding entities in different positions within the queries.
When it comes to extracting entities using the prediction
feature, developers need to diversify their queries so that
they include entities in different positions (i.e., beginning,
middle, and end of the query) in order to improve the
NLU’s ability to extract the entities in different contexts
[67, 68]. Also, developers should expose the NLU with
different variants of the entity (e.g., ‘issues’ and ‘bugs’) [68].
Finally, we believe that there is a need for a benchmark that
contains SE terms (i.e., SE thesaurus) and their variations
(e.g., ‘commit’ and ‘change’) as this helps the developers
of SE chatbots to train the NLUs on SE entities and their
synonyms.
6 R ELATED WORK
Since the goal of this paper is to examine the different NLUs
for SE chatbots, we discuss the related work in two areas:
work that studies chatbots in the SE domain and work that
focuses on evaluating NLUs.
6.1 Using Chatbots to Assist Developers
Storey and Zagalsky deﬁned bots as tools that perform
tedious tasks to increase developer’ productivity and save

==== Page 13 ====
13
Table 10: Recommendations for ﬁne-tuning the NLUs when developing Chatbots.
Problem Recommendation
Low accuracy on intents classiﬁcationR1. Train NLUs with multiple queries per intent
R2. Merge intents with similar words and disambiguate with a follow-up action
R3. Combine extra factors (e.g. regex, entity type) to aid to the conﬁdence score
Low accuracy on entity extractionR4. Use different entity features (list feature vs prediction feature) according to the entity type
R5. When using entity prediction, focus on including entities in different query positions
their time [1]. They outlined ﬁve roles for bots in the soft-
ware development process; coding, testing, DevOps, sup-
port and documentation. For example, BugBot [69], a code
bot that allows developers to create bugs easily through
Slack. Moreover, there are bots that help in code refac-
toring [52], recommend reviewers for pull-requests [70],
and generate bug ﬁxes [71]. Chatbots are a sub-category of
software bots [72, 73] where they are getting more attention
from the practitioners in the SE domain [3, 12, 18, 24, 74,
75, 76, 77]. For example, Toxtli et al. [18] developed TaskBot
using LUIS, which helps developers within teams to man-
age their tasks by initiating them and tracking reminders.
Abdellatif et al. [3] leveraged Dialogﬂow to implement the
MSRBot to help answer developers’ questions related to
their software projects. Bradley et al. [74] developed Divy
using Amazon Alexa to assist developers in their daily
development tasks. Moreover, chatbots are used to resolve
code conﬂicts [76] and answer development questions using
Stack Overﬂow [2, 17, 78].
The mentioned studies help motivate our work; to
guide developers and researches to select an NLU for
their chatbots based on their needs and the context of
usage in the SE domain. However, our work differs in that
we evaluate different NLUs and we do not propose new
chatbots.
6.2 Evaluating and Comparing NLUs
Recently, many researchers compared different NLUs from
different perspectives [19, 79, 80]. For example, Canonico
and De Russis [19] assessed the different aspects/features
of NLUs, such as usability, supported programming lan-
guages, and the ability to integrate with third parties. Also,
the authors tested different NLUs using a dataset from
the weather domain. The results show that IBM Watson
outperforms other NLUs in terms of classifying the correct
intents. Also, Angara [79] compared different attributes
of NLUs such as security to help users select a suitable
NLU based on the attributes of the chatbot. Gregori [20]
evaluated different NLUs using frequently asked questions
on a students admission corpus. The results show that
LUIS outperforms other NLUs. The work closest to ours
is the work by Braun et al. [14], which evaluated different
NLUs using public transport connections, Ubuntu platform,
and web applications corpora. The results showed that
LUIS achieved the best compared to other NLUs across all
datasets. The main difference between the work by Braun
et al. and ours is that we evaluate the NLUs using different
features (i.e., list and prediction features) on SE tasks rather
than technical support tasks (e.g., setup printers).Our work differs and complements the prior work in
two ways. First, our work uses data from two common
tasks that are highly relevant to the SE domain, as we
focus on providing insights to developers of SE chatbots.
Second, our performance evaluation covers different NLU
features (e.g., list feature) and pinpoint the impact of some
characteristics of entities in the performance of NLUs, which
are not previously studied by prior work. Overall, our work
complements the studies evaluating NLUs and contributes
to that body of research by providing a thorough evaluation
of NLUs in the SE domain.
7 T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In this section, we discuss the threats to internal, construct,
replicability, veriﬁability, conclusion, and external validity
of our study.
7.1 Internal Validity
Concerns confounding factors that could have inﬂuenced
our results. The Stack Overﬂow tasks used to evaluate the
NLUs’ performance were manually labelled which might
introduce human bias. To mitigate this threat, we had
multiple annotators to label the tasks and used the discus-
sion and voting to resolve all disagreements between the
annotators. Another threat to internal validity is that we
use the default conﬁgurations for all NLUs in our study,
which could impact their performance. For example, we
use the default NLU conﬁdence score threshold to present
our results in Section 4, but mitigate this threat by studying
the impact of conﬁdence score threshold on the NLUs’ per-
formance in Section 5.1. Other parameters could be tuned
to enhance the NLUs’ performance (spell-correction and
training validation [81]). We purposely decided to evaluate
the NLUs under their default conﬁgurations, to evaluate
the performance of an average user would encounter when
deploying the NLUs in a chatbot. Also, the only common
conﬁguration across all NLUs is the conﬁdence score thresh-
old. In other words, some NLUs have conﬁgurations that
could be tuned, which are not available in the other NLUs or
have been implicitly deﬁned in the NLU (since their internal
implementation is closed source). Hence, modifying these
conﬁgurations in one NLU might lead to different results
and conclusions.
7.2 Construct Validity
Considers the relationship between theory and observation,
in case the measured variables do not measure the actual
factors. To evaluate the NLUs’ performance in the Repos-
itory task, we use the MSRBot corpus that was created

==== Page 14 ====
14
to evaluate the MSRBot. The MSRBot dataset might have
some limitations, such as having questions (intents) that
might be less popular than others in real settings. However,
we argue that the questions that MSRBot supports were
derived via a semi-structured process that collected the most
common questions asked by software practitioners from
previous studies [82, 83, 84]. On the other hand, the MSRBot
evaluation participants were free to word their questions to
the chatbot. Finally, the list of questions used to train the
MSRBot was not revealed to the participants.
7.3 Replicability Validity
Concerns the possibility of replicating the study [85]. In our
study, we used three of the most popular NLUs that are
closed source (except for Rasa). The NLU internal imple-
mentation might change without any prior notice to the
users. Therefore, replicating the study might lead to differ-
ent results. We mitigate this issue by providing the scripts
and datasets used in each task and the version used for
Rasa (open-source). We encourage the scientiﬁc community
to replicate the study through our replication package [31]
after a certain time (e.g., 6 months) to examine if there is a
change in the NLUs performance. We believe that our study
presents a snapshot of the NLUs’ performance comparison
in the SE domain. Moreover, our results serve as a starting
point for the chatbot practitioners when selecting the NLUs
to use.
7.4 Veriﬁability Validity
Concerns the veriﬁability of the study results [86]. In our
study, we compared the performance of different NLUs
using two common SE tasks (i.e., Repository and Stack
Overﬂow tasks). Using different NLUs or different tasks
might lead to different conclusions. To mitigate this threat,
we selected NLUs that are used in prior work [14, 20, 36] as
a ﬁrst step to benchmark the NLUs in the SE domain. Also,
we described our case study setup in Section 3, studied each
task characteristics and detailed our analysis and results in
Section 4. Finally, we shared the dataset used to train/test
NLUs, NLUs’ responses [31], and the used scripts [31]
with the community to allow for further investigation and
accelerate the future research in the ﬁeld.
7.5 Conclusion Validity
Concerns the relationship between the treatment and the
outcome. In Section 4.4, we compute the overall NLUs’
performance in both tasks by ranking the NLUs on each
task based on their F1-measure then compute their average
ranks in all tasks. The NLU’s performance differs based
on its intended usage (i.e., intents classiﬁcation and entity
extraction) and task (i.e., Repository and Stack Overﬂow).
The main goal behind this analysis is to ﬁnd the NLU that
could be the best to use in the initial implementation of the
SE chatbots. Moreover, this analysis has been used in similar
studies [62] to obtain an overall performance for the NLUs.
Finally, our results show consistency in the NLUs’ ranks in
all usages (except for entity extraction) for both tasks.7.6 External Validity
Concerns the generalization of our ﬁndings. While we use
four of the most commonly used NLUs to evaluate their
performance in the SE domain, there exist other NLUs
which are not included in our study. Since our goal is to ﬁnd
the best performing NLU in the SE domain, in our study
we only select the NLUs that have been widely used by
researchers and practitioners and they can be trained using
their API calls and/or user interface.
Our study may be impacted by the fact that we evaluate
the NLUs using the Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks;
hence our results may not generalize to other tasks in the
SE domain. However, we believe that they cover very com-
mon tasks in SE, which could be improved with chatbots.
That said, we encourage other researchers to conduct more
similar studies that consider other NLUs and more SE tasks.
8 C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
Software chatbots are becoming popular in the SE commu-
nity due to their beneﬁts in saving development time and
resources. An NLU lies at the heart of each chatbot to enable
the understanding of the user’s input. Selecting the best
NLU to use for a chatbot that operates in the SE domain is a
challenging task. In this paper, we evaluate the performance
of four widely-used NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Google
Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and Microsoft LUIS. We assess the NLUs’
performance in intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence score, and
entity extraction using two different tasks designed from a
Repository and Stack Overﬂow contexts.
When considering all three aspects (intents classiﬁcation,
conﬁdence scores, and entity extraction), we ﬁnd that IBM
Watson is the best performing NLU for the studied SE
tasks. For each individual aspect, in intents classiﬁcation,
IBM Watson outperforms other NLUs for both tasks. On the
other hand, when it comes to conﬁdence scores, all NLUs
(except for Dialogﬂow) return high conﬁdence scores for
the correctly classiﬁed intents. Also, we ﬁnd that Rasa is
the most trustworthy NLU in terms of conﬁdence score.
Finally, LUIS and IBM Watson achieve the best results in
extracting entities from the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks, respectively. Moreover, our results shed light on the
characteristics that affect the NLUs’ performance in intents
classiﬁcation (e.g., # Training Samples) and entity extraction
(e.g., unique entities). Therefore, we encourage researchers
to develop techniques and methods that enhance the NLUs’
performance for tasks with different characteristics. We be-
lieve that our work guides chatbot practitioners to select the
NLU that best ﬁts the SE task performed by their chatbots.
Our study paves the way for future work in this area.
First, our results show that NLUs tend to perform well when
they are trained on more examples. Therefore, we plan to
examine different dataset augmentation techniques to gen-
erate more training examples for the NLUs to enhance their
performance. Also, we believe that there is a need for more
studies that compare different NLUs using more datasets to
benchmark NLUs in the SE context. We contribute towards
this effort by making our dataset publicly available [31].

==== Page 15 ====
15
REFERENCES
[1] M.-A. Storey and A. Zagalsky, “Disrupting developer
productivity one bot at a time,” in Proceedings of
the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Foundations of Software Engineering , ser. FSE 2016.
ACM, 2016, pp. 928–931.
[2] B. Xu, Z. Xing, X. Xia, and D. Lo, “AnswerBot: Au-
tomated generation of answer summary to develop-
ers technical questions,” in Proceedings of the 32Nd
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Soft-
ware Engineering , ser. ASE 2017. Piscataway, NJ, USA:
IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 706–716.
[3] A. Abdellatif, K. Badran, and E. Shihab, “MSRBot:
Using bots to answer questions from software repos-
itories,” Empirical Software Engineering (EMSE) , p. To
Appear, 2019.
[4] J. Dominic, J. Houser, I. Steinmacher, C. Ritter, and
P . Rodeghero, “Conversational bot for newcomers on-
boarding to open source projects,” in Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Bots in Software Engineer-
ing, ser. BotSE ’20. IEEE Press, 2020.
[5] A. Abdellatif, D. E. Costa, K. Badran, R. Abdelkareem,
and E. Shihab, “Challenges in chatbot development: A
study of stack overﬂow posts,” in Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR’20) , 2020.
[6] C.-T. Lin, S.-P . Ma, and Y.-W. Huang, “MSABot: A chat-
bot framework for assisting in the development and
operation of microservice-based systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International Workshop on Bots in Software
Engineering , ser. BotSE ’20. IEEE Press, 2020.
[7] T. C. Conference, “The chatbot conference,”
https://www.chatbotconference.com/, (Accessed
on 11/09/2019).
[8] BotSE, “1st international workshop on bots in soft-
ware engineering,” http://botse.org/, (Accessed on
11/19/2019).
[9] M. Wessel, B. M. de Souza, I. Steinmacher, I. S. Wiese,
I. Polato, A. P . Chaves, and M. A. Gerosa, “The power
of bots: Characterizing and understanding bots in oss
projects,” Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. , vol. 2, no.
CSCW, pp. 182:1–182:19, Nov. 2018.
[10] DeployBot, “Code deployment tools,” https:
//deploybot.com/, (Accessed on 08/27/2020).
[11] Dependabot, “Dependabot,” https://dependabot.
com/, (Accessed on 08/26/2020).
[12] S. Urli, Z. Yu, L. Seinturier, and M. Monperrus, “How
to design a program repair bot?: Insights from the re-
pairnator project,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering
in Practice , ser. ICSE-SEIP ’18. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2018, pp. 95–104.
[13] B. Rychalska, H. Glabska, and A. Wroblewska, “Multi-
intent hierarchical natural language understanding for
chatbots,” in 2018 Fifth International Conference on Social
Networks Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS) ,
Oct 2018, pp. 256–259.
[14] D. Braun, A. Hernandez-Mendez, F. Matthes, and
M. Langen, “Evaluating natural language understand-
ing services for conversational question answeringsystems,” in Proceedings of the 18th Annual SIGdial
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue . Saarbr ¨ucken,
Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics,
August 2017, pp. 174–185. [Online]. Available:
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-3622
[15] S. Munoz, O. Araque, A. F. Llamas, and C. A. Iglesias,
“A cognitive agent for mining bugs reports, feature
suggestions and sentiment in a mobile application
store,” in 2018 4th International Conference on Big Data
Innovations and Applications (Innovate-Data) , Aug 2018,
pp. 17–24.
[16] Marbot, “Chatbot for aws monitoring,” https://
marbot.io/, (Accessed on 08/20/2020).
[17] A. Murgia, D. Janssens, S. Demeyer, and B. Vasilescu,
“Among the machines: Human-bot interaction on so-
cial q&a websites,” in Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Confer-
ence Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , ser. CHI EA ’16. New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2016, pp. 1272–1279.
[18] C. Toxtli, A. Monroy-Hern ´andez, and J. Cranshaw,
“Understanding chatbot-mediated task management,”
inProceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , ser. CHI ’18. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 58:1–58:6.
[19] M. Canonico and L. De Russis, “A comparison and
critique of natural language understanding tools,”
CLOUD COMPUTING 2018 , p. 120, 2018.
[20] E. Gregori, “Evaluation of modern tools for an omscs
advisor chatbot,” 2017.
[21] StackOverﬂow, “Natural language processing,”
https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/4115526/
natural-language-processing, 03 2020, (Accessed on
03/09/2020).
[22] StackOverﬂow, “Artiﬁcial intelligence - com-
parison between luis.ai vs api.ai vs wit.ai?”
https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/37215188/
comparison-between-luis-ai-vs-api-ai-vs-wit-ai,
(Accessed on 04/11/2020).
[23] StackOverﬂow, “NLP - build chatbot for education
purporse,” https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/
52206324/build-chatbot-for-education-purporse,
(Accessed on 11/25/2019).
[24] C. Lebeuf, M. Storey, and A. Zagalsky, “Software bots,”
IEEE Software , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 18–23, January/Febru-
ary 2018.
[25] J. Ask, M. Facemire, and A. Hogan, “The state of
chatbots,” Forrester.com report , vol. 20, 2016.
[26] GoodRebels, “The impact of conversational bots in the
customer experience,” https://www.goodrebels.com/
the-impact-of-conversational-bots-in-the- nncustomer-
experience/, (Accessed on 04/21/2020).
[27] Microsoft, “LUIS (language understanding) – cogni-
tive services,” https://www.luis.ai/home, (Accessed
on 02/20/2020).
[28] IBM, “IBM Watson,” https://www.ibm.com/watson,
(Accessed on 11/20/2019).
[29] Google, “Dialogﬂow,” https://dialogﬂow.com/, (Ac-
cessed on 02/05/2020).
[30] Rasa, “Rasa: Open source conversational ai,” https://
rasa.com/, (Accessed on 02/20/2020).
[31] A. Abdellatif, K. Badran, D. Costa, and E. Shihab, “A

==== Page 16 ====
16
comparison of natural language understanding plat-
forms for chatbots in software engineering — zenodo,”
https://zenodo.org/record/4734080, 2021, (Accessed
on 02/10/2021).
[32] Rasa, “Conﬁdence and fallback intents,” https:
//rasa.com/docs/rasa/api/http-api/, (Accessed on
11/18/2019).
[33] Microsoft, “Prediction scores - language
understanding - azure cognitive services,”
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-
services/luis/luis-concept-prediction-score, (Accessed
on 11/10/2019).
[34] Dialogﬂow, “query,” https://dialogﬂow.com/docs/
reference/agent/query, (Accessed on 11/10/2019).
[35] IBM, “Watson assistant v1,” https://cloud.ibm.com/
apidocs/assistant-v1, (Accessed on 11/18/2019).
[36] F. Koetter, M. Blohm, M. Kochanowski, J. Goetzer,
D. Graziotin, and S. Wagner, “Motivations, classiﬁ-
cation and model trial of conversational agents for
insurance companies,” in 11th International Conference
on Agents and Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[37] D. Ye, Z. Xing, C. Y. Foo, Z. Q. Ang, J. Li, and N. Kapre,
“Software-speciﬁc named entity recognition in soft-
ware engineering social content,” in 2016 IEEE 23rd
International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution,
and Reengineering (SANER) , vol. 1, March 2016, pp. 90–
101.
[38] L. Mamykina, B. Manoim, M. Mittal, G. Hripcsak, and
B. Hartmann, “Design lessons from the fastest QA site
in the west,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser. CHI ’11. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 2857–2866.
[39] R. Abdalkareem, E. Shihab, and J. Rilling, “What do
developers use the crowd for? a study using stack
overﬂow,” IEEE Softw. , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 53–60, Mar.
2017.
[40] Dialogﬂow, “Developer entities,” https://dialogﬂow.
com/docs/entities/developer-entities, (Accessed on
03/10/2020).
[41] Microsoft, “Entity types - language un-
derstanding - azure cognitive services,”
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-
services/luis/luis-concept-entity-types, (Accessed on
03/10/2020).
[42] Rasa, “Training data format,” https://rasa.com/docs/
nlu/0.13.8/dataformat/, (Accessed on 03/10/2020).
[43] IBM, “Creating entities,” https://cloud.ibm.
com/docs/services/assistant?topic=assistant-
entities#entities, (Accessed on 03/11/2020).
[44] D. S. Cruzes and T. Dyba, “Recommended steps for
thematic synthesis in software engineering,” in 2011 In-
ternational Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement , Sep. 2011, pp. 275–284.
[45] V . Braun and V . Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in
psychology,” Qualitative research in psychology , vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006.
[46] P . Lenberg, R. Feldt, and L. G. Wallgren, “Human
factors related challenges in software engineering: An
industrial perspective,” in Proceedings of the Eighth In-
ternational Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of
Software Engineering , ser. CHASE ’15. Piscataway, NJ,USA: IEEE Press, 2015, pp. 43–49.
[47] H. Munir, K. Wnuk, and P . Runeson, “Open
innovation in software engineering: a systematic
mapping study,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 684–723, Apr 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-015-9380-x
[48] Rasa, “Frequently asked questions,” https://rasa.com/
docs/nlu/faq/, (Accessed on 02/18/2020).
[49] J. Cohen, “A coefﬁcient of agreement for nomi-
nal scales,” Educational and Psychological Measurement ,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 37–46, 1960.
[50] J. L. Fleiss and J. Cohen, “The equivalence of weighted
kappa and the intraclass correlation coefﬁcient as mea-
sures of reliability,” Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 613–619, 1973.
[51] StackOverﬂow, “PHP mysqli query returns empty error
message,” https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/
25941078/php-mysqli-query-returns-empty-error-
message, 2019, (Accessed on 07/20/2020).
[52] M. Wyrich and J. Bogner, “Towards an autonomous bot
for automatic source code refactoring,” in Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Bots in Software
Engineering , ser. BotSE ’19. IEEE Press, 2019, p. 24–28.
[53] J. Han, J. Pei, and M. Kamber, Data mining: Concepts
and techniques , ser. The Morgan Kaufmann Series in
Data Management Systems. Elsevier Science, 2011.
[Online]. Available: https://books.google.ca/books?
id=pQws07tdpjoC
[54] G. Barash, E. Farchi, I. Jayaraman, O. Raz, R. Tzoref-
Brill, and M. Zalmanovici, “Bridging the gap between
ml solutions and their business requirements using
feature interactions,” in Proceedings of the 2019 27th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering , ser. ESEC/FSE 2019. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019,
p. 1048–1058. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3338906.3340442
[55] A. Ilmania, Abdurrahman, S. Cahyawijaya, and A. Pur-
warianti, “Aspect detection and sentiment classiﬁca-
tion using deep neural network for indonesian aspect-
based sentiment analysis,” in 2018 International Confer-
ence on Asian Language Processing (IALP) , 2018, pp. 62–
67.
[56] Dialogﬂow, “Training phrases,” https://dialogﬂow.
com/docs/intents/training-phrases, (Accessed on
02/24/2020).
[57] IBM, “Deﬁning intents,” https://cloud.ibm.
com/docs/services/assistant?topic=assistant-
intents#intents-entity-references, (Accessed on
02/24/2020).
[58] StackOverﬂow, “Chatbot dialogﬂow returning answers
with conﬁdence score below ml classiﬁcation
threshold,” https://stackoverﬂow.com/questions/
54218274/dialogﬂow-returning-answers-with-
conﬁdence-score-below-ml-classiﬁcation-thres,
(Accessed on 08/19/2020).
[59] StackOverﬂow, “Dialogﬂow matches irrelevant
phrases to existing intents,” https://stackoverﬂow.
com/questions/49560851/dialogﬂow-matches-
irrelevant-phrases-to-existing-intents, (Accessed

==== Page 17 ====
17
on 08/27/2020).
[60] IBM, “Entities,” https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/
services/assistant-icp?topic=assistant-private-
entities#entity-described, (Accessed on 01/09/2020).
[61] Rasa, “Duckling,” https://duckling.wit.ai/, (Accessed
on 12/07/2019).
[62] E. Shihab, Z. M. Jiang, B. Adams, A. E. Hassan,
and R. Bowerman, “Prioritizing the creation of unit
tests in legacy software systems,” Software: Practice
and Experience , vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1027–1048, 2011.
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/spe.1053
[63] Rasa, “multiple entity recognition · issue #427,”
https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasa nlu/issues/427,
(Accessed on 11/19/2019).
[64] Dialogﬂow, “History — dialogﬂow documen-
tation,” https://cloud.google.com/dialogﬂow/docs/
history, (Accessed on 02/07/2020).
[65] X. Zhu and A. Goldberg, Introduction to Semi-Supervised
Learning .
[66] Z.-H. Zhou, “A brief introduction to weakly supervised
learning,” National Science Review , vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 44–53, 08 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwx106
[67] Rasa, “rasa/crf entity extractor.py at master
· rasahq/rasa,” https://github.com/RasaHQ/
rasa/blob/master/rasa/nlu/extractors/crf entity
extractor.py, (Accessed on 11/25/2019).
[68] Microsoft, “Good example utterances - language
understanding - azure cognitive services,”
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-
services/luis/luis-concept-utterance, (Accessed on
11/19/2019).
[69] Bugbot, “A slack slash command app to ﬁle browser
bugs in jira,” https://github.com/jshjohnson/Bugbot,
(Accessed on 11/16/2019).
[70] R. Kumar, C. Bansal, C. Maddila, N. Sharma, S. Marte-
lock, and R. Bhargava, “Building Sankie: An AI plat-
form for DevOps,” in Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Bots in Software Engineering , ser. BotSE ’19.
IEEE Press, 2019, p. 48–53.
[71] S. Urli, Z. Yu, L. Seinturier, and M. Monperrus, “How
to design a program repair bot? insights from the re-
pairnator project,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering
in Practice , ser. ICSE-SEIP ’18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 95–104.
[72] C. Lebeuf, A. Zagalsky, M. Foucault, and M.-A. Storey,
“Deﬁning and classifying software bots: A faceted tax-
onomy,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop
on Bots in Software Engineering , ser. BotSE ’19. IEEE
Press, 2019, p. 1–6.
[73] C. R. Lebeuf, “A taxonomy of software bots: Towards a
deeper understanding of software bot characteristics,”
Ph.D. dissertation, 2018.
[74] N. C. Bradley, T. Fritz, and R. Holmes, “Context-aware
conversational developer assistants,” in Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering ,
ser. ICSE ’18. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp.
993–1003.
[75] I. Beschastnikh, M. F. Lungu, and Y. Zhuang, “Accel-erating software engineering research adoption with
analysis bots,” in Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerg-
ing Results Track , ser. ICSE-NIER ’17. Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 35–38.
[76] E. Paikari, J. Choi, S. Kim, S. Baek, M. Kim, S. Lee,
C. Han, Y. Kim, K. Ahn, C. Cheong, and et al., “A chat-
bot for conﬂict detection and resolution,” in Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Bots in Software
Engineering , ser. BotSE ’19. IEEE Press, 2019, p. 29–33.
[77] Y. Tian, F. Thung, A. Sharma, and D. Lo, “APIBot:
Question answering bot for api documentation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 32Nd IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering , ser. ASE 2017. IEEE
Press, 2017, pp. 153–158.
[78] R. Romero, E. Parra, and S. Haiduc, “Experiences build-
ing an answer bot for gitter,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
International Workshop on Bots in Software Engineering ,
ser. BotSE ’20. IEEE Press, 2020.
[79] P . P . Angara, “Towards a deeper understanding of
current conversational frameworks through the design
and development of a cognitive agent,” Master’s thesis,
2018.
[80] B. A. Shawar and E. Atwell, “Different measurements
metrics to evaluate a chatbot system,” in Proceedings of
the Workshop on Bridging the Gap: Academic and Industrial
Research in Dialog Technologies , ser. NAACL-HLT-Dialog
’07. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2007, pp. 89–96.
[81] Google, “Dialogﬂow agent validation,” https://cloud.
google.com/dialogﬂow/es/docs/agents-validation,
(Accessed on 09/02/2020).
[82] A. Begel and T. Zimmermann, “Analyze this! 145
questions for data scientists in software engineering,”
inProceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering , ser. ICSE 2014. New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 12–23. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2568225.2568233
[83] V . S. Sharma, R. Mehra, and V . Kaulgud, “What do
developers want?: An advisor approach for developer
priorities,” in Proceedings of the 10th International
Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering , ser. CHASE ’17. Piscataway, NJ, USA:
IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 78–81. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/CHASE.2017.14
[84] T. Fritz and G. C. Murphy, “Using information
fragments to answer the questions developers ask,”
inProceedings of the 32Nd ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1 , ser.
ICSE ’10. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp.
175–184. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1806799.1806828
[85] S. Epskamp, “Reproducibility and replicability in
a fast-paced methodological world,” Advances in
Methods and Practices in Psychological Science , vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 145–155, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/2515245919847421
[86] M. Brundage, S. Avin, J. Wang, H. Belﬁeld, G. Krueger,
G. Hadﬁeld, H. Khlaaf, J. Yang, H. Toner, R. Fong,
T. Maharaj, P . W. Koh, S. Hooker, J. Leung, A. Trask,
E. Bluemke, J. Lebensold, C. O’Keefe, M. Koren, T. Ryf-

==== Page 18 ====
18
fel, J. Rubinovitz, T. Besiroglu, F. Carugati, J. Clark,
P . Eckersley, S. de Haas, M. Johnson, B. Laurie,
A. Ingerman, I. Krawczuk, A. Askell, R. Cammarota,
A. Lohn, D. Krueger, C. Stix, P . Henderson, L. Graham,
C. Prunkl, B. Martin, E. Seger, N. Zilberman, S. O.
hEigeartaigh, F. Kroeger, G. Sastry, R. Kagan, A. Weller,
B. Tse, E. Barnes, A. Dafoe, P . Scharre, A. Herbert-Voss,
M. Rasser, S. Sodhani, C. Flynn, T. K. Gilbert, L. Dyer,
S. Khan, Y. Bengio, and M. Anderljung, “Toward trust-
worthy ai development: Mechanisms for supporting
veriﬁable claims,” 2020.
Ahmad Abdellatif is a PhD candidate in the
Department of Computer Science and Soft-
ware Engineering at Concordia University, Mon-
treal, Canada. He received his masters in Soft-
ware Engineering from King Fahd University of
Petroleum and Minerals in 2015, where his work
focused on assessing software quality. He did his
Bachelors in Computer Engineering at An-Najah
National University. His research interests are in
software chatbots, mining software repositories,
software quality, and empirical software engi-
neering. More about his work is available at http://das.encs.concordia.
ca/members/ahmad-abdellatif.
Khaled Badran is a Master’s Software Engi-
neering student at Concordia University, Mon-
treal, Canada. He works as a research assistant
in the Data-driven Analysis of Software (DAS)
lab. His research interests are in software bot-
s/chatbots, mining software repositories, natural
language understanding, and empirical software
engineering. He was awarded the prestigious
NSERC Undergraduate Research Award. Y ou
can ﬁnd more at http://das.encs.concordia.ca/
members/khaled-badran.
Diego Elias Costa is a postdoctoral researcher
in the Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering at Concordia University.
He received his PhD in Computer Science from
Heidelberg University, Germany. His research in-
terests cover a wide range of software engineer-
ing and performance engineering related topics,
including mining software repositories, empirical
software engineering, performance testing, soft-
ware ecosystems, and software bots. Y ou can
ﬁnd more about him http://das.encs.concordia.
ca/members/diego-costa.
Emad Shihab is an associate professor and
Concordia research chair in the Department of
Computer Science and Software Engineering at
Concordia University. Dr. Shihab leads the Data-
driven Analysis of Software (DAS) lab. He re-
ceived his PhD from Queens University. Dr. Shi-
hab’s research interests are in Software Quality
Assurance, Mining Software Repositories, Tech-
nical Debt, Mobile Applications and Software Ar-
chitecture. He worked as a software research
intern at Research In Motion in Waterloo, On-
tario and Microsoft Research in Redmond, Washington. Dr. Shihab is
a member of the IEEE and ACM. More information can be found at
http://das.encs.concordia.ca.

==== Page 19 ====
19
APPENDIX
Detailed Precision and Recall Values When Evaluating Intents Classiﬁcations.
In section 4.1, we presented the F1-measure values for each task when classifying intents. In this appendix, we add detailed
precision, recall, and F1-measure values that are used to compute the F1-measure values for each task on each NLU.
Table 11: Intents classiﬁcation results for the Repository task.
IntentIBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS
P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
CountCommitsByDate 86.4 90.5 88.4 84.0 100.0 91.3 100.0 66.7 80.0 88.9 38.1 53.3
FileCommits 83.3 41.7 55.6 100.0 66.7 80.0 100.0 16.7 28.6 16.7 8.3 11.1
OverloadedDev 100.0 88.9 94.1 100.0 66.7 80.0 88.9 88.9 88.9 40.9 100.0 58.1
CommitsByDate 87.5 58.3 70.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 88.9 66.7 76.2 0.0 0.0 0.0
ExperiencedDevFixBugs 100.0 85.7 92.3 92.3 85.7 88.9 100.0 85.7 92.3 100.0 7.1 13.3
BuggyFiles 100.0 92.3 96.0 100.0 92.3 96.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 90.9 76.9 83.3
BuggyCommitsByDate 60.0 92.3 72.7 80.0 61.5 69.6 70.6 92.3 80.0 100.0 84.6 91.7
FixCommit 100.0 100.0 100.0 84.6 100.0 91.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 52.4 100.0 68.8
BuggyCommit 90.0 100.0 94.7 90.0 100.0 94.7 90.0 100.0 94.7 47.4 100.0 64.3
BuggyFixCommit 100.0 100.0 100.0 85.7 85.7 85.7 50.0 85.7 63.2 33.3 85.7 48.0
P: Precision, R: Recall, F1: F1-measure
Table 12: Intents classiﬁcation results for the Stack Overﬂow task.
IntentIBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS
P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
UsingMethodImproperly 93.6 73.3 79.1 84.0 58.3 66.5 81.6 58.3 64.4 71.7 51.7 57.5
LookingForCodeSample 85.3 97.9 90.9 81.5 91.4 85.9 78.2 92.1 84.5 75.4 95.7 84.0
FacingError 80.0 80.0 80.0 60.0 60.0 60.0 30.0 40.0 33.3 10.0 10.0 10.0
PassingData 35.0 40.0 36.7 50.0 50.0 50.0 35.0 40.0 36.7 0.0 0.0 0.0
LookingForBestPractice 86.7 80.0 81.3 86.7 80.0 81.3 76.7 80.0 78.0 90.0 80.0 83.3
P: Precision, R: Recall, F1: F1-measure
Detailed Precision and Recall Values When Assessing Entity Extraction.
When discussing the entity extraction results in Section 4.3, we presented the F1-measure values for each task. Here, we
present the detailed precision, recall, and F1-measure values that are used to compute the F1-measure values presented
earlier.
Table 13: Entity extraction classiﬁcation results for the Repository task.
Entity TypeIBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS
P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
FileName 8.6 100.0 15.9 86.4 73.1 79.2 93.8 57.7 71.4 83.3 76.9 80.0
JiraTicket 100.0 100.0 100.0 84.6 100.0 91.7 100.0 81.8 90.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
DateTime 78.1 96.2 86.2 56.9 55.8 56.3 100.0 100.0 100.0 98.1 98.1 98.1
CommitHash 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 80.0 88.9 100.0 100.0 100.0
P: Precision, R: Recall, F1: F1-measure
Table 14: Entity extraction classiﬁcation results for the Stack Overﬂow task.
Entity TypeIBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS
P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
ProgLanguage 88.4 96.2 92.0 90.7 97.2 93.7 92.1 91.5 91.4 95.9 80.2 86.8
Framework 70.7 63.2 65.4 85.3 43.2 56.0 89.1 42.1 56.1 88.6 41.1 54.4
Standards 81.0 42.9 54.1 85.7 47.6 56.9 17.5 14.3 14.9 23.8 14.3 17.5
API 50.9 39.2 43.3 84.0 32.4 42.8 62.3 20.3 29.9 48.6 16.2 23.5
Platform 76.9 61.5 67.4 64.1 53.8 55.9 84.6 69.2 75.1 53.8 38.5 43.6
P: Precision, R: Recall, F1: F1-measure

