==== Page 1 ====
 
 Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70 (2020 ) 
ISSN: 2708 -0757 
 
JOURNAL OF APPLIED SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS  
 
www.jastt.org   
 
                                                            56 
doi: 10.38094/jastt1224          
 
A Comprehensive Review of Dimensionality Reduction 
Techniques for Feature Selection and Feature Extraction  
 
 
Rizgar R. Zebari 1, *, Adnan Mohsin Abdulazeez2, Diyar Qader Zeebaree3, Dilovan Asaad Zebari4, Jwan Najeeb Saeed5 
  
1IT Department. Technical College of Informatics Akre, Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region, Iraq, 
rizgar.ramadhan@dpu.edu.krd  
2Presidency of Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region , Iraq, Adnan.mohsin@dpu.edu.krd  
3,4Research Center of Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdistan Region, Iraq, dqszeebaree@dpu.edu.krd , 
dilovan.zebari@dpu.edu.krd  
5IT Department. Duhok Technical Institute, Duhok Polytechnic University, Duhok, Kurdista n Region, Iraq, 
jwan.najeeb@dpu.edu.krd  
* Correspondence: rizgar.ramadhan@dpu.edu.krd  
  
Abstract  
Due to sharp increases in data dimensions, working on every data mining or machine learning (ML) task requires more efficient  
techniques to get the desired results. Therefore, in recent years, researchers have proposed and developed many methods and techniques 
to reduce the high dimensions of data and to attain the required accuracy. To ameliorate the accuracy of learning features as  well as to 
decrease the t raining time dimensionality reduction is used as a pre -processing step, which can eliminate irrelevant data, noise, and 
redundant features. Dimensionality reduction (DR) has been performed based on two main methods, which are feature selection ( FS) and 
feature extraction (FE). FS is considered an important method because data is generated continuously at an ever -increasing rate; some 
serious dimensionality problems can be reduced with this method, such as decreasing redundancy effectively, eliminating irrel evant data, 
and ameliorating result comprehensibility. Moreover, FE transacts with the problem of finding the most distinctive, informati ve, and 
decreased set of features to ameliorate the efficiency of both the processing and storage of data. This paper o ffers a comprehensive 
approach to FS and FE in the scope of DR. Moreover, the details of each paper, such as used algorithms/approaches, datasets, classifiers, 
and achieved results are comprehensively analyzed and summarized. Besides, a systematic discussi on of all of the reviewed methods to 
highlight authors' trends, determining the method(s) has been done, which significantly reduced computational time, and selec ting the 
most accurate classifiers. As a result, the different types of both methods have been  discussed and analyzed the findings.  
 
Keywords : dimension reduction, dimension reduction techniques, feature selection, feature extraction.  
 
Received: April 29, 2020 / Accepted: May 13, 2020 / Online: May 15, 2020  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, data mining and knowledge discovery have a 
great role in several digital applications. Knowledge is detected 
by processing and an alyzing a large amount of the previously 
collected data [1]. Data generated in a huge volume in different 
fields, and it is on continuous growth in size, complexity, and 
dimensionality [2, 3]. A dataset with high dimensionality 
features its numerous featur es, but few samples have a direct 
relation with data mining and machine learning tasks [4, 5]. 
Therefore, these issues of data become a big challenge for 
extracting potentially useful, and ultimately understandable patterns or information in almost every d ata mining task. Also, 
working in high dimensional data increases the difficulty of 
knowledge discovery and pattern classification because there 
are a lot of redundant and irrelevant features. Reducing high 
dimensional datasets to a low dimensional dataset  by filter or 
remove redundant and noise information is a method to solve 
this problem, and this is known as dimensionality reduction [6].  
Dimensionality reduction is a process for decreasing 
features’ dimensionality, but the data is still present. In the  
reduced or low dimension dataset, the crucial features remain 
even if some particular pattern vanishes [7, 8]. Also, it utilizes 

==== Page 2 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
57 to reduce the size of input data and then preserve much variance 
of essential features compared to the dataset with the larger  
size. In real -world data, it will become easy to detect and use 
for data mining applications and gain high accuracy 
performance [1, 9]. Moreover, the role of dimensionality 
reduction is to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of the data 
mining computation , and it is considered as a vital 
preprocessing step. Furthermore, it provides several advantages 
such as eliminating irrelevant, redundant patterns in the dataset; 
as a result, to reduce the time and amount of memory required 
for processing such data [1, 10]. By reducing the dataset, the 
quality of data will improve, the algorithm will work 
efficiently, achieve better accuracy, and pattern design and 
examination will be clearer for researchers [11]. Additionally, 
reducing the cost of computing, improving d imensions 
visualization, and enhancing the results [12, 13].  
This work reviewed more than forty articles of feature 
selection and feature extraction that have been introduced and 
published in the last three years.  
II. DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION TECHNIQUES  
Dimensionality reduction is the operation of transforming 
the high dimensional representation of data in low dimensional 
representations. With the massive growth in high dimensional 
data, the use of various dimensionality reduction techniques has 
become po pular in many areas of use. Moreover, several 
modern approaches are continually emerging. Dimensionality 
reduction techniques transform the original dataset having high 
dimensionality and turn it into a new dataset representing low 
dimensionality while mai ntaining as much as possible the 
original meanings of the data. The low dimensional 
representation of the original data contributes to solving the 
dimensionality curse problem. The low dimensional data can be 
easily analyzed, processed, and visualized [14] . Several 
benefits can be obtained due to applying the dimensionality 
reduction techni ques applied to a dataset. (i) As  the number of 
dimensions comes down, data storage space can be reduced. (ii) 
It takes les s computation time only. (iii) Redundant , irrel evant, 
and n oisy data can be removed. (iv) Data  quality can be 
improved. (v) Some algorithms do not perform well on a greater 
number of dimensions taken. So, reducing these dimensions 
helps an algorithm to work efficiently and improves accuracy. 
(vi) It is  challenging to visualize data in higher dimensions. So, 
reducing the dimension may allow us to design and examine 
patterns more clearly. (vii) It simplifies the process of 
classification and also improves efficiency [15, 16]. Generally, 
the dimensionality  reduction techniques can be classified into 
two main groups, or in other words, the dimensionality 
reduction is achieved through two different techniques: feature 
selection and feature extraction. In feature selection, 
information can be lost since some f eatures should be excluded 
when the process of feature subset choice by doing this 
information can be reduced. However, in feature extraction, the 
dimension can be decreased without losing much initial feature 
dataset [2, 10, 14, 17].  Table I provides a d escriptive summary 
of the methods of dimension reduction.  
 TABLE I.  THE SUMMARY OF DIMENSION REDUCTION TECHNIQUES  
Method  Main concept  Pros  Cons  
Feature  
extraction  Summarize the 
dataset by creating 
linear combinations 
of the features  Preserves the 
original, relative 
distance between  
covers latent 
structure, objects  Not sufficient 
enough in the 
existing of a huge 
number of  
irrelevant features  
Feature 
selection  A sublist of relevant 
features can be 
selected depending 
on defined criteria  Strong against 
irreleva nt features  Latent structure 
does not cover  
 
A. Feature S election  
Feature selection is utilized to reduce the dimensionality 
impact on the dataset through finding the subset of feature 
which efficiently define the data [18, 19]. It selects the 
important and relevant features to the mining task from the 
input data and removes redundant and irrelevant features [20, 
21]. It is useful for detecting a good subset of features that is 
appropriate for the given problem [2, 22].  The main purpose of 
feature selection is to construct a subset of features as small as 
possible but represents the whole input data vital features [11, 
23]. Feature selection provides numerous advantages: reduce 
the size of data, decrease needed storage, prediction accuracy 
improvement, overfi tting evading, and reduce executing and 
training time from easily understanding variables. Feature 
selection algorithm phase is divided into two -phase such as (i) 
Subset Generation: (ii) Subset Evaluation: In subset 
Generation, we need to generate subset f rom the input dataset 
and to use Subset Evaluations we have to check whether the 
generated subset is optimal or not [24, 25]. “Fig.1” shows the 
overall method of the feature selection process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Process of feature s election . 
 
B. Feature Selection Problems  
Various issues can benefit from the feature selection 
techniques application. High dimension, low sample size data  
are becoming more popular in different fields. Many of the 
features of these problems do not facilitate an adequate 
classification. More so, the imbalance problem happens when 
one of the two classes has more samples than other classes. 
Many algorithms neg lect the minority sample when 
concentrating on a major sample classification.  However, the 
minority samples are crucial but seldom occurred. Moreover , in 
 
Subset 
Generatio
n 
Subset 
Evaluation  
Is stopping 
criteria met?  
Selected 
Feature 
Set 
Full Feature 
Set 
No 
 Yes 

==== Page 3 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
58 machine learning, the shift of the dataset is a popular problem 
that happens when the joint distributi on of inputs and outputs 
varies between training and test stages. A special case of dataset 
shift, which happens when only the input distribution changes 
is called Covariate shift. Furthermore, the reduction of the 
dimensionality and consequently feature s election is one of the 
most common techniques of noisy data elimination. Eventually, 
misclassification costs and test costs are the two most 
significant kinds of cost in cost -sensitive learning [26 -28]. 
C. Feature Selection Methods  
Feature selection aims to s elect a feature subset from the 
original set of features based on a/the feature’s relevance and 
redundancy. Originally evaluation methods in feature selection 
are divided into four kinds: filter, wrapper, embedded [10, 14, 
18], and hybrid [20, 29]. Recentl y, another type of evaluation 
method is developed, i.e., ensemble feature selection [30, 31]. 
“Fig. 2” d epict s the hierarchy of feature selection t echniques.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Hierarchy of feature s election t echniques . 
Filter  is considered the earliest method and also known as 
an open -loop method. It checks the features relying on the 
intrinsic characteristics prior to the learning tasks. It mainly 
measures the feature characteristics depending on four different 
kinds of measu rement criteria, i.e. information, dependency, 
consistency, and distance [32]. In the filter method, the feature 
selection process is performed independently of the data mining 
algorithm. It uses statistical standards for evaluating the ranking 
of the subs et [17, 24]. Moreover, this technique is to perform 
good performance and high -efficiency computing, easily 
scalable in high dimensional datasets, and outperformed the 
wrapper technique. The primary downside of this method is that 
it neglects the integratio n between the selected subset and the 
performance of the induction algorithm [10, 22, 26].  
Wrapper,  or it also can be called a close -loop method, 
wraps the feature selection around the learning algorithm and 
uses the accuracy of the performance or the err or rate of the 
classification process as a criterion of feature evaluation. By 
decreasing the estimation error of a specific classifier, it 
chooses the most discriminative subset of features. The wrapper 
method performs feature selection based on the perfo rmance of 
the learning algorithm; it selects the most optimal feature for 
the prediction algorithm. Hence it achieves better performance 
and high accuracy compared to the filter algorithm [22, 27, 33]. 
The main disadvantage of this approach is computing 
complexity and more exposure to overfitting in comparison to 
the filter approach. Most wrapper methods are multivariate; thus, they need extensive computation times to achieve the 
convergences and can be intractable for  large datasets [33, 34]. 
“Fig. 3” show s the involved steps in the wrapper method.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Wrapper method for feature s election . 
  Embedded  method is a built -in feature selection mechanism 
that embeds feature selection in the learning algorithm and uses 
its properties to guide feature evaluation. The embedded 
method is more effective and more tractable than the wrapper 
method computationally while retaining similar perfor mance. 
This is because the embedded method avoids the repeated 
execution of the classifier and the examination of every feature 
subset. The embedded method combines the qualities of both 
filter and wrapper methods. It selects features during the 
implementa tion of the mining algorithm, and hence it has less 
computational expensiveness [32, 35]. Steps involved in th e 
embedded method are shown in “Fig. 4 ”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Embedded method for feature s election.  
 
 
   Hybrid and ensemble  methods the recent developments in 
feature selection can be represented in the hybrid method. Thus, 
it can be developed either by integrating two 
various  methods  (e.g. wrapper and filter), two methods with the 
same criteria, or two feature selection approaches.  In the hybrid 
method, the advantages of both methods can be inherited by 
combining their complementary strengths [36]. The 
combination of filter and wrappe r methods is the most common 
hybrid method [37]. However, ensemble  method is a method 
that aims at building a group of feature subsets and then 
producing an aggregated result out of the group [38]. This 
method is depending on various subsampling techniques  where 
a particular feature selection method is implemented on a 
variety of subsamples, and the obtained features are merged to 
create a more stable subset. Table II describes the advantages 
and disadvantages of each method  
 
Wrappe
r 
Feature Selection Techniques  
 
Filter 
 Embedde
d 
Hybrid  
 Ensemble  
 
Pearson  
correlation  
LDA 
 
Forward 
selection  
Backward 
elimination  
Recursive 
Feature 
Elimination  
 
Selecting the Best Subset  
Set of all 
Features  
  
 
 
Generate a subset  
Learning Algorithm and 
Performance  
 
Selecting the Best Subset  
Set of all 
features  
 
 
 
Generate a subset  
 Learning  
algorithm  
Performance  

==== Page 4 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
59  
TABLE II.  ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE OF FEATURE SELECTION 
METHODS . 
Method  Advantages  Disadvantages  
Filter  
 - It works faster than 
wrapper  
- Scalable  
- Classifier independent  
- The computational 
complexity is better than   
wrapper  
- Better generalizable 
property  - The interaction 
between 
classifiers is 
neglected  
- The dependency 
among features is 
ignored  
 
Wrapper  
 - It Interacts with classifier  
- Consider the dependence 
among features  
- Higher performance 
accuracy than filter  - More prone to 
over-fitting  
- Classifier specific  
- Need expensive 
computation  
Embedded  
 - Interact with classifier  
- Better computational 
complexity than wrapper  
- Higher performance 
accuracy than filter  
- Less prone to over -fitting 
than wrapper  
- Consider the dependency 
among features  - Classifier specific  
 
Hybrid  
 - The performance accuracy 
is higher than filter  
- Better computational 
complexity than wrapper  
- Less prone to over -fitting 
than wrapper  - Classifier specific  
 
Ensemble  - Less exposed to over -
fitting  
- It has more flexibly and 
robustness upon high 
dimensional data  - An ensemble of 
classifiers is not 
easy to 
understand  
 
 
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION  
Feature extraction method extracting new features from 
original dataset, and it is very beneficial when we want to 
decrease the number of resources required for processing 
without missing relevant feature dataset. Feature extraction can 
also decrease the number of additional features for an offered 
study. Feature extraction produces a remarkable transformation 
of first features to create more significant features. Feature 
extraction is a process for creating new fea tures that depend on 
the original input feature set to decrease the high dimensionality 
of the feature vector. The transformation method is done by 
algebraic transformation, and according to some optimization 
criteria [39, 40]. Also, feature extraction has  the ability to 
handle essential information during dealing with high 
dimensional issues [41, 42]. These dimensionality reduction 
techniques aim to not lose a large amount of information during 
the feature transformation process by conserving the original 
relative distance between features and cover the original data 
potential structure [10]. Feature extraction is less exposed to 
overfitting and perform good accuracy for the classification in 
comparison to the feature selection methods. However, the data 
description is lost occasionally after the transformation, and the 
cost of this process is expensive in several datasets [43, 44] . Feature extraction algorithms are classified into linear and 
nonlinear algorithms [39, 43, 45] . However, the ideal feature 
extraction based dimensionality reduction methods is Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) [46, 47], Multi -Dimensional 
Scaling (MDS), Isometric Mapping (ISOMAP), Locally Linear 
Embedding (LLE), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), 
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) an d clustering methods [48, 
49]. “Fig. 5 ” depict s the overall process of feature extraction 
method.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5. The process of feature extraction  
  In Compare with feature selection, feature extraction 
diminishes the number of variables by transforming a 
considerable number of attributes into a set of reduced features. 
Feature extraction tries to find a significant low -dimensional 
representation of hi gh-dimensional data. In other words, a 
lesser information loss and a higher discriminating power can 
be guaranteed using feature extraction rather than feature 
selection. However, the application of feature extraction in 
sentiment analysis has been hindere d by several  difficulties. 
First, many feature extraction algorithms that have been 
classified as nonlinear methods cannot perform the mapping 
from a high -dimensional space to a low -dimensional space, 
thereby prohibiting the training of a practically usabl e 
classification model and resulting in a loss of data 
interpretability. An expert system that can automatically 
determine the sentiment of documents must obtain a low -
dimensional representation of new documents during the test 
phase. Furthermore, unlike m ost feature selection techniques , 
feature extraction methods are usually unsupervised; that is, 
label information cannot be utilized during the process of 
dimension reduction. When implementing machine learning 
algorithms for sentiment analysis, those docu ments with label 
information must be used to train a predictive model. This same 
information can also help feature extraction methods create 
excellent features [45, 50].  
    In this paper, a comprehensive review is performed for 
the latest and most efficie nt methods that have been performed 
by researchers in the past three years to reduce data dimensions 
in various areas of machine learning and data mining. Also, the 
details of each method, such as used algorithms/approaches, 
datasets, utilized classifiers,  and the results obtained are 
summarized. Moreover, we performed a scientific analysis of 
the studied feature selection and feature extraction methods. 
Furthermore, we highlighted the most widely used approaches, 
the best -reduced dimension, the best decrea sed computational 
time, and the highest achieved accuracy methods. This paper  is 
organized as follows: the introduction is done in section  I, 
section II  presents the dimensionality reduction techniques then  
a review about these techniques is done III , the broad discussi on 
is illustrated in section V , while  section IV contains the 
conclusion.  
 
Full Feature Set  
Extracting new 
Features from 
Existing Features  
New Feature Set  

==== Page 5 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
60 IV. AREVIW ON DIMENTIONALITY REDUCTIOM METHODS  
A. Feature Selectuion Methods  
Dimensionality reduction utilizes the feature selection 
methods to select relevant features. In th is study, we discuss 
several recent works for feature selection. The kinds of 
literature on feature selection methods are summarized in Table 
III. 
Churmonge and Jena [51] proposed a method to address the 
dimensionality issue based on the clustering combine d with 
correlation filter subset selection. The relevant features were 
found by the K -means clustering algorithm and redundant 
features found from clusters and removed by the correlation 
measure. The presented method used on 8 text and 4 microarray 
dataset s and the Naive Bayes (NB) classifier depended on the 
classification. Furthermore, the authors compared their method 
performance with the ReliefF and information gain (IG) feature 
selection methods relating to the accuracy and computational 
time. The accur acy of the proposed method outperformed both 
methods in all datasets except two datasets, and in 
computational, the proposed was faster than other methods in 
all datasets.  
Tan et al. [52] presented a feature selection method based on 
the evolutionary algo rithm (EA) to reduce the dimensionality 
of motor imagery brain -computer interface from 
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. The subset of important 
features was generated from each iteration of the EA, while the 
redundant and insignificant features were eli minated. The 
experiments were performed in two different datasets: EEG 
dataset and several machine learning datasets. Also, three 
classifiers depended: support vector machine (SVM), K -
Nearest Neighbor (KNN), and discriminant analysis (DA). 
Also, the perfor mance of the proposed EA – feature selection 
method was compared with PCA and independent component 
analysis (ICA), neighborhood component analysis (NCA), and 
variable -length particle swarm optimization (VLPSO). The 
results showed that the introduced metho ds outperformed all 
the above methods and could achieve high accuracy even with 
a small subset of the features.  
Hafiz et al. [53] investigated the feature selection issues in 
the power quality events and proposed a two dimensional PSO 
feature selection met hod. They depended on the two 
dimensional in order to efficiently guide the search space of the 
particle swarm. The noise measurement against the reduced 
subset was studied by the Gaussian. The used induction 
algorithms in this study were KNN and Naïve Bay es. 
Moreover, the proposed method performance was compared 
with the Genetic Algorithm (GA), Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO), Binary PSO (BPSO), Catfish BPSO, and Chaotic 
BPSO (CHBPSO). The results have shown that the presented 
method could find an important and robust feature subset and 
achieve better accuracy than the above -mentioned methods.  
Han et al. [54] worked on the limitation of the local linear 
embedding (LLE) method to propose an unsupervised feature 
selection mechanism. They depended on the low di mensional 
space learning and graph matrix learning. The experiments 
performed in 15 datasets (6 of them from the UGI machine learning repository and 9 from the feature selection dataset 
website). Also, the SVM and decision tree (DT) used as 
classifiers and . In addition, the presented method compared 
with eight unsupervised feature selection methods. The results 
demonstrated that the proposed method accomplished better 
accuracy regarding the SVM and DT classifier except in two 
datasets and better stability i n both classifiers compared to the 
8 feature selection methods.  
Niu et al. [55] presented a method to deal with multivariate 
financial time series nonlinearity inherent to improve the 
accuracy of forecasting and make the financial decision better. 
The proposed method involved a feature selection part, deep 
learning framew ork, and error correlation part. In the feature 
selection part, the RReliefF algorithm (which is the enhanced 
version of the ReliefF) cooperated wrapper -based method to 
remove the redundant feature. Also, the deep learning part has 
consisted of long -short term memory (LSTM), gated recurrent 
unit (GRU), and the optimizer based on adaptive moment 
estimation (Adam). The deep leaning part was trained based on 
the subset generated by the first part. Furthermore, the error 
correlation used to enhance the accuracy  of the method. The 
method performance validated on 16 benchmarks and three 
datasets, and the results have shown its superiority.  
Jain and Singh [56] proposed a hybrid feature selection 
method that consisted of ReliefF and PCA algorithms. First, the 
weigh t for each feature was calculated in the used datasets, and 
a set of satisfying features was generated by the first algorithm. 
The second algorithm was applied in the generated set. In the 
proposed method, two types of datasets were considered (text 
and mi croarray), and the experiments performed in ten datasets. 
The performance of the method evaluated in terms of a number 
of the selected features and computation time. The results 
indicated that the presented method could achieve better 
performance in low an d high dimensional datasets and reduced 
half of the irrelevant and redundant features.  
Hosseini and Moattar [57] presented a feature subset 
selection method for imbalanced data classification with high 
dimensional. The authors focused on the feature space , and the 
method was based on interaction information to improve the 
search process. Through each iteration of the method, multiple 
subsets of the features generated, and the best subset involved 
in the next iteration. In more detail, the candidate feature s 
selected by the Symmetric Uncertainty Algorithm (SUA) first. 
After the multivariate interaction information used to test the 
candidate feature subset and based on the dominated 
relationship the best subset of the features selected. 
Furthermore, KNN, Naïv e Bayes and CART were used as 
classifiers. The efficiency of the proposed method assessed in 
13 datasets from different repositories. Additionally, the  
performance of the method outperformed 10 other feature 
selection methods in terms of accuracy and in a number of the 
reduced features.  
Manbari et al . [58] proposed a hybrid unsupervised feature 
selection method based on the clustering and binary ant system. 
The procedure of the method executed in two stages: In the first, 

==== Page 6 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
61 the clustering was performed in ord er to cluster the features and 
in the second stage and from each cluster the best feature 
calculated through the iteration of the Ant process. Meanwhile, 
the second stage of the proposed method repeated several times 
until the dominated features collected.  The presented method 
compared to seven other unsupervised feature selection 
methods in eight datasets from UCI and Pablo de Olavide 
research group. Moreover, the comparison of the method with 
other methods was performed and the assessment done by using 
four classifiers (SVM, KNN, DT, and RF). The results 
demonstrated that the performance of the method was better 
than other methods and significantly minimized computation 
time.  
Qu et al . [59] proposed feature selection for predicting 
colorectal cancer based  on operational taxonomic units. Three 
feature selection methods were integrated into the proposed 
method. In first the subset of most significant operational 
taxonomic units generated by multiple dimension -reduction 
methods. Then for reducing the dimensio nality and increasing 
the efficiency of the correlation -based feature selection (CFS) 
and maximum relevance –maximum distance (MRMD) was 
used as a combined method. Moreover, according to the 
taxonomy file, the best features selected. The experiment was 
performed in two datasets, and three classifiers (RF, Naïve 
Bayes, and DT) were dependent on evaluation. The results 
illustrated that the correlation -based feature selection method 
performed better reduction, and the MRMD required more 
amount of time and memor y for computation. Among all used 
classifiers, the RF achieved better performance.  
Umbarkar and Shukla [60] presented a method to improve 
the performance of the instruction detection system. They used 
IG, gain ratio (GR), and CFS algorithms for reducing t he 
dimensionality in the used dataset. To obtain the best -reduced 
set of features, they divided the original set into several parts, 
and then each algorithm applied to those parts, and the most 
accurate was selected. The experiment of the proposed system 
was performed on KDD -Cup 99 dataset, and DT used as the 
classifier. The results indicated that the correlation -based 
feature selection method achieved better performance 
compared to other used algorithms.  
Farokhmanesh and Sadeghi [61] proposed a feature 
selection method based on sparse feature selection and deep 
neural networks. Initially, Correntropy -induced, Discriminative 
Least Squares Regression (DLSR), and Sparse Group Lasso 
(SGL) three methods of sparse were evaluated and compared. 
Next, the SGL was i ntegrated with a deep neural network, and 
the performance of this combination also assessed. Meanwhile,  
the K -means algorithm was used in the SGL method in order to 
group features. The nearest neighbor (NN) algorithm was used 
as a classifier in the perform ance evaluation of the used 
techniques. The experiment and valuation process of three 
methods of the sparse and combination method was performed 
on the MNIST dataset. The results illustrated that the SGL 
combined with a deep neural network achieved better accuracy.  Duong and Hoang [62] presented a method based on 
Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) descriptor and feature 
selection method to classify the rice quality. They extracted 
HOG features from the rice image, and the score of each feature 
was calcul ated by the fisher score feature selection method. In 
the proposed method, the VNRICE dataset was used to perform 
the experiment of the method. Also, the NN classifier was 
utilized. The results have shown that the fisher score method 
enhanced the accuracy by 42% of the classification and the 
computation time reduced.  
Alharan et al. [63] proposed a method based on feature 
extraction and feature selection methods for texture image 
classification. Firstly, the set of features was extracted from the 
used datas ets by using three approaches (Gray Level Co -
occurrence Matrix (GLCM), Local Binary Pattern (LBP), and 
Gabor filter). After that, the second stage was performed, which 
was the evaluation of the extracted features, and the assessment 
was done by five techni ques (info gain, Gain ratio, oneR, 
ReliefF, and symmetric). Then based on the previous 
assessment, the feature selection was accomplished by utilizing 
the K -means clustering algorithm. The presented method 
experiment was done on three datasets, and SVM, NB , and 
KNN classifiers were used for the classification. The results 
showed that the NB and KNN achieved better accuracy in the 
first dataset while the SVM attained superior accuracy in the 
second and third datasets.  
Osman et al. [64] proposed a model invo lved in feature 
extraction and feature selection color -based methods for 
identifying origin automatically. The presented method was 
performed in three stages. In the first, the skin color information 
was extracted from human faces by using skin color detec tion 
technique. Next, the wrapper subset evaluator and GA method 
to eliminate the redundant and irrelevant features. Moreover, 
1550 face images from different regions were used by the 
authors, and six classifiers (NB, Bayes Net, KNN, SVM, RF, 
and Multilaye r Perceptron (MLP)) were used for the 
classification. The results illustrated that the individual color 
features accuracy was lower than the accuracy of the combined 
color features. Also, the accuracy of the SVM, NB, and Bayes 
Net was very low, and hence t hey could not be used for the 
proposed method.  
Arshak and Eesa [65] proposed a feature selection method 
for dimensionality reduction based on the cuttlefish algorithm 
(CFA) for gene classification. The cuttlefish was used to 
generate a subset of the optim al features. Also, the KNN was 
used as a classifier for the evaluation and classification of the  
proposed method. The experiment was performed on eight 
different datasets from ELVIRA biomedical dataset repository. 
The performance of the proposed method was  compared with 
SVM and DT and the hidden Markov model in terms of 
accuracy and computational time. The result demonstrated that 
the presented achieved better performance in five datasets 
compared to the other methods.  
Zeebaree et al.[66, 67] proposed a fea ture selection method 
based on the Convolutional neural network (CNN) for 

==== Page 7 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
62 classifying and identifying the cancer type in the microarray 
cancer data. In the presented method, the cancer data was 
transformed into the array after the files of data were opened . 
Next, the cancer data organized as matrix vectors, then the CNN 
was applied for the classification. The experiment was 
accomplished in ten cancer datasets, and the performance of the 
method was compared with mSVM -RFE-iRF and varSeIRF 
methods. The results  indicated that the proposed CNN method 
achieved better classification accuracy compared to the other 
methods. Also, it outperformed the other methods in terms of 
decreasing cancer’s genes.  
Balasaraswathi [68] introduced a feature selection method for 
intrusion detection systems based on CAF and membrane 
computing (MC). In the proposed method membrane 
computing was integrated with the cuttlefish algorithm aiming 
to enhance the feature selection process. Moreover, two 
datasets of the intrusion detection syst em were dependent on 
performing the method experiment. The performance of the 
cuttlefish with and without MC was illustrated. Furthermore, 
the comparison of the proposed method’s performance and a 
number of various methods of feature selection was 
accompli shed. The results show the accuracy and computation 
time of the CAF combined with MC was better than all other 
methods.  
Kaur and Singh [69] proposed a method for image 
steganalysis based on feature selection and PSO. First, the 
predominant features were se lected by mutual information. 
Moreover, for selecting dominant features, adaptive PSO was used by the authors. 10000 stego images have been taken from 
the BOSSbase dataset for the experiment of the presented 
method. The classification accuracy of the metho ds was 
evaluated with SVM, KNN, and DT classifiers and compared 
with three other PSO based methods. The results revealed that 
the proposed method outperformed other methods.  
Fatima et al. [70] proposed an optimized feature selection 
method for detecting m alware in the android platform. They 
used evolutionary GA to reduce the feature dimensionality to 
50% of the original dataset and then to train the classifier in 
order to be capable of detecting the malware features. They 
used two APks sets (Malware/Good w are) and two classifiers 
(SVM and neural network). The experimental results 
demonstrated that the SVM accuracy was 96.6%, and neural 
network accuracy was 95.2%. The authors conducted the 
performance of the presented method could be enhanced by 
utilizing la rger datasets.  
Widiyanti and Endah [71] worked on a study for recognition 
of the music emotion based on the feature selection algorithms. 
In the first several features were extracted from the used 
datasets. After that, three feature selection algorithms, namely 
Sequential Forward Selection (SFS), Sequential Backward 
Selection (SBS), and ReliefF were used to identify emotional 
features. Some emotion classification has been used, such as 
sad, angry and happy, etc. the experimental performed on songs 
dataset and SVM classifier was used to compare the 
performance of the used algorithms. The results explained that 
the accuracy of the ReliefF algorithm was lower than other 
algorithms that obtained a similar accuracy.  
TABLE III.  FEATURE SELECTION METHODS SUMMARIZATION  
Ref. Year  Dataset  Technique(s)  Computation 
Time  Classifier(s)  Accuracy  
[51] 2018  Text and 
Microarray  Correlation and K -
means  0.5 to 10.24 
seconds  NB The best 99.0.2%  and the 
worst 68.02%  
[53] 2018  Power quality  PSO 20.9 seconds  KNN and NB  KNN:99.68% and 
NB:99.44%  
[56] 2018  Text and 
Microarray  ReliefF and PCA  1 to 29 seconds  - - 
[60] 2018  KDD -Cup 99  IG, GR and 
correlation  - DT Correlation: 92.65%, IG: 
92.33% and GR: 92.54%  
[64] 2018  Human images  wrapper subset and 
GA - NB, KNN, SVM, 
RF and MLP  NB: 57%, SVM:60%, 
KNN:64%, RF: 75% and 
MLP: 71%  
[65] 2018  ELVIRA  CFA  0.049 to 2.11 
seconds  KNN  100%  
[66] 2018  Different cancer 
datasets  CNN  - - 100%  
[68] 2018  KDDCUP’99  CFA and MC  0.15 by CFA  
and 0.11 
CFAMC  j48 96.66%  
[71] 2018  Song dataset  SFS, SBS and 
ReliefF  - SVM  43% 
[57] 2019  UCI, KEEL and 
GitHub  SUA and interaction 
information  126.57 seconds  KNN, NB and 
CART  100% for KNN, NB and 
CART  
[58] 2019  UCI K-means and binary 
Ant 9.939  seconds  SVM, KNN, DT 
and RF  - 
[59] 2019  [72] and[73]  CFS and MRMD  - RF, NB, and DT  RF achieved better accuracy  
[61] 2019  MNIST  DLSR, SGL and 
Deep Learning  - NN 96.77%  

==== Page 8 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
63 [62] 2019  VNRICE  HOG and fisher 
score  - NN 93.34%  
[63] 2019  Kelberg, And 
Brodatz  IG, ReliefF, 
symmetric and K -
means  - SVM, NB and 
KNN  99.95% by KNN and NB, 
and 99% by SVM  
[70] 2019  APKs  GA 3.76 to 8.57 
seconds  SVM and neural 
network  SVM: 96.6% and neural 
network: 95.2%  
[52] 2020  EEG  EA - SVM, KNN and 
DA SVM:99.25%, 
KNN:99.13% and 
DA:100%  
[54] 2020  UGI LLE - SVM and DT  SVM:97.71% and 
DT:97.20%  
[55] 2020  SZCI and DJIA  RReliefF and LSTM  - - 98.62%  
B. Feature Extraction Methods  
In previous literature, the dimensionality reduction uses the 
feature selection methods to select the relevant features have 
been presented. The remainder of the aim of this paper reviews 
is to review the latest literature related to feature extraction and 
dimensionality  reduction techniques. Table IV  illustrates the 
summary of the recent litera ture.  
Moghaddam et al. [41] proposed a method known as 
spectral segmentation and integration (SSI) as supervised 
feature extraction for hyperspectral images. The developed 
method divided pixels’ spectral signature curve to channels. 
Then a mean weighted o perator was used for integration of each 
channel band in order to extract new features in a very minimal 
number compared to the original bands. Moreover, the PSO 
algorithm was used to merge spectral signature curve pixel 
segments so as to reduce the dimens ionality of the image and to 
increase the class accuracy. In the proposed technique, the 
SVM was used as a classifier, and two datasets were used. The 
experimental results confirmed the SSI method outperformed 
other feature extraction methods such as PCA, SRS, NWFE, 
DAFE, PCA, SELD, BCC, and CBFE.  
Berbar [74] worked on malignant masses in mammograms 
based on the feature extraction. The researcher presented Gray 
Level Co -occurrence Matrix (GLCM) texture feature extraction 
by three hybrid methods that were us ed in the proposed method. 
The three hybrid methods called Wavelet CT1, Wavelet CT2, 
and ST -GLCM. The interesting point of the image was divided 
into sub -image then contrast stretching stage was used prior to 
feature extraction. Then the sub -image has been  applied for the 
methods of feature extraction. Next, the GLCM extracted the 
seven -feature texture and have been merged with seven 
statistical features. Moreover, two datasets images were used in 
this research and SVM classifier. The proposed methods 
outpe rformed the multi -resolution feature extractions methods 
in terms of the number of the extracted feature. Also, in Area 
under the Curve (AUC) measure, the researcher methods were 
superior to other feature extraction methods.  
Rahman et al. [75] worked on th e emotion recognition task. 
They used PCA and t -statistical to reduce the dimensionality of 
extracted features from emotional signals of EEG. The 
proposed method was applied to the dataset called SJTU 
emotion EEG. The emotional state with extracted feature s has  
been classified by four classifiers: SVM, ANN, LDA, and 
KNN.  The result indicated that the prepared method outperformed 
several other emotion recognition methods.  Chu et al. [76] 
proposed a system for extracting features from the machinery 
fault-based vibration signals. They used three feature extraction 
methods: Fourier transform frequency spectrum (FTFS), 
envelopment analysis, and local mean decomposition (LMD). 
The vibration signals were analyzed by the Fourier transform 
analysis to get amplitude and phase spectrums. The results have 
given that the envelope analysis and mean decomposition 
methods could extract between cancerous and non -cancerous 
tumors in the breast. The authors used a new threshold to 
improve LBP texture features and the LBP descr iptor for 
identifying the abnormal cases. In the proposed method, the 
features extracted by using CNN and SVM were used for the 
classification. The experimental results have explained that the 
developed method could classify the ultrasound images with 
high accuracy and sensitivity.  
Li et al. [77] worked on fault diagnosis and used 
discriminative graph regularized autoencoder (DGAE) to 
design a feature extraction method.  To map process data to the 
feature space, to avoid manually designing feature problems  
and to ensure that the data characteristics is truly reflected by 
the learned feature reflect they used advanced neural network 
structure. Furthermore, the neural network structure model is 
integrated with the graph to learn internal representation and to  
preserve locality. Also, to improve the performance of the 
classification, training samples for the label information were 
embedded to the graph. NN was used as a classifier. In 
comparison with other fault diagnosis feature extraction 
methods the proposed  method achieved better performance.  
Nagarajan et al. [78] used Empirical Mode Decomposition 
(EMD) to propose two feature extraction methods of 
mammogram image. The interesting point of the images 
divided into a group of different frequency components. Th en 
they performed their first method based on Bi -dimensional 
Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEMD). Through these 
groups, the GLCM and gray level rum matrix features were 
extracted. However, the extracted features by BEMD first 
feature extraction method were  less orthogonal to each other.  
Therefore, the researchers proposed the second feature 
extraction which was a modified version of the first one and 
called (MBEMD). The SVM and LDA classifier were used in 
this research. Furthermore, the proposed method appl ied in 
different databases and obtained steady performance.   

==== Page 9 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
64 Rabin et al. [79] used a short -time Fourier transform (STFT) 
to extract features from the human hand movement -based 
signal of electromyography (EMG). Because the space of the 
extracted features was large, they used PCA and diffusion maps 
(DM) to reduce the dimensionality of the extracted features. 
Also, to perform the comparison for the performance of both 
methods with different sizes of the training set. The researchers 
used KNN as a classifier in this study. The result indicated the 
DM technique outperformed the PCA method in case of the 
limited training set. However, in the large training set, both 
methods achieved high performance in the term of the 
classification.  
Kuncan et al. [80] worked o n the diagnosis of bearing fault 
for the rotary machine. They extracted features from the 
vibration signals of bearing by applying their proposed method 
called a one -dimensional ternary pattern (1D -TP). The signals 
were collected from three different datas ets in size, speed, and 
parts. Moreover, Random Forest (RF), KNN, SVM, Bayes Net, 
and ANN were used as classifiers with the ternary pattern. The 
results indicated that the proposed method could extract 
efficient features from vibration signals for classifi cation. Also, 
all used classifiers attained effective accuracy.  
Liu et al. [81] built a method for feature extractions based 
on the incorporation of the discriminant analysis and the low 
ranks representation of the original data samples. The 
supervised pr oposed feature extraction method is called 
discriminative low rank preserving projection (DLRPP). The 
presented method performance was compared with seven other 
feature extraction methods (LPP, LSDA, DPSR, LRRDP, 
LSPP, LRPP and FOLP) on images of six diffe rent datasets. 
The DLRPP method achieved better performance in the term of 
recognition rate.  
Ma and Yuan [82] proposed a method for extraction 
features from images based on the deep CNN and PCA. They 
used a neural network to extract features. Due to the h igh 
dimension of the extracted features, they improved and 
optimized the PCA algorithm by deep learning through 
simulation experiments. Then the researchers compared the 
performance of the PCA before and after improvement. The 
memory usage before optimizin g the algorithms was more than 
6000 MB and after optimizing the memory utilization 
decreased to less than 1000 MB. Also, there was a big 
difference in the time consumed by the PCA algorithm before 
and after optimization. Rather than the performance of the 
improved PCA was effective, also the classifier accuracy was 
enhanced which was done by the SVM algorithm.  
Sellami and Farah [83] presented a combination of feature 
extraction and band selection methods to reduce the 
dimensionality of hyperspectral images . They used several 
feature extraction methods such as PCA, TLPP, KPCA and LE  
as linear, nonlinear methods. Also, the researchers utilized MI, 
DM, CBS, and PA supervised and unsupervised band selection 
methods. The SVM algorithm was used as a classifier in  the 
proposed implementation. They combine both groups of the 
algorithms as follows: TLPP/CBS, PCA/CBS, KPCA/BS, 
PCA/MI, LE/CBS, TLPP/MI, LE/MI, and KPCA/MI.  The 
authors used two datasets (the first dataset’s images were from 
Indian Pines and the second d ataset’s images were from Pavia University). The results revealed that the classification 
accuracy of the TLPP/CBS was better compared to all other 
combination methods for both used datasets.  
Chen et al. [84] proposed a study on X -ray images for 
determini ng bone age. They used a deep neural network to 
extract features from the X -ray images. The extracted features 
include: Glutamate cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM) 
features and Local Binary Patterns (LBP) features in the image. 
In more detail, the fe atures of the X -ray hand bone image could 
be automatically extracted using deep learning and the bone age 
was assessed automatically by the convolution neural network. 
Moreover, the PCA algorithm was used to reduce the 
dimensionality of the extracted featu res. The extracted features 
were classified by the SVM classifier. The test data, training 
data and verify data established by a captured image from 
several males and females and different ages.  The results 
proved that the presented study achieved better performance 
compared to other methods in this field.   
Jin et al. [85] proposed  a feature extraction algorithm for 
JPEG steganalysis based on the adaptive scale adjustment 
algorithm. In this algorithm, the scale of feature extraction was 
adjusted adaptivel y according to the quality of JPEG images. 
They mainly depended on the Boss Base 1.01 database, and 
they applied their algorithm on the MD -CFR feature. The result 
has shown that the performance of the steganalysis improved 
by the proposed method. Also, the  dimensionality of extracted 
features was reduced by the presented method and hence it 
could be used based on residual images in the other steganalysis 
methods.  
Liu et al. [67] presented a method for feature extraction 
depending on graph -based space to co nstruct an optimal 
algorithm for semi -supervised learning. Particularly the 
presented method was a combination of sparse representation, 
discriminative projection, and manifold learning for 
dimensionality reduction. They designed and performed their 
method  to obtain semi -supervised feature extraction and spars 
structure local manifolds at the same time. Moreover, the 
optimal value was accomplished by modifying the similarity 
matrix in each iteration. The experiment was executed in five 
datasets and the perf ormance of the presented method 
compared with six other methods (PCA, MSEC, DLSR, 
NLDLSR, SOGFS, and SDR). The offered method 
outperformed all other methods in all used datasets.  
Lin et al. [68] worked on the discriminative graph signal to 
propose a featu re extraction method that could extract good 
features to perform the desired classification. All the training 
samples in the contained graph were established. Moreover, 
they used eigenvector decomposition in order to attain the 
Fourier base of the graph. N umerous discriminative signals 
were extracted concurrently for achieving high accuracy 
especially in a problem that has multiple classes. The proposed 
method was performed in four different experiments with 
several datasets. The results indicated that the presented 
methods could achieve encouraging performance, and it was 
considered to be more effective with supervised classification.  
Kasongo and Sun [69] proposed a method for wireless 
intrusion detection systems based on the feed -forward Deep 

==== Page 10 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
65 Neural Netwo rk (DNN). They used a wrapper feature 
extraction unit with the DNN framework in order to extract the 
optimal feature vector. Then the extra trees algorithm was used 
as a classifier. Moreover, two intrusion detection datasets 
(UNSW -NB15 and the AWID) were d ependent as well to 
examine their methods’ efficiency. Moreover, the experiment 
of the proposed method performed in two different types of 
attacks, which were binary and multiclass. Furthermore, the 
researchers compared their method with RF, KNN, SVM, DT, 
and NB. The proposed method of detection accuracy 
outperformed the other methods. Whereas the attack 
classification by feed -forward deep neural network was better 
than all the above classifiers.  
Liu and Sui [70] worked on different methods to minimize 
the dimensionality in content -based public cultural video 
retrieval. The public cultural videos’ content features extracted 
by using the combination of the deep learning framework 
(Caffe) and Alex's net network model. Due to the high 
dimension of the extracte d features, the researchers used PCA 
to reduce that dimensionality. The researchers examined their 
work in several videos. The results indicated that the video 
contents of the used datasets could effectively be compressed 
by the PCA algorithm, and only min or contents of the video 
retrieval were lost while lowering the dimensionality of the 
extracted feature.  
Dehzangi and Sahu [71] worked on human activity 
recognition. They used spectral and temporal analysis to extract 
features from the Inertial Measurement  Unit. Moreover, several 
feature extraction methods evaluated and particularly the 
methods based on the time and frequency domain such as power 
spectral density and Autocorrelation. Also, a number of the 
classifiers (DT, KNN, SVM, Neural network, and Ensem ble 
bagged) were utilized for human activity recognition that was 
used in the proposed system. In addition to reducing the 
dimensionality of the extracted features, the researchers used 
PCA and KPCA. Although they used feature selection and transformation methods to reduce dimensionality. The results 
showed that using the Random forest feature selection method 
with Ensemble bagged classiﬁer and using Neighborhood 
component analysis along with Ensemble bagged classiﬁer 
achieved better accuracy.  
Zhang et al.  [86] proposed a system for the hyperspectral 
images to minimize the dimensionality. They depended on the 
sparse graph and spatial as the integrated method. They utilized 
PCA and entropy rate in order to divide hyperspectral images 
to superpixel patch. Mor eover, trained data of the graph was 
constructed by using superpixel segmentation. Then, they 
extracted spatial -spectral information when the sparse and low -
rank graphs generated on the obtained data. After that, to 
transform the graph embedding to nonline ar space and map the 
input data into a high -dimensional space, they used the kernel 
trick. The proposed method was evaluated by two datasets 
(Indian Pines data set and the University of Pavia (Pavia -U) 
data set) and the SVM algorithm was dependent as a cla ssifier. 
The results show that the accuracy of the presented method is 
higher than other methods.  
Alipourfard  et al. [87] worked on the hyperspectral images 
high dimensionality and proposed a system to reduce it. The 
proposed system was a combination of CNN and the subspace 
feature extraction method. The authors reduced the 
dimensionality of the hyperspectral ima ges by the subspace 
method in order to generate high -quality training samples for 
the convolutional neural network and for logistic regression that 
they used as the classifier. Moreover, the presented method was 
examined by the researchers in two famous tw o datasets 
(Indiana Pines and the Pavia University scenes). The 
experimental results proved that the proposed method accuracy 
has been improved and achieved higher marks, even under the 
limited samples of the training samples.  
 
 
TABLE IV.  FEATURE EXTRACTION METHODS SUMMARY  
Ref. Year  Dataset  Technique(s)  Computation 
Time  Classifier(s)  Accuracy  
 [74] 2018  DDSM and MIAS  Wavelet and GLCM  - SVM  97.89%  
[76] 2018  - FTFS and LMD  - - - 
[83] 2018  Indian Pines and 
Pavia University  PCA, TLPP, KPCA, and 
LE PCA: 10,TLPP: 
12, KPCA: 12 
and LE: 28  SVM  96.96%  
[88] 2018  public cultural  deep learning, Alex net, 
and PCA  - - - 
[89] 2018  UCI Spectral, temporal analysis 
and PCA  - DT, KNN, SVM, Neural 
network and Ensemble bagged  KNN:  95.4%, DT: 
90.9%, SVM: 93.2%, 
Neural Network: 90.6% 
and Ensemble bagged: 
96.9%  
[90] 2018  Indian Pines and 
Pavia  sparse graph, spatial and 
PCA  - SVM  93.01%  
[91] 2018  Indiana Pines and the 
Pavia  CNN and subspace feature  - logistic regression  98.3%  
[92] 2019  US breast datasets  LBP and CNN  - SVM  96% 
[80] 2019  TE process  DGAE and neural network  2.47 seconds  NN 83.95%  
[78] 2019  MIAS, DDSM and 
MGM Hospital  EMD  - SVM and LDA  SVM: 96.2% and LDA: 
92.59%  

==== Page 11 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
66 [80] 2019  Artificial Fault Type  1D-TP 0.352 second  RF, KNN, SVM, Bayes Net and 
ANN  100% for all classifiers  
[81] 2019  public image 
databases  DLRPP   NN - 
[82] 2019  - CNN and PCA  100 to 1300 
seconds  SVM  91.3%  
[79] 2020  UCI STFT, PCA and DM  - KNN  94.8%  
[85] 2020  Boss Base 1.01  adaptive scale adjustment  - - - 
[93] 2020  [94], [95], [96], and 
[97] sparse representation and 
discriminative projection  - - - 
[86] 2020  UCI eigenvector decomposition  - NN, LDA, NB and SVM  97.5%  
[87] 2020  UNSW -NB15 and 
AWID  wrapper feature extraction 
and DNN  - Extra trees  99.77%  
[41] 2020  ROSIS and AVIRIS  SSI and PSO  - SVM  84.83 %  
[75] 2020  SJTU  PCA and t -statistical  - SVM, ANN, LDA and KNN  ANN: 86.57%, SVM: 
85.85%, LDA: 82.50% 
KNN:73.42%  
[41] 2020  ROSIS and AVIRIS  SSI and PSO  - SVM  84.83 %  
V. DISCUSSION  
In the proposed feature selection methods, different 
techniques/algorithms used to get the dimensionality reduction 
of the dataset, minimize computation time, and improve 
classification accuracy.  Through the literature and table I II 
there are three methods ([51,  58, 63]) dependent  on the 
clustering technique using K -means. The authors in [51] used 
K-means for removing non -relevant features, while [58] in the 
similarity value was used to separate the features in multiple 
clusters, and in [44] the algorithm was use d to divide the 
features into the most relevant and noisy clusters. The 
mentioned three methods were performed in the highly 
dimension datasets such as text, microarray and texture image 
classification. In [51] the computational time was reduced to 
more th an 50% as the researchers compared with the ReliefF 
and IG methods. Also, in the [58], the authors compared the 
fulfillment of their methods with other three ant colony -based 
feature selection methods and illustrated that the computation 
time was better 5 -8 times than those of the other methods.  
Also, about 50% of the reviewed feature selection methods 
were based on the optimization approaches. Where these 
methods used several optimized algorithms such as PSO in [53] 
and [69], EA in [52], Ant in [58], GA i n [64] and [70], CAF in 
[65] and [68] and deep learning in [61] and [65]. In [53] and 
[69] PSO algorithm was used to incorporate the features 
information into search space and hence selecting the most 
desired features and removing  not required ones. In [52 ] EA 
was used to reduce the dimensionality of the search space by 
eliminating the unnecessary features from each iteration 
process, then influential features were  selected at the same time.  
In [58] after the features clustered, the binary Ant used to rank  
them from each cluster. Then from each iteration of the Ant 
process, the wanted set of the important features constructed. 
The GA was used due to its capability for reducing the dataset 
dimensionality. According to the research [64] the average of 
reducti on was 93%, and in [70] used feature dataset was 
reduced by 50%. Also, the CFA has a great role in reducing the 
dimensionality and computational time in [65] the dataset was 
reduced up to 93% and in [68] the time was less than compared 
to other optimizatio n algorithms the authors did a comparison 
with. The deep neural network was used in order to improve 
classification accuracy. In the literature two methods ([61] and [66]) based on the neural network where the accuracy of both 
of them enhanced about 19% an d 8.75%.  
The traditional feature selection methods were used in 
different methods such as ReliefF was utilized in [55], [56], 
[63], and Information  Gain used in [60] and [63].  The 
important task of the ReliefF approached in the used methods 
was to select  relevant features and in the most researches was 
utilized with other techniques for example in [55] it used with 
LSTM, in [56] the PCA algorithm was utilized with it, and in 
[63] IG,  symmetric and K -means were used with it. Similarly, 
the IG algorithm wa s used to reduce the dimensionality of the 
datasets and this technique was used with other approaches 
such as GR, correlation -based feature and symmetric 
techniques.  
In general, the accuracy of the reviewed methods is varied 
from approach to another one. H owever, the optimization -
based feature selection methods achieved better performance 
than the traditional methods. The most used classifiers in the 
methods are SVM and KNN, both were used in 8 methods and 
NB was used in 6 studies. In some articles, more th an one 
classifier was used. Nevertheless, the SVM obtained better 
accuracy compared to others in those manuscripts who used 
multiple classifiers. Also, there is a variety in the computational 
time and the role of clustering and optimization algorithms was 
significant for reducing the computational complexity. 
Whereas, in research [51] the execution time was better, about 
50% to 70% when compared with IG and ReliefF techniques. 
Moreover, in the researches [65] and [70], execution time was 
reduced by 40% and 50% by the CFA and GA.  However, the 
best computational time was achieved when the Ant system 
integrated with the clustering algorithm in the research [58] 
where it was 5 -8 times better compared to the other three ACO 
algorithms.  
On the other hand, 21 feature extraction methods have been 
reviewed in this study and summarized in Table I V. Among 
them 7 methods ([92], [77], [82], [84], [87], [88], and [91]) 
depended  on deep  learning (CNN and DNN). CNN and LBP 
were used in research [92] and achieved high -efficiency 
accuracy. In [77] the neural  network was integrated with graph 
autoencoder. Particularly, the neural network was used to map 
the process data to feature space. In [82] the PCA algorithm was 
optimized by CNN to efficiently reduce dimensionality in big 

==== Page 12 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
67 data. As a result, about  70% of the features reduced, executed 
time minimized and memory utilized decreased and hence the 
accuracy increased by 3%. Also, in research [84] the accuracy 
was improved around 7% by using CNN and PCA together. In 
[87] DNN fr amework was used with a wrapper feature 
extraction algorithm. In the used datasets the dimensionality 
was reduced efficiently, and accuracy increased by about more 
than 6%. In [88] the dimensionality of the public culture videos 
was reduced proficiently by  the deep learning framework and 
PCA algorithm. The classification accuracy enhanced about 4% 
by the integrated CNN and feature subspace reduction in the 
research [91].  
Moreover, the PCA algorithms were  used in 8 feature 
extraction methods [70], [79], [82] , [83], [84], [88], [89] and 
[90] which exist  in the literature. In [55] the PCA role was to 
reduce the redundant information rather than extracting the 
features. Also, in [79], [83], [84], [88] and [89], the 
dimensionality of the extracted features were r educed by the 
PCA.  While in research [90] the PCA algorithm was used for 
extracting the initial component in the process of converting the 
HSI images into a superpixel patch. In research [41] the PSO 
was used to minimize the dimensionality and enhance the  
classification accuracy. The wavelet transform was utilized to 
decrease the number of extracted features in [74]. Also, the 
study [76] proved that extracting the features in the strong noise 
was only accomplished by the FTFS when compared with 
envelopment  analysis and LMD. Further, the SVM algorithm 
was the most used classifier in the summarized feature 
extraction methods in this paper, it was used in 12 methods.  
The best -achieved accuracy of the reviewed methods and 
from those who depended on the PCA algo rithms is research 
[82] for a reason; they optimized the algorithm by deep 
learning. Also, the enhanced PCA by the CNN in the research 
[82] reduced a great computational time, it was 1300 without 
CNN and became 100 when the PCA algorithm improved by 
the CN N. But in the research [41] the computational complexity 
of the SSI that has been combined with PSO was more 
compared to the spectral region splitting (SRS).  
VI. CONCLUSION  
The high dimensionality of data has a direct impact on the 
learning algorithm, computat ional time, computer resources 
(memory), and model accuracy. Therefore, reducing 
dimensionality and tackling  its curse became an exciting topic 
in search and development areas to provide the most reliable, 
flexible, and high accurate computerized tools and  applications. 
Hence, several methods and techniques accomplished in the last 
two decades based on the feature selection and feature 
extraction.  
This paper reviews the most recent studies in several fields 
such as medical disease analysis, ethnicity ident ification, 
emotion recognition, genes classification, text classification, 
image Steganalysis, data visualization, Hyperspectral images 
classification, network malware detection and several 
engineering tasks, etc. moreover, the details used 
techniques/algo rithms, datasets, classifiers approaches were 
used by the authors and attained results relating to the accuracy 
and computational time are summarized for each of the feature selection and feature extraction methods. We observed that the 
trend of the resear chers for reducing the dimensionality based 
on the feature selection methods is to use the optimization 
algorithms, and about half of the reviewed researches were 
relaying on the different techniques of optimization. Also, the 
most used classifiers are the  SVM and KNN, and the best -
achieved accuracy was the SVM algorithm. On the other hand, 
for feature extraction methods, CNN and DNN techniques take 
a great role and have been used in 7 methods of the studied 
research . While the PCA is still a widely used al gorithm in the 
feature extraction works, it has been used in 8 methods.  
Additionally, the optimized PCA could achieve better 
performance in terms of accuracy, computational time, and the 
number of reduced features.  
REFERENCES  
[1] N. Sharma and K. Saroha, "Study of dimension reduction methodologies 
in data mining," in International Conference on Computing, 
Communication & Automation, 2015, pp. 133 -137: IEEE.  
[2] S. Ayesha, M. K. Hanif, and R. Talib, "Overview and comparative study 
of dimensionality reductio n techniques for high dimensional data," 
Information Fusion, vol. 59, pp. 44 -58, 2020.  
[3] D. Q. Zeebaree, H. Haron, A. M. Abdulazeez, and S. R. Zeebaree, 
"Combination of K -means clustering with Genetic Algorithm: A review," 
International Journal of Applie d Engineering Research, vol. 12, no. 24, 
pp. 14238 -14245, 2017.  
[4] Z. Cheng and Z. Lu, "A novel efficient feature dimensionality reduction 
method and its application in engineering," Complexity, vol. 2018, 2018.  
[5] D. A. Zebari, H. Haron, D. Q. Zeebaree,  and A. M. Zain, "A Simultaneous 
Approach for Compression and Encryption Techniques Using 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid," in 2019 13th International Conference on 
Software, Knowledge, Information Management and Applications 
(SKIMA), 2019, pp. 1 -6: IEEE.  
[6] M. Li,  H. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Shang, and H. Wan, "Fast hybrid 
dimensionality reduction method for classification based on feature 
selection and grouped feature extraction," Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 150, p. 113277, 2020.  
[7] A. P. Pandian, R . Palanisamy, and K. Ntalianis, Proceeding of the 
International Conference on Computer Networks, Big Data and IoT 
(ICCBI -2019). Springer Nature, 2020.  
[8] M. A. Mohammed, B. Al -Khateeb, A. N. Rashid, D. A. Ibrahim, M. K. 
A. Ghani, and S. A. Mostafa, "Neura l network and multi -fractal 
dimension features for breast cancer classification from ultrasound 
images," Computers & Electrical Engineering, vol. 70, pp. 871 -882, 2018.  
[9] O. Saini and S. Sharma, "A review on dimension reduction techniques in 
data mining, " Computer engineering and intelligent systems, vol. 9, pp. 
7-14, 2018.  
[10] N. Abd -Alsabour, "On the Role of Dimensionality Reduction," JCP, vol. 
13, no. 5, pp. 571 -579, 2018.  
[11] S. Velliangiri and S. Alagumuthukrishnan, "A Review of Dimensionality 
Redu ction Techniques for Efficient Computation," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 165, pp. 104 -111, 2019.  
[12] W. Wang, W. -g. Shen, Y. -x. Sun, B. Chen, and R. Zhu, "Dimensionality 
reduction via adjusting data distribution density," in 2018 5th 
International Con ference on Systems and Informatics (ICSAI), 2018, pp. 
1052 -1055: IEEE.  
[13] J. Stuckman, J. Walden, and R. Scandariato, "The effect of dimensionality 
reduction on software vulnerability prediction models," IEEE 
Transactions on Reliability, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 17 -37, 2016.  

==== Page 13 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
68 [14] M. Verleysen and D. François, "The curse of dimensionality in data 
mining and time series prediction," in International Work -Conference on 
Artificial Neural Networks, 2005, pp. 758 -770: Springer.  
[15] L. Liu and M. T. Özsu, Encycloped ia of database systems. Springer New 
York, NY, USA:, 2009.  
[16] A. Juvonen, T. Sipola, and T. Hämäläinen, "Online anomaly detection 
using dimensionality reduction techniques for HTTP log analysis," 
Computer Networks, vol. 91, pp. 46 -56, 2015.  
[17] X. Huang , L. Wu, and Y. Ye, "A Review on Dimensionality Reduction 
Techniques," International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial 
Intelligence, vol. 33, no. 10, p. 1950017, 2019.  
[18] D. L. Padmaja and B. Vishnuvardhan, "Comparative study of feature 
subse t selection methods for dimensionality reduction on scientific data," 
in 2016 IEEE 6th International Conference on Advanced Computing 
(IACC), 2016, pp. 31 -34: IEEE.  
[19] M. B. Abdulrazzaq and J. N. Saeed, "A Comparison of Three 
Classification Algorithms fo r Handwritten Digit Recognition," in 2019 
International Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering 
(ICOASE), 2019, pp. 58 -63: IEEE.  
[20] A. S. Eesa, Z. Orman, and A. M. A. Brifcani, "A novel feature -selection 
approach based on the cuttlefish optimizati on algorithm for intrusion 
detection systems," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 
2670 -2679, 2015.  
[21] A. S. Eesa, A. M. A. Brifcani, and Z. Orman, "Cuttlefish algorithm -a 
novel bio -inspired optimization algorithm," International Journa l of 
Scientific & Engineering Research, vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 1978 -1986, 2013.  
[22] P. Jindal and D. Kumar, "A review on dimensionality reduction 
techniques," International journal of computer applications, vol. 173, no. 
2, pp. 42 -46, 2017.  
[23] A. S. Eesa, Z . Orman, and A. M. A. Brifcani, "A new feature selection 
model based on ID3 and bees algorithm for intrusion detection system," 
Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, vol. 23, 
no. 2, pp. 615 -622, 2015.  
[24] U. M. Khaire and R. Dhana lakshmi, "Stability of feature selection 
algorithm: A review," Journal of King Saud University -Computer and 
Information Sciences, 2019.  
[25] S. Visalakshi and V. Radha, "A literature review of feature selection 
techniques and applications: Review of featur e selection in data mining," 
in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence 
and Computing Research, 2014, pp. 1 -6: IEEE.  
[26] C. M. Teng, "Combining noise correction with feature selection," in 
International Conference on Data Warehous ing and Knowledge 
Discovery, 2003, pp. 340 -349: Springer.  
[27] H. Zhao, F. Min, and W. Zhu, "Cost -sensitive feature selection of numeric 
data with measurement errors," Journal of Applied Mathematics, vol. 
2013, 2013.  
[28] J. N. Saeed, "A SURVEY OF ULTRASONOGRAPHY BREAST 
CANCER IMAGE SEGMENTATION TECHNIQUES," Academic 
Journal of Nawroz University, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1 -14, 2020.  
[29] Y. Leung and Y. Hung, "A multiple -filter -multiple -wrapper approach to 
gene selection and micr oarray data classification," IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 7, no. 1, 
pp. 108 -117, 2008.  
[30] C. Lazar et al., "A survey on filter techniques for feature selection in gene 
expression microarray analysis," IEEE/ACM T ransactions on 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1106 -1119, 
2012.  
[31] M. R. Mahmood and A. M. Abdulazeez, "A Comparative Study of a New 
Hand Recognition Model Based on Line of Features and Other 
Techniques," in International Con ference of Reliable Information and 
Communication Technology, 2017, pp. 420 -432: Springer.  [32] M. Dash and H. Liu, "Feature selection for classification," Intelligent data 
analysis, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 131 -156, 1997.  
[33] D. Jain and V. Singh, "Feature sel ection and classification systems for 
chronic disease prediction: A review," Egyptian Informatics Journal, vol. 
19, no. 3, pp. 179 -189, 2018.  
[34] D. Q. Zeebaree, H. Haron, A. M. Abdulazeez, and D. A. Zebari, "Machine 
learning and Region Growing for Breast  Cancer Segmentation," in 2019 
International Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering 
(ICOASE), 2019, pp. 88 -93: IEEE.  
[35] D. Zebari, H. Haron, and S. Zeebaree, "Security Issues in DNA Based on 
Data Hiding: A Review," International Journal of Applie d Engineering 
Research,vol. 12,no. 24, ISSN, pp. 0973 -4562, 2017.  
[36] M. M. Kabir, M. M. Islam, and K. Murase, "A new wrapper feature 
selection approach using neural network," Neurocomputing, vol. 73, no. 
16-18, pp. 3273 -3283, 2010.  
[37] Y. Peng, Z. Wu, a nd J. Jiang, "A novel feature selection approach for 
biomedical data classification," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 
43, no. 1, pp. 15 -23, 2010.  
[38] Q. Shen, R. Diao, and P. Su, "Feature Selection Ensemble," Turing -100, 
vol. 10, pp. 289 -306, 2012 . 
[39] M. K. Elhadad, K. M. Badran, and G. I. Salama, "A novel approach for 
ontology -based dimensionality reduction for web text document 
classification," International Journal of Software Innovation (IJSI), vol. 5, 
no. 4, pp. 44 -58, 2017.  
[40] D. A. Zebar i, H. Haron, S. R. Zeebaree, and D. Q. Zeebaree, "Enhance 
the Mammogram Images for Both Segmentation and Feature Extraction 
Using Wavelet Transform," in 2019 International Conference on 
Advanced Science and Engineering (ICOASE), 2019, pp. 100 -105: IEEE.  
[41] S. H. A. Moghaddam, M. Mokhtarzade, and B. A. Beirami, "A feature 
extraction method based on spectral segmentation and integration of 
hyperspectral images," International Journal of Applied Earth 
Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 89, p. 102097, 2020.  
[42] D. M. Sulaiman, A. M. Abdulazeez, H. Haron, and S. S. Sadiq, 
"Unsupervised Learning Approach -Based New Optimization K -Means 
Clustering for Finger Vein Image Localization," in 2019 International 
Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering (ICOASE),  2019, pp. 
82-87: IEEE.  
[43] R. Aziz, C. Verma, and N. Srivastava, "Dimension reduction methods for 
microarray data: a review," AIMS. Bioengineering, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 179 -
197, 2017.  
[44] A. S. Eesa, A. M. Abdulazeez, and Z. Orman, "A DIDS Based on The 
Combination of Cuttlefish Algorithm and Decision Tree," Science Journal 
of University of Zakho, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 313 -318, 2017.  
[45] Z. M. Hira and D. F. Gillies, "A review of feature selection and feature 
extraction methods applied on microarray data," Ad vances in 
bioinformatics, vol.170. 2015, 2015.  
[46] A. M. Abdulazeez and A. S. Issa, "Intrusion detection system based on 
neural networks using bipolar input with bipolar sigmoid activation 
function," AL -Rafidain Journal of Computer Sciences and Mathematic s, 
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 79 -86, 2011.  
[47] D. A. Zebari, H. Haron, S. R. Zeebaree, and D. Q. Zeebaree, "Multi -Level 
of DNA Encryption Technique Based on DNA Arithmetic and Biological 
Operations," in 2018 International Conference on Advanced Science and 
Engine ering (ICOASE), 2018, pp. 312 -317: IEEE.  
[48] O. M. S. Hassan, A. M. Abdulazeez, and V. M. TİRYAKİ, "Gait -based 
human gender classification using lifting 5/3 wavelet and principal 
component analysis," in 2018 International Conference on Advanced 
Science an d Engineering (ICOASE), 2018, pp. 173 -178: IEEE.  
[49] F. P. Shah and V. Patel, "A review on feature selection and feature 
extraction for text classification," in 2016 International Conference on 
Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking 
(WiSPNET), 2016, pp. 2264 -2268: IEEE.  

==== Page 14 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
69 [50] H. Sadeeq, A. Abdulazeez, N. Kako, and A. Abrahim, "A Novel Hybrid 
Bird Mating Optimizer with Differential Evolution for Engineering 
Design Optimization Problems," in International Conference of Reliable 
Informatio n and Communication Technology, 2017, pp. 522 -534: 
Springer.  
[51] S. Chormunge and S. Jena, "Correlation based feature selection with 
clustering for high dimensional data," Journal of Electrical Systems and 
Information Technology, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 542 -549, 2018.  
[52] P. Tan, X. Wang, and Y. Wang, "Dimensionality reduction in 
evolutionary algorithms -based feature selection for motor imagery brain -
computer interface," Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, vol. 52, p. 
100597, 2020.  
[53] F. Hafiz, A. Swain, C. Naik, and N. Patel, "Efficient feature selection of 
power quality events using two dimensional (2D) particle swarms," 
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 81, p. 105498, 2019.  
[54] X. Han, P. Liu, L. Wang, and D. Li, "Unsupervised feature selection via 
graph matri x learning and the low -dimensional space learning for 
classification," Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 
87, p. 103283, 2020.  
[55] T. Niu, J. Wang, H. Lu, W. Yang, and P. Du, "Developing a deep learning 
framework with two -stage feat ure selection for multivariate financial time 
series forecasting," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 148, p. 
113237, 2020.  
[56] D. Jain and V. Singh, "An efficient hybrid feature selection model for 
dimensionality reduction," Procedia Computer Science , vol. 132, pp. 333 -
341, 2018.  
[57] E. S. Hosseini and M. H. Moattar, "Evolutionary feature subsets selection 
based on interaction information for high dimensional imbalanced data 
classification," Applied Soft Computing, vol. 82, p. 105581, 2019.  
[58] Z. M anbari, F. AkhlaghianTab, and C. Salavati, "Hybrid fast 
unsupervised feature selection for high -dimensional data," Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 124, pp. 97 -118, 2019.  
[59] K. Qu, F. Gao, F. Guo, and Q. Zou, "Taxonomy dimension reduction for 
color ectal cancer prediction," Computational biology and chemistry, vol. 
83, p. 107160, 2019.  
[60] S. Umbarkar and S. Shukla, "Analysis of heuristic based feature reduction 
method in intrusion detection system," in 2018 5th International 
Conference on Signal Pr ocessing and Integrated Networks (SPIN), 2018, 
pp. 717 -720: IEEE.  
[61] F. Farokhmanesh and M. T. Sadeghi, "Deep Feature Selection using an 
Enhanced Sparse Group Lasso Algorithm," in 2019 27th Iranian 
Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE), 2019, pp. 1 549-1552: 
IEEE.  
[62] H.-T. Duong and V. T. Hoang, "Dimensionality Reduction Based on 
Feature Selection for Rice Varieties Recognition," in 2019 4th 
International Conference on Information Technology (InCIT), 2019, pp. 
199-202: IEEE.  
[63] A. F. Alharan, H. K. Fatlawi, and N. S. Ali, "A cluster -based feature 
selection method for image texture classification," Indonesian Journal of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1433 -
1442, 2019.  
[64] M. Z. Osman, M. A. Maarof, M. F. Rohani, K.  Moorthy, and S. Awang, 
"Multi -Scale Skin Sample Approach for Dynamic Skin Color Detection: 
An Analysis," Advanced Science Letters, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 7662 -7667, 
2018.  
[65] Y. Arshak and A. Eesa, "A New Dimensional Reduction Based on 
Cuttlefish Algorithm  for Human Cancer Gene Expression," in 2018 
International Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering 
(ICOASE), 2018, pp. 48 -53: IEEE.  
[66] D. Q. Zeebaree, H. Haron, and A. M. Abdulazeez, "Gene selection and 
classification of microarray data using convo lutional neural network," in 2018 International Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering 
(ICOASE), 2018, pp. 145 -150: IEEE.  
[67] O. Ahmed and A. Brifcani, "Gene Expression Classification Based on 
Deep Learning," in 2019 4th Scientific International C onference Najaf 
(SICN), 2019, pp. 145 -149: IEEE.  
[68] V. Balasaraswathi, "Enhanced Cuttle Fish Algorithm Using Membrane 
Computing for feature selection of intrusion detection.",vol.10, special 
issue,2018.  
[69] J. Kaur and S. Singh, "Feature selection using  mutual information and 
adaptive particle swarm optimization for image steganalysis," in 2018 7th 
International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and 
Optimization (Trends and Future Directions)(ICRITO), 2018, pp. 538 -
544: IEEE.  
[70] A. Fatima , R. Maurya, M. K. Dutta, R. Burget, and J. Masek, "Android 
Malware Detection Using Genetic Algorithm based Optimized Feature 
Selection and Machine Learning," in 2019 42nd International Conference 
on Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP), 2019, pp . 220 -223: 
IEEE.  
[71] E. Widiyanti and S. N. Endah, "Feature Selection for Music Emotion 
Recognition," in 2018 2nd International Conference on Informatics and 
Computational Sciences (ICICoS), 2018, pp. 1 -5: IEEE.  
[72] G. Zeller et al., "Potential of fecal microbiota for early ‐stage detection 
of colorectal cancer," Molecular systems biology, vol. 10, no. 11, 2014.  
[73] J. Zackular, M. Rogers, and M. Ruffin, "4th, Schloss PD," The human gut 
microbiome as a screening tool for colorectal cancer. Cancer Prev Res  
(Phila), vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 1112 -21, 2014.  
[74] M. A. Berbar, "Hybrid methods for feature extraction for breast masses 
classification," Egyptian informatics journal, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 63 -73, 
2018.  
[75] M. A. Rahman, M. F. Hossain, M. Hossain, and R. Ah mmed, "Employing 
PCA and t -statistical approach for feature extraction and classification of 
emotion from multichannel EEG signal," Egyptian Informatics Journal, 
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 23 -35, 2020.  
[76] C. Chu, Z. Zuo -xi, K. Xin -rong, and G. Yun -zhi, "The Res earch of 
Machinery Fault Feature Extraction Methods Based On Vibration 
Signal," IFAC -PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 17, pp. 346 -352, 2018.  
[77] Y. Li, Y. Chai, H. Zhou, and H. Yin, "A novel feature extraction method 
based on discriminative graph regularized au toencoder for fault 
diagnosis," IFAC -PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 24, pp. 272 -277, 2019.  
[78] V. Nagarajan, E. C. Britto, and S. M. Veeraputhiran, "Feature extraction 
based on empirical mode decomposition for automatic mass classification 
of mammogram images ," Medicine in Novel Technology and Devices, 
vol. 1, p. 100004, 2019.  
[79] N. Rabin, M. Kahlon, S. Malayev, and A. Ratnovsky, "Classification of 
human hand movements based on EMG signals using nonlinear 
dimensionality reduction and data fusion techniques,"  Expert Systems 
with Applications, vol. 149, p. 113281, 2020.  
[80] M. Kuncan, K. Kaplan, M. R. Mi̇naz, Y. Kaya, and H. M. Ertunç, "A 
novel feature extraction method for bearing fault classification with one 
dimensional ternary patterns,",vol.100,p.346 -357.ISA transactions, 2020.  
[81] Z. Liu, J. Wang, G. Liu, and L. Zhang, "Discriminative low -rank 
preserving projection for dimensionality reduction," Applied Soft 
Computing, vol. 85, p. 105768, 2019.  
[82] J. Ma and Y. Yuan, "Dimension reduction of image deep f eature using 
PCA," Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation, vol. 
63, p. 102578, 2019.  
[83] A. Sellami and M. Farah, "Comparative study of dimensionality reduction 
methods for remote sensing images interpretation," in 2018 4th 
International  Conference on Advanced Technologies for Signal and 
Image Processing (ATSIP), 2018, pp. 1 -6: IEEE.  

==== Page 15 ====
Zebari et al. / Journal of Applied Science and Technology Trends Vol. 01, No. 01, pp. 56 –70, (2020 ) 
 
70 [84] X. Chen, J. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, and S. Liu, "Automatic feature extraction 
in X-ray image based on deep learning approach for determination of bone 
age," Future Generation Computer Systems, 2019 Oct 31.  
[85] Z. Jin, G. Feng, Y. Ren, and X. Zhang, "Feature Extraction Optimization 
of JPEG Steganalysis Based on Residual Images," Signal 
Processing,Vol.170, p. 107455, 2020.  
[86] W. Lin, J. Huang, C. Y. Suen, a nd L. Yang, "A feature extraction model 
based on discriminative graph signals," Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 139, p. 112861, 2020.  
[87] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, "A deep learning method with wrapper based 
feature extraction for wireless intrusion  detection system," Computers & 
Security, vol. 92, p. 101752, 2020.  
[88] Y. Liu and A. Sui, "Research on Feature Dimensionality Reduction in 
Content Based Public Cultural Video Retrieval," in 2018 IEEE/ACIS 17th 
International Conference on Computer and Inf ormation Science (ICIS), 
2018, pp. 718 -722: IEEE.  
[89] O. Dehzangi and V. Sahu, "IMU -Based Robust Human Activity 
Recognition using Feature Analysis, Extraction, and Reduction," in 2018 
24th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2018, pp. 
1402 -1407: IEEE.  
[90] X. Zhang et al., "Spatial -Spectral Graph -Based Nonlinear Embedding 
Dimensionality Reduction for Hyperspectral Image Classificaiton," in 
IGARSS 2018 -2018 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium, 2018, pp. 8472 -8475: IEEE.  [91] T. Alipourfard, H. Arefi, and S. Mahmoudi, "A novel deep learning 
framework by combination of subspace -based feature extraction and 
convolutional neural networks for hyperspectral images classification," in 
IGARSS 2018 -2018 IEEE International Ge oscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium, 2018, pp. 4780 -4783: IEEE.  
[92] D. Q. Zeebaree, H. Haron, A. M. Abdulazeez, and D. A. Zebari, 
"Trainable Model Based on New Uniform LBP Feature to Identify the 
Risk of the Breast Cancer," in 2019 International Confere nce on 
Advanced Science and Engineering (ICOASE), 2019, pp. 106 -111: IEEE.  
[93] Z. Liu, Z. Lai, W. Ou, K. Zhang, and R. Zheng, "Structured optimal graph 
based sparse feature extraction for semi -supervised learning," Signal 
Processing,vol.170, p. 107456, 2020.  
[94] A. M. Martinez, "The AR face database," CVC Technical Report24, 1998.  
[95] P. J. Phillips, H. Wechsler, J. Huang, and P. J. Rauss, "The FERET 
database and evaluation procedure for face -recognition algorithms," 
Image and vision computing, vol. 16 , no. 5, pp. 295 -306, 1998.  
[96] Y. Xu, X. Li, J. Yang, Z. Lai, and D. Zhang, "Integrating conventional 
and inverse representation for face recognition," IEEE transactions on 
cybernetics, vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1738 -1746, 2013.  
[97] F. S. Samaria and A. C. H arter, "Parameterisation of a stochastic model 
for human face identification," in Proceedings of 1994 IEEE workshop on 
applications of computer vision, 1994, pp. 138 -142: IEEE.  
. 
 
 

