==== Page 1 ====
111A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search:
Challenges and Solutions
PENGZHEN REN∗and YUN XIAO∗,Northwest University
XIAOJUN CHANG, Monash University
PO-YAO HUANG, Carnegie Mellon University
ZHIHUI LI†,Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
XIAOJIANG CHEN and XIN WANG, Northwest University
Deep learning has made breakthroughs and substantial in many fields due to its powerful automatic represen-
tation capabilities. It has been proven that neural architecture design is crucial to the feature representation of
data and the final performance. However, the design of the neural architecture heavily relies on the researchers’
prior knowledge and experience. And due to the limitations of human’ inherent knowledge, it is difficult for
people to jump out of their original thinking paradigm and design an optimal model. Therefore, an intuitive
idea would be to reduce human intervention as much as possible and let the algorithm automatically design
the neural architecture. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is just such a revolutionary algorithm, and the
related research work is complicated and rich. Therefore, a comprehensive and systematic survey on the
NAS is essential. Previously related surveys have begun to classify existing work mainly based on the key
components of NAS: search space, search strategy, and evaluation strategy. While this classification method is
more intuitive, it is difficult for readers to grasp the challenges and the landmark work involved. Therefore, in
this survey, we provide a new perspective: beginning with an overview of the characteristics of the earliest
NAS algorithms, summarizing the problems in these early NAS algorithms, and then providing solutions for
subsequent related research work. Besides, we conduct a detailed and comprehensive analysis, comparison,
and summary of these works. Finally, we provide some possible future research directions.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Machine learning algorithms .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Neural Architecture Search, AutoDL, Modular Search Space, Continuous
Search Strategy, Neural Architecture Recycle, Incomplete Training.
ACM Reference Format:
Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Xiaojiang Chen, and Xin Wang. 2020. A
Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions. ACM Comput. Surv. 37, 4,
Article 111 (August 2020), 33 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep learning has already exhibited strong learning capabilities in many fields, including machine
translation [ 1–3], image recognition [ 4,6,7] and object detection [ 8–10]. This is mainly due to
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author.
Authors’ addresses: Pengzhen Ren, pzhren@foxmail.com; Yun Xiao, yxiao@nwu.edu.cn, Northwest University; Xiaojun
Chang, cxj273@gmail.com, Monash University; Po-Yao Huang, Carnegie Mellon University; Zhihui Li, Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences); Xiaojiang Chen; Xin Wang, Northwest University.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2020/8-ART111 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.arXiv:2006.02903v3  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2021

==== Page 2 ====
111:2 Ren and Chang, et al.
the powerful automatic feature extraction capabilities offered by deep learning for unstructured
data. Deep learning has transformed the traditional approach of manually designing features
[13,14] into automatic extraction [ 4,30,31], which has allowed researchers to focus on the design
of neural architecture [ 11,12,19]. However, designing neural architecture heavily relies on the
researchers’ prior knowledge and experience; this makes it difficult for beginners to make reasonable
modifications to the neural architecture in line with their actual needs. Besides, people’s existing
prior knowledge and fixed thinking paradigms are likely to limit the discovery of new neural
architectures to a certain extent. As a result, Neural architecture search (NAS) was developed.
NAS aims to design a neural architecture that achieves the best possible performance using
limited computing resources in an automated way with minimal human intervention [ 26,114]. NAS-
RL [11] and MetaQNN [ 12] are considered pioneers in the field of NAS. The neural architectures
obtained by these works using reinforcement learning (RL) methods have reached state-of-the-art
classification accuracy on image classification tasks. This demonstrates that automated neural
architecture design is feasible. Subsequently, the work of Large-scale Evolution [ 15] once again
verified the feasibility of this concept by using evolutionary learning to achieve similar results.
However, these methods consume hundreds of GPU days or even more computing resources.
This huge amount of computation is almost catastrophic for everyday researchers. Therefore, a
large body of work has emerged on how to reduce the amount of calculation and accelerate the
search for neural architecture [ 18–20,49,50,53,85,106]. As the efficiency of search has improved,
NAS has also been rapidly applied in the fields of object detection [ 66,76,112,120], semantic
segmentation [ 63,65,122], adversarial learning [ 54], speech recognition [ 64], architectural scaling
[116, 124, 126], multi-objective optimization [40, 117, 127], platform-aware [29, 35, 104, 119], data
augmentation [ 123,125] and so on. Also, some works have considered how to strike a balance
between performance and efficiency [ 118,121]. Although NAS-related research has been highly
abundant, it is still difficult to compare and reproduce NAS methods [ 79,128,129,156]. This is
because different NAS methods vary widely in terms of search space, hyperparameters, tricks, etc.
Some works have also been devoted to providing a unified evaluation platform for popular NAS
methods [79, 128].
1.1 Motivation
Due to the deepening and rapid development of NAS-related research, some methods that were
previously accepted by researchers have proven to be imperfect by new research, leading to
the development of an improved solution. For example, early incarnations of NAS trained each
candidate neural architecture from scratch during the architecture search phase, leading to a surge
in computation [ 11,12]. ENAS [ 19] proposes to accelerate the architecture search process using a
parameter sharing strategy. Due to the superiority of ENAS in terms of search efficiency, the weight
sharing strategy was quickly recognized and adopted by a large number of researchers [ 23,54,55].
However, soon afterward, new research finds that the widely accepted weight sharing strategy is
likely to lead to candidate architectures being inaccurately ranked [ 24]; this make the algorithm
difficult to the optimal neural architecture from a large number of candidate architectures, thereby
further deteriorating the performance of the neural architecture that is eventually selected. Shortly
afterward, DNA [ 21] modularized the large search space of NAS into blocks, enabling the candidate
architecture to be fully trained to reduce the representation shift problem caused by the weight
sharing. Besides, GDAS-NSAS [ 25] proposes a Novelty Search based Architecture Selection (NSAS)
loss function to solve the problem of multi-model forgetting (i.e. when weight sharing is used to
sequentially train a new neural architecture, the performance of the previous neural architecture is
reduced) caused by weight sharing during the super network training process. Similar research
clues are very common in the rapidly developing field of NAS research.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 3 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:3
Table 1. Comparison of article frameworks of different NAS-related surveys.
SurveysClassification
standardMain frame
Survey 1 [27] Basic componentsSearch space, Search strategy and Evaluation strategySurvey 2 [28] Basic components
OurChallenges
and solutions(Challenge→Solution:)
Global search space →Modular search space
Discrete search strategy →Continuous search strategy
Search from scratch →Neural architecture recycling
Fully trained→Incomplete training
More concisely, this survey has the following motivations:
•Previous surveys often use the basic components of NAS to associate NAS-related work,
which makes it difficult for readers to grasp the research ideas of NAS-related work.
•NAS-related fields are developing rapidly, and related work is complex and rich. There are
obvious connections between different works, and existing surveys have not conducted a
detailed and clear analysis of these links.
So a comprehensive and systematic survey based on challenges and solutions is highly beneficial
to NAS research.
1.2 Our Contributions and Related Surveys
The contributions of this survey are summarized as follows:
•As far as we know, this is the first comprehensive and systematic review from the perspective
of NAS challenges and corresponding solutions.
•We conduct a comprehensive analysis and comparison on the performance of existing NAS-
related work and the optimization strategies they adopted.
•We analyze multiple possible development directions of NAS and point out two issues worthy
of vigilance. The hyperparameter search of NAS is also discussed. They are very beneficial to
the development of NAS.
Previous related surveys classify existing work mainly based on the basic components of NAS:
search space, search strategy, and evaluation strategy [ 27,28]. Although this classification method
is more intuitive, it is not conducive to assisting readers in capturing the research clues. Therefore,
in this survey, we first summarize the characteristics and corresponding challenges of the early
NAS methods. Based on these challenges, we then summarized and categorized existing research
to present readers with a comprehensive and systematic overview of the extant challenges and
solutions. A more specific NAS-related survey framework comparison is shown in Table 1.
1.3 Article Organization
We first made an insightful summary of the characteristics of early NAS in Section 2. Then, in
response to the challenges faced by early NAS, we conducted a comprehensive and systematic
analysis of the optimization strategy used by NAS in Section 3 according to the following four parts:
modular search space, continuous search strategy, neural architecture recycling, and incomplete
training. In Section 4, we conducted a comprehensive performance comparison of NAS related
work. In Section 5, we discussed the future direction of NAS in detail. In Section 6, we explained
the corresponding review threats. Finally, in Section 7, we made a summary and conclusion of this
survey.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 4 ====
111:4 Ren and Chang, et al.
ControllerSearch Space
Candidate 
ArchitectureOptimal 
Architecture
Training & RankSelectPerformance 
Evaluation Evaluation 
Strategy
Fig. 1. The general framework of NAS.
2 CHARACTERISTICS OF EARLY NAS
In this section, we first analyze the early work of NAS and then summarize their overall framework
and characteristics.The general framework of NAS is summarized in Fig.1. NAS generally begins
with a set of predefined operation sets and uses a controller to obtain a large number of candidate
neural architectures based on the search space created by these operation sets. The candidate
architectures are then trained on the training set and ranked according to their accuracy on the
validation set. The ranking information of the candidate neural architecture is then used as feedback
information to adjust the search strategy, enabling a set of new candidate neural architectures to
be obtained. When the termination condition is reached, the search process is terminated to select
the best neural structure. The chosen neural architecture then conducts performance evaluation on
the test set.
Early NAS also followed the above process to a large extent [ 11,12,15,16]. The idea behind
NAS-RL [ 11] comes from the very simple observation that the architecture of a neural network can
be described as a variable-length string. Therefore, an intuitive idea is that we can use RNN as a
controller to generate such a string, then use RL to optimize the controller, and finally obtain a satis-
factory neural architecture. MetaQNN [ 12] regards the selection process of the neural architecture
as a Markov decision process, and uses Q-learning to record rewards to obtain the optimal neural
architecture. Large-scale Evolution [ 15] aims to learn an optimal neural architecture automatically
using evolutionary algorithms (EA) while reducing human intervention as much as possible. This
approach uses the simplest network structure to initialize a large population, then obtains the best
neural architecture by reproducing, mutating, and selecting the population. GeNet [ 16], which also
uses EA, proposes a new neural architecture coding scheme, that represents the neural architecture
as a fixed-length binary string. It randomly initializes a group of individuals, employs a predefined
set of genetic operations to modify the binary string to generate new individuals, and finally selects
the most competitive individual as the final neural architecture.
These early NAS approaches eventually made the automatically generated neural architecture a
reality. To understand the reasons behind restricting the widespread use of early NAS, we have
summarized the common characteristics existing in early NAS work from the perspective of a
latecomer, as follows:
•Global search space. This requires the NAS to use a search strategy that searches all
necessary components of the neural architecture. This means that NAS needs to find an
optimal neural architecture within a very large search space. The larger the search space, the
higher the corresponding search cost.
•Discrete search strategy. This regards the differences between different neural architectures
as a limited set of basic operations; that is, by discretely modifying an operation to change
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 5 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:5
Input
Output𝑜𝑜1
𝑜𝑜2
𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(𝑛𝑛)𝑧𝑧(2)
𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆Input
Output𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜1
𝑜𝑜2
𝑜𝑜3𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(𝑛𝑛)𝑧𝑧(2)𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(2)
Fig. 2. Two common global search spaces with chain structure in early NAS work. Left: The simplest example
of a chain structure. Right: The chain structure example after adding skip connections. 𝑜𝑖is an operation in
the candidate set of operations and the 𝑖-th operation in the chain structure. The feature map generated by
𝑜𝑖is represented as 𝑧(𝑖). The input undergoes a series of operations to obtain the final output.
the neural architecture. This means that we cannot use the gradient strategy to quickly adjust
the neural architecture.
•Search from scratch. In this approach, the model is built from scratch until the final neural
architecture is generated. These methods ignore the existing neural architecture design
experience and are unable to utilize the existing excellent neural architecture.
•Fully trained. This approach requires training each candidate neural architecture from
scratch until convergence. The network structures of the subsequent network and previous
neural architectures are similar, as are those of the neural architectures at the same stage.
Therefore, it is clear that this relationship not be fully utilized if each candidate neural archi-
tecture is trained from scratch. Also, we only need to obtain the relative performance ranking
of the candidate architecture. Whether it is necessary to train each candidate architecture to
convergence is also a question worth considering.
To more clearly show the relationship between the characteristics of early NAS and NAS key
components, we follow the expressions in the previous two NAS-related surveys [ 27,28], they
generally regard search space, optimization methods, and performance estimation strategies as the
three major components of NAS. In this paper, the global search space and full training of early
NAS correspond to the two components of NAS search space and performance evaluation strategy
respectively. The discrete search strategy and search from scratch in the early NAS correspond to
the search strategy used in the RL and EA optimization methods in NAS.
More specifically, the search space is determined by the predefined operation set and the hy-
perparameters of the neural architecture (for example architectural template, connection method,
the number of convolutional layer channels used for feature extraction in the initial stage, etc.).
These parameters define which neural architectures can be searched by the NAS. Fig.2 presents
examples of two common global search spaces with a chain structure in early NAS work. 𝑜𝑖is an
operation in the candidate operation set and the 𝑖-th operation in the chain structure. The feature
map generated by 𝑜𝑖is represented as 𝑧(𝑖). The input undergoes a series of operations to obtain the
final output. Fig.2 (left): The simplest example of a chain structure MetaQNN [ 12]. At this point, for
any feature map 𝑧(𝑖), there is only one input node 𝑧(𝑖−1), and𝑧(𝑖)=𝑜𝑖{(𝑧(𝑖−1))}. Fig.2 (right): The
example after skip connections are added [ 11,15,16]. At this time, there can be multiple inputs for
any feature map 𝑧(𝑖), and
𝑧(𝑖)=𝑜(𝑖)n
𝑧(𝑖−1)o
⊙n
𝑧(𝑘)|𝛼𝑘,𝑖=1,𝑘<𝑖−1o
, (1)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 6 ====
111:6 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 3. Taking Large-scale Evolution [ 15] as an example, beginning from the simplest neural architecture to
gradually generate the final neural architecture. 𝐶,𝐵𝑁and𝑅denote the convolution, Batch Normalization
and ReLU operations in sequence.
where⊙can be a sum operation or a merge operation; for example, ⊙is a merge operation in
NAS-RL [ 11], and⊙is an element-wise summation operation in GeNet [ 16]. It should be pointed
out here that NASNet [ 32] considers these two operations in the experiment, but the experimental
results demonstrate that the sum operation is better than the merge operation. Accordingly, since
then, a large number of works have taken the summation operation as the connection method of
the feature map obtained between different branch operations [ 17,37,38]. Like the chain structure,
Mnasnet [ 29] suggests searching for a neural architecture that is composed of multiple segments
and connected in sequence, with each segment having its repeating structure.
Besides, in early NAS works, searching from scratch was a commonly adopted strategy. NAS-RL
[11] expresses the neural architecture as a string of variable length that is generated by RNN as a
controller. The corresponding neural architecture is then generated according to the string, after
which reinforcement learning is used as the corresponding search strategy to adjust the neural
architecture search. MetaQNN [ 12] trains an agent to sequentially select the layer structure of the
neural network on the search space constructed by the predefined operation set. This approach
regards the layer selection process as a Markov decision process, and also uses Q-learning as a
search strategy to adjust the agent’s selection behavior. Similar to NAS-RL [ 11], GeNet [ 16] also
adopts the concept of encoding the network structure. The difference is that in GeNet [ 16], the
neural architecture representation is regarded as a string of fixed-length binary codes, which are
regarded as the DNA of the neural architecture. The population is initialized randomly, after which
evolutionary learning is used to reproduce, mutate and select the population, and then to iterate
to select the best individual. It can be seen from the above analysis that these methods do not
employ the existing excellent artificially designed neural architecture, but instead, search the neural
architecture from scratch in their respective methods. More simply, Large-scale Evolution [ 15]
uses only a single-layer model without convolution as the starting point for individual evolution.
Evolutionary learning methods are then used to evolve the population, and then to select the most
competitive individuals in the population. We take Large-scale Evolution [ 15] as an example and
present an example of searching from scratch in Fig.3.
The common characteristics of these early NAS works are also the collective challenges faced
by the automatic generation of neural architecture. We summarize the solutions to the above-
mentioned challenges in the subsequent NAS-related research work in Section 3.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 7 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:7
3 OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY
Regarding the characteristics and challenges of early NAS [ 11,12,15,16], in this section, we
summarize the existing NAS research work regarding the following four aspects:
•Modular search space. Corresponding to the global search space, the modular search space
treats the neural architecture as a stack of multiple different types of modules. Therefore,
the search task is simplified from the original global search to only one or more modules of
different types.
•Continuous search strategy. Corresponding to the discrete search strategy, the continuous
search strategy continuously relaxes the structural parameters of the neural architecture so
that they can be gradient optimized like network parameters.
•Neural architecture recycling. Corresponding to the search from scratch, neural architec-
ture recycling takes the existing artificially designed high-performance neural architecture
as a starting point and uses the NAS method to perform network transformations on them to
improve their performance.
•Incomplete training. Corresponding to fully training, incomplete training aims to speed
up the relative performance ranking of candidate architectures by making full use of the
shared structure between candidate architectures or performance prediction, thereby avoiding
resource consumption caused by complete training of all candidate architectures.
3.1 Modular Search Space
Search space design has a critical impact on the final performance of the NAS algorithm. It not
only determines the freedom of the neural architecture search but also directly determines the NAS
algorithm’s upper-performance limit to some extent. Therefore, the reconstruction of the search
space is necessary.
One widely used approach is to transform the global search into a modular search space. As
a result, cell or block-based search space is commonly used in various NAS tasks because it can
effectively reduce the complexity of NAS search tasks. This is mainly because the cell-based search
space often needs to search only a few small cell structures, after which it repeatedly stacks such
cells to form the final neural architecture. However, the global search space needs to search for all
the components involved in building the entire neural architecture. Besides, the cell-based search
space can be migrated to different data set tasks by stacking different numbers of cells, but this
is often not possible when the global search space is used. Therefore, compared with the global
search space, the cell-based search space is more compact and flexible.
This concept mainly stems from the observation of the excellent neural architectures that have
been artificially designed in recent years [ 4,30,31]. These artificial neural architectures typically
accomplish the construction of the overall neural architecture by repeatedly stacking a certain unit
operation or a small structure. In the NAS context, this small repeating structure is often called a
cell. The construction of cell-based neural architecture is based on this idea. Neural architecture
constructed in this way is not only superior in terms of performance but also easy to generalize.
NASNet [ 32] is one of the first works to explore this idea. It proposes to search for two types of
cells, namely normal cells and reduction cells. Normal cells are used to extract advanced features
while keeping the spatial resolution unchanged, and reduction cells are mainly used to reduce the
spatial resolution. Multiple repeated normal cells are followed by a reduction cell; this connection
is then repeated multiple times to form the final neural architecture. In Fig.4 (left), we illustrate this
kind of neural architecture based on two cells. In Fig.4 (right), we present the internal structure
of an optimal normal cell in NASNet [ 32]. The structures of the corresponding reduction cell and
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 8 ====
111:8 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 4. Left: The structure of the search space example based on two cells in [ 32]. The normal cell is repeated
𝑛times and then connected to a reduction cell. The basic operation of the normal cell has a stride of 1, and
the size of the feature map remains unchanged before and after output. The basic operation stride of the
reduction cell is 2, and the size of the feature map is halved. Right: The best normal cell with 5 blocks searched
in [32].
normal cell are similar; the difference is that the basic operation step of the reduction cell is 2. A
large number of subsequent works [17, 43, 44] have used a search space similar to NASNet [32].
In ENAS [ 19], its experiments provide strong evidence for the utilization of this similar cell-based
search space. Subsequently, this cell-based search space is widely used in other research work. In
[33–35,45], to complete down-sampling, some unit operations are selected to replace reduction
cell; at this time, the model only needs to search for a normal cell. We illustrate this structure in
Fig.5. Here, the curved dotted line indicates the dense connection in Dpp-net [ 35]. At the same
time as Block-QNN [ 33] of NASNet [ 32], the pooling operation is used in place of the reduction cell
to reduce the size of the feature map. Hierarchical-EAS [ 34] uses convolution with a kernel size of
3×3and a stride of 2 instead of the reduction cell to reduce the spatial resolution. Furthermore,
the idea of meta-operation is used to hierarchically build the cell structure. Dpp-net [ 35] is similar
to Block-QNN [ 33], but uses average pooling operation instead of a reduction cell. The difference is
that Dpp-net [ 35] draws on the concept of DenseNet [ 36] to use dense connections, including cells,
to build a neural architecture, and further proposes to take devices into account for multi-objective
optimization tasks. In [ 33–35], the structure of each cell is the same, and it is only necessary to
search for a cell. For video tasks, [ 45] uses𝐿×3×3,𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒 =1,2,2max-pooling instead of a
reduction cell.
Moreover, to adapt to the complex task of video and expand the search space, the structure of
each cell can be made different. AutoDispNet [ 38] proposes to apply automatic architecture search
technology in order to optimize large-scale U-Net-like encoder-decoder architectures. Therefore, it
searches for three types of cells: normal, reduction, and upsampling. In the coding stage, the neural
architecture comprises alternate connections of normal cells and reduction cells. In the decoding
stage, it consists of a stack of multiple upsampling cells. [ 18] studies the structural commonality
of the cells obtained from some popular cell-based search spaces [ 17,19,32,43,46] and defines
the width and depth of cells. [ 18] further proves theoretically and experimentally that due to the
existence of the common connection mode, wide and shallow cells are easier to converge during
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 9 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:9
Fig. 5. Using unit operations to replace the reduction cell in [ 32], while having a densely connected neural
architecture. The curved dotted line indicates the dense connection in Dpp-net [ 35]. The initial convolution is to
extract low-level features. After the cell is repeated multiple times, a unit operation is used for downsampling.
This connection is repeated multiple times to form the final neural architecture.
training and easier to be searched, but the generalization effect is poor. This provides guidance that
helps us to understand the cell-based NAS. Besides, there are many cell-based NAS-related works
[54, 92].
In addition to repeatedly stacking one or more identical cells, FPNAS [ 39] also considers the
diversity of blocks when stacking blocks. The experimental results of FPNAS show that stacking
diversified blocks is beneficial to the improvement of neural architecture performance, and FPNAS
treats the search process as a bi-level optimization problem, which reduces the search cost to a
level similar to that of the most advanced NAS method [ 17,19,92]. Similar to FPNAS, FBNet [ 103]
explores a layer-wise search space. Specifically, FBNet fixes the macro-architecture and searches
for blocks with multiple layers. Moreover, each block can have a different layer structure, and the
blocks can also be different.
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive review of the modular search space. Compared with
global search, the modular search space more effectively reduces the search space and makes NAS
more accessible to researchers. Of course, this does not mean that the modular search space can
meet all task requirements. Global search still has a unique research value because it provides the
neural architecture design with a higher degree of freedom [104, 154].
3.2 Continuous Search Strategy
NAS is regarded as a revolution in neural architecture design. However, NAS also requires high
computational demand. For example, NASNet [ 32] uses the RL methods to spend 2000 GPU days to
obtain the best architecture in CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Similarly, AmoebaNet-A [ 43] spends 3150
GPU days using evolutionary learning. One internal reason why these mainstream search methods
based on RL [ 11,12,32], EA [ 15,43], Bayesian optimization [ 61], SMBO [ 37] and MCTS [ 62] are so
inefficient is that they regard neural architecture search as a black-box optimization problem in a
discrete search strategy.
To address this issue, DAS [ 69] explores the possibility of transforming the discrete neural
architecture space into a continuously differentiable form, and further uses gradient optimization
techniques to search the neural architecture. This approach mainly focuses on the search of the
hyperparameters of convolutional layers: filter sizes, number of channels, and grouped convolutions.
MaskConnect [ 70] find that the existing cell-based neural architecture tends to adopt a predefined
fixed connection method between modules; for example, each module only connects its first two
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 10 ====
111:10 Ren and Chang, et al.
modules [ 30], or connects all previous modules [ 36]. This connection method may not be optimal.
Moreover, it uses the modified gradient method to explore the connection method between modules.
Besides, other works [ 71–73] have also explored searching for neural architecture on continuous
domains. However, the search for these neural architectures is limited to fine-tuning the specific
structure of the network.
In order to solve the above challenges, DARTS [ 17] was developed. DARTS continuously relaxes
the originally discrete search strategy, which makes it possible to use gradients to efficiently
optimize the architecture search space. DARTS follows the cell-based search space of NASNet [ 32]
and further normalizes it. Every cell is regarded as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which is formed
by sequentially connecting 𝑁nodes. Each of these cells has two input nodes and one output node.
For convolutional cells, the input node is the output of the first two cells; for the recurrent cell, one
is the input of the current step, while the other is the state of the previous step. The cell output
is the concatenation result of all intermediate nodes. Each intermediate node 𝑥(𝑗)in the cell is a
potential feature representation, and is linked with each previous intermediate node 𝑥(𝑖)in the cell
through a directed edge operation 𝑜(𝑖,𝑗). For a discrete search strategy, each intermediate node can
be expressed as follows:
𝑥(𝑗)=∑︁
𝑖<𝑗𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑥(𝑖)
. (2)
The DARTS approach makes the discrete search strategy continuous by relaxing the selection of
candidate operations to a softmax of all possible operations. The mixed operation ¯𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)(𝑥)applied
to feature map 𝑥can be expressed as follows:
¯𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)(𝑥)=∑︁
𝑜∈Oexp
𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜
Í
𝑜′∈Oexp
𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜′𝑜(𝑥) (3)
whereOrepresents a set of candidate operations, while 𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜represents the weight of operation 𝑜
on directed edge 𝑒(𝑖,𝑗). Therefore, the neural architecture search has evolved into an optimization
process for a set of continuous variables 𝛼={𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)}. Once the search is complete, the most likely
operation𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)on the directed edge 𝑒(𝑖,𝑗)is selected while other operations is discarded.
𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)=argmax𝑜∈O𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜 (4)
By solving a bilevel optimization problem [ 67,68], the probability of mixed operations (the param-
eters𝛼of the neural architecture) and network weights 𝑤can be jointly optimized as follows:
min
𝛼L𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑤∗(𝛼),𝛼)
s.t.𝑤∗(𝛼)=argmin𝑤L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑤,𝛼)(5)
whereL𝑣𝑎𝑙andL𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 denote validation and training losses, respectively, while 𝛼is the upper-level
variable and 𝑤is the lower-level variable. By jointly optimizing this problem, the optimal 𝛼is
obtained, after which the discretization is performed to obtain the final neural architecture. We
illustrate this process in Fig.6.
Compared with DARTS, the neural architecture search process is changed from the selection of
discrete candidate operations to the optimization of the probability of continuous mixed operations.
During the same period, NAO [ 74] opts to encode the entire neural architecture to map the origi-
nally discrete neural architecture to continuously embedded encoding. Subsequently, the output of
the performance predictor is maximized by the gradient optimization method to enable the optimal
embedded coding to be obtained. Finally, a decoder is used to discretize the optimal continuous
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 11 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:11
0
2
31
(a)? ?
??
?
??0
2
31
(b)0
2
31
(c)0
2
31
(d)
(a) Connection to be
determined
0
2
31
(a)? ?
??
?
??0
2
31
(b)0
2
31
(c)0
2
31
(d)(b) Continuous relax-
ation
0
2
31
(a)? ?
??
?
??0
2
31
(b)0
2
31
(c)0
2
31
(d)(c) Joint optimization
0
2
31
(a)? ?
??
?
??0
2
31
(b)0
2
31
(c)0
2
31
(d) (d) Discrete neural ar-
chitecture
Fig. 6. Continuous relaxation and discretization of search space in DARTS [ 17]. (a) A cell structure to be
learned; the specific operation on the side is unknown. (b) Continuous relaxation of the cell-based search
space, where each edge 𝑒(𝑖,𝑗)is a mixture of all candidate operations. (c) Joint optimization of the probability
of mixed operations and network weights. (d) Discrete searched neural architecture.
representation (that is, the optimal embedded coding) into the optimal neural architecture. Fur-
thermore, DARTS uses the 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥 strategy to eliminate the less probable operations among the
mixed operations as a means of discretizing the neural architecture. However, common non-linear
problems in network operation can introduce bias into the loss function; this bias exacerbates the
performance difference between the derived child networks and the converged parent networks,
which results in the need to retrain the parameters of the derived child networks. Therefore, a
NAS solution with reduced performance deviation between the derived child networks and the
converged parent networks is necessary. To this end, SNAS [ 46] begins with the delayed reward
of reinforcement learning, then determines why delayed reward leads to the slow convergence
speed of reinforcement learning when performing architecture search. Accordingly, SNAS proposes
remodeling the NAS to theoretically bypass the delayed reward problem for reinforcement learn-
ing, while simultaneously ensuring that neural architecture parameters are continuous, so those
network operation parameters and neural architecture parameters can be jointly optimized using
a gradient method. Based on this, SNAS has a more efficient and automated neural architecture
search framework that still maintains the completeness and differentiability of the NAS pipeline.
In works about SNAS, DARTS and many other NAS [ 76–79], the feasible paths of the searched
neural architecture depend on each other and are closely coupled during the search phase. While
SNAS does to some extent reduce the performance difference between the derived child network and
the converged parent network, SNAS and DARTS are still required to choose only one path during
the verification phase. This crude decoupling inevitably leads to a gap between neural architectures
during the search and verification phases. To address this issue, DATA [ 75] developed the Ensemble
Gumbel-Softmax (EGS) estimator, which can decouple the relationship between different paths of
the neural architecture and achieve the seamless transfer of gradients between different paths. This
solves the problem of the architecture’s inability to be seamlessly connected between search and
verification.
Furthermore, I-DARTS [ 80] notes that the softmax -based relaxation constraint between each pair
of nodes may cause DARTS to be a "local" model. In DARTS, the cell’s middle node is connected to all
the precursor nodes, and when discretizing the neural architecture, there is an only one-directional
edge between each pair of nodes. This results in the existence of edges from different nodes that are
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 12 ====
111:12 Ren and Chang, et al.
0
2
311th tx
SS
S
(b) I-DARTS cell0
2
311th tx
S SS
S
S
S
(a) DARTS cell Softmax S
(a) DARTS cell
0
2
311th tx
SS
S
(b) I-DARTS cell0
2
311th tx
S SS
S
S
S
(a) DARTS cell Softmax S (b) I-DARTS cell
0
2
311th tx
SS
S
(b) I-DARTS cell0
2
311th tx
S SS
S
S
S
(a) DARTS cell Softmax S
Fig. 7. Comparison of the cell structure of DARTS [ 17] and I-DARTS [ 80] in a recurrent neural network. (a) In
DARTS, edges from different nodes cannot be compared. Moreover, when discretizing the neural architecture,
there is only one correlation edge between each pair of nodes. (b) In I-DARTS, a given node uses a softmax
while considering all input edges. Given a specific node, I-DARTS can determine whether edges are connecting
related nodes according to the importance of all input edges: either there are multiple connected edges or no
related edges.
unable to be compared with each other. Besides, DARTS requires only one directed edge between
each pair of nodes; this constraint design has no theoretical basis and also limits the size of the
DARTS search space. These local decisions, which are caused by the bias problem in graph-based
models [ 81,82] compel DARTS unable to make the best choice of architecture. Based on this,
I-DARTS proposes an interesting and simple idea: namely, using a softmax to simultaneously
consider all input edges of a given node. We present the cell structure comparison of DARTS and
I-DARTS in the recurrent neural network in Fig.7. As can be seen from Fig.7b, when given a node,
I-DARTS can determine whether edges are connecting related nodes depending on the importance
of all input edges: there are either multiple connected edges or no related edges.
P-DARTS [ 44] starts with the deep gap between the search and evaluation of neural architecture,
and improves DARTS overall. In DARTS, due to limitations on computational resources, DARTS
uses a shallow cell stack architecture in the search phase; in the evaluation phase, moreover, it stacks
more searched cells to enable the processing of data sets with higher resolution. Therefore, the
basic cell of the neural architecture used for evaluation is designed for shallow architecture, which
differs from the deep neural architecture used in the evaluation stage. Based on this, P-DARTS
uses progressive search to gradually increase the depth of the network during the search phase.
Moreover, it also gradually reduces the candidate operation set according to the weights of the
mixed operation in the search process, to cope with the problem of the increase in the calculation
volume caused by the increase in depth. At the same time, P-DARTS proposes regularization of the
search space to deal with the problem of insufficient stability during the process of searching in
deep architectures (algorithms are heavily biased towards skip-connect).
Compared with NAS based on RL and EA, DARTS greatly improves the search efficiency, but to
an insufficient extent. As shown in Fig.6c, in the search phase, DARTS continuously relaxes the
cell’s search space and optimizes all parameters in the DAG simultaneously. This causes DARTS to
occupy too much memory on the device during searching, which slows down the search speed. At
the same time, the effects of different operations between the same pair of nodes may be canceled
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 13 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:13
0
12 3
sampled
unsampled
intermediate features
Fig. 8. In GDAS [ 83], an example of sampling subgraphs in a DAG with three intermediate nodes. Colored
lines indicate operations in the candidate operation set, while black lines indicate corresponding information
flows. The circles indicate the intermediate features following operation processing. Each intermediate node
is equal to the sum of all the sampled intermediate features. In one iteration, only one sampled subgraph is
trained.
by each other, thereby destroying the entire optimization process. To this end, GDAS [ 83] proposes
to use a differentiable architecture sampler in each training iteration to sample only one subgraph
in the DAG, meaning that only one part of the DAG needs to be optimized in any one iteration. We
illustrate this process in Fig.8. At the same time, in the verification stage, the architecture sampler
can be optimized by using the gradient-based method, thereby further improve the search efficiency
of GDAS.
To reduce DARTS’s memory usage during search and improve the search efficiency, PC-DARTS
[84] opts to start from the channel, as opposed to GDAS’ sampling subgraphs in DAG and training
only one subgraph in one iteration. During the search process, PC-DARTS samples the channels
and convolves only the sampled channel features to achieve efficient gradient optimization. To
deal with the problem of inconsistent information brought about by the channel sampling strategy,
PC-DARTS uses edge normalization to solve this problem. It reduces the uncertainty in the search
process by adding a set of edge-level parameters. As a result, PC-DARTS can save memory and
is more efficient and stable. [ 111] recently find that DARTS [ 17] exhibits poor test performance
for architecture generated in a wide search space. This work contends that when the discovered
solutions are consistent with the high verification loss curvature in the architecture space, the
discovered architecture is difficult to promote. Moreover, various types of regularization are added
to explore how to make DARTS more robust. Finally, [ 111] proposes several simple variants and
achieve good generalization performance. Although we have conducted many reviews, there are
still many improvements that have been made based on DARTS [115, 153].
In the above-mentioned gradient-based methods, local optimization is a common problem. There-
fore, we conduct a comprehensive review of the solution to this problem here. The experimental
results of DARTS [ 17] show that an appropriate learning rate helps the model converge to a better
local optimal value. As shown in Fig.7b, I-DARTS [ 80] relaxes the softmax-based relaxation on
each edge of DARTS to all incoming edges of a given node, thereby alleviating the impact of bias
caused by local decision-making. PC-DARTS [ 84] uses channel sampling to replace the convolution
operation on all channels in DARTS, thereby reduces the possibility of falling into a local optimum.
In general, local optimization is still an important challenge faced by gradient-based optimization
methods, so more related research is needed in the future.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 14 ====
111:14 Ren and Chang, et al.
In this section, we provide a comprehensive and systematic overview of optimized NAS work
that employs gradient strategies on a continuous search strategy. Due to the simplicity and elegance
of the DARTS architecture, the research work related to DARTS is quite rich. Moreover, gradient
optimization in a continuous search strategy is an important trend of NAS.
3.3 Neural Architecture Recycling
Early NAS works [ 11,12,15,16] and many subsequent works [ 17,39–41] aim to search the neural
architecture from scratch. From a certain perspective, this type of approach does increase the
freedom of neural architecture design, and it is very likely to result in the design of a new high-
performance network structure unknown to humans. However, it is clear that this idea also increases
the time complexity of searching for the best neural architecture; this is because it does not make
full use of the prior knowledge regarding the existing artificially designed high-performance
neural architecture. Therefore, a new idea would be to use the existing, artificially designed high-
performance neural architecture as a starting point, then use the NAS method to modify or evolve
these neural architectures, as this would enable a more promising neural architecture to be obtained
at a lower computing cost. This process is generally referred to as ’network transformation’.
Net2Net [ 47] conducts a detailed study of network transformation technology and proposes
function-preserving transformations to facilitate the reuse of model parameters after transformation.
This approach can effectively accelerate the training of new and larger networks. Based on this idea,
[51] proposes efficient architecture search (EAS), which uses the encoder network as a meta-controller
to learn the low-dimensional representation of the existing neural architecture, and further refers to
the multiple actor networks in Net2Net [ 47] to decide whether to make corresponding adjustments
to the neural architecture at the layer level (deepening or widening layer). Besides, this approach
uses reinforcement learning strategies to update the parameters in the meta-controller. EAS takes
the view that the network transformation at the layer level needs to combine the information of
the entire neural architecture; thus, a bidirectional recurrent network (Bi-LSTM) [ 48] is used as
the network encoder. Since EAS is a network transformation on an existing network, models and
weights can be reused to substantially reduce the amount of calculation required. We illustrate
the overall neural architecture of EAS in Fig.9. In Fig.10, we also present the internal structure
of two actor networks: Net2Wider and Net2Deeper. In Net2Wider, the actor network shares the
same sigmoid classifier and decides whether to widen the layer according to each hidden encoder
state. In Net2Deeper, the actor network inputs the state of the final hidden Bi-LSTM layer into the
recurrent network, after which the recurrent network decides both where to insert the layer and
the parameters of the inserted layer.
Rather than widening or deepening the layers of the existing network in EAS [ 51], N2N learning
[52] compresses the teacher network by removing or shrinking the layers. In more detail, it
compresses the teacher network through a two-stage operation selection: first, the layer removal
is performed on the macro level, after which the layer shrinkage is performed on the micro-level.
Reinforcement learning is used to explore the search space, while knowledge distillation [ 56] is
used to train each generated neural architecture. In the next step, a locally optimal student network
is learned. Using this method, under similar performance conditions, a compression ratio of more
than 10×is achieved for networks such as ResNet-34 [ 30]. Moreover, unlike EAS [ 51] and N2N
learning [ 52], which can only deepen (remove) and widen (shrink) the network at the layer level,
Path-level EAS [ 57] realizes a network transformation at the path level. The inspiration behind
this concept stems from the performance gains achieved by the multi-branch neural architecture
included in the manually designed network [ 30,31,58,59], which achieves network path-level
transformation by replacing a single layer with multi-branch operations incorporating allocation
and merge strategies. Allocation strategies include: replication andsplit, while merge strategies
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 15 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:15
Conv(32,3,1) Pool(2,2) Conv(64,5,1) Pool(2,2) FC(64)LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTMLSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM
Layer EmbeddingEnconder
NetworkNetwork Transformation 
Net2Wider
Actor NetworkNet2Deeper
Actor NetworkUpdate the network
Multiple
Actor Networks ⋯
Fig. 9. In EAS [ 51], architecture search based on network transformation. After the existing network layer is
encoded by the layer encoder, Bi-LSTM [ 48] is used as a meta-controller to learn the low-dimensional feature
representation of the neural architecture. The multi-actor network combines these features to decide whether
the corresponding network transformation operation (deepening layer or widening layer) should be adopted.
Finally, reinforcement learning is used to update the meta-controlled parameters.
Fig. 10. The internal structure of two actor networks in EAS [ 51]: Net2Wider and Net2Deeper. In Net2Wider,
the actor network shares the same sigmoid classifier and decides whether to widen the layer according to
each hidden state of the encoder. In Net2Deeper, the actor network inputs the state of the final hidden layer
of Bi-LSTM into the recurrent network, after which the recurrent network decides where to insert the layer
and the parameters of the inserted layer.
include: addandconcatenation . We present an example of the process of implementing a path-level
network transformation by using a multi-branch operation rather than a single layer in Fig.11.
Another similar work, NASH-Net [ 85], further proposes four network morphism types based
on Net2Net [ 47]. NASH-Net can begin with a pre-trained network, apply network morphism to
generate a set of sub-networks, and obtain the best sub-network following a short period of training.
Then, after starting from the best sub-network, this process is iterated using the Neural Architecture
Search by Hill-climbing (NASH) to get the best neural architecture.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 16 ====
111:16 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 11. In Path-level EAS [ 57], an example of a process for implementing path-level network transformation
using a multi-branch operation rather than a single layer. (a) Using the replication -add strategy to add
branches to a single layer. (b) Using the split-concat strategy to further add branches to the network. (c)
Replacing identity mapping with a 3×3depthwise-separable convolution. (d) The tree structure of the neural
architecture in (c).
For complex tasks such as semantic segmentation or object detection, previous works have
often used networks designed for image classification, such as the backbone network. Under these
circumstances, performance gains can be obtained by specifically designing networks for complex
target tasks. Although some works [ 63,65,66] have used NAS to design backbone networks for
semantic segmentation or object detection tasks, pre-training is still necessary and the computa-
tional cost is high. Fast Neural Network Adaptation (FNA) [ 60] proposes a method that can adapt
a network’s architecture and parameters to new tasks at almost zero cost. It starts from a seed
network (a manually designed high-performance network), expands it into a super network in
its operation set, and then uses the NAS method [ 17,19,43] to adapt the neural architecture in
a way that allows it to obtain the target architecture. Moreover, it uses the seed network to map
the parameters to the super network and the target network to initialize the parameters. Finally,
the target network is obtained by fine-tuning the target task. We illustrate this process in Fig.12. It
is precisely due to the low cost of FNA in network transformation that NAS can design a special
neural architecture for large-scale tasks, such as detection and segmentation.
Different from the above methods which mainly focus on using the NAS method to improve the
visual model, Evolved Transformer [ 155] is committed to using the NAS method to design a better
feedforward architecture for seq2seq tasks. Specifically, Evolved Transformer first constructed
a large search space and then run an evolutionary architecture search with warm starting by
seeding our initial population with the Transformer, thereby search for better alternatives to
the Transformer. Besides, to be able to dynamically allocate more computing resources to more
promising candidate networks, Evolved Transformer also developed the Progressive Dynamic
Hurdles method and achieved continuous improvement on four well-established language tasks.
In this section, we present a comprehensive overview of NAS based on architecture recycling.
This method makes it possible to utilize a large number of high-performance networks that are
previously artificially designed. This saves the NAS from having to search the neural architecture
from scratch, which substantially reduces the number of unnecessary random searches required in
the massive search space. Compared with other optimization strategies, there are relatively few
studies on NAS based on neural architecture recycling.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 17 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:17
⋯⋯Seed NetworkSuper Network Target Architecture
Target Network
Network
Expansion Architecture
AdaptationParameter
Adaptation
Parameter Remapping
Fig. 12. The overall framework of FNA [ 60]. It starts from a seed network, expands this network into a super
network in its operation set, and then uses the NAS method to adapt the neural architecture to obtain the
target architecture. The seed network is then used to map the parameters to the super network and the target
network to initialize the parameters. Finally, the target network is obtained via fine-tuning the target task.
3.4 Incomplete Training
The key technology behind NAS involves using a search strategy to find the best neural architecture
by comparing the performance of a large number of candidate neural architectures. Accordingly,
the performance ranking of candidate neural architectures is extremely important. Early versions of
NAS [ 11,12,15,16] usually fully train the candidate neural architecture, then obtain the rankings
of the candidate neural architectures based on their performance on the validation set. However,
this method is excessively time-consuming because there are excessively many candidate neural
architectures to compare.
It should however be noted here that these works have also used some methods to accelerate the
ranking of candidate neural architectures. For example, NAS-RL [ 11] uses parallel and asynchro-
nous updates [ 42] to accelerate candidate neural architecture training. MetaQNN [ 12] compares
the performance of the candidate neural architecture after the first epoch of training with the
performance of the random predictor to determine whether it is necessary to reduce the learning
rate and restart training. Large-scale Evolution [ 15] allows the mutated child neural architecture
to inherit the weight of the parent to the greatest possible extent, thereby reducing the burden
associated with retraining the candidate neural architecture. However, there are still a large number
of child networks whose structural changes are unable to inherit the weight of their parents after
mutation, meaning that these candidate networks will be forced to retrain. Although the above
methods also accelerate the training of candidate neural architectures to a certain extent, they still
require a lot of computing power and their acceleration effects are relatively limited. Therefore, it is
necessary to conduct some research that can be used to further accelerate the training of candidate
neural architectures to obtain their relative ranking.
3.4.1 Training from scratch? Can we only train each candidate’s neural architecture from scratch?
This may ignore the interconnection between neural architectures. Parameter sharing brings us a
new possibility.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 18 ====
111:18 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 13. Parameter sharing mechanism in ENAS [ 19]. The candidate neural architecture in NAS can be
represented as a directed acyclic subgraph that is sampled in a supercomputing graph constructed by the
search space. The nodes in the graph represent local calculations, while the edges represent information flow.
Each node has its corresponding weight parameter, as indicated in the upper right. Only when a specific
edge is sampled will the corresponding parameter be activated and updated. The ENAS mechanism allows all
subgraphs (that is, candidate neural architectures) to share parameters.
When treating the candidate neural architecture as an independent individual, each candidate
neural architecture is trained from scratch, after which the candidate neural architecture is ranked
according to their performance on the validation set. This may provide a more accurate ranking,
as has occurred in other works [ 11,32,34,37]. In this process, the parameters of each trained
candidate neural architecture are directly discarded. This does not result in full utilization of these
trained parameters; accordingly, a new idea of parameter sharing has emerged.
ENAS [ 19] is the first NAS work to explicitly proposes parameter sharing. The ENAS work
has noted that the candidate neural architecture in NAS can be regarded as a directed acyclic
subgraph, which is in a supercomputing graph constructed by the search space. We illustrate this
sampling process in Fig.13. Based on this observation, ENAS uses LSTM as a controller for use in
searching the optimal subgraph on a large computation graph to obtain the neural architecture. In
transfer learning and multi-task learning, the weights obtained by training a model designed for
a specific task on a data set are also applicable to other models designed for other tasks [ 86–88].
Encouraged by this, ENAS proposes forcing the sharing of parameters among all different child
models (candidate architecture). Through the use of this mechanism, the child models can obtain
empirical performance, thereby avoiding the need to completely train each child model from scratch.
We present an example of different subgraphs sharing weights in Fig.13. The supercomputing
graph can be expressed as a DAG: the nodes in the graph are defined as local calculations, while
the edges represent the flow of information. Each node has its corresponding weight parameter,
as illustrated in the upper right of Fig.13. However, the corresponding parameters can only be
activated when a specific edge is sampled. The ENAS mechanism allows all subgraphs (i.e. candidate
neural architectures) to share parameters. Therefore, EANS has greatly improved search efficiency
compared to [11, 32, 34, 37].
Subsequently, CAS [ 55] explored a multi-task architecture search based on ENAS. This approach
extends NAS to transfer learning across data sources, and further introduces a novel continuous
architecture search to solve this ’forgetting’ problem in the continuous learning process. This
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 19 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:19
enables CAS to inherit the experience gained from the previous task when training a new task,
thereby allowing the model parameters can to continuously trained. This is highly beneficial to
NAS research on multi-tasking. Moreover, AutoGAN [ 54] first introduced NAS into generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [ 93] and used the Inception score (IS) [ 94] as the reward value of RL
to accelerate the search process through parameter sharing ENAS [ 19] and dynamic-resetting.
Further, progressive GAN training [ 95] has been used to introduce multi-level architecture search
(MLAS) into AutoGAN and gradually implement NAS. Compared with the most advanced manual
GANs [ 95–98], AutoGAN is highly competitive. The parameter sharing mechanism is also used
to accelerate the deployment research of the NAS architecture model across multiple devices and
multiple constrained environments. At the kernel level, OFA [ 100] uses an elastic kernel mechanism
to meet the application needs of multi-platform deployment and the diverse visual needs of different
platforms. Small kernels share the weight of large kernels; this is done to avoid repeatedly centering
sub-kernels (centering sub-kernels is used for both an independent kernel and a part of a large kernel)
to reduce the performance of certain sub-networks, OFA also introduces a kernel transformation
matrix. At the network level, OFA recommends training the largest network first, while the smaller
network shares the weight of the larger network before fine-tuning. Moreover, the weight of the
large network can provide a small network with good initialization, which greatly accelerates the
training efficiency.
Besides, the one-shot based method also employs parameter sharing. SMASH [ 23] proposes to
train an auxiliary HyperNet [ 89], which is used to generate weights for other candidate neural
architectures. Besides, SMASH also uses the early training performance of different networks
derived from the research in Hyperband [ 90] to provide meaningful guidance suggestions for
the ranking of candidate neural architectures. Parameter sharing is primarily reflected in the
hypernetwork and between candidate neural architectures. The use of the auxiliary HyperNet avoids
the need to completely train each candidate neural architecture. By comparing the performance of
the candidate neural architectures using weights generated by the HyperNet on the verification set,
their relative rankings can be obtained; this allows SMASH to quickly obtain the optimal neural
architecture at the cost of a single training session. Understanding One-Shot Models [ 22] conducts
a comprehensive analysis of the rationality of the parameter sharing approaches used in SMASH
[23] and ENAS [ 19]. Besides, Understanding One-Shot Models also discussed the necessity of the
hypernetwork in SMASH and the RL controller in ENAS, pointing out that a good enough result
can be obtained without the use of the hypernetwork and RL controller. Unlike SMASH, which
encodes an architecture into a three-dimensional tensor via a memory channel scheme, Graph
HyperNetwork (GHN) [ 91] employs computation graphs to represent the neural architecture, then
uses graph neural networks to perform architecture searches. Compared to SMASH, which can
only use the hypernetwork to predict some weights, GHN can predict all the free weights through
the use of a graph model. Therefore, network topology modeling-based GHN can predict network
performance faster and more accurately than SMASH.
A typical one-shot NAS must randomly sample a large number of candidate architectures from
the hypernetwork using parameter sharing, then evaluate these architectures to find the best
one [ 22,23]. SETN [ 92] noted that finding the best architecture from these sampled candidate
architectures is extremely difficult. This is because, in the relevant NAS [ 22,23,83], the shared
parameters are closely coupled with the learnable architectural parameters. This will introduce
deviations into the template parameters, which will cause some of the learnable architectural
parameters to be more biased towards simple networks (these networks have fewer layers and
are more lightweight). Because they converge faster than more complex networks, this will lead
to a simplified search architecture. At the same time, it also results in the sampled candidate
architectures having a very low good rate. To this end, SETN adopts a uniformly stochastic training
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 20 ====
111:20 Ren and Chang, et al.
strategy to treat each candidate architecture fairly, meaning that they are fully trained to obtain
more accurate verification performance. Besides, SETN is also equipped with a template architecture
estimator. Unlike the random sampling methods previously used in Understanding One-Shot Models
[22] and SMASH [ 23], the estimator in SETN can be used to determine the probability that the
candidate architecture has a lower verification loss, as well as to ensure that the low verification
loss architecture with a higher probability will be selected for one-shot evaluation. At the same
time, the estimator is trained on the validation set. Therefore, SETN improves the excellent rate
of the sampling candidate architecture compared to Understanding One-Shot Models [ 22] and
SMASH [23], making it more likely to find the optimal architecture.
[24], through evaluating the effectiveness of the NAS search strategy, find that the weight sharing
strategy in ENAS [ 19] resulted in inaccurate performance evaluation of the candidate architecture,
making it difficult for the NAS to identify the best architecture. Besides, the research of Fairnas [ 101]
and [ 102] also demonstrates that candidate neural architectures based on these parameter sharing
methods also cannot be adequately trained, which lead to an inaccurate ranking of candidate neural
architectures. In NAS works based on gradient optimization [ 17,103,104], the joint optimization
of supernet weights and architectural parameters also introduces bias between sub-models. In light
of this, DNA [ 21] proposes to modularize the NAS’s large-scale search space to ensure that the
candidate architecture is adequately trained to reduce the representation shift caused by parameter
sharing. Besides, DNA [ 21] also uses block-wise search to evaluate all candidate architectures
within the block. These methods are used to evaluate candidate architectures more accurately.
GDAS-NSAS [ 25] also considered and improved the weight sharing mechanism in one-shot NAS,
proposing an NSAS loss function to solve the problem of multi-model forgetting (when weight
sharing is used to sequentially train a new neural architecture, the performance of the previous
neural architecture is reduced) that arises due to weight sharing during the super network training
process. Finally, GDAS-NSAS [ 25] applies the proposed method to RandomNAS [ 105] and GDAS
[83]; this approach effectively suppresses the multi-model forgetting problem and consequently
improves the training quality of the supernet,
Differentiable neural architecture search also employs similar parameter sharing ideas. Examples
include DARTS-like work [ 17,44,80,84]; for details, refer to Section.3.2. In ENAS, a controller is
used to sample subgraphs in a supercomputing graph. Subgraphs with the same information flow
share parameters in the search phrase, so only the sampled subgraphs need to be optimized in
each iteration. The difference is that the DARTS-like method chooses to optimize a super network
directly, and the best sub-network is decoupled from the super network according to the learned
mixed operation weights. Parameters are shared among different sub-networks in the super network.
Moreover, optimization strategies based on neural architecture recycling can often be initialized
with the help of function preservation [ 47] to inherit the parameters of the template network,
thereby avoiding the retraining of sub-neural architecture. More detailed content can be found in
Section.3.3, for example: EAS [51], Path-level EAS [57] and N2N learning [52], etc.
3.4.2 Training to convergence? Can we only train each candidate neural architecture to conver-
gence? This may ignore the guiding role of early performance curves in predicting the potential of
neural architecture. Early termination brings us a new possibility.
To quickly analyze the effectiveness of a specific model in deep learning, human experts often
judge whether this model is necessary to continue training according to the model’s learning
curve. Therefore, the training of models with no potential will be terminated as soon as possible;
this means that there is no need to wait for this model to converge, which saves resources for
new exploration. Similar strategies can also be used to rank the performance of NAS candidate
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 21 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:21
IterationsValidation Accuracy
Early
termination
Fig. 14. Assuming learning curve for performance prediction. The black curve represents an attempt to use an
observable early performance learning curve (solid line) to predict the neural architecture’s final performance
on the validation set [ 20,37,110]. The three red curves indicate the hypothesis that the performance of the
neural architecture during early training and convergence is consistent with ranking [ 50]. Using performance
prediction and early performance ranking assumptions can facilitate the termination of the training of neural
architectures that lack potential as early as human experts, as well as the use of minimal computing resources
to explore more potential neural architectures. This speeds up the NAS architecture search process.
architectures: for candidate architectures with no potential, training can be terminated early, while
more adequate training can be obtained for more promising architectures.
Early termination of training is not a new idea; many researchers have done a large amount of
related research on this subject. For example, [ 107] uses the probabilistic method to simulate the
learning curve of the deep neural network and terminates the training of poorly running models in
advance. However, this approach requires a long early training period to accurately simulate and
predict the learning curve. [ 108] extends [ 107]; in [ 108], the probability model of the learning curve
can be set across hyperparameters, and a mature learning curve is used to improve the performance
of the Bayesian neural network. Similar strategies have also been used to solve hyperparameter
optimization problems [90, 109].
The above methods are based on the use of partially observed early performance to predict
the learning curve and design the corresponding machine learning model. To imitate human
experts to the extent that NAS search can also automatically identify below-standard candidate
architectures and terminate their training early, [ 20] combines learning curve prediction with NAS
tasks for the first time. This approach builds a set of standard frequentist regression models and
obtains the corresponding simple features from the neural architecture, hyperparameters, and
early learning curve. These features are then used to train the frequentist regression model and
are then used to predict the final verification set performance of the neural architecture with early
training experience. Performance prediction is also used in PNAS [37]. To avoid the need to train
and evaluate all child networks, it learns a predictor function that can be trained based on the
observable early performance of the cell. The predictor is used to evaluate all candidate cells, then
the top-𝑘cells are selected, and this process is repeated until a sufficient number of blocks of cells
are found. The black curve in Fig.14 shows the learning curve prediction trying to predict the final
performance from the premature learning curve.
NAO [ 74] uses a performance predictor similar to previous work [ 20,37,110]. This is dissimilar
to PNAS [ 37], which uses a performance predictor to evaluate and select the generated neural
architecture to speed up the search process. In NAO [ 74], after the encoder completes the continuous
representation of the neural architecture, the performance predictor is taken as the optimization goal
of the gradient ascent. By maximizing the output of the performance predictor 𝑓, the continuous
representation of the best neural architecture can be obtained. Finally, the decoder is used to
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 22 ====
111:22 Ren and Chang, et al.
get the final discrete neural architecture. Unlike previous NAS based on performance prediction
[20,37,110], in multinomial distribution learning for NAS, MdeNAS [ 50] put forward a performance
ranking hypothesis: that is, the relative performance ranking of the neural architecture at each
training stage is consistent. In other words, the neural architecture that performed well in the early
days still maintains good performance when the training converges. MdeNAS [ 50] has conducted
a large number of experiments to verify this hypothesis; according to these results, the early
performance of candidate architectures can be used to quickly and easily obtain their relative
performance rankings, thereby speeding up the neural architecture search process. We illustrate an
early performance ranking hypothesis in Fig.14 (as shown by the three red curves).
In this section, we focus on the challenge of fully trained candidate architectures, starting with the
necessity of two aspects (training from scratch and training to convergence), and comprehensively
and systematically summarizing the existing work. Compared with other optimization strategies,
this aspect of the research work is relatively small, but still very necessary.
4 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
NAS is a highly promising study. In this section, we classify and compare the performance of
existing NAS based on mainstream search methods [ 27,28], while also reporting the optimization
strategies they use according to Section 3. These search methods primarily include the following:
reinforcement learning (RL), evolutionary algorithm (EA), gradient optimization (GO), random search
(RS) and sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) [ 162]. We summarized in Fig.15 the general
framework comparison of RL, SMBO, and EA in the context of NAS. Fig.15a shows the general
framework of RL in the context of NAS. The agent (controller) makes corresponding actions
(sampling neural framework) to modify the system state (neural architecture), and the environment
gives the agent corresponding rewards (accuracy on the verification set) and updates the agent
accordingly (adjusting algorithm parameters). Fig.15b shows the general framework of SMBO in
the context of NAS. The surrogate model ˆ𝑓(performance predictor) evaluates all candidate cells 𝛼
(the structure description of the neural architecture) [ 37] and selects promising candidate cells, and
then evaluates the performance of the neural architecture composed of the candidate cells on the
validation set and get the response value 𝑓(𝛼)(loss value) of the corresponding response function
𝑓[161]. The cell𝛼𝑖and the corresponding response value 𝑓(𝛼𝑖)are added as a new meta instance
(𝛼𝑖,𝑓(𝛼𝑖))to the history record 𝐻of cell measurement performance, and the surrogate model is
updated again according to 𝐻until convergence. Through iteration, the surrogate model value
ˆ𝑓(𝛼)of the cell𝛼is continuously approximated to the corresponding response value 𝑓(𝛼)to avoid
time-consuming training steps. Fig.15c shows the general framework of EA in the context of NAS.
The algorithm first initializes the population and selects parents, then cross or mutate based on the
parent to generate a new individual offspring (neural architecture), and evaluate the adaptability of
the offspring (the performance evaluation of the new neural architecture), and select a group of
individuals with the strongest adaptability (the best performing neural architecture) to update the
population. GO has been described in detail in Fig.6, so it is no longer repeated here.
We intend to obtain their similarities and differences from these summaries. The situation is
not as simple as it might appear. In fact, it is relatively difficult to compare NAS performance,
because NAS lacks certain baselines. Besides, different types of NAS have great differences in
preprocessing, hyperparameters, search space, and trick, which increase the difficulty of NAS
performance comparison. These tricks include learning rate decay, regularization (e.g., DropPath
[32,136]), augmenting techniques (e.g., Cutout [ 131]), etc. The random search strategy is considered
to be a strong baseline. For example, in [ 24], the random search identifies the best RNN cells
compared to other strategies. The findings presented in [ 129], [34] and [ 105] also prove this.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 23 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:23
Environment
(Neural Architecture)
(The Controller)Action
(Sample 
Architecture)Rewards & Update 
(Accuracy on the 
validation set)
AgentSurrogate 
Model (̂𝑆𝑆)Response
Function ( 𝑆𝑆)Select Candidates Evaluate Candidates…
Candidate Cells 
(Architecture description)
Approximates
Update Record
(𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖))
⋮Update Surrogate
History (𝐻𝐻 )(𝛼𝛼1,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼1))
(𝛼𝛼2,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼2))
⋮𝛼𝛼1 …𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖
(a) The general framework of RL in the
context of NAS.
Environment
(Neural Architecture)
(The Controller)Action
(Sample 
Architecture)Rewards & Update 
(Accuracy on the 
validation set)
AgentSurrogate 
Model (̂𝑆𝑆)Response
Function ( 𝑆𝑆)Select Candidates Evaluate Candidates…
Candidate Cells 
(Architecture description)
Approximates
Update Record
(𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖))
⋮Update Surrogate
History (𝐻𝐻 )(𝛼𝛼1,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼1))
(𝛼𝛼2,𝑆𝑆(𝛼𝛼2))
⋮𝛼𝛼1 …𝛼𝛼𝑖𝑖(b) The general framework of SMBO in the context of NAS.
Initialization
PopulationParent Selection
Parents
Crossover & Mutation
(Add\Remove- Skip andReset- weights, etc. )
OffspringEvaluation & Selection & Update
(Performance evaluation and selection of 
neural architecture, and population update)…
…
Initialization
PopulationParent Selection
Parents
Crossover & Mutation
(Add\Remove- Skip、
Reset- weights, etc. )
Offspring
Evaluation & Selection & Update
(Performance evaluation and selection of 
neural architecture, and population update) ……
…
…
(c) The general framework of EA in the context of NAS.
Fig. 15. Comparison of RL, SMBO, and EA general frameworks in the context of NAS.
Therefore, [ 129] uses the average architecture of the random search strategy as the baseline for
comparison.
The performance of the state-of-the-art NAS and mainstream artificial networks on the CIFAR-
10 dataset are summarized in Table 2. Moreover, based on Section 3, we simultaneously report
the optimization strategy used in NAS. Similarly, we present a performance comparison on the
ImageNet dataset in Table 3. Because the optimization strategies used in the same NAS method are
identical, we, therefore, omit the reporting of the corresponding optimization strategies in Table 3.
From observing Table 2 and 3, we can clearly see that in popular NAS, the use of modular
search strategies is highly extensive. This is mainly because the modular search greatly reduces the
complexity of the search space compared to a global search. However, as summarized in Section
3.1, this does not necessarily imply that the modular search space is better than the global search.
Moreover, we can conclude with certainty that incomplete training is also widely used; this can
effectively accelerate the ranking of candidate neural architectures, thereby reducing the search
duration. In addition, among the many optimization strategies considered, the gradient optimization
based on the continuous search strategy can most significantly reduce the search cost and has a
very rich body of research to support it. We also observe that random search strategy-based NAS
has also achieved highly competitive performance. However, it is clear that existing NAS research
on random search strategies is relatively inadequate. The optimization strategy of architecture
recycling also exhibits comparatively excellent performance, but there are relatively few related
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 24 ====
111:24 Ren and Chang, et al.
Table 2. The performance comparison between the state-of-the-art NAS and mainstream artificial networks on
CIFAR-10. In the interests of clarity, we classify NAS according to mainstream search methods: reinforcement
learning (RL), evolutionary algorithm (EA), gradient optimization (GO), random search (RS) and sequential
model-based optimization (SMBO). At the same time, the optimization strategy used in NAS is reported
based on the analysis Section 3. Cutout is an augmentation technology used in [131].
Search
methodReference VenueOptimization Strategy
Error
Acc (%)Params
(Millions)GPU
DaysModular
search
spaceContinuous
search
strategyArchitecture
recycleIncomplete
training
HumanWRN [133] CVPR16 3.87 36.2 -
Shark [134] CoRR17 3.55 2.9 -
PyramidSepDrop [135] CoRR16 2.67 26.2 -
ResNet [136] ECCV16 6.41 1.7 -
Fractalnet [137] ICLR17 5.22 38.6 -
DenseNet-BC [36] CVPR17 3.46 25.6 -
RLNAS-RL [11] ICLR17 3.65 37.4 22,400
MetaQNN [12] ICLR17 6.92 11.2 100
EAS [51] AAAI18 ✓ ✓ 4.23 23.4 10
NASNet-A [32] CVPR18 ✓ 3.41 3.3 2,000
NASNet-A + Cutout [32] CVPR18 ✓ 2.65 3.3 2,000
Block-QNN [33] CVPR18 ✓ 3.54 39.8 96
Path-level EAS [57] ICML18 ✓ ✓ 2.99 5.7 200
Path-level EAS+Cutout [57] ICML18 ✓ ✓ 2.49 5.7 200
N2N learning [52] ICLR18 ✓ ✓ 6.46 3.9 2.1
ProxylessNAS-R+Cutout [104] ICLR19 ✓ 2.30 5.8 N/A
FPNAS+Cutout [39] ICCV19 ✓ ✓ 3.01 5.8 0.8
EALarge-scale Evolution [15] ICML17 ✓ 5.40 5.4 2,600
GeNet [16] ICCV17 5.39 N/A 17
Genetic Programming CNN [5] GECC17 5.98 1.7 14.9
Hierarchical-EAS [34] ICLR18 ✓ 3.75 15.7 300
NASH-Net [85] ICLR18 ✓ ✓ 5.20 19.7 1
Neuro-Cell-based Evolution [130] ECML-KDD18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.57 5.8 0.5
AmoebaNet-A [43] AAAI19 ✓ 3.34 3.2 3,150
Single-Path One-Shot NAS [106] CoRR19 ✓ ✓ N/A N/A N/A
GOENAS+micro [19] ICML18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.54 4.6 0.5
ENAS+micro+Cutout [19] ICML18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.54 4.6 0.5
ENAS+macro [19] ICML18 ✓ ✓ 4.23 21.3 0.32
SMASH [23] ICLR18 ✓ ✓ 4.03 16 1.5
Understanding One-Shot Models [22] ICML18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 4.00 5.0 N/A
Maskconnect [70] ECCV18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.27 N/A N/A
DARTS ( 1𝑠𝑡order)+Cutout [17] ICLR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.00 3.3 1.5
DARTS ( 2𝑛𝑑order)+Cutout [17] ICLR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.76 3.3 4
SNAS+Cutout [46] ICLR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.85 2.8 1.5
GHN [91] ICLR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.84 5.7 0.84
ProxylessNAS-G+Cutout [104] ICLR19 ✓ ✓ 2.08 5.7 N/A
PARSEC+Cutout [132] CoRR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.81 3.7 1
BayesNAS [138] ICML19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.81 3.4 0.2
P-DARTS+Cutout [44] ICCV19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.50 3.4 0.3
SETN [92] ICCV19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.69 N/A 1.8
DATA+Cutout [75] NeurIPS19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.59 3.4 1
TAS [126] NeurIPS19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 6.82 N/A 0.3
XNAS [115] NeurIPS19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 1.60 7.2 0.3
GDAS [83] CVPR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.82 2.5 0.17
FBNet-C [103] CVPR19 ✓ ✓ ✓ N/A N/A N/A
SGAS [153] CVPR20 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.66 3.7 0.25
GDAS-NSAS [25] CVPR20 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.73 3.5 0.4
PC-DARTS+Cutout [84] CVPR20 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.57 3.6 0.1
R-DARTS [111] ICLR20 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.93 4.1 N/A
RSHierarchical-EAS Random [34] ICLR18 ✓ 3.91 N/A 300
NAO Random-WS [74] NeurIPS18 ✓ ✓ 3.92 3.9 0.3
NASH-Net Random [85] ICLR18 6.50 4.4 0.2
DARTS Random [17] ICLR19 ✓ 3.29 3.2 4
RandomNAS+Cutout [105] UAI19 ✓ ✓ 2.85 4.3 2.7
RandomNAS-NSAS [25] CVPR20 ✓ 2.64 3.08 0.7
SMBONASBOT [61] NeurIPS18 8.69 N/A 1.7
NAO [74] NeurIPS18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.98 28.6 200
NAO-WS [74] NeurIPS18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 3.53 2.5 0.3
NAO-Cutout [74] NeurIPS18 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2.11 128 200
PNAS [37] ECCV18 ✓ ✓ 3.41 3.2 225
DPP-Net [35] ECCV18 ✓ ✓ 5.84 0.45 2
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 25 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:25
Table 3. The performance comparison between the state-of-the-art NAS and mainstream artificial networks
on ImageNet. The search strategy adopted by the corresponding NAS is consistent with Table 2. Cutout is an
augmentation technology used in [131].
Search mothed Reference VenueTop 1/Top 5
Acc(%)Params
(Millions)Image Size
(squarred)GPU Days
HumanMobilenets [6] CoRR17 70.6/89.5 4.2 224 -
ResNeXt [140] CVPR17 80.9/95.6 83.6 320 -
Polynet [141] CVPR17 81.3/95.8 92.0 331 -
DPN [142] NIPS17 81.5/95.8 79.5 320 -
Shufflenet [139] CVPR18 70.9/89.8 5.0 224 -
RLNASNet [32] CVPR18 82.7/96.2 88.9 331 2,000
NASNet-A [32] CVPR18 74.0/91.6 5.3 224 2,000
Block-QNN [33] CVPR18 77.4/93.5 N/A 224 96
N2N learning [52] ICLR18 69.8/N/A 3.34 32 11.3
Path-level EAS [57] ICML18 74.6/91.9 594 224 200
FPNAS [39] ICCV19 73.3/N/A 3.41 224 0.8
EAGeNet [16] ICCV17 72.1/90.4 156 224 17
Hierarchical-EAS [34] ICLR18 79.7/94.8 64.0 299 300
AmoebaNet-A (N=6, F=190) [43] AAAI19 82.8/96.1 86.7 331 3,150
AmoebaNet-A (N=6, F=448) [43] AAAI19 83.9/96.6 469 331 3,150
Single-Path One-Shot NAS [106] CoRR19 74.7/N/A N/A 224 <1
GOUnderstanding One-Shot Models [22] ICML18 75.2/N/A 11.9 224 N/A
SMASH [23] ICLR18 61.4/83.7 16.2 32 3
Maskconnect [70] ECCV18 79.8/94.8 N/A 224 N/A
PARSEC [132] CoRR19 74.0/91.6 5.6 N/A 1
DARTS [17] ICLR19 73.3/91.3 4.7 224 4
SNAS [46] ICLR19 72.7/90.8 4.3 224 1.5
ProxylessNAS [104] ICLR19 75.1/92.5 N/A 224 8.33
GHN [91] ICLR19 73.0/91.3 6.1 224 0.84
SETN [92] ICCV19 74.3/92.0 N/A 224 1.8
TAS [126] NeurIPS19 69.2/89.2 N/A 224 2.5
XNAS [115] NeurIPS19 76.1/N/A 5.2 224 0.3
GDAS [83] CVPR19 72.5/90.9 4.4 224 0.17
FBNet-C [103] CVPR19 74.9/N/A 5.5 224 9
SGAS [153] CVPR20 75.6/92.6 5.4 224 0.25
PC-DARTS (CIFAR10) [84] ICLR20 74.9/92.2 5.3 224 0.1
PC-DARTS (ImageNet) [84] ICLR20 75.8/92.7 5.3 224 3.8
RS Hierarchical-EAS Random [34] ICLR18 79.0/94.8 N/A 299 300
SMBOPNAS (Mobile) [37] ECCV18 74.2/91.9 5.1 224 225
PNAS (Large) [37] ECCV18 82.9/96.2 86.1 331 225
DPP-Net [35] ECCV18 75.8/92.9 77.2 224 2
studies. On the other hand, transfer learning is a widely used technique in NAS tasks; that is, the
architecture searched on a small dataset (CIFAR-10) will be transferred to a large dataset (ImageNet).
Therefore, the search time costs involved in the two datasets shown in Table 2 and 3 are the same
[17,32,39,46]. These search tasks conducted in advance on small datasets are often called agent
tasks. ProxylessNAS [ 104] also considers the problem of searching on large target tasks directly
and without agents.
In this part, we compare and summarize the popular NAS method with mainstream, artificially
designed networks in multiple dimensions in terms of both performance and parameter amount. It
is however worth noting that, the performance gains obtained using NAS are limited compared to
those achieved using manually designed networks.
5 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The emergence of NAS is exciting, as it is expected to end the tedious trial and error process of
manual neural architecture design. Moreover, it is also hoped that it can design a network structure
that is completely different from the artificial network, thereby breaking through the existing human
mindset. Artificially designed networks have made breakthroughs in many fields, including image
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 26 ====
111:26 Ren and Chang, et al.
recognition [ 4,7,113], machine translation [ 1,3,143,151], semantic segmentation [ 144,145,150],
object detection [ 8,148,149], and video understanding [ 146,147] and so on. Although the NAS-
related research has been quite rich, compared with the rapid development of artificial neural
architecture design in various fields, NAS is still in the preliminary research stage. The current NAS
is primarily focused on improving image classification accuracy, compressing the time required to
search for neural architecture, and making it as light and easy to promote as possible. In this process,
a proper baseline is crucial, as this helps to avoid NAS search strategy research being masked by
various powerful augmenting technologies, regularization, and search space design tricks. Besides,
the search strategies currently used by NAS are relatively concentrated, especially GO based on
supernets, and there are many theoretical deficiencies in the related research. Therefore, improving
the related research background is of great benefit to the development of NAS.
More specifically, from the original intention of NAS design, early NAS was very close to people’s
expectations for automatic neural architecture design. For example, Large-scale Evolution [ 15] uses
an EA as a NAS search strategy, and emphasizes that there is no need for manual participation
once network evolution begins. In the case of reducing human interference as much as possible,
the algorithm is allowed to autonomously determine the evolution direction of the network. This is
a good start, although the search performance at the time was insufficient. This is mainly because
Large-scale Evolution emphasizes the reduction of artificial restrictions to the greatest extent
possible, and also evolves from the simplest single-layer network (as shown in Fig.3). This means
that the population must contain a sufficient number of individuals to evolve satisfactory results.
Besides, due to the limitations of evolutionary efficiency and the huge search space, it is difficult to
evolve a network structure that can achieve outstanding performance. Therefore, subsequent NAS
works began to discuss how to reduce the search space as much as possible while also improving
network performance. NASNet [ 32] benefited from the idea of artificial neural architecture design
[4,30,31], and proposes a modular search space that was later widely adopted. However, this comes
at the expense of the freedom of neural architecture design. Although this modular search space
does significantly reduce the search cost, it is unclear in reality whether a better neural architecture
has been ignored in the process of turning global search into modular search. This is also the main
reason why it is unclear whether the modular search is better than a global search (related research
is also lacking). Besides, the freedom of neural architecture design and the search cost presents a
contradiction. How to balance the two and obtain good performance remains an important future
research direction.
Also, there are two issues worthy of vigilance. From the perspective of the baseline, as analyzed
in Section 4, a widely criticized problem of NAS is the lack of a corresponding baseline and sharable
experimental protocol, which makes it difficult to compare NAS search algorithms with each other.
While RS has proven to be a strong baseline [ 24,34,105,129], there is still insufficient research
on this subject. [ 24] pointed out that the performance of the current optimal NAS algorithm is
similar to the random strategy, which should arouse researchers’ concerns. Therefore, more ablation
experiments are necessary, and researchers should pay more attention to which part of the NAS
design leads to performance gains. Blindly stacking certain techniques to increase performance
should also be criticized. Therefore, relevant theoretical analysis and reflection are crucial to the
future development of NAS.
Another issue that requires vigilant is the widely used parameter sharing strategy [ 19]; although
it effectively improves NAS search efficiency, an increasing body of evidence shows that the
parameter sharing strategy is likely to result in a sub-optimal inaccurate candidate architecture
ranking [ 21,24,25,100]. This would make it almost impossible for NAS to find the optimal neural
architecture in the search space. Therefore, relevant theoretical research and improvements are
expected in the future. Besides, the current NAS works are mainly focused on improving the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 27 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:27
accuracy of image classification and reducing the search cost. In the future, NAS will play a greater
role in areas that require complex neural architecture design, such as multi-object architecture
search, network transformation that employs NAS based on existing models, model compression,
target detection, and segmentation, and so on.
RobNet [ 152] uses the NAS method to generate a large number of neural architectures by
analyzing the differences between strongly and poorly performing architectures; this will enable
the identification of which network structures help to obtain a robust neural architecture. Inspired
by this, the once feasible idea would be to use a similar concept to RobNet in a search space with
a higher degree of freedom, analyze the structural features common to promising architectures,
and increase their structural proportion in the search space. Besides, it enables a reduction in the
proportion of the common structural features of poorly performing architectures in the search space,
to gradually reduce the search space in stages. The algorithm should be allowed to autonomously
decide which network structures should be removed or added rather than artificially imposing
constraints.
On the other hand, in the design of deep neural networks, in addition to the design of the
neural architecture that consumes a lot of researchers’ energy, another headache is the setting of
non-architecture hyperparameters (for example optimizer type, initial learning rate, weight decay,
mixup ratio [ 159], drop out ratio and stochastic depth drop ratio [ 160], etc.). Because the impact of
these hyperparameters on network performance is also crucial. Moreover, the number of possible
related non-architectural hyperparameter groups and architectural combinations is often very
large, and it is difficult and inefficient to manually design all possible combinations. Therefore, it
is also a very promising research direction to consider how to integrate the hyperparameters in
the neural architecture into the search space and allow the algorithm to automatically adjust the
settings of the hyperparameters. Although some early methods also explored the joint search of
hyperparameters and architectures, they mainly focused on small data sets and small search spaces.
Fortunately, the experiments of FBNetV3 [ 157] and AutoHAS [ 158] show that this direction has
great potential, and it is expected to find higher-accuracy architecture-recipe combinations.
In short, the emergence of NAS is an exciting development. At present, NAS is still in its initial
stages, and additional theoretical guidance and experimental analysis are required. Determining
which NAS designs lead to improved performance is a critical element of improving NAS. If NAS is
to completely replace the design of artificial neural architecture, more research, and a more solid
theoretical basis are required. There is still a long way to go.
6 REVIEW THREATS
We made the above summary and discussion based on the open NAS related work. We objectively
state the viewpoints in some unpublished papers that need to be further confirmed. Due to the
limited time and energy, we directly applied the results in the references without reproducing their
results.
7 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This survey provides an insightful observation of the early NAS work and summarizes the four
characteristics shared by the early NAS. In response to these challenges, we conducted a compre-
hensive and systematic analysis and comparison of existing work in turn. For the first time, we
reviewed all NAS-related work from the perspective of challenges and corresponding solutions.
And the performance of existing NAS work was comprehensively compared and discussed. Finally,
we conducted a comprehensive discussion on the possible future direction of NAS and raised two
questions worthy of vigilance. This is very useful for future NAS research.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 28 ====
111:28 Ren and Chang, et al.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the NSFC under Grant (No.61972315 and No. 62072372),
the Shaanxi Science and Technology Innovation Team Support Project under grant agreement
(No.2018TD-026) and the Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher Award
(No.DE190100626).
REFERENCES
[1] Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Lonort-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735-1780.
[2]Chen, M. X., Firat, O., Bapna, A., Johnson, M., Macherey, W., Foster, G., ... & Wu, Y. (2018). The best of both worlds:
Combining recent advances in neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09849.
[3]Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., ... & Klingner, J. (2016). Google’s neural machine
translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144.
[4] Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. (2015). Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. ICLR.
[5]Suganuma, M., Shirakawa, S., & Nagao, T. (2017, July). A genetic programming approach to designing convolutional
neural network architectures. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (pp. 497-504).
[6]Howard, A. G., Zhu, M., Chen, B., Kalenichenko, D., Wang, W., Weyand, T., ... & Adam, H. (2017). Mobilenets: Efficient
convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861.
[7]Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 1097-1105).
[8]Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., & Sun, J. (2015). Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 91-99).
[9]Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C. Y., & Berg, A. C. (2016, October). Ssd: Single shot multibox
detector. In European Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 21-37). Springer, Cham.
[10] Lin, T. Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., He, K., & Dollár, P. (2017). Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 2980-2988).
[11] Zoph, B., & Le, Q. V. (2017). Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. ICLR.
[12] Baker, B., Gupta, O., Naik, N., & Raskar, R. (2016). Designing neural network architectures using reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02167.
[13] Dalal, N., & Triggs, B. (2005, June). Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In 2005 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05) (Vol. 1, pp. 886-893). IEEE.
[14] Lowe, D. G. (1999, September). Object recognition from local scale-invariant features. In Proceedings of the Seventh
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (Vol. 2, pp. 1150-1157). Ieee.
[15] Real, E., Moore, S., Selle, A., Saxena, S., Suematsu, Y. L., Tan, J., ... & Kurakin, A. (2017, August). Large-scale evolution of
image classifiers. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 (pp. 2902-2911).
JMLR. org.
[16] Xie, L., & Yuille, A. (2017). Genetic cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp.
1379-1388).
[17] Liu, H., Simonyan, K., & Yang, Y. (2018). Darts: Differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055.
[18] Shu, Y., Wang, W., & Cai, S. (2019). Understanding architectures learnt by cell-based neural architecture search. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.09569.
[19] Pham, H., Guan, M. Y., Zoph, B., Le, Q. V., & Dean, J. (2018). Efficient neural architecture search via parameter sharing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03268.
[20] Baker, B., Gupta, O., Raskar, R., & Naik, N. (2017). Accelerating neural architecture search using performance prediction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10823.
[21] Li, C., Peng, J., Yuan, L., Wang, G., Liang, X., Lin, L., & Chang, X. (2020). Block-wisely Supervised Neural Architecture
Search with Knowledge Distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (pp. 1989-1998).
[22] Bender, G., Kindermans, P., Zoph, B., Vasudevan, V. & Le, Q.. (2018). Understanding and simplifying one-shot architecture
search. Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, in PMLR 80:550-559
[23] Brock, A., Lim, T., Ritchie, J. M., & Weston, N. (2017). Smash: one-shot model architecture search through hypernetworks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05344.
[24] Sciuto, C., Yu, K., Jaggi, M., Musat, C., & Salzmann, M. (2019). Evaluating the search phase of neural architecture search.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08142.
[25] Zhang, M., Li, H., Pan, S., Chang, X., & Su, S. (2020) Overcoming multi-model forgetting in one-shot NAS with diversity
maximization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 29 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:29
[26] Cheng, X., Zhong Y., Harandi M., Dai Y., Chang, X., Li H., Drummond T., and Ge, Z. (2020) Hierarchical Neural
Architecture Search for Deep Stereo Matching. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[27] Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., & Hutter, F. (2018). Neural architecture search: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05377.
[28] Wistuba, M., Rawat, A., & Pedapati, T. (2019). A survey on neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.01392.
[29] Tan, M., Chen, B., Pang, R., Vasudevan, V., Sandler, M., Howard, A., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural
architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp.
2820-2828).
[30] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 770-778).
[31] Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., ... & Rabinovich, A. (2015). Going deeper with
convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1-9).
[32] Zoph, B., Vasudevan, V., Shlens, J., & Le, Q. V. (2018). Learning transferable architectures for scalable image recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 8697-8710).
[33] Zhong, Z., Yan, J., Wu, W., Shao, J., & Liu, C. L. (2018). Practical block-wise neural network architecture generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 2423-2432).
[34] Liu, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Fernando, C., & Kavukcuoglu, K. (2017). Hierarchical representations for efficient
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00436.
[35] Dong, J. D., Cheng, A. C., Juan, D. C., Wei, W., & Sun, M. (2018). Dpp-net: Device-aware progressive search for
pareto-optimal neural architectures. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (pp.
517-531).
[36] Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2017). Densely connected convolutional networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 4700-4708).
[37] Liu, C., Zoph, B., Neumann, M., Shlens, J., Hua, W., Li, L. J., ... & Murphy, K. (2018). Progressive neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (pp. 19-34).
[38] Saikia, T., Marrakchi, Y., Zela, A., Hutter, F., & Brox, T. (2019). AutoDispNet: Improving disparity estimation with
AutoML. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1812-1823).
[39] Cui, J., Chen, P., Li, R., Liu, S., Shen, X., & Jia, J. (2019). Fast and practical neural architecture search. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 6509-6518).
[40] Xiong, Y., Mehta, R., & Singh, V. (2019). Resource constrained neural network architecture search: Will a submodularity
assumption help?. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1901-1910).
[41] Ryoo, M. S., Piergiovanni, A. J., Tan, M., & Angelova, A. (2019). Assemblenet: Searching for multi-stream neural
connectivity in video architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13209.
[42] Dean, J., Corrado, G., Monga, R., Chen, K., Devin, M., Mao, M., ... & Le, Q. V. (2012). Large scale distributed deep
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 1223-1231).
[43] Real, E., Aggarwal, A., Huang, Y., & Le, Q. V. (2019, July). Regularized evolution for image classifier architecture search.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 33, pp. 4780-4789).
[44] Chen, X., Xie, L., Wu, J., & Tian, Q. (2019). Progressive differentiable architecture search: Bridging the depth gap between
search and evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1294-1303).
[45] Piergiovanni, A. J., Angelova, A., Toshev, A., & Ryoo, M. S. (2019). Evolving space-time neural architectures for videos.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1793-1802).
[46] Xie, S., Zheng, H., Liu, C., & Lin, L. (2018). SNAS: Stochastic neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09926.
[47] Chen, T., Goodfellow, I., & Shlens, J. (2015). Net2net: Accelerating learning via knowledge transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05641.
[48] Schuster, M., & Paliwal, K. K. (1997). Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
45(11), 2673-2681.
[49] Bashivan, P., Tensen, M., & DiCarlo, J. J. (2019). Teacher guided architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 5320-5329).
[50] Zheng, X., Ji, R., Tang, L., Zhang, B., Liu, J., & Tian, Q. (2019). Multinomial distribution learning for effective neural
architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1304-1313).
[51] Cai, H., Chen, T., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., & Wang, J. (2018). Efficient Architecture Search by Network Transformation. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 2787–2794).
[52] Ashok, A., Rhinehart, N., Beainy, F., & Kitani, K. M. (2017). N2n learning: Network to network compression via policy
gradient reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06030.
[53] Mei, J., Li, Y., Lian, X., Jin, X., Yang, L., Yuille, A., & Yang, J. (2019). AtomNAS: Fine-grained end-to-end neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09640.
[54] Gong, X., Chang, S., Jiang, Y., & Wang, Z. (2019). Autogan: Neural architecture search for generative adversarial
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 3224-3234).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 30 ====
111:30 Ren and Chang, et al.
[55] Pasunuru, R., & Bansal, M. (2019). Continual and multi-task architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05226.
[56] Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., & Dean, J. (2015). Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531.
[57] Cai, H., Yang, J., Zhang, W., Han, S., & Yu, Y. (2018). Path-level network transformation for efficient architecture search.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02639.
[58] Szegedy, C., Ioffe, S., Vanhoucke, V., & Alemi, A. A. (2017, February). Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of
residual connections on learning. In Thirty-first AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[59] Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., & Wojna, Z. (2016). Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 2818-2826).
[60] Fang, J., Sun, Y., Peng, K., Zhang, Q., Li, Y., Liu, W., & Wang, X. (2020). Fast neural network adaptation via parameter
remapping and architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02525.
[61] Kandasamy, K., Neiswanger, W., Schneider, J., Poczos, B., & Xing, E. P. (2018). Neural architecture search with bayesian
optimisation and optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 2016-2025).
[62] Negrinho, R., & Gordon, G. (2017). Deeparchitect: Automatically designing and training deep architectures. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.08792.
[63] Liu, C., Chen, L. C., Schroff, F., Adam, H., Hua, W., Yuille, A. L., & Fei-Fei, L. (2019). Auto-deeplab: Hierarchical neural
architecture search for semantic image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (pp. 82-92).
[64] Ding, S., Chen, T., Gong, X., Zha, W., & Wang, Z. (2020). AutoSpeech: Neural Architecture Search for Speaker Recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03215.
[65] Zhang, Y., Qiu, Z., Liu, J., Yao, T., Liu, D., & Mei, T. (2019). Customizable architecture search for semantic segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 11641-11650).
[66] Chen, Y., Yang, T., Zhang, X., Meng, G., Pan, C., & Sun, J. (2019). Detnas: Neural architecture search on object detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10979.
[67] Anandalingam, G., & Friesz, T. L. (1992). Hierarchical optimization: An introduction. Annals of Operations Research,
34(1), 1-11.
[68] Colson, B., Marcotte, P., & Savard, G. (2007). An overview of bilevel optimization. Annals of Operations Research,
153(1), 235-256.
[69] Shin, R., Packer, C., & Song, D. (2018). Differentiable Neural Network Architecture Search. ICLR.
[70] Ahmed, K., & Torresani, L. (2018). Maskconnect: Connectivity learning by gradient descent. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (pp. 349-365).
[71] Saxena, S., & Verbeek, J. (2016). Convolutional neural fabrics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(pp. 4053-4061).
[72] Ahmed, K., & Torresani, L. (2017). Connectivity learning in multi-branch networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.09582.
[73] Veniat, T., & Denoyer, L. (2018). Learning time/memory-efficient deep architectures with budgeted super networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 3492-3500).
[74] Luo, R., Tian, F., Qin, T., Chen, E., & Liu, T. Y. (2018). Neural architecture optimization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (pp. 7816-7827).
[75] Chang, J., Guo, Y., MENG, G., XIANG, S., & Pan, C. (2019). DATA: Differentiable ArchiTecture Approximation. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 874-884).
[76] Ghiasi, G., Lin, T. Y., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Nas-fpn: Learning scalable feature pyramid architecture for object detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 7036-7045).
[77] Tran, D., Ray, J., Shou, Z., Chang, S. F., & Paluri, M. (2017). Convnet architecture search for spatiotemporal feature
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.05038.
[78] Chen, L. C., Collins, M., Zhu, Y., Papandreou, G., Zoph, B., Schroff, F., ... & Shlens, J. (2018). Searching for efficient
multi-scale architectures for dense image prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp.
8699-8710).
[79] Ying, C., Klein, A., Real, E., Christiansen, E., Murphy, K., & Hutter, F. (2019). Nas-bench-101: Towards reproducible
neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09635.
[80] Jiang, Y., Hu, C., Xiao, T., Zhang, C., & Zhu, J. (2019, November). Improved differentiable architecture search for language
modeling and named entity recognition. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) (pp.
3576-3581).
[81] Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. C. (2001). Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for segmenting and
labeling sequence data. ICML 2001: 282-289
[82] Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT Press.
[83] Dong, X., & Yang, Y. (2019). Searching for a robust neural architecture in four gpu hours. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1761-1770).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 31 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:31
[84] Xu, Y., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Chen, X., Qi, G., Tian, Q., & Xiong, H. (2019). PC-DARTS: Partial channel connections for
memory-efficient architecture search. ArXiv, abs/1907.05737.
[85] Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., & Hutter, F. (2017). Simple and efficient architecture search for convolutional neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04528.
[86] Sharif Razavian, A., Azizpour, H., Sullivan, J., & Carlsson, S. (2014). CNN features off-the-shelf: An astounding baseline
for recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition workshops (pp.
806-813).
[87] Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., & Knight, K. (2016). Transfer learning for low-resource neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1604.02201.
[88] Luong, M. T., Le, Q. V., Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., & Kaiser, L. (2015). Multi-task sequence to sequence learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06114.
[89] Ha, D., Dai, A., & Le, Q. V. (2016). Hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106.
[90] Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A., & Talwalkar, A. (2017). Hyperband: Bandit-based configuration
evaluation for hyperparameter optimization. In ICLR 2017: International Conference on Learning Representations 2017.
[91] Zhang, C., Ren, M., & Urtasun, R. (2018). Graph hypernetworks for neural architecture search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.05749.
[92] Dong, X., & Yang, Y. (2019). One-shot neural architecture search via self-evaluated template network. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 3681-3690).
[93] Mirza, M., & Osindero, S. (2014). Conditional generative adversarial nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784.
[94] Salimans, T., Goodfellow, I., Zaremba, W., Cheung, V., Radford, A., & Chen, X. (2016). Improved techniques for training
gans. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 2234-2242).
[95] Karras, T., Aila, T., Laine, S., & Lehtinen, J. (2017). Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and
variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196.
[96] Tran, N. T., Bui, T. A., & Cheung, N. M. (2018). Dist-gan: An improved gan using distance constraints. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (pp. 370-385).
[97] Wang, W., Sun, Y., & Halgamuge, S. (2018). Improving mmd-gan training with repulsive loss function. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.09916.
[98] Hoang, Q., Nguyen, T. D., Le, T., & Phung, D. (2018). MGAN: Training generative adversarial nets with multiple
generators. ICLR.
[99] Ghiasi, G., Lin, T. Y., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Nas-fpn: Learning scalable feature pyramid architecture for object detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 7036-7045).
[100] Cai, H., Gan, C., & Han, S. (2019). Once for all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deployment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.09791.
[101] Chu, X., Zhang, B., Xu, R., & Li, J. (2019). Fairnas: Rethinking evaluation fairness of weight sharing neural architecture
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01845.
[102] Li, X., Lin, C., Li, C., Sun, M., Wu, W., Yan, J., & Ouyang, W. (2019). Improving one-shot NAS by suppressing the
posterior fading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02543.
[103] Wu, B., Dai, X., Zhang, P., Wang, Y., Sun, F., Wu, Y., ... & Keutzer, K. (2019). Fbnet: Hardware-aware efficient convnet
design via differentiable neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (pp. 10734-10742).
[104] Cai, H., Zhu, L., & Han, S. (2018). Proxylessnas: Direct neural architecture search on target task and hardware. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.00332.
[105] Li, L., & Talwalkar, A. (2019). Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.07638.
[106] Guo, Z., Zhang, X., Mu, H., Heng, W., Liu, Z., Wei, Y., & Sun, J. (2019). Single path one-shot neural architecture search
with uniform sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00420.
[107] Domhan, T., Springenberg, J. T., & Hutter, F. (2015, June). Speeding up automatic hyperparameter optimization of
deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
[108] Klein, A., Falkner, S., Springenberg, J. T., & Hutter, F. (2016). Learning curve prediction with Bayesian neural networks.
[109] Chandrashekaran, A., & Lane, I. R. (2017, September). Speeding up hyper-parameter optimization by extrapolation of
learning curves using previous builds. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases (pp. 477-492). Springer, Cham.
[110] Deng, B., Yan, J., & Lin, D. (2017). Peephole: Predicting network performance before training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.03351.
[111] Zela, A., Elsken, T., Saikia, T., Marrakchi, Y., Brox, T., & Hutter, F. (2020). Understanding and robustifying differentiable
architecture search.ICLR.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 32 ====
111:32 Ren and Chang, et al.
[112] Peng, J., Sun, M., Zhang, Z. X., Tan, T., & Yan, J. (2019). Efficient neural architecture transformation search in
channel-level for object detection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 14290-14299).
[113] Y. Zhu et al., "Deep subdomain adaptation network for image classification, " in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2988928.
[114] Zhang, M., Li, H., Pan S., Chang X., Zhou C., Ge Z., and Su S. (2020) In IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. (T-PAMI).
[115] Nayman, N., Noy, A., Ridnik, T., Friedman, I., Jin, R., & Zelnik, L. (2019). Xnas: Neural architecture search with expert
advice. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 1975-1985).
[116] Cao, S., Wang, X., & Kitani, K. M. (2019). Learnable embedding space for efficient neural architecture compression.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00383.
[117] Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., & Hutter, F. (2018). Efficient multi-objective neural architecture search via lamarckian
evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09081.
[118] Li, X., Zhou, Y., Pan, Z., & Feng, J. (2019). Partial order pruning: for best speed/accuracy trade-off in neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 9145-9153).
[119] Dai, X., Zhang, P., Wu, B., Yin, H., Sun, F., Wang, Y., ... & Vajda, P. (2019). Chamnet: Towards efficient network design
through platform-aware model adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (pp. 11398-11407).
[120] Liang, F., Lin, C., Guo, R., Sun, M., Wu, W., Yan, J., & Ouyang, W. (2019). Computation reallocation for object detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11234.
[121] Fedorov, I., Adams, R. P., Mattina, M., & Whatmough, P. (2019). Sparse: Sparse architecture search for cnns on
resource-constrained microcontrollers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 4978-4990).
[122] Nekrasov, V., Chen, H., Shen, C., & Reid, I. (2019). Fast neural architecture search of compact semantic segmentation
models via auxiliary cells. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp.
9126-9135).
[123] Cubuk, E. D., Zoph, B., Mane, D., Vasudevan, V., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Autoaugment: Learning augmentation strategies
from data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 113-123).
[124] Tan, M., & Le, Q. V. (2019). Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.11946.
[125] Zhang, X., Wang, Q., Zhang, J., & Zhong, Z. (2019). Adversarial AutoAugment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11188.
[126] Dong, X., & Yang, Y. (2019). Network pruning via transformable architecture search. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (pp. 759-770).
[127] Lu, Z., Whalen, I., Boddeti, V., Dhebar, Y. D., Deb, K., Goodman, E. D., & Banzhaf, W. (2018). NSGA-NET: A multi-
objective genetic algorithm for neural architecture search. ArXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
[128] Dong, X., Liu, L., Musial, K., & Gabrys, B. (2020). NATS-Bench: Benchmarking NAS algorithms for Architecture
Topology and Size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00437.
[129] Yang, A., Esperança, P. M., & Carlucci, F. M. (2019). NAS evaluation is frustratingly hard. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.12522.
[130] Wistuba, M. (2018, September). Deep learning architecture search by neuro-cell-based evolution with function-
preserving mutations. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (pp.
243-258). Springer, Cham.
[131] DeVries, T., & Taylor, G. W. (2017). Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks with cutout. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.04552.
[132] Casale, F.P., Gordon, J., & Fusi, N. (2019). Probabilistic neural architecture search. ArXiv, abs/1902.05116.
[133] Zagoruyko, S., & Komodakis, N. (2016). Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146.
[134] Gastaldi, X. (2017). Shake-shake regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07485.
[135] Yamada, Y., Iwamura, M., & Kise, K. (2016). Deep pyramidal residual networks with separated stochastic depth. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.01230.
[136] Huang, G., Sun, Y., Liu, Z., Sedra, D., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2016, October). Deep networks with stochastic depth. In
European Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 646-661). Springer, Cham.
[137] Larsson, G., Maire, M., & Shakhnarovich, G. (2016). Fractalnet: Ultra-deep neural networks without residuals. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.07648.
[138] Zhou, H., Yang, M., Wang, J., & Pan, W. (2019). Bayesnas: A bayesian approach for neural architecture search. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.04919.
[139] Zhang, X., Zhou, X., Lin, M., & Sun, J. (2018). Shufflenet: An extremely efficient convolutional neural network for
mobile devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 6848-6856).
[140] Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dollár, P., Tu, Z., & He, K. (2017). Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1492-1500).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

==== Page 33 ====
A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:33
[141] Zhang, X., Li, Z., Change Loy, C., & Lin, D. (2017). Polynet: A pursuit of structural diversity in very deep networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 718-726).
[142] Chen, Y., Li, J., Xiao, H., Jin, X., Yan, S., & Feng, J. (2017). Dual path networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (pp. 4467-4475).
[143] Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
[144] Long, J., Shelhamer, E., & Darrell, T. (2015). Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 3431-3440).
[145] Sun, W., Huang, Z., Liang, M., Shao, T., & Bi, H. (2020). Cocoon image segmentation method based on fully convolutional
networks. In Proceedings of the Seventh Asia International Symposium on Mechatronics (pp. 832-843). Springer,
Singapore.
[146] G. Vecchio, S. Palazzo, D. Giordano, F. Rundo and C. Spampinato, "MASK-RL: Multiagent video object segmentation
framework through reinforcement learning," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2963282.
[147] Z. Ji, Y. Zhao, Y. Pang, X. Li and J. Han, "Deep attentive video summarization with distribution consistency learning,"
in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2991083.
[148] D. Zhang, J. Han, L. Zhao and T. Zhao, "From discriminant to complete: Reinforcement searching-agent learn-
ing for weakly supervised object detection," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2969483.
[149] K. Shih, C. Chiu, J. Lin and Y. Bu, "Real-time object detection with reduced-region proposal network via multi-feature
concatenation," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2164-2173, June 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2929059.
[150] Y. Zhou, G. G. Yen and Z. Yi, "Evolutionary compression of deep neural networks for biomedical image segmentation, "
in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2933879.
[151] B. Zhang, D. Xiong, J. Xie and J. Su, "Neural machine translation with GRU-gated attention model," in IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2957276.
[152] Guo, M., Yang, Y., Xu, R., & Liu, Z. (2019). When NAS meets robustness: In search of robust architectures against
adversarial attacks. ArXiv, abs/1911.10695.
[153] Li, G., Qian, G., Delgadillo, I. C., Müller, M., Thabet, A., & Ghanem, B. (2019). SGAS: Sequential Greedy Architecture
Search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00195.
[154] Fang, J., Sun, Y., Zhang, Q., Li, Y., Liu, W., & Wang, X. (2019). Densely connected search space for more flexible neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09607.
[155] So, D., Liang, C., & Le, Q.V. (2019). The Evolved Transformer. ArXiv, abs/1901.11117.
[156] Zela, A., Siems, J., & Hutter, F. (2020). Nas-bench-1shot1: Benchmarking and dissecting one-shot neural architecture
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.10422.
[157] Dai, X., Wan, A., Zhang, P., Wu, B., He, Z., Wei, Z., ... & Gonzalez, J. E. (2020). FBNetV3: Joint Architecture-Recipe
Search using Neural Acquisition Function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02049.
[158] Dong, X., Tan, M., Yu, A. W., Peng, D., Gabrys, B., & Le, Q. V. (2020). AutoHAS: Differentiable Hyper-parameter and
Architecture Search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03656.
[159] Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N., & Lopez-Paz, D. (2017). mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.09412.
[160] Huang, G., Sun, Y., Liu, Z., Sedra, D., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2016, October). Deep networks with stochastic depth. In
European conference on computer vision (pp. 646-661). Springer, Cham.
[161] Jones, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response surfaces. Journal of global
optimization, 21(4), 345-383.
[162] Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H., & Leyton-Brown, K. (2011, January). Sequential model-based optimization for general
algorithm configuration. In International conference on learning and intelligent optimization (pp. 507-523). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.

