==== Page 1 ====
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Survey paper
A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms: State-of-the-art machine
learning applications, taxonomy, challenges, and future research prospects
Absalom E. Ezugwua,∗, Abiodun M. Ikotuna, Olaide O. Oyeladea, Laith Abualigahb,c,∗∗,
Jeffery O. Agushakaa, Christopher I. Eked, Andronicus A. Akinyelue
aSchool of Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg Campus, Pietermaritzburg 3201, South Africa
bFaculty of Computer Sciences and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Amman 11953, Jordan
cSchool of Computer Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, 11800, Malaysia
dDepartment of Computer Science, Faculty of Natural Science, Federal University of Lafia, Lafia, Nigeria
eDepartment of Computer Science and Informatics, University of the Free State, 9301 Bloemfontein, South Africa
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Clustering
Clustering algorithms, partitioning
Data mining
Hierarchical clustering
Automatic clustering
K-Means
Optimization algorithms, Machine learning
Unsupervised learning
Supervised learningA B S T R A C T
Clustering is an essential tool in data mining research and applications. It is the subject of active research
in many fields of study, such as computer science, data science, statistics, pattern recognition, artificial
intelligence, and machine learning. Several clustering techniques have been proposed and implemented, and
most of them successfully find excellent quality or optimal clustering results in the domains mentioned earlier.
However, there has been a gradual shift in the choice of clustering methods among domain experts and
practitioners alike, which is precipitated by the fact that most traditional clustering algorithms still depend
on the number of clusters provided a priori. These conventional clustering algorithms cannot effectively
handle real-world data clustering analysis problems where the number of clusters in data objects cannot be
easily identified. Also, they cannot effectively manage problems where the optimal number of clusters for a
high-dimensional dataset cannot be easily determined. Therefore, there is a need for improved, flexible, and
efficient clustering techniques. Recently, a variety of efficient clustering algorithms have been proposed in the
literature, and these algorithms produced good results when evaluated on real-world clustering problems. This
study presents an up-to-date systematic and comprehensive review of traditional and state-of-the-art clustering
techniques for different domains. This survey considers clustering from a more practical perspective. It shows
the outstanding role of clustering in various disciplines, such as education, marketing, medicine, biology,
and bioinformatics. It also discusses the application of clustering to different fields attracting intensive efforts
among the scientific community, such as big data, artificial intelligence, and robotics. This survey paper will
be beneficial for both practitioners and researchers. It will serve as a good reference point for researchers and
practitioners to design improved and efficient state-of-the-art clustering algorithms.
1. Introduction
Clustering (an aspect of data mining) is considered an active method
of grouping data into many collections or clusters according to the
similarities of data points features and characteristics (Jain, 2010;
Abualigah, 2019). Over the past years, dozens of data clustering tech-
niques have been proposed and implemented to solve data clustering
problems (Zhou et al., 2019; Abualigah et al., 2018a,b). In general,
clustering analysis techniques can be divided into two main groups:
hierarchical and partitional (Tan, 2018). Although methods in these
∗Correspondence to: School of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, King Edward Road, Pietermaritzburg,
KwaZulu-Natal 3201, South Africa.
∗∗Corresponding author at: Faculty of Computer Sciences and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Amman 11953, Jordan.
E-mail addresses: Ezugwua@ukzn.ac.za (A.E. Ezugwu), 220078470@stu.ukzn.ac.za (A.M. Ikotun), oyeladeo@ukzn.ac.za (O.O. Oyelade),
laythdyabat@aau.edu.jo (L. Abualigah), 218088307@stu.ukzn.ac.za (J.O. Agushaka), eke.ifeanyi@fulafia.edu.ng (C.I. Eke), AkinyeluAA@ufs.ac.za
(A.A. Akinyelu).two groups have proved to be very effective and efficient, they gen-
erally depend on providing prior knowledge or information of the
exact number of clusters for each dataset to be clustered and analyzed
(Chang et al., 2010). More so, when dealing with real-world datasets,
it is normal not to expect or have any prior information regarding the
number of naturally occurring groups in the data objects (Liu et al.,
2011). Therefore, the concept of automatic data clustering algorithms
is introduced to address this limitation. Automatic clustering algorithms
refer to any clustering techniques used to automatically determine
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.104743
Received 7 December 2021; Received in revised form 16 January 2022; Accepted 3 February 2022
Available online 23 February 2022
0952-1976/ ©2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

==== Page 2 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Abbreviations
The abbreviations used in this paper are given as listed below:
FCM Fuzzy C Means
BIRCH Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering
Using Hierarchies
DENCLUE DENsity-based CLUstEring
OPTIGRID Optimal Grid
EM Expectation Maximization
CLUSTREAM Stream Clustering
CLUS TREE Cluster Tree index structure for stream data
D-STREAM Density Based Clustering for real time
stream data
DENSTREAM Density-Based Microclustering
DGCLUST Distributed Grid Clustering
ODAC Online Divisive–Agglomerative Clustering
LSEARCH Linear Search
STREAMKM K-means clustering algorithm for data
streams
CURE Clustering Using Representative
DIVFRP Reference-point-based dissimilarity mea-
sure
IDPSO Improved particle optimizer
HGCUDF Hierarchical grid clustering using data field
SWIFT Scalable Weighted Iterative Flow-clustering
Technique
TR Total Roughness
MMR Min–Min-Roughness
MCA Multiple Correspondence Analysis
MGR Mean Gain Ratio
CF Cluster Features
SS Sum of Square
DTG Delaunay triangulation graph
CLICK CLuster Identification via Connectivity Ker-
nels.
DBSCANS Density Based Spatial Clustering of Appli-
cations with Noise
OPTICS Ordering points to identify the clustering
structure
MLE Maximum Likelihood Estimation
SOM Self-organizing map
DE Differential Evolution
ACO Ant Colony Optimization
PSO Particle Swarm Optimization
GA Genetic Algorithm
the number of clusters without having any prior information of the
dataset features and attributes (Ezugwu, 2020a). Many automatic data
clustering algorithms have been proposed in the literature, and several
of them are nature-inspired. The current survey presents a systematic
study of traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques applied
in different fields.
Many surveys on clustering techniques exist in the literature (Xu
and Wunsch, 2005; Xu and Tian, 2015; Benabdellah et al., 2019; Adil
et al., 2014; Dafir et al., 2021; Saxena et al., 2017; Nagpal, 2013;
Oyelade et al., 2016; Bindra and Mishra, 2017; Singh and Srivastava,
2020; Djouzi and Beghdad-Bey, 2019; Ezugwu, 2020a). Xu and Tian
(2015) explained the basic elements involved in the clustering pro-
cess and broadly categorized existing clustering algorithms into two
major perspectives: the traditional and modern ones. Xu and Wunsch
(2005) reviewed major clustering algorithms for datasets appearing inIWO Invasive Weed Optimization
GKA Genetic K-Means Algorithm
TWCV Total within cluster variation
GGA Genetically Guided Algorithm
IGKA Incremental Genetic K-means Algorithm
ABC Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algo-
rithm
SOS Symbiotic Organisms Search
BEA Bacterial Evolutionary Algorithm
IGKA Incremental Genetic K-means Algorithm
SI Swarm Intelligence
TS Tabu Search
SA Simulated Annealing
CF Cluster features
HDENSTREAM Density Based Clustering Algorithm for
Heterogeneous Data Stream
C-DENSTREAM A density-based clustering algorithm for
data streams that includes domain informa-
tion in the form of constraints
MUDI-STREAM Multi Density data Stream
RDENSTREAM Density Based Clustering Algorithm with
outlier retrospect
HDDSTREAM Density-based projected clustering algo-
rithm for high dimensional data streams
SDSTREAM Density-Based Data Streams Clustering over
Sliding Windows
DDSTREAM A Grid and Density-Based Clustering Algo-
rithm for Processing Data Stream
DENGRIS Density-Grid based Clustering Algorithm
D-STREAM Stream Data Clustering Based on Grid
Density and Attraction
PKS-STREAM Data stream Clustering Algorithm based on
grid density and index tree PKS tree
MR-STREAM Density-Based Clustering of Data Streams at
Multiple Resolutions
SWEM An EM-Based Algorithm for Clustering Data
Streams in Sliding Windows
GMM Gaussian mixture model
GPU Graphics Processing Unit
GMM Gaussian mixture model
DBSCAN Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applica-
tions with Noise
GDBSCAN Generalized density based clustering algo-
rithm
MRTA Multi-Robot Task Allocation
ACD2PSO A dynamic distributed particle swarm opti-
mization
Statistics, Computer Science, and Machine learning. Benabdellah et al.
(2019) categorized clustering algorithms using the three V’s properties
of Big Data: Volume, Variety, and Velocity. These three properties were
used to explore the various categories of clustering algorithms. Adil
et al. (2014) gave a concise survey of existing clustering algorithms and
conducted extensive experiments to highlight the best-performing clus-
tering algorithm for Big data analysis. Berkhin et al. (2001) reviewed
clustering techniques in data mining, emphasizing object attribute type,
large dataset scalability, handling high dimensional data, and finding
irregularly shaped clusters.
Dafir et al. (2021)’s work was on parallel clustering algorithms, clas-
sifying and summarizing them. He discussed the framework for each
kind of parallel clustering algorithm. Saxena et al. (2017) presented a
2

==== Page 3 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
taxonomy of existing clustering algorithms, debating each algorithm’s
various measures of similarity and evaluation criteria. Nagpal (2013)
carried out a comparative analysis of the different clustering algo-
rithms concerning both the mixed and categorical datasets with the
observation that no clustering algorithm can be adjudged as best for
handling a large dataset of either the mixed or categorical dataset.
Oyelade et al. (2016) examined various clustering algorithms and their
suitability for gene expression data to discover and provide helpful
knowledge that will guarantee stability and a high degree of accuracy
in the area. Jain (2010) summarized well-known clustering methods
with a discussion on critical issues and challenges in the design of
clustering algorithms. Jain et al. (1999) discussed emerging techniques
for non-numeric constraints and large sets of patterns. Ezugwu et al.
(2020a) presented an in-depth and systematic review of nature-inspired
metaheuristic algorithms used for automatic clustering analysis focus-
ing on the metaheuristic algorithms that have been employed to solve
clustering problems over the last three decades.
Obviously, from the literature, there has been a considerable growth
of interdisciplinary interests and dynamics in the application of clus-
tering analysis to different research domains indicating that without a
doubt, much has been achieved regarding clustering with new emerg-
ing research directions in automatic clustering algorithms (Ezugwu
et al., 2020a). However, despite the decades of reported research on
clustering methods and algorithms, the existing literature is remark-
ably segmented. Moreover, applied researchers find it challenging to
acquire systematic information on research progress and advancement
on the subject (Ezugwu, 2020a). Therefore, there is the need for a
comprehensive systematic survey of literature on both the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques that have been applied in
different fields. Hence, the following main research question for this
study has been formulated as follow:
‘‘What are the various state-of-the-art clustering methods and algorithms
discussed in the literature, and in what research domains have they been
applied? ’’.
Towards realizing the answer for the main research question, the
following sub-research questions are formulated:
(a) What are the various traditional and recently proposed clustering
techniques and algorithms in existence today?
(b) What research has been conducted using both the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques to address identified
challenges of clustering ?
(c) In what domains have both the traditional and recently pro-
posed clustering techniques been applied in solving clustering
problems?
(d) How have various similarity measures been employed in tradi-
tional and recently proposed clustering techniques ?
(e) What are the characteristic differences between the traditional
and recently proposed clustering techniques that have been ap-
plied in different fields?
(f) What are other challenges of clustering problems yet to be explored
by researchers in this research area?
This survey aims to provide an up-to-date comprehensive review of
the different clustering techniques applied to many data mining-related
fields. Retrospectively, we also highlight novel and most recent practi-
cal applications areas of clustering. This survey is intended to provide
a convenient research path for new researchers, furnishing them with a
comprehensive study on the various data clustering techniques and re-
search progression over the years in clustering techniques. This survey
will also help experts develop new algorithms for emerging challenges
in the research area. The main contribution of this survey study is as
follows:
•Provides an up-to-date comprehensive systematic review of the
traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques that have
been applied in different fields.•Provides a concise presentation of concepts, architecture, and
taxonomy of clustering algorithms.
•Presents a discussion on open recent research issues relating to
clustering problems
•Defined possible future research trends and directions regarding
the implementation and application of clustering algorithms in
different research domains.
2. Methodology
This section presents the procedure used in selecting and reviewing
the various clustering methods considered in this survey. In this com-
prehensive review process and methodology, the standard approach
for systematic literature review was adopted and followed to ensure
that the topic of interest is sufficiently covered and reduce bias on
the review work. In this study, the literature review procedure pro-
posed by (Weidt and Silva, 2016) was used in this paper. Moreover,
the work (Thilakaratne et al., 2019) served as a guide. The search
techniques, search keywords, databases, data sources, and the inclusion
and exclusion criteria used in this survey are explained below.
2.1. Keywords
In order to obtain the relevant literature, different keywords were
selected regarding the defined goal of this survey. Initially, several
keywords were formulated but later streamlined to reflect the research
objective. The keywords used in the extraction of articles include:
‘‘Clustering’’, ‘‘non-supervised classification’’, ‘‘Clustering Algorithms’’,
‘‘Clustering Methods’’, ‘‘Evolutionary Clustering Algorithms’’, ‘‘Nature
Inspired Clustering Algorithms’’; ‘‘Data Mining Algorithms’’; ‘‘Cluster-
ing Applications Areas’’; ‘‘Clustering in Data Mining’’. Each of the
various clustering methods from the taxonomy was paired with the
word ‘‘clustering’’ to search for articles solely on the technique. For
example, ‘‘mode seeking clustering’’, ‘‘subspace clustering, etc. The
various application areas discussed were also paired with the term
‘‘Clustering’’ to search for articles that reported clustering activities in
the field and the clustering algorithm employed.
2.2. Searching the articles
Two different rounds of the search were performed. The first round
of searches was carried out from 11th to 28th of November 2020,
while the second round of questioning was conducted between the
7th to 18th of December 2020. More searches were conducted in late
December 2020 through mid-January 2021. During the search, more
related papers were extracted from the citations of the selected relevant
articles.
2.3. Academic databases
The formulated keywords were used in the retrieval of the litera-
ture. Reputable peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and
edited books indexed in different academic databases were targeted in
the study. Table 1 below contains the list of the academic databases
targeted during the search. No specific interval period was stated at
the beginning of the investigation. This enables proper capturing and
in-depth study of existing traditional clustering methods, which served
as a bedrock for the more recent ones. However, in selecting previous
related reviews and clustering applications, the selected articles were
streamlined to the articles published from 1999 to date. This is to
capture updated works on unsupervised classification techniques for
different domains.
3

==== Page 4 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 1
The list of academic databases with their corresponding links.
Academic databases Web ink
ACM digital library http://dl.acm.org/
DBLP http://dblp.uni-trier.de/
IEEE Xplore http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
ISI Web of science http://apps.webofknowledge.com/
ScienceDirect http://www.sciencedirect.com/
Scopus http://www.scopus.com/
SpringerLink http://www.link.springer.com/
Wiley online library http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
2.4. Article Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
There is the need to set up some inclusion and exclusion criteria
to extract only the relevant articles for this review. Articles’ titles,
abstracts, conclusions, and complete content were studied to decide the
articles included or excluded. The criteria used for the exclusion and
inclusion are presented in Table 2.
2.5. Eligibility
All the criteria outlined in Table 2 were used to determine the
eligibility of the selected articles. Duplicates were removed, and many
articles were eliminated based on their title. Some articles were elimi-
nated after a careful study of the abstract and conclusion, while some
were eliminated based on the study of their full content. A total number
of 347 papers were considered eligible and hence used for this review.
3. Comparison with existing survey works
This section presents and discusses the main difference between
the already published review papers and this survey paper. Although
there have been several attempts in the literature to comprehensively
present a systematic review of different clustering techniques with their
trending applications areas, this effort has become almost impossible
because of the evolving nature of the study area and its relevance to
different theoretical and practical fields of study relative to data mining
and knowledge acquisition. For example, Jain et al. (1999) published a
relatively comprehensive overview of pattern clustering methods from
a statistical pattern recognition perspective to provide useful advice
and references to fundamental concepts accessible to the broad research
community of clustering practitioners. Ezugwu et al. (2020a) presented
a corpus of nature-inspired algorithms covering different algorithms,
including stochastic, evolutionary, physical, probabilistic, swarm, im-
mune and neural algorithms often employed for automatic clustering
tasks application. A summary of the previous clustering survey studies
compared to the present work is presented in table form, as illustrated
in Table 3.
Despite researchers’ efforts to bring together a comprehensive list
of both traditional state-of-the-art clustering methods and the new
generation clustering algorithms, only a handful of these survey papers
covered an up-to-date report on vast clustering methods available in the
literature comprehensively. Moreover, other attempted survey works
covered limited classification of clustering algorithms. In the past few
decades, there has been exponential growth in the design and imple-
mentation of new clustering algorithms scattered in the literature. The
previous works mainly focused on either problem-specific clustering
approaches or presented survey works that do not include the most
recently published state-of-the-art clustering algorithms. More so, none
of the earlier works attempted taxonomical analysis of the compre-
hensive list of the clustering algorithms to show the impact of the
algorithms in different domains despite the significance of clustering
analysis techniques in the literature. Table 4 summarizes the previous
survey works with their current citation impact extracted from Google
scholar.4. Taxonomy of clustering algorithms
Several clustering algorithms have been identified and broadly clas-
sified under two categories, namely: the Hierarchical Clustering Al-
gorithm and the Partitional Clustering Algorithm (Xu and Wunsch,
2005; Xu and Tian, 2015; Benabdellah et al., 2019; Adil et al., 2014;
Dafir et al., 2021; Saxena et al., 2017; Nagpal, 2013; Oyelade et al.,
2016; Bindra and Mishra, 2017; Singh and Srivastava, 2020; Djouzi
and Beghdad-Bey, 2019; Ezugwu, 2020a). A hierarchical clustering al-
gorithm is further subdivided into agglomerative and divisive methods,
while the Partitional has four subdivisions: Hard or Crisp clustering
method, Fuzzy method, Mixture, and Square error. Under the Hard or
Crisp, six major categories are identified: the Search-based method, the
Graph-theoretic method, Density-based, Model-based, Sub-space, and
Miscellaneous. The complete taxonomy for these clustering methods is
shown in Fig. 1.
4.1. Hierarchical clustering algorithms
In Hierarchical Clustering algorithms, data objects are partitioned
into levels in a hierarchical format (Btissam, 2015). Clusters are it-
eratively formed in a top-down or bottom-up approach to generate a
dendrogram depicting the formulated clusters’ hierarchical structure
(Saxena et al., 2017). This clustering method allows exploring data on
different levels of granularity (Bekhin, 2006). The bottom-up approach
is termed the agglomerative method, while the top-down approach is
the divisive method. In the agglomerative method, clusters are built up
from single objects that are iteratively merged appropriately into larger
clusters that form the hierarchy’s various levels until the entire object
forms a single cluster or the stopping criterion is met. The reverse is
the case in a divisive method. The cluster containing all the objects is
broken down iteratively appropriately until each object forms a single
cluster or the stopping criterion is met. The merging or splitting is done
based on the similarity or dissimilarity of the cluster elements. Fig. 2
illustrates a dendrogram representation for the hierarchical clustering
method.
In hierarchy clustering, merging or splitting subsets of a point is
done by generalizing the distance between individual points to the
distance between subsets of point. This is determined using a proximity
measure called the linkage metric. Three basic linkage metrics are used
in hierarchical clustering: the single linkage, the average connection,
and the complete linkage (Saxena et al., 2017; Olson, 1995; Jain et al.,
1999; Murtagh, 1985). The hierarchical clustering algorithm uses 𝑁×
𝑁connectivity matrix form, where the linkage metrics used for the
clustering are constructed. The construction of the similarity matrix is
achieved by finding the similarity between each pair of data points.
The linkage criterion is then calculated by finding the pairwise distance
between the clusters. The similarity metric is used to determine the
distance between the sets of the clusters. It is also used in determining
the shape of the clusters.
Single-linkage clustering: The single-linkage clustering is also referred
to as the nearest neighbor or minimum or connectedness method. It
measures the nearest distance from any member of one cluster to any
other cluster member. It measures the similarity between two clusters
by measuring the closest distance between a single element pair. The
single linkage clustering has a chaining effect with the tendency of
producing elongated clusters (Punit, 2018).
Average linkage clustering: The average linkage clustering is also re-
garded as the minimum-variance linkage (Saxena et al., 2017; Jain and
Dubes, 1988). It finds the mean or median of the distances among all
the data points between clusters (Punit, 2018).
Complete linkage: The complete linkage, also known as the maximum or
diameter or farthest neighbor method, determines the distance between
two clusters by measuring the longest distance from any member of one
4

==== Page 5 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 2
The inclusion and exclusion criteria used.
Inclusion Exclusion
The review focused on the various Clustering methods and algorithms. Articles on general Data Mining techniques were not considered.
Articles that reviewed specific clustering methods and their variants. Articles focusing on the review of the performance of a specific method in a specific
domain were excluded.
Articles on the application of a specific method in a specific domain. Articles that focused on the comparison of various methods in a specific domain were
not considered
Only articles written in the English language were considered. Articles written in other languages were excluded from the review
Only published articles from reputable peer-reviewed journals, conference
proceedings and edited books were considered.Keynote speeches, PowerPoint presentation slides were not considered.
Table 3
Summary of the previous related review on metaheuristic algorithms.
Reference Publication date Remark
Jain et al. (1999) 1999 Areas covered include pattern representation, similarity computation, grouping process, and cluster representations.
Other areas include statistical, fuzzy, neural, evolutionary, and knowledge-based approaches for clustering.
Application areas covered include image segmentation, object recognition, document retrieval and data mining.
Murtagh (1983) 1983 The study presented an in-depth survey of agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithms and discussed efficient
implementations in R and other software environments. Similarly, a review of grid-based clustering focusing on
hierarchical density-based approaches was also presented.
Belkin et al. (2006) 2006 Covered a few classical and evolutionary clustering algorithms with their associated challenges to the identified
practical application areas
José-García and
Gómez-Flores (2016)2016 A total of 65 automatic clustering approaches were reviewed based on single-solution, single-objective, and
multiobjective metaheuristics, whose usage percentages are 3%, 69%, and 28%, respectively.
Saxena et al. (2017) 2017 Presented a comprehensive study on existing clustering methods and developments made at various times. The
similarity and the evaluation criteria, which are the central components of clustering, are also presented in the paper.
Bandaru et al. (2017) 2017 The paper surveyed the different data mining methods that can be applied to extract knowledge about multi-objective
optimization problems from the solutions generated during optimization.
Yang and Wang (2018) 2018 This paper serves as an introductory text and survey for multi-view clustering. Simultaneously, the study summarizes
many multi-view clustering algorithms and provides a taxonomy according to the mechanisms and principles involved.
Hancer et al. (2020) 2020 The paper introduces a comprehensive survey on feature selection approaches for clustering, reflecting on some
advantages/disadvantages of current approaches from different perspectives and identifying promising trends for future
research.
Ezugwu et al. (2020a) 2020 Presented a systematic taxonomical overview and bibliometric analysis of trends and progress in nature-inspired
metaheuristic clustering approaches from the early attempts in the 1990s until today’s novel solutions
Bhattacharjee and Mitra
(2021)2021 The survey presents a comprehensive study of various Density-based clustering algorithms (DBCLAs) over last the two
decades, along with their classification.
This study 2021 Presentation of a comprehensive survey, taxonomy, analysis of state-of-the-art clustering algorithms that have ever
been identified in literature till today’s novel development and their practical applications areas.
cluster to any member of the other cluster. The complete-linkage algo-
rithm clusters are more compact and tightly bound than single-linkage
clustering (Jain and Dubes, 1988).
In calculating the inter-cluster distances, the three proximity as
mentioned earlier measures consider all the points of a pair of clus-
ters. They are regarded as graph methods (Xu and Wunsch, 2005).
Sibson (1973) implemented the single linkage hierarchical clustering
algorithm to produce SLINK, Voorhees (1986) and Defays (1977)
implemented Voorhees’ method and CLINK, which are the implementa-
tions of average link clustering algorithm and complete link clustering
algorithm, respectively. Using the central point for determining prox-
imity measure, other geometrics methods were developed based on the
same idea. These included the median linkage, centroid linkage, and
the minimum variance linkage metrics (Berkhin, 2001; Murtagh, 1983;
Day and Edelsbrunner, 1984). A distance-based proximity measure cap-
tures the inter-cluster closeness while the similarity measures capture
the intra-cluster connectivity.
The hierarchical clustering algorithms can easily handle any simi-
larity measure and flexible level of granularity (Bekhin, 2006, Punit,
2018). As a result of these, it applies to any attribute type. The hierar-
chical clustering methods are plagued with irreversible split or merge
processes such that already formulated clusters cannot be revisited
to reassign wrongly assigned objects. The application of hierarchi-
cal clustering in large-scale data sets is limited because it has high
computational complexity. According to Saxena et al. (2017), most
of the hierarchical clustering has at least a computational complexityof (O(N2). Bekhin (2006) reported that hierarchical clustering algo-
rithms based on linkage metrics suffer from time complexity. Apart
from these, there is also the problem of the vagueness of termination
criteria (Bekhin, 2006) and lack of robustness due to its sensitivity
to noise and outliers. It has also been reported that linkage metrics-
based hierarchical clustering algorithms that use Euclidean distance
tend to form spherical shapes (Bekhin, 2006). Fraley (988), in their
work, observed that ‘‘A drawback of agglomerative methods is that
those that are practical in terms of time efficiency require memory
usage proportional to the square of the number of groups in the initial
partition’’.
4.1.1. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering
In the agglomerative method, clusters are built up from single
objects, which are iteratively merged appropriately into larger clusters
that form the hierarchy’s various levels until the entire object includes
a single cluster or until the stopping criterion is met. The single cluster
forms the root of the hierarchy. Two closest objects (based on the
similarity measure used) are combined to form a cluster during the
merging operation. It requires at most n iterations to complete the
clustering operation since two clusters are merged during one iteration.
Ward’s clustering method implements an agglomerative clustering
algorithm that is not based on the linkage metric implemented by Ward
in 1963 (Ward, 1963). It was based on K-Means’ objective function
with the merger decision dependent on its effect on the objective
5

==== Page 6 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 4
Summary of major survey literature on clustering algorithms.
Clustering methods Study covered Application area Author and year Impact as of 2021
Clustering algorithms with
design concepts that are
based on the following:
graph theory,
combinatorial search
techniques, fuzzy set
theory, neural networks,
and kernels techniquesSurvey of clustering algorithms for data sets
appearing in statistics, computer science,
and machine learning. Several tightly
related topics, such as proximity measure
and cluster validation, were also covered in
the paperBenchmark data sets, such as the
traveling salesman problem and
bioinformaticsXu and Wunsch (2005) 6369
FCM, BIRCH, DENCLUE,
OptiGrid, and EMThe survey provided a comprehensive study
of the clustering algorithms proposed in the
literature, namely Fuzzy-Cmeans (FCM),
BIRCH algorithm, DENCLUE algorithm,
Optimal Grid (OptiGrid), and
Expectation-Maximization (EM)Big data clustering covering Adil et al. (2014) 785
Traditional and modern
clustering algorithmsThe survey covered at least 19 categories of
the commonly used clustering algorithms,
with high practical relevance and
well-studied in the literature.Generic application Xu and Tian (2015) 680
Hierarchical and
nonhierarchical methodsGeneral discussion and presentation of
clustering algorithms specifically targeted at
information retrieval applicationsDocument collection Rasmussen (1992) 677
Text clustering algorithms
including Hierarchical
methodsProvided a detailed survey of the problem
of text clustering. The key challenges of the
clustering problem, as it applies to the text
domain were discussed as well.Text clustering relative to social
network and linked dataAggarwal and Zhai
(2012)653
BIRCH, CluStream,
ClusTree, D-Stream,
DenStream, DGClust,
ODAC, Scalable K-Means,
Single-pass K-Means,
Stream, Stream LSearch,
StreamKM++,
SWClusteringPresented a survey of data stream clustering
algorithms, providing a thorough discussion
of the main design components of
state-of-the-art algorithms.Network intrusion detection, sensor
networks, and stock market analysisSilva et al. (2013) 463
Evolutionary algorithms,
physical algorithms, swarm
intelligence, bio-inspired
algorithms, and other
nature inspired algorithmsProvided an up-to-date review of all major
nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithms
that were employed for partitional
clusteringCharacter recognition, traveling
salesman problem, blind channel
equalizer design, human action
classification, book clustering, texture
segmentation, tourism market
segmentation, analysis of gene
expression patterns,
electrocardiogram processing, the
security assessment in power
systems, manufacturing cell design,
clustering of sensor nodes,
identification of clusters for accurate
analysis of seismic catalogs.Nanda and Panda
(2014)374
Fuzzyc-means,
Agglomerative hierarchical,
K-Means, fuzzyc-Means,
K-Medoids-based genetic
clustering, Neural network
clustering performed by a
batch EM version of
minimal free energy vector
quantizationThe paper provided surveys and summaries
of most previous works investigating the
clustering of time series data in various
application domains.Business and socio-economics,
engineering, science, medicine, art
and entertainmentLiao (2005) 2524
Evolutionary algorithms This paper provides an up-to-date overview
of evolutionary algorithms for clustering,
including advanced topics such as
multiobjective and ensemble-based
evolutionary clustering. Similarly, the study
also provides a taxonomy that highlights
some important aspects in the context of
evolutionary data clustering, namely, fixed
or variable number of clusters,
cluster-oriented or non-oriented operators,
context-sensitive or context-insensitive
operators, guided or unguided operators,
binary, integer, or real encodings,
centroid-based, medoid-based, label-based,
tree-based, or graph-based representations,
among others.Image processing, computer security,
and bioinformaticsHruschka et al. (2009) 731
6

==== Page 7 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 1. Taxonomy of clustering algorithms.
function. Furthermore, it is considered a general agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering procedure. The criterion for choosing the pair
of clusters to merge at each step is based on the optimal value of
an objective function. This clustering method is most appropriate for
quantitative variables and not binary variables. Gowda and Krishna
(1978) developed a non-parametric hierarchical, agglomerative cluster-
ing algorithm based on the use of a conventional nearest neighbor to
determine the mutual neighborhood value (MNV) and mutual nearest
neighbors (MNN) of a sample point. Their simple, non-deterministic
and non-iterative algorithm requires low storage and can discern non-
spherical and spherical clusters. More so, their method was reported
to have the ability to discern mutually homogeneous clusters and
applications to a wide class of data of arbitrary shape, large size, and
high dimensionality.
The Clustering Using Representative (CURE) implements agglomer-
ative hierarchical clustering algorithms for large databases. It is more
robust to outliers and can identify clusters of different sizes and shapes
but with lesser cluster quality than BIRCH. It has a time complexityof𝑂(𝑁2𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑁)and its performance is good on a 2-dimensional data
set. CURE achieves scalability by using data sampling and partitioning;
clusters with fine granularity are first constructed in partitions. Clusters
are represented by a fixed number of points scattered around it. The
distance between two clusters is generated by finding the minimum
distance between the two clusters’ representative points. The use of
scattered representative points enables CURE to identify clusters of
diverse sizes and shapes. The scattered representative points are shrunk
to the cluster’s geometric centroid as the clustering progresses based on
the user-specified factor. The choice of the input parameters for CURE:
the shrink factor, representative point number, sample size, and the
number of partitions affect the clustering output. CURE was developed
to work with a dataset with numerical attributes (Berkhin, 2001).
4.1.2. Divisive hierarchical clustering
Divisive hierarchical clustering is a reverse of the agglomerative
clustering process that effectively divides every cluster into smaller
chunks beginning with every object in a single cluster until the required
7

==== Page 8 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 2. A dendrogram representation for hierarchical clustering of data objects 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7..
number of clusters is attained. By contrast with the agglomerative
clustering method, the divisive approach uses the top-down method
whereby the data objects are primarily considered a fused cluster
that progressively divides pending when the cluster number is ac-
quired (Boley, 1998; Savaresi et al., 2002; Chavent et al., 2007). The
standard method of splitting a cluster into two subsets that contains
one or more elements requires the consideration of every likely bi-
partition. Though it is normal to analyze all the likely bipartitions,
whereby each cluster can be split into two sub-cluster, it is evident
that the full enumeration process offers a universal optimum but very
expensive in terms of computation cost. Various divisive clustering
approaches that do not consider all bipartitions have been investigated.
For instance, Karypis and Kumar (2000) proposed a bisecting K-Means
divisive clustering method to attain more accurate results than the
traditional K-Means or agglomerative method. In another study, Zhong
et al. (2008) investigated a novel clustering method called ‘‘reference-
point-based dissimilarity measure’’ (DIVFRP) by combining it with the
divisive clustering method purpose of datasets partition. An improved
particle optimizer (IDPSO) was proposed by Feng et al. (2010) to
determine the closest optimal partition hyperplane for splitting des-
ignated clusters into two smaller chunks. The divisive hierarchical
approach that uses this splitting method is both practical and efficient.
Macnaughton-Smith et al. (1964) and Kaufman and Rousseeuw (2009)
used an average dissimilarity between an object and a set of objects
to investigate the iterative divisive procedure. However, a different
approach that uses a dissimilarity matrix as an input relies on the
optimization criteria that include the partition or bipartition (Guénoche
et al., 1991; Wang et al., 1996).
Divisive clustering can be classified into two primary, monothetic,
or polythetic methods. A divisive cluster is monothetic if combining
a logical characteristic of each one involving one variable is essential
and adequate for cluster membership (Sneath and Sokal, 1973). Mono-
thetic divisive clusters are acquired by employing a single variable in
each splitting by partitioning objects with specific object values from
those without value. Monothetic is usually a variant of the ‘‘associa-
tion analysis method’’ (Williams and Lambert, 1959) and is proposed
for binary data. Various studies have applied monothetic clusters for
problem-solving. For instance, Kim (2009) and Brito and Chavent
(2012) employed a monothetic clustering approach on interval and his-
togram data. Similarly, Kim and Billard (2012) utilized the monothetic
clustering method on multi-modal data. However, those monothetic
approach decreases the number of computations required to identify an
optimum bipartition, such that only 𝑝(𝑛− 1)bipartition is needed for
testing to determine the optimum bipartition instead of every(2𝑛−1− 1)likely bipartitions. The larger the number of objects, the possible bipar-
tition number is further decreased by the monothetic method. Besides,
they offer binary questions that facilitate the interpretation of cluster-
ing structures. On the other hand, the polythetic divisive clustering
approach utilizes all variables concurrently via dissimilarity or distance
values. It does not rely on single variable order but depends entirely
on distance values, and the distance values reflect on all variable
dissimilarity concurrently (Kim and Billard, 2011).
Various divisive clustering is polythetic such that all variables are
considered concurrently in tasks to reveal the two instances’ similarities
(Kim et al., 2017). However, a large variable may lead to a scalability
issue when there is a large variable. In this case, monothetic clustering
that works on a single feature in a time cycle is the best option.
Wang et al. (2014) proposed a modern divisive clustering algorithm
termed ‘Hierarchical grid clustering using data field’ (HGCUDF). In
this approach, hierarchical grids divide and conquer large datasets
in their subset’s hierarchy. However, the clustering regions limit the
search scope, minimizing the data space for producing data fields.
HGCUDF exhibits rapid execution and stability, which improves the
clustering results on a large automated dataset. In another study,
Naim et al. (2014) investigated a model-based clustering technique
for high-dimension datasets. Its operation is divided into three stages:
multi-modal splitting, iterative weighted sampling, and uni-modality
preserving merging to measure the model-based clustering approach of
large high-dimensional datasets. This method of clustering algorithm
solves the problem of small datasets and the effective scaling of the
large datasets when evaluated with synthetic datasets compared with
the conventional methods. It is helpful in immune response jobs and
can tremendously regulate rare populations.
Most of the clustering algorithms in the literature have focused on
binary data. Recently, the clustering of categorical data has attracted
most researchers in finding a solution to the definite data-clustering
problem. Many researchers have proposed different divisive hierarchi-
cal clustering algorithms to combat the problem. For instance, Herawan
et al. (2010) suggested ‘Maximum Dependency of Attributes’ (MDA) for
divisive hierarchical clustering attributes selection. The maximum de-
pendency of attributes is created by relying on attributes dependency in
rough set theory, which measures the dataset’s attributes dependency.
Mazlack et al. (2000) investigated a bi-clustering method for choosing
two-valued attributes by considering multi-valued attributes and a
Total Roughness (TR) approach. They maintained that high total rough-
ness attributes attain optimum performance and are suitable for cluster
splitting. In another study, Parmar et al. (2007) developed a Min–Min-
Roughness (MMR) metric to resolve the uncertainty in the categorical
data clustering process. However, MMR signifies TR’s reverse and does
not yield clustering algorithms with comparative improvement in com-
plexity or accuracy (Herawan and Deris, 2009; Herawan et al., 2010).
Xiong et al. (2009) investigated a divisive method for categorical data
based on ‘‘Multiple Correspondence Analysis’’ (MCA). Similarly, Qin
et al. (2014) implemented information theory-based divisive clustering
for categorical data by employing Mean Gain Ratio (MGR) to choose
clustering attributes and select class equivalents on the cluster attribute
using cluster entropy. Although divisive clustering is appealing based
on computational time, partitioned clusters’ quality is better than a
divisive one.
Naim et al. (2014) proposed a model-based SWIFT (scalable
weighted iterative Flow-Clustering Technique) for high-dimensional
large datasets. The model consists of three stages, namely, multimodal-
ity splitting, iterative weighted sampling, and unimodality preserv-
ing merging for model-based clustering scaling on high-dimensional
datasets are constructed to be effectively scalable to large datasets,
offering a significant enhancement when compared with the current
soft clustering approaches (Lo et al., 2008; Ge and Sealfon, 2012).
These three major SWIFT stages are motivated by two main require-
ments: rare population identification and scalability to large datasets. In
SWIFT, multimodality splitting and weighted iterative sampling iden-
tify rare populations. This algorithm is usually met for Flow Cytometry
8

==== Page 9 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
(FC) and finding rare populations. The multimodality stage plays a vital
role in identifying rare subpopulations. When evaluated with synthetic
datasets, the algorithm solves small datasets and can effectively scale
large datasets compared to conventional methods. SWIFT may also be
employed to represent skewed clusters by LDA-based agglomerative
merging, which decreases clusters numbers as it preserves the separate
unimodal populations.
The interaction between the merging and multimodality splitting in
many clusters uses a reasonable heuristic (cluster modality). It is more
reasonable when compared with knee point in entropy plots formally
employed (Lo et al., 2008; Finak et al., 2009). The algorithm advanta-
geous immune response tasks and efficient scaling on large FC datasets.
Moreover, the soft clustering method utilized in SWIFT is essential
for understanding the overlapping clusters compared to the complex
clusters approach like K-Means (Murphy, 1985) or spectral clusters
(Zare et al., 2010). SWIFT has the power to control the tremendously
rare populations. SWIFT is partially synonymous with flowPeaks (Ge
and Sealfon, 2012) since both depend on unimodality criterion. Thus,
flowPeaks focuses on the significant peaks without modality splitting
and leans in missing tiny overlapping clusters. Consequently, one of
the limitations of SWIFT is that it is restricted to a specific clustering
task (Naim et al., 2014).
4.1.3. Some implementations for improving hierarchical clustering
The traditional algorithm has been enhanced over time to over-
come the deficiencies of hierarchical algorithms. One improvement
that takes hierarchical clustering limitation (due to large dataset) into
consideration is the Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering Using
Hierarchies (BIRCH) clustering algorithm (Zhang et al., 1996). Birch
employed the idea of Cluster Features (CF) which is presented as a
triple containing the cluster objects total number n, the linear sum of
attribute values of the cluster objects LS, and the sum of squares of the
attribute’s values of the cluster object SS, CF (n, LS, SS). The CF triple
is a data structure that summarizes the information maintained about
a cluster (Oyelade et al., 2016). CF triple is kept in a tree form, and
only the tuples are kept in the main memory.
BIRCH is reported to be robust to outliers and can achieve O(N)
computational complexity (Nagpal, 2013). The BIRCH algorithm con-
sists of four phases, with phases 2 and 4 being optional (Oyelade et al.,
2016). The scanning of the entire dataset and the construction of the CF
tree is handled in phase 1. The clustering information stored in the CF
Tree is done in such a way as to adequately reflect all the information
in the dataset as much as possible while still accommodating the limita-
tion imposed by the memory space with crowded data points grouped
as fine sub-clusters. During the CF tree formation, outliers are treated
as sparse data points and are removed from the dataset. The generation
of the CF tree in phase 1 ensures no other input–output operation
is required in the subsequent phases, thus reducing the computation
time for the remaining steps. The clustering activity is also reduced to
smaller sub-datasets of each sub-clusters in the entries of leaves of the
CF tree because these are generated through incremental updating of
the CF (Oyelade et al., 2016). The order of leaf entry of the initial tree
construction produces a better data locality, enhancing the clustering
output. BIRCH algorithm is credited with the ability to handle outliers,
large datasets, and a good clustering output that is not affected by
order of input data. The efficiency of BIRCH is, however, dependent
on proper parameter settings. It also has the problem of biases towards
non-spherical clusters due to diameter/radius in controlling the cluster
boundary. Evaluation of BIRCH using both synthetic and real datasets
showed that it returns a better result in computational time complexity,
the robustness of the approach, and cluster quality.
COBWEB is another implementation of the hierarchical cluster-
ing algorithm for categorical data characterized with two major vital
qualities: incremental learning and clusters’ ability to be modeled or
described intrinsically instead of being regarded as a collection of
points. By processing one data point at a time, Cobweb dynamically
builds the hierarchy of clusters instead of the merging or splitting
approach of the agglomerative or divisive methods.
Fig. 3. A partition with 𝑛= 154 and𝑘= 4.
4.2. Partitional clustering algorithm
In a partitional clustering algorithm, data is organized into a nested
sequence of groups without any hierarchical structure (Jain and Dubes,
1988; Jain, 2010). Jain et al. (1999) stated that the partitioning method
is suitable for handling clustering problems in applications involv-
ing large data sets for which the construction of a dendrogram is
computationally prohibitive. Their operation is based on generating
data clusters to recover the existing natural groupings inherent in the
dataset. Fig. 3 illustrates the clustering pattern representation of the
partitional clustering method.
The dataset of 𝑛objects is iteratively partitioned into a pre-
determined knumber of distinct subsets through the process of opti-
mization of a criterion function (Ahmad and Dey, 2007). The squared-
error criterion is the criterion function on which the most commonly
used partitional clustering algorithm is based. The general objective is
to find the partition for which a fixed number of clusters minimizes the
square error. In this case, deviations of the patterns from the centroids
are represented by the error with a view of the patterns as a collection
of𝑘numbered spherically shaped clusters. The target cost function 𝜁
which can be minimized is given in Eq. (1):
𝜁=𝑛∑
𝑖=1‖‖‖𝑑𝑖−𝐶𝑗‖‖‖𝑞(1)
where𝐶𝑗is defined as the center of the 𝑗th cluster and is the center
nearest to the data object 𝑑𝑖, while the variable 𝑛denotes the number
of elements in the data set, and 𝑞is an integer that defines the nature
of the distance function ( 𝑞= 2for Euclidean distance) as discussed in
Ahmad and Dey (2007).
The partitional clustering algorithm starts with an initial dataset
partition and iteratively assigns data points or patterns to clusters to
reduce the square error. A set of K seed points well separated from
each other can be chosen randomly from the pattern matrix to be the
initial partition. Nagpal (2013) noted that good seed points could be
determined if the selected initial points are from existing data objects
and sufficiently distanced from one another. As the number of clusters
increases, the square error tends to reduce, and this minimization can
only be achieved for a fixed number of clusters.
In some algorithms, the square error criterion function in partition
clustering makes the generated K numbered clusters as compact and
separated as possible. It is less computationally demanding than other
criterion functions (Jain and Dubes, 1988). Because square-error-based
algorithms can converge to local minimal, different initial partitions
can produce varying clusters as output, especially if the initial points
9

==== Page 10 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
are not well separated (Nagpal, 2013). According to (Jain and Dubes,
1988), partitional techniques are frequently used in engineering ap-
plications where single partitions are most important and appropriate
for efficient representation and compression of large databases. It has
also been observed that partitional algorithms are preferred in pattern
recognition due to the nature of the available data (Jain, 2010). The
partitional clustering method is a local search technique (Khaled et al.,
1995) and local convergence. Therefore the optimal global solution
cannot be guaranteed (Sanse and Sharma, 2015a).
Partitioned-based clustering is an NP-hard optimization problem
with the standard approach of finding an approximate solution (Har-
shada et al., 2015). Jain et al. (1999) stated that ‘‘the combinatorial
search of the set of possible labelings for an optimum value of a
criterion function is computationally prohibitive’’. As a result, the
typical partitional clustering algorithm runs several times with varying
starting partitions so that the one that gives the best clustering output
of all the runs is chosen as the optimal solution Jain et al. (1999).
One major disadvantage of Partitional Clustering algorithms is the
need for predefined user values for parameter 𝑘, which is usually non-
deterministic (Suganya et al., 2018; Jain et al., 1999). This arbitrary
choice of clusters centroid leads to wrong clustering output (Oyelade
et al., 2016). Clustering Algorithms based on the partitional methods
usually generate clusters of approximately similar sizes because data
objects are permanently assigned to the nearest centroid, which invari-
ably results in incorrect cut borders between clusters (Harshada et al.,
2015). The partitional clustering method has been noted for having
biasedness to spherically shaped clusters and that it is also unable
to handle highly connected clusters and a high-dimensional dataset
(Oyelade et al., 2016).
The partitional Clustering algorithm can be categorized based on the
various techniques adopted in generating the clusters and the nature of
the resultant clusters produced. These include Hard/Crisp Clustering,
Fuzzy clustering, and Mixture Resolving Clustering.
4.2.1. Hard/Crisp CLustering
Each data object belongs to only one cluster in a hard or crisp clus-
tering algorithm. The clustering methods under this category include
Graph-theoretic clustering, Density-based clustering, Model-based clus-
tering, Subspace clustering and Miscellaneous Clustering.
4.2.1.1 Graph-theoretic clustering A Graph structure is a data structure
made up of nodes and edges connecting the nodes. A graph can
model relationships between features of data objects and list important,
relevant features during data analysis. In graph-theoretic clustering,
clusters are represented in graphs (Saxena et al., 2017). The data
objects are represented as nodes that are connected as edges. The edges
reflect the proximities between pairs of data points (Xu and Wunsch,
2005). Nodes are divided into clusters so that the edge density across
clusters is smaller compared to edge density within clusters (Saxena
et al., 2017). Edges whose clustering length (weight) is substantially
larger than the nearby edges’ average is termed inconsistent. Nodes
are grouped into clusters based on the graph topology so that the out-
put clusters are characterized by high intra-connectivity/homogeneity
and low inter-connectivity/homogeneity among the generated clusters.
Representing clusters in graphs is convenient, but it is not robust in
handling outliers.
Graph theory can be used to represent both hierarchical and non-
hierarchical clusters. Graph method that directly deals with connectiv-
ity graphs can be used for linkage metrics-based hierarchical clustering
when the connectivity 𝑁×𝑁matrix is sparse (Jain and Dubes, 1988;
Berkhin, 2001). This clustering method uses some topological prop-
erties in graphs to build clusters from a network of data objects.
Finding the maximally connected subgraphs in a graph structure is the
same as the problem of single linkage hierarchical clustering. In like
manner, finding maximally complete subgraphs in a graph structure
is equivalent to the total linkage hierarchical clustering (Jain and
Dubes, 1988). The k-nearest-neighbor graph model was used to develop
Fig. 4. Initial dataset represented as an undirected graph.
Fig. 5. Resulting clustered subgraphs with cuttings at points a, b, c, d.
Chameleon (an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm) (Xu
and Wunsch, 2005). Using the k-nearest-neighbor graph approach,
Chameleon constructs a sparse graph with each data object representing
a vertex of the graph with an edge existing between pairs of vertices.
The weight of each edge indicates the similarities (distance) between
the corresponding vertices. The k-nearest neighbor graph is partitioned
into several relatively small sub-clusters using a graph partitioning
algorithm in such a way as to minimize the weight of the edges to
be cut. The clustering eliminates edges whose vertices are not within
the k closest points concerning each other and uses an agglomerative
hierarchical clustering algorithm to merge similar sub-clusters.
Another graph representation of hierarchical clustering is the Delau-
nay triangulation graph (DTG) that uses a hypergraph where more than
two vertices are connected to an edge creating the hypergraph structure
(Cherng and Lo, 2001). Zahn’s clustering algorithm (Zahn, 1971) is an
example of graph theory for non-hierarchical clustering. Uneven edges
in minimum spanning trees are detected and discarded in the bid of
connecting components as clusters (Jain and Dubes, 1988). However,
there is a need for the cluster shape’s pre-knowledge to select the proper
heuristic to identify irregular edges. Cluster Identification via Connec-
tivity Kernels (CLICK) is an example of a graph theory-based clustering
algorithm. In CLICK, the minimum weight division is performed on the
graph to generate clusters (Dongkuan, 2015; Sharan and Shamir, 2000).
Specifying suitable parameters and criterion properties lead to some
practical difficulties to be addressed (Jain and Dubes, 1988). According
to Jain and Dubes (1988), ‘‘no theory exists for choosing among the
various properties of graphs to select the best clustering method for a
particular application’’. Figs. 4 and 5 show examples of graph-theoretic
clustering approaches.
10

==== Page 11 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
4.2.1.2 Subspace clustering Subspace clustering is an extension of the
traditional clustering algorithm with the primary aim of finding clusters
in different subspaces in which a dataset exists. It is often better to use
the subspaces in which a dataset exists for its description instead of
describing a large dimensional dataset as a whole (Parsons et al., 2004).
This way, the subspace clustering technique helps discover hidden
knowledge in such a sizeable dimensional dataset. Clusters existing in
multiple overlapping subspaces are easily identifiable using subspace
clustering. In subspace clustering, redundant and irrelevant dimen-
sions are removed using feature selection, leaving only the relevant
dimension that the clustering algorithm uses to find the clusters in the
dataset.
The subspace clustering algorithm is categorized into two subsec-
tions using the clustering algorithm search strategies: the top-down
and bottom-up approaches. The bottom-up subspace method uses an
APRORI style approach to leverage density’s downward closure prop-
erty to reduce search space. The density’s downward closure property’s
idea is those dense units exist in k-dimension, then dense units in (k-1)
dimension projections. Based on this, the bottom-up method creates a
histogram for each dimension and selects dimensions whose density is
above a given threshold. Examples of bottom-up subspace clustering
include CLIQUE (Agrawal et al., 1998), ENCLUS (Cheng et al., 1999),
MAFIA (Goil et al., 1999), CBF (Chang and Jin, 2002), CLTree (Cheng
et al., 1999), DOC (Procopiuc et al., 2002).
In the top-down subspace clustering, an initial approximation of the
clusters in the whole feature space with equally weighted dimensions
is first found. In the next step, a weight is assigned for each size in
each cluster using a sampling technique to improve the algorithm’s
performance. Clusters formed using this approach forms partitions of
the given dataset, with each instance of the data object belonging to
exactly one cluster. There is a need to specify the number of clusters
and the subspace’s size ahead of time, which is a bottleneck for the
approach. Parameter tuning must be performed to achieve a meaningful
result. Dealing with outliers in the dataset is another challenge in this
approach. PROCLUS (Aggarwal et al., 1999), ORCLUS (Aggarwal et al.,
2000), FINDIT (Woo and Lee, 2002), COSA Friedman and Meulman, 𝛿-
Clusters (Yang et al., 2002) are examples of clustering methods that use
this subspace clustering approach.
4.2.1.3 Density-based clustering In density-based clustering, dense re-
gions in pattern space separated by low pattern density regions are
viewed as clusters in the pattern space. These regions with high density
called modes are associated with a cluster center, while the objects in
the sparse areas separating the clusters are considered as noise and
outliers (Harshada et al., 2015). The data points are then added to clus-
ters with the closest center. A histogram is constructed by dividing the
pattern space into non-overlapping regions to identify the pattern space
modes. The regions with high-frequency counts form the potential
modes and the histogram structure’s valleys as the boundaries between
the clusters. The major concern in using a histogram to measure the
density function is that the pattern space must be large enough to
identify the sections (Jain and Dubes, 1988). Furthermore, clusters
that are small in size are usually very noisy because they cannot be
adequately defined. In contrast, enormous clusters cannot properly
define the cluster properties because of the member patterns’ varied
properties. It is also difficult to locate the precise values for the peak
and valleys in the histogram.
Several works proposing the general concept for mode identifica-
tion has been reported in the literature (Jain and Dubes, 1988). This
clustering method has been used extensively in engineering, mostly
in remote sensing applications (Wharton, 1983). In some other cases,
clusters are formed based on the data points density within a region.
Data points are added to the cluster until the neighborhood’s density is
less than a given threshold. In this case, a cluster in the neighborhood of
a given radius must contain a minimum number of objects concerning
the specified threshold. Generation of the cluster this way enables
the building of clusters with arbitrary shapes. Outliers or noisy datapoints are naturally eliminated. Examples include Density-Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN), ordering points to
identify the clustering structure (OPTICS), DENsity-based CLUstEring
(DENCLUE). The DBSCAN has a well-defined cluster model with fairly
low complexity (Harshada et al., 2015). OPTICS solved the DBSCAN’s
problem of choosing an appropriate value for the range parameter
producing a hierarchical output similar to linkage clustering (Harshada
et al., 2015).
The use of the spatial index in finding data point’s neighborhood has
been reported as improving the complexity of the model from 𝑂(𝑛2)
to𝑂(𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑛 )compare with other methods (Nagpal, 2013). The density-
based clustering method is reported as resistant to outliers, insensitive
to data object ordering, ability to form arbitrary shape clusters, and no
need for pre-stating the number of clusters (Sanse and Sharma, 2015b).
However, they are not ideal for large data sets due to dimensionality.
The low-density areas as noise make the algorithms based on this
clustering method unable to detect intrinsic cluster structure common
in real-life data. There is also the problem of cluster border detection
because there is the need to have data point’s density drop to show the
demarcation between clusters (Harshada et al., 2015). Fig. 6 presents
the clustering pattern of the density-based clustering method.
4.2.1.4 Model-based clustering In model-based clustering, data are as-
sumed to be generated by an underlying probability distribution or a
model (Fraley and Raftery, 1998). Each component of the distribution
represents a different cluster. The principle is to recover the model and
use it to determine the data points that satisfy the generated model
or the probability functions in building clusters of similar data points.
Model-Based clustering seeks to optimize the fitness of the predefined
model concerning the given data. Since clusters are generated using the
given data point, the total number of clusters present can be automati-
cally generated to identify outliers easily. In Model-based clustering, a
mixture model is used in representing data, and the components of the
model correspond to the different clusters.
Fraley and Raftery (1998) reported two ways for formulating mod-
els for the composition of clusters: the classification likelihood ap-
proach and the mixture likelihood approach. Model parameters can
be found using the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) criterion
(Sanse and Sharma, 2015b) as well as the Bayesian information cri-
terion (BIC) (Fraley and Raftery, 1998; Dasgupta and Raftery, 1998;
Mukerjee et al., 1998). The BIC can also determine between two
clusters the closest to which a data point will be assigned (Campbell
et al., 1997). Data clustering uses two major approaches using this
method: the statistical approach and the neural network approach
(Sanse and Sharma, 2015b). Examples of the Model-Based Clustering
method includes EM (Expectation-Maximization) (Fraley and Raftery,
1998; Dempster et al., 1977; Mclachlan and Krishnan, 1997), COBWEB,
SOM. The Expectation-Maximization algorithm for maximum likeli-
hood can determine the partition. A parametric mixture distribution
for a random vector 𝐴such that𝐴can be written as
𝑓(𝜗)=𝐵∑
𝑏=1𝜋𝑏𝑓𝑏(𝑎|𝜃𝑏)
(2)
where𝜋𝑏>0; such that∑𝐵
𝑏=1𝜋𝑏= 1 are regarded as the mixing
proportions. The 𝑓𝑏(𝑎|𝜃𝑏)is the b thcomponent density with the pa-
rameter vectors of the distribution represented as 𝜗=(𝜋,𝜃1,…,𝜃𝑏)
with (𝜋=𝜋1,…,𝜋𝑏). The𝑓(𝜗)is called the B-component finite mixture
density.𝑓1(𝜃1),𝑓1(𝜃1),𝑓2(𝜃1),…,𝑓𝑏(𝜃1)represent the distribution
components, that is, the clusters of the parametric mixture distribution.
The distribution components are the same type for all the 𝑏. Shekar
et al. (1987) proposed a knowledge-based clustering scheme by intro-
ducing the notion of conceptual cohesiveness as precise enough to be
adopted for semantic grouping of related objects based on cohesion
forest knowledge structure. The authors presented a set of axioms that
should be satisfied to give meaning to the generated clusters.
11

==== Page 12 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 6. (a) Initial dataset (b) Density-based clustering.
4.2.1.5 Search-based clustering Search-based clustering algorithms are
nature-inspired metaheuristic approaches, termed automatic data clus-
tering algorithms. They spontaneously determine the structure and
number of clusters in a dataset without prior information on the
dataset’s attributes values (Aliniya and Mirroshandel, 2019). They
emerge as a solution to the need to provide the traditional clustering
algorithms, a priori information (Agarwal, 2011) on the number of
clusters generated (Ezugwu, 2020a). The need to provide this vital
information usually impose some additional computational burdens or
requirements on the relevant traditional clustering algorithms (Ezugwu,
2020a). Determining the best estimate of cluster number is a fundamen-
tal problem in cluster analysis, and it is tagged ’automatic clustering
problem’ (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016). This problem becomes
more pronounced for real-world data clustering analysis characterized
by high density and dimensionality datasets. The lack of prior domain
knowledge makes it difficult to choose appropriate cluster numbers,
especially in datasets with many dimensionalities with widely varied
cluster shape, size, density and sometimes overlapping. It is a pro-
foundly difficult task to determine the optimal number of clusters for
such data sets, so pre-identifying the number of clusters for a data
clustering algorithm is not easy.
Automatic clustering techniques where such a requirement is not
needed become a better option for real-world data sets with high
density and dimensionality. Automatic clustering algorithms produce
the same results as the traditional clustering technique without sup-
plying any background information concerning the datasets (Aliniya
and Mirroshandel, 2019; Jain and Dubes, 1988; Agrawal et al., 2005;
Ezugwu, 2020a). It has also been found appropriate for handling au-
tomatic identification and classification of unlabeled data points in
real-world datasets, which is evidently difficult and almost impossible
manually. Automatic clustering algorithms have a higher possibility
of obtaining optimal global solutions, unlike the traditional clustering
algorithms that are mostly local search algorithms whose solutions are
influenced by the initial starting points. They cannot guarantee global
optimality except linear and convex optimization (Ezugwu, 2020a).
Aside these, the nature-inspired clustering algorithms have demon-
strated more flexibility in handling clustering problems in various fields
than the traditional clustering algorithms that are mostly problem-
specific and lack continuity (Agarwal et al., 2011). With the main
aim of clustering algorithm as having the ability to generate clusters
that exhibit the characteristics of reduced intracluster distance and
increased inter-cluster distance, the automatic clustering algorithms
treat clustering problems as optimization problems with a focus on the
minimization of the dissimilarity within a cluster and maximization of
dissimilarity between clusters (Ezugwu, 2020a; Kuo et al., 2014).
As an optimization problem, finding an optimal solution for a
clustering problem is classified as NP-hard when the number of clusters
is more than three; that is 𝑘 >3(Falkenauer, 1998). Thus, clusteringtasks for moderately sized problems could be computationally pro-
hibitive. This makes most metaheuristic approaches suitable for finding
solutions to data clustering problems (Kuo et al., 2014), and the meta-
heuristic search algorithms became the most applied techniques for im-
plementing automatic clustering algorithms (José-García and Gómez-
Flores, 2016). Nature-Inspired metaheuristic algorithms are practically
designed to handle high-dimensional and complex real-world problems
(Ezugwu et al., 2020b). Moreover, their higher heuristic search capa-
bility makes them look for the most promising (optimal) solution while
balancing intensification and diversification in the search. Also, while
searching for optimal solutions, they ensure that the generated solution
gets into unpromising regions within the search space are avoided.
These natured inspired metaheuristics algorithms have solved a wide
range of continuous and discrete combinatorial optimization problems,
particularly the GA, DE, PSO, FA and IWO (Ezugwu, 2020b). The
automatic clustering algorithms are superior in performance compared
with the traditional clustering algorithms in terms of convergence speed
and their ability to produce good quality solutions
Some of the nature-inspired algorithms that have been deployed
as search based clustering algorithms include Genetic Algorithm (GA)
(Jain and Dubes, 1988; He and Tan, 2012; Doval et al., 1999), Dif-
ferential Evolution (DE) (Paterlini and Krink, 2006; Suresh et al.,
2009), Artificial Bee Colony Optimization Algorithm (ABC) (Kuo et al.,
2014; Su et al., 2012), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) (Izakian et al., 2016; Das and Roy, 2008), Inva-
sive Weed Optimization (IWO) (Chowdhury et al., 2011), Symbiotic
Organisms Search (SOS), Bacterial Evolutionary Algorithm (BEA) (Das
et al., 2009), Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS), Firefly Algorithm
(FA) (Senthilnath et al., 2011) and Tabu Search (TS) Algorithm.
The metaheuristics-based clustering algorithms can be classified
into the Evolutionary and the Swarm intelligence metaheuristics al-
gorithms. The GA and DE come under the Evolutionary group, while
the rest fall under the Swarm intelligence group. These two broad
classes of algorithms have common design steps: the starting point of
random initializing population size, then identifying suitable candidate
individuals representing the choice solution (Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
This is achieved by evaluating the candidate’s members of the initial
generation. The choice solutions are then used to generate a new
population by modifying the individual-specific variation operators.
The second and third steps are repeated iteratively, and an update is
made concerning which candidate individual is best fitted in terms of
the defined objective function of the problem. The best candidate’s
choice is achieved by comparing the current generation solution with
the previous generation solution, and precedence is given to the current
best solution. The subsequent sections will report reviews of different
research involving the application of various nature-inspired algorithms
to clustering problems.
(a.) Evolutionary algorithm
i. Genetic Algorithm-Based Clustering Techniques
12

==== Page 13 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Genetic algorithm is a single objective evolutionary computation al-
gorithm that has been used for automatic clustering. Holland developed
the algorithm in the early 1970s (Holland, 1975). Its idea stemmed
from Charles Darwin’s principle of evolution by natural selection. In
genetic algorithms, some fundamental genetic ideas are borrowed and
artificially used in constructing robust search algorithms with minimal
problem information (Sheikh et al., 2008). The search is performed
in large, complex multimodal landscapes providing a near-optimal
solution for the search problem’s stated objectives or fitness function.
In GA-based clustering techniques, the capability of GA is applied to
evolve the proper number of clusters and provide appropriate clustering
(Sheikh et al., 2008).
The search space parameters are represented as strings called chro-
mosomes. A combination of cluster centroids encodes them, and a
collection of them forms the algorithm’s population. At the first genera-
tion, a random population representing different search space solutions
is created at the initial stage. Each chromosome has an objective and
fitness function associated with it which measures the degree of good-
ness of the chromosome. Using the principle of survival of the fittest,
the best fit among existing chromosomes is selected to ‘birth’ the next
generation of chromosomes through the biologically inspired operators:
the crossover and mutation operators. The selection, crossover and
mutation operation are iteratively repeated for a given number of
generations or until a stopping criterion is met (Goldberg, 1989). In GA-
based clustering techniques, the selection operators control the search
direction, while the crossover and mutation operators generate new
regions for search.
Several research efforts in developing GA-based clustering algo-
rithms have been reported in the literature. Krovi (1992) investigated
the potential feasibility of the use of GA for the purpose of cluster-
ing. Krishna and Murty (1999) proposed Genetic K-Means Algorithm
(GKA), a novel hybrid GA to find a globally optimized partition of a
given dataset into a specified number of clusters using the K-Means
algorithm to solve the problem of expensive crossover operations.
The K-Means operators were used as search operators in place of the
crossover. GKA searches faster and converges to the global optimum. It
minimized total within-cluster variation (TWCV) (Krishna and Murty,
1999). The Fast Genetic K-Means Algorithm (FGKA) by Lu et al. (2004a)
is another GA-based clustering algorithm inspired by GKA featuring
several improvements over it. Other GA-based clustering algorithms
include Incremental Genetic K-Means Algorithm (IGKA) (Lu et al.,
2004b), GA-clustering (Maulik and Bandyopadhyay, 2000), Genetically
Guided Algorithm GGA (Hall et al., 1999). The study conducted by the
following authors: Sheikh et al. (2008), José-García and Gómez-Flores
(2016); Ezugwu 2020a provides other references on further works on
GA-based clustering. Based on a different encoding scheme for GA-
based clustering, José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016) discussed four
different categories of automatic clustering based on GA: the Centroid-
based encoding of variable length, the Centroid-based encoding of fixed
length, the Label-based encoding, and the Binary-based encoding.
(b.) Swarm Intelligence Algorithm
i. Ant Colony Optimization Clustering Algorithm
The ACO algorithm is a stochastic metaheuristic for combinatorial
optimization (Dorigo and Stützle, 2004) classified under Swarm Intel-
ligence (SI). SI is a category of artificial intelligence paradigm inspired
by the study of emergent behavior in decentralized, self-organized
systems. SI methods aim to imitate the behavior and apply it in finding
solutions to hard computational problems. They are credited with hav-
ing simple design capability, scalability and robustness. There are other
algorithms based on the natural swarm behavior, such as bee colony,
flocks of birds, and schools of fish. However, the ACO is categorized
under ant-based techniques under SI. The Ant-based clustering methods
are directly modeled on ant’s social behavior (Dorigo and Stützle,
2004). It is the most widely used group of swarm-based clustering
algorithms. There are two major approaches to ant-based clustering:those that directly mimic ants’ behavioral nature and those that are
less directly inspired by nature. The first groups considered gathering
items and occasional sorting activities observed in the nest and brood
care of ants (Deneubourg et al., 1991). The behavior is directly imitated
in the clustering of abstract data where the clustering objective is
implicitly defined. The second group, which is less directly inspired by
nature, handles clustering tasks as an optimization task using the ant-
based optimization method to generate good or near-optimal clusters.
The second group has the advantage of explicit specification of the
objective function, offering a better understanding and prediction of
the clustering performance (Handl and Meyer, 2007). ACO clustering
algorithm falls under this second group. It is inspired by the foraging
behavior of mass recruiting ants. The ants use pheromones to mark
areas of promising forage and potential food sources (Handl and Meyer,
2007; Dorigo and Stützle, 2004; Dorigo et al., 1996). Runkler (2005)
and Saatchi and Hung (2005) carried out some research on the ACO-
based clustering algorithms. An ant-based clustering algorithm was
also presented by Kanade and Hall (2004), which finds the adequate
number of clusters and initializes the fuzzy c means algorithm. Handl
et al. (2006) worked on adaptive time-dependent transporter ant for
clustering.
ii. Particle Swarm Optimization
The PSO is another general-purpose optimization metaheuristic al-
gorithm inspired by the collective behaviors of unsophisticated agents
that interact locally among the neighboring individuals and their en-
vironment to cause more complex valuable behavior for solving opti-
mization problems (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016; Engelbrecht,
2005). Kennedy and Eberhart introduced the PSO as a population-based
search algorithm where individual population members are grouped
into a swarm. During optimization, the swarm of particles moves coop-
eratively in the defined region representing the objective function, with
each particle representing a complete solution. Each particle moves in
response to the influence of forces that attract it to a good position in
the search space which previously has been explored by other swarm
members or itself. According to José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016),
‘‘the particles explore the search space by adjusting their trajectories
iteratively according to self-experience and neighboring particles’’. Sev-
eral particles with randomly assigned velocities are initially placed at
random positions in the search space at the search’s commencement.
Each particle will evaluate the objective function at its position at every
iteration, updating its position, velocity, and memory for its individual
best position (Handl and Knowles, 2007).
Omran first introduced the application of PSO for solving clustering
problems in 2002. The algorithm used a fixed number of clusters,
and then PSO was used in searching for the optimal centroids of the
clusters and each data point assigned to the closest centroid. The work
was further extended in their presentation of the DCPSO — dynamic
clustering approach based on PSO (Omran et al., 2002; José-García
and Gómez-Flores, 2016). Another PSO-based segmentation algorithm
for automatically grouping image pixels into different regions was
proposed by Das et al. (2006). Other researches on PSO based clustering
algorithm can be found in (Qu et al., 2010; Ouadfel et al., 2010; Cura,
2012; Kuo et al., 2012, 2014; Van der Merwe and Engelbrecht, 2003;
Cui et al., 2005; Cui and Potok, 2005; Kanungo et al., 2000). It has been
observed that PSO-based clustering algorithms give excellent results in
quality clustering to find the correct cluster number. The PSO basic
algorithmic form is characterized by extreme simplicity. It is mostly
used to optimize the functions of continuous variables.
iii. Whale Optimization Algorithm
The Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) is a swarm based meta-
heuristic optimization algorithm proposed by Mirjalili and Lewis in
2016 (Mirjalili and Lewis, 2016). The WOA was inspired by the social
behavior of humpback whales with reference to their foraging behavior
termed bubble-net hunting strategy. In hunting school of krill or small
fishes close to the ocean surface, the humpback whales use two maneu-
vers: the ‘upward-spirals’ and the ‘double-loops’. In the first maneuver,
13

==== Page 14 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
a ‘9’ shaped path is created around the prey from a depth of 12 m by the
humpback whale and start to swim up towards the surface. The prey is
captured in the second maneuver in three behavioral patterns called:
the coral loop, lobtail and capture loop (Goldbogen et al., 2013).
Nasiri et al. (2018) proposed the Whale Clustering Optimization
Algorithm based on the humpback whales’ foraging behavior for data
clustering. The advantages of WOA, among which include, low number
of parameters and lack of local optimal entrapment, were harnessed in
the proposed clustering algorithm. The main goal was to use the WOA
for a complete search to cluster unlabeled data for better clustering
results using a simple solution. Soppari and Chandra (2020) used an
optimized clustering approach to develop an effective framework for
digital watermarking. They combined Least Favorable-based Whale Op-
timization Algorithm (LF-WOA) with optimized Fuzzy-Cmeans (FCM)
for selecting the initial centroid to identify regions for watermarks
insertion in digital watermarking. More recent literature regarding
the WOA-based clustering algorithm includes (Reddy and Babu, 2019;
Rahnema and Gharehchopogh, 2020; Jadhav and Gomathi, 2018).
iv. Crow search algorithm
The Crow Search Algorithm (CSA) is a population-based metaheuris-
tic optimizer inspired by the intelligent behavior of crows developed
by Askarzadeh (2016). The crows are distributed widely and are con-
sidered among the world’s most intelligent birds. Crows stores excess
food in certain places, which are later retrieved when needed. They are
known to be greedy, following each other to obtain better food sources.
A crow watches and observes the location where other birds hide their
food to steal it. It also takes precautionary steps of moving its own
hiding place to prevent others from stealing its food. If a crow detects
that another one is following it, the crow goes to another position of
the environment to fool the one following it.
Lakshmi et al. (2018) combined CSA with K-means algorithm to
improve the performance of K-means algorithm to achieve global op-
timum clustering solution. The CSAK algorithm was used to find the
optimum solution for the initial centroids for the K-means algorithm.
Balavand et al. (2018) also combined K-means with CSA for automatic
clustering based on data envelopment analysis which measures the
efficiency of the decision making units of the algorithm. In this case,
the CSA carry out the clustering processing using the initial cluster
centers generated by the K-means algorithm. Wu et al. (2015) proposed
a hybrid clustering algorithm based on WOA and CSA, harnessing
the advantages of the two algorithms with respect to their search
strategy. In Anter et al. (2019), the CSA improved the Fast Fuzzy C-
means algorithm for data clustering. The CSA generates the initial
cluster centers for the fuzzy C-means algorithm for a more accurate
cluster result. In the proposed algorithm, generating an optimal cluster
center ensures the FFCM avoids getting stuck in the local minimal and
improves computational performance.
v. Emperor Penguin Optimizer
The Emperor Penguin Optimizer is a bio-inspired metaheuristic
algorithm introduced by Dhiman and Kumar (2018). It mimics the em-
peror penguin’s huddling behavior for successful survival in the depth
of the Antarctic winter. The huddling behavior is made up of four major
steps: the huddle boundary generation, computation of the temperature
around the huddle, calculating the distance and finding the effective
mover. Ragaventhiran and Kavithadevi (2020)) adopted CSA as an
optimizer in their proposed Frequent Pattern Mining in which Affinity
propagation-based clustering is implemented in one of the five pro-
cesses with the main objective of performing preprocessing to remove
data redundancy. Furthermore, the authors validate the performance
of their implemented method with previous approaches for succeeding
metrics that are execution time, response time, load balancing rate, and
scalability. The results obtained in the work revealed that the authors’
proposed map-optimize-reduce mining technique on Hadoop achieved
excellent results compared to existing literature results.
c. Other Algorithms
i. Variable Neighborhood SearchThe Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) is a metaheuristic algo-
rithm that represents a flexible framework for a heuristic building to
find approximate solutions to combinatorial and non-linear continuous
optimization problems. It was proposed by Mladenovic and Hansen in
1997 (Mladenovic and Hansen, 1997). It is characterized by systematic
exploitation of changes of neighborhood, finding the local minimum in
the descent phase while escaping from the corresponding valley. The
neighborhood structures are systematically changed while searching
for an optimal (or near-optimal) solution. According to Brimberg et al.
(2017), it is a proven heuristic framework for finding good solutions
to combinatorial and global optimization problems. Compared with
other metaheuristics, the VNS basic scheme and its variants are simple,
requiring non or few parameters. The reasons for these characteristic
behaviors of VNS are stated by Alguwaizani et al. (2011) as based on
the following properties:
•Relativity of a local optimum to the corresponding neighborhood
structure, that is, a local optimum relative to one neighborhood
structure, is not necessarily a local optimum for another neighbo-
rhood structure.
•Consideration of global optimality with reference to local optimal
in terms of all neighborhood structure. ‘A global optimum is
a local optimum with respect to all neighborhood structures’
(Hansen and Mladenovic, 2018).
•The relative closeness of all or majority of local optimal to one
another. In the words of Alguwaizani et al. (2011) ‘Empirical
evidence shows that all or a large majority of the local optima
are relatively close to each other for many problems.
The VNS increasingly uses complex moves to find the local optimal in
all the neighborhood structures. If the local optima found is poor, sev-
eral neighborhoods are used. An increase in exploitation of the vicinity
of the incumbent solution is also suggested (Hansen and Mladenovic,
2018).
The basic VNS algorithm, as with other metaheuristic algorithms,
starts with a set of randomly generated initial solutions. This is followed
by the random generation of a neighbor of the incumbent solution. This
phase is called the shaking step. After this phase, the moving step is
then performed where the local optimal and the incumbent solution are
compared, and the incumbent solution is updated if the local optimal
solution is better. These two phases are repeated until the maximum
neighborhood number’s termination condition is met.
The VNS and its variants have been used to solve many clustering
problems. Alguwaizani et al. (2011) used VNS to solve the harmonic
means clustering problem and reported that VNS compared favorably
with solutions obtained from Tabu Search TS and Simulated Annealing
SA Heuristics. The capacitated clustering problem was solved using two
VNS based heuristics by Brimberg et al. (2019) and the performance
accessed on benchmark instances from the literature. According to
their report, all VNS procedures outperform the state-of-the-art in the
stated problem. Consoli et al. (2019), Orlov et al. (2018); Mladenovic
and Hansen (1997), Hansen (2005), Hansen and Mladenovic (2018),
Hansen et al. (2009), Rozhnov et al. (2019), Hansen and Mladenovic
(2001), Martins (2020), Carrizosa et al. (2013) are other research
reports on using VNS and its variants for solving clustering problems.
Ros and Guillaume (2019), in related work on neighborhood search,
proposed a clustering method referred to as Munec to address the chal-
lenge of new clustering algorithms in finding an appropriate number of
clusters in complex datasets and demonstrate self-tuning capability and
adaptiveness for input parameters in identifying acceptable solutions.
Their algorithm adopted the nearest neighbor technique in group re-
lated data objects. Nearest neighbor data objects are merged without
constraints at the beginning until the number of groups attains the
maximum (at least two groups). Subsequent merging is then based on
mutual neighbor groups with a similar distance between neighbors.
The experimental tests carried out using two-dimensional datasets
revealed that Munec proved to match a ground truth target highly
14

==== Page 15 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
effectively. More so, under the same input configuration, Munec can
identify clusters of various densities, arbitrary shapes, and a large
amount of noise (Ros and Guillaume, 2019).
ii. Tabu Search Algorithm
The Tabu Search (TS) Algorithm is an optimization problem-solving
higher-level heuristic procedure designed to guide other methods in
escaping the possibility of getting trapped in local optimal (Glover,
1990). It uses a local search procedure guided to avoid local optimal,
rejecting already visited points (kept on the tabu list) in search space
(Batres, 2012). A thorough information search is enabled in tabu search
using a flexible memory structure. This aids the algorithm in strategi-
cally constraining and freeing the search process with varying period
memory functions for intensification and diversification. According to
Glover (1990), ‘‘the form of guidance provided by tabu search is highly
flexible and often motivates the creation of new types of moves and
evaluation criteria to take advantage of its adaptability to different
problem structures and strategic goals’’. TS has been credited with
finding solutions superior to the best solutions of other alternative
methods for various problem settings. Implementing the TS algorithm
is easy, and it can handle additional considerations. For instance, con-
straints that are not included in the original formulation of the problem
are given consideration. TS algorithm was applied to subset clustering
problems by Glover et al. in 1985 with a solution obtained in less
than one minute on a V77 minicomputer (Glover, 1990). As mentioned
earlier, three basic themes can be identified in the development of the
TS algorithm with its core embedded in the short-term memory process:
•Usage of flexible attribute-based memory structure
•An associated control mechanism for employing the memory
structure and
•Incorporation of memory functions of different time spans from
short to long term.
In recent times, there have been several reports on using TS algorithms
to solve various clustering problems. Cao et al. (2015) presented a TS
algorithm for solving cohesive clustering problems in various business
applications. They introduced an objective function for generating as
pure as possible clusters, maximizing the intracluster similarity as
much as possible. They employed the intensification and diversification
strategies of tabu search to enhance the clustering outcome. Sung and
Jin (2000) combined the tabu search algorithm with complimentary
packing and releasing procedures for solving the clustering problem. Lu
et al. (2018) proposed a tabu search-based clustering algorithm and its
parallel implementation on Spark. Their design was adapted to alleviate
the challenges associated with big data applications taking advantage
of the parallel processing based on the Spark framework. They found
the system superior to other similar systems in terms of scalability,
accuracy, and effectiveness. Other TS algorithm applications for solving
clustering problems can be found in Kharrousheh et al. (2011), Xia et al.
(2018), Yaghini and Ghazanfari (2020) and Ibrahim et al. (1994).
4.2.1.6 Square error clustering The square error clustering method is a
partitioning clustering method that assigns data points into a specified
number of clusters based on the sum of square error criterion functions.
The squared differences between each data point and the estimated
center value for each stated group have been divided into the data
point. In cases where the sum of squared error for a group of data
objects is equal to zero, the cluster’s data points are identical (very
close).
The formula for Sum of Square Error is:
𝑆𝑢𝑚𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 =𝑛∑
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)2
(3)
where𝑛represents the number of data points and 𝑥irepresents the 𝑖th
data point in the group and 𝑥is the center object relative to the group.
The k-means clustering algorithm is the best know squared error-based
clustering algorithm (Xu and Wunsch, 2005).
i. K-Means ClusteringThe K-Means clustering algorithm is a centroid-based partitioning
technique in which data objects are distributed into a specified number
of k clusters. The distribution is done through the use of an objective
function which accesses the quality of the partition, ensuring that the
similarities of objects within a cluster (intra-cluster similarity) is higher
compared with objects in another cluster (inter-cluster similarity). K-
Means clustering is a centroid-based technique, and it uses the mean
to represent the centroid of a cluster. The centroid of a cluster is a
measure of the center point of the cluster. Specified 𝑘numbers of data
points/objects are randomly selected from a set of the existing data
points as the representative center for 𝑘clusters. The Euclidean distance
between the remaining data points and each assumed center point is
then iteratively measured. The obtained value assigns the data point
to the cluster with the smallest distance. The intracluster similarity
is improved each time a new data point is given to the cluster by
computing a new mean using the objects previously assigned to the
clusters. The new mean is then used to reassign the data objects. This
procedure is repeated severally until stability is achieved.
The sum of square function for the Euclidean distances produces
compact and well-separated clusters. The K-Means algorithm tries to
minimize the sum of the squared error criterion (Ezugwu, 2020a;
Hartigan and Wong, 1979; MacQueen, 1967). The major problems
identified with K-Means clustering algorithms include the problem of
the initial definition of the number of clusters at the algorithm’s onset.
An efficient and universal method for determining the initial number
of clusters and partition is not found. K-Means algorithm is reported
to be very sensitive to initial centroid selection such that suboptimal
solution may be produced when wrongfully chosen (Punit, 2018). Also,
convergence to global optimum cannot be guaranteed. Using means as
a centroid limits the K-Means algorithm’s application to data objects
with numerical variables (Xu and Wunsch, 2005). Not only these, but
the K-Means algorithm is also sensitive to outliers (objects that are quite
far from the cluster centroid are forced into the cluster, distorting the
cluster’s shape (Saxena et al., 2017). It works on the assumption that
the variance of the distribution of each attribute is spherical and thus
produces a roughly equal number of observations. Moreover, the mem-
ory space requirement is high and the number of iterations to obtain a
stable distribution is unknown. Due to the simplicity of implementation
and low computation complexity (Jain, 2010), the K-Means algorithm
is still popular and widely used today (Ezugwu, 2020a).
Some research work extending K-Means has been reported. For
example, the G-means (Hamerly and Elkan, 2004) and the X-means
algorithms (Pelleg, 2000). The sum of square function for the Euclidean
distances for the K-Means algorithm is given as:
𝑑𝑖𝑘=𝑚∑
𝑗=1(𝑥𝑖𝑗−𝑐𝑘𝑗)2
(4)
where𝑑𝑖𝑘is the Euclidean distance, 𝑥𝑖𝑗is the𝑗th data point for 𝑖th
cluster and 𝑐𝑘𝑗is the centroid for the 𝑗th cluster.
The K-Means is arguably the most popular clustering method but
is plagued with drawbacks such as poor scalability, sensitivity to ini-
tialization and outliers, assumed knowledge of cluster count, and local
production rather than the global optimum. It is noteworthy to mention
that the most recent extensions and improvements on the K-Means seek
to advance the state-of-the-art in addressing these issues.
ii. K-MCI (K-Means modified cohort intelligence) Clustering algorithm
The K-MCI (K-Means modified cohort intelligence) is an efficient
hybrid evolutionary data clustering algorithm that combines the K-
Means algorithm with modified cohort intelligence (Krishnasamy et al.,
2014). Cohort Intelligence(CI) is an optimization algorithm inspired
by the natural and societal tendency of cohort candidates/individuals
learning from one another. It was proposed by Kulkarni et al. (2013).
In cohort intelligence, while observing every other candidate, each
candidate tries to improve their behavior. The MCI is a modified
cohort intelligence with improved accuracy and speed of convergence
of the traditional CI. In K-MCI, the K-Means algorithm enhances the
15

==== Page 16 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
candidate’s behavior generated by MCI, annexing the advantages of
the K-Means algorithm and that of the MCI. K-MCI converges more
quickly with greater clustering accuracy without being trapped in the
local optimum.
iii. ELM K-Means (Extreme Learning Machine K-Means)
In ELM K-Means, the extreme learning machine (ELM) method is
incorporated into the K-Means clustering algorithm (Alshamiri et al.,
2015). The ELM method functions in projecting the dataset into a high
dimensional feature space, and the K-Means algorithm is used to cluster
the dataset using the Euclidean distance in the feature space to measure
the similarity between the objects. The ELM proposed by Huang et al.
(2006) is a new learning algorithm that randomly generates hidden
nodes for single hidden layer feedforward neural networks(SLFNs) and
determines the output weight of the SLFNs analytically. ELM is credited
with a meager computational cost for its operations and has been used
in finding the solution to classification and regression problems.
iv. K-means based multiview clustering methods and K-means
subspace clustering models
The generation of high dimensional data due to the social network’s
rapid development has been a significant challenge to the traditional
K-means clustering generally tagged as the curse of dimensionality.
Redundant features and noises in such data make efficient clustering
of such data very difficult. The K-means based multiview clustering
methods are developed to provide simple and efficient algorithms for
accurately exploring shared information in multiview data. Zheng et al.
(2018) proposed a robust discriminative multiview K-means clustering
with feature selection and group sparsity learning. The proposed algo-
rithm addressed the problem of extreme time consuming and sensitivity
to outliers that is common with clustering of high-dimensional feature
space. It efficiently handles the curse of dimensionality by using group
sparsity constraints for selecting the most important views and the most
relevant features.
In handling high dimensional data of a real-world application, us-
ing eigenvalue decomposition by existing K-means subspace clustering
algorithm to find an approximate solution is less efficient. Moreover,
their loss functions exhibit sensitivity to outliers or suffer small loss
errors (Wang et al., 2019). A new adaptive Multiview subspace cluster-
ing method was recently proposed by Yan et al. (2020) for integrating
heterogeneous data in low-dimensional feature space. Their work ex-
tended K-Means clustering with feature learning capability for handling
high-dimensional data. Wang et al. (2019) developed a fast adaptive
K-means (FAKM) type subspace clustering model embedded with a
mechanism for flexible cluster indicator using an adaptive loss function.
According to Wang et al. the existing methods of combining sub-
space learning with K-means clustering still exhibit some limitations.
These include: no thorough capturing of discriminative information
in low-dimensional subspace, consideration of intrinsic geometric in-
formation is rare, and the vulnerability to noises of the optimizing
procedure of a discrete cluster indicator. They proposed a robust dimen-
sion reduction for clustering with a local adaptive learning algorithm to
address these limitations. The proposed algorithm adaptively explores
the discriminative information by unifying K-means clustering with
local adaptive subspace learning.
4.2.1.7 Miscellaneous clustering techniques i. Time series Clustering
A time series is a sequence of real numbers collected regularly in
time, where each number represents a value. It is the simplest form
of temporal data, which is naturally characterized as high dimensional
and large data size (Chiş et al., 2009a,b; Antunes and Oliveira, 2001;
Warrenliao, 2005; Rani and Sikka, 2012; Lin et al., 2004). Since time-
series data feature changes at a function of time, they are classified
as dynamic data. Each time series is made up of many data points,
but at the same time, they can be seen as a single object. Time-series
clustering is an aspect of temporal data mining research that provides
useful information in various domains (Liao, 2005; Aghabozorgi et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2002; Das et al., 1998).
Fig. 7. Time-series clustering taxonomy (Zolhavarieh et al., 2014).
By clustering time-series data, diverse scientific areas have dis-
covered patterns that data analysts have used to extract valuable in-
formation from complex and massive datasets (Aghabozorgi et al.,
2015). According to Aghabozorgi et al. (2015), Chiş et al. (2009a,b),
time series clustering as an exploratory data mining technique is the
most used approach and has also been a subroutine in more complex
data mining algorithms. The visual image representation of time se-
ries cluster structures helps users quickly understand the clusters, the
anomalies, the structure of the data, and other datasets’ regularities.
Time series clusters have been used in finding answers to numerous
real-world problems such as anomaly, novelty or discord detection
(Keogh et al., 2002; Chan and Mahoney, 2005; Wei et al., 2005; Leng
et al., 2009), recognition of dynamic changes in time series (He et al.,
2011), prediction and recommendation (Sfetsos and Siriopoulos, 2004;
Pavlidis et al., 2006; Ito et al., 2009; Graves and Pedrycz, 2010) and
pattern discovery (Wang et al., 2002; Das et al., 1998). The enormous
size of time series data requires being stored on disks during processing,
resulting in an exponential decrease in the speed of the clustering
process.
Time-series clustering can be classified into three (Aghabozorgi
et al., 2015): the whole time series clustering, the subsequence clus-
tering and the time point clustering. Performing clustering operations
on many individual time series to similar group ones into a cluster is
called the Whole-time series clustering. In this case, each time series
is treated as an object, and the conventional clustering algorithm is
employed. Subsequence clustering entails a clustering set of sliding win-
dow extractions of a single time series intending to find the similarity
and differences among the extracted time windows. According to Chiş
et al. (2009a,b), the subsequence clustering is a standard subroutine
in rule discovery algorithm (Das et al., 1998; Fu et al., 2004; Halkidi
and Vazirgiannis, 2001), indexing, classification algorithm, prediction
algorithm (Ormerod and Mounfield, 2000; Popivanov and Miller, 2002)
and anomaly detection (Steinback et al., 2002). The time point cluster-
ing (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015; Gionis and Mannila, 2003; Ultsch and
Mörchen, 2005; Morchen et al., 2005) involves clustering of time point-
based on the combination of the time point’s temporal proximity and
the similarity of the corresponding values. Fig. 7 presents a time-series
clustering taxonomy.
There are different ways to cluster time series data recorded in the
literature. These includes:
•Customize existing conventional clustering algorithms (Aghabo-
zorgi et al., 2015; Warrenliao, 2005).
•Conversion of time series data into simple objects as input into
conventional clustering algorithms (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015;
Warrenliao, 2005).
•The use of multi resolutions of time series as input of a multi-step
approach (Aghabozorgi et al., 2015)
Three different clustering time series data approaches were identified:
feature-based, model-based, and shape-based approaches. The shape-
based approach employs the conventional clustering methods to match
two time-series shapes by a non-linear stretching and contracting of
the time axes using a distance or similarity measure appropriate for
the time series. The feature-based convert the raw time series into
16

==== Page 17 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 8. Four Components of whole time series clustering.
feature vectors of lower dimension then apply a conventional clustering
algorithm to extract the feature vectors. The model-based method in-
volves transforming the raw time series into model parameters for each
time series. Then, it applies a conventional clustering algorithm and a
suitable model distance to extract model parameters. Model-based has
scalability problems, and there is performance reduction when clusters
are close to each other (Vlachos et al., 2004; Mitsa, 2009). The four
components of whole time series clustering is depicted in Fig. 8.
Time Series clustering is made up of four major components
(Aghabozorgi et al., 2015):
i. Dimensionality Reduction or Representation Method
ii. Distance Measurement
iii. Clustering Algorithm
iv. Prototype Definition
ii. Streaming Clustering
A data stream is an infinite and fast-changing massive sequence of
multidimensional objects that continuously arrives rapidly over time
(Mansalis et al., 2018). A data stream cannot be stored in memory or
disk due to its infinite nature, so it is besieged with the constraint of a
single pass over the data. Also, there is no control over the order of data
arrival, and random access of objects is not possible. As a result of these
constraints, the conventional clustering algorithms cannot sufficiently
handle data streams’ clustering problems (Gama and Gaber, 2007),
hence the need for streaming clustering algorithms. Mansalis et al.
(2018) identify three major challenges peculiar to streaming clustering
algorithms: the evolving nature of data streams and the number of
clusters and outliers handling. As a result of the evolving nature of data
streams, Streaming clustering algorithms must continuously update ex-
tracted clusters to capture changes in underlying data. It will be highly
restrictive if a fixed number of clusters is assumed for a data stream
since it is infinite. There is a need to configure the number of clusters
over time. Identifying outliers upon arrival of an object in a data stream
is difficult because both the clusters and outliers are developing over
time. Other three problems of data streams that are general to data
processing activities which are still relevant to streaming clustering
include the single pass constraints mentioned earlier, limited processing
time, which require the fast response of processing algorithm, and the
limited memory, which makes working with summary data essential
when data stream processing is concerned.In data streams, window models control the part contributing to
the data mining patterns. Landmark Window model, sliding window
model, Damped window model, and Tilted window model are the
literature’s various window models. Mansalis et al. (2018) provides
more information on the various window models. St streaming cluster-
ing algorithms can follow two major directions during the clustering
process: Online Clustering and Online–Offline clustering. In Online
clustering, the stream clustering problem is viewed as a single pass
clustering challenge.
Hence to maintain the clusters, a general adaptive strategy is
adopted. The single clustering model adopted is maintained and up-
dated as new data objects arrive from the stream. This way, cluster
structure cannot be investigated at different time intervals. Aggarwal
et al. (2003) introduced Online–offline clustering to overcome the
problem in online clustering. The data statistics are maintained online
during the online phase, while the actual clustering is performed on
the statistics based on the user-defined temporal predicates during
the offline phase. Different time windows can be selected for possible
multiple cluster extraction in this method, thus providing flexibility in
data stream exploration. As earlier stated, the infinite nature of the data
stream makes storing the data impossible; hence summarization be-
comes necessary. According to Mansalis et al. (2018), the most common
user summaries for clustering include Cluster features (CF), Micro-
Clusters, Core-micro-clusters, Temporal cluster feature, Prototype array
Grids, Coreset Tree.
Streaming Clustering Algorithm can be categorized into four based
on the existing taxonomy of conventional clustering algorithms. The
partitioning algorithms category produces spherical clusters that do
not handle outliers. Criterion Optimization like the Sum of Squared
Errors is used in the partitioning. Example of such algorithms includes
Clustream (Stream Clustering) (Aggarwal et al., 2003), Stream Frame-
work Algorithm (Guha et al., 2000), StreamKM++ (K-Means clustering
algorithm for data streams) (Ackermann et al., 2012), SWClustering
(Zhou et al., 2008). The density-based category includes HDenStream
(Density-Based Clustering Algorithm for Heterogeneous Data Stream)
(Lin and Lin, 2009), DenStream (Density-Based Clustering over an
Evolving Data Stream with Noise) (Cao et al., 2006), MuDi-Stream
(Multi Density data Stream), rDenStream (Density-Based Clustering
Algorithm with outlier retrospect) (Xiong et al., 2009), HDDStream
(density-based projected clustering algorithm for high dimensional
data streams) (Ntoutsi et al., 2012), SDStream (Density-Based Data
Streams Clustering over Sliding Windows) (Ren and Ma, 2009) and C-
DenStream (a density-based clustering algorithm for data streams that
includes domain information in the form of constraints) Ruiz et al.
(2009). As it is with conventional density-based clustering algorithms,
they can discover clusters of arbitrary shapes and identify outliers. The
third category is the Grid-based category which includes DDStream
(Zhou et al., 2008), DENGRIS (Density-Grid based Clustering Algo-
rithm) Amini et al. (2012), D-Stream (Stream Data Clustering Based on
Grid Density and Attraction) (Chen and Tu, 2007), PKS-Stream (Data
stream Clustering Algorithm based on grid density and index tree PKS
tree) (Ren et al., 2011) and MR-Stream (Density-Based Clustering of
Data Streams at Multiple Resolutions) (Wan et al., 2009). The Model-
based Algorithms are the fourth category that tries to fit a model to
the data. SWEM (An EM-Based Algorithm for Clustering Data Streams
in Sliding Windows) (Dang et al., 2009) is an example.
The Stream framework under the partition category works by break-
ing the data stream into batches of fixed sizes and applying the K-
median clustering algorithm. The problem of memory limitation and
single-pass constraint was adequately dealt with. However, the problem
of noise and data aging persists with the single model being maintained
over the stream, which is inadequate in describing the stream’s whole
evolution. A detailed description of each category and method can be
obtained from the stated references for each technique.
iii. Mode Seeking Clustering Algorithm
17

==== Page 18 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Mode is a measure of central tendency that returns the value that
occurs most frequently in a data set. The mode can be determined for
qualitative and quantitative attributes, and it is possible that a single
data set can have more than one mode. In mode-seeking clustering
algorithms, estimated density functions generate clusters (Fukunaga
and Hostetler, 1975; Comaniciu and Meer, 2002). These modes are
the local maxima of the probability density functions. Mode-seeking
clustering assigns cluster labels by associating data samples with the
nearest modes (Sasaki et al., 2018). The number of detected modes
automatically forms the number of generated clusters in the mode-
seeking clustering algorithm. According to Duin et al. (2012c), the
mode-seeking clustering can be considered an agglomerative approach
where a density function is estimated for the dataset (running a mean-
shift iteration initialized at every data point) and have each mode
defining one cluster. In the clustering phase, to decide which mode
an object belongs to, the density gradient from that object is followed
until a mode is found. Objects that end up in the same mode belong
to the same cluster. This procedure allows the number of clusters to be
identical to the number of modes (Duin et al., 2012c; Carreira-Perpiñán,
2015). Duin et al. (2012c) discussed two-mode seeking procedures
relative to the non-parametric density estimates used: the mean shift
procedure (that uses the Parzen Kernel for mode seeking (Fukunaga and
Hostetler, 1975; Cheng, 2002)) and the kNN mode seeking procedure
which uses the K-nearest Neighbor estimator (Koontz et al., 1976;
Kittler, 1976; Shaffer et al., 1979). The two procedures have a width
parameter that influences the number of modes in the density estimate,
and the consideration is on the clustering.
The Mean shift clustering is a mode-seeking clustering algorithm
that initially considers all objects of a data set as candidates for cluster
centers which are then updated iteratively towards the nearest mode of
the estimated density by gradient descent. In Myhre et al. (2018), Co-
maniciu and Meer (2002), mode seeking is a prominent density-based
clustering method represented mainly by the Mean shift algorithm. To
some extent, the mode-seeking clustering algorithms do allow capturing
nonlinear clusters because the density can adapt locally to the data. As
stated earlier, the density estimate determines the number of clusters.
Apart from these, it is also robust to outliers because an outlier is
represented by its cluster and, based on its density value, can easily
be thresholded away (Myhre et al., 2018).
The k-NN mode seeking procedure defines a pointer for every
object with the highest density in its neighborhood. The density of
every object is proportional to the distance to its 𝑘th Neighbor. The
pointers are then followed to the object that points to itself because
it represents a mode in the density as the objects with the highest
density in its neighborhood. The k-NN procedure has been reported to
be significantly faster than the mean shift algorithm and can handle
larger datasets (in terms of large numbers of an object and high
dimensions) compared with the Mean shift algorithm, which can handle
large datasets for only low dimensional spaces (Duin et al., 2012a,b).
This is because the mean shift algorithm has problems tracking the
density gradient in high dimensions. From the conclusion (Duin et al.,
2012c), the mode seeking clustering algorithm is presented as the most
natural procedure for cluster analysis, but there is a need for the dataset
to be sufficiently large enough before a good density estimate can be
obtained.iv. Multiview Clustering
The big data paradigm introduced multi-view data in more recent
times, which are data observed from different views or generated from
different sources (Yang and Wang, 2018). Multiview data exhibits its
specific heterogeneous property while holding potential connections
with others. The specific property of a particular view may be associ-
ated with a particular task of knowledge discovery with other different
views containing information that is complementary to it, which may
be exploited. Multiview clustering involves using advanced techniques
that exploit the complementary and consensus information that falls
across the multiple views from where the data is drawn. It provides
a means of discovering the hidden power of knowledge embedded in
such type of data. The early work on multiview clustering includes
reinforcement clustering for multi-type interrelated data (Wang et al.,
2003), two view version of EM-based and agglomerative algorithm
(Bickel and Scheffer, 2004) and multiview version of DBSCAN (Kailing
et al., 2004).
The inherent problem being addressed by multiview clustering is
maximizing the clustering quality within each view while maintaining
clustering consistency across the different views. Other challenges of
multiview clustering include the successful handling of incomplete
multiview data. Incomplete multiview data have some data objects that
have no observation in some of the views or have only part of their
features registered on the view.
Five categories of multiview clustering algorithms were discussed
from the survey work on multiview clustering carried out by Yang
and Wang (2018). These include multi-kernel learning, co-training
style algorithms, multi-view subspace clustering, multi-task multi-view
clustering and multi-view graph clustering. In multi-kernel learning,
predefined kernels that correspond to different views are used. The
kernels are then combined in a linear or non-linear order to improve
clustering performance. The co-training style algorithms use a co-
training strategy to treat multiview data. It uses prior knowledge or
learning knowledge obtained from other views to bootstrap each view’s
clustering. This process is done iteratively with each view’s clustering
results tending towards each other to produce the broadest consensus
that cut across all the views.
The multi-view subspace clustering assumes that all views share a
unified representation. Based on this assumption, this unified represen-
tation that serves as input into a model for clustering is learned from all
the views’ subspace features and used for clustering. The methods under
this category include the subspace learning-based method and the non-
negative matrix factorization-based method. The multi-task multi-view
clustering saddles each view with a single or multiple related tasks. The
inter-task knowledge is transferred among the various views to exploit
the Multiview relationship and the multitasking capability to improve
the performance of the clustering process. The multi-view graph clus-
tering applies a graph clustering algorithm or related algorithm such
as spectra clustering on a sought-out fusion graph that cuts across
all the multiview data views. This category of multiview clustering is
further sub-divided into three methods based on the clustering method
applied. These are the graph-based method, network-based method and
spectral-based method.
The success and effectiveness of multiview clustering are based on
two related principles: the complementary principle and the consensus
principles. These two principles reflect the underlying assumptions em-
ployed in the clustering process and how such algorithms are modeled
and operated. The complementary principle reflects the necessity of
employing multiview for a comprehensive and accurate description of
data objects. In contrast, the consensus principle handles consistency
maximization across multiple distinct views based on the generalization
error analysis proposed by Dasgupta et al. (2002).
According to Yang and Wang (2018), each category of the multiview
algorithm has its pros and cons. For instance, in the co-training style,
the clusters of different views are enhanced interactively through the
information exchange, but the approach becomes intractable when the
18

==== Page 19 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
view size exceeds three. The kernel-based has the advantage of the
kernel but has high computation complexity. The interpretability of
the multiview subspace method is straightforward, but it suffers from
dependence on initialization parameters. The multi-view graph method
harnesses the spectral graph theory and its advantages. However, it
relies on the constructed affinity. In the multi-task multiview method,
the approach enjoys the advantages inherent in multi-view clustering
and multi-task cluster properties. Nonetheless, the research work in this
area is still relatively new.
v. Deep Learning Clustering
Deep learning clustering methods use deep neural networks to learn
clustering representations (Min et al., 2018). The optimizing objective
of the deep clustering usually refers to as the loss function, has two
parts: the clustering loss L𝑐and the network loss L𝑛. The network
loss𝐿𝑛learns the feasible features and also avoids irrelevant solutions
while the𝐿𝑐fosters the formation of feature points groups or become
discriminatory. The loss function is given as :
𝐿=𝜆𝐿𝑛+(1 −𝜆)𝐿𝑐 (5)
where𝜆∈[0,1]as a hype-parameter balances 𝐿𝑛and𝐿𝑐. The use
of deep neural networks for data clustering makes learning no-linear
mappings possible, transforming data into a more clustering-friendly
representation, eliminating the need for manual feature extraction or
selection.
The similarity methods used in convectional data clustering meth-
ods cause poor performance when clustering high-dimensional data
(Min et al., 2018). Methods of feature transformation and dimensional-
ity reduction have been applied for mapping raw data into new feature
space for generated data that existing classifiers can easily separate.
However, the high complexity of the latent structure of data still poses
a challenge to the existing clustering methods effectiveness. Data can be
transformed into a more clustering-friendly representation using deep
learning algorithms such as deep neural networks (DNN) because of its
inherent highly non-linear transformation characteristic. T deep neural
networks-based clustering methods have proven promises for effective
and efficient clustering of real-world data (Aljalbout et al., 2018).
There are existing novel deep learning-based clustering methods
that combine deep neural networks with clustering methods. According
to Li et al. (2018), the various approaches can be categorized into two:
one, the unified approach that optimizes the clustering objectives and
the deep representation learning, and two, the sequential methods that
apply clustering on the learned DNN representation. Xie et al. (2016)
proposed a deep embedding clustering (DEC) method, which uses deep
neural networks to simultaneously learn feature representations and
cluster assignments. Its operations involve mapping from the data
to a lower-dimensional feature space while iteratively optimizing a
clustering objective. Li et al. (2018) used fully convolutional auto-
encoders for learning image features as a base for a unified clustering
framework for joint image representation and cluster centers learning.
In the same vein, Yang et al. (2017) proposed a joint K-means clustering
approach and dimensionality reduction with the dimensionality reduc-
tion accomplished by learning a deep neural network. Other methods
include DEPICT — deep embedded regularIzed clustering (Dizaji et al.,
2017).), VaDE — variation deep embedding (Jiang et al., 2016),
CCNN-CNN-based joint clustering (Hsu and Lin, 2018) and DTAGnet
— deep learning task-specific and graph-regularized network (Wang
et al., 2016).
Pitchai et al. (2021) proposed brain tumor segmentation using deep
learning and fuzzy K-means for magnetic resonance images. Artificial
neural networks and fuzzy K-means were combined to segment the
tumor locale in their work. In Huang et al. (2021), the hidden rep-
resentation associated with different implicit lower-level attributes is
learned using their proposed robust deep K-means model. Systematic
taxonomy of clustering methods that used deep neural networks was
presented by Aljalbout et al. (2018). Their taxonomy presentation was
based on a comprehensive review of recent work.4.2.2 Mixture Resolving Algorithms
The Mixture Resolving Algorithm or mixture-based algorithm as-
sumes that a set of observed objects emanates from a mixture of
instances from multiple probabilistic clusters. Therefore, a probabilistic
cluster is chosen according to the cluster’s probabilities to generate
each observed object. A sample is then chosen according to the proba-
bility density function of the chosen cluster. The data set is assumed
to be a mixture of a given number of different cluster groups with
varying proportions during clustering. The mixture likelihood-based
approach to clustering is model-based because the specification of each
component density of observation is required in advance. Aitkin and
Rubin (1985) stated that a statistical model to be used must be stated
or known ahead in the clustering of samples from a population. With
this overlapping relationship between the model-based clustering and
mixture-based algorithm, it is possible to conduct estimation analysis
and hypothesis testing of clustering methods based on mixture models
using standard statistical theory. Marriott (1974), in support of this,
had stated that the mixture likelihood-based approach ‘is about the
only clustering technique that is entirely satisfactory from the math-
ematical point of view’. It assumes a well-defined mathematical model,
investigates it by well-established statistical techniques and provides
a test of significance for the results.’. The determination of the most
suitable number of clusters can be easily achieved in a Mixture-based
algorithm because it has a clear probabilistic foundation (Berkhin,
2012). Mclachlan and Basford (1988) stated that providing an effective
clustering of various data sets under various experimental designs is
one of the mixture model’s usefulness. However, the assumptions made
regarding the data distribution are rather strong, and the computation
complexity is high. Moreover, each cluster is viewed as a single simple
distribution, constraining the cluster’s shape (Grira et al., 2005).
4.2.2.1 Expectation maximization The expectation–maximization algo-
rithm is a framework that employs two major steps in approaching the
maximum likelihood of estimates of parameters in a statistical model;
the Expectation Steps and the Maximization Step. In the expectation
step, objects are assigned to clusters based on the probabilistic clusters’
parameters and in the Maximization step, the new clustering or pa-
rameter that maximizes the expected likelihood is found. Given initial
random values for the probabilistic distribution parameters such as
the mean and standard deviation, the E-step and the M-step are then
iteratively conducted until the parameter converges or the change is
sufficiently small. During clustering, each object’s probability belongs
to each distribution is calculated, and the probabilistic distribution
parameters are adjusted to maximize each cluster object’s expected
likelihood in the M-step. Several computations are required for each
iteration of the EM algorithm. The product of the number of data
points and the number of mixture components scaled linearly with
this iterative computation, limiting EM Algorithm’s applicability in
large-scale applications (Verbeek, 2004). The EM algorithm is easy
to implement, and there is no need to set any parameters that will
influence the optimization algorithm (Verbeek, 2004). However, the
found solution is highly sensitive to the initial parameter values with
all local optimization methods.
4.2.3 Fuzzy clustering
Fuzzy clustering is a clustering method based on the Fuzzy set devel-
oped by Zadeh (1965). The clusters are defined in fuzzy sets, with each
pattern simultaneously belonging to more than one cluster, as shown in
Fig. 9. Data points are assigned to two or more clusters with a degree
of membership in the reflecting clusters, thereby building a non-binary
relationship (Ezugwu, 2020a; Saxena et al., 2017). This way, clusters
are allowed to overlap, showing what is regarded as Fuzzy overlap.
Fuzzy overlap reflects the cluster boundaries’ fuzziness enumerating the
number of data points with significant membership in the overlapping
clusters. This clustering method is beneficial for clusters of data points
whose boundaries are ambiguous and not well separated (Kaufman and
Rousseeuw, 1990). The degree of membership assigned to data points
19

==== Page 20 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 9. Fuzzy clustering.
can also help discover the intrinsic relationship between a given object
and the clusters where it is a member. Initial clustering algorithms
using this method had problems with initial partition dependence, noise
and outliers (Saxena et al., 2017). Subsequent algorithms based on this
method tried to address these problems (Yager and Filev, 1994; Gath
and Geva, 1989; Bezdek, 2000; Krishnapuram and Keller, 1993).
Fuzzy clustering can suitably handle issues such as understanding
pattern’s ability, mixed-media information, incomplete or noisy data,
and providing faster approximate solutions (Saxena et al., 2017). For
image retrieval, fuzzy clustering algorithms have been used to discover
association rules and functional dependencies among data points. In
line with the fuzzy clustering problems observed by Saxena et al.
(2017), Gath and Geva (1989) reported three major fuzzy clustering
issues: apriori knowledge of the number of clusters is not possible, there
is always the need to state a cluster validity criterion before the optimal
number of clusters can be determined. Also, the cluster’s character and
location are unknown apriori; an initial guess is needed and variability
in clusters’ shape, cluster densities, and the number of data points in
each cluster. The time complexity of this clustering method is also high
(Saxena et al., 2017). It is noteworthy that the fuzzy nature of fuzzy
clusters can be removed by assigning common data to clusters with the
highest degree of membership. The Fuzzy c-means is one of the most
well-known algorithms based on this method (Dunn, 1973; Bezdek,
2013)
In more recent work, Shi et al. (2021) proposed FCM-RDpA com-
bining FCM with a mini-batch gradient descent with regularization,
DropRule and AdaBound (MBGD-RDA), replacing the grid partition
approach in rule initialization of MBGD-RDA with fuzzy c-means to
optimize a fuzzy system for a regression problem effectively. The
algorithm effectively handled higher dimensional regression datasets.
Borlea et al. (2021) introduced a unified form of fuzzy c-means and K-
means as a single configurable algorithm. It was designed to facilitate
the software implementations of FCM and K-means algorithms as one
that can be configured to work as K-means or as FCM. A partitional im-
plementation of the unified form (PIUF) was built on the UF algorithm
for efficient sequential processing of large datasets and ensuring the UF
algorithm’s scalability in handling datasets of any size.
5 Recent work on clustering methods
Cluster validity evaluation is a major problem in the clustering
algorithm. Li et al. (2020) addressed this problem by designing a cluster
validity evaluation technique based on the Ratio of Deviation of Sum-
of-squares and Euclid distance. The technique was evaluated on both
artificial and real-world datasets, and the results show that it candynamically obtain the near-optimal number of clusters. Chowdhury
et al. (2020) introduced another technique for calculating the optimal
number of clusters in a dataset. The authors designed an entropy-
based initialization method, which they claim is better than other
initialization methods of the K-Means algorithm. In the entropy-based
initialization method, initial points are selected based on entropy and
not random. The proposed technique and initialization method was
evaluated on both 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional image datasets,
and experiments show that it produced good results. Patil and Baidari
(2019) proposed another novel method for obtaining the optimal num-
ber of clusters in a dataset, called depth difference (DeD). They used
the Mahalanobis depth function to estimate the centrality of different
data points within a dataset. In the study, a value between 0 and 1 is
assigned to different data points in a dataset, and each value signifies
the centrality or depth of each data point. The maximum depth value
corresponds to the cluster centroid. The average difference between
each depth value and the cluster centroid is estimated and used to
obtain the optimal clusters. The optimal number of clusters is obtained
by maximizing the estimated value of the depth difference.
Sinaga and Yang (2020) noted that the clustering algorithm is not
mainly an unsupervised learning algorithm because it requires the
number of clusters to be defined as apriori. The authors propose an
unsupervised learning procedure for the K-Means clustering algorithm.
The procedure can dynamically calculate the optimal number of clus-
ters without the need for parameter selection or initialization. The
method was evaluated on numerical and real-world datasets, and the
results show that the proposed technique is effective. The clustering
algorithm is very useful for analyzing large-scale datasets. However,
selecting the optimal number of clusters for big data analysis is a major
problem. Safari et al. (2020) designed a technique for automatically de-
termining the number of clusters for large-scale datasets. They used the
Bisecting K-Means algorithm and a unique splitting measure to design
the technique. The technique was evaluated on several datasets, and
results show the algorithm is efficient and decreases the computational
costs.
Most clustering algorithm has been designed to handle datasets
with one data type — either categorical or numerical datatype. How-
ever, many recent real-world applications generate datasets that con-
tain mixed data types. Applying clustering algorithms on mixed-type
datasets is difficult because of the complex relationship between the
numerical and categorical attributes. Some studies proposed methods
that can handle the clustering of datasets with mixed attributes. D’urso
and Massari (2019) proposed a clustering-based method for handling
mixed features. The model is based on the Fuzzy C-Medoids algorithm.
They designed a weighting scheme to calculate each attribute’s weight,
representing each attribute’s importance. They also calculated the dis-
similarity measure for all the attribute types in the dataset. The authors
combined the dissimilarity measures for each attribute and obtained a
distance measure for multiple attributes. The technique was evaluated,
and simulation results show that it can effectively find clusters in
mixed-attributes datasets.
In another study, Behzadi et al. (2020) proposed an algorithm for
clustering mixed data, called CLustering mixed-type data, including
COncept Trees (ClicoT). The algorithm is based on the Minimum De-
scription Length (MDL) principle. The algorithm leverages the natural
conceptual hierarchy that exists between categorical information. The
authors also designed an MDL-based objective function to integrate
categorical and numerical attributes for the proposed algorithm. Ex-
periments on synthetic and real datasets show that the algorithm is
effective and robust to noise. Tran et al. (2021) proposed a framework
for handling mixed-type datasets, called the COrrelation-Preserving
Embedding framework (COPE). The framework uses Autoencoder Vin-
cent et al. (2008) to learn the representations of categorical features
in mixed-type data. The representations were learned by integrat-
ing two sub-networks to capture the relationship between categorical,
20

==== Page 21 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Table 5
Summary of recent work on clustering algorithms.
Clustering methods Study covered Application area Author and year Impact as of 2021
Ratio of Deviation of
Sum-of-squares and Euclid
distanceThe authors designed a cluster validity
evaluation technique based on Ratio of
Deviation of Sum-of-squares and Euclid
distanceArtificial and real-world
datasets, including Iris plants,
Glass dataset, Wine dataset,
Gauss datasets, and shape
datasetsLi et al. (2020) 5
Entropy-based initialization
method for K-Means
algorithmThe authors proposed a technique for
calculating the optimal number of
clusters in a dataset. They also designed
an entropy-based initialization method
for K-Means algorithm.2-dimensional and
3-dimensional image datasetsChowdhury et al. (2020) 5
Depth difference (DeD) for
K-Means algorithmThe authors proposed a novel method
for obtaining the optimal number of
clusters in a dataset, called depth
difference (DeD)2-D synthetic datasets Patil and Baidari (2019) 23
A novel technique called
U-K-Means algorithmThe authors propose an unsupervised
learning procedure for K-Means
clustering algorithm, called U-K-Means
algorithm.Medical dataset, Iris, Seeds,
Australian credit approval,
Flowmeter D, Sonar, Wine,
Horse, and waveformSinaga and Yang (2020) 23
Bisecting K-Means
algorithm and a unique
splitting measureThe authors designed a technique for
automatically determining the number of
clusters for large-scale datasetsDifferent large-scale datasets Safari et al. (2020) –
Fuzzy C–Medoids (FCMd)
algorithmThe authors proposed a fuzzy
clustering-based method for handling
mixed features. The model is based on
the Fuzzy C–Medoids algorithm. They
designed a weighting scheme to
calculate the weight of each attribute in
a dataset.Two simulation studies and
two empirical applications
were performed.D’urso and Massari (2019) 16
Modified K-Means
algorithmThe authors proposed an algorithm for
clustering mixed data, called CLustering
mixed-type data Including COncept
Trees (ClicoT). The algorithm is based
on the principle of Minimum Description
Length (MDL)Synthetic and real-world
datasets including Automobile
and Adult data sets.Behzadi et al. (2020) 3-
K-Means clustering The authors proposed a framework for
handling mixed-type datasets, called
COrrelation-Preserving Embedding
framework (COPE). The framework uses
Autoencoder Vincent et al. (2008) to
learn the representations of categorical
features in mixed-type dataReal-world UCI datasets
including KDD99, Income,
Titanic, and EchoTran et al. (2021) –
k-prototype clustering
algorithmThe authors introduced a mixed-type
data clustering technique for risk
management.Life insurance Yin et al. (2021) –
numerical, and embedded data. The technique also preserves the corre-
lation between numerical and categorical attributes. Extensive experi-
ments were performed on different real-world datasets, and the results
show that the proposed method generates very good representations of
categorical features.
Death benefits are one of the largest items that affect life insurance
companies. Moreover, some life insurance companies do not have a
process of effectively tracking and monitoring death claims. Yin et al.
(2021) introduced a mixed-type data clustering technique for risk man-
agement. They used the technique to examine the difference between
actual and expected death claims. The authors used the k-prototype
clustering method to extract insights from a real-world mixed-type
dataset. The dataset contains policy information on life insurance. They
used gap statistics to obtain optimal clusters from the dataset, and
each cluster had low actual to expected death claims. The method was
evaluated, and results showed that it identified a policy-holder feature,
which can improve decision-making (see Table 5).
6 Discussion and open challenges
Many clustering-based algorithms have been proposed in the lit-
erature, and some of them performed remarkably well. This section
presents a discussion on various issues in clustering analysis. Thediscussion is divided into three sub-sections. The first section presents
a discussion on the performance of existing clustering algorithms. The
second section presents some open issues in clustering algorithms. The
third subsection presents some validation and similarity measures used
in both traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques.
6.1 Performance of clustering algorithms
The performance of clustering algorithms can be categorized using
nine properties (Al-Jabery et al., 2019). These properties form the
major and important criteria for evaluating any clustering algorithm.
The properties are presented and discussed below.
Scalability measures the running time and memory requirements for
executing the clustering algorithm. It is the top priority for a clustering
algorithm because of the ever-increasing data from different big data
mining sources. Linear or near-linear complexity is therefore highly
desirable for all clustering algorithms.
High dimensionality: This measures the algorithm’s ability to handle data
with many features that sometimes may be larger than the number of
objects in the dataset. Identifying relevant features or capturing the
intrinsic dimension is important for describing the real data structure.
Robustness :Dataset is usually not pure because there is a level of con-
tamination introduced at the different stages of measurement, storage,
21

==== Page 22 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
and processing, hence the need for data cleaning in data mining. It is
inevitable for noise and outliers to be present in the data. The measure
of the robustness of a clustering algorithm is its ability to detect and
remove possible outliers and noise in the data set.
User-dependent K: Knowing the number of clusters apriori is the most
fundamental problem in cluster analysis. Many existing algorithms
require the number of clusters to be specified as part of the user param-
eters required for running the algorithm. Determining this parameter
apriori is known as automatic clustering, and it has continued to attract
more attention since, in many of the recent algorithms, it is difficult
to decide without prior knowledge. Ability to specify the correct num-
ber of clusters assists in obtaining optimal solutions to the clustering
problems in many applications. The algorithm should determine the
number of clusters based on the data properties. Therefore, clustering
algorithms are considered an optimization problem that can be solved
using metaheuristic algorithms. Metaheuristics algorithms can be used
to discover the number of clusters automatically. They can also be used
to find the identified clusters.
Parameter reliance: Apart from the requirement of specifying the num-
ber of clusters apriori, there are still other algorithm-sensitive parame-
ters that are user-defined for many of the existing clustering algorithms
for users to specify for the proper functioning of such algorithms. This
leaves such clustering algorithms’ performances at the mercy of the
wide range of users’ guesses. Thus, providing practical guidance in
the self-determination of such parameters by the algorithm itself or
incorporating schemes that decrease reliance of algorithms on user-
dependent parameters is a good measure of clustering algorithm’s
performance.
Irregular cluster shape: The ability to discover irregular clusters is an-
other challenge of Clustering algorithms. There are many applications
whose data may not always be formed into clusters with regular shapes.
For applications with such a dataset, an optimal solution to their
clustering problem will be presenting clusters of the natural shape
(regular or irregular). Rather than being confined to some particular
shape, a good cluster algorithm should detect irregular cluster shapes.
Order dependence: Maintaining the order of input patterns in a dataset
is important in achieving correct clusters. Such characteristic is com-
monly in incremental or online (stream) data. Clustering algorithms
for such a dataset may require that their clustering solutions vary
with different orders of the presentation of the input patterns. Such
algorithms must be able to achieve this. A major challenging problem
in incremental learning is a reduced sensitivity or outright insensitivity
to the effects of input patterns.
Visualization : Good presentation of clustering output enhances the
proper interpretation of the presented result and also aids the extraction
of useful information. Good visual representation of clustering output
aids interpretability of the same in the problem domain, thus assisting
users in understanding the results and extracting useful information
from the data.
Mixed data types: Clustering algorithms are expected to be flexible
enough to handle any data type in which the dataset is presented.
This is very important because data obtained from different sources
may be characterized by additional features, such as categorical or
continuous. Some studies have shown that when operators are com-
bined in algorithm design, it tends to poise such algorithms to robustly
handle diversity in data/ population, thereby improving the quality of
results within a short time (Saemi et al., 2018). Leveraging this concept,
designers of clustering algorithms have the opportunity of developing
algorithms capable of handling input with different attributes.6.2 Open issues in clustering algorithms
One of the major challenges in clustering analysis is identifying the
number of clusters apriori. This challenge occurs due to a lack of prior
domain knowledge. It also occurs when a dataset has many dimensions
with different shapes, size, density, and overlapping among groups.
Although effort has been deployed towards handling this problem, it
remains a major challenge. Future studies can explore nature-inspired
algorithms to solve this problem (José-García and Gómez-Flores, 2016).
José-García and Gómez-Flores (2016) noted that nature-inspired ap-
proaches such as bacterial foraging optimization, firefly optimization,
and gravitational search algorithms could be further considered beyond
non-automatic clustering to automatic clustering problems. Further-
more, the authors revealed that only a few studies thought hybrid
nature-inspired algorithms in their studies. Nature-Inspired techniques
can be hybridized with traditional techniques to design more effi-
cient and faster cluster-based algorithms. Nature-inspired clustering
algorithms should be hybridized through a reasonable combination of
related algorithms in a fashionable and performance enhancement way
that can produce improved results. Moreover, swarm intelligence-based
clustering algorithms have not been fully explored in solving NP-hard
problems in computational biology (Das et al., 2008b). Many more
open issues in clustering analysis exist in the literature, and some of
them are discussed under the sub-headings below.
Computational complexity: Some clustering algorithms have computa-
tional complexity issues, especially when applied to datasets with large
instances and high-dimensional feature space. This problem can be
solved by increasing computational resources production with high-
capacity GPU (Shirkhorshidi et al., 2014). Moreover, exploiting parallel
computing’s advantage may help design patterns to deliver better clus-
tering algorithms. Two separate studies (Shirkhorshidi et al., 2014;
Zerhari et al., 2015) reported that clustering algorithms based on paral-
lel computing appears to be very useful but suffer from the challenge of
complexity as it relates to implementation. MapReduce-based cluster-
ing algorithms are an alternative to parallel computing. MapReduce-
based clustering algorithms are more scalable and faster. They can
considerably deploy clustering algorithms on GPU-based MapReduce
frameworks to achieve better scalability and speed.
In addition to increasing computational resources with high-
capacity such as GPU to tackle computational complexity issues, fur-
ther refinement and enhancement to the clustering algorithm might
reduce complexity. This became necessary considering each clustering
algorithm’s different computational complexity, yet they can achieve
come commendable measure of clustering operation. We opined that
finding an optimal representation of each clustering algorithm without
losing its clustering operation helps minimize complexity while main-
taining or maximizing the quality of clusters derived from its clustering
operation.
Considering computational complexity from the general point of
view of clustering categorizations, the hierarchical clustering method
is known to have the complexity of O(n2), partitioning is O(n), the
grid-based method is O(n), and density based method is O(n log n).
Although each of these methods has a wide range of examples of
clustering algorithms that often may not have the same complexity
as demonstrated by the respective category they belong to, we argue
that finding a minimization mechanism for representing the clustering
algorithm will help reduce complexity. To further support our assertion,
we show the complexity of some clustering algorithms belonging to
the clustering methods (hierarchical, density-based, grid-based, and
partitioned) and how they differ in their complexity compared with
their parent category. The computational complexity of the clustering
algorithms BIRCH is O(n), CURE is O(n2logn), ROCK O(n2+nmmma
+n2logn), is CHAMELEON is O(n2), PAM is O(k(n-k)2), CLARA is
O(k(40 +k)2+k(n-k)), CLARANS is O(kn2), DBSCAN is O(nlogn),
Fuzzy C-means is O(n), K-Means is O(n), STING is O(k), WaveCluster
is O(n), CLIQUE is O(Ck +mk), SOM net is O(n2m), DENCLUE is
22

==== Page 23 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
O(log|D|), and DBCLASD is O(3n2). A careful observation of each
algorithm’s complexity concerning the methods they fall into might
reveal a slight variation, indicating that the algorithms’ enhancement
can reduce complexity while sustaining good and qualitative clustering
results.
Refinement of Clusters: The resulting clusters from a clustering operation
often require further improvement using either the same clustering
algorithm or another clustery algorithm. This refinement aims to ensure
that objects wrongly clustered due to inefficient similarity measures
might be displaced to the cluster where they fit well. Some clustering
methods, such as the divisive method, apply two approaches to the
refinement task of clusters, namely monothetic and polythetic. While
the former split a cluster using only one attribute, the latter split a
cluster using all attributes. We considered that such approaches are
already proof that more techniques can evolve to improve the quality
of clusters. This refinement issue presents itself as necessary regarding
the effect of wrongly classifying objects into clusters in life-threatening
applications. In fact, for improved performance of the applicability of
metaheuristic algorithms, such algorithms’ hybrids may be considered
to achieve optimal performance of the refinement task.
Speed of Convergence: A wide range of metaheuristic algorithms have
inspired nature and human activities to solve optimization problems,
including clustering operations effectively. Since a good convergence
is one of the pointers to the effectiveness and measure of how quali-
tative the resulting clusters from a clustering algorithm is, continuous
research into applying metaheuristic algorithms to clustering problem
is encouraged. In addition to repurposing metaheuristic algorithms
for solving clustering convergence problems, other related clustering
operation problems that may be optimized are the sensitivity of the
initialization phase and multi-objective functions involving both inter-
and intra-cluster measurement and escape from local optima. Most
clustering algorithms suffer from these clustering-related operations
and have presented open issues allowing for further research. We argue
that the effective repurposing of metaheuristic algorithms for solving
these problems has great performance for clustering algorithms. For
instance, variants of the firefly algorithm have been applied to the
problem of initialization and escape from local optima in K-Means
clustering operation (Xie et al., 2019), application of PSO to multi-
objective clustering (Gong et al., 2017). We, however, note that there
are other clustering operations, such as convergence, spatial clustering,
and many more, which are yet to be optimized through the application
of optimization algorithms.
Data dimensionality: Algorithms such as K-Means, Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) clustering, maximum-margin clustering and information-
theoretic clustering cannot be easily applied to problems with high-
dimensional data. This problem can be solved by projecting the original
data onto a low-dimensional subspace and then clustering on the
feature embedding such as sparse codes (Wang et al., 2016).
Effectiveness and scalability: Effectiveness and scalability are two major
challenges that open further research in clustering methods related to
Big Data. The approach of deep learning has been introduced as a
potential solution to this challenge. Also, decreasing the reliance of
algorithms on user-dependent parameters can improve the effectiveness
of clustering algorithms. Future studies can integrate domain-based
requirements into a new single algorithm. Additionally, future research
can develop new clustering algorithms emerging from designing solu-
tions to some fundamental challenges of non-automatic and automatic
clustering. Future research can also design improved algorithms that
deal with newly occurring data without relearning from scratch.
Data object representation: Data object representation is another chal-
lenge with clustering methods. The data objects are not represented in
a suitable format. Moreover, data objects are represented differently
across different application areas. Some data objects are represented
as feature vectors, while some are represented as graphs together witha notion of object similarity (Plant and Böhm, 2009). The differences
in data object representation across different application areas por-
tend a viable research interest. One relevant outcome of finding an
efficient way for representing data in clustering operation is that it
supports clustering algorithms’ performance by reducing computational
complexity. This allows the clustering algorithm to be scalable by
identifying regions or special distribution in data. Some useful regions
to identify are those aspects of the compressible data, regions that
do not need to be swapped out of memory but maintained in main
memory, and regions that are discardable based on noise or irrelevance
to the outcome of clustering operation.
Evaluation measures: The following measures can be used as yard-
sticks to evaluate and compare the performance of different clustering
algorithms: accuracy, algorithm stability, and dataset normalization
(Chaouni et al., 2019). Moreover, there is the need to design algo-
rithmic approaches to compare different clustering methods based on
different validity indices such as internal, stability and biology indices
(Bouveyron et al., 2012). Although Kokate et al. (2018) suggested that
a single algorithm may not satisfy all evaluation measures, starting
with one algorithmic solution may lead to further hybridized or robust
solutions.
Data streams: The peculiarity of clustering makes the clustering process
more demanding than clustering on static data. Kokate et al. (2018),
reported some challenges of clustering methods on data streams. Clus-
tering methods should be robust enough to deal with the existence
of outliers/noise. Moreover, clustering algorithms should be capable
of sharply detecting the change in context and grouping of streaming
data objects to support the analysis of trends in data streams. Further,
the increasing volume of data streams generated from different media
like social networks should improve the computational capability and
memory space optimization of clustering algorithms. More research ef-
forts will be needed to produce adaptive models for clustering evolving
data streams and improving existing context-based adaptive clustering
methods.
Knowledge extraction: Another problem in clustering is knowledge ex-
traction from big datasets. It is caused by increased data sources and
generation (Ezugwu et al., 2020a). This problem poses a big challenge
to the data analyst, as they cannot effectively extract knowledge from
terabytes and petabytes of data. Future studies can design improved
techniques that can overcome the limitation of knowledge extraction
from big datasets, such as distributed clustering and parallel evolu-
tionary algorithm. Moreover, future studies can develop new clustering
methods that can choose between single-objective or multi-objective
optimizations.
Therefore, in the light of the studies mentioned above and discus-
sions, a comprehensive survey paper may be necessary which is focused
on presenting an exhaustive list of clustering algorithms since it is
often reported that it is hard to give a complete list of all clustering
algorithms due to the diversity of information (Xu and Tian, 2015).
6.3 Cluster similarity and validation measures
This section presents the various cluster similarity and validation
measures employed in traditional and recently proposed clustering
techniques. A similar framework structure that briefly discussed most
of the commonly used clustering validation measures was presented in
Ezugwu et al. (2020a).
6.3.1 Clustering similarity measures
Cluster similarity measure gives the degree of closeness or sepa-
ration of characteristics of various data points. The degree of separa-
tion or closeness can be defined explicitly or implicitly, reflecting the
strength of the relationship between data points. All cluster methods
clearly define cluster relationships among data objects that they are
applied on, which plays a significant role in the clustering method’s
23

==== Page 24 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
success or otherwise (Patidar et al., 2012). The subsequent subsection
presents a brief overview of commonly used similarity measures in
traditional and recently proposed clustering techniques.
Euclidean distance: Euclidean distance is considered the standard or
commonly used metric for numerical data. Simply put, it is the distance
between two points, 𝑋and𝑌. Euclidean distance has wide acceptance
in many clustering problems, and it is the default distance measure used
with the K-means algorithm. The Euclidean distance is shown in Eq. (6)
(Singh et al., 2013).
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑋𝑌=√√√√𝑚∑
𝑘=1(𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘)2(6)
where
where𝑋and𝑌are two objects or sets of a certain class in cluster 𝑘.
Cosine distance: The Cosine distance measures the cosine of the angle be-
tween two data points given by Eq. (7) (Pandit and Gupta, 2011). Here
𝜃gives the angle between two data vectors, and A, B are n-dimensional
vectors and have excellent application in document similarity.
𝜃=arccos (𝐴.𝐵)
‖𝐴‖‖𝐵‖(7)
Jaccard distance: The Jaccard distance or coefficient typically measures
the similarity between the two data objects by evaluating the intersec-
tion divided by the data objects’ unions shown in Eq. (8) (Pandit and
Gupta, 2011). The Jaccard similarity measure was applied in ecological
clustering species (Choi et al., 2010).
𝐽(𝐴,𝐵)=|𝐴∩𝐵|
|𝐴∪𝐵|(8)
Manhattan distance: Manhattan distance measures the absolute differ-
ences between coordinates of pairs of data objects 𝑋and𝑌, as shown in
Eq. (9) (Singh et al., 2013). Manhattan distance in clustering algorithms
results in hyper-rectangular-shaped clusters (Xu and Wunsch, 2005).
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑋𝑌=|||𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘|||(9)
Chebyshev distance: The determination of the absolute magnitude of
the differences between coordinates of a pair of data objects 𝑋and
𝑌is Chebyshev’s goal. Eq. (10) gives the formula for Chebyshev (Singh
et al., 2013).
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑋𝑌=𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑘|||𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘|||(10)
Minkowski distance: Minkowski Distance is also called the generalized
distance metric because given Eq. (11), when 𝑝= 2, the distance
becomes the Euclidean distance and taking the limit when 𝑝= ∞
becomes Chebyshev distance metric. The Minkowski distance has a
significant advantage when the embedded clusters in the dataset are
compacted or isolated. Otherwise, it performs poorly (Mao and Jain,
1996).
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑋𝑌=(𝑑∑
𝑘=1|||𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘|||1
𝑝)𝑝
(11)
Average distance: As a solution to the drawback of Euclidean distance,
the average distance, which is a modified version of the Euclidean
distance, was proposed to improve the results in the work of Gan et al.
(2007). The average distance is defined in Eq. (12).
𝐷𝑎𝑣𝑒=√√√√1
𝑛𝑚∑
𝑘=1(𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘)2(12)
Weighted Euclidean distance: The Weighted Euclidean distance modifies
Euclidean distance (Hand et al., 2001). It can be used when eachattribute’s relative importance or weights are available. This distance
is defined in Eq. (13).
𝐷𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 =√√√√𝑚∑
𝑘=1𝑤𝑖(𝑋𝑖𝑘−𝑋𝑗𝑘)2(13)
Chord distance: Given two normalized or non-normalized data points
within a hypersphere of radius one, the chord length joining the points
𝑋and𝑌is called the chord distance. Chord distance is another variant
of the Euclidean distance (Gan et al., 2007). Chord distance is defined
by Eq. (14).
𝑑𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑑 =(
2 − 2∑𝑛
𝑖=1𝑥𝑖𝑦𝑖
‖𝑥‖2‖𝑦‖2)1
2
(14)
where‖𝑥‖2is the𝐿2-norm‖𝑥‖2=√∑𝑛
𝑖=1𝑥2
𝑖
Mahalanobis distance: Mahalanobis distance is a data-driven similarity
measure far from previously discussed metrics (Boriah et al., 2008).
It can extract hyper ellipsoidal clusters and solve the issues caused by
linear correlation among features measured (Mao and Jain, 1996) (AK,
MN, & PJ., 1999). Mahalanobis distance is defined by Eq. (15) (Abonyi
and Feil, 2007).
𝑑𝑚𝑎ℎ=√
(𝑥−𝑦)𝑆−1(𝑥−𝑦)𝑇(15)
where𝑆is the covariance matrix of the dataset.
Pearson correlation: Pearson correlation has found great application
in clustering gene expression data. Pearson correlation evaluates the
similarities in the shape of gene expression pattern in this case (Xu and
Wunsch, 2005). The Pearson correlation is defined by Eq. (16).
𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛 (𝑥,𝑦)=∑𝑛
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖−𝜇𝑥)(𝑦𝑖−𝜇𝑦)
√∑𝑛
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖−𝑦𝑖)2√∑𝑛
𝑖=1(𝑥𝑖−𝑦𝑖)2(16)
where𝜇𝑥and𝜇𝑦are the means for 𝑥𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑦 respectively.
Multi Viewpoint-Based Similarity Measure: Multi Viewpoint-Based Simi-
larity Measure has excellent advantages in document clustering, where
multiple viewpoints can be used to make a more informative assess-
ment of similarity. Multi Viewpoint was proposed by Sruthi and Reddy
(2013), where the two data points whose similarity is to be measured
must be in the same cluster, whereas the viewpoint is outside the
cluster. Eq. (17) defines the multi viewpoint-based similarity measure.
𝑀𝑉𝑆(𝑑𝑖,𝑑𝑗|𝑑𝑖,𝑑𝑗∈𝑆𝑟)
=1
𝑛−𝑛𝑟∑
𝑑ℎcos(𝑑𝑖−𝑑ℎ,𝑑𝑗−𝑑ℎ)‖‖𝑑𝑖−𝑑ℎ‖‖‖‖‖𝑑𝑗−𝑑ℎ‖‖‖(17)
where𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑑𝑗are points in clusters 𝑆𝑟and𝑑ℎis viewpoint.
Bilateral Slope-Based Distance: A new similarity measure was proposed
by Kamalzadeh et al. (2020) in their work on time-series clustering. It
combines a simple representation of time series, slope of each segment
of time series, Euclidean distance, and the so-called dynamic time
warping. The bilateral slope-based distance (BSD) is defined as shown
in Eq. (18).
𝑑𝐵𝑆𝐷(
𝑇𝑆(1)
𝑖,𝑇𝑆(2)
𝑗)
=|||𝑥(1)
𝑖−𝑥(2)
𝑗|||+|||𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃(1)
𝑖−𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃(2)
𝑗|||+|||𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃(1)
𝑖−1−𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃(1)
𝑖−1|||(18)
Distance measure for non-continuous-valued attributes: The distance mea-
sures discussed above are best applied for continuous-valued attributes.
Nevertheless, not all data attributes are continuous; therefore, the
distance measures are revised for categorical, binary, ordinal, or mixed
type attributes.
The contingency table may be used for binary attributes, and this is
given using the simple matching coefficient shown in Eq. (19).
(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)=𝑟+𝑠
𝑞+𝑟+𝑠+𝑡(19)
24

==== Page 25 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
For nominal attributes, the simple matching in Eq. (20) may be
used.
𝑑(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)=𝑝−𝑚
𝑝(20)
6.3.2 Cluster validation measure
The analogous question in cluster analysis is ‘‘how to evaluate the
goodness of the resulting clusters’’. The resulting cluster is greatly
influenced by each clustering method’s parameters and initial condi-
tions; therefore, evaluating the goodness of the clusters should consider
this range of parameters and constraints. Though cluster validation
is an arduous task, it plays a significant role in avoiding situations
where patterns are found in the presence of noise, comparing clustering
algorithms, comparing two sets of clusters, and comparing two clusters.
Cluster validation criteria are usually internal or external validation
(Bezdek and Pal, 1998). However, a third classification is called relative
validation (Legány et al., 2006).
6.3.2.1 Internal validation criteria The underlying structure of the
dataset plays a significant role in successfully partitioning the dataset.
Practically, the dataset’s underlying structure is usually unknown, and
there is no way of knowing the correct partitioning of the dataset.
The internal validation criteria measure the intra-cluster compactness
and the inter-cluster separation after the dataset partitioning by the
clustering algorithm. There are a variety of standards that have been
proposed, which are outlined below.
Sum of squared error : Sum of squared error (SSE) is one of the most
popular cluster evaluation criteria, and it is defined as follows:
𝑆𝑆𝐸 =𝐾∑
𝑘=1∑
∀𝑥𝑖∈𝐶𝑘‖‖𝑥𝑖−𝜇𝑘‖‖2
(21)
where𝐶𝑘is the set of all instances in the cluster 𝑘and𝜇𝑘is the vector
mean of𝑘. The partition with the lowest SSE is considered the best
(Hamilton, 1994; Tsay, 2005)
Scatter criteria: The scatter criteria (Rokach, 2005; Duda et al., 2001) is
given as follows:
𝑆𝑘=∑
𝑥∈𝐶𝑘(𝑥−𝜇𝑘)(𝑥−𝜇𝑘)𝑇.(22)
Condorcet’s criterion: Condorcet’s criterion is given as follows:
∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘∈𝐶𝑖
𝑥𝑗≠𝑥𝑘𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)+∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝑖;𝑥𝑘∉𝐶𝑖𝑑(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)
(23)
where𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)and𝑑(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘), respectively, are similarity and distance
between the vectors 𝑥𝑗𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑥𝑘.
C-criterion: An extension of Condorcet’s validity index is given in Fortier
and Solomon (1996). The C-criterion is defined as follows:
∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘∈𝐶𝑖
𝑥𝑗≠𝑥𝑘(𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘)−𝛾)+∑
𝐶𝑖∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝑖;𝑥𝑘∉𝐶𝑖(𝛾−𝑠(𝑥𝑗,𝑥𝑘))
(24)
where𝛾is a threshold value.
Category utility metric: Given a set of entities, the binary feature set of
sizenis defined as
𝐹={𝑓𝑖},𝑖= 1,2,…,𝑛
and the binary category 𝐶={𝑐,𝑐}is defined as follows:
𝐶𝑈(𝐶,𝐹)=[
𝑝(𝑐)𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)+𝑝(𝑐)𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)]
−𝑛∑
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑓𝑖)log𝑝(𝑓𝑖), (25)
given that: 𝑝(𝑐)is the prior probability of an entity belonging to
the positive category 𝑐 𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)is the conditional probability of thefeature𝑓𝑖given that it belongs to the positive category 𝑐 𝑝(𝑓𝑖|𝑐)is
the conditional probability of the feature 𝑓𝑖given that it belongs to the
positive category 𝑐and𝑝(𝑓𝑖)is the previous probability of the entity
(Corter and Gluck, 1992; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) index: The problem of overfitting
the partitions generated by the clustering algorithm is huge, and BIC
tries to solve it. BIC is a minimization problem (Raftery, 1986) and is
defined as follows:
𝐵𝐼𝐶 = − ln (𝐿)+𝑣𝑙𝑛(𝑛) (26)
where𝑛is the number of entities, 𝐿is the likelihood of the param-
eters to generate the data in the model, and 𝑣is the number of free
parameters in the Gaussian model.
Calinski–Harabasz index: The Calinski–Harabasz validity index measures
the compactness or closeness of the clusters by calculating the distances
between the points in a cluster to their centroids. Likewise, the separa-
tion is calculated by measuring the distance from the centroids to the
global centroid (Calinski and Harabasz, 1974; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
This index is defined as
𝐶𝐻=trace (SB)
trace (Sw).𝑛𝑝− 1
𝑛𝑝−𝑘(27)
where (𝑆𝐵) is the inter-cluster scatter matrix, ( 𝑆𝑤) the intra-cluster
scatter matrix, 𝑛𝑝is the number of entities in a cluster, and 𝑘the
number of clusters.
Davies–Bouldin index (DB): The DB index evaluates the average inter-
cluster similarity between any two clusters and their nearest. This
information is critical to the success of the DB index (Davies and
Bouldin, 1979). For better results, DB is minimized. The Davies–Bouldin
index is defined as follows:
𝐵𝐷=1
𝑐𝑐∑
𝑖=1𝑀𝑎𝑥
𝑖≠𝑗{
𝑑(𝑥𝑖)+𝑑(𝑥𝑗)
𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)}
(28)
where𝑐is the number of clusters, 𝑖,𝑗are cluster labels, 𝑑(𝑥𝑖)and
𝑑(𝑥𝑗)are all entities in clusters 𝑖and𝑗,𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)is the distance between
the cluster centroids.
Silhouette index: The silhouette index requires that information about
the compactness and separation of at least two clusters be known
(Rousseeuw, 1987).
Given a cluster, 𝑋𝑗(𝑗= 1,..𝑐), the index assigns to the 𝑖thentity of
𝑋𝑗the silhouette width, 𝑠(𝑖)=(𝑖= 1,…,𝑚). This value gives a degree
of likelihood of the 𝑖thsample belonging in the cluster 𝑋𝑗. The index
is defined as:
𝑠(𝑖)=(𝑏(𝑖)−𝑎(𝑖))
𝑀𝑎𝑥 {𝑎(𝑖),𝑏(𝑖)}(29)
where𝑎(𝑖) is the average distance between the 𝑖thentity in the cluster
and the remaining entities of cluster 𝑋𝑗;𝑏(𝑖) is the minimum average
distance between the 𝑖th𝑠and all of the entities clustered in 𝑋𝑘(𝑘= 1,
. .𝑐;𝑘≠𝑗).
Dunn index: The Dunn index basically looks for the ratio between the
smallest inter-cluster distance and the largest intra-cluster distance in
a partitioning (Dunn, 1973). The Dunn index is defined as follows:
𝐷𝑢𝑛𝑛 =𝑚𝑖𝑛1≤𝑖≤𝑐⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩min⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)
𝑚𝑎𝑥
1≤𝑘≤𝑐𝑑(𝑋𝑘)⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭(30)
where𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑗)is the distance between cluster 𝑋𝑖and𝑋𝑗;𝑑(𝑋𝑘)
represents the distance between members of cluster ( 𝑋𝑘) and𝑐is the
number of clusters in the dataset. The Dunn index is a maximization
problem with setbacks that include its time complexity, and it is being
affected by noise in datasets.
NIVA index: The NIVA validation index (Rendon et al., 2008) is defined
as follows:
𝑁𝐼𝑉𝐴 (𝐶)=𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐 (𝐶)
𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑥𝐺 (𝐶)(31)
25

==== Page 26 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
where𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐 (𝐶)is the average compactness of the cluster C and
𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑥𝐺 (𝐶)is the average separability of cluster C.
Gamma Index: The gamma index (Baker and Hubert, 1975) is defined
as:
𝐺(𝐶)=∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗∈𝑐𝑘𝑑𝑙(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
𝑛𝑤((𝑁
2)−𝑛𝑤)(32)
where𝑑𝑙(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)is the number of all object pairs in X.
Score function: The scoring index evaluates the dispersion amongst
clusters by estimating the distance between cluster centroids and the
global centroid. The score function measures the degree of closeness
of the clusters by estimating the distance from the points in a cluster
to their centroid (Saitta and Smith, 2007; Saitta, Raphael, and Smith,
2007; Ezugwu et al., 2020a). The index is defined as follows:
𝑆𝐹(𝐶)= 1 −1
𝑒𝑒𝑏𝑐𝑑(𝐶)+𝑤𝑐𝑑(𝐶)(33)
where
𝑏𝑐𝑑(𝐶)=∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶||𝑐𝑘||𝑑𝑒(𝑐𝑘,𝑋)
𝑁×𝐾
and
𝑤𝑐𝑑(𝐶)=∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶1
||𝑐𝑘||∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑖,(𝑐𝑘).
C-Index: The C-index (Dalrymple-Alford, 1970) is defined as:
𝐶𝐼(𝐶)=𝑆(𝐶)−𝑆min(𝐶)
𝑆max(𝐶)−𝑆min(𝐶)(34)
where
𝑆(𝐶)=∑
𝐶𝑘∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝑘𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑥𝑗)
𝑆min(𝐶)=∑
min(𝑛𝑤)
𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗∈𝑋{𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑥𝑗)}
𝑆max(𝐶)=∑
max(𝑛𝑤)
𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗∈𝑋{𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑥𝑗)}
Sym-index: The sym-index (Bandyopadhyay and Saha, 2008). It is de-
fined as follows:
𝑆𝑦𝑚 (𝐶)=𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐶𝑘,𝐶𝑙∈{
𝑑𝑒(𝑐𝑘,𝑐𝑙)}
𝐾∑
𝑐𝑘∈∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘𝑑∗
𝑝𝑠(𝑥𝑖,𝑐𝑘) (35)
COP Index: The COP index is measured as the distance from the
centroids to the cluster points. Likewise, the separation is measured
as the largest distance between neighbors (Arbelaitz et al., 2013). It
is defined as follows:
𝐶𝑂𝑃 (𝐶)=1
𝑁∑
𝑐𝑘∈||𝑐𝑘||1
|𝑐𝑘|∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑐𝑘)
𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑥𝑖∉𝑐𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑥𝑗) (36)
Negentropy Increment: Measuring the normality of clusters instead of the
compactness or separation of the clusters is the goal of the negentropy
index (Lago-Fernández and Corbacho, 2010)
𝑁𝐼(𝐶)=1
2∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶𝑝(𝑐𝑘)log|∑
𝑐𝑘|− 1∕2 log |∑
𝑋|−∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶𝑝(𝑐𝑘)𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(𝑐𝑘)
(37)
SV-Index: The SV-index evaluates cluster separation as a measure be-
tween nearest neighbors. The compactness measures border points
to centroids of the cluster (Žalik and Žalik, 2011). It is defined as
follows:
𝑆𝑉(𝐶)=∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙∈𝐶∖𝑐𝑘{𝑑𝑒(𝑐𝑘,𝑐𝑙)}
∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶10∕|𝑐𝑘|∑𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘(0.1||𝑐𝑘||){𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑐𝑘)}(38)OS-Index: The OS-index (Drewes, 2005) is defined as follows:
𝑂𝑆(𝐶)=∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶∑
𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘𝑂𝑉(𝑥𝑖,𝑐𝑘)
∑
𝑐𝑘∈𝐶10∕|𝑐𝑘|∑𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑥𝑖∈𝑐𝑘(0.1||𝑐𝑘||){𝑑𝑒(𝑥𝑖𝑐𝑘)}(39)
The modified Hubert 𝛤statistic: The modified Hubert 𝛤statistic
(Theodoridis and Koutroubas, 1999) is defined as follows:
𝛤=(1
𝑀)𝑁−1∑
𝑖=1𝑁∑
𝑗=𝑖+1𝑃(𝑖,𝑗).𝑄(𝑖,𝑗)(40)
where the dimension of the dataset is N,𝑀=𝑁(𝑁−1)
2,Pis the proximity
matrix of the dataset and Qis an𝑁×𝑁matrix.
SD validity index: The SD validity index measures the mean intra- and
inter-cluster scattering (Halkidi et al., 2002). The definition for this
index is as follows:
𝑆𝐷(𝑛𝑐)=𝑎.𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝑛𝑐)+𝐷𝑖𝑠(𝑛𝑐)(41)
where
𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝑛𝑐)=1
𝑛𝑐∑𝑛𝑐
𝑖=1‖‖‖𝜎(𝑣𝑖)‖‖‖
‖𝜎(𝑋)‖
𝐷𝑖𝑠(𝑛𝑐)=𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐷𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑐∑
𝑘=1(𝑛𝑐∑
𝑧=1‖‖𝑣𝑘−𝑣𝑧‖‖)−1
Dbw validity index: The clusters’ underlying characteristics are used by
S_Dbw validity index aims to measure the validity of the results from
the clustering algorithm (Halkidi and Vazirgiannis, 2001). It is defined
as follows
𝑆𝐷𝑏𝑤(𝑛𝑐)=𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝑛𝑐)+𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑏𝑤(𝑛𝑐) (42)
where
𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠_𝑏𝑤(𝑛𝑐) =1
𝑛𝑐.(𝑛𝑐− 1)𝑛𝑛∑
𝑖=1⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝𝑛𝑐∑
𝑗=1
𝑖≠𝑗𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 (𝑢𝑖𝑗)
max{𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑣𝑖),𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑣𝑗)}⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
where𝑣𝑖,𝑣𝑗are the centroids of cluster 𝑐𝑖𝑐𝑗, and𝑢𝑖𝑗the middle point of
the line segment.
Root-mean-square standard deviation (RMSSTD): The RMSSTD evaluates
the square root of the variance of all the attributes used in the clustering
process (Davies and Bouldin, 1979). It is defined as:
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝑆𝑇𝐷 =⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣∑
𝑖=1…𝑛𝑐
𝑗=1…𝑣∑𝑛𝑖𝑗
𝑘=1(𝑥𝑘−𝑥𝑘)2
∑
𝑖=1…𝑛𝑐
𝑗=1…𝑣(𝑛𝑖𝑗− 1)⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦(43)
R-squared (RS): The RS index (Sharma, 1996) is defined as follows:
𝑅𝑆=𝑆𝑆𝑏
𝑆𝑆𝑡=𝑆𝑆𝑡−𝑆𝑆𝑤
𝑆𝑆𝑡. (44)
Compact-Separated (CS) index: The CS index measures the ratio of the
sum of within-cluster scatter to between-cluster separation (Kosters and
Laros, 2007). Minimizing the CS index leads to better clustering. Let
the within-cluster scatter be denoted as 𝑋𝑖and the between-cluster
separation be represented as 𝑋𝑗, such that the distance measure 𝑉is
given as𝑉(𝑋𝑖,𝑋𝑗). Hence, the CS index for a clustering 𝑄is computed
as follows (Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
𝐶𝑆(𝑄,𝑉)=1
𝑃∑𝑃
𝑖=1[1
𝐷𝑛∑
𝑋𝑖∈𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑋𝑗∈𝑄𝑖{𝑉(𝑋𝑖,𝑋𝑗)}]
1
𝑃∑𝑃
𝑖=1[𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑗∈𝑃,𝑗≠𝑖{𝑉(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)}]
=∑𝑃
𝑖=1[
1
𝑄𝑖∑
𝑋𝑖∈𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑋𝑗∈𝑄{𝑉(𝑋𝑖,𝑋𝑗)}]
∑𝑃
𝑖=1[𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑗∈𝑃,𝑗≠𝑖{𝑉(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)}](45)
where||𝐷𝑛||represents the number of data points in cluster 𝑃, the
function𝑉(𝑋𝑖,𝑋𝑗)is the distance between within-cluster scatter 𝑋𝑖
26

==== Page 27 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
and between-cluster separation 𝑋𝑗,𝑉(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)is the distance of data
points𝑑from their centroids, and 𝑃is the number of clusters in 𝑄.
Ball–Hall index : The Ball–Hall index gives the mean of the mean disper-
sion of all the clusters, and it is given as follows (Ball and Hall, 1965):
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑙–𝐻𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 (𝐶)=1
𝐾𝐾∑
𝑘=11
𝑛𝑘∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘‖‖‖𝑀{𝑘}
𝑖−𝐺{𝑘}‖‖‖2(46)
Banfeld–Raftery index : The Banfeld–Raftery index evaluates the
weighted sum of the logarithms of the traces of the variance of the
covariance matrix of each cluster. The definition is given as follow
(Banfield and Raftery, 1993):
𝐶=𝐾∑
𝑘=1𝑛𝑘𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑇𝑟(𝑊𝐺){𝑘}
𝑛𝑘)
(47)
Det Ratio index : The Det Ratio index is defined as follows (Scott and
Symons, 1971)
𝐷𝑒𝑡 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =det(𝑇)
det(𝑊𝐺)(48)
where T is the total scatter matrix and WG is the individual matrices
Baker-Hubert Gamma index : Given two vectors, A and B, with the same
dataset size, the Baker-Hubert Gamma index evaluates the two vectors’
correlation. The index is an adaptation of the 𝛤index, and it is defined
as follows (Baker and Hubert, 1975):
𝐶=𝛤=𝑆+−𝑆−
𝑆++𝑆−(49)
where𝑆+=∑
(𝑟,𝑠)𝜖𝐼𝐵∑
(𝑢,𝑣)𝜖𝐼𝑊1{𝑑𝑢𝑣<𝑑𝑟𝑠}and𝑆−=∑
(𝑟,𝑠)𝜖𝐼𝐵∑
(𝑢,𝑣)𝜖𝐼𝑊
1{𝑑𝑢𝑣>𝑑𝑟𝑠}
GDI index : The Generalized Dunn’s Index (GDI) evaluates the intra-
cluster and inter-cluster distances (Bezdek and Pal, 1998)
𝐶=𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑘≠𝑘′𝛿(𝐶𝑘,𝐶𝑘′)
𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑘𝛥(𝐶𝑘) (50)
where𝛿is a measure of inter-cluster distance and 𝛥is a measure of
intra-cluster distance, with 1≤𝑘≤𝐾𝑎𝑛𝑑 1≤𝑘′≤𝐾
G-plus index : The G-plus index (Rohlf, 1974) is defined as follows:
𝐺+ =2𝑆−
𝑁𝑇(𝑁𝑇− 1)(51)
Ksq_DetW index : Also denoted as 𝑘2|𝑊|, this index (Marriot, 1975) is
defined as follows:
𝐶=𝐾2det(𝑊𝐺) (52)
where WG is the individual cluster matrices
Log_Det_Ratio index : This index is the logarithmic version of Det_Ratio
given in Eq. (53), and it is defined as follows (Scott and Symons, 1971):
𝐶=𝑁𝑙𝑜𝑔(det(𝑇)
det(𝑊𝐺))
(53)
Log_SS_Ratio index : The Log_SS_Ratio index evaluates the ratio of the
traces of matrices 𝐵𝐺and𝑊𝐺. The definition of the index is given as
follows (Hartigan, 1975):
𝐶=𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐵𝐺𝑆𝑆
𝑊𝐺𝑆𝑆)
(54)
McClain–Rao index : The McClain–Rao index calculates the mean ratio of
intra-cluster and inter-cluster distances (McClain and Rao, 1975). The
index is defined as follows:
𝐶=𝑁𝐵𝑆𝑊
𝑁𝑊𝑆𝐵(55)where
𝑆𝑊=𝐾∑
𝑘=1∑
𝑖,𝑗∈𝐼𝑘
𝑖<𝑗𝑑(𝑀𝑖,𝑀𝑗)
𝑆𝐵=∑
𝑘<𝑘′∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘,𝑗∈𝐼𝑘′
𝑖<𝑗𝑑(𝑀𝑖,𝑀𝑗)
𝑁𝐵is the total number of distances between pairs of points that do not
belong to the same clusters and 𝑁𝑊is the total number of distances
between pairs of points that belong to the same clusters
PMB index: The PBM index evaluates the distance between the points
and their barycenters. Furthermore, it also evaluates the distances be-
tween the barycenters Pakhira et al. (2004). PMB is the acronym for the
author’s initials of the names of its authors (Pakhira, Bandyopadhyay,
and Maulik)
𝐶=(
1
𝐾×𝐸𝑇
𝐸𝑊×𝐷𝐵)2
(56)
where
𝐷𝐵= max
𝑘<𝑘′𝑑(
𝐺{𝑘},𝐺{𝑘′})
𝐸𝑊=𝐾∑
𝑘=1∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘𝑑(𝑀𝑖,𝐺{𝑘})
𝐸𝑇=𝑁∑
𝑖=1𝑑(𝑀𝑖,𝐺)
Point-Biserial index: The Point-Biserial index (Milligan, 1981) is
defined as follows:
𝐶=𝑠𝑛×𝑟𝑝𝑏(𝐴,𝐵)=(𝑆𝑊
𝑁𝑊−𝑆𝐵
𝑁𝐵)√
𝑁𝑊𝑁𝐵
𝑁𝑇(57)
where
𝑟𝑝𝑏(𝐴,𝐵)=𝑀𝐴1−𝑀𝐴0
𝑠𝑛√𝑛𝐴0𝑛𝐴1
𝑛2
𝑀𝐴1is the mean of the intra-cluster distances and 𝑀𝐴0is the mean of
the inter-cluster distances. 𝑠𝑛is the standard deviation of A, 𝑛𝐴0,𝑛𝐴1
are the number of elements in each group. Set A represents distances
between pairs of cluster points, and the value of B is 1 if a pair of points
are in the same cluster and 0 otherwise.
Ratkowsky–Lance index : The Ratkowsky–Lance index (Ratkowsky and
Lance, 1978). is defined as follows:
𝐶=√
𝑅
𝐾=𝑐√
𝐾(58)
where
𝑐2=𝑅=1
𝑝𝑝∑
𝑗=1𝐵𝐺𝑆𝑆𝑗
𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑗
𝐵𝐺𝑆𝑆𝑗is the𝑗th diagonal term of the matrix BG
Ray–Turi index : The Ray–Turi index (Ray and Turi, 1999) can be
defined as follows
𝐶=1
𝑁𝑊𝐺𝑆𝑆
min𝑘<𝑘′𝛥2
𝑘𝑘′(59)
The numerator is the mean of the squared distances of all points
concerning the barycenter of the cluster they belong. The denomina-
tor is the minimum of the squared distances between all the cluster
barycenters
Scott–Symons index : The Scott–Symons index evaluates each cluster, the
weighted sum of the logarithms of the variance–covariance matrix’s
27

==== Page 28 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
determinant (Scott and Symons, 1971).
𝐶=𝐾∑
𝑘=1𝑛𝑘log𝑑𝑒𝑡(
𝑊𝐺{𝑘}
𝑛𝑘)
(60)
where
𝑊𝐺{𝑘}are matrices and the determinants of the matrices are positive.
Tau index : The Tau index can be defined as follows:
𝐶=𝑠+−𝑠−
√
𝑁𝐵𝑁𝑊(𝑁𝑇(𝑁𝑇−1)
2)(61)
when inter-cluster and intra-cluster distances are equal, the numerator
is not affected because 𝑠+𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠−do not count ties
Trace_W index : This index is defined as follows (Edwards and Cavalli-
Sforza, 1965):
𝐶=𝑇𝑟(𝑊𝐺)=𝑊𝐺𝑆𝑆 (62)
where WGSS is the within-cluster sum of squares and WG is the sum of
all the clusters
Trace_WiB index : The Trace_WiB index (Friedman and Rubin, 1967) can
be defined as follows
𝐶=𝑇𝑟(𝑊𝐺−1.𝐵𝐺) (63)
Wemmert–Gançarski index : The weighted mean of all quantities (𝐽𝑘)for
all the clusters is evaluated by the Wemmert–Gançarski index. This
index is defined as follows
𝐶−1
𝑁𝐾∑
𝑘=1max{0,𝑛𝑘−∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘𝑅(𝑀𝑖)} (64)
where for M belonging to cluster 𝐶𝑘
𝐽𝑘= max{0,1 −1
𝑛𝑘∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘𝑅(𝑀𝑖)}
𝑅(𝑀) =‖‖‖𝑀−𝐺{𝑘}‖‖‖
min𝑘′≠𝑘‖‖𝑀−𝐺{𝑘′}‖‖
Xie–Beni index : This index gives the ratio between the mean quadratic
error and the minimum of the squared distances between the clusters’
points (Xie and Beni, 1991).
𝐶=1
𝑁𝑊𝐺𝑆𝑆
min𝑘<𝑘′𝛿1(𝐶𝑘,𝐶𝑘′)2(65)
𝛿1(𝐶𝑘,𝐶𝑘′)= min
𝑖∈𝐼𝑘
𝑗∈𝐼𝑘′𝑑(𝑀𝑖,𝑀𝑗)
6.3.2.2 External quality criteria measures External quality criteria re-
quire that knowledge about the dataset, particularly the underlying
structure and number of clusters embedded in the dataset, is known.
This knowledge is always not available in real-world scenarios. The
basic idea is to match the result of the partition with the predefined
structure of the dataset.
Mutual Information-Based Measure: The goal of the mutual information-
based measure is to evaluate the mutual interdependence between
the partition result and the dataset’s underlying structure (Strehl and
Ghosh, 2000).
For m instances in clusters 𝐶={𝐶1,𝐶2,…,𝐶𝑔}and target attribute
𝑧with domain 𝑑𝑜𝑚(𝑧)={𝑐1,𝑐2,…,𝑐𝑘}, the index is defined as follows:
𝐶=2
𝑚𝑔∑
𝑖=1𝑘∑
ℎ=1𝑚𝑖,ℎ𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑔.𝑘(𝑚𝑖,ℎ.𝑚
𝑚.,ℎ.𝑚𝑖,.)
(66)where𝑚𝑖,ℎis the number of instances in cluster 𝐶𝑖and in class 𝑐ℎ,𝑚.,ℎ
denotes the total number of instances in the class 𝑐ℎ, and𝑚𝑙,.denotes
the number of instances in cluster 𝐶𝑖.
Rand Index: Rand index refers to the similarities between partitions of
the clustering algorithm and the dataset’s underlying structure (Rand,
1971; Ezugwu et al., 2020a). The index is defined as follows:
𝑅𝐴𝑁𝐷 =𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃+𝐹𝑁+𝑇𝑁(67)
F-measure: The consequence of equal weighting for the false positives
and false negatives is that we usually end up with undesirable features.
The F-measure index uses the weighting recall parameter 𝜂 > 0to
balance the false negatives (Rijsbergen, 1979; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
The F-measure is defined as follows:
𝐹=(𝜂2+ 1).𝑃.𝑅
𝜂2.𝑃+𝑅(68)
where𝑃is the precision rate and 𝑅is the recall rate.
The range of recall starts from no effect ( 𝜂= 0) to more effect as 𝜂
increases (indicating a higher clustering quality).
Jaccard Index: The Jaccard index evaluates the ratio of the intersection
of both dataset elements and the union of the elements in both datasets.
The Jaccard index is defined as follows:
𝐽𝐽(𝐴𝐵)=𝐴∩𝐵
𝐴∪𝐵=𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃+𝐹𝑁(69)
if𝐴and𝐵are empty, then 0≤𝐽(𝐴𝐵)≤1.
Fowlkes–Mallows Index: Fowlkes–Mallows index measures the compact-
ness of clusters obtained from a clustering algorithm, maximizing
the index results in higher similarities (Fowlkes and Mallows, 2010;
Ezugwu et al., 2020a). The Fowlkes–Mallows index is defined as follows
𝐹𝑀 =√
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃.𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁(70)
NMI measure: The normalized mutual information (NMI) is defined as
follows:
𝑁𝑀𝐼 (𝑋,𝑌)=𝐼(𝑋,𝑌)√
𝐻(𝑋)𝐻(𝑌)(71)
where,𝐼(𝑋,𝑌) is the mutual information between two random vari-
ables𝑋and𝑌and𝐻(𝑋) denotes the entropy of 𝑋,𝑋is the partition
by a clustering algorithm, and 𝑌represents the true labels of the dataset
(Legány et al., 2006).
Purity: The purity for each cluster 𝑃𝑗is defined as:
𝑃𝑗=1
𝑛𝑗𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑖(
𝑛𝑖
𝑗)
(72)
The purity for the set of clusters is calculated as a weighted sum of
the individual purities (Kovács and Ivancsy, 2006). This is given as:
𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 =𝑚∑
𝑗=1𝑛𝑗
𝑛𝑃𝑗 (73)
where𝑛𝑗denote the size of cluster 𝑗,𝑚is the number of clusters, and
𝑛is the total number of entities.
Entropy: Entropy increases as the classification of objects in a cluster
becomes more varied. If all the objects in the cluster belong to one
label, then the entropy is 0 (Drewes, 2005; Ezugwu et al., 2020a). In
this case, entropy is defined as follows:
𝐸𝑗=∑
𝑖𝑝𝑖𝑗log(𝑝𝑖𝑗)
(74)
Relative validation: This scheme aims to validate the partitions of a
clustering algorithm by specifying the best clustering scheme possible
under certain assumptions and parameters. The relative validation
28

==== Page 29 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
involves a lot of statistical testing (Halkidi et al., 2002; Ezugwu et al.,
2020a). Assuming the clustering problem is defined as thus:
‘‘ Let𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔be the set of parameters associated with a specific clustering
algorithm (e.g. the number of clusters 𝑛𝑐). Among the clustering schemes
𝐶𝑖,𝑖= 1,…,𝑛𝑐,defined by a specific algorithm, for different values of the
parameters in 𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔,choose the one that best fits the data set’’. (Halkidi et al.,
2002; Ezugwu et al., 2020a).
The following cases hold:
∙𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔does not contain 𝑛𝑐as a parameter.
The idea here is to tune the parameter over a wide range of values
and run the clustering algorithm, then choose the maximum range for
which𝑛𝑐is constant. Normally, 𝑛𝑐≪ 𝑁 where𝑁is the number of
tuples
∙𝑃𝑎𝑙𝑔contains𝑛𝑐as a parameter.
Define a maximum and minimum range first, then run the algorithm
𝑟times over each 𝑛𝑐between the minimum and maximum range, tuning
the parameters during each run. Then plot the best values of the index
obtained against 𝜆. The plot may indicate the best cluster.
7 Trending application areas of clustering algorithms
Clustering algorithms can be applied to different domains. This sec-
tion provides diverse areas that cluster analysis that has been success-
fully utilized. Specifically, we present the applicability of the clustering
algorithms reviewed in Section 4 to the field of medicine, financial
sector, artificial intelligence, aviation sector, marketing and sales sec-
tor, industries and manufacturing context, urban development, privacy
protection, and robotics. Fig. 10 summarizes these fields by presenting
a taxonomy of the applicability of clustering algorithms.
7.1 Web usage
The ever-growing electronic data size originating from web applica-
tions’ proliferation has motivated the exploration of hidden information
from text content. Nirkhi and Hande (2008) presented a summary on
the use of web page rank algorithms (such as Hyperlink Induced Topic
Search, page rank) and web page-based clustering algorithms (such
as Suffix Tree, Vivisimo and Lingo clustering algorithms) (Nirkhi and
Hande, 2008). Similarly, Ivancsy and Kovacs (2006) listed some newer
and relevant approaches to web clustering algorithms, such as Fuzzy
clustering.
The corresponding web server logs information for each user is ac-
cessing a page, including IP address, time of access, file path, browser,
and amount of transferred data. Vast volumes of web server log data
are generated every day, and they can be used for commercial and non-
commercial applications such as designing online shops or providing
users with personalized content in digital libraries. Madhulatha (2015)
supported this claim that clustering algorithms have been used for
library book ordering, document classification, clustering web log data
to discover groups of similar access patterns. Another study proposed
using the KEA-Means algorithm, which combines the keyphrase extrac-
tion algorithm and the K-Means algorithm to generate the number of
web documents clusters from a dataset (Ware and Dhawas, 2012). Lin
et al. applied a novel algorithm named hierarchical clustering (HSClus)
to extract a similarity matrix among pages via in-page and cross-
page link structures. This resulted in clusters that hierarchically groups
densely linked web pages into semantic clusters (Lin et al., 2009).
Tang Rui et al. (2012) carried out an investigative study to discover
the possibilities of applying other nature-inspired-based optimization
algorithms: Fireflies, Cuckoos, Bats, and Wolves for performing cluster-
ing over Web Intelligence data. Sardar and Ansari (2018a) applied the
K-Means algorithm using the MapReduce programming model to the
task of document clustering (Sardar and Ansari, 2018a,b).7.2 Speech processing
Speech is an important communication medium among humans
and even animals as well. Large data sourced from communication
on phone and tele-media platforms may require clustering methods
to discover knowledge. Sonkamble and Doye proposed a clustering
algorithm named Modified K-MeansLBG. They applied it to obtain a
good codebook for vector quantization which is usually used in speech
coding, image coding, speech recognition, speech synthesis and speaker
recognition (Sonkamble and Doye, 2012). Rovetta et al. applied fuzzy
clustering to the task of recognizing emotion from speech signals in
addition to the use of probabilistic, possibilistic and graded-possibilistic
c-means techniques (Rovetta et al., 2019). Neel (2005) used K-Means
and fuzzy K-Means clustering to capture phonetic classification effec-
tively. They used clustering to identify the kinds of phonetic features
to the group and discover automatic clustering efficiency in clustering
speech data. In another study, Bach and Jordan (2006) applied spectral
clustering to the blind one-microphone speech separation problem.
They cast the problem as one of the segmentation of the spectrogram.
Vani and Anusuya (2019) investigated the performances of clustering
techniques (like K-Means, Fuzzy C means, and Kernel Fuzzy C Means
algorithms) for clustering noisy speech signals. Single-space and Multi-
level clustering methods were applied to the speech processing system’s
problem (Räsänen, 2007). Fig. 10 gives the taxonomy of clustering
algorithm applications.
7.3 Medical science: Disease onset and progression
The Healthcare sector is one of the predominant fields of human
endeavor that requires improvement alongside contemporary society’s
development. It is one of the main sectors that generally impact the
members of the public. Presently, clustering analysis has solely de-
pended on the transformation of healthcare services. Clustering algo-
rithm has tremendously contributed to disease diagnosis aspects of
healthcare services such as simplification of the ocular disease detection
process, utilizing retinal blood vessels segmentation (Waheed et al.,
2015), detection of tumors using K-Means clustering algorithm (Patel
et al., 2013), and detection of neovascularization in retina image
by employing multivariate m-Medoids clustering algorithms (Akram
et al., 2013). Besides the diagnosis, medical imaging is another crucial
aspect of medicine that plays a role in inpatient treatment. It assists
the medical research domain in investigating different parts of hu-
man anatomy and understanding the effects of particular illnesses. For
instance, mean shift clustering has been employed in blood oxygen
level-dependent function MRI activation detection (Ai et al., 2014).
Also, semi-supervised clustering has been utilized for brain image
segmentation (Saha et al., 2016). Similarly, fuzzy clustering – a hybrid
approach – has been successfully applied to segment inhomogeneous
medical images (Rastgarpour et al., 2014). Medical image analysis
uses spectral clustering (Kuo et al., 2014). Recent research has been
conducted on genetics and hype found in modern medicine to produce a
personalized treatment system. Thus, clustering analysis has facilitated
such a research process (Datta and Datta, 2003; Aouf et al., 2008;
Oyelade et al., 2016).
In a study (Magoeva et al., 2018), authors investigated the possi-
bility of applying some clustering algorithms (such as DBSCAN and
K-Means) to detect critical patient patients conditions with coronary
syndrome using medical parameter time series. The study successfully
performed a preliminary analysis showing that outlier clustering is
viable for potential outlier classification and analysis. Their results
revealed that the investigated clustering algorithms achieve a moderate
performance in critical patient detection. Another study (Newcomer
et al., 2011) reported using cluster analysis to identify sub-populations
of complex patients who may benefit from targeted care management
strategies. This was achieved by using a massive 2-year cohort of health
maintenance organization members with 2 or more chronic conditions.
29

==== Page 30 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 10. Taxonomy of clustering algorithm application.
A new study proposes a medical-oriented big data clustering algorithm
using an improved immune evolutionary method (evolutionary algo-
rithm and FCM) by applying the clustering algorithm to medical data,
including encoding, constructing fitness function, and selecting genetic
operators (Yu et al., 2020). To unravel patient heterogeneity, Forte
et al. (2019) applied some selected hard and soft clustering algorithms
(based on the expected overlap between sub-phenotypes and the size
of the dataset) to conduct a panorama of clustering analyzes using het-
erogeneous and complex ICU data. In a different study (Venkataramana
et al., 2017), the authors attempted to apply the clustering method
(Fuzzy C-Means and K-Means) to speed up the process of analyzing
patients’ samples in high volume hospitals to aid decide on the stage
of the disease.
7.4 Image processing and segmentation
Clustering methods have been applied to the problem of image
segmentation and image processing. While image processing describes
a situation where a wide range of likely computational operations
is (are) applied to an image for knowledge discovery of image re-
finement, a component of image processing is image segmentation.
Image segmentation can be expressed as exhaustive partitioning of an
input image into regions so that each is considered homogeneous con-
cerning some image property. Chopade and Sheetlani (2017) reported
that studies had employed evolutionary fuzzy clustering methods with
knowledge-based evaluation to handle image segmentation problems.
The approach of the GAs clustering method was applied to the prob-
lem, which was formulated as an optimization so that clustering of
small regions in color feature space was achieved. A study by Saxena
et al. (2017) reported that K-Means had been successfully applied to
image segmentation. The quality of images presented by Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) to visualize objects and living organisms’
internal structures made it a candidate for the segmentation task. This
task can be formulated as a clustering problem from MRI images so that
feature vectors obtained through transformation image measurements
and pixel positions are grouped into several structures. Dhanachan-
dra et al. combined K-Means and subtractive cluster algorithms for
image segmentation. They achieved this by pre-processing the image
using partial stretching enhancement and the hybridized algorithm to
generate the initial centers.
The K-Means algorithm then uses the initial centers to segment
the image before removing unwanted regions using a medial filter
(Dhanachandra et al., 2015). In a similar work (Chena et al., 2015), the
authors applied the use of the DP clustering algorithm. They directly
provided the cluster number of the image based on the decision graphand identified cluster centers to carry out hierarchical segmentation.
In another study (Nameirakpam and Jina, 2015), the authors combined
local histogram equalization and K-Means clustering for image segmen-
tation. Bora and Gupta carried out a similar study using a hard K-Means
clustering algorithm with cosine distance measure while filtering and
analyzing the segmented image with the Sobel filter and watershed
algorithm (Bora and Gupta, 2014).
Gulhane et al. (2012) investigated the association that exists be-
tween the density of data points in the given data set of pixels of an
image using K-Means and M-step differently. Parida (2018) carried out
image segmentation using fuzzy C-means clustering by applying it to
the variance feature image to separate its transitional features (Parida,
2018). An attempt to apply clustering algorithms to the novel Covid-
19 disease was made by the authors in ElazizID et al. (2020). They
carried out image segmentation on COVID-19 Computed Tomography
(CT) images. They proposed a clustering method to improve the density
peaks clustering (DPC) combined with generalized extreme value (GEV)
distribution.
7.5 Information retrieval
The field of information retrieval is focused on finding an effec-
tive computational approach to automate the storage and retrieval
of documents. This information retrieval task has proven relevant
in online search engines and library management systems. A study
(Manning et al., 2009) summarized potential application areas such as
search result clustering, scatter–gather, collection clustering language
modeling, cluster-based retrieval, for the use of clustering methods
the related analysis to the problem of information retrieval. Vries
(2014) used two novel clustering algorithms (TopSig Ktree and EM-
tree) to evaluate document cluster quality for large scale collections
by first performing document clustering in information retrieval. The
authors in Prabhu (2011) designed a technique for information retrieval
using K-Means clustering. Elbattah and Molloy (2017) used K-Means to
support decision-making regarding elderly healthcare in Ireland, with
a particular focus on hip fracture care. Another study (Bellot and El-
Bèze, 2000) applied hierarchical clustering methods to classify a set of
documents retrieved by any information retrieval system. Liu and Croft
performed cluster-based retrieval using K-Means in conjunction with
language models to the task of information retrieval (Liu and Croft,
2004).
7.6 Aviation and automotive systems
Clustering methods have been applied to aviation and automotive-
related issues. Specifically, clustering algorithms have been used to
30

==== Page 31 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
detect a fault, manage emergencies, and proactive risk management. Li
et al. (2015) investigated the applicability of cluster-based solutions to
detect anomalies regarding flights aiding detection of associated risks
from routine airline operations. They used DBSCAN to achieve a cluster
analysis that successfully detected abnormal flights. Also, multiple
kernel anomaly detection was able to identify operationally significant
anomalies, surpassing the capability of exceedance detection. In a
related study, authors applied trajectory clustering by deriving a frame-
work to monitor aircraft behavior in given airspace (Gariel et al., 2011).
This trajectory clustering method was achieved by using K-Means and
DBSCAN algorithms. Wang and Pham proposed using ANOVA and
Scheffe post hoc with a clustering analysis task to evaluate and improve
service networks operated at airports (Wang and Pham, 2020). A
similar study (Rose et al., 2020) applied the K-Means algorithm with
a combination of 2-D mapping and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) for a cluster post-processing routine which identi-
fies driving factors in each cluster and building a hierarchical structure
of cluster and sub-cluster labels. Mangortey et al. (2020) investigated
the performance of Model-based Clustering, Self-Organizing Tree Algo-
rithm (SOTA), Divisive Analysis (DIANA), Agglomerative Hierarchical,
PAM, CLARA, K-Means clustering algorithms. The algorithms were
used to group similar flights and identify abnormal operations and
anomalies.
7.7 Bioinformatics
The application of clustering methods to bioinformatics can be
grouped into two, namely, (i) the analysis of gene expression data
generated from DNA microarray technologies and (ii) clustering pro-
cesses that directly work on linear deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or
protein sequences (Saxena et al., 2017). Gene expression analysis has
benefited from clustering methods. It enables biologists to identify
patterns within datasets relating to this domain. A huge amount of data
on molecular biology is being generated from different experimenta-
tion in this domain. Such data consists of gene expression features,
consisting of conclusions regarding the amount of the corresponding
gene product and concurrent measurement of the gene expression level
for thousands of genes under hundreds of conditions. Data generated
in this form is often represented in a Data Matrix, in which rows
are genes and columns are different experimental conditions, different
tissues, consecutive time slots, or different patients. Other tasks that
have benefited from clustering algorithms include: identification of
homology; discovering natural structure inherent in gene expression
data; knowing subtypes of cells; understanding gene functions and gene
regulation; and mining useful information from noisy data (Oyelade
et al., 2016; Guzzi et al., 2014).
The authors in Chopade and Sheetlani (2017) disclosed that in
handling microarray data analysis, researchers employed the clustering
method to group thousands of genes by their similarities of expres-
sion levels, thereby supporting the task of analyzing gene expression
profiles. Similarly, it is widely reported that Genetic Convex Cluster-
ing Algorithms (GCCA) has been successfully applied to address the
problem of clustering on an unbounded number of processors. A study
in Sugavaneswaran (2017) stated that clustering algorithms had been
used in gene expression. The genes are analyzed and grouped based on
similarity in profiles using one of the widely used K-Means clustering
algorithms. Lakhani et al. reported that to analyze biological sequences
and group them into similar genes, clustering algorithms like evolution-
ary clustering, hierarchical clustering, K-Means, and bi-clustering have
been successfully applied to the domain (Lakhani et al., 2015). Mishra
et al. also strengthen the fact that the K-Means clustering algorithm
has proven relevant in bioinformatics (Mishra et al., 2015). Research
in Zahoor and Zafar (2020) proposed a warzone-inspired infiltration
tactics-based optimization algorithm (ITO) to classify microarray gene
expression. Nunes (2011), in a Master thesis, proposed time series-
based clustering algorithms for separating and organizing unlabeleddata into different groups whose signals are similar to each other in
biomedical signals (Nunes, 2011). Two variants of the K-Means genetic
algorithm selection process (KGA) were applied to the selection process
in the GA algorithm. These algorithms can be applied to medical
informatics and bioinformatics (Chehouri et al., 2017). In the study (Ko-
rdos and Blachnik, 2019), the authors attempt to overcome a genetic
algorithm’s limitation by applying a fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering
algorithm to reduce the chromosome size and solve the clusters border
problem allowing the clusters to overlap.
7.8 Financial systems and economics
The sensitivity and level of security mechanisms built around the
systems associated with banking and financial institutions require that
the data generated from them be intelligently handled by automated
systems. Cai et al. reported that banking and financial institutes are
widely using clustering methods to capture the natural structure of
data in a quest to improve their customer services and profit margins
(Cai et al., 2010). Dardac and Boitan carried out a study to investigate
the performance clustering analysis on the data from Romania institu-
tions. They aimed to uncover the bank’s risk profile by grouping such
institutions into smaller, homogeneous clusters to assess which credit
institutions have similar patterns according to their risk profile and
profitability (Dardac and Boitan, 2019). In another study, the author
presented research into main cluster-type methodologies for grouping
data to use them in economic fields (Stefan, 2014). The study selected
six macroeconomic indicators necessary to reveal a country’s economic
development and then applied hierarchical-based cluster methods on
some sets of complex and heterogeneous data. In a related study,
Brauksa (2013) applied K-Means for cluster analysis in comparing
socio-economic development of different municipalities. Another study
curated economic data and carried out clustering analysis using K-
clustering and proposed techniques that use similarity measures for
data files with nominal variables (Řezanková, 2014). In a different
consideration of the applicability of clustering methods, authors in
Novaliendry et al. (2015) performed clustering using K-Means to ease
the process of handling extensive data of a systematic, detailed list of
receipts, expenditures, and local spending within a year. An interesting
improved K-Means algorithm based on the historical financial ratios
was applied to analyze indicators related to economic attributes listed
enterprises in Zhejiang province (Qian, 2006). A different study (Boyko
et al., 2020) combined apriori and K-Means clustering algorithms to get
a user behavior analysis template to predict a person location for the
next month.
The banking sector is one of the key thriving sectors at the forefront
of global digitization. However, numerous threats surfaced to hamper
the digital banking initiative’s advancement in digital banking devel-
opment. Thus, clustering analysis can offer a convenient solution to
such threats. One of the big threats expected in the banking sector is
money laundering. The money laundering issue can be resolved by im-
plementing Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
(DBSCAN) clustering in the "Anti Money Laundering Regulatory Appli-
cation System’’. In such a case, DBSCAN is employed for detecting and
reporting suspicious banking transactions. However, the anti-money
laundering regulatory application system has been effectively evaluated
on large financial data where it has successfully detected and prevented
money laundering on likely suspicious transactions (Yang et al., 2014).
Every banking institution must acknowledge the reality of the
threats emanating from customers’ ignorance of basic safe banking tips
like giving out confidential information such as security passwords and
pin to strangers, resulting in huge bank fraud. Banking institutions can
apply clustering analysis to fish out such customers and give extra
warning of being cautious about such activities and the overall notice
provided to all the customers. K-Means++ and K-Means clustering ap-
proaches have recorded tremendous success in appraising cardholders’
share vulnerable to bank scams such as skimming, fishing, fishing, etc.
31

==== Page 32 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
(Alkhasov et al., 2015). Besides the threat of mitigation in the banking
institution, clustering could also provide other vital applications such as
location siting for optimal business extension. Every banking institution
would like to expand the service covering locations to attract more
customers, thereby growing the organizational profit margins. This can
be implemented by installing e-corners and ATMs strategically to cover
important economic locations and create branches at locations with
excessive demand.
We can observe that the location sitting option plays a vital role in
expanding the financial economy. The solution to such a task can be ad-
dressed by applying the generalized density-based clustering algorithm
(GFDBSCAN) cluster algorithm (Kisore and Koteswaraiah, 2017). The
contemporary world is mostly reliant on industrial relationships, and
financial crises are crucial to any nation. Thus, long-term prediction
of failure in the banking sector presents a significant confrontation.
Happily, Fuzzy refinement domain adaptation offers a good answer to
such a challenge (Behbood et al., 2013).
7.9 Robotics
Asmaa & Sadok presented a cluster-based solution to the Multi-
Robot Task Allocation (MRTA) problem (Asmaa and Sadok, 2019). The
authors proposed a clustering algorithm based on a dynamic distributed
PSO technique and called it ACD2PSO. The new clustering algorithm
first groups the robot tasks into clusters using the dynamic distributed
particle swarm optimization (D2PSO) and, after that, allocates the
robots to the clusters using the concept of multiple traveling salesman
problems (MTSP). In another study, Guérin et al. (2018) addressed the
problem of unsupervised robotic sorting (URS) using the combination
of deep CNN feature extraction and standard clustering algorithms
(K-Means, Minibatch K-Means (MBKM), Affinity Propagation, Mean
Shift, Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering, and DBSCAN) to obtain
an industrial robotic system. Using hierarchical clustering, Arslan et al.
(2016) addressed the problem of feedback motion planning and control
to achieve a provably correct, computationally efficient coordinated
multi-robot motion design. Boldt-Christmas and Wong (2015) applied
to shift clustering algorithm that allows for the placement of robotic
agents anywhere within the communicative range. Janati et al. applied
the K-Means clustering algorithm to solve the problem of assigning
tasks to robots for many tasks, and robots can handle their assigned
tasks efficiently and efficiently (Janati et al., 2017).
7.10 Text mining
Text mining applications are essential to research, considering the
ever-growing databases across different platforms. It is widely used
in several sectors such as publishing and media; telecommunications,
energy, and other services industries; information technology sector
and Internet; banks, insurance and financial markets; political insti-
tutions, political analysts, public administration and legal documents;
pharmaceutical and research companies and healthcare (G. & K., 2015).
With this wide range of applicability, clustering analysis has also been
researched and applied to the task of text mining.
The automation of extracting knowledge from text documents ex-
ploits the solutions provided by clustering algorithms to fast-track this
task. In-text documents mining, clusters are built based on themes
from text documents. This is often achieved by first transforming text
documents into high-dimensional feature vectors based on frequency
features. This results in a data matrix that contains rows and columns,
where columns represent the count of one particular term. Further-
more, the processed documents are grouped based on the frequency of
words and similar words in a subset of terms; these subsets are related
to the theme of the documents. This may further reveal some important
knowledge about the documents ranging from knowing the different
themes a document may consist of and how to deduce the category
to which the document may be assigned. Studies have shown that themodified variable string length genetic algorithm (MVGA) has success-
fully applied text clustering (Chopade and Sheetlani, 2017). K-Means
clustering algorithms have also been successfully applied to analyz-
ing news headlines across different portals by using document pre-
processing techniques and creating clusters of similar news headlines
(Lama, 2013).
Using an improved version of K-Means (Tunali et al., 2015) ap-
plied a spherical K-Means (SKM) algorithm named multi-cluster SKM
clustering high dimensional document collections with high perfor-
mance and efficiency. Similarly, Lydia et al. (2018) applied K-Means
to the document clustering process task while calculating the cen-
troid similarity, and cluster similarity was achieved with Euclidean
Distance Similarity. Another study (Kalyanasundaram et al., 2015)
applied K-Means to perform document clustering using supplementary
information and the content for generating clusters with higher purity.
The study in Sathya Priya and Priyadharshini (2012) proposed using
semantic clustering and feature selection method to improve the clus-
tering and feature selection mechanism with semantic relations of the
text documents. Abualigah et al. solved the problem of text clustering
by leveraging nature-inspired clustering-based algorithms, including
Harmony Search (HS) Algorithm, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO) Algorithm, Ant Colony Optimization (ACO),
Krill Herd Algorithm (KHA), Cuckoo Search (CS) Algorithm, Gray Wolf
Optimizer (GWO), and Bat-inspired Algorithm (BA) (Abualigah et al.,
2020).
7.11 Video surveillance
Text-based data may appear to be increasing in size on the internet
and across different automated systems, but sometimes, the amount
of information or knowledge we can discover from them might not
be comparable with video files. A small video file can contain more
information than text documents and other media files such as audio
and images. Asad et al. in Asad et al. (2019) proposed a clustering
algorithm that variation of the Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering
algorithm. The algorithm was designed to cluster face images of hu-
mans. Another study (Auslander et al., 2011) applied the combination
K-Means clustering algorithm and the k-NN Localized 𝑝-value Estimator
(KNN-LPE) to surveillance tasks for detecting threats in the domain of
ground-based maritime video surveillance. Authors in Wu et al. (2015)
formulate static video summarization as a clustering problem by using
a new clustering algorithm (named Video Representation based High-
Density Peaks Search (VRHDPS)) to analyze properties of video and
gather similar frames into the cluster. In another related work on video
surveillance, Damnjanovic et al. applied a spectral clustering algorithm
that detects events from video through two types of summaries: static
and dynamic (Damnjanovic et al., 2008).
7.12 Marketing
Considering the wide range of clustering algorithms available in the
research domain, different studies have applied them to the problem
of analyzing and predicting customers so that services are provided
for them based on their requirements. In addition to this, automating
market segmentation tasks, new product development, and product
positioning have become possible through clustering methods.
Marketers have taken advantage of the automation of customer
recommendation systems for processing reviews from customers. Clus-
tering methods are now being widely applied to this task by using
captured customer reviews and grouping them into reviews with similar
preferences for market analysis. Such analysis provides markets with
means for strategizing on aggressive marketing to beat or outper-
form their market competitors. Clustering algorithms have provided
solutions to aid this process by grouping customers with overlapping
preferences based on product type. K-Means and EM clustering al-
gorithms were used in Hanumanth Sastry and PrasadaBabu (2013)
32

==== Page 33 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
to analyze a steel’s annual sales data to analyze sales volume and
value concerning dependent attributes like products, customers and
quantities sold. In a similar report, the author confirmed that clustering
methods had been applied to finding groups of customers with similar
behavior given a large database of customer data containing their
properties and past buying records (Madhulatha, 2015). Rajagopal
attempted to identify the high-profit, high-value and low-risk cus-
tomers by one of the data mining techniques — customer clustering
(Rajagopal, 2011); Örnek & Subaşıdeveloped a methodology using K-
Means and E-M to identify the characteristics of customers (Örnek
and Subaşı, 2011). A study (M., Hanji, & Hanji, 2014) attempted
to achieve market segmentation of customers by using enhanced K-
Means, which uses similarity measures for efficient segmentation of
two-wheeler market data. In a similar study, Piggott (2015) designed
a new airline-based market segment model with data clustering by
investigating the performances of K-Means, expectation–maximization
(EM), X-means, hierarchical and random clustering.
7.13 Object recognition and character recognition
A wide range of clustering methods and algorithms has been pro-
posed for grouping views of 3D objects for object recognition in range
data. This is made possible by first representing objects in terms of
a library of range images of that object to make it possible to apply
clustering tasks. Some studies, such as Saxena et al. (2017), Chel-
lapilla et al. (2006) and Connell and Jain (1999), identified lexemes in
handwritten text for writer independent handwriting recognition using
clustering algorithms.
7.14 Data mining and big data mining
The increasing volume of data generated daily through different
social media and other systems has necessitated efficient and optimal
knowledge discovery from such huge unprocessed data. Some of these
data-generating media have siloed data, while others have provided
data integration and interoperation frameworks. Clustering methods
have been deployed into such data warehouses to facilitate discovering
knowledge and patterns that are not readily available. Moreover, big
data processing tools like Hadoop are now widely used to support
clustering operations. Data mining systems have also taken advan-
tage of clustering to deploy applications capable of supportive mining
information in detecting money laundry from magnificent banking
data, detecting trends of behavior or responses from among people
groups, and many more. The amount of data generated, collected
and accumulated at industrial companies require effective automated
knowledge discovery solutions. Benabdellah et al. (2018) investigated
the appropriateness of K-Means, agglomerative hierarchical, DBSCAN
and SOM to the problem of sparse datasets originating from industrial
companies.
7.15 Dimensionality reduction
Data reduction has leverage on clustering techniques in reducing
data dimensionality to automatically separate cases from fault cases.
This has invariably supported fault detection procedures in production
and plant systems. Thomas and Romagnoli reported that industries like
chemical plants applied clustering methods to overcome the challenge
of cutting-edge fault detection and diagnosis by applying the clustering
algorithms to the organization of data into groups before training is
possible (Thomas and Romagnoli, 2016). We argue that this challenge
of data reduction before grouping is not limited to chemical plants
alone but several industries needing to perform similar tasks. In Erdog-
mus and Kayaalp (2020), swarm-based, nature-inspired optimization
algorithms, including GA, PSO, biogeography-based, and Gray wolf
optimization algorithms, have been used for clustering iris datasets.
Another study combined K-Means with nature-inspired algorithms totransform high-dimensional time series data onto a lower-dimensional
space by selecting important points in the time series (Fuad, 2017).
Nanda (2014) addressed the problem of efficiently handling large
data related to environmental disaster management by proposing an
enhancement to nature-inspired clustering algorithms by developing
multi-objective and constrained approaches (Nanda, 2014). Sardar and
Ansari (2018a,b) emphasized the need for maximizing the MapRe-
duce programming paradigm for handling clustering challenges in real-
world large dataset clustering through evolving new partition-based
clustering (Sardar and Ansari, 2018a,b).
7.16 Data transfer through network
Nowadays, huge user-generated data are shared online via social
media sites and forums. An effective transmission system is required
to attain high-speed data transmission and prevent setbacks. However,
the application of clustering analysis assists in such a situation. For
instance, DBSCAN, AutoClass algorithm, and K-Means can be used to
group similar traffic detection with transport layer statistics centered
on the application’s unique features as they transmit via a particular
network (Erman et al., 2006). This facilitates data transfer by transfer-
ring a cluster of the same traffic and the network. It is preferred that
sensor data be transmitted via the sensor network to the processing end
be achieved using the lowest energy. In such an instance, hierarchical
clustering has greatly impacted such tasks by significantly decreasing
power consumption (Erman et al., 2006). This can be performed by
classifying wireless sensor networks into clusters.
7.17 Urban development
Contemporary society is speedily accepting Internet of Things (IoT)
technology. Modern society is rapidly adopting smart technology. It
is pertinent that this technology goes beyond electronic devices by
becoming parts of our everyday lives in such settings. As a result, we
must be mindful of positioning our towns, building effective power
supplies, and providing other basic needs. However, a data clustering
algorithm can achieve such tasks effectively. For instance, an Ant clus-
tering technique (K-Means) is a common algorithm that has recorded
success in setting stations to sit firm towns and economic centers
on roads (Meng and Liu, 2007). Moreover, the GFDBSCAN clustering
technique can be employed to decide on the geographic position for es-
tablishing social amenities such as schools, hospitals, banks, electricity,
etc. (Kisore & Koteswaraiah, 2017). For instance, K-Means clustering
has tremendously contributed to pattern identification in online cable-
dissemination supervision (Peng et al., 2013). Similarly, k-medoids
clustering has been successfully employed to diagnose the transformer’s
fault (Zhou et al., 2017). The chaotic population registration procedure
can be lessened by satellite imaging, but its high resolution triggers a
spatial mismatch using ground reference data. However, convolutional
expectation maximization can be employed to deal with such an issue
(Pomente and Aleandri, 2017).
7.18 Privacy protection
Data security and privacy are the most crucial matters requiring
consideration in the current digital globe. Reliable and data sharing
security can be attained by separating data into clusters and presenting
a critical cluster to investigators. The task can be performed by employ-
ing distributed clustering (Erkin et al., 2013) and K-Means clustering
(Vaidya and Clifton, 2003). In addition to shared data security, it is
imperative to secure information publicly available on the web. The
existence of illegal web replication has been discovered in several
cases. As a result, a hybrid of clustering algorithms has been effectively
designed to jointly connect several scam-webs, thereby simplifying
their identification and elimination (Drew and Moore, 2014). Another
33

==== Page 34 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 11. A distribution of application of clustering analysis among the studies summarized in Section 6.1 through 6.14.
challenge in information security settings is identifying which fam-
ily a particular malware belongs to and the signature generation of
anti-virus systems. Malware that contradicts normal data is signifi-
cantly regarded as outliers and, as a result, eliminated from normal
data clusters. However, normal clustering techniques such as x-means
and K-Means and co-clustering algorithms have been successfully em-
ployed for network anomaly detection (Ahmed et al., 2016). Behavioral
malware-clustering has been made possible by exploiting hierarchical
(single-linkage) clustering to secure data from attack (Biggio et al.,
2014). Even though K-Means clustering has succeeded in anomaly-
based intrusion detection, the modified cluster labeling algorithm and
’Opt-Grid Clustering’ are more capable of attaining enhanced perfor-
mance in the high-performance intrusion identification domain (Ishida
et al., 2005). Clustering algorithms have made a tremendous contri-
bution to the domain of computer security. Thus, a data clustering
algorithm can deal extensively with cyber-attacks and simultaneously
improve data privacy and data mining.
As reviewed in the sub-sections above, a summary of the appli-
cations of clustering methods to different domains is presented in
graphical format. Our interest is to visually glance at the most applied
clustering algorithm or methods and distribution of such methods’
application in each domain.
The graph displayed in Fig. 11 shows the distribution of publications
reviewed across the applicability of clustering algorithms. This study
found that image segmentation/processing, medicine, and bioinformat-
ics attract more research interest, applying clustering algorithms or
methods to tackle data object grouping problems. This is followed
by data mining and financial or economic-related application areas.
The findings in this study will give prospective research work im-
petus to investigate the applicability of clustering algorithms to the
anticipated domain and to know the extent and number the clustering
algorithms are applied. This will also allow examining the application
of newer or even hybrid clustering algorithms to a domain of choice
depending on the trend observed, as shown in Fig. 12. Furthermore, in
Fig. 13, we studied and presented how each clustering algorithm has
been applied across domains. This study discovered that while some
clustering algorithms enjoy an extensive range of applicability, others
suffer. This could be pointers to many research opportunities for keen
researchers. For instance, one could investigate a clustering algorithm’s
properties that make it suitable for application and enjoy adoption
by many in a particular domain. This could further reveal possibleimprovements that could be done in that specific clustering algorithm
rather than invest research efforts on a clustering algorithm that may
not be profitable to that particular domain of interest.
To further study the trends indeed applying clustering methods to
different domains of interest, this study plotted a graph of categoriza-
tion of the use of all clustering algorithms in each domain/field. Again,
this was carried out to check the peak and distribution of frequency of
applicability of clustering algorithms in each group. For instance, the
field of financial and economic institutions/systems attracts clustering
algorithms more than other fields of human endeavors. In contrast,
other clustering algorithms are least adopted for some fields. This
leaves a thoughtful researcher with questions about investigating each
domain’s problem’s characteristics versus the properties of the clus-
tering algorithms of interest and how both maps efficiently solve the
problem in the field.
.
8 Concluding remark
Clustering is a powerful data mining and analysis tool used in many
fields, including machine learning, bioinformatics, robotics, pattern
recognition, and image analysis. Identifying the number of clusters
apriori is the most fundamental problem in cluster analysis. Speci-
fying the correct number of clusters apriori can help obtain optimal
solutions to many clustering problems. Because of this, automatic
clustering algorithms are taking over traditional clustering algorithms.
Automated clustering algorithms are designed to perform clustering
without the prior knowledge of data sets. They also can determine
the optimal number of clusters in noisy datasets. This study presents a
comprehensive and up-to-date survey of traditional and state-of-the-art
clustering algorithms. The paper will be beneficial for both practi-
tioners and researchers. It outlines the strengths and weaknesses of
various clustering algorithms. Moreover, it presents many open issues
that interested researchers and practitioners can explore. It also offers
valuable insights into clustering algorithms’ practical applications to
different sectors, including medical science, image processing, robotics,
aviation, automotive, financial systems, and big data mining.
The findings in this study show that the field of bioinformatics,
financial systems and economics, image processing, and segmentation
attracts more research interest than other domains, such as data mining
and object recognition. It also shows that the K-Means algorithm, Fuzzy
34

==== Page 35 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Fig. 12. An illustration of the distribution of the application of the clustering algorithms/methods across all studies considered in this section.
Fig. 13. Trend of the applicability of clustering algorithms/methods to different domains across all studies considered in this section.
35

==== Page 36 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
C-Means, and Hierarchical clustering technique are among the most
widely used clustering algorithms in the literature. Moreover, this study
shows that many clustering algorithms (such as nature-inspired ones)
have not been explored fully. These findings should give impetus for
future research studies. Future research can investigate the applicability
of clustering algorithms to different domains.
Furthermore, future studies can investigate the characteristics of
the problems experienced in different domains versus the properties
of different clustering algorithms and how both maps efficiently solve
problems in other application domains. Moreover, future studies can in-
vestigate the application of newer or even hybrid clustering algorithms
to a field of choice depending on various trends shown in this survey.
This survey will serve as a good reference point for researchers and
practitioners to design improved and efficient state-of-the-art clustering
algorithms.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
Abonyi, J., Feil, B., 2007. Cluster Analysis for Data Mining and System Identification.
Birkhäuser: Springer Science & Business Media, Basel.
Abualigah, L.M.Q., 2019. Feature Selection and Enhanced Krill Herd Algorithm for Text
Document Clustering. Springer, Berlin, pp. 1–165.
Abualigah, L., Gandomi, A.H., Elaziz, M.A., Hussien, A.G., Khasawneh, A.M., Alshin-
wan, M., et al., 2020. Nature-inspired optimization algorithms for text document
clustering—A comprehensive analysis. Algorithms 13 (345), 1–32.
Abualigah, L.M., Khader, A.T., Hanandeh, E.S., 2018a. A new feature selection method
to improve the document clustering using particle swarm optimization algorithm.
J. Comput. Sci. 25, 456–466.
Abualigah, L.M., Khader, A.T., Hanandeh, E.S., 2018b. Hybrid clustering analysis using
improved krill herd algorithm. Appl. Intell. 48 (11), 4047–4071.
Ackermann, Marcel R., Martens, Marcus, Raupach, Christoph, Swierkot, Kamil, Lam-
mersen, Christiane, Streamkm, Christian Sohler, 2012. A clustering algorithm for
data streams. ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 17 (4).
Adil, Fahad, Najlaa, Alshatri, Zahir, Tari, Abdullah, Alamri, Ibrahim, Khalil, Al-
bert, Zomaya, Sebti, Foufou, Abdelaziz, Bouras, 2014. A survey of clustering
algorithms for big data: Taxonomy and empirical analysis. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top.
Comput. 2, 267–279. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TETC.2014.2330519.
Agarwal, P., Alam, M.A., Biswas, R., 2011. Issues, challenges and tools of clustering
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1110.2610.
Aggarwal, C.C., Hinneburg, A., Keim, D.A., 2000. On the Surprising Behavior of
Distance Metrics in High Imensional Space. IBM Research report, RC 21739.
Aggarwal, C.C., Philip, S.Y., Han, J., Wang, J., 2003. A framework for clustering
evolving data streams. In: Proceedings 2003 VLDB Conference. Morgan Kaufmann,
pp. 81–92.
Aggarwal, C.C., Procopiuc, C., Wolf, J.L., Yu, P.S., Park, J.S., 1999. Fast algorithms
for projected clustering. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD Conference, 61-72,
Philadelphia, PA.
Aggarwal, C.C., Zhai, C., 2012. A survey of text clustering algorithms. In: Mining Text
Data. Springer, Boston, MA, pp. 77–128.
Aghabozorgi, Saeed, Shirkhorshidi, Ali Seyed, Wah, Teh Ying, 2015. Time-series
clustering – A decade review. Inf. Syst. 53, 16–38.
Agrawal, R., Gehrke, J., Gunopulos, D., Raghavan, P., 1998. Automatic subspace
clustering of high dimensional data for data mining applications. In: Proceedings
of the ACM SIGMOD Conference, 94-105, Seattle, WA.
Agrawal, R., Gehrke, J., Gunopulos, D., Raghavan, P., 2005. Automatic subspace
clustering of high dimensional data. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 11 (1), 5–33.
Ahmad, A., Dey, L., 2007. A k-mean clustering algorithm for mixed numeric and
categorical data. Data Knowl. Eng. 63 (2), 503–527.
Ahmed, T., Shaffer, P., Connelly, K., Crandall, D., Kapadia, A., 2016. Addressing phys-
ical safety, security, and privacy for people with visual impairments. In: Twelfth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2016, Denver, Colorado, pp.
341–354.
Ai, L., Gao, X., Xiong, J., 2014. Application of mean-shift clustering to Blood oxygen
level dependent functional MRI activation detection. BMC Med. Imaging 14 (1),
1–10.
Aitkin, M., Rubin, D., 1985. Estimation and hypothesis testing in finite mixture models.
J. R. Stat. Soc. B 47, 67–75.
Akram, M.U., Khalid, S., Tariq, A., Javed, M.Y., 2013. Detection of neovascularization
in retinal images using multivariate m-mediods based classifier. Comput. Med.
Imaging Graph. 37 (5–6), 346–357.Al-Jabery, K., Obafemi-Ajayi, T., Olbricht, G., Wunsch, D., 2019. Computational
Learning Approaches to Data Analytics in Biomedical Applications. Academic Press.
Alguwaizani, A., Hansen, P., Mladenović, N., Ngai, E., 2011. Variable neighborhood
search for harmonic means clustering. Appl. Math. Model. 35 (6), 2688–2694.
Aliniya, Z., Mirroshandel, S.A., 2019. A novel combinatorial mergesplit approach for
automatic clustering using imperialist competitive algorithm. Expert Syst. Appl.
117, 243–266.
Aljalbout, E., Golkov, V., Siddiqui, Y., Strobel, M., Cremers, D., 2018. Clustering with
deep learning: Taxonomy and new methods.
Alkhasov, S.S., Tselykh, A.N., Tselykh, A.A., 2015. Application of cluster analysis for the
assessment of the share of fraud victims among bank card holders. In: Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Security of Information and Networks.
Sochi Russia, pp. 103–106, September 8 - 10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2799979.
2800033.
Alshamiri, A.K., Surampudi, B.R., Singh, A., 2015. A novel ELM K-means algorithm for
clustering. In: Panigrahi, B., Suganthan, P., Das, S. (Eds.), Swarm, Evolutionary,
and Memetic Computing. SEMCCO 2014. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 8947, Springer, Cham, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20294-5_19.
Amini, A., Wah, T.Y., Teh, Y.W., 2012. DENGRIS-Stream: A density-grid based clustering
algorithm for evolving data streams over sliding window. In: Proc. International
Conference on Data Mining and Computer Engineering. pp. 206–210.
Anter, A.M., Hassenian, A.E., Oliva, D., 2019. An improved fast fuzzy c-means using
crow search optimization algorithm for crop identification in agricultural. Expert
Syst. Appl. 118, 340–354. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.10.009.
Antunes, C., Oliveira, A.L., 2001. Temporal data mining: an overview. In: KDD
Workshop on Temporal Data Mining. pp. 1–13.
Aouf, M., Lyanage, L., Hansen, S., 2008. Review of data mining clustering techniques
to analyze data with high dimensionality as applied in gene expression data
(june 2008). In: 2008 International Conference on Service Systems and Service
Management. IEEE, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, pp. 1–5.
Arbelaitz, O., Gurrutxaga, I., Muguerza, J., PéRez, J.M., Perona, I., 2013. An extensive
comparative study of cluster validity indices. Pattern Recognit. 46 (1), 243–256.
Arslan, O., Guralnik, D.P., Koditschek, D.E., 2016. Clustering-based robot navigation
and control. In: 2016 IEEE International, Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Workshop on Emerging Topological Techniques in Robotics.
Asad, M.-U., Mustafa, R., Hossain, M.S., 2019. An efficient strategy for face clustering
use in video surveillance system. In: Joint 2019 8th International Conference
on Informatics, Electronics & Vision (ICIEV) & 3rd International Conference on
Imaging, Vision & Pattern Recognition (IVPR). pp. 12–17.
Askarzadeh, A., 2016. A novel metaheuristic method for solving constrained engineering
optimization problems: Crow search algorithm. Comput. Struct. 169, 1–12. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPSTRUC.2016.03.001.
Asmaa, A., Sadok, B., 2019. PSO-based dynamic distributed algorithm for automatic
task clustering in a robotic swarm. In: Procedia Computer Science, 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems, Vol. 159. pp. 1103–1112.
Auslander, B., Gupta, K.M., Aha, D.W., 2011. A Comparative Evaluation of Anomaly De-
tection Algorithms for Maritime Video Surveillance. Knexus Research Corporation,
Springfield, pp. 1–15.
Bach, F.R., Jordan, M.I., 2006. Learning spectral clustering, with application to speech
separation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 1963–2001.
Baker, F.B., Hubert, L.J., 1975. Measuring the power of hierarchical cluster analysis.
J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 70, 31–38.
Balavand, A., Kashan, A.H., Saghaei, A., 2018. Automatic clustering based on crow
search algorithm-kmeans (CSA-Kmeans) and data envelopment analysis (DEA). In:
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems, Vol. 11.
Ball, G.H., Hall, D.J., 1965. ISODATA, a Novel Method of Data Analysis and Pattern
Classification. Stanford research inst, Menlo Park CA.
Bandaru, S., Ng, A.H., Deb, K., 2017. Data mining methods for knowledge discovery
in multi-objective optimization: Part A-Survey. Expert Syst. Appl. 70, 139–159.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.10.015.
Bandyopadhyay, S., Saha, S., 2008. A point symmetry-based clustering technique for
automatic evolution of clusters. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 20, 1441–1457.
Banfield, J.D., Raftery, A.E., 1993. Model-based Gaussian and non-Gaussian clustering.
Biometrics 80, 3–821.
Behbood, V., Lu, J., Zhang, G., 2013. Fuzzy refinement domain adaptation for long
term prediction in banking ecosystem. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 10 (2), 1637–1646.
Behzadi, S., Müller, N.S., Plant, C., Böhm, C., 2020. Clustering of mixed-type data
considering concept hierarchies: problem specification and algorithm. Int. J. Data
Sci. Anal. 10 (3), 233–248.
Belkin, M., Niyogi, P., Sindhwani, V., 2006. Manifold regularization: A geometric
framework for learning from labeled and unlabeled examples. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
7 (11).
Bellot, P., El-Bèze, M., 2000. A clustering method for information retrieval.
Benabdellah, A.C., Benghabrit, A., Bouhaddou, I., 2018. A survey of clustering
algorithms for an industrial context. In: Procedia Computer Science, Second
International Conference on Intelligent Computing in Data Sciences (ICDS 2018),
Vol. 148. pp. 291–302.
Benabdellah, Abla Chouni, Benghabrit, Asmaa, Bouhaddou, Imane, 2019. A survey
of clustering algorithms for an industrial context. Procedia Comput. Sci. (ISSN:
1877-0509) 148, 291–302.
36

==== Page 37 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Berkhin, P., Beche, J.D., Randall, D.J., 2001. Interactive path analysis of web site
traffic. In: Proceedings of the Seventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 414–419. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
502512.502574.
Bezdek, J.C., 2013. Pattern Recognition with Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms.
Springer Science & Business Media. Springer, Berlin.
Bezdek, J.C., Pal, N.R., 1998. Some new indexes of cluster validity. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. B 28 (3), 301–315.
Bhattacharjee, P., Mitra, P., 2021. A survey of density based clustering algorithms.
Front. Comput. Sci. 15 (1), 1–27.
Bickel, S., Scheffer, T., 2004. Multi-view clustering. In: ICDM, Vol. 4. pp. 19–26.
Biggio, B., Corona, I., Nelson, B., Rubinstein, B.I., Maiorca, D., Fumera, G., Roli, F.,
2014. Security evaluation of support vector machines in adversarial environments.
In: Support Vector Machines Applications. Springer, Cham, pp. 105–153.
Bindra, K., Mishra, A., 2017. A detailed study of clustering algorithms. In: 6th
International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization
(Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO). Noida, pp. 371–376. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ICRITO.2017.8342454.
Boldt-Christmas, a., Wong, b., 2015. A Study of Algorithms for 2-Dimensional Self-
Assembly in Swarm Robotics. Degree Project, in Computer Science, kth Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Boley, D., 1998. Principal direction divisive partitioning. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2
(4), 325–344.
Bora, D.J., Gupta, A.K., 2014. A novel approach towards clustering based image
segmentation. Int. J. Emerg. Sci. Eng. (IJESE) 2 (11), 6–10.
Boriah, S., Chandola, V., Kumar, V., 2008. Similarity measures for categorical data: A
comparative evaluation. In: Proceedings of the 2008 SIAM International Conference
on Data Mining. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, pp. 243–254.
Borlea, I.D., Precup, R.E., Borlea, A.B., Iercan, D., 2021. A unified form of fuzzy C-
means and K-means algorithms and its partitional implementation. Knowl.-Based
Syst. 214, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106731.
Bouveyron, C., Hammer, B., Villmann, T., 2012. Recent developments in clustering
algorithms. In: ESANN 2012 Proceedings, European Symposium on Artificial Neural
Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning. pp. 447–458.
Boyko, N., Komarnytska, H., Kryvenchuk, Y., Malynovskyy, Y., 2020. Clustering
algorithms for economic and psychological analysis of human behavior. In: CMiGIN-
2019: International Workshop on Conflict Management in Global Information
Networks. pp. 1–13.
Brauksa, I., 2013. Use of cluster analysis in exploring economic indicator differences
among regions: The case of latvia. J. Econ. Bus. Manage. 1 (1), 42–45.
Brimberg, J., Janićijević, S., Mladenović, N., Urošević, D., 2017. Solving the clique
partitioning problem as a maximally diverse grouping problem. Optim. Lett. 11
(6), 1123–1135.
Brimberg, J., Mladenović, N., Todosijević, R., et al., 2019. Solving the capacitated
clustering problem with variable neighbourhood search. Ann. Oper. Res. 272,
289–321. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2601-5.
Brito, P., Chavent, M., 2012. Divisive monothetic clustering for interval and
histogram-valued data.
Cai, F., Le-Khac, N.-A., Kechadi, M.-T., 2010. Clustering approaches for financial data
analysis: a survey.
Calinski, T., Harabasz, J., 1974. A dendrite method for cluster analysis. Commun. Stat.
3, 1–27.
Campbell, J.G., Fraley, C., Murtagh, F., Raftery, A.E., 1997. Linear flaw detection in
woven textiles using model based clustering. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 18, 1539–1548.
Cao, F., Ester, M., Qian, W., Zhou, A., 2006. Density-based clustering over an evolving
data stream with noise. https://epubs.siam.org/page/term.
Cao, Buyang, Glover, Fred, Rego, Cesar, 2015. A tabu search algorithm for cohesive
clustering problems. J. Heuristics 21, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10732-015-9285-
2.
Carreira-Perpiñán, M.Á., 2015. A review of mean-shift algorithms for clustering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.00687.
Carrizosa, E., Mladenovic, N., Todosijevic, R., 2013. Variable neighbourhood search
for minimum sum-of-squares clustering on networks. European J. Oper. Res. 230,
356–363.
Chan, P.K., Mahoney, M.V., 2005. Modeling multiple time series for anomaly detection.
In: Proceedings of Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. pp. 90–97.
Chang, J.W., Jin, D.S., 2002. A new cell-based clustering method for large, high-
dimensional data in data mining applications. In: Proceedings of the 2002 ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing. ACM Press, pp. 503–507.
Chang, D.X., Zhang, X.D., Zheng, C.W., Zhang, D.M., 2010. A robust dynamic niching
genetic algorithm with niche migration for automatic clustering problem. Pattern
Recognit. 43 (4), 1346–1360.
Chaouni, A., Benabdellah, Benghabrit, A., Bouhaddou, I., 2019. A survey of clustering
algorithms for an industrial context. Procedia Comput. Sci. 148, 291–302.
Chavent, M., Lechevallier, Y., Briant, O., 2007. DIVCLUS-T: A monothetic divisive
hierarchical clustering method. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 52 (2), 687–701.
Chehouri, A., Younes, R., Khoder, J., Perron, J., Ilinca, A., 2017. A selection process
for genetic algorithm using clustering analysis. Algorithms 10 (123), 1–15.
Chellapilla, K., Simard, P., Abdulkader, A., 2006. Allograph based writer adaptation for
handwritten character recognition. In: Tenth International Workshop on Frontiers
in Handwriting Recognition. Suvisoft.Chen, Yixin, Tu, Li, 2007. Density-based clustering for real-time stream data. In
Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2007.
Chena, Z., Qi, Z., Meng, F., Cui, L., Shi, Y., 2015. Image segmentation via improving
clustering algorithms with density and distance. In: Procedia Computer Science,
Information Technology and Quantitative Management (ITQM 2015), Vol. 55. pp.
1015–1022.
Cheng, Y., 2002. Mean shift, mode seeking, and clustering. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 17 (8), 790–799, (1995) Comaniciu and Meer.
Cheng, C., Fu, A., Zhang, Y., 1999. Entropy-based subspace clustering for mining
numerical data. In: Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGKDD. San Diego, CA. pp. 84-93.
Cherng, J., Lo, M., 2001. A hypergraph based clustering algorithm for spatial data sets.
In: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM’01), pp. 83–90.
Chiş, M., Banerjee, S., Hassanien, A.E., 2009a. Clustering time series data: an
evolutionary approach. Found. Comput. Intell. 6 (1), 193–207.
Chiş, Monica, Banerjee, Soumya, Hassanien, Aboul Ella, 2009b. Clustering time series
data: An evolutionary approach. In: Abraham, A., et al. (Eds.), Foundations of
Comput. Intel. Vol. 6, SCI 206. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 193–207,
springerlink.com ©.
Choi, S.S., Cha, S.H., Tappert, C.C., 2010. A survey of binary similarity and distance
measures. J. Syst. Cybern. Inform. 8 (1), 43–48.
Chopade, N., Sheetlani, J., 2017. Recent trends in incremental clustering: A review.
IOSR J. Comput. Eng. 19 (1), 19–24.
Chowdhury, A., Bose, S., Das, S., 2011. Automatic clustering based on invasive weed
optimization algorithm. In: International Conference on Swarm, Evolutionary, and
Memetic Computing. Springer, Berlin, pp. 105–112.
Chowdhury, K., Chaudhuri, D., Pal, A.K., 2020. An entropy-based initialization method
of K-Means clustering on the optimal number of clusters. Neural Comput. Appl.
1–18.
Comaniciu, D., Meer, P., 2002. Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space
analysis. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 24 (5), 603–619.
Connell, Scott D., Jain, Anil K., 1999. Writer adaptation of online handwritten models.
In: Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Document Analysis and Recognition, pp. 434–437.
Consoli, S., Korst, J., Pauws, S., Geleijnse, G., 2019. Improved variable neighbourhood
search heuristic for quartet clustering. In: Sifaleras, A., Salhi, S., Brimberg, J.
(Eds.), Variable Neighbourhood Search. ICVNS 2018. In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 11328, Springer, Cham, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-15843-
9_1.
Corter, J.E., Gluck, M.A., 1992. Explaining basic categories: Feature predictability and
information. Psychol. Bull. 111 (2), 291–303.
Cui, X., Potok, T.E., 2005. Document clustering analysis based on hybrid PSO+K-Means
algorithm. J. Comput. Sci. 5, 27–33.
Cui, X., Potok, T.E., Palathingal, P., 2005. Document clustering using particle swarm
optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Swarm Intelligence Symposium, SIS 2005.
IEEE Press, Piscataway, pp. 185–191.
Cura, T., 2012. A particle swarm optimization approach to clustering. Expert Syst. Appl.
39 (1), 1582–1588. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.07.123.
Dafir, Z., Lamari, Y., Slaoui, S.C., 2021. A survey on parallel clustering algorithms for
big data. Artif. Intell. Rev. 54 (4), 2411–2443.
Dalrymple-Alford, E.C., 1970. The measurement of clustering in free recall. Psychol.
Bull. 74, 32–34.
Damnjanovic, U., Fernandez, V., Izquierdo, E., Martinez, J.M., 2008. Event detec-
tion and clustering for surveillance video summarization. In: Ninth International
Workshop on Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services. pp. 63–66.
Dang, X.H., Lee, V., Ng, W.K., Ciptadi, A., Ong, K.L., 2009. An EM-based algorithm
for clustering data streams in sliding windows. In: International Conference on
Database Systems for Advanced Applications. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.
230–235.
Dardac, N., Boitan, I.A., 2019. A cluster analysis approach for banks’ risk profile: The
Romanian evidence. Eur. Res. Stud. 7 (1), 109–118.
Das, S., Abraham, A., Konar, A., 2008b. Swarm intelligence algorithms in
bioinformatics. Stud. Comput. Intell. (SCI) 94, 113–147.
Das, S., Abraham, A., Sarkar, S., 2006. A hybrid rough set–particle swarm algorithm
for image pixel classification. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HIS.2006.264909, 26.
Das, S., Chowdhury, A., Abraham, A., 2009. A bacterial evolutionary algorithm for
automatic data clustering. In: 2009 IEEE Congresson Evolutionary Computation.
IEEE, pp. 2403–2410.
Das, G., Lin, K.I., Mannila, H., Renganathan, G., Smyth, P., 1998. Rule discovery from
time series. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. 98, 16–22.
Das, A.S., Roy, S., 2008. Swarm intelligence algorithms for data clustering. In: Soft
Computing for Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Springer, Boston, MA, USA,
pp. 279–313.
Dasgupta, S., Littman, M.L., McAllester, D., 2002. PAC generalization bounds for
co-training. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 1. pp.
375–382.
Dasgupta, A., Raftery, A.E., 1998. Detecting features in spatial point processes with
clutter via model-based clustering. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 93, 294–302.
Datta, S., Datta, S., 2003. Comparisons and validation of statistical clustering techniques
for microarray gene expression data. Bioinformatics 19 (4), 459–466.
Davies, D.L., Bouldin, D.W., 1979. A cluster separation measure. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. (2), 224–227.
37

==== Page 38 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Day, W.H.E., Edelsbrunner, H., 1984. Efficient algorithms for agglomerative hierar-
chical clustering methods. J. Classification 1, 7–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF01890115.
Defays, D., 1977. An efficient algorithm for a complete link method. Comput. J. 20,
364–366.
Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M., Rubin, D.B., 1977. Maximum likelihood for incomplete
data via the EM algorithm. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 39, 1–38.
Deneubourg, J.L., Goss, S., Franks, N., Sendova-Franks, A., Detrain, C., Chrétien, L.,
1991. The dynamics of collective sorting: robot-like ants and ant-like robots. In:
Meyer, J.-A., Wilson, S. (Eds.), From Animals to Animals: Proceedings of the
First International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior. MIT Press,
Cambridge, pp. 356–365.
Dhanachandra, N., Manglem, K., Chanu, Y.J., 2015. Image segmentation using K-means
clustering algorithm and subtractive clustering algorithm. In: Procedia Computer
Science, Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Information Processing-2015
(IMCIP-2015), Vol. 54. pp. 764–771.
Dhiman, G., Kumar, V., 2018. Emperor penguin optimizer: A bio-inspired algorithm for
engineering problems. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2018.06.001.
Dizaji, K., Herandi, A., Deng, C., Cai, W., Huang, H., 2017. Deep clustering via joint
convolutional autoencoder embedding and relative entropy minimization.
Djouzi, K., Beghdad-Bey, K.A., 2019. Review of clustering algorithms for big data.
In: 2019 International Conference on Networking and Advanced Systems (ICNAS).
Annaba, Algeria, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICNAS.2019.8807822.
Dongkuan, Xu, 2015. A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms.
Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., Colorni, A., 1996. Ant system: optimization by a colony of
cooperating agents. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 26 (1), 29–41.
Dorigo, M., Stützle, T., 2004. Ant Colony Optimization. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Doval, D., Mancoridis, S., Mitchell, B.S., 1999. Automatic clustering of software systems
using a genetic algorithm. In: STEP’99. Proceedings Ninth International Workshop
Software Technology and Engineering Practice. IEEE, pp. 73–81.
Drew, J., Moore, T., 2014. Automatic identification of replicated criminal websites
using combined clustering. In: 2014 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE,
pp. 116–123.
Drewes, B., 2005. Some industrial applications of text mining. In: Knowledge Mining.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 233–238.
Duda, R.O., Hart, P.E., Stork, D.G., 2001. Pattern Classification. Wiley Publications.
Duin, R.P., Fred, A.L., Loog, M., P ˛ ekalska, E., 2012c. Mode seeking clustering by KNN
and mean shift evaluated. In: Joint IAPR International Workshops on Statistical
Techniques in Pattern Recognition (SPR) and Structural and Syntactic Pattern
Recognition (SSPR). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 51–59.
Duin, R.P.W., Fred, A.L.N., Loog, M., Pękalska, E., 2012a. Mode seeking clustering by
KNN and mean shift evaluated. In: Gimel’farb, G., et al. (Eds.), Structural, Syntactic,
and Statistical Pattern Recognition. SSPR/SPR 2012. In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 7626, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-34166-3_6.
Duin, Robert P.W., Fred, Ana L.N., Loog, Marco, Pękalska, Elzbieta, 2012b. Mode
seeking clustering by KNN and mean shift evaluated. In: farb, G.L. Gimel’, et al.
(Eds.), SSPR & SPR. In: LNCS, vol. 7626, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp.
51–59.
Dunn, J.C., 1973. A fuzzy relative of the ISODATA process and its use in detecting
compact well-separated clusters. J. Cybern. 3 (3), 32–57.
D’urso, P., Massari, R., 2019. Fuzzy clustering of mixed data. Inform. Sci. 505, 513–534.
Edwards, A.W., Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., 1965. A method for cluster analysis. Biometrics
362–375.
ElazizID, M.A., Al-qaness, M.A., Zaid, E.O., Lu, S., Ibrahim, R.A., Ewees, A.A., 2020.
Automatic clustering method to segment COVID-19 CT images. PLoS ONE 16 (1),
1–13.
Elbattah, M., Molloy, O., 2017. Clustering-aided approach for predicting patient
outcomes with application to elderly healthcare in Ireland. In: The AAAI-17 Joint
Workshop on Health Intelligence WS-17-09. pp. 533–541.
Engelbrecht, A.P., 2005. Fundamentals of Computational Swarm Intelligence. John
Wiley and Sons Ltd.
Erdogmus, P., Kayaalp, F., 2020. Introductory chapter: Clustering with nature-inspired
optimization algorithms. In: Erdogmus, P., Kayaalp, F. (Eds.), Introduction to Data
Science and Machine Learning. IntechOpen, p. 16.
Erkin, Z., Veugen, T., Toft, T., Lagendijk, R.L., 2013. Privacy-preserving distributed
clustering. EURASIP J. Inf. Secur. vol. 2013 (1), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1687-417X-2013-4.
Erman, J., Arlitt, M., Mahanti, A., 2006. Traffic classification using clustering algo-
rithms. In: Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCOMM Workshop on Mining Network
Data. pp. 281–286, Pisa Italy September 11 - 15, 2006. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
1162678.1162679.
Ezugwu, A.E., 2020a. Nature-inspired metaheuristic techniques for automatic clustering:
a survey and performance study. SN Appl. Sci. 2 (2), http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s42452-020-2073-0.
Ezugwu, A.E., 2020b. Nature-inspired metaheuristic techniques for automatic clustering:
a survey and performance study. SN Appl. Sci. 2 (2), http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s42452-020-2073-0.
Ezugwu, A.E., Shukla, A.K., Agbaje, M.B., Oyelade, O.N., José-García, A.,
Agushaka, J.O., 2020a. Automatic clustering algorithms: a systematic review and
bibliometric analysis of relevant literature. Neural Comput. Appl. 1–60.Ezugwu, A.E., Shukla, A.K., Agbaje, M.B., Oyelade, O.N., José-García, A.,
Agushaka, J.O., 2020b. Automatic clustering algorithms: a systematic review and
bibliometric analysis of relevant literature. Neural Comput. Appl. 1–60.
Falkenauer, E., 1998. Genetic Algorithms and Grouping Problems. John Wiley and Sons
Ltd., Chichester, England.
Feng, L., Qiu, M.-H., Wang, Y.-X., Xiang, Q.-L., Yang, Y.-F., Liu, K., 2010. A fast divisive
clustering algorithm using an improved discrete particle swarm optimizer. Pattern
Recognit. Lett. 31 (11), 1216–1225.
Finak, G., Bashashati, A., Brinkman, R., Gottardo, R., 2009. Merging mixture compo-
nents for cell population identification in flow cytometry. Adv. Bioinform. 2009,
1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2009/247646.
Forte, J.C., Perner, A., Horst, I.C., 2019. The use of clustering algorithms in critical
care research to unravel patient heterogeneity. Intensive Care Med. 45, 1025–1028.
Fortier, J., Solomon, H., 1996. Clustering procedures. In: P.R. Krishnaiah (Ed.),
Proceedings ofthe Multivariate Analysis, ’66. pp. 493–506.
Fowlkes, E.B., Mallows, C.L., 2010. A method for comparing two hierarchical
clusterings. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 78 (383), 553–569.
Fraley, Chris, Raftery, Adrian E., 1998. How many clusters? Which clustering method?
Answers via model-ased cluster analysis.
Friedman, J.H., Meulman, J.J., 2002. Clustering objects on subsets of attributes. http:
//citeseer.nj.nec.com/friedman02clustering.html.
Friedman, H.P., Rubin, J., 1967. On some invariant criteria for grouping data. J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc. 62 (320), 1159–1178.
Fu, T.K., Chung, F., Ng, C.M., 2004. Financial time series segmentation based on
specialized binary tree representation.
Fuad, M.M., 2017. Applying Nature-Inspired Optimization Algorithms for Selecting
Important Timestamps to Reduce Time Series Dimensionality. Coventry University,
pp. 1–13.
Fukunaga, K., Hostetler, L.D., 1975. The estimation of the gradient of a density function,
with applications in pattern recognition. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 21 (1), 32–40.
Gama, J., Gaber, M. (Eds.), 2007. Learning from Data Streams. Springer.
Gan, G., Ma, C., Wu, J., 2007. Data Clustering: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA.
Gariel, M., Srivastava, A.N., Feron, E., 2011. Trajectory clustering and an application
to airspace monitoring. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 12 (4), 1511–1524.
Gath, I., Geva, A., 1989. Unsupervised optimal fuzzy clustering. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 11 (7), 773–781.
Ge, Y., Sealfon, S.C., 2012. Flowpeaks: A fast unsupervised clustering for flow cytometry
data via K-means and density peak finding. Bioinformatics 28 (15), 2052–2058.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts300.
Gionis, A., Mannila, H., 2003. Finding recurrent sources in sequences. In: Proceedings
of the Seventh Annual International Conference on RESEARCH in Computational
Molecular Biology, 2003. pp. 123–130.
Glover, Fred, 1990. Tabu search: A tutorial. Interfaces 20, 74–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1287/inte.20.4.74, Rafael Batres, in Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 2012.
Glover, Fred, McMillan, C., Novick, Beth, 1985. Interactive decision software and
computer graphics for architectural and space planning. Ann. Oper. Res. 5,
557–573. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02023611.
Goil, S., Nagesh, H., Choudhary, A., 1999. MAFIA: Efficient and Scalable Subspace Clus-
tering for Very Large Data Sets. Technical Report CPDC-TR-9906-010, Northwestern
University.
Goldberg, D.E., 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine
Learning. Addison-Wesley, New York.
Goldbogen, J.A., Friedlaender, A.S., Calambokidis, J., McKenna, M.F., Simon, M.,
Nowacek, D.P., 2013. Integrative approaches to the study of baleen whale diving
behavior, feeding performance, and foraging ecology. BioScience 63 (2), 90–100.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/bio.2013.63.2.5.
Gong, C., Chen, H., He, W., Zhang, Z., 2017. Improved multi-objective clustering
algorithm using particle swarm optimization. Plos One.
Gowda, K.C., Krishna, G., 1978. Agglomerative clustering using the concept of mutual
nearest neighbourhood. Pattern Recognit. 10 (2), 105–112. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/0031-3203(78)90018-3.
Graves, D., Pedrycz, W., 2010. Proximity fuzzy clustering and its application to time
series clustering and prediction. In: Proceedings of the 2010 10th International
Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications ISDA10. pp. 49–54.
Grira, N., Crucianu, M., Boujemaa, N., 2005. Unsupervised and Semi-Supervised Clus-
tering: A Brief Survey * a Review of Machine Learning Techniques for Processing
Multimedia Content, Re-Port of the MUSCLE European Network of Excellence (6th
Framework Programme).
Guénoche, A., Hansen, P., Jaumard, B., 1991. Efficient algorithms for divisive
hierarchical clustering with the diameter criterion. J. Classification 8 (1), 5–30.
Guérin, J., Thiery, S., Nyiri, E., Gibaru, O., 2018. Unsupervised robotic sorting: Towards
autonomous decision making robots. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Appl. (IJAIA) 9 (2), 81–98.
Guha, S., Mishra, N., Motwani, R., O’Callaghan, L., 2000. Clustering data streams. In:
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science.
IEEE Computer Society.
Gulhane, A., Paikrao, P.L., Chaudhari, D.S., 2012. A review of image data clustering
techniques. Int. J. Soft Comput. Eng. (IJSCE) 2 (1), 212–215.
Guzzi, P.H., Masciari, E., Mazzeo, G.M., Zaniolo, C., 2014. A discussion on the biological
relevance of clustering results. In: ITBAM 2014. In: LNCS, pp. 30–44.
38

==== Page 39 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Halkidi, M., Batistakis, Y., Vazirgiannis, M., 2002. Clustering validity checking methods:
part II. ACM Sigmod Rec. 31 (3), 19–27.
Halkidi, M., Vazirgiannis, M., 2001. Clustering validity assessment: Finding the optimal
partitioning of a data set. In: Proceedings 2001 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining. IEEE, pp. 187–194.
Hall, L.O., Ozyurt, I.B., Bezdek, J.C., 1999. Clustering with a genetically optimized
approach. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput..
Hamerly, G., Elkan, C., 2004. Learning the k in K-means. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 2003. MIT Cambridge Press, pp. 281–288.
Hamilton, J.D., 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, p. 159.
Hancer, E., Xue, B., Zhang, M., 2020. A survey on feature selection approaches for
clustering. Artif. Intell. Rev. 53 (6), 4519–4545.
Hand, D.J., Mannila, H., Smyth, P., 2001. Principles of Data Mining (Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning). MIT Press.
Handl, J., Knowles, J., 2007. An evolutionary approach to multiobjective clustering.
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 11 (1), 56–76.
Handl, J., Knowles, J., Dorigo, M., 2006. Ant-based clustering and topographic mapping.
Artif. Life 12 (1), 35–62.
Hansen, P., 2005. Variable neighbourhood search. Search methodology. In: Bruke, E.K.,
Kendall, G. (Eds.), Search Metodologies. Springer, New York, NY, USA, pp.
211–238.
Hansen, P., Brimberg, J., Urosevic, D., Mladenovic, N., 2009. Solving large p-median
clustering problems by primal dual variable neighbourhood search. Data Min.
Knowl. Discov. 19, 351–375.
Hansen, P., Mladenovic, N., 2001. J -Means: A new local search heuristic for minimum
sum-of-squares clustering. Pattern Recognit. 34, 405–413.
Hansen, P., Mladenovic, N., 2018. Variable neighbourhood search. In: Martí, R.,
Pardalos, P., Resende, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Heuristics. Springer, Cham,
Switzerland.
Hanumanth Sastry, S., PrasadaBabu, M., 2013. Analysis & prediction of sales data
in saperp system using clustering algorithms. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol.
(IJCSITY) 1 (4), 95–109.
Harshada, S., Deshmukh, P., Ramteke, L., 2015. Comparing the techniques of cluster
analysis for big data.
Hartigan, J.A., 1975. Clustering Algorithms. John willey and sons. Inc, new york.
Hartigan, J.A., Wong, M.A., 1979. Algorithm AS 136: A K-means clustering algorithm.
J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. C (Appl. Stat.) 28 (1), 100–108.
He, W., Feng, G., Wu, Q., He, T., Wan, S., Chou, J., 2011. A new method for abrupt
dynamic change detection of correlated time series. Int. J. Climatol. 32 (10),
1604–1614.
He, H., Tan, Y., 2012. A two-stage genetic algorithm for automatic clustering.
Neurocomputing 81, 49–59.
Herawan, T., Deris, M.M., 2009. A framework on rough set-based partitioning attribute
selection. In: Paper Presented at the International Conference on Intelligent
Computing.
Herawan, T., Deris, M.M., Abawajy, J.H., 2010. A rough set approach for selecting
clustering attribute. Knowl.-Based Syst. 23 (3), 220–231.
Holland, J.H., 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. University of
Michigan Press, Michigan, USA.
Hruschka, E.R., Campello, R.J., Freitas, A.A., 2009. A survey of evolutionary algorithms
for clustering. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C 39 (2), 133–155.
Hsu, C.C., Lin, C.W., 2018. CNN-based joint clustering and representation learning with
feature drift compensation for large-scale image data. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 20 (2),
421–429. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2017.2745702.
Huang, S., Kang, Z., Xu, Z., Liu, Q., 2021. Robust deep k-means: An effective and
simple method for data clustering. Pattern Recognit. 117, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.patcog.2021.107996.
Huang, G.B., Zhu, Q.Y., Siew, C.K., 2006. Extreme learning machine: theory and
applications. Neurocomputing 70, 489–501.
Ibrahim, Osman, H., Christofides, Nicos, 1994. Capacitated clustering problems by hy-
brid simulated annealing and tabu search. Int. Trans. Oper. Res. (ISSN: 0969-6016)
1 (3), 317–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0969-6016(94)90032-9.
Ishida, C., Arakawa, Y., Sasase, I., Takemori, K., 2005. Forecast techniques for
predicting increase or decrease of attacks using bayesian inference. In: PACRIM.
2005 IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications, Computers and Signal
Processing, 2005. IEEE, Victoria, BC, Canada, pp. 450–453. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/PACRIM.2005.1517323.
Ito, F., Hiroyasu, T., Miki, M., Yokouchi, H., 2009. Detection of preference shift timing
using time-series clustering. pp. 1585–1590.
Ivancsy, R., Kovacs, F., 2006. Clustering techniques utilized in web usage mining.
In: Proceedings of the 5th WSEAS Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge
Engineering and Data Bases, Madrid, Spain, pp. 237-242.
Izakian, Z., Mesgari, M.S., Abraham, A., 2016. Automated clustering of trajectory data
using a particle swarm optimization. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 55, 55–65.
Jadhav, A.N., Gomathi, N., 2018. WGC: Hybridization of exponential grey wolf
optimizer with whale optimization for data clustering. Alex. Eng. J. 57 (3),
1569–1584. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2017.04.013.
Jain, A.K., 2010. Data clustering: 50 years beyond K-Means. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 31
(8), 651–666.
Jain, A.K., Dubes, R.C., 1988. Algorithms for Clustering Data. Prentice-Hall, Inc, Upper
Saddle River, NJ.Jain, A.K., Murty, M.N., Flynn, P.J., 1999. Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput.
Surv. 31 (3), 264–323.
Janati, F., Abdollahi, F., Ghidary, S.S., Jannatifar, M., Baltes, J., Sadeghnejad, S.,
2017. Multi-robot task allocation using clustering method. In: Robot Intelligence
Technology and Applications, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. pp.
223–247.
Jiang, Z., Zheng, Y., Tan, H., Tang, B., Zhou, H., 2016. Variational deep embedding:
An unsupervised and generative approach to clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1611.05148.
José-García, A., Gómez-Flores, W., 2016. Automatic clustering using nature-inspired
metaheuristics: A survey. Appl. Soft Comput. 41, 192–213.
Kailing, K., Kriegel, H.P., Pryakhin, A., Schubert, M., 2004. Clustering multi-represented
objects with noise. In: Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 394–403.
Kalyanasundaram, C., Snehal, A., Gaurav, J., Jain, S., 2015. Text clustering for
information retrieval system using supplementary information. Int. J. Comput. Sci.
Inf. Technol. 6 (2), 1613–1615.
Kamalzadeh, H., Ahmadi, A., Mansour, S., 2020. Clustering time-series by a novel
slope-based similarity measure considering particle swarm optimization.. Appl. Soft
Comput. 96, 106701.
Kanade, P.M., Hall, L.O., 2004. Fuzzy ant clustering by centroid positioning. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, Vol. 1. IEEE
Press, Piscataway, pp. 371–376.
Kanungo, T., Mount, D.M., Netanyahu, N.S., Piatko, C.D., Silverman, R., Wu, A.Y.,
2000. The analysis of a simple K-Means clustering algorithm. In: Symposium on
Computational Geometry. ACM, New York, 100109.
Karypis, G., Kumar, V., 2000. Multilevel k-way hypergraph partitioning. VLSI Des. 11
(3), 285–300.
Kaufman, L., Rousseeuw, P., 1990. Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster
Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Kaufman, L., Rousseeuw, P.J., 2009. Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster
Analysis, Vol. 344. John Wiley & Sons.
Keogh, E., Lonardi, S., Chiu, B.Y., 2002. Finding surprising patterns in a time series
database in linear time and space. In: Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD. pp.
550–556.
Khaled, S., Al-Sultan, M., Khan, Maroof, 1995. Computational experience on four
algorithms for the hard clustering problem.
Kharrousheh, Adnan, Abdullah, Salwani, Nazri, Mohd Zakree Ahmad, 2011. A modified
tabu search approach for the clustering problem. J. Appl. Sci. 11, 3447–3453.
Kim, J., 2009. Dissimilarity Measures for Histogram-Valued Data and Divisive Clustering
of Symbolic Objects. University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
Kim, J., Billard, L., 2011. A polythetic clustering process and cluster validity indexes
for histogram-valued objects. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 55 (7), 2250–2262.
Kim, J., Billard, L., 2012. Dissimilarity measures and divisive clustering for symbolic
multimodal-valued data. Comput. Statist. Data Anal. 56 (9), 2795–2808.
Kim, J., Lee, W., Song, J.J., Lee, S.-B., 2017. Optimized combinatorial clustering for
stochastic processes. Cluster Comput. 20 (2), 1135–1148.
Kisore, N.R., Koteswaraiah, C.B., 2017. Improving ATM coverage area using density
based clustering algorithm and voronoi diagrams. Inform. Sci. 376, 1–20. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2016.09.058.
Kittler, J.V., 1976. A locally sensitive method for cluster analysis. Pattern Recognit. 8
(1), 23–33.
Kokate, U., Deshpande, A., Mahalle, P., Patil, P., 2018. Review: Data stream clustering
techniques, applications, and models: Comparative analysis and discussion. Big Data
Cogn. Comput. 2 (32), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/bdcc2040032.
Koontz, W.L.G., Narendra, P.M., Fukunaga, K., 1976. A graph-theoretic approach to
nonparametric cluster analysis. IEEE Trans. Comput. 25, 936–944.
Kordos, M., Blachnik, M., 2019. Improving evolutionary instance selection with
clustering and ensembles. In: PP-RAI2019 Conference Proceeding. pp. 302–305.
Kosters, W., Laros, J., 2007. Metrics for mining multisets. In: International Conference
on Innovative Techniques and Applications of Artificial Intelligence. Springer,
London, pp. 293–303.
Kovács, F., Ivancsy, R., 2006. Cluster Validity Measurement for arbitrary Shaped
clustering. In: Proceeding of the 5th. WSEAS Int.Conf. on Artificial, Knowledge
Engineering and Data Bases. Madrid, Spain. pp. 372–377.
Krishna, Murty, M.N., 1999. Genetic K-means algorithm. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
B 29 (3).
Krishnapuram, R., Keller, J., 1993. A possibilistic approach to clustering. IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst. 1 (2), 98–110.
Krishnasamy, G., Kulkarni, A.J., Paramesran, R., 2014. A hybrid approach for data
clustering based on modified cohort intelligence and K-Means. Expert Syst. Appl.
(ISSN: 0957-4174) 41 (13), 6009–6016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.03.
021.
Krovi, R., 1992. Genetic algorithms for clustering: a preliminary investigation. In:
System Sciences, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Hawaii International Conference,
Volume: Iv on. pp. 540–544.
Kulkarni, A.J., Durugkar, I.P., Kumar, M., 2013. Cohort intelligence: A selfsuper-
vised learning behavior. In: IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC). pp. 1396–1400.
Kuo, R.J., Huang, Y.D., Lin, C.C., Wu, Y.H., Zulvia, F.E., 2014. Automatic kernel
clustering with bee colony optimization algorithm. Inform. Sci. 283, 107–122.
39

==== Page 40 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Kuo, R.J., Syu, Y.J., Chen, Z.Y., Tien, F.C., 2012. Integration of particle swarm
optimization and genetic algorithm for dynamic clustering. Inform. Sci. 195 (2012),
124–140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2012.01.021.
Lago-Fernández, L.F., Corbacho, F., 2010. Normality-based validation for crisp
clustering. Pattern Recognit. 43 (3), 782–795.
Lakhani, J., Chowdhary, A., Harwani, D., 2015. Clustering techniques for biological
sequence analysis: A review. J. Appl. Inf. Sci. 14–32.
Lakshmi, K., Karthikeyani Visalakshi, N., Shanthi, S., 2018. Data clustering using K-
means based on crow search algorithm. S ¯adhan ¯a 43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12046-018-0962-3S.
Lama, P., 2013. Clustering System Based on Text Mining using the K-Means
Algorithm (Bachelor’s thesis). (UAS), Information Technology.
Legány, C., Juhász, S., Babos, A., 2006. Cluster validity measurement techniques. In:
Proceeding of the 5th. WSEAS Int. Conf. on Artificial, Knowledge Engineering and
Data Bases, February 15-17. WSEAS, Madrid, Spain, pp. 388–393.
Leng, M., Lai, X., Tan, G., Xu, X., 2009. Time series representation for anomaly
detection. In: Proceedings of 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer
Science and Information Technology. In: ICCSIT 2009, vol. 2009, pp. 628–632.
Li, L., Das, S., John Hansman, R., Palacios, R., Srivastava, A.N., 2015. Analysis of flight
data using clustering techniques for detecting abnormal operations. J. Aerosp. Inf.
Syst. 12 (9).
Li, X., Liang, W., Zhang, X., Qing, S., Chang, P.C., 2020. A cluster validity evaluation
method for dynamically determining the near-optimal number of clusters. Soft
Comput. 24 (12), 9227–9241.
Li, F., Qiao, H., Zhang, B., 2018. Discriminatively boosted image clustering with fully
convolutional auto-encoders. Pattern Recognit. 83, 161–173. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.patcog.2018.05.019.
Liao, T.W., 2005. Clustering of time series data-a survey. Pattern Recognit. 2005.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2005.01.025.
Lin, J., Lin, H., 2009. A density-based clustering over evolving heterogeneous data
stream. In: 2009 ISECS International Colloquium on Computing, Communication,
Control, and Management, Vol. 4. IEEE, pp. 275–277.
Lin, J., Vlachos, M., Keogh, E., Gunopulos, D., 2004. Iterative incremental clustering
of time series. Adv. Database Technol. 521–522.
Lin, C.X., Yu, Y., Han, J., Liu, B., 2009. Hierarchical Web-Page Clustering Via in-Page
and Cross-Page Link Structures. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Liu, X., Croft, W.B., 2004. Cluster-based retrieval using language models. In: Proceed-
ings of the 27th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval. University of Sheffield, UK, pp. 186–193.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1008992.1009026.
Liu, Y., Wu, X., Shen, Y., 2011. Automatic clustering using genetic algorithms. Appl.
Math. Comput. 218 (4), 1267–1279.
Lo, K., Brinkman, R.R., Gottardo, R., 2008. Automated gating of flow cytometry data
via robust model-based clustering. Cytometry A 73 (4), 321–332. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/cyto.a.20531.
Lu, Y., Cao, B., Rego, C., Glover, F., 2018. A tabu search based clustering algorithm
and its parallel implementation on spark. Appl. Soft Comput. 63, 97–109.
Lu, Yi, Lu, Shiyong, Fotouhi, Farshad, 2004a. FGKA: A fast genetic K-means clustering
algorithm. In: SAC’04 Nicosia, Cyprus. ACM, 1-58113-812-1/03/04.
Lu, Yi, Lu, Shiyong, Fotouhi, Farshad, Deng, Youping, Susan, Brown J., 2004b. An
incremental genetic K-means algorithm and its application in gene expression data
analysis. BMC Bioinformatics.
Lydia, E.L., Govindaswamy, P., Lakshmanaprabu, S.K., Ramya, D., 2018. Document
clustering based on text mining K-means algorithm using euclidean distance
similarity. J. Adv. Res. Dyn. Control Syst. 10 (02-Special Issue), E.
Macnaughton-Smith, P., Williams, W., Dale, M., Mockett, L., 1964. Dissimilarity
analysis: a new technique of hierarchical sub-division. Nature 202 (4936),
1034–1035.
MacQueen, J., 1967. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate
observations. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
Statistics and Probability, Vol. 1, No. 14. pp. 281–297.
Madhulatha, T.S., 2015. An overview on clustering methods. IOSR J. Eng. 2 (4),
719–725.
Magoeva, K., Krzhizhanovskaya, V.V., Kovalchuk, S.V., 2018. Application of clustering
methods for detecting critical acute coronary syndrome patients. In: Procedia
Computer Science, 7th International Young Scientist Conference on Computational
Science, Vol. 138. pp. 370–379.
Mangortey, E., Monteiro, D., Ackley, J., Gao, Z., Puranik, T.G., Kirby, M., et al., 2020.
Application of Machine Learning Techniques To Parameter Selection for Flight Risk
Identification. Georgia Inst. Technol., Atlanta, pp. 1–39.
Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P., Schütze, H., 2009. Flat clustering. In: Clustering in
Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 349–375.
Mansalis, S., Ntoutsi, E., Pelekis, N., Theodoridis, Y., 2018. An evaluation of data
stream clustering algorithms. Statist. Anal. Data Min. ASA Data Sci. J. 11. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/sam.11380.
Mao, J., Jain, A.K., 1996. A self-organizing network for hyperellipsoidal clustering
(HEC). IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 7 (1), 16–29.
Marriot, F.H., 1975. Practical problems in a method of cluster analysis. Biometrics 27,
456–460.
Marriott, F.H.C., 1974. The Interpretation of Multiple Observations. Academic Press,
London.Martins, P., 2020. Goal clustering: VNS based heuristics. Available online: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1705.07666v4 (accessed on 24 October 2020).
Maulik, U., Bandyopadhyay, S., 2000. Genetic algorithm-based clustering technique.
Pattern Recognit. 33.
Mazlack, L.J., He, A., Zhu, Y., 2000. A rough set approach in choosing partitioning
attributes. In: Paper Presented At the Proceedings of the ISCA 13th International
Conference (CAINE-2000).
McClain, J.O., Rao, V.R., 1975. Clustisz: A program to test for the quality of clustering
of a set of objects. J. Mar. Res. 456–460.
Mclachlan, G., Basford, K., 1988. Mixture Models: Inference and Applications to
Clustering. Marcel Dekker, New York, NY.
Mclachlan, G., Krishnan, T., 1997. The EM Algorithm and Extensions. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, NY.
Meng, Y., Liu, X., 2007. Application of K-means algorithm based on ant clustering
algorithm in macroscopic planning of highway transportation hub. In: 2007 First
IEEE International Symposium on Information Technologies and Applications in
Education. IEEE, Kunming, China, pp. 483–488. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISITAE.
2007.4409331.
Van der Merwe, D., Engelbrecht, A., 2003. Data clustering using particle swarm
optimization. In: Proceedings of the 2003 Congress on Evolutionary Computation.
IEEE Press, Piscataway, pp. 215–220.
Milligan, G.W., 1981. A Monte Carlo study of thirty internal criterion measures for
cluster analysis. Psychometrika 46 (2), 187–199.
Min, E., Guo, X., Liu, Q., Zhang, G., Cui, J., Long, J., 2018. A survey of clustering
with deep learning: From the perspective of network architecture. IEEE Access 6,
39501–39514. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2855437.
Mirjalili, S., Lewis, A., 2016. The whale optimization algorithm. Adv. Eng. Softw. 95,
51–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2016.01.008.
Mishra, J., Agarwal, V., Sharma, M., Srivastava, J., 2015. Clustering algorithms: Brief
review in bioinformatics. Int. J. Sci. Res. (IJSR) 1012–1019.
Mitsa, T., 2009. Temporal Data Mining, Vol. 33. Chapman & Hall/CRC Taylor and
Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL.
Mladenovic, N., Hansen, P., 1997. Variable neighbourhood search. Comput. Oper. Res.
24, 1097–1100.
Morchen, F., Ultsch, A., Mörchen, F., Hoos, O., 2005. Extracting interpretable muscle
activation patterns with time series knowledge mining. J. Knowl. Based 9 (3),
197–208.
Mukerjee, S., Feigelson, E.D., Babu, G.J., Murtagh, F., Fraley, C., Raftery, A., 1998.
Three types of gamma ray bursts. Astrophys. J. 508, 314–327.
Murphy, R.F., 1985. Automated identification of subpopulations in flow cytometric list
mode data using cluster. In: Alan R. Liss, Inc. Cytometry, Vol. 6.
Murtagh, F., 1983. A survey of recent advances in hierarchical clustering algorithms.
Comput. J. 26, 354–359. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/26.4.354.
Murtagh, F., 1985. A survey of algorithms for contiguity-constrained clustering and
related problems. Comput. J. 28, 82–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/28.1.
82.
Myhre, J.N., Mikalsen, K.Ø., Løkse, S., Jenssen, R., 2018. Robust clustering using a
kNN mode seeking ensemble. Pattern Recognit. 76, 491–505.
Nagpal, Arpita, 2013. Review based on data clustering algorithms.
Naim, I., Datta, S., Rebhahn, J., Cavenaugh, J.S., Mosmann, T.R., Sharma, G., 2014.
SWIFT—scalable clustering for automated identification of rare cell populations
in large, high-dimensional flow cytometry datasets, part 1: Algorithm design.
Cytometry A 85 (5), 408–421.
Nameirakpam, D., Jina, C.Y., 2015. Image segmentation method using K-means
clustering algorithm for color image. Adv. Res. Electr. Electron. Eng. 2 (11), 68–72.
Nanda, S.J., 2014. Nature inspired clustering algorithms for analysis of natural
databases. Hydrol. Meteorol. 5, 4.
Nanda, S.J., Panda, G., 2014. A survey on nature inspired metaheuristic algorithms for
partitional clustering. Swarm Evol. Comput. 16, 1–18.
Nasiri, J., Farzin, Khiyabani, M., Khiyabani, F.M., 2018. A whale optimization algorithm
(WOA) approach for clustering under a creative commons attribution (CC-BY)
4.0 license a whale optimization algorithm (WOA) approach for clustering. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1080/25742558.2018.1483565.
Neel, J., 2005. Cluster Analysis Methods for Speech Recognition (Master Thesis in
Speech Technology). Department of Speech, Music and Hearing, Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm.
Newcomer, S.R., Steiner, J.F., Bayliss, E.A., 2011. Identifying subgroups of complex
patients with cluster analysis. Am. J. Manage. Care 17 (8), 324–332.
Nirkhi, S., Hande, K., 2008. A survey on clustering algorithms for web applications.
In: SWWS. pp. 124–129.
Novaliendry, D., Hendriyani, Y., Yang, C.-H., Hamimi, H., The optimized K-means
clustering algorithms to analyzed the budget revenue expenditure in padang. in:
Proceeding of International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science
and Informatics (EECSI 2015), Palembang, Indonesia, pp. 61-66.
Ntoutsi, Irene, Zimek, Arthur, Palpanas, Themis, Kroger, Peer, Kriegel, Hans-Peter,
2012. Density-based projected clustering over high dimensional data streams. In:
Proc. of the 12th SIAM International Conference on Data Mining.
Nunes, N.F., 2011. Algorithms for Time Series Clustering Applied to Biomedical Signals.
New University of Lisbon, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, Physics Department,
Lisbon.
40

==== Page 41 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Olson, C., 1995. Parallel algorithms for hierarchical clustering. Parallel Comput. 21,
1313–1325.
Omran, M., Salman, A., Engelbrecht, A., 2002. Image classification using particle swarm
optimization. In: Wang, L., Tan, K.C., Furuhashi, T., Kim, J.-H., Yao, X. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Fourth Asia-Pacific Conference on Simulated Evolution and
Learning, SEAL’02. IEEE Press, Piscataway, pp. 370–374.
Orlov, V., Kazakovtsev, L., Rozhnov, I., Popov, N., Fedosov, V., 2018. Variable
neighbourhood search algorithm for K-means clustering. IOP Conf. Series: Mater.
Sci. Eng. 450, 022035.
Ormerod, P., Mounfield, C., 2000. Localised structures in the temporal evolution of
asset prices. In: New Approaches to Financial Economics. Santa Fe Conference.
Örnek, Ö., Subaşı, A., 2011. Clustering marketing datasets with data mining techniques.
Journal 408–412.
Ouadfel, S., Batouche, M., Taleb-Ahmed, A., 2010. A modified particle swarm
opti-mization algorithm for automatic image clustering. In: Proceedings of the
1stInternational Symposium on Modeling and Implementing Complex Systems.
Constantine, Algeria.
Oyelade, J., Isewon, I., Oladipupo, F., Aromolaran, O., Uwoghiren, E., Ameh, F., et al.,
2016. Clustering algorithms: Their application to gene expression data. Bioinform.
Biol. Insights 10, 237–253.
Pakhira, M.K., Bandyopadhyay, S., Maulik, U., 2004. Validity index for crisp and fuzzy
clusters.. Pattern Recognit. 37 (3), 487–501.
Pandit, S., Gupta, S., 2011. A comparative study on distance measuring approaches for
clustering.. Int. J. Res. Comput. Sci. 2 (1), 29–31.
Parida, P., 2018. Fuzzy clustering based transition region extraction for image
segmentation. Future Comput. Inform. J. 32, 1–333.
Parmar, D., Wu, T., Blackhurst, J., 2007. Mmr: an algorithm for clustering categorical
data using rough set theory. Data Knowl. Eng. 63 (3), 879–893.
Parsons, Lance, Haque, Ehtesham, Liu, Huan, 2004. Subspace clustering for high
dimensional data: A review. SIGKDD Explor. 6, 90–105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
1007730.1007731.
Patel, P.M., Shah, B.N., Shah, V., 2013. Image segmentation using K-mean clustering
for finding tumor in medical application. Int. J. Comput. Trends Technol. 4 (5),
1239–1242.
Paterlini, S., Krink, T., 2006. Differential evolution and particle swarm optimisation in
partitional clustering. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 50 (5), 1220–1247.
Patidar, A.K., Agrawal, J., Mishra, N., 2012. Analysis of different similarity measure
functions and their impacts on shared nearest neighbor clustering approach. Int. J.
Comput. Appl. 40 (16), 1–5.
Patil, C., Baidari, I., 2019. Estimating the optimal number of clusters k in a dataset
using data depth. Data Sci. Eng. 4 (2), 132–140.
Pavlidis, N., Plagianakos, V.P., Tasoulis, D.K., Vrahatis, M.N., 2006. Financial fore-
casting through unsupervised clustering and neural networks. Oper. Res. 6 (2),
103–127.
Pelleg, D., 2000. Extending K-Means with efficient estimation of the number of clusters
in ICML. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on machine learning,
pp. 277–281.
Peng, X., Zhou, C., Hepburn, D.M., Judd, M.D., Siew, W.H., 2013. Application of K-
means method to pattern recognition in on-line cable partial discharge monitoring.
IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 20 (3), 754–761.
Piggott, J., 2015. Identification of Business Travelers Through Clustering Algo-
rithms (Master thesis Business and Information Technology). Faculty of Man-
agement and Governance, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and
Computer Science.
Pitchai, R., Supraja, P., Sulthana, R., Veeramakali, T., 2021. Brain tumor segmentation
and prediction using fuzzy neighborhood learning approach for 3D MRI images.
Plant, C., Böhm, C., 2009. Novel Trends in Clustering. Technische Universität München,
Munich Germany, pp. 1–28.
Pomente, A., Aleandri, D., 2017. Convolutional expectation maximization for population
estimation. In: CLEF (Working Notes). http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1866/paper_138.pdf.
(Accessed July 7, 2021).
Popivanov, I., Miller, R.J., 2002. Similarity search over time series data using wavelets.
In: Proceedings of the 18th Int’l Conference on Data Engineering, San Jose, CA,
Feburary 26-March 1, pp. 212–221.
Prabhu, P., 2011. Document clustering for information retrieval – a general perspective.
Indian Streams Res. J. 1–4.
Procopiuc, C.M., Jones, M., Agarwal, P.K., Murali, T.M., 2002. A monte carlo algo-
rithm for fast projective clustering. In: Proceedings of the 2002 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data. ACM Press, pp. 418–427.
Punit, R., 2018. Big Data Cluster Analysis and its Applications (Doctor of Philosophy).
The University Of Melbourne.
Qian, Y., 2006. K-means algorithm and its application for clustering companies listed
in zhejiang province. Data Min. VII: Data Text Web Min. Bus. Appl. 35–44.
Qin, H., Ma, X., Herawan, T., Zain, J.M., 2014. Mgr: An information theory based
hierarchical divisive clustering algorithm for categorical data. Knowl.-Based Syst.
67, 401–411.
Qu, J., Shao, Z., Liu, X., 2010. Mixed PSO clustering algorithm using point symmetry
distance. J. Comput. Inf. Syst. 6 (6), 2027–2035.
Raftery, A., 1986. A note on Bayes factors for log-linear contingency table models with
vague prior information. J. R. Statist. Soc. 48 (2), 249–250.Ragaventhiran, J., Kavithadevi, M.K., 2020. Map-optimize-reduce: CAN tree assisted FP-
growth algorithm for clusters based FP mining on hadoop. Future Gener. Comput.
Syst. 103, 111–122. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.09.041.
Rahnema, N., Gharehchopogh, F.S., 2020. An improved artificial bee colony algorithm
based on whale optimization algorithm for data clustering. Multimedia Tools Appl.
79 (43–44), 32169–32194. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-09639-2.
Rajagopal, S., 2011. Customer data clustering using data mining technique. Int. J.
Database Manage. Syst. ( IJDMS ) 3 (4).
Rand, W.M., 1971. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods. J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc. 66 (336), 846–850.
Rani, S., Sikka, G., 2012. Recent techniques of clustering of time series data: a survey.
Int. J. Comput. Appl. 52 (15).
Räsänen, O., 2007. Speech Segmentation and Clustering Methods for a New Speech
Recognition Architecture. Helsinki University of Technology, Department of Elec-
trical and Communications Engineering, Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal
Processing.
Rasmussen, E.M., 1992. Clustering Algorithms. Information Retrieval: Data Structures
& Algorithms, vol. 419. p. 442.
Rastgarpour, M., Shanbehzadeh, J., Soltanian-Zadeh, H., 2014. A hybrid method
based on fuzzy clustering and local region-based level set for segmentation of
inhomogeneous medical images. J. Med. Syst. 38 (8), 1–15.
Ratkowsky, D.A., Lance, G.N., 1978. A criterion for determining the number of groups
in a classification. Aust. Comput. J. 10, 115–117.
Ray, S., Turi, R.H., 1999. Determination of number of clusters in k-means clustering and
application in colour image segmentation. In: Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Advances in Pattern Recognition and Digital Techniques. Narosa
Pub. House, Calcutta, pp. 137–143.
Reddy, M., Babu, M.R., 2019. Implementing self adaptiveness in whale optimization
for cluster head section in Internet of Things. Cluster Comput. 22 (1), 1361–1372.
Ren, J., Cai, B., Hu, C., 2011. Clustering over data streams based on grid density and
index tree. J. Converg. Inf. Technol. 6 (1), 83–93.
Ren, J., Ma, R., 2009. Density-based data streams clustering over sliding windows. In:
2009 Sixth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery,
Vol. 5. IEEE, pp. 248–252.
Rendon, E., Garcia, R., Abundez, I., Gutierrez, C., Gasca, E., Del Razo, F., Gonzalez, A.,
2008. Niva:A robust cluster validity. In: WSEAS International Conference. Proceed-
ings. Mathematics and Computers in Science and Engineering. World Scientific and
Engineering Academy and Society, Crete, Greece, pp. 209–213.
Řezanková, H., 2014. Cluster analysis of economic data. STATISTIKA 94 (1), 73–86.
Rijsbergen, V., 1979. Information Retrieval. Butterworths, London.
Rohlf, F.J., 1974. Methods of comparing classifications. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 5 (1),
101–113.
Rokach, L., 2005. Clustering Methods, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
Handbook. Springer, pp. 331–352.
Ros, F., Guillaume, S., 2019. Information sciences munec: A mutual neighbor-based
clustering algorithm. In: Information Sciences, Vol. 00. https://www.elsevier.com/
open-access/userlicense/1.0/.
Rose, R.L., Puranik, T.G., Mavris, D.N., 2020. Natural language processing based method
for clustering and analysis of aviation safety narratives. Aerospace 7 (143), 1–22.
Rousseeuw, P., 1987. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation
of cluster analysis. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 20, 53–65.
Rovetta, S., Mnasri, Z., Masulli, F., Cabri, A., 2019. Emotion recognition from speech
signal using fuzzy clustering. In: Atlantis Studies in Uncertainty Modelling, 11th
Conference of the European Society for Fuzzy Logic and Technology (EUSFLAT
2019). pp. 120–127.
Rozhnov, I.P., Orlov, V.I., Kazakovtsev, L.A., 2019. Vns-based algorithms for the
centroid-based clustering problem. Facta Univ. Ser. Math. Inform. 34, 957–972.
Ruiz, Carlos, Menasalvas, Ernestina, Spiliopoulou, Myra, C-denstream 2009. Using
domain knowledge on a data stream. In: Proc. of the International Conference
on Information Engineering and Computer Science, ICIECS.
Runkler, T.A., 2005. Ant colony optimization of clustering models. Int. J. Intell. Syst.
20 (12), 1233–1251.
Saatchi, S., Hung, C.C., 2005. Hybridization of the ant colony optimization with the
K-means algorithm for clustering. In: Image Analysis. In: Lecture notes in computer
science, vol. 3540, Springer, Berlin.
Saemi, B., Hosseinabadi, A.A., Kardgar, M., Balas, V.E., Ebadi, H., 2018. Nature inspired
partitioning clustering algorithms: A review and analysis. Soft Comput. Appl. Adv.
Intell. Syst. Comput. 643, 97–116.
Safari, Z., Mursi, K.T., Zhuang, Y., 2020. Fast automatic determination of cluster
numbers for high dimensional big data. In: Proceedings of the 2020 the 4th
International Conference on Compute and Data Analysis, pp. 50–57.
Saha, S., Alok, A.K., Ekbal, A., 2016. Brain image segmentation using semi-supervised
clustering. Expert Syst. Appl. 52, 50–63.
Saitta, R.B., Smith, I., 2007. Abounded index for cluster validity. In: Perner, P. (Ed.),
In: Machine Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 4571, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 174–187.
Sanse, K., Sharma, M., 2015a. Clustering methods for big data analysis. Int. J. Adv.
Res. Comput. Eng. Technol. 4 (3), 642–648.
Sanse, Keshav, Sharma, Meena, 2015b. Clustering methods for Big data analysis.
Sardar, T.H., Ansari, Z., 2018a. An analysis of MapReduce efficiency in document
clustering using parallel K-means algorithm. Future Comput. Inform. J. 3, 200–209.
41

==== Page 42 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Sardar, T.H., Ansari, Z., 2018b. Partition based clustering of large datasets using
MapReduce framework: An analysis of recent themes and directions. Future
Comput. Inform. J. 3, 143–151.
Sasaki, Hiroaki, Kanamori, Takafumi, Hyvarinen, Aapo, Niu, Gang, Sugiyama, Masashi,
2018. Mode-seeking clustering and density ridge estimation via direct estimation
of density-derivative-ratios. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18 (2018), 1–47.
Sathya Priya, P., Priyadharshini, S., 2012. Clustering technique in data mining for text
documents. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. 294, 3–2947.
Savaresi, S.M., Boley, D.L., Bittanti, S., Gazzaniga, G., 2002. Cluster selection in divisive
clustering algorithms. In: Paper Presented at the Proceedings of the 2002 SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining.
Saxena, A., Prasad, M., Gupta, A., Bharill, N., Patel, O.P., Tiwari, A., et al., 2017. A
review of clustering techniques and developments. Neurocomputing http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.neucom.2017.06.053.
Scott, A.J., Symons, M.J., 1971. Clustering methods based on likelihood ratio criteria.
Biometrics 387–397.
Senthilnath, J., Omkar, S.N., Mani, V., 2011. Clustering using firefly algorithm:
performance study. Swarm Evol. Comput. 1 (3), 164–171.
Sfetsos, A., Siriopoulos, C., 2004. Time series forecasting with a hybrid clustering
scheme and pattern recognition. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 34 (3), 399–405.
Shaffer, E., Dubes, R.C., Jain, A.K., 1979. Single-link characteristics of a mode-seeking
clustering algorithm. Pattern Recognit. 11 (1), 65–70.
Sharan, R., Shamir, R., 2000. CLICK: a clustering algorithm with applications to gene
expression analysis. In: Proc international conference intelligent systems molecular
biology, pp. 307–316.
Sharma, S., 1996. Applied Multivariate Techniques. John Willwy & Sons.
Sheikh, R.H., Raghuwanshi, M.M., Jaiswal, A.N., 2008. Genetic algorithm based
clustering: a survey. In: First International Conference on Emerging Trends in
Engineering and Technology, Vol. 2. IEEE, Nagpur, India, pp. 314–319.
Shekar, B., Murty, M.N., Krishna, G., 1987. A knowledge-based clustering scheme.
Pattern Recognit. Lett. 5 (4), 253–259.
Shi, Z., Wu, D., Guo, C., Zhao, C., Cui, Y., Wang, F.Y., 2021. FCM-RDpA: TSK
fuzzy regression model construction using fuzzy C-means clustering, regularization,
Droprule, and Powerball Adabelief. Inform. Sci. 574, 490–504. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.ins.2021.05.084.
Shirkhorshidi, A.S., Shirkhorshidi, A.S., Wah, T.Y., Herawan, T., 2014. Big data
clustering: A review. In: ICCSA 2014, Part V. In: LNCS 8583, Springer International
Publishing Switzerland, pp. 707–720.
Sibson, R., 1973. SLINK: An optimally efficient algorithm for the single-link cluster
method. Comput. J. 16 (1), 30–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/16.1.30.
Silva, J.A., Faria, E.R., Barros, R.C., Hruschka, E.R., Carvalho, A.C.D., Gama, J., 2013.
Data stream clustering: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 46 (1), 1–31.
Sinaga, K.P., Yang, M.S., 2020. Unsupervised K-means clustering algorithm. IEEE Access
8, 80716–80727.
Singh, S., Srivastava, S., 2020. Review of clustering techniques in control system.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 173, 272–280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.06.
032.
Singh, A., Yadav, A., Rana, A., 2013. K-means with three different distance metrics.
Int. J. Comput. Appl. 67 (10).
Sneath, P.H., Sokal, R.R., 1973. Numerical taxonomy. In: The Principles and Practice
of Numerical Classification.
Sonkamble, B.A., Doye, D.D., 2012. Speech recognition using vector quantization
through modified K-MeansLBG Algorithm. Comput. Eng. Intell. Syst. 3 (7), 137–145.
Soppari, K., Chandra, N.S., 2020. Development of improved whale optimization-based
FCM clustering for image watermarking. Comp. Sci. Rev. 37, 100287. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/J.COSREV.2020.100287.
Sruthi, K., Reddy, M.B., 2013. Document clustering on various similarity measures. Int.
J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng. 3 (8), 1269–1273.
Stefan, R.-M., 2014. Cluster type methodology for grouping data. Proc. Econ. Finance
Emerg. Markets Queries Finance Bus. 15, 357–362.
Steinback, M., Tan, P.N., Kumar, V., Klooster, S., Potter, C., 2002. Temporal data mining
for the discovery and analysis of ocean climate indices. In: The 2nd Workshop
on Temporal Data Mining, at the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Strehl, A., Ghosh, J., 2000. Clustering guidance and quality evaluation using
relationship-based visualization. In: Intelligent Engineering Systems through
Artificial Neural Networks. St. Louis, Missouri, USA, pp. 483–488.
Su, Z.G., Wang, P.H., Shen, J., Li, Y.G., Zhang, Y.F., Hu, E.J., 2012. Automatic fuzzy
partitioning approach using variable string length artificial bee colony (VABC)
algorithm. Appl. Soft Comput. 12 (11), 3421–3441.
Suganya, R., Pavithra, M., Nandhini, P., 2018. Algorithms and challenges in big data
clustering. Int. J. Eng. Tech. 4 (4), 40–47.
Sugavaneswaran, L., 2017. Mathematical modeling of gene networks. Encycl. Biomed.
Eng. 1–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.64118-1.
Sung, C.S., Jin, H.W., 2000. A tabu-search-based heuristic for clustering. Pattern
Recognit. 33, 849–858. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0031-3203(99)00090-4.
Suresh, K., Kundu, D., Ghosh, S., Das, S., Abraham, A., 2009. Data clustering using
multi-objective differential evolution algorithms. Fund. Inform. 97 (4), 381–403.
Tan, P.N., 2018. Introduction to Data Mining. Pearson Education India.Tang Rui, S.F., Yang, X.-S., Deb, S., 2012. Nature-inspired clustering algorithms for
web intelligence data. In: 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology. pp. 147–153.
Theodoridis, S., Koutroubas, K., 1999. Pattern Recognition. Academic Press.
Thilakaratne, M., Falkner, K., Atapattu, T., 2019. A systematic review on literature-
based discovery workflow [PeerJ]. PeerJ Computer Science, 5, e235.trees. Pattern
Recognit. 43, 752–766.
Thomas, M.C., Romagnoli, J., 2016. Extracting knowledge from historical databases for
process monitoring using feature extraction and data clustering. In: Proceedings of
the 26th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering – ESCAPE
26, 859-864.
Tran, L., Fan, L., Shahabi, C., 2021. Mixed-type data with correlation-preserving embed-
ding. In: International Conference on Database Systems for Advanced Applications.
Springer, Cham, pp. 342–358.
Tsay, R.S., 2005. Analysis of Financial Time Series. John Wiley & SONS.
Tunali, V., Bilgin, T., Camurcu, A., 2015. An improved clustering algorithm for text
mining: Multi-cluster spherical K-means. Int. Arab J. Inform. Technol. 1, 2–19.
Ultsch, A., Mörchen, F., 2005. ESOM-Maps: Tools for Clustering, Visualization, and
Classification with Emergent SOM.
Vaidya, J., Clifton, C., 2003. Privacy-preserving k-means clustering over vertically par-
titioned data. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 206–215.
Vani, H., Anusuya, M.A., 2019. Fuzzy clustering algorithms - comparative studies for
noisy speech signals. Ictact J. Soft Comput. 9 (3), 1920–1926.
Venkataramana, B., Padmasree, L., Srinivasa Rao, M., Ganesan, G., Rama Krishna, K.,
2017. Implementation of clustering algorithms for real datasets in medical
diagnostics using MATLAB. J. Soft Comput. Appl. 2017 (1), 53–66.
Verbeek, J., 2004. Mixture Models for Clustering and Dimension Reduction (Doctoral
dissertation). Universiteit van Amsterdam.
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y., Manzagol, P.A., 2008 Extracting and com-
posing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th
international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1096–1103.
Vlachos, M., Gunopulos, D., Das, G., 2004. Indexing time-series under conditions of
noise. In: Last, M., Kandel, A., Bunke, H. (Eds.), Data Mining in Time Series
Databases. World Scientific, Singapore, p. 67.
Voorhees, Ellen M., 1986. Implementing agglomerative hierarchic clustering algorithms
for use in document retrieval. Inf. Process. Manage. (ISSN: 0306-4573) 22 (6),
465–476.
Vries, C.M., 2014. Document clustering algorithms, representations and evaluation
for information retrieval. In: Computational Intelligence and Signal Processing.
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
Žalik, K.R., Žalik, B., 2011. Validity index for clusters of different sizes and densities.
Pattern Recognit. Lett. 32 (2), 221–234.
Waheed, A., Akram, M.U., Khalid, S., Waheed, Z., Khan, M.A., Shaukat, A., 2015.
Hybrid features and mediods classification based robust segmentation of blood
vessels. J. Med. Syst. 39 (10), 1–14.
Wan, L., Ng, W.K., Dang, X.H., Yu, P.S., Zhang, K., 2009. Density-based clustering of
data streams at multiple resolutions. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data (TKDD) 3
(3), 1–28.
Wang, Z., Chang, S., Zhou, J., Wang, M., Huang, T.S., 2016. Learning a task-specific
deep architecture for clustering. In: Proceedings of the 2016 SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, pp.
369–377.
Wang, X.D., Chen, R.C., Yan, F., Zeng, Z.Q., Hong, C.Q., 2019. Fast adaptive K-
means subspace clustering for high-dimensional data. IEEE Access 7, 42639–42651.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2907043.
Wang, S., Fan, J., Fang, M., Yuan, H., 2014. HGCUDF: Hierarchical grid clustering
using data field. Chinese J. Electron. 23 (1), 37–42.
Wang, T.-C., Pham, Y.T., 2020. An application of cluster analysis method to determine
Vietnam airlines’ ground handling service quality benchmarks. J. Adv. Transp.
Hindawi 1–13.
Wang, H., Wang, W., Yang, J., Yu, P.P.S., 2002. Clustering by pattern similarity in
large data sets. In: Proceedings of 2002 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
Management data – SIGMOD ’02, 2, p. 394.
Wang, Y., Yan, H., Sriskandarajah, C., 1996. The weighted sum of split and diameter
clustering. J. Classification 13 (2), 231–248.
Wang, J., Zeng, H., Chen, Z., Lu, H., Tao, L., Ma, W.Y., 2003. Recom: reinforcement
clustering of multi-type interrelated data objects. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in informaion
retrieval, pp. 274–281.
Ward, J.H., 1963. Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc. 58, 236–244.
Ware, S., Dhawas, N.A., 2012. Web document clustering using KEA-means algorithm.
Int. J. Comput. Technol. Appl. 3 (5), 1720–1725.
Warrenliao, T., 2005. Clustering of time series data—a survey. Pattern Recognit 38
(11), 1857–1874.
Wei, L., Kumar, N., Lolla, V., Keogh, E., 2005. Assumption-free anomaly detection in
time series. In: roceedings of the 17th International Conference on Scientific and
Statistical Database Management, pp. 237–240.
Weidt, F., Silva, R., 2016. Systematic Literature Review in Computer Science-a Practical
Guide. Relatórios Técnicos Do DCC/UFJF, 1.
42

==== Page 43 ====
A.E. Ezugwu, A.M. Ikotun, O.O. Oyelade et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 110 (2022) 104743
Wharton, S.W., 1983. A generalized histogram clustering scheme for multidimensional
image data. Pattern Recognit. 16 (2), 193–199.
Williams, W.T., Lambert, J.M., 1959. Multivariate methods in plant ecology: I.
Association-analysis in plant communities. J. Ecol. 83–101.
Woo, K.-G., Lee, J.-H., 2002. FINDIT: A Fast and Intelligent Subspace Clustering
Algorithm using Dimension Voting (Ph.D. thesis). Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Taejon, Kore.
Wu, J., Zhong, S.-h., Jiang, J., Yang, Y., 2015. A novel clustering method for static
video summarization. Multimedia Tools Appl. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-
016-3569-x.
Xia, Y., Fu, Z., Pan, L., Duan, F., 2018. Tabu search algorithm for the distance-
constrained vehicle routing problem with split deliveries by order. PLoS ONE 13
(5), e0195457. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195457.
Xie, X.L., Beni, G., 1991. A validity measure for fuzzy clustering. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 13 (8), 841–847.
Xie, J., Girshick, R., Farhadi, A., 2016. Unsupervised deep embedding for clustering
analysis. https://github.com/piiswrong/dec.
Xie, H., Zhang, L., Lim, C.P., Yu, Y., Liu, C., Liu, H., et al., 2019. Improving K-means
clustering with enhanced firefly algorithms. Appl. Soft Comput. 84.
Xiong, T., Wang, S., Mayers, A., Monga, E., 2009. A new MCA-based divisive
hierarchical algorithm for clustering categorical data. In: Paper Presented At the
2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining.
Xu, D., Tian, Y., 2015. A comprehensive survey of clustering algorithms. Ann. Data.
Sci. 2 (2), 165–193.
Xu, R., Wunsch, D., 2005. Survey of clustering algorithms. Neural Netw. IEEE Trans.
on 16, 645–678. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2005.845141.
Yager, R., Filev, D., 1994. Approximate clustering via the mountain method. IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. Part B: Cybern. 24 (8), 1279–1284.
Yaghini, M., Ghazanfari, N., 2020. Tabu-KM: A hybrid clustering algorithm based on
tabu search approach. Int. J. Ind. Eng. Prod. Res. (2010), 71–79.
Yan, F., Wang, X.D., Zeng, Z.Q., Hong, C.Q., 2020. Adaptive multi-view subspace
clustering for high-dimensional data. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 130, 299–305.
Yang, B., Fu, X., Sidiropoulos, N.D., Hong, M., 2017. Towards K-means-friendly spaces:
Simultaneous deep learning and clustering. https://github.com/boyangumn/DCN.
Yang, Y., Ma, Z., Yang, Y., Nie, F., Shen, H.T., 2014. Multitask spectral clustering by
exploring intertask correlation. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 45 (5), 1083–1094.
Yang, Y., Wang, H., 2018. Multi-view clustering: A survey. In Big Data Mining and
Analytics, Vol. 1, (2). Tsinghua University Press, pp. 83–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.
26599/BDMA.2018.9020003.Yang, J., Wang, W., Wang, H., Yu, P., 2002. 𝛿-Clusters: capturing subspace correlation
in a large data set. In: Data Engineering, 2002. Proceedings. 18th International
Conference on. pp. 517–528.
Yin, S., Gan, G., Valdez, E.A., Vadiveloo, J., 2021. Applications of clustering with mixed
type data in life insurance. Risks 9 (3), 47.
Yu, J., Li, H., Liu, D., 2020. Modified immune evolutionary algorithm for medical data
clustering and feature extraction under cloud computing environment. J. Healthcare
Eng. 1–11.
Zadeh, L., 1965. Fuzzy sets. Inform. Control 8 (3), 338–353.
Zahn, C.T., 1971. Graph-theoretical methods for detecting and describing gestalt
clusters. IEEE Trans. Comput. C-20 (1), 68–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/T-C.
1971.223083.
Zahoor, J., Zafar, K., 2020. Classification of microarray gene expression data using an
infiltration tactics optimization (ITO) algorithm. Genes 11 (819), 1–28.
Zare, H., Shooshtari, P., Gupta, A., Brinkman, R.R., 2010. Data reduction for spec-
tral clustering to analyze high throughput flow cytometry data. http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/403.
Zerhari, B., Lahcen, A.A., Mouline, S., 2015. Big data clustering: Algorithms and
challenges. In: Conference: LRIT, Unité Associée au CNRST URAC 29. Mohammed
V University, Rabat, Morocco.
Zhang, T., Ramakrishnan, R., Linvy, M., 1996. BIRCH: An efficient method for very
large databases. In: ACM SIGMOD.
Zhong, C., Miao, D., Wang, R., Zhou, X., 2008. DIVFRP: An automatic divisive
hierarchical clustering method based on the furthest reference points. Pattern
Recognit. Lett. 29 (16), 2067–2077.
Zhou, Aoying, Cao, Feng, Qian, Weining, Jin, Cheqing, 2008. Tracking clusters in
evolving data streams over sliding windows. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 15 (2).
Zhou, L., Wang, D., Guo, L., Wang, L., Jiang, J., Liao, W., 2017. FDS Analysis for
multilayer insulation paper with different aging status in traction transformer of
high-speed railway. IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. vol. 24 (5), 3236–3244.
Zhou, Y., Wu, H., Luo, Q., Abdel-Baset, M., 2019. Automatic data clustering using
nature-inspired symbiotic organism search algorithm. Knowl.-Based Syst. 163,
546–557.
Zolhavarieh, S., Aghabozorgi, S., Teh, Y.W., 2014. A review of subsequence time series
clustering. Sci. World J. 312521, 19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/312521.
43

