==== Page 1 ====
1
A Comprehensive Survey of Few-shot Learning:
Evolution, Applications, Challenges, and Opportunities
Yisheng Song, Ting Wang, Subrota K Mondal, Jyoti Prakash Sahoo
Abstract —Few-shot learning (FSL) has emerged as an effective learning method and shows great potential. Despite the recent
creative works in tackling FSL tasks, learning valid information rapidly from just a few or even zero samples still remains a serious
challenge. In this context, we extensively investigated 200+ latest papers on FSL published in the past three years, aiming to present a
timely and comprehensive overview of the most recent advances in FSL along with impartial comparisons of strengths and
weaknesses of the existing works. For the sake of avoiding conceptual confusion, we ﬁrst elaborate and compare a set of similar
concepts including few-shot learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning. Furthermore, we propose a novel taxonomy to classify the
existing work according to the level of abstraction of knowledge in accordance with the challenges of FSL. To enrich this survey, in each
subsection we provide in-depth analysis and insightful discussion about recent advances on these topics. Moreover, taking computer
vision as an example, we highlight the important application of FSL, covering various research hotspots. Finally, we conclude the
survey with unique insights into the technology evolution trends together with potential future research opportunities in the hope of
providing guidance to follow-up research.
Index Terms —Cross-domain, Few-shot Learning, Fine Tuning, Meta learning, Transfer Learning.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in hardware and information technology
have accelerated the interconnection of billions of devices
in various IoT-enabled application domains. Smart and
adaptive devices are increasingly deployed in critical infras-
tructures such as health, transportation, industrial produc-
tion, environmental detection, home automation, and many
other justifying the Internet of Everything (IoE) frameworks.
These massive number of terminal devices have been gen-
erating a huge amount of data, which need to be sent back
to the server for central processing and storage. Although
the total amount of generated data at the edge is very large,
the volume of every dataset generated by a single device or
single scene is extremely limited with very few samples.
Traditional data-driven and single-domain algorithms do
not perform well in these settings. To this end, numerous
research has been conducted in exploring effective learning
methods based on few samples and cross-domain scenes.
Few-shot learning (FSL) as well as meta-learning have in-
evitably emerged as a promising way. However, how to
effectively obtain valid information from small sample data
set or even cross-domain still remains the greatest challenge
faced by FSL today.
(Corresponding author: Ting Wang.)
Yisheng Song and Ting Wang are with the Engineering Research Center
of Software/Hardware Co-design Technology and Application, Ministry
of Education; the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Comput-
ing; East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (email:
71205902054@stu.ecnu.edu.cn; twang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn).
Subrota K Mondal is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Macau
University of Science and Technology, Macao, China (email: skmon-
dal@must.edu.mo).
Jyoti Prakash Sahoo is with the Department of Computer Science &
Information Technology, Institute of Technical Education and Research,
Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, India (email: jpsahoo@ieee.org).Besides, data distribution in real-world scenarios of-
ten has long-tail effects and it is difﬁcult to generalize
the same model across diverse domains. Taking the smart
manufacturing industrial inspection as an example, such
poor generalization issue has become one of the key chal-
lenges affecting the performance of its intelligent models.
Speciﬁcally, current industrial quality inspection equipment
requires certain speciﬁc lighting conditions, and the AI
models trained under one lighting condition are difﬁcult
to ”generalize” to other lighting conditions. In addition,
considering the high accuracy requirements of industrial
quality inspection scenarios, current AI models, usually us-
ing supervised learning, require a large number of defective
samples for training. However, it is difﬁcult to collect a
sufﬁcient number of satisfactory samples as the proportion
of defective products in actual production scenes is small.
Moreover, it is not possible to transfer across domains either.
For example, a model for PC appearance defect detection
cannot be directly used to detect defects of mobile phone
screens, refrigerators, washing machines, or even different
models of PCs. Similarly, as another example, when recog-
nizing character images of components and circuit boards,
as there are many suppliers of components, many types of
devices, and many different character styles, thus it is not
possible to collect a sufﬁcient number of all kinds of samples
of character images for one supplier, resulting in few or no
samples of each type. Table 1 provides a detailed summary
of these challenges.
To address these challenges more effectively, FSL has
produced some creative work on data, algorithms, and
models. Up to now, as one of the most classical taxonomy,
FSL is classiﬁed into meta-learning and metric-based learn-
ing. In this review, from the perspective of challenges, we
divide the FSL into data augmentation, transfer learning,
meta-learning, and multimodal learning. Data augmenta-arXiv:2205.06743v2  [cs.LG]  24 May 2022

==== Page 2 ====
2
TABLE 1
Current challenges that industry urgently needs to address
Scenes Challenges Key Solutions
Quality Inspection LineSusceptible to light
Few sample data
Unable to transfer across-domainsFew shot cross-domain transfer
Robust model generalization
Electronic Component IdentiﬁcationA variety of colors, sizes and brands
Insufﬁcient samples of each brand
Existence of unseen new brandsFew-shot learning
Transfer learning
Uniﬁed feature representation
tion focuses on simulating data in different scenarios by
metric or generative methods to maximize the actual data
distribution. Transfer learning is mainly combined with pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning to extract prior knowledge from
large-scale auxiliary data sets. When domain relevance is
relatively uncommon or large auxiliary datasets are not
available, transfer learning has deﬁnite limitations. Meta-
learning is currently the mainstream approach to solve the
FSL problem. In recent years, some scholars have ques-
tioned ”Is such a kind of meta or episodic-training paradigm
really responsible and optimal for the FSL problem?”. This
has led to extensive discussions [1], [2] on the necessity
of meta-learning for FSL. As for multimodal learning, it
integrates different dimensions of information, such as lan-
guage, images, and audio. Multimodal learning is expected
to break the dilemma of insufﬁcient useful information for
FSL in the real human information world.
Due to the speciﬁcity of FSL, each method of FSL is
confronting multifaceted challenges to varying degrees. One
of the most direct challenges in data augmentation is that
the data samples are too limited and the model cannot
evaluate the true data distribution by relying solely on a
few samples. As a result, the model trained in this setting is
biased and easily falls into over-ﬁtting. In transfer learning,
features can effectively alleviate the problem of FSL, where
the volume of data is small and cannot be migrated across
similar domains. Nevertheless, how to represent features
effectively, how to reuse features between different tasks,
and how to establish an effective mapping between data
and labels are great challenges that exist in transfer learning.
Moreover, in the meta-learning paradigm, when training the
meta-learner with a set of tasks, it not only samples the data
space but also the task space. By constantly adapting to each
speciﬁc task, it makes the network have an abstract learn-
ing ability. When the training task and the target task are
distinctly different, the effect of meta-learning is minimal.
Furthermore, in the ﬁeld of multimodal learning, extensive
studies have been conducted to explore how to effectively
integrate information from multiple modalities to assist the
FSL.
Several existing survey papers have investigated the re-
lated work of FSL, for instance, the work [3] categorizes FSL
approaches into experience learning and conception learn-
ing. The work [4] classiﬁes FSL approaches into generative
models and discriminative models according to probability
distribution. Lately, the work [5] proposes a new taxonomy
to classify the FSL approaches from the aspect of data,
models, and algorithms. Nevertheless, to the best of our
knowledge, no one paper has ever provided a taxonomyfrom the perspective of challenges in FSL. By summarizing
the challenges of FSL, readers can better grasp the motiva-
tion and principle behind the FSL, rather than being limited
to various models. A list of key acronyms used in this paper
is summarized in Table 2.
1.1 Organization of the Survey
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
Section 2 provides an overview of FSL, introducing FSL,
comparatively analyzing machine learning, meta-learning,
and transfer learning along with summarizing the current
variants of FSL and challenges. Furthermore, to tackle the
obstacles systematically, in this section we demonstrate a
new taxonomy to classify the existing FSL related works.
Section 3 to Section 6 present a systematic investigation
on the current mainstream researches from the perspective
of challenges in FSL and provide a comparative analysis
from various aspects. With this taxonomy, a discussion and
summary are provided at the end of each section, giving
our insights into the respective ﬁelds accompanied by some
potential research opportunities. Section 7 takes computer
vision as an example, counting the latest progress of FSL
in image classiﬁcation, object detection, semantics segmen-
tation, and instance segmentation in chronological order.
Section 8 delves into exploring the current challenges faced
by FSL and how to seek breakthroughs in each branch. The
overall outline of this paper is shown in Fig. 1.
The main contributions of this survey can be summa-
rized as follows:
We start with the edge computing scenario, in which
the few-shot learning challenges arise, explaining
and clarifying several similar concepts that are easily
confused with FSL. This will be beneﬁcial to help
readers establish the relationship between few-shot
learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning.
We comprehensively investigate the FSL related
work from the perspective of challenges through
knowledge graphs and heat maps. With this taxon-
omy, we divide the FSL into several different levels,
where the highest level is multimodal learning that
mainly uses various semantic knowledge to assist
judgment, and the second, third, and fourth levels
are single-modal learning that addresses data level,
feature level, and task level challenges, respectively.
Notably, we also provide insightful discussions on
FSL cross-domain research, which is currently the
more challenging direction in the ﬁeld of FSL.

==== Page 3 ====
3
TABLE 2
A List Of Key Acronyms
NOMENCLATURE
Full Form Abbreviation Full Form Abbreviation
Artiﬁcial Intelligence AI Few-Shot Learning FSL
Deep Learning DL Machine Learning ML
Zero-Shot Learning ZSL One-Shot Learning OSL
Neural Architecture Search NAS Conventional Neural Network CNN
K-NearestNeighbor KNN Support Vector Machine SVM
Nearestcentroid Classiﬁer NCC Graph Few-Shot learning GFL
Variational Auto Encoders VAE Few-Shot Object Detection FSOD
Long Short-Term Memory LSTM Data Augmentation DA
Few-Shot Cross-Domain FSCD Contrast Learning CL
 Perspective of Challenges
 Few-shot Learning Inaccurate data distribution 
 assessment
 Data Augmentation:  To Evaluate 
 The True Data Distribution With 
 Maximum Probability
 Feature Reuse Sensitivity
 Transfer Learning:  Builds Data-
 To-Label Mappings For Specific 
 Problems
 Generality of future tasks
 Meta-learning:  Derive Task-To-
 Target Model Mappings Out Of 
 Specific Problems
 Defects of single-modal 
 information
 Multimodal Learning:  
 Complementary Learning Of 
 Small Samples With Limited 
 Information
 Future Direction
 Optimized few-shot 
 learning benchmark 
 dataset Using only few sample to 
 evaluate the real data 
 distribution  Improve robustness of 
 data-to-label mapping  Learn more effectively 
 from historical tasks  How to use modal info 
 more effectively Meta Learning Learning model parameters
 Learning Metrics
 Learning Transmit 
 Information
 Multimodal Learning Multimodal embedding Data Augmentation Hand-Crafted Rules
 Learn Data Processing
 Transfer Learning Pretrain and Fine-tuning
 Cross-domain
 Generate semantic 
 information based on 
 pixels Computer Vision 
 Applications Few-shot image 
 classification
 Few-shot object 
 detection
 Few-shot semantic 
 segmentation
 Few-shot instance 
 segmentation Overview (Q&A) What Is Few-shot Learning?
 What Is Machine Learning 
 And How It Is Different 
 From Few-Shot Learning?
 What Is Meta-Learning and 
 How It Is Different From 
 Few-shot Learning?
 What Is Transfer Learning 
 and How It Is Different 
 From Few-shot Learning?
Fig. 1. The conceptual map of the survey.
We investigate an adequate number of papers in
recent three years and summarize the main achieve-
ments of FSL in the ﬁeld of computer vision, includ-
ing image classiﬁcation, object detection, semantic
segmentation, and instance segmentation.
With these challenges mentioned at the end of the
survey, combined with practical applications, we
delve into the current challenges of FSL and explore
how to ﬁnd breakthrough points in each branch to
jointly drive the research of FSL towards a more
practical direction.
We provide unique insights into the evolution of FSL
and identify several future directions and potential
research opportunities concerning each challenge.2 C ONCEPTS AND PRELIMINARIES
As a branch of machine learning (ML), FSL is still a young
ﬁeld. What is FSL, and how does it relate to machine
learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning? What are
the variants of FSL that currently exist? What benchmark
datasets frequently appear in research papers? In this sec-
tion, we will address the obstacles to FSL for readers by
answering these questions.
2.1 What Is Few-Shot Learning?
The concept of FSL is inspired by the robust reasoning and
analytical capabilities of humans, and it is widely found
in edge computing scenarios. In 2020, Wang et al. [5] give
a detailed deﬁnition of FSL through experience, task, and

==== Page 4 ====
4
performance of machine learning, which is one of the most
recognized deﬁnitions so far: A computer program is said
to learn from experience Ewith respect to some classes of
taskTand performance measure Pif its performance can
improve with EonTmeasured by P. It is worth mentioning
here that Ein FSL is very small. In recent years, relevant
neural scientiﬁc evidence [6], [7] has shown that innate
human abilities are related to various memory systems,
including parametric slow learning neocortical systems and
non-parametric fast hippocampal learning systems, which
correspond to FSL’s data-based slow learning and feature-
based fast learning, respectively.
To better understand FSL, it is necessary to introduce
two concepts, one is N-way- K-shot problem and the other
is cross-domain FSL. The N-way- K-shot problem is often
used to describe the speciﬁc problems encountered by FSL.
In this case, the support set represents the small dataset used
in the training phase, which generates reference information
for the second phase of testing. The query set is the task on
which the model actually needs to predict. Notice that the
query set classes never appear in the support set. Classical
N-way- K-shot represents support set with Ncategories
andKsamples per category, then the whole task has only
NKsamples. As thus, N-way- 1-shot represents one-
shot learning and N-way- 0-shot represents zero-shot learn-
ing. The concept of cross-domain originates from transfer
learning, which refers to the transfer the knowledge from
source domain to target domain. There usually exist domain
gaps between these domains. Cross-domain FSL integrates
the features of cross-domain and FSL, and is a challenging
direction that has recently emerged.
At this stage, there still exist many challenges in FSL,
which are generated from various aspects, including but not
limited to data, models, and algorithms. In this context, the
challenges can be generally summarized according to the
degree of integration of knowledge as follows:
Inaccurate data distribution assessment :
FSL does not have access to large datasets due to
costs, ethical, legal, or other reasons. Consequently,
relying on few samples for learning produces biases
in estimating the actual data distribution, which
may be fatal for some tasks. To this end, maximizing
the exploration of data distributions with limited
information becomes the most signiﬁcant challenge
for FSL. Data augmentation is the direct way to
address the inaccurate estimation of FSL. The
primary efforts currently focus on exploring
migratable intra-class or inter-class features and
customizing speciﬁc images using generators.
Feature reuse sensitivity : Continuous accu-
mulation of a priori knowledge by sampling large-
scale auxiliary datasets. Transfer learning can eas-
ily use it from the source domain to the similar
target domain. Pre-training aims to extract high-
dimensional feature vectors through a feature extrac-
tor, while the goal of ﬁne-tuning is to make minor
adjustments to the initial parameters of the pre-
training. Transfer learning focuses on the data level
and obtains more valuable features independent of
the task by mapping data to labels. It has an out-standing performance in optimizing speciﬁc tasks,
but it is generally limited by the characteristics of
current tasks and has a poor generalization to future
tasks. Especially when there is a large shift in the
domain, without ﬁltering and alignment of features
may result in negative knowledge transfer.
Generality of future tasks : Differing from
transfer learning, meta-learning learns to quickly
build mappings from known tasks to target models
in previously unseen tasks by double sampling the
task and data. In FSL, by exploring the task space,
summarizing meta-knowledge in different tasks can
result in fast aggregation of unseen tasks at a lower
cost. As a general learning framework, meta-learning
is independent of speciﬁc problems and more ori-
ented to future tasks instead of optimizing the cur-
rent one. However, meta-learning has proven effec-
tive only when the testing and training tasks are
relatively similar, and it is highly depends on the
network structure and lacks ﬂexibility. When training
meta-learners with a set of tasks at the same time, it
is even difﬁcult to adapt to the distribution of tasks,
requiring a redesign of the network structure.
Defects of single-modal information : It is
difﬁcult to learn features effectively because FSL
is inherently information-limited. This situation is
improved to a great extent when aided by getting
information from other modalities. In this respect,
semantic assistance [8], [9] is an excellent method
to provide external prior knowledge, where through
the introduction or generation of semantic informa-
tion as weak supervision, adaptive classiﬁcation can
be accomplished in conjunction with the original
model.
2.2 What Is Machine Learning And How It Is Different
From Few-shot Learning?
The traditional Von Neumann computer architecture allows
users to execute a series of instructions step by step in the
form of a program [10]. However, this method does not
work in ML. On the contrary, ML uses large-scale datasets as
input. Its judgment on a new sample is based on statistical
results extracted by historical data. Now, the burgeoning
of 5G [11] provides massive connectivity for millions of end
devices, enabling an interconnection of everything. The total
amount of data generated by terminal devices is huge, but
the amount of one single data set is extremely small. Hence,
traditional ML, whose performance strongly depends on
large data sets, cannot perform well in this setting with few
samples. To this end, FSL emerges and provides a promising
way to handle the data scarcity scenario.
In recent ten years, the research on FSL has been ex-
tensively conducted, and signiﬁcant research progress has
been achieved, e.g. the KGBert [12] proposed by Alibaba
surpasses humans in the ﬁeld of FSL for the ﬁrst time. Fig. 2
exhibits the statistics of paper publications related to FSL in
recent ten years based on the statistical results of the Web of
Science. As revealed, there are relatively few related papers
from 2011 to 2015 due to that the FSL theory is still incom-
plete. With the rise of deep learning since 2015, the number

==== Page 5 ====
5
of FSL related research papers has increased linearly almost
every year. In the past 2020, the number of relevant papers
has reached as high as 239, and the number of citations has
reached 2731 times, accordingly. Fig. 3 provides a knowl-
edge map covering the hot research topics and cutting-edge
developments in the ﬁeld of FSL in recent years, including
but not limited to zero-shot learning, one-shot learning,
transfer learning, multi-task learning, and meta-learning.
FSL related tasks include feature representation, visual-
ization, robotics and cross-domain transfer. Among them,
domain adaptation is a widely utilized method for few-shot
cross-domain learning. Computer vision with predominant
green color is the most active research ﬁeld, including image
classiﬁcation, object detection, semantic segmentation, and
instance segmentation.
Fig. 2. The number of FSL-related papers published in prestigious
journals from 2010 to the ﬁrst half of 2021, excluding citations.
sensorsrobustnessrepresentation learningmeta-learning
image reconstructionhuman-designed attributes
face recognitioneducation
associative memory
semantic segmentationpredictive models
online learningmeasurement
gallium nitridedynamic time warping
convolutioncnnattribute learning
attention
adversarial learningzero-shotsupervised learningsemantic representation
multi-task learning
image segmentationtransductive learningconvolutional neural network (one-shot
memory
zero-shot classification
siamese networkobject detectionlearning (artificial intellige
domain adaptation
correlationactive learning
zero shot learning
prototypesencoding
convolutional neural networkslibrary instruction
convolutional neural networkclassificationimage recognition
few-shot learninginformation literacy
zero-shot learning (zsl)
computer visiongeneralized zero-shot learningreinforcement learning
object recognition
gesture recognitionlearning
visualizationmachine learningtransfer learning
neural networks
semanticstrainingone-shot learningzero-shot learning
VOSviewer
Fig. 3. The knowledge graph uses Few-shot learning, One-shot learning
and Zero-shot learning as keywords to relate the main advances and
research directions in the ﬁeld of Few-shot learning in recent three
years.
The most signiﬁcant difference between FSL and tra-
ditional machine learning is that the set of classes of the
support set and the query set are disjoint. In machine
learning, the classes of the test set are included in the
training set in advance. FSL combines the limited supervi-
sion information with prior knowledge to train the model.
The input of the model is generally given in the form of
tasks. Through continuously collecting tasks, the model canrecognize the similarities and differences between data as
well as task. When the model encounters an unseen task,
knowledge transfer can be accomplished quickly with just
a few iterative training steps with appropriate initializa-
tion parameters. In contrast, traditional machine learning
requires optimization through the loss function generated
by a large scale data sets in the model. In conclusion, FSL
is only a very young branch of machine learning, which
mainly addresses the issue of difﬁcult access to quality data
sets in machine learning scenarios.
2.3 What Is Transfer Learning and How It Is Different
From Few-shot Learning?
Traditional transfer learning involves applying knowledge
learned in the source domain to a different but related target
domain. In FSL, the limited amount of training data, domain
variations, and task modiﬁcations are the key factors that
cause the model to fail to transfer well from the source
domain to the target domain. For instance, a medical image
dataset with low similarity to the natural image dataset
imagenet is difﬁcult to identify accurately without the help
of relevant expertise, even for a human-guided by only a
few images. Certainly, it is also effective when the source
domain and target domain are relative similar. The end in
FSL tasks, if the prior knowledge is obtained from other
tasks or domains by pre-training, FSL can belong to transfer
learning, which mainly learns the mapping of data to labels.
According to the taxonomy of transfer learning, there are
many variants of FSL problems, including one-shot learning
(OSL), zero-shot learning (ZSL), and cross-domain few-shot
learning.
One-shot learning : OSL has only one correct
label for each sample in the support data set, which
aims to ﬁnd the most similar class as a match among
the seen-classes. During the police interrogation,
these two processes are incredibly similar. The wit-
ness just looked once at the suspect, and the photos
given by the police can be regarded as the query
image. The witness only needs to answer ’yes’ or ’no’
towards those photos. Similarly, one-shot learning
does not classify the data speciﬁcally, but simply
makes a cluster in order of similarity function. Ac-
cording to the existing work, one-shot learning can
be divided into two main approaches. One is to use
generative models to caste prior knowledge [13], [14],
[15], where bayesian programming learning [16] is
the most representative framework [17] in this ﬁeld.
Another method is to convert a OSL classiﬁcation
task into a veriﬁcation task [18], [19].
Zero-shot learning : ZSL was ﬁrst proposed by
Lampert et al. [20], which considers a more extreme
case in FSL. In the absence of any query samples,
the inference mechanism is solely relied on to iden-
tify samples that have not been seen before. ZSL
is essentially done by using high-dimensional se-
mantic features [21], [22], [23] to replace the low-
dimensional raw data. Embedding representations
and autoencoders are the most efﬁcient ways to
construct intermediate semantic spaces, which con-
tains attributes that more comprehensively deﬁne the

==== Page 6 ====
6
categories. Up to now, zero-shot learning is one of the
closest methods to human intelligence that discerns
previously unobserved categories. One-shot learning
and FSL can essentially be considered as special ZSL.
Cross-domian few-shot learning : In transfer
learning, each class in the target domain has a suf-
ﬁciently large number of available samples. When
a large domain shift occurs between the source do-
mains and target domains, knowledge transfer tends
to become very challenging. Cross-domain few-shot
learning combines the challenges of transfer learning
and FSL. In the existence of domain gaps, where
the intersection of classes in the source and target
domains is empty, and the available sample size for
each class in the target domain is extremely small.
The improvement of the model’s generalization ca-
pability through source domain data alone brings
very limited performance to the model. The present
work mainly focuses on the shift transformation of
features and the construction of auxiliary datasets.
Cross-domian few-shot learning can be regarded as
one of the most challenging setting in the ﬁeld of FSL
at present.
2.4 What Is Meta-Learning and How It Is Different From
Few-shot Learning?
Meta-learning is a general learning paradigm that provides
training on tasks in an episodic-training mechanism. Fig.
4 illustrates the three-steps involved in meta-learning [24]
training. Meta-learning focuses on improving generalization
for unseen tasks using prior knowledge. If prior knowledge
is used to teach the model how to learn on a speciﬁc task,
meta-learning can be regarded as a variant of FSL. It is
emphasized that meta learning is not equivalent to FSL.
FSL should be seen rather as an ultimate goal. It aims
to achieve robust generations without relying on a large
scale of datasets. By dual sampling of data and task space,
meta-learning is enabled to construct a large number of
auxiliary tasks related to the unseen task. Even if some
papers do not use meta-learning, it is likely to improve the
model’s performance if episodic-training mechanism can be
considered, such as meta reinforcement learning [25], [26],
meta video detection [27], and so on.
Fig. 4. Meta-learning training three-step approach includes: ﬁnd the
learning algorithm, deﬁne loss function using tasks, ﬁnd parameter that
can minimze loss function.Nevertheless, meta-learning has its own limitations:
when the training and testing tasks exist obviously domain
gap, Meta-learning is rarely used to initialize parameter
weights. It can easily lead to negative migration of the
model. In addition, meta-learning is highly dependent on
the structure of the network, and needs to be redesigned for
widely varying tasks. In spite of this, meta-learning is still
one of the most effective methods to solve FSL.
2.5 Datasets
Before the availability of FSL benchmark datasets, re-
searchers regularly used tasks like manually constructing N-
way-K-shots to evaluate the performance of models. How-
ever, these simple tasks cannot reﬂect the complexity of
real-world problems. After 10 years of evolution, the FSL
benchmark dataset has completed the transition from a
single domain, single dataset to a cross-domain, multiple
dataset.
As shown in Fig. 5, during 2017-2021, 898 papers used
the CUB-200-2011 [28] dataset, accounting for 46.6% of
the total number of statistics; 587 papers used the Mini-
ImageNet [29] dataset, accounting for 30.5%; and 335 papers
using the Omniglot [30] dataset, accounting for 17.4% ; 44
papers used the PASCAL-5i [31] dataset, and 46 papers
used the Meta-DataSet [32]. The other speciﬁc datasets are
Paris-Lille-3D [33], N-Digit MNIST [34], SUN397 [35], which
are used in 15 papers in the past ﬁve years. In terms of
quantity, the CUB-200-2011, Mini-ImageNet, and Omniglot
benchmark datasets occupy a dominant position in the ﬁeld
of FSL. Table. 3 compares the datasets mentioned above
from different dimensions. By the publication of the article,
a more objective benchmark dataset [36] for evaluating the
cross-domain ability of FSL was proposed. 1) CropDiseases
[37], a plant diseases dataset , 2) EuroSAT [38], a dataset for
satellite images, 3) ISIC [39] a medical skin image dataset, 4)
ChestX [40], a dataset for X-ray chest images. The similarity
comparing to MiniImageNet is decreas across these datasets.
2.6 Taxonomy
According to the degree of integration of knowledge, FSL is
broaderly divided into a single-modal learning and a multi-
modal learning. In this survey, The single-modal learning
can be further divided into data augmentation, transfer
learning, and meta learning. It mainly focuses on abstracting
or transferring limited information into higher-level feature
vectors or meta-knowledge. Multimodal learning is more
close to the real world of human intelligence, which no
longer relies on the limited sample, and tries to ﬁnd the
space of other modalities to assist the FSL. With this tax-
onomy, we exhaustively review and discuss each method.
Fig. 6 vividly demonstrates the FSL’s taxonomy under the
challenge perspective.
Evaluate The True Data Distribution : The
key to the difﬁculty of FSL is that limited samples
cannot reﬂect the actual data distribution. The most
intuitive idea of machine learning is to generate
additional data based on a certain probability model
or to extend the auxiliary data set using a large

==== Page 7 ====
7
Omniglot Mini-ImageNet CUB-200-2011 PASCAL-5i
Meta-DataSet Other17%30%
47%2%2%1%
CUB-200-2011 miniImageNet Omniglot2017 2018 2019 2020 2021050100150200250
90
2032112
6669200
143
93227
207
86172
144
56
Fig. 5. There are eight most frequently used datasets in few-shot learning, including the number of papers on mainstream benchmark datasets
(2017-2021). There may be one paper that tests all mainstream benchmark datasets. Data from “paperswithcode” platform.
TABLE 3
The latest performance of FSL in the main tasks of machine vision
Dataset Variant Leader Numbers/Classes Train/Test Content Main FSL Task License
CUB-200 Wah el al. [28] 11788/200 5994/5794 Birds Few-shot Image classiﬁtion Attribution 4.0
Mini-ImageNet Vinyals et al. [29] 600/100 480/120 Real scene Few-shot Image classiﬁtion MIT
Omniglot Lake et al. [30] 32460/50 4800/1692 Character Few-shot Image classiﬁtion MIT
PASCAL-5i Shaban et al. [31] 576/20 11530/- Really scence Few-shot Image classiﬁtion MIT
Meta-Dataset Triantaﬁllou et al. [32] 10 datasets -/- Really scence Few-shot Image classiﬁtion Multiple licenses
BSCD-FSL Guo et al. [36] 4 datasets -/- Really scence, Satellite and medical image Cross-domain few-shot learning MIT
Paris-Lille-3D Roynard et al. [33] 450000000/50 450000000/380000000 Point cloud Few-shot Semantic Segmentation CC BY-NC-ND 3.0
N-Digit MNIST Oh et al. [34] -/- -/- Character Metric Learning Apache License
SUN397 Oh et al. [35] 108,753/397 76128/21750 Really scence Few-shot Image classiﬁtion -
Data Augmentation
Evaluate The True Data Distribution Transfer Learning
Build Data-To-Label Mappings Meta Learning
Derive Task-To-
Target Model 
Mappings 
Cloud
Edge
TerminalMultimodal Learning
Complementary Learning 
With Limited Information
Single-modal 
LearningDegree of 
integration of 
knowledge
Fig. 6. The entire taxonomy is presented in the form of a pyramid. The
bottom level represents the ”cloud-edge-terminal” edge computing sce-
nario, which is characterized by few-shot real-time computation under
high trafﬁc. Based on this, the challenges of FSL are classiﬁed into four
levels according to the degree of integration of the required knowledge.
Among them, the challenges represented by data augmentation, trans-
fer learning, and meta-learning are single-modal challenges.
volume of unlabeled data from extending data. Ex-
isting work focuses on exploring feature differences
that can be learned between classes or with external
datasets at the semantic level. Handcrafted rules and
automatic learning data processing are the two main
approaches at this stage.
Build Data-To-Label Mappings : Furthermore,
if a large number of features from the benchmarkdataset can be reused, which will signiﬁcantly re-
duce the pressure of the model on the data. Pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning assist FSL by learning ef-
fective representation of data to labels, coupled with
effective regularization of the underlying semantic
features. In particular, the pre-training stage learns
the optimal initialization parameters in a variety of
different tasks, and the ﬁne-tuning stage freezes most
of the lower-level parameters and retrains only the
parameters of the classiﬁcation layer.
Derive Task-To-Target Model Mappings :
Fine-tuning already has a good performance in
baseline models with small samples. Nevertheless,
in multi-task learning, a large scale of tasks are
learned just as one task, which leads to a terrible
generalization of the model. In contrast, meta-
learning dual-samples the data and task space
using episodic-training mechanism, ﬁnding latent
associations between different tasks and thus having
a good description of the whole task space.
Complementary Learning With Limited Information :Multimodal
learning has been proposed in deep learning for a
long time, but it has only started to be integrated
with FSL in recent years. Information in multimodal
dimensions is closest to the real human information
world, and it compensates to some extent for the
inability of FSL to make accurate assessments
of data distributions in a single modality. Pixels,
semantics, and sounds can be supervised signals
for FSL tasks, and even more recently unsupervised

==== Page 8 ====
8
learning has been used to explore more robust
feature representations using contrast learning.
3 D ATAAUGMENTATION TOEVALUATE THETRUE
DATADISTRIBUTION WITHMAXIMUM PROBABILITY
In real-world FSL tasks, the number of samples in the
support and query sets is usually limited due to privacy,
collection costs, and labeling costs. To mitigate this issue,
data augmentation is recognized as the most direct way
to increase the sample richness in FSL. Nevertheless, the
core risk of the FSL data augmentation is how likely the
augmented dataset can evaluate the distribution behind the
real data. Based on whether the data augmentation tech-
niques can be reused on other tasks, FSL data augmentation
is divided into hand-crafted rules and automatic learning
data processing.
3.1 Hand-Crafted Rules
Hand-Crafted rules require guidance from experts with
specialized domain knowledge. A representative result is
that Bouthillier et al. proposed to randomly discard pix-
els [41] on a random rectangular area to generate black
rectangular blocks of simulated noise. Similar operations
also include random erase [42] and ﬁll [43], [44] in FSL.
Nevertheless, brieﬂy relying on the simple transformation of
single-sample pixels cannot prevent the risk of overﬁtting.
Further, the hand-crafted rules contains data level and fea-
ture level according to the dimension of information. Table.
4 summarizes the data augmentation methods for hand-
crafted rules making.
Original
AdarGCN
FTT
Image Deformation
CSEI
Fig. 7. FSL data augmentation based on data level mainly includes
internet data collection, environment variation, difference transfer and
random crop ﬁlling. Here a picture of a panda is used as an example to
implement the above variation.
3.1.1 Data Level
The data level augmentation is mainly a transformation of
the input data that aims to scale up existing data by making
modiﬁcations to the data marginally for achieving diversity
in model input. Random erasure [42] and random cropping
[43], [53] are classical algorithms by simulating the images
with different degrees of damage and thus improving the
generalization of the model. Inspired by this, Li et al.
[46] discarded the traditional approach based on a entire
feature extractor for images and instead focused on local
patch images. These methods require large-scale datasetsas support. It is not easy to achieve in the FSL settings.
Conversely, CSEI [46] does not require extra data sets. The
speciﬁc operation is to erase most of the discriminatory area
in the support set derived from the metric function and
replace it with an image ﬁll using the restoring operation.
FTT [45] enriches the data set by linear interpolation of some
transiently transformed attributes, such as different weather
and lighting. Z Chen et al. [15] proposes an end-to-end
approach to partitioning images as a whole inspired with
the idea of MIXUP [54], which argues that images preserve
important semantic information even after they have un-
dergone various distortions. The most signiﬁcant difference
between image distortion and GNN is that image distortion
simply stitches two images together in a linear pattern. This
method is able to achieve maximum deformation without
loss of classiﬁcation. In addition, it is a good direction for
data expansion by using the large amount of unlabelled data
sets in the real world for supplementation. Finally, when
both the source and target classes both have only a limited
number of samples, AdarGCN’s [47] implementation crawls
data from internet resources and automatically removes
irrelevant noise to achieve controllable data augmentation.
At the same time, AdarGCN can automatically determine
how far the information has been propagated in each graph
node. In conclusion, data augmentation at the data level
focuses on increasing the number of samples by means of
pixel transformations and pixel generation. Fig. 7 shows the
main methods based on data level under hand-crafted rules.
Global Features
Local FeaturesHigh-dimensional 
vectors
Prospects Feature
Bacground Feature
Fig. 8. Feature level-based data enhancement can be mainly divided into
global features and local features. Global features focus on the whole
image, including the foreground and background. Local features, on the
other hand, selectively focus on the subject part in the foreground.
3.1.2 Feature Level
Feature level data augmentation mostly maps pixel infor-
mation into a high-dimensional latent space. It carries more
valid information than mere original pixels. Gao et al. [48]
ﬁrst explored the underlying distribution behind few-shot
data and proposed an adversarial covariance augmentation
network to overcome the limitations of FSL. Its experiments
have shown that relying solely on learning the features of
the entire image brings noise into the results. Chu et al.
[49] tried to compute feature representations for each patch,
rather than the entire image. Each small patch is connected
by RNN and the features of the image are further fused.
This heuristic algorithm is far superior to simple attentional
models[55]. Zhang et al. [50] explain partial feature learning

==== Page 9 ====
9
TABLE 4
The latest performance of FSL in the hand-crafted rules.
Model Core View Key Approach Experimental Dataset Using External Dataset Data Level Feature Level
FTT [45] Enriching Instant Attributes Places-CNN Transient Attributes Database " "
CSEI [46] Erase Repair Metric based miniImageNet % "
Image Deformation [15] Semantic Invariance Meta-learning miniImageNet " "
AdarGCN [47] Denoising the collected web images GCN layer - " " -
Covariance-Preserving Adversarial
Augmentation Network [48]”Variability” of covariance information
as base instancesGenerative Adversarial Network ImageNet " "
Spot and Learn [49] extracts varying sequences of patches reinforcement learning miniImagenet % "
Saliency-guided Hallucination [50] Background - Prospective Learning Realation network miniImagenet % "
Laso [51] Explore the reliable differences between labels Transfer learning MS-COCO " "
Dual TriNet [52] Semantic Synthesis Example Auto Encoder MS-COCO % "
from another perspective, proposing to use a pre-trained
model to decompose visual features into three parts and
then select the original, foreground, and background images
to be re-stitched into new visual features. Similarly, Laso
[51] explores the differences in features between different
datasets in a high-dimensional space. Combining different
labels through the intersection and complementation of sets
allows images to contain key information from multiple
classes at the feature level simultaneously. Training this part
of the image as a support set can signiﬁcantly improve the
classiﬁcation performance of small samples. Chen et al. [56]
go further by extending the features to a high-dimensional
semantic space. In FSL, feature-level augmentation is more
effective than data-level augmentation by modeling the
valid information in a compressed manner. Fig. 8 shows the
main methods based on features level under hand-crafted
rules.
Geometric transformations Color Flip
  Differential  Search
Auto Encoder Contrast Generator
Metric
Original
 Augmented
Fig. 9. Learned Data Processing aims to learn a policy generator in
multiple task spaces so as to automatically match different tasks. Its
biggest beneﬁt over hand-crafted rule is that it can be reused.
3.2 Learning Data Processing
In 2018, data augmentation entered the area of auto aug-
mentation with the maturation of meta-learning. Through
the combination of meta-learning with other data augmen-
tation methods, a large amount of excellent work emerged
during this period. Hu et al. [57] was inspired by the
DARTS algorithm to abstract the data augmentation into
multiple sub-strategies, each with a certain probability of
being selected according to the different few-shot tasks. In
addition to the probability-based method, another approach
is based on generation. Li et al. [58] proposed the adversarial
feature phantom network-AFHN. The phantom diversity
and discriminative features are conditional on a small num-
ber of labelled samples. Chen et al. [56] attempt to train a
meta-learner and generate a network to learn similaritiesand differences between images end-to-end by fusing pairs
of images. MetaGAN [59], on top of which an adversarial
generator conditional on the task is introduced, which helps
FSL tasks form generalizable decision boundaries between
different classes. On the other hand, Zhang et al. [50] further
demonstrate the usefulness of phantom data generation for
FSL and propose a low-cost automated data generation
method that uses a direct foreground-background combi-
nation to generate feature space-level data for training. In
addition, it is also effective to explore the migratable differ-
ences between and within classes in support datasets. Delta-
encoder [60] uses auto-encoder [61] to learn differences in
the same class for transfer learning, which is different from
metric-based computation [62] of visual similarity. Table. 5
summarizes the data augmentation methods for learning
data process. Fig. 9 shows the main approaches involved
in auto-learning data processing under FSL.
3.3 Discussion and Summary
To maximize the evaluation of the distribution of the real
data in FSL setting, data augmentation has from the hand-
crafted rules to the auto learned data processing stage. The
watershed is the maturity of meta-learning in 2018. This
section comprehensively investigates the emerging repre-
sentative technologies in the ﬁeld of data augmentation and
reviews the evolution of few-shot data augmentation. Table.
5 summarizes the model in different dimensions clearly.
4 T RANSFER LEARNING BUILDS DATA-TO-LABEL
MAPPINGS FORSPECIFIC PROBLEMS
Transfer learning [63] is a classical learning paradigm, which
aims to solve the challenging problem that there are only
a few or even no labelled samples [64] in the FSL [65].
Feature reuse is the core idea of transfer learning to solve
FSL absence of data setting. The basic operation is to pre-
train the model on an extensive dataset and then ﬁne-
tune on the limited support set. When source and target
domains exist a large gap, knowledge transfer is invariably
much less effective. This cross-domain setting brings a new
challenge for FSL. In FSL, transfer learning can be broadly
divided into pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stage, which can
also be referred to the baseline. Fig. 10 illustrates the general
process.
4.1 Pre-training and Fine-Tuning
From 2012 to 2018, a large number of excellent works
have emerged in the ﬁeld of computer vision and natural

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE 5
The latest performance of FSL in the ﬁeld of learn data process.
Model Core View Key Approach Experimental Dataset Using External Data
DADA [57]Automatic generation of
enhancement policiesGradient Descent CIFAR-10 "
AFHN [58] Condition-based generation Generative Adversarial Network MNIST "
MetaGAN [59] Generate extral data Generative Adversarial Network MNIST "
Delta-encoder [60] Differential transfer Auto Encoder Mini-ImageNet "
MSFN [62]Calculate multi-scale features
and the similarity of
each class of labelsMetric Learning Omniglot "
Pre-training Stage
F(θ)Feature 
Extractor
Fin-Tuning Stage
F(θ)Meta-learning
Metric Learning
Optimizer
Knowledge distillationTask
Base-line Meta-learning Metric Learning Knowledge distillation
Fig. 10. Transfer learning can be divided into pre-training and ﬁne-
tuning stages, where the baseline model can be combined with other
techniques to improve the model performance.
language processing, such as MobileNet [66], ResNet [67],
ELMO [68], GPT [69], and BERT [70]. In particular, the
area of natural language processing was slow to progress
before the advent of pre-training models. It has grown
considerably under the leadership of BERT as computing
power has increased and excellent pre-training models have
been proposed.
As a downstream task, how to use these excellent models
to obtain features will largely alleviate the pressure on the
data for FSL. Especially for few-shot image classiﬁcation, as
a pre-training model [71], [72], it needs to use an external
large-scale label dataset to extract prior knowledge from
similar task. The most common practice is to design a back-
bone model without classiﬁer layer, which includes convo-
lutional neural networks or auto-encoders. The input of the
model is an array of images, and the output is the feature
vector embedding in a high-dimensional space [73]. High-
dimensional feature vectors obtain sufﬁcient valid semantic
information about the target image. After the pre-training
was put forward, the researchers proposed ﬁne-tuning later.
Most parameters in the pre-training are frozen, and only the
classiﬁcation layer parameters are updated in the testing
stage. Many recent works [74], [1] have proved that ﬁne-
tuning can improve the 5-way-1-shot tasks accuracy rate
by 2%-7% compared with the baseline model. Although the
number of samples in the support set and query set is small,
pre-training and ﬁne-tuning are still very helpful for im-
proving the accuracy of FSL. The conclusions are analogous
in natural language processing as well. The authors in [75],
[76], [77] have also shown that ﬁne-tuning can be embeddedin state-of-the-art meta-learning or semi-supervised learn-
ing frameworks for optimizing model parameters.
Dhillon et al. [76] replaced the standard activation
function with cosine similarity, and Nakamura et al. [74]
replaced conventional gradient descent with an adaptive
gradient optimizer, which both improve the ﬁne-tuning
process in the accuracy of the model. Currently, ﬁne-tuning
is usually combined with meta-learning. Cai et al. [78]
attempted to integrate them to train networks with speciﬁc
layers. However, experimental results suggest that since the
support and query sets do not overlap in FSL setting, trans-
ferring whole knowledge from the source dataset is not the
best solution for FSL. Shen et al. [79] suggest that knowledge
should be transferred speciﬁcally for parts. The degree of
transferability needs to be controlled by freezing or ﬁne-
tuning speciﬁc layers in the backbone model. Similarly, ﬁne-
tuning can also be used to prevent new classes of networks
from polluting the feature space of the basic classes. Up to
now, the FSL and ﬁne-tuning have been widely used in tasks
like plant disease and insect pest identiﬁcation [80], road
detection [81], and automatic question and answer [82].
4.2 Cross-Domain Few-shot Learning
The latest progress of FSL largely depends on the labelled
data of the training stage. However, it is unrealistic to collect
various forms of datasets for speciﬁc tasks in many practical
applications, which results in challenging of FSL between
intensely different domains. Cross-domain few shot learn-
ing integrates FSL and domain adaptive problems, which
is a relatively comprehensive and challenging setting. For
a long time, the benchmark datasets commonly used for
FSL have suffered from a standardized dataset structure
and large similarity of natural scenes, which leads to that
models perform well on standard datasets but get unac-
ceptable results in the real world task. Google ﬁrst released
a FSL cross-domain dataset named Meta-Dataset [32] in
2020, which includes a total of 10 public image datasets
including ImageNet, CUB-200-2011, etc. Yet these datasets
are still focused on natural scenarios and cannot be broadly
regarded as cross-domain few-shot benchmark datasets.
Until the availability of BSCD-FSL [36] datasets. According
to the degree of similarity with the ImageNet, it is divided
into CropDiseases [37], EuroSAT [38], ISIC [39], ChestX [40].
The authors extensively evaluate the performance of current
FSL methods, and experiments show that the accuracy of
all methods is correlated with the proposed natural image
data similarity metric. Nowadays, cross-domain FSL focuses

==== Page 11 ====
11
on distinguishing domain-irrelevant features and domain
adaptive techniques with transfer learning.
The objective of domain adaptation is to transfer knowl-
edge from the source domain to the target domain, which
has the same set of classes but a different data distribution
than the source domain. Recently, much work has used
adaptive networks to align their features with a new do-
main or to select domain-irrelevant features from multiple
backbone model. Dvornik et al. [83] obtained multiple do-
main representations separately by training a set of feature
extractors with different domains. Setting the model to a
dataset with multiple domains during training allows an at-
tempt to migrate to other domains during the testing stage.
Nevertheless, this approach may not be effective during the
meta-training and meta-testing phases when the domains
are orthogonal. Based on this, FRN [84] explores the po-
tential space for few-shot image classiﬁcation, using ridge
regression to reconstruct and normalize the feature map
without adding new learning parameters. FWT [85] utilizes
only the source data for the afﬁne transformation of features,
as do LRP-GNN [86] and SBMTL [87]. FD-MIXUP [88]
constructs auxiliary datasets by mixup and uses encoders
to learn domain-irrelevant features to guide the network
generalization to other tasks. STARTUP [89] takes advantage
of not only the source data but also assumes that the model
has access to a lot of unlabeled target data during training.
A large amount of unlabeled data is used to enhance the
generalizability of the model to other domains. Metric-based
approaches are frequently used for semi-supervised and
unsupervised cross-domain FSL. A recent paper by Lu et
al. [90] uses attention as a metric strategy to reweight and
combine domain-speciﬁc representations. Chen et al. [72]
based on a meta-baseline by pre-training the classiﬁer on
all base classes and classifying a small number of samples
based on the nearest centroid algorithms for meta-learning,
which greatly surpasses the latest state-of-the-art methods.
Li et al. [91] inspired by [92], [93], proposes to map domain-
speciﬁc features to the same shared space, thus achieving a
domain-irrelevant universal representation.
4.3 Discussion and Summary
While meta-learning methods have higher performance
than transfer learning in standard FSL settings, the situation
is reversed in cross-domain FSL settings. A newly published
paper recently pointed out that the improvements from ﬁne-
tuning and pre-training are similarly very limited when
the domains appear orthogonal. In the pre-trained feature
space, the base classes form compact clusters, while the new
classes are distributed in large difference groups. Currently,
the actual deployment of trained models into production
environments is often not adapted to rapidly changing
environments. Pre-training can be seen as a task with many
learning classes, but it is only a single learning task.
5 M ETA-LEARNING DERIVE TASK-TO-TARGET
MODEL MAPPINGS INDEPENDENT OFSPECIFIC
PROBLEMS
Meta-learning learns historical prior knowledge from a dual
sampling of data and tasks, then extracts meta-knowledgeto apply to future tasks. Meta-learning is independent of
the speciﬁc problem, and exploring an optimal initialization
parameter in task space, discarding the task-independent
feature representation under traditional supervised learn-
ing. Up to now, most of the meta-learning models are
updated with parameters using traditional gradient descent.
Absolutely, there are also non-gradient descent methods
based on reinforcement learning and metric methods. In
FSL, meta-learning can be used to automate the learning
of model parameters, metrics function, and the transfer of
information
5.1 Learning Model Parameters
Most of the deep learning frameworks use different param-
eter initialization methods, such as uniform distribution,
normal distribution, and so on. The biggest problem with
this random initialization is that it easily falls into the local
optimal position. The goal of meta-learning is to train a hy-
perparameter generator, the classical methods being MAML
[94], Repital [95] even their derived variants. MAML iden-
tiﬁes the global optimization direction by calculating the
optimization direction for each task. Compared to MAML,
Reptile can update fewer parameters at once. The biggest
difference between meta learning and multi-task learning is
that multi-task learning only focuses on the performance
of the current task. Meta-learning was demonstrated to
perform better than transfer learning with a standard FSL
benchmark dataset. Nevertheless, meta-learning is more
sensitive to network structure and requires ﬁne tuning of
hyperparameters. After that more versions have evolved
to address these issues separately. Such as MAML++ [96],
First-order MAML (FOMAML) [95], Meta-SGD [97], TAML
[98], iMAML [99], iTMAML [100]. Of which Meta-SGD,
expect MAML, ﬁnds the optimal learning rate and update
the direction of the parameters at the same time, in addition
to learning the initialization parameters. TAML [98] is a
task-independent method, which overcomes the problem
that MAML can only use an external model. Subsequently,
IMAML [99] proposes a new loss function and a corre-
sponding method for computing the gradient, making it
possible to obtain the gradient of the parameters by calcu-
lating only the solution of the loss function, without caring
its speciﬁc optimization method. iTMAML [100] based on
TAML, which implements automatic task recognition. It can
be quickly adapted to new tasks by updating when the data
is in a continuous state. At present, MAML has been widely
used in various tasks [101], [102], [103], producing different
variants. Table. 6 distinguishes between MAML, Reptile and
their variants in various perspective.
Learning optimizers are another important direction for
learning model parameters. LSTM as the base optimizer
[104], [105], which accepts the difference at time tand
the hidden state of the meta-network at time t 1. The
output of the original network is an updating of the model’s
weight and bias. In 2016, Xu et al. [106] proposed the
BPTT to supervise LSTM training. It is notable that this
is performed in the context of supervised learning. What
update should be required to the optimization if it is in
the setting of unsupervised and active learning? Inspired
by this, there has been a long period of work focusing on

==== Page 12 ====
12
TABLE 6
Summary MAML, Reptile and their variants
Model Directions for improvement Key Approach First order gradient Two-step gradient
MAML [94] Original Inner-loop+outer-loop % "
Reptile [95] Computational Complexity Standard stochastic gradient descent " %
FOMAML [95] Simplify secondary gradient updates Using the gradient calculated from the previous task " %
Meta-SGD [97] Increasing the Volume of the Model Increase the learning rate vector parameter % "
TAML [98] Task unbiased estimation Introducing Entropy and Inequality Metrics % "
iMAML [99] Gradient disappearance Propose new loss functions and optimization methods % "
iTMAML [100] Automatic task identiﬁcation Data is in continuous state % "
reinforcement learning [107], Bayesian inference [108] and
evolutionary algorithms [109] in an attempt to automatically
ﬁnd optimization strategies through heuristic algorithms.
Finally, traditional Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
also incorporated the idea of meta-learning and adapted it
accordingly under FSL. To our best knowledge, the shared
[110] and randomly selected supernet weights [111], [112]
were early solutions for FSL. Recently, a large volume of
work [112], [113], [114] has shown that performance differ-
ences still exist between one-shot NAS and traditional NAS.
The one-shot NAS uses weight-sharing networks to train the
supernetwork only once and then perform a single round
of inference to get an accurate prediction, greatly reducing
the amount of computation required for the experiment.
Subsequently, Zhao et al. [115] proposed the few-shot NAS
based on one-shot NAS. The core idea is to divide the
supernets into multiple sub-supernets to search different
regions of the search space. With a slight increase in the
number of supernets, the accuracy of few-shot NAS is
greatly improved. MetaNAS [116] is the ﬁrst method that
completely integrates meta-learning and traditional NAS.
MetaNAS be capable of better initialization parameters with
the help of meta-learning ideas. It completely replaces the
weighted summation in the DARTS algorithm to reduce
different operations, and the experimental results also show
that it is more adaptable to more downstream learning tasks.
5.2 Learning Metric Algorithm
Metric learning [117] is different from classical meta-
learning, metric learning no longer divides the model into
training and testing stages. In many previous papers [4], [5],
[3], [118], metric learning is always introduced separately.
In our context, metric learning will be explained under the
frame of meta-learning. Fig. 11 illustrates one of the most
representative learning methods, which is based on a proto-
type network that has been improved to obtain substantial
improvements on a benchmark dataset for classiﬁcation
tasks.
The siamese neural network [119] is a relatively early
model in the metric learning. It can be simply regarded
as a binary classiﬁcation problem. The input to the model
composes of a set of positive or negative sample pairs, and
the model needs to evaluate the similarity of the images
during inference stage. Triple loss [120] is another way to
deal with more than pairs input in FSL metric learning.
Contrary to the Siamese neural network, triple loss requires
positive samples, negative samples, and anchor samples to
be available at the same time. If training samples are easilydistinguished from each other, this would not be beneﬁcial
for the model to better learn discriminative features. The
hard sample selection technique [121] incorporates the ab-
solute distance between positive sample pairs in addition
to considering the relative distance between positive and
negative samples. In addition to this, Li et al. [122] revisited
the classical triplet network and extended it to a K-tuple
network for FSL.
Compared to the Siamese neural network, the prototype
network [123] realizes the true meaning of classiﬁcation. The
most signiﬁcant difference is that the model allows for more
data as input. By feature averaging it is feasible to ﬁnd the
most representative sample as a prototype. However, simple
feature averaging is easily disturbed by noise. On this basis,
many works [124], [125], [126], [127], [128] have explored
how to make the distance between prototypes larger and
larger. One of the most representative works is the proposal
of positive and negative margins [129], which further reduce
the over-ﬁtting and enhance the generalization based on
maximizing the discriminative ability of the model.
Embeeding
ModuleFeature Vector For Support Set
Class 1Class 2
…Class M
Feature Vector For Query SetSupport
 Set
Query
 Set
…
Class 1 Class 2 Class M
…Pull PushNearest Neighbor Ideas
Prototypical
LearningAttentive
Prototypical
Compute
DistanceCompute
Posterior
Fig. 11. The framework [128] performs end-to-end learning of the em-
bedding model and prototype learning jointly, and the learned embed-
ding features are used to compute the distance between the query
image and the prototype, pushing the distance between different classes
farther and bringing the distance between the same classes closer.
Matching Networks [29] is a more general network
framework that maps few-shot datasets and unlabeled data
to vectors in the embedding space. The matching network
combines the best features of parametric and nonparametric
models of the nearest neighbour algorithm to model the
sample distance distribution by learning the embedding
representation. Experiments have proved [130] that embed-
ding propagation produces a smoother embedding mani-
fold. How to learn high-quality embedding representations
in a limited time is substantial for improving the model’s
accuracy. GVSE [131] fuses visual embeddings, semantic
embeddings, and gating metrics automatically balances the
relative importance of each metric dimension by the model.

==== Page 13 ====
13
Subsequently, Arvind Srinivasan et al. [132] proposed a new
architecture to improve Inception-Net, U-Net, Attention U-
Net, and Squeeze-Net, which takes the time to generate
embedding quality as a cost. The processing based on the
embedding representation plays a vital role in FSL.
The relational network [133] differs from the three mod-
els mentioned above in that its similarity is calculated by
using a neural network. In contrast to the Siamese neural
networks and prototype networks, relational networks can
be seen as providing a learnable nonlinear classiﬁer for
determining relationships. The classiﬁer can be a feature
extractor of a pre-trained neural network [122] or a multiple
embedded module [134]. The most signiﬁcant contribution
of the relational network is that it breaks away from a single
linear metric function and explores the use of an alternative
model to generate similarity. Table. 7 categorizes each of the
representative metric learning algorithms, comparing their
innovations on the original approach.
5.3 Learning To Transmit Information
It is proved that graph neural networks (GNNs) [137] have
performed well on relational-based tasks in recent years
[138]. Researchers have found that its classes-based transfer
of information can work well to help FSL learn to identify
new class, while avoiding these classes being dominated
by proprietary features. Primarily, early graph neural net-
works simulate the propagation of weights between differ-
ent nodes by creating full connections between support and
query sets. The nodes can be represented by either a one-
hot encoding or an embedding vector, and the connections
between nodes can be passed through edges. Given the
complexity of graph neural network algorithms, most graph
neural networks currently have a shallow number of layers.
In order to better accommodate FSL, graph neural networks
have been uniquely designed with nodes and edges in
recent developments. Fig. 12 shows a recent representative
algorithm for FSL of graph neural networks from the per-
spective of exploring small sample distributions.
Distribution
Graph
embf…generation 1 generation 2 … generation n
Point
Graph …Prediction
Fig. 12. DPGN [139] is concerned with the relationship between samples
in GNN, in addition to the relationship between sample distributions.
Where Point Graph is used to describe the samples and Distribution
Graph is used to describe the distribution. The two GNNs fuse the
instance-level and distribution-level relationships by passing information.
The EGNN uses vertex sets, edge sets, and task sets to
encode the labels of nodes. When updates occur between
nodes, both the similarity and the difference are considered,
which greatly improves the generalization performance of
graph neural networks to FSL. Meta-GCN [140] further
incorporates the idea of meta-learning, which enables the
updating of weights of graphs under FSL to also be opti-
mized according to the gradient descent steps, the wholeprocess requires very few gradient steps and can receive
new data quickly. Subsequently, several models based on
improvements in the graph structure itself have emerged.
The prototype network was improved by GFL [141] network
that focuses on learning small samples of data with a graph
structure. DPGN uses a dual graph neural network that de-
scribes samples while modelling their distribution. Further-
more, GERN [142] uses embedding of graph neural network
connections to achieve more robust intra-class weight trans-
fer. Nevertheless, none of these approaches addressed the
problem of shallow layers of graph neural networks until
2021, HGNN [143] designed three sections of bottom-to-top,
and skip connections to remove the pitfall of ordinary GNNs
losing the hierarchical association between nodes. Based on
this, Frog-GNN [144] uses multidimensional information to
synthesize information about the adjacency between nodes
to form pairwise relational features of intra-class similarity
and inter-class dissimilarity. At present, graph neural net-
works are widely used for tasks such as few-shot image
classiﬁcation [145], [146], semantic segmentation [147] and
instance segmentation tasks.
5.4 Discussion and Summary
In FSL, meta-learning mainly explore the mapping from the
task to the target model. It trains a super-tuning device
that gives a good set of hyperparameters as it converges
according to the different tasks. In contrast to multi-task
learning, which learns only focus on single task. However,
meta-learning is not universal for all conditions. The current
idea of meta-learning is to have enough historical tasks. If
there are not enough tasks on certain problems, then meta-
learning may not be able to solve those problems. Similarly,
if the domain gap between source and target is too large, the
results will also become terrible.
6 M ULTIMODAL COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING OF
SMALL SAMPLES WITHLIMITED INFORMATION
Until now, FSL has made signiﬁcant progress in the uni-
modal domain. Within unimodal learning, models are pri-
marily responsible for representing information as feature
vectors that can be processed by a computer or further
abstracted into higher-level semantic vectors. Particularly,
multimodal learning in FSL refers to learning better feature
representations by exploiting complementarities between
multiple modalities and removing redundancies between
modalities. In real life, when parents teach their babies
about things, they always include general information along
with semantic descriptions. This is crucial for FSL, which
inherently comes with little valid information to make a
good evaluation of the data or feature distribution. Inspired
by this, many research works [8], [148], [149] consider the
introduction of other modal information when solving FSL.
By fusing multimodal information, the ability of the model
to perceive small sample data can be improved. Fig. 13
shows the main paths of FSL under multimodality,
6.1 Multimodal embedding
Recent works [9], [148], [149], [150], [160] proved the limi-
tations of visual features for FSL of certain tasks. Semantic

==== Page 14 ====
14
TABLE 7
A Summary of Metric Learning by base approach.
Model Key idea Metric function Improvement
Siamese Neural Network [119] A pair of inputs Cosine Original
Triple loss [120] Triple input CosineMaximize intra-class distance and
minimize inter-class distance
E-nagivate sample [121] Difﬁcult sample training Cosine Compare more samples at once
K-tuple network [122] K inputs Cosine Compare more samples at once
Prototype Network [123] Prototype representation European Original
Negative Margin Matters [129] Negative margin loss Cosine Balancing discriminative and migratory
Attentive Prototype [128]Consider spatial association
between featuresEuropean Weighted summation to obtain the prototype
SEN [135] Feature normalization EuropeanThe modal length of the constraint feature
approximates the modal length of the prototype
Prototype Rectiﬁcation [136]Modifying prototypes with
query setsCosine Consistent distribution of query sets and support sets
Matching Network [29]Attention mechanism to
access the memory matrixCosine Original
GVSE [131]The relative importance of the
automatic balancing model for
each metricCosineFuses visual embeddings, semantic embeddings,
and gating metrics
Optimization of image embeddings [132] Monitoring embedded quality Manhattan Improved quality of embedding
Relational Network [133] Using models to compute similarity Model Original
Revisiting metric learning [122] Using a simple but powerful baseline non-linear distance Proposing a deep K-tuplet network
BSNet [134] Simultaneously by two similarity measures Euclidean and cosineLearning feature maps based on the similarity
of two different features
Input ModalitiesLanguage
AcousticVisualRepresentationEmbeding
LearningAlignment Translation Fusion Modeling
CO-Learning
Extral
KnowledgeOrigin
Knowledge
Fig. 13. Multimodal FSL scenarios, how to effectively model other modal
information under the condition of feature representation by fusion,
alignment, and assistance to compensate for the lack of valid information
in itself.
TABLE 8
The challenge of learning from small samples in multimodality.
Approach Representation Alignment Fusion Co-Learning Translation
Wang et al. [8] "
Li et al. [148] "
Eli et al. [150] "
Peng et al. [151] "
Schonfeld et al. [149] "
Wang et al. [152] "
Pade et al. [153] "
Fortin et al. [154] "
Zhang et al. [155] "
Sharma et al. [156] "
Akata et al. [157] "
Elhoseiny et al. [158] "
Zhu et al. [159] "
Xian et al. [21] "
Pahde et al. [153] "
space as auxiliary information can provide effective context
for visual features and help FSL. Experiments have shown
[8], [148], [149] that adaptive combinations of two or more
modalities are much better than unimodal FSL. Wang et al.[8] constructed weak semantic supervision for each category
by integrating multiple visual features. Schonfeld et al.
[149] instead used variational autoencoders (VAEs) to model
semantic features based on latent visual features. Subse-
quently, Schwartz et al. [150] and Peng et al. [151] further
extended the semantic information by adding classes labels,
attribute and natural language descriptions, and knowledge
inference. The additional semantic information is aligned
with visual features by embedding loss functions [152] to
largely reduce the cost of knowledge transfer. Based on
this, Karpathy et al. [160] used multimodal alignment to
ﬁnd potential correspondences that exist between image
patches in the training set images and their descriptive
utterances. Aoxue et al. [148] went further by using semantic
information to model classes as hierarchy.
6.2 Generate semantic information from images
In addition to this, another related area using multimodal
FSL is text-to-image generation. In few-shot visual classi-
ﬁcation tasks, the visual and semantic-based approaches
[153], which try to use textual descriptions to generate
additional training images, have a considerable advantage.
Pade et al. [153] used generative adversarial networks as
data generators to train the model, which can purposefully
generate corresponding visual features based on semantic
information, and enhanced visual features can be obtained
by combining the original visual features. Zhu et al. [159]
and Xian et al. [21] explored generative images and feature
vectors, respectively, making promising progress in the ﬁeld
of ZSL.
Similarly, Fortin et al. [154] migrated text-to-image gen-
eration to the target detection task, which can be integrated
with current FSL to implement a more general module in the
contextual joint learning phase. Zhang et al. [155] improved
the resolution of the generated images by concatenating two
CGANs based on ordinary generative networks. The ﬁrst
subtask generates a relatively blurred image from the text,
and the second subtask generates a high resolution image

==== Page 15 ====
15
from the blurred image. Eventually, the model will use
more details to generate images. Nevertheless, sometimes
text descriptions contain multiple targets and a single text
description does not capture all the details in an image.
Sharma et al. [156] provided a dialogue interface that uses
textual information from the dialogue to obtain more de-
tailed information about the image.
Another set of text-to-image algorithms is based on the
variant auto-encoder with embedding. Unlike the gener-
ative approach, the input to the encoder is a vector of
attributes. Akata et al. [157] explored semantic features from
different sources, such as WordNet and word embeddings.
However, these methods were unable to recognize parts
of an image without part-term annotation. Elhoseiny et al.
[158] used a visual classiﬁer to detect patches from bird
image dataset by using only text terms and tests without
partial annotation. The results show that visual text infor-
mation and bird parts can be linked with zero samples.
6.3 Discussion and Summary
Multi-modal FSL is still in the developing stage and there
are currently several challenges until now: how to combine
data from heterogeneous domains, how to deal with the
different levels of noise that occur during the combination
of different modalities, and how to learn together. Table.
8 classiﬁes FSL tasks in multimodality as representation,
alignment, fusion, co-learning, and translation. In a multi-
modal FSL, a good feature representation should be able
to ﬁll in the missing modalities based on the observed
modal information. More approaches will emerge in the
future, going well beyond modal embedding and generating
semantic information from images.
7 FSL A PPLICATIONS INCOMPUTER VISION
In the past ﬁve years, we systematically combed and sum-
marized FSL in the ﬁeld of computer vision [161] and
divided tasks into image classiﬁcation, object detection, se-
mantic segmentation, and instance segmentation. Following
is a detailed summary in the form of graphs and tables
based on the time dimension. By reading this section, the
reader will be able to gain a comprehensive grasp of FSL in
the ﬁeld of computer vision.
7.1 Few-shot Image Classiﬁcation
Except like Google and Facebook, most researchers in real
life do not have access to a large dataset of good quality.
In FSL computer vision classiﬁcation tasks, each task may
contain only one or a few samples. Solving few-shot image
classiﬁcation tasks is mainly addressed by data augmenta-
tion, transfer learning, meta-learning, and multimodal fu-
sion learning. At present, the top three methods in terms of
accuracy are all based on feature augmentation and feature
transformation of the backbone model. In this section, we
investigates all few-shot image classiﬁcation models from
2016 to the present and counts the best performance of all
models on the mini-ImageNet benchmark dataset. Here we
use 5-way-1-shot and 5-way-5-shot as baseline tasks. Table.
9 and Fig. 14 illustrate our investigation results.7.2 Few-shot Object Detection
Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD) is the task of detecting
rare objects from several samples. There has been a lot of
progress in FSL for image classiﬁcation, but rarely for object
detection. At present the evolution of few-shot object detec-
tion can be divided into three main camps: Data augmen-
tation, transfer learning, and meta-learning. Out of them,
Attention mechanisms plays a pivotal role in small sample
target detection. Equally, the issue of slow inference for a
few-shot object detections to meet real-time requirements
remains serious. The Table. 10 and Fig. 14 are used to show
recent advances in object detection in FSL.
7.3 Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Few-shot semantic segmentation was ﬁrst proposed in [31]
until 2017. And it has been widely used in scenes such
as medical images and driverless cars. Unlike traditional
semantic segmentation, few-shot semantic segmentation has
less pixel annotation information in support data set. To
our best knowledge, few-shot semantic segmentation can be
broadly classiﬁed into supervised semantic segmentation,
unsupervised semantic segmentation, and video semantic
segmentation. In the machine learning stage, the more clas-
sical approach is to use probabilistic mappings as prior
knowledge for derivation. In the deep learning phase, a
large number of efﬁcient algorithms for segmentation tools
have emerged, but these models often require a large num-
ber of manual sample annotations. Recently, [201] has made
signiﬁcant improvements to few-shot semantic segmenta-
tion by proposing a more concise paradigm where only the
classiﬁer is meta-learned and the feature encoding decoder
remains trained using a conventional segmentation model.
Providing the Table. 16 and Fig. 14 for showing few-shot
semantic segmentation.
7.4 Few-Shot Instance Segmentation
In contrast to semantic segmentation, instance segmentation
involves identifying each pixel in an image and labelling
it separately. Recently, few studies are dealing with the
problem of segmenting few samples of instances. Current
work still focuses on how to improve R-CNNs using some
effective tools. The most recent work [210] proposes an in-
cremental few-shot instance segmentation algorithm, which
greatly improves the performance on benchmark data sets.
In this section, we survey papers of recent three years on
few-shot instance segmentation. Table. 12 and Fig. 14 show
the research progress of the few-shot instance segmentation.
8 F UTURE DIRECTION AND OPPORTUNITIES OF
FSL
Considerable recent work has made promising progress
on various task settings for FSL. Nonetheless, for more
challenging scenes, both the training and validation data
sets are minimal, where the distribution of other data neither
helps real samples to be evaluated nor has extensive training
data or validation datasets for transfer learning. Moreover,
meta-learning also does not have enough tasks to initialize
the parameters. With the taxonomy proposed in this sur-
vey, in this section we put forward several possible future

==== Page 16 ====
16
TABLE 9
The latest performance of FSL in the image classiﬁcation tasks of computer vision
Ref Model 5-way-1-shot accuary 5-way-5-shot accuary Extra Training Data Approach Features Pubilsed Date Available code
Lee et al. [162] ESFR 76.84% 84.36% "Early-Stage Feature Reconst
-ructionJun 2021 "
Wang et al. [163] Multi-Task Learning 59.84% 77.72% %Multi-Task Learning and Meta
-LearningJun 2021 "
Afham et al. [164] RS-FSL 65.33% - " Semantic assistance Apr 2021 "
Rizve et al. [165] Invariance-Equivariance 67.28% 84.78% %Invariant and Equivariant Repres
-entationsApr 2021 "
Esfandiarpoor et al. [166] pseudo-shots 73.35% 82.51% % Exploiting Existing Resources Dec 2020 "
Chen et al. [167] MATANet 53.63% 72.67% % Multi-scale Adaptive + Attention Nov 2020
Wang et al. [168] MTUNet 55.03% 56.12% %using backbone model and weight
generatedNov 2020 "
Khacef et al. [169] WRN + Self-Organizing Map 71.5% 82.2% % Self-Organizing Maps Sep 2020 %
Xue et al. [170] RCN - ResNet12 57.40% 75.19% % Transfer learning Sep 2020 "
Zhong et al. [171] MCRNET 62.53% 80.34% % Meta-learning Jul 2020 "
Ziko et al. [172] LaplacianShot 75.57% 84.72% % Transductive Laplacian-regularized Jul 2020 "
Bateni et al. [173] Transductive CNAPS + FETI 79.9% 91.5% " Data Augmentation Jun 2020 %
Rajasegaran et al. [174] SKD 67.04% 83.54% % Knowledge Distillation Jun 2020 "
Hu et al. [175] PT+MAP 82.92% 88.82% % Feature Distribution Jun 2020 "
Simon et al. [176] Adaptive Subspace Network 67.09% 81.65% % central block of a dynamic classiﬁer Jun 2020 "
Bateni et al. [173] Transductive CNAPS 55.6% 73.1% % Self-Organizing Maps Jun 2020 "
Li et al. [177] TRAML 67.10% 79.54% % Adaptive Margin Loss May 2020 "
Hu et al. [178] SIB 70.0% 79.2% % Empirical Bayes Transductive May 2020 "
Wang et al. [179] ICI 69.66% 80.11% % Instance Credibility Inference Apr 2020 "
Rodr ´ıguez et al. [130] EPNet + SSL - 88.05% " Embedding Propagation Apr 2020 "
Nguyen et al. [180] SImPa 52.11% 63.87% % PAC-Bayes framework Mar 2020 %
Guan et al. [181] DAPNA 71.88% 84.07% " Domain Adaptation Feb 2020 %
Chen et al. [182] AmdimNet 76.82% 90.98% " Embedding network Nov 2019 "
Xu et al. [183] MetaFun-Attention 64.13% 80.82% %Use similar gradient descent
to encode labeled data
to predict unlabeled data.Jau 2020 "
Liu et al. [184] MetaOptNet-SVM+Task Aug 65.38% 82.13 % " Embedding Propagation Nov 2019 "
Song et al. [185] ACC + Amphibian 62.21% 80.75% "Uing pre-trained base model
to generalize novel modelNov 2019 "
Rodr ´ıguez et al. [186] DKT + BNCosSim 62.96% 64% %Learn a kernel that
transfers to new tasksDec 2019 "
Mangla et al. [187] S2M2R 64.93% 83.18% " Embedding Propagation Apr 2020 "
Li et al. [188] LST 70.1% 78.7% "Train a small sample
model to predict fake
signatures on unlabeled dataSep 2019 "
Yoon et al. [189] TapNet 61.65% 76.36% "Learn the reference vector
of each class in
different tasksMay 2019 "
Kim et al. [190] EGNN + Transduction - 76.37% %Using graph neural network
to model intra-class similarityMay 2019 "
Ye et al.[191] feat+ 61.72% 78.38% %Set-to-set applied
to embedded functionsJau 2019 "
Li et al. [192] DN4 51.24% 71.02% %Use image local descriptors
for measurementJun 2019 "
Park et al. [193] MC2+ 55.73% 70.33% % Factorization matrix Jau 2019 "
TABLE 10
The latest performance of FSL in the tasks of few-shot object detection during 2019-2021
Ref Model10-shot AP/
30-shot APExtra Training Data Core idea Approach Taxonomy Pubilsed Date Available code
Zhang et al. [26] Meta-DETR 17.8/22.9 %Use semantic alignment to
perform speciﬁc encoding and
feature-independent decoding
of imagesFeature Reconstruction Jun 2021 "
Sun et al. [194] FSCE 11.1/15.3 %Compare proposal coding loss
to improve intra-class compactness
and inter-class varianceFeature embedding Jun 2021 "
Zhu et al. [195] SSR-FSD 11.3/14.7 "Learning Semantic Embeddings
Using the Invariance of
Semantic RelationsEmbedding learning Mar 2021 %
Xiao et al. [196] FsDetView 12.5/14.7 "Share the features of
the base class and
the new classMeta-learning Jul 2020 "
Wu et al. [197] MPSR 9.8/14.1 %Reﬁnement of samples using
multi-scale techniquesData augmentation Jul 2020 "
Wang et al. [198] TFA w/ cos 10/13.7 %Fine-tuning the ﬁnal
layer of the detectorFine-tuning Mar 2020 "
Yan et al. [199] Meta R-CNN -/12.4 %Meta-learning using partial
featuresMeta-learning Sep 2019 "
Wang et al. [200] MetaDet 7.1/11.3 "Prediction of component-speciﬁc
parameters from several samplesMeta-learning Sep 2020 %

==== Page 17 ====
17
5-way -1-shot 5-way -5-shotTime(year/month)
2016/07 2017/06 2017/07 2018/07 2019/01 2019/07 2020/01 2020/07 2021/02ACCURACY
405060708090100
Matching NetsMAMLCategory-agnostic m apping WRNDelta-encoderDeep Com parison Netw orkLSTSim ple CNAPS + FETIPT+MAPIllum ination Augm entation
Matching NetsMAMLCategory-agnostic m apping WRNTADAMFeat+S2M2RAm dim NetTransductive CNAPS + FETI
Illum ination Augm entation
Fig. 14. Best performance of metric learning in image classiﬁcation
tasks during 2017-2021
10-shots 30-shotsTime(year/month)
2018/03 2018/12 2019/10 2020/03 2020/08 2021/04 2021/05AP
0369121518212425
LSTD(YOLO)MetaYOLOFSODFSDetView NULL NULLMeta-DETR
LSTD(YOLO)FeatRew eightMeta R-CNNTF A w / cosMPSRFSCEMeta-DETRFig. 15. Best performance of metric learning in object detection
tasks during 2017-2021
1-shot 5-shotsTime(year/month)
2018/10 2019/03 2019/10 2020/07 2020/12 2021/03MEAN IOU
4448525660646872
SG-OneCANetFWBPFENet NULLHSNet
SG-OneCANetFWBPPNetRePRIHSNet
Fig. 16. Best performance of metric learning in semantic
segmentation tasks during 2018-2021
1-shotTIME(year/month)
2017/8 2018/11 2020/9 2021/1 2021/4MAP50
1416182022ONCE iMTFA
FAPISFGN
Mask R-CNNSiamese Mask R-CNN Fig. 17. Best performance of metric learning in instance
segmentation tasks during 2017-2021
research directions in FSL. Furthermore, recent advances in
applications and algorithms are also presented through this
comprehensive survey of FSL.
8.1 Better evaluation of data distribution
The essence of FSL is that the support data sets are too small
to evaluate the true data distribution. So what exactly can
be done to maximize the evaluation of the true data distri-
bution using a limited number of samples? The latest work
[215] is making a useful attempt in this direction, proposing
the idea of distribution correction where the mean and co-
variance of the base class are computationally corrected and
then a linear classiﬁer can be used directly to obtain good
results. In fact, the difference between FSL and traditional
deep learning is not big enough when the few samples are
accurate enough to estimate the true data distribution. This
is an exciting direction to explore. Similarly, in the ﬁeld of
computer vision, there are no task settings or datasets based
on real application scenarios for FSL. Most of the work is
still focused on leveraging and mining information from
image data. The current mainstream benchmark datasets
have more or less various problems: the mini-Imagenet
dataset has some inappropriate samples or too difﬁcult
samples, such as solid occlusion, multiple objects in the
same image, etc. The Omniglot dataset is far away frompractical applications and is not easily inspired in real-world
applications. BSCD-FSL [36] provides a more violent cross-
domain FSL benchmark dataset involving satellite images,
medical images. Until now there is no benchmark dataset
to evaluate the generalization ability of a model at a ﬁne
grained detail. Developing and completing a benchmark
dataset in the ﬁeld of FSL will provide a more realistic
evaluation of the current state-of-the-arts in FSL.
8.2 Improving the robustness of data-to-label mapping
A new challenge to FSL is posed by the emergence of BSCD-
FSL. Its emergence explores and reveals the limitations of
current FSL solutions for cross-domain learning. Recent
research has produced some excellent results in this area,
such as skillfully designed task tuning, more sophisticated
hyperparameter tuning, formation of auxiliary data sets,
and extraction of domain-irrelevant features. Currently, ﬁne-
tuning is already performing very robustly at the intersec-
tion of transfer learning and meta-learning. Nonetheless,
both techniques are still very distinct. Pre-training can be
seen as learning many categories of tasks, but it is single-
task learning. Meta-learning, on the other hand, is a multi-
task learning approach. Whether there is a better model that
can integrate meta-learning and ﬁne-tuning to maximize the
performance of the model while reducing the computational

==== Page 18 ====
18
TABLE 11
The latest performance of FSL in the tasks of few-shot semantic segmentation during 2019-2021
Ref Model1-shot Mean IoU/
5-shot Mean IoUExtra Training Data Core idea Approach Taxonomy Pubilsed Date Available code
Zhang et al. [202] CyCTR 64.3/66.6 %Aggregate supported and pixel
features into query setsTransfer learning Jun 2021 "
Min et al.[203] HSNet 66.2/70.4 "Extracting different sets of
feature composition from different
levels of intermediate convolutional
layersFeature Engineering Apr 2021 "
Yang et al. [204] RPMM 56.3/- %Different image regions are
associated with multiple prototypes
to obtain a semantic
representationMetric learning Sep 2020 "
Tian et al. [205] PFENet 60.8/- % Feature enrichment + a priori mask Feature Engineering Aug 2020 "
Liu et al. [206] PPNet 51.5/62.0 "Reﬁnement of samples using
multi-scale techniquesGNN Sep 2020 "
Nguyen et al. [207] FWB 56.2/59.9 %Measuring the cosine similarity
of class feature vectors
and query feature vectorsMetric learning Sep 2019 "
Wang et al. [208] PANet 48.1/55.7 % Each pixel is compared to the prototype Metric learning Feb 2020 "
Zhang et al. [209] CANet 55.4/57.1 %Support for performing multi
-level feature comparisons between
images and query imagesMetric learning Mar 2019 "
TABLE 12
The latest performance of FSL in the tasks of few-shot instance segmentation during 2018-2021.
Ref Model 1-shot MAP50 Extra Training Data Core idea Approach Taxonomy Pubilsed Date Available code
Ganea et al. [210] ONCE iMTFA 20.13 %Learning discriminative
embedding vectorsMetric learning Jun 2021 "
Nguyen et al. [211] FAPIS 16.3 % Modeling of shared parts Metric learning Apr 2021 "
Fan et al. [212] FGN 16.2 %Using attention and
relationships to guide
generalizationBased model Sep 2020 "
He et al. [213] Mask R-CNN 14.8 %Adding masks to
predicted objectsData Augmentation Aug 2017 "
Michaelis et al. [214] Siamese Mask R-CNN 14.5 %Encoding reference image
subjectsMetric learning Nov 2018 "
complexity of meta-learning is a direction worthy of deeper
discussion and exchange among researchers at the moment.
8.3 Learn meta-knowledge more effectively from his-
torical tasks
Meta learning is still limited to performance in a speciﬁc
task space under a deﬁned network structure. In the case of
classiﬁcation tasks, only associations between classiﬁcation
tasks can currently be considered. Is it possible to have a
framework that can take into account tasks such as classi-
ﬁcation, detection, prediction, and generation at the same
time? This would enable meta-learning to be somewhat
separated from the conception of tasks. Some recent work
has attempted to optimize each small batch as a whole. In
this case, how to optimize the inner loop will be an im-
portant direction of optimization for efﬁcient applications.
In the future, pre-training and ﬁne-tuning will become the
mainstream algorithms for FSL. At present, meta-learning is
still exploring the correlation between tasks, and no relevant
theory has yet emerged to explain the causal relationship
behind meta-learning. As the causation theory framework
evolves, meta-learning would probably tend to become a
more general framework.
8.4 Full convergence of multimodal information
Multimodal learning is currently an emerging approach for
solving FSL problems by automatically learning small sam-
ple tasks in edge scenarios without supervised information
and quickly migrating to data from different domains. Itis widely regarded as a path exploration from weak AI in
limited domains towards general AI. The implementation
of pre-training and ﬁne-tuning in multimodal learning sce-
narios can largely enable the usage of a uniform feature
representation across different tasks. For instance, cross-
modal understanding, and cross-modal generation. The
emergence of multimodal pre-training models can support
multiple tasks, generalize across many scenarios, and have
a substantial ability to generalize and replicate at scale.
Extensive work has been done on fusing two or more types
of information, including semantic information. Nonethe-
less, the main work is still focused on pixels and semantic
information, with a relatively single function. In order to
effectively address feature reuse under multiple modalities
and reduce the cost of data annotation, there is an urgent
need for the industry to materialize a powerful pre-trained
model involving the fusion of three and more modalities.
9 CONCLUSION
As an important branch of deep learning, few-shot Learning
does not require a large amount of data but chooses a
softer approach to solve problems, where it can be perfectly
integrated with techniques such as transfer learning, meta-
learning and data augmentation. In this paper, we provide
a comprehensive survey of FSL in the form of questions and
answers that easily distinguish the confused concepts and
summarize the rich baseline dataset under FSL. Besides, we
provide unique insights into the challenges in the develop-
ment of FSL following a new taxonomy. The evolution of

==== Page 19 ====
19
relevant research methods is analyzed in depth according
to the degree of integration of knowledge in each stage.
Furthermore, for the sake of completeness of the exposition,
we also compare and analyze the recent advances of FSL
in the ﬁeld of computer vision. Finally, we present a list
of possible future research directions and opportunities in
light of the extensive recent literature. Overall, this paper
provides an overall comprehensive summary of the frontier
advances in FSL over the past three years and is expected
to contribute to the synergistic development of FSL and its
related ﬁelds.
REFERENCES
[1] Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang,
and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer look at few-shot classiﬁcation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.04232, 2019.
[2] Carl Doersch, Ankush Gupta, and Andrew Zisserman.
Crosstransformers: spatially-aware few-shot transfer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.11498, 2020.
[3] Jun Shu, Zongben Xu, and Deyu Meng. Small sample learning in
big data era. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04572, 2018.
[4] Jiang Lu, Pinghua Gong, Jieping Ye, and Changshui Zhang.
Learning from very few samples: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.02653, 2020.
[5] Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M
Ni. Generalizing from a few examples: A survey on few-shot
learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 53(3):1–34, 2020.
[6] Endel Tulving. How many memory systems are there? American
psychologist, 40(4):385, 1985.
[7] Endel Tulving. Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual
review ofpsychology, 53(1):1–25, 2002.
[8] Shuo Wang, Jun Yue, Jianzhuang Liu, Qi Tian, and Meng Wang.
Large-scale few-shot learning via multi-modal knowledge dis-
covery. In European Conference onComputer Vision, pages 718–
734. Springer, 2020.
[9] Chen Xing, Negar Rostamzadeh, Boris Oreshkin, and Pedro O
O Pinheiro. Adaptive cross-modal few-shot learning. Advances
inNeural Information Processing Systems, 32:4847–4857, 2019.
[10] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina
Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey on bias and fairness in
machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6):1–35,
2021.
[11] Sakshi Painuly, Sachin Sharma, and Priya Matta. Future trends
and challenges in next generation smart application of 5g-iot. In
2021 5thInternational Conference onComputing Methodologies
and Communication (ICCMC), pages 354–357. IEEE, 2021.
[12] Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. Kg-bert: Bert for
knowledge graph completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03193,
2019.
[13] Mark Woodward and Chelsea Finn. Active one-shot learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06559, 2017.
[14] Akshay Mehrotra and Ambedkar Dukkipati. Generative adver-
sarial residual pairwise networks for one shot learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.08033, 2017.
[15] Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yu-Xiong Wang, Lin Ma, Wei Liu, and
Martial Hebert. Image deformation meta-networks for one-
shot learning. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8680–8689,
2019.
[16] Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba.
One-shot learning with a hierarchical nonparametric bayesian
model. In Proceedings ofICML Workshop onUnsupervised
and Transfer Learning, pages 195–206. JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings, 2012.
[17] Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary,
Mattias Marder, Sharathchandra Pankanti, Rogerio Feris, Ab-
hishek Kumar, Raja Giries, and Alex M Bronstein. Repmet:
Representative-based metric learning for classiﬁcation and one-
shot object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04728, 4323, 2018.
[18] Kwangjin Yoon, Jeonghwan Gwak, Young-Min Song, Young-
Chul Yoon, and Moon-Gu Jeon. Oneshotda: Online multi-object
tracker with one-shot-learning-based data association. IEEE
Access, 8:38060–38072, 2020.[19] Shruti Jadon and Aditya Arcot Srinivasan. Improving siamese
networks for one-shot learning using kernel-based activation
functions. In Data Management, Analytics and Innovation, pages
353–367. Springer, 2021.
[20] Christoph H Lampert, Hannes Nickisch, and Stefan Harmeling.
Learning to detect unseen object classes by between-class at-
tribute transfer. In 2009 IEEE Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 951–958. IEEE, 2009.
[21] Yongqin Xian, Tobias Lorenz, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep
Akata. Feature generating networks for zero-shot learning. In
Proceedings ofthe IEEE conference oncomputer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 5542–5551, 2018.
[22] Elyor Kodirov, Tao Xiang, and Shaogang Gong. Semantic au-
toencoder for zero-shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE
conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition, pages
3174–3183, 2017.
[23] Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Yongqin Xian, Federico Tombari, and
Zeynep Akata. Learning graph embeddings for compositional
zero-shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 953–962,
2021.
[24] Joaquin Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.03548, 2018.
[25] Kevin Li, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Vitchyr H Pong,
Aurick Zhou, Justin Yu, and Sergey Levine. Mural: Meta-learning
uncertainty-aware rewards for outcome-driven reinforcement
learning. In International Conference onMachine Learning,
pages 6346–6356. PMLR, 2021.
[26] Gongjie Zhang, Zhipeng Luo, Kaiwen Cui, and Shijian Lu. Meta-
detr: Few-shot object detection via uniﬁed image-level meta-
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.11731, 2021.
[27] Meng Cheng, Hanli Wang, and Yu Long. Meta-learning based
incremental few-shot object detection. IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems forVideo Technology, 2021.
[28] C. Wah, S. Branson, P . Welinder, P . Perona, and S. Belongie. The
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 Dataset. Technical Report CNS-
TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
[29] Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wier-
stra, et al. Matching networks for one shot learning. Advances
inneural information processing systems, 29:3630–3638, 2016.
[30] Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B Tenen-
baum. Human-level concept learning through probabilistic pro-
gram induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.
[31] Amirreza Shaban, Shray Bansal, Zhen Liu, Irfan Essa, and Byron
Boots. One-shot learning for semantic segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.03410, 2017.
[32] Eleni Triantaﬁllou, Tyler Zhu, Vincent Dumoulin, Pascal Lamblin,
Utku Evci, Kelvin Xu, Ross Goroshin, Carles Gelada, Kevin Swer-
sky, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, et al. Meta-dataset: A dataset of
datasets for learning to learn from few examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.03096, 2019.
[33] Xavier Roynard, Jean-Emmanuel Deschaud, and Franc ¸ois
Goulette. Paris-lille-3d: A large and high-quality ground-truth
urban point cloud dataset for automatic segmentation and
classiﬁcation. The International Journal ofRobotics Research,
37(6):545–557, 2018.
[34] Seong Joon Oh, Kevin Murphy, Jiyan Pan, Joseph Roth, Florian
Schroff, and Andrew Gallagher. Modeling uncertainty with
hedged instance embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00319,
2018.
[35] Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and
Antonio Torralba. Sun database: Large-scale scene recognition
from abbey to zoo. In 2010 IEEE computer society conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3485–3492. IEEE,
2010.
[36] Yunhui Guo, Noel C Codella, Leonid Karlinsky, James V Codella,
John R Smith, Kate Saenko, Tajana Rosing, and Rogerio Feris. A
broader study of cross-domain few-shot learning. In European
Conference onComputer Vision, pages 124–141. Springer, 2020.
[37] Sharada P Mohanty, David P Hughes, and Marcel Salath ´e. Using
deep learning for image-based plant disease detection. Frontiers
inplant science, 7:1419, 2016.
[38] Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian
Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset and deep learning benchmark for
land use and land cover classiﬁcation. IEEE Journal ofSelected
Topics inApplied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing,
12(7):2217–2226, 2019.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[39] Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mohammadhadi
Bagheri, and Ronald M Summers. Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale
chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised
classiﬁcation and localization of common thorax diseases. In
Proceedings ofthe IEEE conference oncomputer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 2097–2106, 2017.
[40] Noel Codella, Veronica Rotemberg, Philipp Tschandl, M Emre
Celebi, Stephen Dusza, David Gutman, Brian Helba, Aadi Kalloo,
Konstantinos Liopyris, Michael Marchetti, et al. Skin lesion
analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: A challenge hosted by
the international skin imaging collaboration (isic). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.03368, 2019.
[41] Xavier Bouthillier, Kishore Konda, Pascal Vincent, and Roland
Memisevic. Dropout as data augmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.08700, 2015.
[42] Zhun Zhong, Liang Zheng, Guoliang Kang, Shaozi Li, and
Yi Yang. Random erasing data augmentation. In Proceedings of
theAAAI Conference onArtiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages
13001–13008, 2020.
[43] Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization
of convolutional neural networks with cutout. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
[44] Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun,
Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo. Cutmix: Regularization
strategy to train strong classiﬁers with localizable features.
InProceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 6023–6032, 2019.
[45] Roland Kwitt, Sebastian Hegenbart, and Marc Niethammer. One-
shot learning of scene locations via feature trajectory transfer. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE Conference onComputer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 78–86, 2016.
[46] Junjie Li, Zilei Wang, and Xiaoming Hu. Learning intact features
by erasing-inpainting for few-shot classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
oftheAAAI Conference onArtiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 35,
pages 8401–8409, 2021.
[47] Jianhong Zhang, Manli Zhang, Zhiwu Lu, and Tao Xiang.
Adargcn: Adaptive aggregation gcn for few-shot learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Winter Conference onApplications
ofComputer Vision, pages 3482–3491, 2021.
[48] Hang Gao, Zheng Shou, Alireza Zareian, Hanwang Zhang,
and Shih-Fu Chang. Low-shot learning via covariance-
preserving adversarial augmentation networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.11730, 2018.
[49] Wen-Hsuan Chu, Yu-Jhe Li, Jing-Cheng Chang, and Yu-
Chiang Frank Wang. Spot and learn: A maximum-entropy
patch sampler for few-shot image classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 6251–6260, 2019.
[50] Hongguang Zhang, Jing Zhang, and Piotr Koniusz. Few-
shot learning via saliency-guided hallucination of samples. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 2770–2779, 2019.
[51] Amit Alfassy, Leonid Karlinsky, Amit Aides, Joseph Shtok, Sivan
Harary, Rogerio Feris, Raja Giryes, and Alex M Bronstein. Laso:
Label-set operations networks for multi-label few-shot learning.
InProceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 6548–6557, 2019.
[52] Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yinda Zhang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xiangyang
Xue, and Leonid Sigal. Semantic feature augmentation in few-
shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.05298, 86:89, 2018.
[53] Hiroshi Inoue. Data augmentation by pairing samples for images
classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02929, 2018.
[54] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David
Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[55] Li-Qun Chen, Xing Xie, Xin Fan, Wei-Ying Ma, Hong-Jiang
Zhang, and He-Qin Zhou. A visual attention model for adapting
images on small displays. Multimedia systems, 9(4):353–364,
2003.
[56] Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yinda Zhang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xi-
angyang Xue, and Leonid Sigal. Multi-level semantic feature
augmentation for one-shot learning. IEEE Transactions onImage
Processing, 28(9):4594–4605, 2019.
[57] Yonggang Li, Guosheng Hu, Yongtao Wang, Timothy
Hospedales, Neil M Robertson, and Yongxin Yang. Dada:
Differentiable automatic data augmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.03780, 2020.[58] Mingyu Kang, Yifan Yang, Duxin Chen, and Wenwu Yu. Cwgan:
A graph vector based trafﬁc missing data adversarial generation
approach. In 2020 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), pages
6234–6238. IEEE, 2020.
[59] Ying Ma, Guoqiang Zhong, Yanan Wang, and Wen Liu. Metac-
gan: A novel gan model for generating high quality and diver-
sity images with few training data. In 2020 International Joint
Conference onNeural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2020.
[60] Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary,
Mattias Marder, Rogerio Feris, Abhishek Kumar, Raja Giryes,
and Alex M Bronstein. Delta-encoder: an effective sample syn-
thesis method for few-shot object recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.04734, 2018.
[61] Cheng-Yuan Liou, Wei-Chen Cheng, Jiun-Wei Liou, and Daw-
Ran Liou. Autoencoder for words. Neurocomputing, 139:84–96,
2014.
[62] Junsik Kim, Tae-Hyun Oh, Seokju Lee, Fei Pan, and In So
Kweon. Variational prototyping-encoder: One-shot learning with
prototypical images. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9462–9470,
2019.
[63] Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun
Zhu, Hengshu Zhu, Hui Xiong, and Qing He. A comprehensive
survey on transfer learning. Proceedings oftheIEEE, 109(1):43–
76, 2020.
[64] I Kevin, Kai Wang, Xiaokang Zhou, Wei Liang, Zheng Yan, and
Jinhua She. Federated transfer learning based cross-domain pre-
diction for smart manufacturing. IEEE Transactions onIndustrial
Informatics, 2021.
[65] Chenjing Cai, Shiwei Wang, Youjun Xu, Weilin Zhang, Ke Tang,
Qi Ouyang, Luhua Lai, and Jianfeng Pei. Transfer learning for
drug discovery. Journal ofMedicinal Chemistry, 63(16):8683–
8694, 2020.
[66] Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry
Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto,
and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convolutional neu-
ral networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
[67] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings ofthe
IEEE conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[68] Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gard-
ner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
Deep contextualized word representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.05365, 2018.
[69] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya
Sutskever. Improving language understanding by generative pre-
training. 2018.
[70] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers
for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
2018.
[71] Guneet S Dhillon, Pratik Chaudhari, Avinash Ravichandran, and
Stefano Soatto. A baseline for few-shot image classiﬁcation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.02729, 2019.
[72] Yinbo Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, Huijuan Xu, and
Trevor Darrell. A new meta-baseline for few-shot learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.04390, 2020.
[73] Mahbub Hussain, Jordan J Bird, and Diego R Faria. A study on
cnn transfer learning for image classiﬁcation. In UKWorkshop
oncomputational Intelligence, pages 191–202. Springer, 2018.
[74] Akihiro Nakamura and Tatsuya Harada. Revisiting ﬁne-tuning
for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00216, 2019.
[75] Alexander R Fabbri, Simeng Han, Haoyuan Li, Haoran Li, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Shaﬁq Joty, Dragomir Radev, and Yashar
Mehdad. Improving zero and few-shot abstractive summariza-
tion with intermediate ﬁne-tuning and data augmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.12836, 2020.
[76] Yann Lifchitz, Yannis Avrithis, Sylvaine Picard, and Andrei Bur-
suc. Dense classiﬁcation and implanting for few-shot learning.
InProceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 9258–9267, 2019.
[77] Zhongjie Yu, Lin Chen, Zhongwei Cheng, and Jiebo Luo. Trans-
match: A transfer-learning scheme for semi-supervised few-
shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference on

==== Page 21 ====
21
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12856–12864,
2020.
[78] John Cai and Sheng Mei Shen. Cross-domain few-shot learning
with meta ﬁne-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10544, 2020.
[79] Zhiqiang Shen, Zechun Liu, Jie Qin, Marios Savvides, and
Kwang-Ting Cheng. Partial is better than all: Revisiting ﬁne-
tuning strategy for few-shot learning. In Proceedings ofthe
AAAI Conference onArtiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 35, pages
9594–9602, 2021.
[80] David Arg ¨ueso, Artzai Picon, Unai Irusta, Alfonso Medela,
Miguel G San-Emeterio, Arantza Bereciartua, and Aitor Alvarez-
Gila. Few-shot learning approach for plant disease classiﬁcation
using images taken in the ﬁeld. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture, 175:105542, 2020.
[81] Anay Majee, Kshitij Agrawal, and Anbumani Subramanian.
Few-shot learning for road object detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.12543, 2021.
[82] Ori Ram, Yuval Kirstain, Jonathan Berant, Amir Globerson, and
Omer Levy. Few-shot question answering by pretraining span
selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00438, 2021.
[83] Nikita Dvornik, Cordelia Schmid, and Julien Mairal. Selecting
relevant features from a multi-domain representation for few-
shot classiﬁcation. In European Conference onComputer Vision,
pages 769–786. Springer, 2020.
[84] Davis Wertheimer, Luming Tang, and Bharath Hariharan. Few-
shot classiﬁcation with feature map reconstruction networks. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8012–8021, 2021.
[85] Hung-Yu Tseng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jia-Bin Huang, and Ming-Hsuan
Yang. Cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation via learned feature-
wise transformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08735, 2020.
[86] Jiamei Sun, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Wojciech Samek, Yunqing
Zhao, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Alexander Binder. Explanation-
guided training for cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation. In 2020
25th International Conference onPattern Recognition (ICPR),
pages 7609–7616. IEEE, 2021.
[87] Andrei A Rusu, Dushyant Rao, Jakub Sygnowski, Oriol Vinyals,
Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, and Raia Hadsell. Meta-
learning with latent embedding optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.05960, 2018.
[88] Yuqian Fu, Yanwei Fu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Meta-fdmixup:
Cross-domain few-shot learning guided by labeled target data.
InProceedings ofthe 29th ACM International Conference on
Multimedia, pages 5326–5334, 2021.
[89] Cheng Perng Phoo and Bharath Hariharan. Self-training for
few-shot transfer across extreme task differences. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.07734, 2020.
[90] Lu Liu, William Hamilton, Guodong Long, Jing Jiang, and Hugo
Larochelle. A universal representation transformer layer for few-
shot image classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11702, 2020.
[91] Wei-Hong Li, Xialei Liu, and Hakan Bilen. Universal representa-
tion learning from multiple domains for few-shot classiﬁcation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.13841, 2021.
[92] Hakan Bilen and Andrea Vedaldi. Universal representations: The
missing link between faces, text, planktons, and cat breeds. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.07275, 2017.
[93] Sylvestre-Alvise Rebufﬁ, Hakan Bilen, and Andrea Vedaldi.
Learning multiple visual domains with residual adapters. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.08045, 2017.
[94] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-
agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In
International Conference onMachine Learning, pages 1126–1135.
PMLR, 2017.
[95] Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On ﬁrst-order
meta-learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.
[96] Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol
Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature reuse? towards understanding
the effectiveness of maml. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09157, 2019.
[97] Zhenguo Li, Fengwei Zhou, Fei Chen, and Hang Li. Meta-sgd:
Learning to learn quickly for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.09835, 2017.
[98] Muhammad Abdullah Jamal and Guo-Jun Qi. Task agnos-
tic meta-learning for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 11719–11727, 2019.
[99] Aravind Rajeswaran, Chelsea Finn, Sham Kakade, and Sergey
Levine. Meta-learning with implicit gradients, 2019.[100] Jathushan Rajasegaran, Salman Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fa-
had Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah. itaml: An incremen-
tal task-agnostic meta-learning approach. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 13588–13597, 2020.
[101] Joel Joseph and Alex Gu. Reproducibility report: La-maml:
Look-ahead meta learning for continual learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.05824, 2021.
[102] Anugunj Naman and Liliana Mancini. Fixed-maml for few shot
classiﬁcation in multilingual speech emotion recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.01356, 2021.
[103] Taewon Jeong and Heeyoung Kim. Ood-maml: Meta-learning
for few-shot out-of-distribution detection and classiﬁcation.
Advances inNeural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
[104] Olga Wichrowska, Niru Maheswaranathan, Matthew W Hoff-
man, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Nando Freitas,
and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Learned optimizers that scale and
generalize. In International Conference onMachine Learning,
pages 3751–3760. PMLR, 2017.
[105] Kiran Kumar Chandriah and Raghavendra V Naraganahalli.
Rnn/lstm with modiﬁed adam optimizer in deep learning
approach for automobile spare parts demand forecasting.
Multimedia Tools and Applications, pages 1–15, 2021.
[106] Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W
Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, Brendan Shillingford, and
Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by
gradient descent. In Advances inneural information processing
systems, pages 3981–3989, 2016.
[107] Rein Houthooft, Richard Y Chen, Phillip Isola, Bradly C Stadie,
Filip Wolski, Jonathan Ho, and Pieter Abbeel. Evolved policy
gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04821, 2018.
[108] Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian
Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson.
Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via
meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08348, 2019.
[109] AJ Piergiovanni, Anelia Angelova, and Michael S Ryoo. Evolv-
ing losses for unsupervised video representation learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 133–142, 2020.
[110] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean.
Efﬁcient neural architecture search via parameters sharing. In
International Conference onMachine Learning, pages 4095–4104.
PMLR, 2018.
[111] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Dif-
ferentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055,
2018.
[112] Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Barret Zoph, Vijay Va-
sudevan, and Quoc Le. Understanding and simplifying one-
shot architecture search. In International Conference onMachine
Learning, pages 550–559. PMLR, 2018.
[113] Kaicheng Yu, Christian Sciuto, Martin Jaggi, Claudiu Musat,
and Mathieu Salzmann. Evaluating the search phase of neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08142, 2019.
[114] Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. Nas-bench-201: Extending the
scope of reproducible neural architecture search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.00326, 2020.
[115] Yiyang Zhao, Linnan Wang, Yuandong Tian, Rodrigo Fon-
seca, and Tian Guo. Few-shot neural architecture search. In
International Conference onMachine Learning, pages 12707–
12718. PMLR, 2021.
[116] Thomas Elsken, Benedikt Stafﬂer, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank
Hutter. Meta-learning of neural architectures for few-shot learn-
ing. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12365–12375, 2020.
[117] Kevin Musgrave, Serge Belongie, and Ser-Nam Lim. A metric
learning reality check. In European Conference onComputer
Vision, pages 681–699. Springer, 2020.
[118] Nihar Bendre, Hugo Terashima Mar ´ın, and Peyman Najaﬁ-
rad. Learning from few samples: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.15484, 2020.
[119] Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al.
Siamese neural networks for one-shot image recognition. In
ICML deep learning workshop, volume 2. Lille, 2015.
[120] Elad Hoffer and Nir Ailon. Deep metric learning using triplet
network. In International workshop onsimilarity-based pattern
recognition, pages 84–92. Springer, 2015.

==== Page 22 ====
22
[121] Weihua Chen, Xiaotang Chen, Jianguo Zhang, and Kaiqi Huang.
Beyond triplet loss: a deep quadruplet network for person
re-identiﬁcation. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 403–412, 2017.
[122] Xiaomeng Li, Lequan Yu, Chi-Wing Fu, Meng Fang, and Pheng-
Ann Heng. Revisiting metric learning for few-shot image classi-
ﬁcation. Neurocomputing, 406:49–58, 2020.
[123] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S Zemel. Prototypical
networks for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.05175,
2017.
[124] Liu Yang and Rong Jin. Distance metric learning: A comprehen-
sive survey. Michigan State Universiy, 2(2):4, 2006.
[125] Matthew Schultz and Thorsten Joachims. Learning a dis-
tance metric from relative comparisons. Advances inneural
information processing systems, 16:41–48, 2004.
[126] Shihyen Chen, Bin Ma, and Kaizhong Zhang. On the similarity
metric and the distance metric. Theoretical Computer Science,
410(24-25):2365–2376, 2009.
[127] Kilian Q Weinberger, John Blitzer, and Lawrence K Saul. Distance
metric learning for large margin nearest neighbor classiﬁcation.
InAdvances inneural information processing systems, pages
1473–1480, 2006.
[128] Fangyu Wu, Jeremy S Smith, Wenjin Lu, Chaoyi Pang, and
Bailing Zhang. Attentive prototype few-shot learning with cap-
sule network-based embedding. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 237–253. Springer, 2020.
[129] Bin Liu, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Qi Li, Zheng Zhang, Mingsheng
Long, and Han Hu. Negative margin matters: Understanding
margin in few-shot classiﬁcation. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 438–455. Springer, 2020.
[130] Pau Rodr ´ıguez, Issam Laradji, Alexandre Drouin, and Alexandre
Lacoste. Embedding propagation: Smoother manifold for few-
shot classiﬁcation. In European Conference onComputer Vision,
pages 121–138. Springer, 2020.
[131] Yan Huang, Yang Long, and Liang Wang. Few-shot image and
sentence matching via gated visual-semantic embedding. In
Proceedings oftheAAAI Conference onArtiﬁcial Intelligence,
volume 33, pages 8489–8496, 2019.
[132] Arvind Srinivasan, Aprameya Bharadwaj, Manasa Sathyan, and
S Natarajan. Optimization of image embeddings for few shot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02034, 2020.
[133] Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr,
and Timothy M Hospedales. Learning to compare: Relation
network for few-shot learning. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE
conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition, pages
1199–1208, 2018.
[134] Xiaoxu Li, Jijie Wu, Zhuo Sun, Zhanyu Ma, Jie Cao, and Jing-Hao
Xue. Bsnet: Bi-similarity network for few-shot ﬁne-grained image
classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions onImage Processing, 30:1318–
1331, 2020.
[135] Van Nhan Nguyen, Sigurd Løkse, Kristoffer Wickstrøm, Michael
Kampffmeyer, Davide Roverso, and Robert Jenssen. Sen: A
novel feature normalization dissimilarity measure for prototypi-
cal few-shot learning networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part XXIII 16, pages 118–134. Springer, 2020.
[136] Jinlu Liu, Liang Song, and Yongqiang Qin. Prototype rectiﬁ-
cation for few-shot learning. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part I16, pages 741–756. Springer, 2020.
[137] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long,
Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A comprehensive survey on
graph neural networks. IEEE transactions onneural networks
and learning systems, 32(1):4–24, 2020.
[138] Victor Garcia and Joan Bruna. Few-shot learning with graph
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04043, 2017.
[139] Ling Yang, Liangliang Li, Zilun Zhang, Xinyu Zhou, Erjin Zhou,
and Yu Liu. Dpgn: Distribution propagation graph network for
few-shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13390–13399,
2020.
[140] Avishek Joey Bose, Ankit Jain, Piero Molino, and William L
Hamilton. Meta-graph: Few shot link prediction via meta learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09867, 2019.
[141] Huaxiu Yao, Chuxu Zhang, Ying Wei, Meng Jiang, Suhang Wang,
Junzhou Huang, Nitesh Chawla, and Zhenhui Li. Graph few-shot
learning via knowledge transfer. In Proceedings oftheAAAIConference onArtiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 6656–
6663, 2020.
[142] Zhen Liu, Yitong Xia, and Baochang Zhang. Graph embedding
relation network for few-shot learning. In 2020 39th Chinese
Control Conference (CCC), pages 7328–7334. IEEE, 2020.
[143] Cen Chen, Kenli Li, Wei Wei, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Zeng Zeng.
Hierarchical graph neural networks for few-shot learning. IEEE
Transactions onCircuits and Systems forVideo Technology, 2021.
[144] Shiyao Xu and Yang Xiang. Frog-gnn: Multi-perspective aggrega-
tion based graph neural network for few-shot text classiﬁcation.
Expert Systems with Applications, 176:114795, 2021.
[145] Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Generating classiﬁcation
weights with gnn denoising autoencoders for few-shot learning.
InProceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 21–30, 2019.
[146] Chao Xiong, Wen Li, Yun Liu, and Minghui Wang. Multi-
dimensional edge features graph neural network on few-shot
image classiﬁcation. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 28:573–577,
2021.
[147] Guo-Sen Xie, Jie Liu, Huan Xiong, and Ling Shao. Scale-aware
graph neural network for few-shot semantic segmentation. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 5475–5484, 2021.
[148] Aoxue Li, Tiange Luo, Zhiwu Lu, Tao Xiang, and Liwei Wang.
Large-scale few-shot learning: Knowledge transfer with class
hierarchy. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7212–7220,
2019.
[149] Edgar Schonfeld, Sayna Ebrahimi, Samarth Sinha, Trevor Dar-
rell, and Zeynep Akata. Generalized zero-and few-shot learn-
ing via aligned variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 8247–8255, 2019.
[150] Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Rogerio Feris, Raja Giryes, and
Alex M Bronstein. Baby steps towards few-shot learning with
multiple semantics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01905, 2019.
[151] Zhimao Peng, Zechao Li, Junge Zhang, Yan Li, Guo-Jun Qi, and
Jinhui Tang. Few-shot image recognition with knowledge trans-
fer. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 441–449, 2019.
[152] Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Ruth Wang, Trevor Darrell, and Joseph E
Gonzalez. Tafe-net: Task-aware feature embeddings for low
shot learning. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1831–1840,
2019.
[153] Frederik Pahde, Mihai Puscas, Tassilo Klein, and Moin Nabi.
Multimodal prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Winter Conference onApplications
ofComputer Vision, pages 2644–2653, 2021.
[154] Mathieu Pag ´e Fortin and Brahim Chaib-Draa. Multimodal senti-
ment analysis: A multitask learning approach. In ICPRAM, pages
368–376, 2019.
[155] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, Hongsheng Li, Shaoting Zhang, Xiaogang
Wang, Xiaolei Huang, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Stackgan: Text to
photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversar-
ial networks. In Proceedings oftheIEEE international conference
oncomputer vision, pages 5907–5915, 2017.
[156] Shikhar Sharma, Dendi Suhubdy, Vincent Michalski,
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, and Yoshua Bengio. Chatpainter:
Improving text to image generation using dialogue. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.08216, 2018.
[157] Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Honglak Lee, and Bernt Schiele.
Learning deep representations of ﬁne-grained visual descrip-
tions. In Proceedings oftheIEEE conference oncomputer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 49–58, 2016.
[158] Mohamed Elhoseiny, Yizhe Zhu, Han Zhang, and Ahmed Elgam-
mal. Link the head to the” beak”: Zero shot learning from noisy
text description at part precision. In Proceedings oftheIEEE
Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
5640–5649, 2017.
[159] Yizhe Zhu, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Bingchen Liu, Xi Peng, and
Ahmed Elgammal. A generative adversarial approach for zero-
shot learning from noisy texts. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE
conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition, pages
1004–1013, 2018.
[160] Andrej Karpathy and Li Fei-Fei. Deep visual-semantic align-
ments for generating image descriptions. In Proceedings ofthe

==== Page 23 ====
23
IEEE conference oncomputer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 3128–3137, 2015.
[161] Peyman Bateni, Raghav Goyal, Vaden Masrani, Frank Wood,
and Leonid Sigal. Improved few-shot visual classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 14493–14502, 2020.
[162] Dong Hoon Lee and Sae-Young Chung. Unsupervised embed-
ding adaptation via early-stage feature reconstruction for few-
shot classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11486, 2021.
[163] Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, and Bo Li. Bridging multi-task learn-
ing and meta-learning: Towards efﬁcient training and effective
adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09017, 2021.
[164] Mohamed Afham, Salman Khan, Muhammad Haris Khan, Muza-
mmal Naseer, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Rich semantics improve
few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12709, 2021.
[165] Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Salman Khan, Fahad Shahbaz Khan,
and Mubarak Shah. Exploring complementary strengths of
invariant and equivariant representations for few-shot learning.
InProceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 10836–10846, 2021.
[166] Reza Esfandiarpoor, Amy Pu, Mohsen Hajabdollahi, and
Stephen H Bach. Extended few-shot learning: Exploiting existing
resources for novel tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07176, 2020.
[167] Haoxing Chen, Huaxiong Li, Yaohui Li, and Chunlin Chen.
Multi-scale adaptive task attention network for few-shot learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14479, 2020.
[168] Bowen Wang, Liangzhi Li, Manisha Verma, Yuta Nakashima,
Ryo Kawasaki, and Hajime Nagahara. Match them up: Visu-
ally explainable few-shot image classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.12527, 2020.
[169] Lyes Khacef, Vincent Gripon, and Beno ˆıt Miramond. Gpu-based
self-organizing maps for post-labeled few-shot unsupervised
learning. In International Conference onNeural Information
Processing, pages 404–416. Springer, 2020.
[170] Zhiyu Xue, Lixin Duan, Wen Li, Lin Chen, and Jiebo Luo. Region
comparison network for interpretable few-shot image classiﬁca-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03558, 2020.
[171] Xian Zhong, Cheng Gu, Wenxin Huang, Lin Li, Shuqin Chen, and
Chia-Wen Lin. Complementing representation deﬁciency in few-
shot image classiﬁcation: A meta-learning approach. In 2020 25th
International Conference onPattern Recognition (ICPR), pages
2677–2684. IEEE, 2021.
[172] Imtiaz Ziko, Jose Dolz, Eric Granger, and Ismail Ben Ayed. Lapla-
cian regularized few-shot learning. In International Conference
onMachine Learning, pages 11660–11670. PMLR, 2020.
[173] Peyman Bateni, Jarred Barber, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and
Frank Wood. Enhancing few-shot image classiﬁcation with
unlabelled examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12245, 2020.
[174] Jathushan Rajasegaran, Salman Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fa-
had Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah. Self-supervised
knowledge distillation for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09785, 2020.
[175] Yuqing Hu, Vincent Gripon, and St ´ephane Pateux. Leveraging
the feature distribution in transfer-based few-shot learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.03806, 2020.
[176] Christian Simon, Piotr Koniusz, Richard Nock, and Mehrtash Ha-
randi. Adaptive subspaces for few-shot learning. In Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4136–4145, 2020.
[177] Aoxue Li, Weiran Huang, Xu Lan, Jiashi Feng, Zhenguo Li, and
Liwei Wang. Boosting few-shot learning with adaptive margin
loss. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12576–12584, 2020.
[178] Shell Xu Hu, Pablo G Moreno, Yang Xiao, Xi Shen, Guillaume
Obozinski, Neil D Lawrence, and Andreas Damianou. Empirical
bayes transductive meta-learning with synthetic gradients. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.12696, 2020.
[179] Yikai Wang, Chengming Xu, Chen Liu, Li Zhang, and Yanwei
Fu. Instance credibility inference for few-shot learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 12836–12845, 2020.
[180] Cuong Nguyen, Thanh-Toan Do, and Gustavo Carneiro. Pac-
bayesian meta-learning with implicit prior and posterior. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.02455, 2020.
[181] Jiechao Guan, Zhiwu Lu, Tao Xiang, and Ji-Rong Wen. Few-shot
learning as domain adaptation: Algorithm and analysis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.02050, 2020.[182] Da Chen, Yuefeng Chen, Yuhong Li, Feng Mao, Yuan He, and Hui
Xue. Self-supervised learning for few-shot image classiﬁcation. In
ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference onAcoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 1745–1749. IEEE,
2021.
[183] Jin Xu, Jean-Francois Ton, Hyunjik Kim, Adam Kosiorek, and
Yee Whye Teh. Metafun: Meta-learning with iterative functional
updates. In International Conference onMachine Learning, pages
10617–10627. PMLR, 2020.
[184] Jialin Liu, Fei Chao, and Chih-Min Lin. Task augmentation by
rotating for meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00804, 2020.
[185] Liang Song, Jinlu Liu, and Yongqiang Qin. Generalized adapta-
tion for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10807, 2019.
[186] Massimiliano Patacchiola, Jack Turner, Elliot J Crowley, Michael
O’Boyle, and Amos Storkey. Bayesian meta-learning for the few-
shot setting via deep kernels. 2020.
[187] Puneet Mangla, Nupur Kumari, Abhishek Sinha, Mayank Singh,
Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Charting
the right manifold: Manifold mixup for few-shot learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Winter Conference onApplications
ofComputer Vision, pages 2218–2227, 2020.
[188] Xinzhe Li, Qianru Sun, Yaoyao Liu, Qin Zhou, Shibao Zheng,
Tat-Seng Chua, and Bernt Schiele. Learning to self-train for
semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation. Advances inNeural
Information Processing Systems, 32:10276–10286, 2019.
[189] Sung Whan Yoon, Jun Seo, and Jaekyun Moon. Tapnet: Neural
network augmented with task-adaptive projection for few-shot
learning. In International Conference onMachine Learning,
pages 7115–7123. PMLR, 2019.
[190] Jongmin Kim, Taesup Kim, Sungwoong Kim, and Chang D Yoo.
Edge-labeling graph neural network for few-shot learning. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 11–20, 2019.
[191] Han-Jia Ye, Hexiang Hu, De-Chuan Zhan, and Fei Sha. Few-shot
learning via embedding adaptation with set-to-set functions. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8808–8817, 2020.
[192] Wenbin Li, Lei Wang, Jinglin Xu, Jing Huo, Yang Gao, and Jiebo
Luo. Revisiting local descriptor based image-to-class measure for
few-shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference
onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7260–7268,
2019.
[193] Eunbyung Park and Junier B Oliva. Meta-curvature. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.03356, 2019.
[194] Bo Sun, Banghuai Li, Shengcai Cai, Ye Yuan, and Chi Zhang. Fsce:
Few-shot object detection via contrastive proposal encoding. In
Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 7352–7362, 2021.
[195] Chenchen Zhu, Fangyi Chen, Uzair Ahmed, Zhiqiang Shen, and
Marios Savvides. Semantic relation reasoning for shot-stable
few-shot object detection. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF
Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
8782–8791, 2021.
[196] Yang Xiao and Renaud Marlet. Few-shot object detection and
viewpoint estimation for objects in the wild. In European
Conference onComputer Vision, pages 192–210. Springer, 2020.
[197] Jiaxi Wu, Songtao Liu, Di Huang, and Yunhong Wang. Multi-
scale positive sample reﬁnement for few-shot object detection.
InEuropean Conference onComputer Vision, pages 456–472.
Springer, 2020.
[198] Xin Wang, Thomas E Huang, Trevor Darrell, Joseph E Gonzalez,
and Fisher Yu. Frustratingly simple few-shot object detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06957, 2020.
[199] Xiaopeng Yan, Ziliang Chen, Anni Xu, Xiaoxi Wang, Xiaodan
Liang, and Liang Lin. Meta r-cnn: Towards general solver for
instance-level low-shot learning. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF
International Conference onComputer Vision, pages 9577–9586,
2019.
[200] Yu-Xiong Wang, Deva Ramanan, and Martial Hebert. Meta-
learning to detect rare objects. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF
International Conference onComputer Vision, pages 9925–9934,
2019.
[201] Zhihe Lu, Sen He, Xiatian Zhu, Li Zhang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Tao
Xiang. Simpler is better: Few-shot semantic segmentation with
classiﬁer weight transformer. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF
International Conference onComputer Vision, pages 8741–8750,
2021.

==== Page 24 ====
24
[202] Gengwei Zhang, Guoliang Kang, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang.
Few-shot segmentation via cycle-consistent transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.02320, 2021.
[203] Juhong Min, Dahyun Kang, and Minsu Cho. Hypercorre-
lation squeeze for few-shot segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.01538, 2021.
[204] Boyu Yang, Chang Liu, Bohao Li, Jianbin Jiao, and Qixiang Ye.
Prototype mixture models for few-shot semantic segmentation.
InEuropean Conference onComputer Vision, pages 763–778.
Springer, 2020.
[205] Zhuotao Tian, Hengshuang Zhao, Michelle Shu, Zhicheng Yang,
Ruiyu Li, and Jiaya Jia. Prior guided feature enrichment net-
work for few-shot segmentation. IEEE Transactions onPattern
Analysis &Machine Intelligence, (01):1–1, 2020.
[206] Yongfei Liu, Xiangyi Zhang, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He.
Part-aware prototype network for few-shot semantic segmenta-
tion. In European Conference onComputer Vision, pages 142–
158. Springer, 2020.
[207] Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic. Feature weighting and boost-
ing for few-shot segmentation. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF
International Conference onComputer Vision, pages 622–631,
2019.
[208] Kaixin Wang, Jun Hao Liew, Yingtian Zou, Daquan Zhou, and
Jiashi Feng. Panet: Few-shot image semantic segmentation
with prototype alignment. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE/CVF
International Conference onComputer Vision, pages 9197–9206,
2019.
[209] Chi Zhang, Guosheng Lin, Fayao Liu, Rui Yao, and Chunhua
Shen. Canet: Class-agnostic segmentation networks with itera-
tive reﬁnement and attentive few-shot learning. In Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5217–5226, 2019.
[210] Dan Andrei Ganea, Bas Boom, and Ronald Poppe. Incremental
few-shot instance segmentation. In Proceedings oftheIEEE/CVF
Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
1185–1194, 2021.
[211] Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic. Fapis: A few-shot
anchor-free part-based instance segmenter. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 11099–11108, 2021.
[212] Zhibo Fan, Jin-Gang Yu, Zhihao Liang, Jiarong Ou, Changxin
Gao, Gui-Song Xia, and Yuanqing Li. Fgn: Fully guided
network for few-shot instance segmentation. In Proceedings
ofthe IEEE/CVF conference oncomputer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 9172–9181, 2020.
[213] Xiaolin Zhang, Yunchao Wei, Yi Yang, and Thomas S Huang. Sg-
one: Similarity guidance network for one-shot semantic segmen-
tation. IEEE transactions oncybernetics, 50(9):3855–3865, 2020.
[214] Claudio Michaelis, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Matthias Bethge, and
Alexander S Ecker. One-shot instance segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.11507, 2018.
[215] Shuo Yang, Lu Liu, and Min Xu. Free lunch for few-shot learning:
Distribution calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06395, 2021.

