==== Page 1 ====
Article
A Forest Fire Detection System Based on Ensemble Learning
Renjie Xu1, Haifeng Lin1, Kangjie Lu1, Lin Cao2
and Yunfei Liu1,*
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Xu, R.; Lin, H.; Lu, K.; Cao,
L.; Liu, Y. A Forest Fire Detection
System Based on Ensemble Learning.
Forests 2021 ,12, 217. https://doi.
org/10.3390/f12020217
Academic Editor: Stelian
Alexandru Borz
Received: 4 January 2021
Accepted: 12 February 2021
Published: 13 February 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1College of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China;
xurenjie@njfu.edu.cn (R.X.); haifeng.lin@njfu.edu.cn (H.L.); lukangjie@njfu.edu.cn (K.L.)
2Co-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry University,
Nanjing 210037, China; lincao@njfu.edu.cn
*Correspondence: lyf@njfu.com.cn; Tel.: +86-139-1389-5117
Abstract: Due to the various shapes, textures, and colors of ﬁres, forest ﬁre detection is a challenging
task. The traditional image processing method relies heavily on manmade features, which is not
universally applicable to all forest scenarios. In order to solve this problem, the deep learning
technology is applied to learn and extract features of forest ﬁres adaptively. However, the limited
learning and perception ability of individual learners is not sufﬁcient to make them perform well in
complex tasks. Furthermore, learners tend to focus too much on local information, namely ground
truth, but ignore global information, which may lead to false positives. In this paper, a novel ensemble
learning method is proposed to detect forest ﬁres in different scenarios. Firstly, two individual
learners Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet are integrated to accomplish ﬁre detection process. Secondly,
another individual learner EfﬁcientNet is responsible for learning global information to avoid false
positives. Finally, detection results are made based on the decisions of three learners. Experiments on
our dataset show that the proposed method improves detection performance by 2.5% to 10.9%, and
decreases false positives by 51.3%, without any extra latency.
Keywords: forest ﬁre detection; deep learning; ensemble learning; Yolov5; EfﬁcientDet; EfﬁcientNet
1. Introduction
With the change of the earth’s climate, forest ﬁres occur frequently all over the world,
which not only cause serious economic losses and destroy the ecological environment, but
also pose a great threat to the safety of human life.
Forest ﬁres usually spread quickly and are difﬁcult to control in a short time. Therefore,
it is imperative to detect the early forest ﬁre before it spreads out, but traditional detection
methods have obvious drawbacks in detecting it in open forest areas. Sensors-based [ 1–3]
detection systems have good performance in indoor space, but it is difﬁcult to install them
outdoors, considering high coverage cost [ 4,5]. In addition, they cannot provide important
visual information which can help ﬁreﬁghters promptly grasp the situation of the ﬁre
scene. Infrared or ultraviolet detectors [ 6,7] are easy to be interfered by the environment,
and considering their short detection distance, they are not suitable for large open areas.
Satellite remote sensing [ 8] is good at detecting large-scale forest ﬁres, but it cannot detect
early regional ﬁre.
Impressed by the rising computer vision technology, researchers start to seek an efﬁ-
cient and effective ﬁre detection model based on image processing. Chen et al. [ 9] proposed
an RGB (red, green, blue) model based chromatic and disorder measurement for extracting
ﬁre-pixels in the video. The color information is responsible for extracting ﬁre-pixels, and
dynamic information is used to verify if it is a real ﬁre. Töreyin et al. [ 10] used 1D temporal
wavelet transform to detect ﬂame ﬂicker, and applied 2D spatial wavelet transform to
identify ﬁre moving regions. This method, which integrated color and temporal variation
information, reduced false alarms in real-world scenes. Çelik et al. [ 11] studied diverse
video sequences and images, and proposed a fuzzy color model using statistical analysis.
Forests 2021 ,12, 217. https://doi.org/10.3390/f12020217 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/forests

==== Page 2 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 2 of 16
Combined with motion analysis, the model achieves a good discrimination between ﬁre
and ﬁre-like objects. Teng et al. [ 12] analyzed ﬁre characteristics and proposed a real-time
ﬁre detection method based on hidden Markov models (HMMs), which extracted candi-
date ﬁre-pixels using moving pixel detection, ﬁre-color inspection, and pixel clustering.
Chino et al. [ 13] found that most algorithms were designed for video, which had obvious
limitations. To solve this problem, a novel ﬁre detection method named BowFire was
proposed. The method combined color features with superpixel texture discrimination to
detect ﬁre in still images. In conclusion, most traditional ﬁre detection methods based on
image processing focused on creating artiﬁcial features like color, motion, and texture to
detect ﬁres.
However, powerful deep learners begin to replace human intelligence. They are better
at learning features than humans, and the features they extract contain much deeper
semantic information than manmade ones. Recently, deep learning has outperformed
traditional manmade features in many ﬁelds, and have been widely used in ﬁre detection.
Zhang et al. [ 14] created a forest ﬁre benchmark, and used Faster R-CNN (region-based
convolutional neural network) [ 15], Yolo (you only look once) [ 16–19], and SSD (single shot
multibox detector) [ 20] to detect ﬁre. They found that SSD was better regarding efﬁciency,
detection accuracy, and early ﬁre detection ability. Moreover, they proposed an improved
tiny-Yolo by adjusting the network architecture. Kim et al. [ 21] employed faster R-CNN to
detect ﬁre and non-ﬁre regions based on their spatial features. In addition, long short-term
memory (LSTM) is used to verify the reliability of ﬁre alarm. Lee et al. [ 22] proposed a
video-based ﬁre detection model, which used faster R-CNN to generate a ﬁre candidate
region for each frame. Then, structural similarity (SSIM) and mean square error (MSE)
were calculated to determine similarity between adjacent frames. Final ﬁre regions were
determined based on spatial and temporal features. Pan et al. [ 23] proposed a camera-based
wildﬁre detection system via transfer learning, in which block-based analysis strategy was
used to improve ﬁre detection accuracy. Redundant ﬁlters, which had low energy impulse
response, were removed to ensure the model’s efﬁciency on edge devices. Wu et al. [ 24]
applied principal component analysis (PCA) to process forest ﬁre images, and then fed
them into the training network. The combination of two models was proved to enhance
location results. In conclusion, faced with ﬁre detection task, most researchers tend to only
assign individual learners to perform object detection tasks, which is considered unreliable,
since it may lead to false negatives.
In this paper, a novel method based on ensemble learning for forest ﬁre detection is
proposed. First, forest ﬁre detection is a complicated and difﬁcult task, making it highly
impractical for individual learners to detect ﬁres in diverse scenarios. Every individual
learner has its own expertise, and can extract different features from the image, so inte-
grating different individual learners can signiﬁcantly improve the robustness of the model
and enhance detection performance. Therefore, two individual object detectors Yolov5 [ 25]
and EfﬁcientDet [ 26] are integrated to detect the ﬁre in parallel. These two learners work
synergistically in detecting different types of forest ﬁres, thereby improving the detection
accuracy. Second, the object detectors only care about what ﬁre is like, so they do not take
the whole image into consideration. In this case, ﬁre-like objects will absolutely affect the
detection results. To solve this problem, the EfﬁcientNet image classiﬁer [ 27] is incorpo-
rated into our model, whose role is to enable the model to take full advantage of the global
information. Final detection results will be made through the decision strategy according
to results of these three learners, which will efﬁciently increase detection accuracy and
decrease the false positives.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Datasets
To ensure our learners can handle different kinds of forest ﬁres (ground ﬁre, trunk
ﬁre, and canopy ﬁre), we collected images from multiple public ﬁre datasets: BowFire [ 28],
FD-dataset [ 29], ForestryImages [ 30], VisiFire [ 31], etc. After manual ﬁltration, we created

==== Page 3 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 3 of 16
a single integrated forest ﬁre dataset containing 10,581 images, with 2976 forest ﬁre images
and 7605 non-ﬁre images. Representative samples of our dataset are shown in Figures 1–3.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   3 of 17 
 
 FD‐dataset [29], ForestryImages  [30], VisiFire [31], etc. After manual filtration,  we created 
a single integrated  forest fire dataset containing  10,581 images, with 2976 forest fire images 
and 7605 non‐fire images. Representative  samples of our dataset are shown in Figures 1–
3. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 1. Representative  forest fire images in the fire section of our dataset, including  (a) ground fire 1, (b) ground fire 2, 
(c) trunk fire, and (d) canopy fire. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 2. Representative  normal forest images in the non‐fire section of our dataset, including  (a) normal forest scene 1, 
(b) normal forest scene 2, (c) normal forest scene 3, and (d) normal forest scene 4. (a–d) illustrate  normal forest scenes 
without fire objects. 
Figure 1. Representative forest ﬁre images in the ﬁre section of our dataset, including ( a) ground
ﬁre 1, ( b) ground ﬁre 2, ( c) trunk ﬁre, and ( d) canopy ﬁre.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   3 of 17 
 
 FD‐dataset [29], ForestryImages  [30], VisiFire [31], etc. After manual filtration,  we created 
a single integrated  forest fire dataset containing  10,581 images, with 2976 forest fire images 
and 7605 non‐fire images. Representative  samples of our dataset are shown in Figures 1–
3. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 1. Representative  forest fire images in the fire section of our dataset, including  (a) ground fire 1, (b) ground fire 2, 
(c) trunk fire, and (d) canopy fire. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 2. Representative  normal forest images in the non‐fire section of our dataset, including  (a) normal forest scene 1, 
(b) normal forest scene 2, (c) normal forest scene 3, and (d) normal forest scene 4. (a–d) illustrate  normal forest scenes 
without fire objects. 
Figure 2. Representative normal forest images in the non-fire section of our dataset, including
(a) normal forest scene 1, ( b) normal forest scene 2, ( c) normal forest scene 3, and ( d) normal
forest scene 4. ( a–d) illustrate normal forest scenes without fire objects.

==== Page 4 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 4 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   4 of 17 
 
   
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 3. Representative  images in the non‐fire section of our dataset, including  (a) wild scene with sun 1, (b) wild scene 
with sun 2, (c) wild scene with sun 3, and (d) wild scene with sun 4. (a–d) illustrate  normal wild scenes containing  fire‐
like object (e.g., sun). 
2.2. Yolov5 
Yolo is a state‐of‐the‐art, real‐time object detector,  and Yolov5 is based on Yolov1‐
Yolov4. Continuous  improvements  have made it achieve top performances  on two official 
object detection  datasets:  Pascal VOC (visual object classes) [32] and Microsoft  COCO 
(common  objects in context) [33].  
The network architecture  of Yolov5 is shown in Figure 4. There are three reasons why 
we choose Yolov5 as our first learner. Firstly, Yolov5 incorporated  cross stage partial net‐
work (CSPNet)  [34] into Darknet,  creating CSPDarknet  as its backbone.  CSPNet solves the 
problems  of repeated  gradient information  in large‐scale backbones,  and integrates  the 
gradient changes into the feature map, thereby decreasing  the parameters  and FLOPS 
(floating ‐point operations  per second) of model, which not only ensures the inference  
speed and accuracy,  but also reduces the model size. In forest fire detection  task, detection  
speed and accuracy  is imperative,  and compact model size also determines  its inference  
efficiency  on resource ‐poor edge devices. Secondly,  the Yolov5 applied path aggregation  
network (PANet) [35] as its neck to boost information  flow. PANet adopts a new feature 
pyramid  network (FPN) structure  with enhanced  bottom‐up path, which improves  the 
propagation  of low‐level features.  At the same time, adaptive  feature pooling, which links 
feature grid and all feature levels, is used to make useful information  in each feature level 
propagate  directly to following  subnetwork.  PANet improves  the utilization  of accurate 
localization  signals in lower layers, which can obviously  enhance the location accuracy  of 
the object. Thirdly, the head of Yolov5, namely the Yolo layer, generates  3 different  sizes 
(18ൈ18, 36ൈ36, 72ൈ72) of feature maps to achieve multi‐scale [18] prediction,  ena‐
bling the model to handle small, medium,  and big objects. A forest fire usually develops  
from small‐scale fire (ground fire) to medium‐scale fire (trunk fire), then to big‐scale fire 
(canopy fire). Multi‐scale detection  ensures that the model can follow size changes in the 
process of fire evolution.  
Figure 3. Representative images in the non-ﬁre section of our dataset, including ( a) wild scene
with sun 1, ( b) wild scene with sun 2, ( c) wild scene with sun 3, and ( d) wild scene with sun 4.
(a–d) illustrate normal wild scenes containing ﬁre-like object (e.g., sun).
2.2. Yolov5
Yolo is a state-of-the-art, real-time object detector, and Yolov5 is based on Yolov1-
Yolov4. Continuous improvements have made it achieve top performances on two ofﬁcial
object detection datasets: Pascal VOC (visual object classes) [ 32] and Microsoft COCO
(common objects in context) [33].
The network architecture of Yolov5 is shown in Figure 4. There are three reasons
why we choose Yolov5 as our ﬁrst learner. Firstly, Yolov5 incorporated cross stage partial
network (CSPNet) [ 34] into Darknet, creating CSPDarknet as its backbone. CSPNet solves
the problems of repeated gradient information in large-scale backbones, and integrates
the gradient changes into the feature map, thereby decreasing the parameters and FLOPS
(ﬂoating-point operations per second) of model, which not only ensures the inference
speed and accuracy, but also reduces the model size. In forest ﬁre detection task, detection
speed and accuracy is imperative, and compact model size also determines its inference
efﬁciency on resource-poor edge devices. Secondly, the Yolov5 applied path aggregation
network (PANet) [ 35] as its neck to boost information ﬂow. PANet adopts a new feature
pyramid network (FPN) structure with enhanced bottom-up path, which improves the
propagation of low-level features. At the same time, adaptive feature pooling, which links
feature grid and all feature levels, is used to make useful information in each feature level
propagate directly to following subnetwork. PANet improves the utilization of accurate
localization signals in lower layers, which can obviously enhance the location accuracy of
the object. Thirdly, the head of Yolov5, namely the Yolo layer, generates 3 different sizes
(1818,3636,7272) of feature maps to achieve multi-scale [ 18] prediction, enabling
the model to handle small, medium, and big objects. A forest ﬁre usually develops from
small-scale ﬁre (ground ﬁre) to medium-scale ﬁre (trunk ﬁre), then to big-scale ﬁre (canopy
ﬁre). Multi-scale detection ensures that the model can follow size changes in the process of
ﬁre evolution.

==== Page 5 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 5 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   5 of 17 
 
  
Figure 4. The network architecture  of Yolov5. It consists of three parts: (1) Backbone:  CSPDarknet,  (2) Neck: PANet, and 
(3) Head: Yolo Layer. The data are first input to CSPDarknet  for feature extraction,  and then fed to PANet for feature 
fusion. Finally, Yolo Layer outputs detection  results (class, score, location,  size). 
2.3. EfficientDet  
EfficientDet  is a new family of object detectors  developed  by Google, and it consist‐
ently achieves  better efficiency  than prior art across a wide spectrum  of resource  con‐
straints. Similar to Yolov5, EfficientDet  has also achieved  remarkable  performances  in 
Pascal VOC and Microsoft  COCO tasks, and is widely used in real‐world applications.  
The network architecture  of EfficientDet  is shown in Figure 5. There are three reasons 
why we choose EfficientDet  as our second learner. Firstly, EfficientDet  employed  state‐of‐
the‐art network EfficientNet  [27] as its backbone,  making that the model has sufficient  
ability to learn the complex feature of diverse forest fires. Secondly,  it applied an im‐
proved PANet, named bi‐directional  feature pyramid  network (Bi‐FPN) as its neck, to al‐
low easy and fast multi‐scale feature fusion. Bi‐FPN introduces  learnable  weights, ena‐
bling network to learn the importance  of different  input features,  and repeatedly  applies 
top‐down and bottom‐up multi‐scale feature fusion. Compared  with Yolov5′s neck 
PANet, Bi‐FPN has better performances  with less parameters  and FLOPS. Meanwhile,  
different  feature fusion strategy brings different  semantic  information,  thereby bringing  
different  detection  results. Thirdly, similar to EfficientNet,  it integrates  a compound  scal‐
ing method that uniformly  scales the resolution,  depth, and width for all backbone,  fea‐
ture network,  and box/class  prediction  networks  at the same time, which ensures the max‐
imum accuracy  and efficiency  under the limited computing  resources.  With more availa‐
ble resources,  accuracy  will be consistently  improved.  Our second learner, EfficientDet,  
with different  backbone,  neck, and head, can learn different  information  that Yolov5 can‐
not. 
Figure 4. The network architecture of Yolov5. It consists of three parts: (1) Backbone: CSPDarknet, (2) Neck: PANet, and
(3) Head: Yolo Layer. The data are ﬁrst input to CSPDarknet for feature extraction, and then fed to PANet for feature fusion.
Finally, Yolo Layer outputs detection results (class, score, location, size).
2.3. EfﬁcientDet
EfﬁcientDet is a new family of object detectors developed by Google, and it consistently
achieves better efﬁciency than prior art across a wide spectrum of resource constraints.
Similar to Yolov5, EfﬁcientDet has also achieved remarkable performances in Pascal VOC
and Microsoft COCO tasks, and is widely used in real-world applications.
The network architecture of EfﬁcientDet is shown in Figure 5. There are three reasons
why we choose EfﬁcientDet as our second learner. Firstly, EfﬁcientDet employed state-
of-the-art network EfﬁcientNet [ 27] as its backbone, making that the model has sufﬁcient
ability to learn the complex feature of diverse forest ﬁres. Secondly, it applied an improved
PANet, named bi-directional feature pyramid network (Bi-FPN) as its neck, to allow easy
and fast multi-scale feature fusion. Bi-FPN introduces learnable weights, enabling network
to learn the importance of different input features, and repeatedly applies top-down and
bottom-up multi-scale feature fusion. Compared with Yolov50s neck PANet, Bi-FPN has
better performances with less parameters and FLOPS. Meanwhile, different feature fusion
strategy brings different semantic information, thereby bringing different detection results.
Thirdly, similar to EfﬁcientNet, it integrates a compound scaling method that uniformly
scales the resolution, depth, and width for all backbone, feature network, and box/class
prediction networks at the same time, which ensures the maximum accuracy and efﬁciency
under the limited computing resources. With more available resources, accuracy will be
consistently improved. Our second learner, EfﬁcientDet, with different backbone, neck,
and head, can learn different information that Yolov5 cannot.

==== Page 6 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 6 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   6 of 17 
 
  
Figure 5. The network architecture  of EfficientDet.  It consists of three parts: (1) Backbone:  EfficientNet,  (2) Neck: Bi‐FPN, 
(3) Head. Similar to Yolov5, the data are first input to EfficientNet  for feature extraction,  and then fed to Bi‐FPN for feature 
fusion. Finally, head outputs detection  results (class, score, location,  size). 
2.4. EfficientNet  
EfficientNet  is a new efficient network proposed  by Google. It applied a novel model 
scaling strategy,  namely compound  scaling method, to balance network depth, network 
width, and image resolution  for better accuracy  at a fixed resource  budget. With this, Ef‐
ficientNet  outperformed  other hot networks  like ResNet [36], DenseNet  [37], ResNeXt  [38] 
with the highest Top‐1 accuracy  in ImageNet  image classification  task. 
The network architecture  of EfficientNet  is shown in Figure 6. The reason why we 
choose EfficientNet  as our third learner is that it achieves  a superior trade‐off between 
accuracy  and efficiency.  In our model, the third learner plays the most important  role. It 
is responsible  for learning the whole image to guide the detection,  meaning  that its deci‐
sions directly determine  the final results. Meanwhile,  it must be highly efficient,  otherwise  
it will slow down the speed of the entire model. 
 
Figure 6. The network architecture  of EfficientNet.  It can output a feature map with deep semantic  information  after the 
input data flows through the multi‐layer network.  
2.5. Our Model 
In real‐world forest fire detection  task, we need to handle different  types of forest 
fires like ground fire, trunk fire, canopy fire. These fires, influenced  by the environment,  
are diverse in shape, texture, or even color, bringing  great difficulty  for individual  learner 
to extract effective features.  By careful observations,  we find that Yolov5 is better at learn‐
ing long‐area fires (Figure 7), but it sometimes  misses objects (Figure 8). Meanwhile,  even 
though EfficientDet  is not sensitive  to long‐area fires (Figure 7), it is more careful than 
Figure 5. The network architecture of EfﬁcientDet. It consists of three parts: (1) Backbone: EfﬁcientNet, (2) Neck: Bi-FPN,
(3) Head. Similar to Yolov5, the data are ﬁrst input to EfﬁcientNet for feature extraction, and then fed to Bi-FPN for feature
fusion. Finally, head outputs detection results (class, score, location, size).
2.4. EfﬁcientNet
EfﬁcientNet is a new efﬁcient network proposed by Google. It applied a novel model
scaling strategy, namely compound scaling method, to balance network depth, network
width, and image resolution for better accuracy at a ﬁxed resource budget. With this, Efﬁ-
cientNet outperformed other hot networks like ResNet [ 36], DenseNet [ 37], ResNeXt [ 38]
with the highest Top-1 accuracy in ImageNet image classiﬁcation task.
The network architecture of EfﬁcientNet is shown in Figure 6. The reason why we
choose EfﬁcientNet as our third learner is that it achieves a superior trade-off between
accuracy and efﬁciency. In our model, the third learner plays the most important role. It is
responsible for learning the whole image to guide the detection, meaning that its decisions
directly determine the ﬁnal results. Meanwhile, it must be highly efﬁcient, otherwise it will
slow down the speed of the entire model.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   6 of 17 
 
  
Figure 5. The network architecture  of EfficientDet.  It consists of three parts: (1) Backbone:  EfficientNet,  (2) Neck: Bi‐FPN, 
(3) Head. Similar to Yolov5, the data are first input to EfficientNet  for feature extraction,  and then fed to Bi‐FPN for feature 
fusion. Finally, head outputs detection  results (class, score, location,  size). 
2.4. EfficientNet  
EfficientNet  is a new efficient network proposed  by Google. It applied a novel model 
scaling strategy,  namely compound  scaling method, to balance network depth, network 
width, and image resolution  for better accuracy  at a fixed resource  budget. With this, Ef‐
ficientNet  outperformed  other hot networks  like ResNet [36], DenseNet  [37], ResNeXt  [38] 
with the highest Top‐1 accuracy  in ImageNet  image classification  task. 
The network architecture  of EfficientNet  is shown in Figure 6. The reason why we 
choose EfficientNet  as our third learner is that it achieves  a superior trade‐off between 
accuracy  and efficiency.  In our model, the third learner plays the most important  role. It 
is responsible  for learning the whole image to guide the detection,  meaning  that its deci‐
sions directly determine  the final results. Meanwhile,  it must be highly efficient,  otherwise  
it will slow down the speed of the entire model. 
 
Figure 6. The network architecture  of EfficientNet.  It can output a feature map with deep semantic  information  after the 
input data flows through the multi‐layer network.  
2.5. Our Model 
In real‐world forest fire detection  task, we need to handle different  types of forest 
fires like ground fire, trunk fire, canopy fire. These fires, influenced  by the environment,  
are diverse in shape, texture, or even color, bringing  great difficulty  for individual  learner 
to extract effective features.  By careful observations,  we find that Yolov5 is better at learn‐
ing long‐area fires (Figure 7), but it sometimes  misses objects (Figure 8). Meanwhile,  even 
though EfficientDet  is not sensitive  to long‐area fires (Figure 7), it is more careful than 
Figure 6. The network architecture of EfﬁcientNet. It can output a feature map with deep semantic information after the
input data ﬂows through the multi-layer network.
2.5. Our Model
In real-world forest ﬁre detection task, we need to handle different types of forest ﬁres
like ground ﬁre, trunk ﬁre, canopy ﬁre. These ﬁres, inﬂuenced by the environment, are
diverse in shape, texture, or even color, bringing great difﬁculty for individual learner to
extract effective features. By careful observations, we ﬁnd that Yolov5 is better at learning
long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), but it sometimes misses objects (Figure 8). Meanwhile, even
though EfﬁcientDet is not sensitive to long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), it is more careful than
Yolov5, meaning that EfﬁcientDet can make a complementary detection (Figure 8). There-

==== Page 7 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 7 of 16
fore, we consider that integrating these two efﬁcient learners with different specialties to
make detection together can improve detection accuracy.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 17 
 
 Yolov5, meaning  that EfficientDet  can make a complementary  detection  (Figure 8). There‐
fore, we consider  that integrating  these two efficient learners with different  specialties  to 
make detection  together can improve  detection  accuracy.  
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 7. Yolov5 is better at detecting  long‐area fires than EfficientDet.  (a) True positive of Yolov5; (b) true positive of 
Yolov5; (c) false negative  of EfficientDet;  (d) false negative  of EfficientDet.  (a,b) illustrate  that Yolov5 detect long‐area fires 
successfully,  while (c,d) show that EfficientDet  fails to detect them. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 8. EfficientDet  is a more careful object detector than Yolov5, meaning  that it seldom losses potential  objects easily. 
(a) Yolov5 fails to cover all fire areas; (b) Yolov5 misses two fire objects; (c) EfficientDet  covers all fire areas; (d) EfficientDet  
detects four fire objects. 
Another issue is that the ability of the object detector is limited. It only learns the fire 
region, which is just a local pattern of the whole image, but ignores the other information  
Figure 7. Yolov5 is better at detecting long-area ﬁres than EfﬁcientDet. ( a) True positive of Yolov5;
(b) true positive of Yolov5; ( c) false negative of EfﬁcientDet; ( d) false negative of EfﬁcientDet.
(a,b) illustrate that Yolov5 detect long-area ﬁres successfully, while ( c,d) show that EfﬁcientDet fails
to detect them.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 17 
 
 Yolov5, meaning  that EfficientDet  can make a complementary  detection  (Figure 8). There‐
fore, we consider  that integrating  these two efficient learners with different  specialties  to 
make detection  together can improve  detection  accuracy.  
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 7. Yolov5 is better at detecting  long‐area fires than EfficientDet.  (a) True positive of Yolov5; (b) true positive of 
Yolov5; (c) false negative  of EfficientDet;  (d) false negative  of EfficientDet.  (a,b) illustrate  that Yolov5 detect long‐area fires 
successfully,  while (c,d) show that EfficientDet  fails to detect them. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 8. EfficientDet  is a more careful object detector than Yolov5, meaning  that it seldom losses potential  objects easily. 
(a) Yolov5 fails to cover all fire areas; (b) Yolov5 misses two fire objects; (c) EfficientDet  covers all fire areas; (d) EfficientDet  
detects four fire objects. 
Another issue is that the ability of the object detector is limited. It only learns the fire 
region, which is just a local pattern of the whole image, but ignores the other information  
Figure 8. EfﬁcientDet is a more careful object detector than Yolov5, meaning that it seldom losses
potential objects easily. ( a) Yolov5 fails to cover all ﬁre areas; ( b) Yolov5 misses two ﬁre objects;
(c) EfﬁcientDet covers all ﬁre areas; ( d) EfﬁcientDet detects four ﬁre objects.

==== Page 8 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 8 of 16
Another issue is that the ability of the object detector is limited. It only learns the ﬁre
region, which is just a local pattern of the whole image, but ignores the other information
like background. As a result, the object detector may treat ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun) as ﬁres
(Figure 9), thereby making false alarms. Therefore, a good leader EfﬁcientNet that has a
full understanding of the whole image is needed to guide the detection process.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   8 of 17 
 
 like background.  As a result, the object detector may treat fire‐like objects (e.g., sun) as 
fires (Figure 9), thereby making false alarms. Therefore,  a good leader EfficientNet  that 
has a full understanding  of the whole image is needed to guide the detection  process. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 9. Object detectors  Yolov5 and EfficientDet  are easy to be deceived  by fire‐like objects (e.g., sun). (a) False positive 
of Yolov5 (confidence  score: 0.63); (b) false positive of Yolov5 (confidence  score: 0.59); (c) false positive of EfficientDet  
(confidence  score: 0.84); (d) false positive of EfficientDet  (confidence  score: 0.71). 
To address the above two issues and make sure our model is robust to diverse sce‐
narios, three deep learners are integrated  to make decisions  together (Figure 10). The first 
and second learners Yolov5 and EfficientDet  act as object detectors,  to detect fire locations  
in images by generating  candidate  boxes, respectively.  Then, the non‐maximum  suppres‐
sion algorithm  [39] (Algorithm  1) is employed  to eliminate  redundant  boxes, preserving  
boxes with top confidence.  The third learner EfficientNet  acts as a binary classifier,  re‐
sponsible  for learning the whole image to determine  whether the image contains fire ob‐
jects. Finally, the object detection  results, and image classification  results are sent into a 
decision strategy module, in which if the image is considered  to contain fire objects, re‐
taining object detection  results, otherwise  ignoring  them. 
In addition,  integrating  multiple  learners will not affect the overall efficiency  of 
model, because the three learners are structurally  independent,  and the whole model is 
executed  by multi processes,  meaning  that each learner has a separate process responsible  
for it. 
  
Figure 9. Object detectors Yolov5 and EfficientDet are easy to be deceived by fire-like objects
(e.g., sun). (a) False positive of Yolov5 (conﬁdence score: 0.63); ( b) false positive of Yolov5 (conﬁdence
score: 0.59); ( c) false positive of EfﬁcientDet (conﬁdence score: 0.84); ( d) false positive of EfﬁcientDet
(conﬁdence score: 0.71).
To address the above two issues and make sure our model is robust to diverse scenar-
ios, three deep learners are integrated to make decisions together (Figure 10). The ﬁrst and
second learners Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet act as object detectors, to detect ﬁre locations in
images by generating candidate boxes, respectively. Then, the non-maximum suppression
algorithm [ 39] (Algorithm 1) is employed to eliminate redundant boxes, preserving boxes
with top conﬁdence. The third learner EfﬁcientNet acts as a binary classiﬁer, responsible
for learning the whole image to determine whether the image contains ﬁre objects. Finally,
the object detection results, and image classiﬁcation results are sent into a decision strategy
module, in which if the image is considered to contain ﬁre objects, retaining object detection
results, otherwise ignoring them.
In addition, integrating multiple learners will not affect the overall efﬁciency of model,
because the three learners are structurally independent, and the whole model is executed
by multi processes, meaning that each learner has a separate process responsible for it.

==== Page 9 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 9 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   9 of 17 
 
  
Figure 10. Structure  of the proposed  model in this paper. Three deep learners are ensembled  in parallel. Two object detec‐
tors Yolov5 and EfficientDet  are integrated  to perform object detection  task, and the classifier  EfficientNet  is in charge of 
discriminating  whether the image contains fire objects. Final detection  results are made based on the decisions  of three 
learners.  
Algorithm  1. Non‐Maximum  Suppression  (NMS) 
INPUT:     Bൌሼbଵ,…,b୒ሽ, Sൌሼsଵ,…,s୒ሽ, N୲ 
B is the list of initial detection  boxes 
S contains corresponding  detection  scores 
N୲ is the NMS threshold  
Begin: 
D←ሼ ሽ 
while B്empt y do 
                  m ←argmax S  
                  M ←b୫ 
                  D  ←D∪M;  B←BെM 
for b୧ in B do 
if iouሺM, b୧ሻ൒N୲ then 
B←Bെb୧;  S←Sെs୧ 
end 
end 
             end 
             Return D, S 
End 
2.6. Model Evaluation  
We evaluate models using Microsoft  COCO criteria (Table 1), which is widely used 
in object detection  tasks. However,  fire is a special object, which is diverse in shape, tex‐
ture, and color. Bounding  box generated  by object detectors  may slightly differ from 
ground truth (Figure 11), thereby influencing  the calculation  of average precision,  but de‐
tectors do identify the fire areas successfully.  Therefore,  to evaluate models more compre‐
hensively,  we introduce  two additional  evaluation  metrics, namely frame accuracy  (FA) 
and false positive rate (FPR). For one image, if the detector misses any fire object, we call 
it is a frame false (FF), otherwise  frame true (FT). If the detector treats any fire‐like object 
as fire, we call it is a false positive (FP), otherwise  true positive (TP). Note that FA is cal‐
culated on the test set containing  476 forest images, and FPR is calculated  on our challeng‐
ing non‐fire dataset containing  641 images with fire‐like objects (e.g., sun). The FA and 
FPR can be calculated  as Equation  (1) and Equation  (2), respectively:  
FAൌ FT
FT൅FFൈ100,  (1)
FPRൌ FP
FP൅TPൈ100.  (2)
Figure 10. Structure of the proposed model in this paper. Three deep learners are ensembled in parallel. Two object
detectors Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet are integrated to perform object detection task, and the classiﬁer EfﬁcientNet is in charge
of discriminating whether the image contains ﬁre objects. Final detection results are made based on the decisions of
three learners.
Algorithm 1. Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS)
INPUT : B =fb1, . . . , b Ng, S=fs1, . . . , s Ng, Nt
B is the list of initial detection boxes
S contains corresponding detection scores
Ntis the NMS threshold
Begin :
D fg
while B6=empty do
m argmax S
M bm
D D[M; B B M
forbiin B do
ifiou(M, b i)Ntthen
B B bi; S S si
end
end
end
Return D, S
End
2.6. Model Evaluation
We evaluate models using Microsoft COCO criteria (Table 1), which is widely used in
object detection tasks. However, ﬁre is a special object, which is diverse in shape, texture,
and color. Bounding box generated by object detectors may slightly differ from ground
truth (Figure 11), thereby inﬂuencing the calculation of average precision, but detectors do
identify the ﬁre areas successfully. Therefore, to evaluate models more comprehensively,
we introduce two additional evaluation metrics, namely frame accuracy (FA) and false
positive rate (FPR). For one image, if the detector misses any ﬁre object, we call it is a frame
false (FF), otherwise frame true (FT). If the detector treats any ﬁre-like object as ﬁre, we call
it is a false positive (FP), otherwise true positive (TP). Note that FA is calculated on the test
set containing 476 forest images, and FPR is calculated on our challenging non-ﬁre dataset
containing 641 images with ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun). The FA and FPR can be calculated
as Equation (1) and Equation (2), respectively:
FA=FT
FT+FF100, (1)
FPR =FP
FP+TP100. (2)

==== Page 10 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 10 of 16
Table 1. Microsoft COCO criteria—commonly used in object detection task for evaluating the model
precision and recall across multiple scales.
Average Precision (AP)
AP0.5 AP at IoU =0.5
AP Across Scales:
APS AP0.5for small objects: area <322
APM AP0.5for medium objects: 322<area<962
APL AP0.5for big objects: area >962
Average Recall (AR)
AR0.5 AR at IoU =0.5
AR Across Scales:
ARS AR0.5for small objects: area <322
ARM AR0.5for medium objects: 322<area<962
ARL AR0.5for big objects: area >962
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   10 of 17 
 
   
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 11. Bounding  boxes generated  by (a) Yolov5, (b) EfficientDet,  and (c) our model (3 learners)  are different  from (d) 
ground truth, but still has good detection  performance.  
Table 1. Microsoft  COCO criteria—commonly  used in object detection  task for evaluating  the 
model precision  and recall across multiple  scales. 
Average  Precision  (AP)  
AP଴.ହ  AP at IoU ൌ0.5 
AP Across Scales:   
APୗ  AP଴.ହ for small objects: area൏32ଶ 
AP୑  AP଴.ହ for medium objects: 32ଶ൏area൏96ଶ 
AP୐  AP଴.ହ for big objects: area൐96ଶ 
Average  Recall (AR)  
AR଴.ହ  AR at IoU ൌ0.5 
AR Across Scales:   
ARୗ  AR଴.ହ for small objects: area൏32ଶ 
AR୑ AR଴.ହ for medium objects: 32ଶ൏area൏
96ଶ 
AR୐  AR଴.ହ for big objects: area൐96ଶ 
3. Results 
3.1. Training 
We applied different  strategies  to train our three learners:  Yolov5, EfficientDet,  and 
EfficientNet.  Object detectors,  namely Yolov5 and EfficientDet,  are trained with 2381 for‐
est fire images, and tested with 476 forest fire images. The image classifier,  namely Effi‐
cientNet,  is trained with 2381 forest fire images and 5804 non‐fire images, and tested with 
476 forest fire images and 1160 non‐fire images. Note that non‐fire images contain normal 
images, and images with fire‐like objects (e.g., sun). Each model is built up by Pytorch [40] 
Figure 11. Bounding boxes generated by ( a) Yolov5, ( b) EfﬁcientDet, and ( c) our model (3 learners)
are different from ( d) ground truth, but still has good detection performance.
3. Results
3.1. Training
We applied different strategies to train our three learners: Yolov5, EfﬁcientDet, and
EfﬁcientNet. Object detectors, namely Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet, are trained with 2381 forest
ﬁre images, and tested with 476 forest ﬁre images. The image classiﬁer, namely EfﬁcientNet,
is trained with 2381 forest ﬁre images and 5804 non-ﬁre images, and tested with 476 forest
ﬁre images and 1160 non-ﬁre images. Note that non-ﬁre images contain normal images,
and images with ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun). Each model is built up by Pytorch [ 40] and
trained on NVIDIA GTX 2080TI. The details of our training strategy are shown in Table 2.

==== Page 11 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 11 of 16
Table 2. Detailed training strategies of models.
Model Train Test Optimizer LR Batch Size Epoch
Yolov5 2381 476 SGD [41,42] 110 28 300
EfﬁcientDet 2381 476 AdamW [43] 110 44 300
EfﬁcientNet 8185 1636 SGD 110 28 300
LR: learning rate, SGD: stochastic gradient descent, AdamW: Adam with decoupled weight decay.
3.2. Comparison
We compare our model with typical one-stage object detectors. As is shown in Table 3,
even though Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet are the most powerful detectors in this task, the
high false positive rate and missing detections cannot be ignored. By integrating them
(2 learners), all evaluation metrics are signiﬁcantly improved, but the false positive rate
is increased to 51.6%, since the false positives come from both Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet.
Under the guide of our third learner EfﬁcientNet, the false positive rate is reduced to
0.3%. What is also worth mentioning is that, after introducing the third learner, some
metrics are slightly decreased. It is because that EfﬁcientNet wrongly treats some ﬁre
images as non-ﬁre ones, and then ignores the object detection results, but we consider it
is worthwhile to sacriﬁce a tiny decrease in average precision and recall for substantial
improvement in the false positive rate. To sum up, our model (3 learners) is superior in
AP0.5,APS,APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR S,AR M,AR L, FPR, and FA compared with other typical
object detectors. Comprehensive improvements make the model have better performance
in detecting different types of forest ﬁres: small-scale ﬁres, medium-scale ﬁres, big-scale
ﬁres, ground ﬁres, trunk ﬁres, canopy ﬁres, and ﬁres at night (Figures 12 and 13). Faced
with ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun), our model will not be interfered. (Figure 14).
Table 3. Experiments on our dataset—evaluating models using Microsoft COCO criteria, FPR, FA, and latency.
Model AP 0.5 APS APM APL AR 0.5 AR S AR M AR L FPR FA Latency (ms)
SSD 66.8 37.8 42.4 78.6 70.1 39.1 45.7 82.7 45.6 92.6 88.8
Yolov3 66.4 26.0 44.6 78.1 71.1 26.1 52.5 82.5 22.9 88.0 15.6
Yolov3-SPP 68.3 56.3 49.9 76.7 73.9 60.9 56.6 81.9 30.7 93.3 15.6
Yolov4 69.6 53.7 48.9 78.4 75.5 60.9 57.5 83.9 61.9 94.1 20.5
Yolov5 70.5 51.9 53.7 79.2 75.6 56.5 61.2 83.0 22.6 94.7 28.0
EfﬁcientDet 75.7 63.7 58.5 83.0 79.2 65.2 63.9 86.5 41.8 95.5 65.6
Ours (2 learners) 79.7 72.2 65.6 85.5 84.1 76.1 73.1 89.3 51.6 99.4 66.8
Ours (3 learners) 79.0 72.2 64.9 84.7 83.8 76.1 72.6 88.9 0.3 98.9 66.8
Note that AP0.5,APS,APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR S,AR M,AR L, FPR, and FA are all percentages. The best ﬁgure of each metric are highlighted
in bold.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   12 of 17 
 
     
(a)  (b)  (c) 
    
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 12. Our ensemble  model (3 learners)  has better performance  on ground fires, trunk fires, and canopy fires. (a) Four 
ground fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) Yolov5 fails to detect the trunk fire; (c) three canopy fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) four 
ground fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (e) the trunk fire detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) two canopy fires detected  by Effi‐
cientDet;  (g) six ground fires detected  by our model; (h) the trunk fire detected  by our model; (i) three canopy fires detected  
by our model. 
    
(a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 12. Cont.

==== Page 12 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 12 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   12 of 17 
 
     
(a)  (b)  (c) 
    
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 12. Our ensemble  model (3 learners)  has better performance  on ground fires, trunk fires, and canopy fires. (a) Four 
ground fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) Yolov5 fails to detect the trunk fire; (c) three canopy fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) four 
ground fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (e) the trunk fire detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) two canopy fires detected  by Effi‐
cientDet;  (g) six ground fires detected  by our model; (h) the trunk fire detected  by our model; (i) three canopy fires detected  
by our model. 
    
(a)  (b)  (c) 
Figure 12. Our ensemble model (3 learners) has better performance on ground ﬁres, trunk ﬁres, and canopy ﬁres. ( a) Four
ground ﬁres detected by Yolov5; ( b) Yolov5 fails to detect the trunk ﬁre; ( c) three canopy ﬁres detected by Yolov5; ( d) four
ground ﬁres detected by EfﬁcientDet; ( e) the trunk ﬁre detected by EfﬁcientDet; ( f) two canopy ﬁres detected by EfﬁcientDet;
(g) six ground ﬁres detected by our model; ( h) the trunk ﬁre detected by our model; ( i) three canopy ﬁres detected by
our model.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   12 of 17 
 
     
(a)  (b)  (c) 
    
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 12. Our ensemble  model (3 learners)  has better performance  on ground fires, trunk fires, and canopy fires. (a) Four 
ground fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) Yolov5 fails to detect the trunk fire; (c) three canopy fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) four 
ground fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (e) the trunk fire detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) two canopy fires detected  by Effi‐
cientDet;  (g) six ground fires detected  by our model; (h) the trunk fire detected  by our model; (i) three canopy fires detected  
by our model. 
    
(a)  (b)  (c) 
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 17 
 
     
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 13. Our improved  model has better performance  on small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires at night. (a) 
Medium ‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (c) small‐
scale, medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  
(e) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  
by EfficientDet;  (g) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by our model; (h) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  
by our model; (i) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  by our model. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 13. Cont.

==== Page 13 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 13 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 17 
 
     
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 13. Our improved  model has better performance  on small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires at night. (a) 
Medium ‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (c) small‐
scale, medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  
(e) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  
by EfficientDet;  (g) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by our model; (h) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  
by our model; (i) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  by our model. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 13. Our improved model has better performance on small-scale, medium-scale, and big-scale fires at night.
(a) Medium-scale and big-scale ﬁres detected by Yolov5; ( b) medium-scale and big scale ﬁres detected by Yolov5; ( c) small-
scale, medium-scale and big-scale ﬁres detected by Yolov5; ( d) medium-scale and big-scale ﬁres detected by EfﬁcientDet;
(e) medium-scale and big scale ﬁres detected by EfﬁcientDet; ( f) small-scale, medium-scale, and big-scale ﬁres detected by
EfﬁcientDet; ( g) medium-scale and big-scale ﬁres detected by our model; ( h) medium-scale and big scale ﬁres detected by
our model; ( i) small-scale, medium-scale, and big-scale ﬁres detected by our model.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 17 
 
     
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 13. Our improved  model has better performance  on small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires at night. (a) 
Medium ‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (b) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (c) small‐
scale, medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by Yolov5; (d) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  
(e) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  by EfficientDet;  (f) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  
by EfficientDet;  (g) medium‐scale and big‐scale fires detected  by our model; (h) medium‐scale and big scale fires detected  
by our model; (i) small‐scale, medium‐scale, and big‐scale fires detected  by our model. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 17 
 
   
(e)  (f) 
Figure 14. Under the guide of EfficientNet,  our ensemble  model has a good discriminability  between fire and fire‐like 
objects (e.g., sun). (a) True negative  of Yolov5; (b) false positive of Yolov5 (confidence  score: 0.59); (c) false positive of 
EfficientDet  (confidence  score 0.71); (d) true negative  of EfficientDet;  (e) true negative  of our model; (f) true negative  of 
our model. 
4. Discussion  
Compared  with other common  objects that have fixed form, forest fire is a dynamic  
object [44]. In the real‐world scenario,  a forest fire usually starts from small‐scale fire, de‐
velops to medium‐scale fire, and then to big‐scale fire [45]. In terms of types, it starts from 
ground fire, then spreads to the trunk, and finally to the canopy [46]. The various shapes, 
sizes, textures,  and colors of forest fires make the fire evolution  a complex  process, and 
bring great difficulty  in fire detection.  
Therefore,  it is highly imperative  for detectors  to be sensitive  to different  types of 
fires. Through  careful experimental  comparisons,  we find that no single detector that can 
handle all kinds of fires. They have respective  advantages  and disadvantages.  Yolov5 is 
excellent  at detecting  long‐area fires (Figure 7), but it frequently  misses objects (Figure 8). 
EfficientDet  is a more careful detector,  compared  to Yolov5; even though it has a bad per‐
formance  on long‐area fires (Figure 7), it can detect fires that Yolov5 cannot (Figure 8), 
meaning  that it is a good partner for Yolov5. Our model, which efficiently  integrates  de‐
cisions of these two powerful  learners,  boost detection  performance  by 2.5–10.9%,  in terms 
of AP଴.ହ, APୗ, AP୑, AP୐, AR଴.ହ, ARୗ, AR୑, AR୐. The significant  improvements  of aver‐
age precision  and average recall for small, medium,  and big objects make the model more 
sensitive  to the size changes of fires, thereby enhancing  detection  performance  on differ‐
ent types of forest fires: ground fire, trunk fire, canopy fire, and fires at night in the fire 
evolution  (Figures 12 and 13). 
Another problem is that the false positive rate of the improved  model (2 learners)  
becomes  higher: 22.6% to 51.6% since the model also integrates  wrong detection  results 
from both learners.  To address this issue, we use 8185 images containing  2381 forest fire 
images and 5804 non‐fire images (containing  fire‐like images and normal forest images) 
to train our third learner EfficientNet.  Sufficient  training sets enabled EfficientNet  to show 
a good discriminability  between fire objects and fire‐like objects, with 99.6% accuracy  on 
476 fire images, and 99.7% accuracy  on 676 fire‐like images. With the help of the leader 
learner EfficientNet,  wrong detection  results are eliminated,  and the false positive rate is 
significantly  decreased  to 0.3% (Figure 14). Noticeably,  the join of EfficientNet  reduces 
AP଴.ହ, AP୑, AP୐, AR଴.ହ, AR୑, AR୐ by roughly 1%, which is because that EfficientNet  
wrongly  ignores 2 fire images containing  medium‐scale and big‐scale fire objects. 
In terms of latency, the Yolo family is superior compared  to EfficientDet  and SSD. 
Excellent  inference  speed makes Yolo family widely used in real‐world applications,  but 
experimental  results show that they are not able to have a satisfactory  performance  on 
forest fire detection  tasks. The latency of EfficientDet  is 65.6 ms, which is over twice that 
of Yolov5 (28.0 ms), but EfficientDet  outperforms  Yolov5 by over 5% regarding  detection  
performance.  We ensemble  these three learners Yolov5 (28.0 ms), EfficientDet  (65.6 ms), 
EfficientNet  (31.3 ms) in parallel to make sure that our model can achieve the best perfor‐
mance without any extra latency. The final latency of our model (3 learners)  is 66.8 ms, 
Figure 14. Under the guide of EfﬁcientNet, our ensemble model has a good discriminability between
ﬁre and ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun). ( a) True negative of Yolov5; ( b) false positive of Yolov5 (conﬁdence
score: 0.59); ( c) false positive of EfﬁcientDet (conﬁdence score 0.71); ( d) true negative of EfﬁcientDet;
(e) true negative of our model; ( f) true negative of our model.

==== Page 14 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 14 of 16
4. Discussion
Compared with other common objects that have ﬁxed form, forest ﬁre is a dynamic
object [ 44]. In the real-world scenario, a forest ﬁre usually starts from small-scale ﬁre,
develops to medium-scale ﬁre, and then to big-scale ﬁre [ 45]. In terms of types, it starts
from ground ﬁre, then spreads to the trunk, and ﬁnally to the canopy [ 46]. The various
shapes, sizes, textures, and colors of forest ﬁres make the ﬁre evolution a complex process,
and bring great difﬁculty in ﬁre detection.
Therefore, it is highly imperative for detectors to be sensitive to different types of ﬁres.
Through careful experimental comparisons, we ﬁnd that no single detector that can handle
all kinds of ﬁres. They have respective advantages and disadvantages. Yolov5 is excellent at
detecting long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), but it frequently misses objects (Figure 8). EfﬁcientDet
is a more careful detector, compared to Yolov5; even though it has a bad performance on
long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), it can detect ﬁres that Yolov5 cannot (Figure 8), meaning that it
is a good partner for Yolov5. Our model, which efﬁciently integrates decisions of these
two powerful learners, boost detection performance by 2.5–10.9%, in terms of AP0.5,APS,
APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR S,AR M,AR L. The signiﬁcant improvements of average precision
and average recall for small, medium, and big objects make the model more sensitive
to the size changes of ﬁres, thereby enhancing detection performance on different types
of forest ﬁres: ground ﬁre, trunk ﬁre, canopy ﬁre, and ﬁres at night in the ﬁre evolution
(Figures 12 and 13).
Another problem is that the false positive rate of the improved model (2 learners)
becomes higher: 22.6% to 51.6% since the model also integrates wrong detection results
from both learners. To address this issue, we use 8185 images containing 2381 forest ﬁre
images and 5804 non-ﬁre images (containing ﬁre-like images and normal forest images) to
train our third learner EfﬁcientNet. Sufﬁcient training sets enabled EfﬁcientNet to show
a good discriminability between ﬁre objects and ﬁre-like objects, with 99.6% accuracy on
476 ﬁre images, and 99.7% accuracy on 676 ﬁre-like images. With the help of the leader
learner EfﬁcientNet, wrong detection results are eliminated, and the false positive rate is
signiﬁcantly decreased to 0.3% (Figure 14). Noticeably, the join of EfﬁcientNet reduces
AP0.5,APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR M,AR Lby roughly 1%, which is because that EfﬁcientNet
wrongly ignores 2 ﬁre images containing medium-scale and big-scale ﬁre objects.
In terms of latency, the Yolo family is superior compared to EfﬁcientDet and SSD.
Excellent inference speed makes Yolo family widely used in real-world applications, but
experimental results show that they are not able to have a satisfactory performance on forest
ﬁre detection tasks. The latency of EfﬁcientDet is 65.6 ms, which is over twice that of Yolov5
(28.0 ms), but EfﬁcientDet outperforms Yolov5 by over 5% regarding detection performance.
We ensemble these three learners Yolov5 (28.0 ms), EfﬁcientDet (65.6 ms), EfﬁcientNet
(31.3 ms) in parallel to make sure that our model can achieve the best performance without
any extra latency. The ﬁnal latency of our model (3 learners) is 66.8 ms, which shows that
an excellent trade-off between detection performance and efﬁciency has been achieved,
and the model is applicable for real-time detection task.
For further improvement, we plan to study the labeling strategy for forest ﬁres, since
the quality of training data directly determines the detection performance. Another inter-
esting extension is to investigate the network architecture of backbones, and modify them
to make sure that they are specially designed for forest ﬁre detection task. Additionally, we
will work on developing a forest ﬁre tracking system, which can classify different types of
forest ﬁres: ground ﬁre, trunk ﬁre and canopy ﬁre, to track the evolution and spread of
forest ﬁres.
5. Conclusions
The successful application of convolutional neural networks signiﬁcantly improves
the performance of object detection. However, forest ﬁre is a dynamic object with no ﬁxed
form, which the individual object detector cannot handle. In addition, object detectors are
easy to be deceived by ﬁre-like objects and generate false positives due to their limited

==== Page 15 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 15 of 16
visual ﬁeld. To address these problems, a novel ensemble learning method for real-time
forest ﬁre detection is proposed in this paper. Two powerful object detectors (Yolov5 and
EfﬁcientDet) with different expertise are integrated to make the whole model more robust
to diverse forest ﬁre scenarios. Then, a leader (EfﬁcientNet) is introduced to guide the
detection process to reduce false positives. Experimental results show that, compared with
other popular object detectors, our model achieves a superior trade-off among average
precision, average recall, false positive rate, frame accuracy, and latency. The signiﬁcant
improvements make it possible for the model to perform well in real-world forestry
applications.
Author Contributions: R.X. devised the programs and drafted the initial manuscript. H.L. and K.L.
helped with data collection, data analysis, and ﬁgures and tables. L.C. contributed to fund acquisition
and writing embellishment. Y.L. designed the project and revised the manuscript. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Key R&D Program of China (grant number
2017YFD0600904) and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education
Institutions (PAPD).
Data Availability Statement: Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. The data can
be found here: BowFire [28], FD-dataset [29], ForestryImages [30], VisiFire [31].
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Zhang, J.; Li, W.; Yin, Z.; Liu, S.; Guo, X. Forest ﬁre detection system based on wireless sensor network. In Proceedings of the 4th
IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA 2009), Xi’an, China, 25–27 May 2009; pp. 520–523.
2. Yu, L.; Wang, N.; Meng, X. Real-time forest ﬁre detection with wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM 2005), Wuhan, China, 26 September
2005; pp. 1214–1217.
3. Chen, S.J.; Hovde, D.C.; Peterson, K.A.; Marshall, A.W. Fire detection using smoke and gas sensors. Fire Saf. J. 2007 ,
42, 507–515. [CrossRef]
4. Zhang, F.; Zhao, P .; Xu, S.; Wu, Y.; Yang, X.; Zhang, Y. Integrating multiple factors to optimize watchtower deployment for
wildﬁre detection. Sci. Total Environ. 2020 ,737, 139561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Zhang, F.; Zhao, P .; Thiyagalingam, J.; Kirubarajan, T. Terrain-inﬂuenced incremental watchtower expansion for wildﬁre detection.
Sci. Total Environ. 2018 ,654, 164–176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Lee, B.; Kwon, O.; Jung, C.; Park, S. The development of UV/IR combination ﬂame detector. J. KIIS 2001 ,16, 1–8.
7. Kang, D.; Kim, E.; Moon, P .; Sin, W.; Kang, M. Design and analysis of ﬂame signal detection with the combination of UV/IR
sensors. J. Korean Soc. Int. Inf. 2013 ,14, 45–51. [CrossRef]
8. Fernandes, A.M.; Utkin, A.B.; Lavrov, A.V .; Vilar, R.M. Development of neural network committee machines for automatic forest
ﬁre detection using lidar. Pattern Recognit. 2004 ,37, 2039–2047. [CrossRef]
9. Chen, T.H.; Wu, P .H.; Chiou, Y.C. An early ﬁre-detection method based on image processing. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP 2004), Singapore, 24–27 October 2004; pp. 1707–1710.
10. Töreyin, B.U.; Dedeo˘ glu, Y.; Güdükbay, U.; Cetin, A.E. Computer vision based method for real-time ﬁre and ﬂame detection.
Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2006 ,27, 49–58. [CrossRef]
11. Çelik, T.; Özkaramanlı, H.; Demirel, H. Fire and smoke detection without sensors: Image processing based approach. In
Proceedings of the IEEE 15th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2007), Poznan, Poland, 3–7 September 2007;
pp. 1794–1798.
12. Teng, Z.; Kim, J.H.; Kang, D.J. Fire detection based on hidden Markov models. Int. J. Control Autom. Syst. 2010 ,8, 822–830. [CrossRef]
13. Chino, D.Y.; Avalhais, L.P .; Rodrigues, J.F.; Traina, A.J. Bowﬁre: Detection of ﬁre in still images by integrating pixel color
and texture analysis. In Proceedings of the 28th SIBGRAPI Conference on Graphics, Patterns and Images, Salvador, Brazil,
26–29 August 2015; pp. 95–102.
14. Wu, S.; Zhang, L. Using popular object detection methods for real time forest ﬁre detection. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID 2018), Hangzhou, China, 8–9 December 2018; pp. 280–284.
15. Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2016 ,39, 1137–1149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 26 June–1 July 2016;
pp. 779–788.

==== Page 16 ====
Forests 2021 ,12, 217 16 of 16
17. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2017), Honolulu, Hawaii, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 7263–7271.
18. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1804.02767.
19. Bochkovskiy , A.; Wang, C.Y .; Liao, H.Y .M. YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2004.10934.
20. Liu, W.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Szegedy, C.; Reed, S.; Fu, C.Y.; Berg, A.C. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Computer Vsion (ECCV 2016), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8–16 October 2016; pp. 21–37.
21. Kim, B.; Lee, J. A video-based ﬁre detection using deep learning models. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 2862. [CrossRef]
22. Lee, Y.; Shim, J. False Positive Decremented Research for Fire and Smoke Detection in Surveillance Camera using Spatial and
Temporal Features Based on Deep Learning. Electronics 2019 ,8, 1167. [CrossRef]
23. Pan, H.; Badawi, D.; Cetin, A.E. Computationally Efﬁcient Wildﬁre Detection Method Using a Deep Convolutional Network
Pruned via Fourier Analysis. Sensors 2020 ,20, 2891. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Wu, S.; Guo, C.; Yang, J. Using PCAand one-stage detectors for real-time forest fire detection. J. Eng. 2020 ,2020 , 383–387. [CrossRef]
25. Ultralytics-Yolov5. Available online: https://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5 (accessed on 1 January 2021).
26. Tan, M.; Pang, R.; Le, Q.V . Efﬁcientdet: Scalable and efﬁcient object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2020), Washington, DC, USA, 14–19 June 2020; pp. 10781–10790.
27. Tan, M.; Le, Q. EfﬁcientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2019), Long Beach, CA, USA, 9–15 June 2019; pp. 6105–6114.
28. BoWFire Dataset. Available online: https://bitbucket.org/gbdi/bowﬁre-dataset/downloads/ (accessed on 1 January 2021).
29. FD-Dataset. Available online: http://www.nnmtl.cn/EFDNet/ (accessed on 1 January 2021).
30. ForestryImages. Available online: https://www.forestryimages.org/browse/subthumb.cfm?sub=740 (accessed on 1 January 2021).
31. VisiFire. Available online: http://signal.ee.bilkent.edu.tr/VisiFire/ (accessed on 1 January 2021).
32. Everingham, M.; Eslami, S.A.; Van Gool, L.; Williams, C.K.; Winn, J.; Zisserman, A. The pascal visual object classes challenge: A
retrospective. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2015 ,111, 98–136. [CrossRef]
33. Lin, T.Y .; Maire, M.; Belongie, S.; Hays, J.; Perona, P .; Ramanan, D.; Doll ár, P .; Zitnick, C.L. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context.
In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Computer Cision (ECCV 2014), Zurich, Switzerland, 6–12 September 2014;
pp. 740–755.
34. Wang, C.Y.; Mark Liao, H.Y.; Wu, Y.H.; Chen, P .Y.; Hsieh, J.W.; Yeh, I.H. CSPNet: A new backbone that can enhance learning
capability of cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2020), Washington,
DC, USA, 14–19 June 2020; pp. 390–391.
35. Wang, K.; Liew, J.H.; Zou, Y.; Zhou, D.; Feng, J. Panet: Few-shot image semantic segmentation with prototype alignment.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2019), Seoul, Korea, 20–26 October 2019;
pp. 9197–9206.
36. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 26 June–1 July 2016; pp. 770–778.
37. Huang, G.; Liu, Z.; Van Der Maaten, L.; Weinberger, K.Q. Densely connected convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2017), Honolulu, Hawaii, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 4700–4708.
38. Xie, S.; Girshick, R.; Doll ár, P .; Tu, Z.; He, K. Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2016), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 26 June–1 July 2016;
pp. 1492–1500.
39. Neubeck, A.; Van Gool, L. Efﬁcient non-maximum suppression. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR 2006), Hong Kong, China, 20–24 August 2006; pp. 850–855.
40. Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.; Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L. Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS
2019), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 8–14 December 2019; pp. 8026–8037.
41. Bottou, L. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Statistics (COMPSTAT 2010), Paris, France, 22–27 August 2010; pp. 177–186.
42. Zinkevich, M.; Weimer, M.; Li, L.; Smola, A.J. Parallelized stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of the Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS 2010), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6–11 December 2010; pp. 2595–2603.
43. Loshchilov, I.; Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1711.05101.
44. Merino, L.; Caballero, F.; Mart ínez-de-Dios, J.R.; Maza, I.; Ollero, A. An unmanned aircraft system for automatic forest ﬁre
monitoring and measurement. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2012 ,65, 533–548. [CrossRef]
45. Serón, F.J.; Guti érrez, D.; Magall ón, J.; Ferragut, L.; Asensio, M.I. The evolution of a wildland forest ﬁre front. Vis. Comput. 2005 ,
21, 152–169. [CrossRef]
46. Pimont, F.; Dupuy, J.L.; Linn, R.R.; Dupont, S. Impacts of tree canopy structure on wind ﬂows and ﬁre propagation simulated
with FIRETEC. Ann. For. Sci. 2011 ,68, 523–530. [CrossRef]

