==== Page 1 ====
Journal of 
Risk and Financial 
Management 
Article
A Gated Recurrent Unit Approach to Bitcoin
Price Prediction
Aniruddha Dutta1,*, Saket Kumar1,2and Meheli Basu3
1Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; saket_kumar@berkeley.edu
2Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400001, India
3Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA;
meheli.basu@pitt.edu
*Correspondence: aniruddha_dutta@berkeley.edu
Received: 21 December 2019; Accepted: 27 January 2020; Published: 3 February 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: In today’s era of big data, deep learning and artiﬁcial intelligence have formed the backbone
for cryptocurrency portfolio optimization. Researchers have investigated various state of the art
machine learning models to predict Bitcoin price and volatility. Machine learning models like
recurrent neural network (RNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM) have been shown to perform
better than traditional time series models in cryptocurrency price prediction. However, very few
studies have applied sequence models with robust feature engineering to predict future pricing. In
this study, we investigate a framework with a set of advanced machine learning forecasting methods
with a ﬁxed set of exogenous and endogenous factors to predict daily Bitcoin prices. We study and
compare di erent approaches using the root mean squared error (RMSE). Experimental results show
that the gated recurring unit (GRU) model with recurrent dropout performs better than popular
existing models. We also show that simple trading strategies, when implemented with our proposed
GRU model and with proper learning, can lead to ﬁnancial gain.
Keywords: Bitcoin; trading strategy; artiﬁcial intelligence; cryptocurrency; neural networks; time
series analysis; deep learning; predictive model; risk management
1. Introduction
Bitcoin was ﬁrst launched in 2008 to serve as a transaction medium between participants
without the need for any intermediary (Nakamoto 2008; Barrdear and Kumhof 2016). Since 2017,
cryptocurrencies have been gaining immense popularity, thanks to the rapid growth of their market
capitalization (ElBahrawy et al. 2017), resulting in a revenue of more than $850 billion in 2019. The
digital currency market is diverse and provides investors with a wide variety of di erent products. A
recent survey (Hileman and Rauchs 2017) revealed that more than 1500 cryptocurrencies are actively
traded by individual and institutional investors worldwide across di erent exchanges. Over 170
hedge funds, specialized in cryptocurrencies, have emerged since 2017 and in response to institutional
demand for trading and hedging, Bitcoin’s futures have been rapidly launched (Corbet et al. 2018).
The growth of virtual currencies (Baronchelli 2018) has fueled interest from the scientiﬁc community
(Barrdear and Kumhof 2016; Dwyer 2015; Bohme et al. 2015; Casey and Vigna 2015; Cusumano 2014;
Krat et al. 2018; Rogojanu and Badeaetal 2014; White 2015; Baek and Elbeck 2015; Bech and Garratt
2017; Blau 2017; Dow 2019; Fama et al. 2019; Fantacci 2019; Malherbe et al. 2019). Cryptocurrencies
have faced periodic rises and sudden dips in speciﬁc time periods, and therefore the cryptocurrency
trading community has a need for a standardized method to accurately predict the ﬂuctuating price
trends. Cryptocurrency price ﬂuctuations and forecasts studied in the past (Poyser 2017) focused on the
analysis and forecasting of price ﬂuctuations, using mostly traditional approaches for ﬁnancial markets
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23; doi:10.3390 /jrfm13020023 www.mdpi.com /journal /jrfm

==== Page 2 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 2 of 16
analysis and prediction (Ciaian et al. 2016; Guo and Antulov-Fantulin 2018; Gajardo et al. 2018; Gandal
and Halaburda 2016). Sovbetov (2018) observed that crypto market-related factors such as market beta,
trading volume, and volatility are signiﬁcant predictors of both short-term and long-term prices of
cryptocurrencies. Constructing robust predictive models to accurately forecast cryptocurrency prices
is an important business challenge for potential investors and government agencies. Cryptocurrency
trading is actually a time series forecasting problem, and due to high volatility, it is di erent from price
forecasting in traditional ﬁnancial markets (Muzammal et al. 2019). Briere et al. (2015) found that
Bitcoin shows extremely high returns, but is characterized by high volatility and low correlation to
traditional assets. The high volatility of Bitcoin is well-documented (Blundell-Wignall 2014; Lo and
Wang 2014). Some econometric methods have been applied to predict Bitcoin volatility estimates such
as (Katsiampa 2017; Kim et al. 2016; Kristoufek 2015).
Traditional time series prediction methods include univariate autoregressive (AR), univariate
moving average (MA), simple exponential smoothing (SES), and autoregressive integrated moving
average (ARIMA) (Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). Kaiser (2019) used time series models to investigate
seasonality patterns in Bitcoin trading (Kaiser 2019). While seasonal ARIMA or SARIMA models
are suitable to investigate seasonality, time series models fail to capture long term dependencies in
the presence of high volatility, which is an inherent characteristic of a cryptocurrency market. On
the contrary, machine learning methods like neural networks use iterative optimization algorithms
like “gradient descent” along with hyper parameter tuning to determine the best ﬁtted optima
(Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). Thus, machine learning methods have been applied for asset
price /return prediction in recent years by incorporating non-linearity (Enke and Thawornwong 2005;
Huang et al. 2005; Sheta et al. 2015; Chang et al. 2009) with prediction accuracy higher than traditional
time series models (McNally et al. 2018; Siami-Namini and Namin 2018). However, there is a dearth of
machine learning application in the cryptocurrency price prediction literature. In contrast to traditional
linear statistical models such as ARMA, the artiﬁcial intelligence approach enables us to capture the
non-linear property of the high volatile crypto-currency prices.
Examples of machine learning studies to predict Bitcoin prices include random forests
(Madan et al. 2015), Bayesian neural networks (Jang and Lee 2017), and neural networks
(McNally et al. 2018). Deep learning techniques developed by Hinton et al. (2006) have been used
in literature to approximate non-linear functions with high accuracy (Cybenko 1989). There are a
number of previous works that have applied artiﬁcial neural networks to ﬁnancial investment problems
(Chong et al. 2017; Huck 2010). However, Pichl and Kaizoji (2017) concluded that although neural
networks are successful in approximating Bitcoin log return distribution, more complex deep learning
methods such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM) techniques
should yield substantially higher prediction accuracy. Some studies have used RNNs and LSTM to
forecast Bitcoin pricing in comparison with traditional ARIMA models (McNally et al. 2018; Guo and
Antulov-Fantulin 2018). McNally et al. (2018) showed that RNN and LSTM neural networks predict
prices better than traditional multilayer perceptron (MLP) due to the temporal nature of the more
advanced algorithms. Karakoyun and Çıbıkdiken (2018), in comparing the ARIMA time series model
to the LSTM deep learning algorithm in estimating the future price of Bitcoin, found signiﬁcantly lower
mean absolute error in LSTM prediction.
In this paper, we focus on two aspects to predict Bitcoin price. We consider a set of exogenous
and endogenous variables to predict Bitcoin price. Some of these variables have not been investigated
in previous research studies on Bitcoin price prediction. This holistic approach should explain whether
Bitcoin is a ﬁnancial asset. Additionally, we also study and compare RNN models with traditional
machine learning models and propose a GRU architecture to predict Bitcoin price. GRU’s train faster
than traditional RNN or LSTM and have not been investigated in the past for cryptocurrency price
prediction. In particular, we developed a gated recurring unit (GRU) architecture that can learn the
Bitcoin price ﬂuctuations more e ciently than the traditional LSTM. We compare our model with
a traditional neural network and LSTM to check the robustness of the architecture. For application

==== Page 3 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 3 of 16
purposes in algorithmic trading, we implemented our proposed architecture to test two simple trading
strategies for proﬁtability.
2. Methodology
A survey of the current literature on neural networks, reveals that traditional neural networks
have shortcomings in e ectively using prior information for future predictions (Wang et al. 2015).
RNN is a class of neural networks which uses their internal state memory for processing sequences.
However, RNNs on their own are not capable of learning long-term dependencies and they often
suer from short-term memory. With long sequences, especially in time series modelling and textual
analysis, RNNs su er from vanishing gradient problems during back propagation (Hochreiter 1998;
Pascanu et al. 2013). If the gradient value shrinks to a very small value, then the RNNs fail to learn
longer past sequences, thus having short-term memory. Long short-term memory (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997), is an RNN architecture with feedback connections, designed to regulate the
ﬂow of information. LSTMs are a variant of the RNN that are explicitly designed to learn long-term
dependencies. A single LSTM unit is composed of an input gate, a cell, a forget gate (sigmoid layer and
a tanh layer), and an output gate (Figure 1). The gates control the ﬂow of information in and out of the
LSTM cell. LSTMs are best suited for time-series forecasting. In the forget gate, the input from the
previous hidden state is passed through a sigmoid function along with the input from the current state
to generate forget gate output ft. The sigmoid function regulates values between 0 and 1; values closer
to 0 are discarded and only values closer to 1 are considered. The input gate is used to update the cell
state. Values from the previous hidden state and current state are simultaneously passed through a
sigmoid function and a tanh function, and the output ( itandect) from the two activation functions are
multiplied. In this process, the sigmoid function decides which information is important to keep from
the tanh output.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 17 
 architecture. For application purposes in algo rithmic trading, we implemented our proposed 
architecture to test two simple trading strategies for profitability.    
2. Methodology  
A survey of the current literature on neural ne tworks, reveals that traditional neural networks 
have shortcomings in effectively using prior inform ation for future predictions (Wang et al. 2015). 
RNN is a class of neural networks which uses thei r internal state memory for processing sequences. 
However, RNNs on their own are not capable of learning long-term dependencies and they often 
suffer from short-term memory. With long sequences,  especially in time series modelling and textual 
analysis, RNNs suffer from vanishing gradient problems during back propagation (Hochreiter 1998; Pascanu et al. 2013). If the gradient value shrinks to  a very small value, then the RNNs fail to learn 
longer past sequences, thus having short-term memory. Long short-term memory (Hochreiter and 
Schmidhuber 1997), is an RNN architecture with feedback connections, designed to regulate the flow of information. LSTMs are a variant of the RNN that are explicitly designed to learn long-term dependencies. A single LSTM unit is composed of an input gate, a cell, a forget gate (sigmoid layer and a tanh layer), and an output gate (Figure 1). The gates control the flow of information in and out of the LSTM cell. LSTMs are best suited for time-ser ies forecasting. In the forget gate, the input from 
the previous hidden state is passed through a sigmoi d function along with the input from the current 
state to generate forget gate output 𝑓
௧. The sigmoid function regulates values between 0 and 1; values 
closer to 0 are discarded and only values closer to 1 are considered. The input gate is used to update 
the cell state. Values from the previous hidden  state and current state are simultaneously passed 
through a sigmoid function and a tanh function, and the output ( 𝑖௧ and 𝑐 ̃௧) from the two activation 
functions are multiplied. In this process, the sigm oid function decides which information is important 
to keep from the tanh output.  
 
Figure 1. Architecture of a long shor t-term memory (LSTM) cell. +: “plus” operation; ◉: “Hadamard 
product” operation; 𝜎: “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function.  
The previous cell state value is  multiplied with the forget gate output and then added pointwise 
with the output from the input gate to generate the new cell state 𝑐௧, as shown in Equation (1). The 
output gate operation consists of two steps: first,  the previous hidden state and current input values 
are passed through a sigmoid function; and secondly , the last obtained cell state values are passed 
through a tanh function. Finally, the tanh output and the sigmoid output are multiplied to produce 
the new hidden state, which is carried over to th e next step. Thus, the forget gate, input gate, and 
output gate decide what information to forget, wh at information to add from the current step, and 
what information to carry forward respectively. 
 𝑐௧ൌ𝑓௧.𝑐௧ିଵ൅𝑖 ௧.𝑐̃௧   (1) 
Figure 1. Architecture of a long short-term memory (LSTM) cell. +: “plus” operation;
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 17 
 architecture. For application purposes in algo rithmic trading, we implemented our proposed 
architecture to test two simple trading strategies for profitability.    
2. Methodology  
A survey of the current literature on neural ne tworks, reveals that traditional neural networks 
have shortcomings in effectively using prior inform ation for future predictions (Wang et al. 2015). 
RNN is a class of neural networks which uses thei r internal state memory for processing sequences. 
However, RNNs on their own are not capable of learning long-term dependencies and they often 
suffer from short-term memory. With long sequences,  especially in time series modelling and textual 
analysis, RNNs suffer from vanishing gradient problems during back propagation (Hochreiter 1998; Pascanu et al. 2013). If the gradient value shrinks to  a very small value, then the RNNs fail to learn 
longer past sequences, thus having short-term memory. Long short-term memory (Hochreiter and 
Schmidhuber 1997), is an RNN architecture with feedback connections, designed to regulate the flow of information. LSTMs are a variant of the RNN that are explicitly designed to learn long-term dependencies. A single LSTM unit is composed of an input gate, a cell, a forget gate (sigmoid layer and a tanh layer), and an output gate (Figure 1). The gates control the flow of information in and out of the LSTM cell. LSTMs are best suited for time-ser ies forecasting. In the forget gate, the input from 
the previous hidden state is passed through a sigmoi d function along with the input from the current 
state to generate forget gate output 𝑓
௧. The sigmoid function regulates values between 0 and 1; values 
closer to 0 are discarded and only values closer to 1 are considered. The input gate is used to update 
the cell state. Values from the previous hidden  state and current state are simultaneously passed 
through a sigmoid function and a tanh function, and the output ( 𝑖௧ and 𝑐 ̃௧) from the two activation 
functions are multiplied. In this process, the sigm oid function decides which information is important 
to keep from the tanh output.  
 
Figure 1. Architecture of a long shor t-term memory (LSTM) cell. +: “plus” operation; ◉: “Hadamard 
product” operation; 𝜎: “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function.  
The previous cell state value is  multiplied with the forget gate output and then added pointwise 
with the output from the input gate to generate the new cell state 𝑐௧, as shown in Equation (1). The 
output gate operation consists of two steps: first,  the previous hidden state and current input values 
are passed through a sigmoid function; and secondly , the last obtained cell state values are passed 
through a tanh function. Finally, the tanh output and the sigmoid output are multiplied to produce 
the new hidden state, which is carried over to th e next step. Thus, the forget gate, input gate, and 
output gate decide what information to forget, wh at information to add from the current step, and 
what information to carry forward respectively. 
 𝑐௧ൌ𝑓௧.𝑐௧ିଵ൅𝑖 ௧.𝑐̃௧   (1) 
 : “Hadamard
product” operation; : “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function.
The previous cell state value is multiplied with the forget gate output and then added pointwise
with the output from the input gate to generate the new cell state ct,as shown in Equation (1). The
output gate operation consists of two steps: ﬁrst, the previous hidden state and current input values
are passed through a sigmoid function; and secondly, the last obtained cell state values are passed
through a tanh function. Finally, the tanh output and the sigmoid output are multiplied to produce
the new hidden state, which is carried over to the next step. Thus, the forget gate, input gate, and
output gate decide what information to forget, what information to add from the current step, and
what information to carry forward respectively.
ct=ft.ct 1+it.ect (1)

==== Page 4 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 4 of 16
GRU, introduced by Cho et al. (2014), solves the problem of the vanishing gradient with a standard
RNN. GRU is similar to LSTM, but it combines the forget and the input gates of the LSTM into a single
update gate. The GRU further merges the cell state and the hidden state. A GRU unit consists of a
cell containing multiple operations which are repeated and each of the operations could be a neural
network. Figure 2 below shows the structure of a GRU unit consisting of an update gate, reset gate,
and a current memory content. These gates enable a GRU unit to store values in the memory for
a certain amount of time and use these values to carry information forward, when required, to the
current state to update at a future date. In Figure 2 below, the update gate is represented by zt, where
at each step, the input xtand the output from the previous unit ht 1are multiplied by the weight Wz
and added together, and a sigmoid function is applied to get an output between 0 and 1. The update
gate addresses the vanishing gradient problem as the model learns how much information to pass
forward. The reset gate is represented by rtin Equation (2), where a similar operation as input gate is
carried out, but this gate in the model is used to determine how much of the past information to forget.
The current memory content is denoted by h0
t, where xtis multiplied by Wand rtis multiplied by ht 1
element wise (Hadamard product operation) to pass only the relevant information. Finally, a tanh
activation function is applied to the summation. The ﬁnal memory in the GRU unit is denoted by ht,
which holds the information for the current unit and passes it on to the network. The computation in
the ﬁnal step is given in Equation (2) below. As shown in Equation (2), if ztis close to 0 ((1 zt) close to
1), then most of the current content will be irrelevant and the network will pass the majority of the past
information and vice versa.
zt=(Wz.[ht 1,xt])
rt=(Wr.[ht 1,xt])
eht=tan h(W.[rt.ht 1,xt])
ht=(1 zt).ht 1+zt.ht (2)
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 17 
 GRU, introduced by Cho et al. (2014), solves the problem of the vanishing gradient with a 
standard RNN. GRU is similar to LSTM, but it combines the forget and the input gates of the LSTM into a single update gate. The GRU further merges  the cell state and the hidden state. A GRU unit 
consists of a cell containing multiple operations which are repeated and each of the operations could 
be a neural network. Figure 2 below shows the structure of a GRU unit consisting of an update gate, reset gate, and a current memory content. These gates enable a GRU unit to store values in the 
memory for a certain amount of time and use these values to carry information forward, when required, to the current state to update at a futu re date. In Figure 2 below, the update gate is 
represented by 𝑧
௧, where at each step, the input 𝑥௧ and the output from the previous unit ℎ௧ିଵ are 
multiplied by the weight 𝑊௭ and added together, and a sigmoid function is applied to get an output 
between 0 and 1. The update gate addresses the va nishing gradient problem as the model learns how 
much information to pass forward. The reset gate is represented by 𝑟௧ in Equation (2), where a 
similar operation as input gate is carried out, but this gate in the model is used to determine how 
much of the past information to forget. The current memory content is denoted by ℎ௧ᇱ, where 𝑥௧ is 
multiplied by W and 𝑟௧ is multiplied by ℎ௧ିଵ element wise (Hadamard product operation) to pass 
only the relevant information. Finally, a tanh activation function is applied to the summation. The final memory in the GRU unit is denoted by ℎ
௧, which holds the information for the current unit and 
passes it on to the network. The computation in the final step is given in Equation (2) below. As 
shown in Equation (2), if 𝑧௧ is close to 0 ((1 − 𝑧௧) close to 1), then most of the current content will be 
irrelevant and the network will pass the majority  of the past information and vice versa.  
 
Figure 2. Architecture of a gated recurring unit (GRU) unit. +: “plus” operation; ◉: “Hadamard 
product” operation; 𝜎: “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function. 
𝑧௧ൌ 𝜎 ሺ 𝑊 ௭.ሾℎ௧ିଵ,𝑥௧ሿሻ  
𝑟௧ൌ 𝜎 ሺ 𝑊 ௥.ሾℎ௧ିଵ,𝑥௧ሿሻ  
ℎ෨௧ൌt a n h  ሺ 𝑊 . ൣ 𝑟 ௧.ℎ௧ିଵ,𝑥௧൧ሻ  
 ℎ௧ൌሺ1െ𝑧 ௧ሻ.ℎ௧ିଵ൅𝑧 ௧.ℎ௧  (2) 
Both LSTM and GRU are efficient at addressing the problem of vanishing gradient that occurs 
in long sequence models. GRUs have fewer tensor operations and are speedier to train than LSTMs 
(Chung et al. 2014). The neural network models considered for the Bitcoin price prediction are simple 
neural network (NN), LSTM, and GRU. The neur al networks were trained with optimized 
hyperparameters and tested on the test set. Finally, the best performing model with lowest root mean 
squared error (RMSE) value was consider ed for portfolio strategy execution. 
Figure 2. Architecture of a gated recurring unit (GRU) unit. +: “plus” operation;
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 17 
 architecture. For application purposes in algo rithmic trading, we implemented our proposed 
architecture to test two simple trading strategies for profitability.    
2. Methodology  
A survey of the current literature on neural ne tworks, reveals that traditional neural networks 
have shortcomings in effectively using prior inform ation for future predictions (Wang et al. 2015). 
RNN is a class of neural networks which uses thei r internal state memory for processing sequences. 
However, RNNs on their own are not capable of learning long-term dependencies and they often 
suffer from short-term memory. With long sequences,  especially in time series modelling and textual 
analysis, RNNs suffer from vanishing gradient problems during back propagation (Hochreiter 1998; Pascanu et al. 2013). If the gradient value shrinks to  a very small value, then the RNNs fail to learn 
longer past sequences, thus having short-term memory. Long short-term memory (Hochreiter and 
Schmidhuber 1997), is an RNN architecture with feedback connections, designed to regulate the flow of information. LSTMs are a variant of the RNN that are explicitly designed to learn long-term dependencies. A single LSTM unit is composed of an input gate, a cell, a forget gate (sigmoid layer and a tanh layer), and an output gate (Figure 1). The gates control the flow of information in and out of the LSTM cell. LSTMs are best suited for time-ser ies forecasting. In the forget gate, the input from 
the previous hidden state is passed through a sigmoi d function along with the input from the current 
state to generate forget gate output 𝑓
௧. The sigmoid function regulates values between 0 and 1; values 
closer to 0 are discarded and only values closer to 1 are considered. The input gate is used to update 
the cell state. Values from the previous hidden  state and current state are simultaneously passed 
through a sigmoid function and a tanh function, and the output ( 𝑖௧ and 𝑐 ̃௧) from the two activation 
functions are multiplied. In this process, the sigm oid function decides which information is important 
to keep from the tanh output.  
 
Figure 1. Architecture of a long shor t-term memory (LSTM) cell. +: “plus” operation; ◉: “Hadamard 
product” operation; 𝜎: “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function.  
The previous cell state value is  multiplied with the forget gate output and then added pointwise 
with the output from the input gate to generate the new cell state 𝑐௧, as shown in Equation (1). The 
output gate operation consists of two steps: first,  the previous hidden state and current input values 
are passed through a sigmoid function; and secondly , the last obtained cell state values are passed 
through a tanh function. Finally, the tanh output and the sigmoid output are multiplied to produce 
the new hidden state, which is carried over to th e next step. Thus, the forget gate, input gate, and 
output gate decide what information to forget, wh at information to add from the current step, and 
what information to carry forward respectively. 
 𝑐௧ൌ𝑓௧.𝑐௧ିଵ൅𝑖 ௧.𝑐̃௧   (1) 
 : “Hadamard
product” operation; : “sigmoid” function; tanh: “tanh” function.
Both LSTM and GRU are e cient at addressing the problem of vanishing gradient that occurs
in long sequence models. GRUs have fewer tensor operations and are speedier to train than LSTMs
(Chung et al. 2014). The neural network models considered for the Bitcoin price prediction are
simple neural network (NN), LSTM, and GRU. The neural networks were trained with optimized
hyperparameters and tested on the test set. Finally, the best performing model with lowest root mean
squared error (RMSE) value was considered for portfolio strategy execution.

==== Page 5 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 5 of 16
3. Data Collection and Feature Engineering
Data for the present study was collected from several sources. We have selected features that may
be driving Bitcoin prices and have performed feature engineering to obtain independent variables
for future price prediction. Bitcoin prices are driven by a combination of various endogenous
and exogenous factors (Bouri et al. 2017). Bitcoin time series data in USD were obtained from
bitcoincharts.com. The key features considered in the present study were Bitcoin price, Bitcoin daily lag
returns, price volatility, miners’ revenue, transaction volume, transaction fees, hash rate, money supply,
block size, and Metcalfe-UTXO. Additional features of broader economic and ﬁnancial indicators that
may impact the prices are interest rates in the U.S. treasury bond-yields, gold price, VIX volatility
index, S&P dollar returns, U.S. treasury bonds, and VIX volatility data were used to investigate the
characteristics of Bitcoin investors. Moving average convergence divergence (MACD) was constructed
to explore how moving averages can predict future Bitcoin prices. The roles of Bitcoin as a ﬁnancial
asset, medium of exchange, and as a hedge have been studied in the past (Selmi et al. 2018; Dyhrberg
2016). Dyhrberg (2016) proved that there are several similarities of Bitcoin with that of gold and dollar
indicating short term hedging capabilities. Selmi et al. (2018) studied the role of Bitcoin and gold in
hedging against oil price movements and concluded that Bitcoin can be used for diversiﬁcation and for
risk management purposes.
The speculative bubble in cryptocurrency markets are often driven by internet search and
regulatory actions by di erent countries (Filippi 2014). In that aspect, internet search data can be
considered important for predicting Bitcoin future prices (Cheah and Fry 2015; Yelowitz and Wilson
2015). Search data was obtained from Google trends for the keyword “bitcoin”. Price of cryptocurrency
Ripple (XRP), which is the third biggest cryptocurrency in terms of market capitalization, was also
considered as an exogenous factor for Bitcoin price prediction (Cagli 2019). Bitcoin data for all the
exogenous and endogenous factors for the period 01 /01/2010 to 30 /06/2019 were collected and a total of
3469 time series observations were obtained. Figure 3 depicts the time series plot for Bitcoin prices. We
provide the deﬁnitions of the 20 features and the data sources in Appendix A.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 17 
 3. Data Collection and Feature Engineering 
Data for the present study was collected from se veral sources. We have selected features that 
may be driving Bitcoin prices and have perfor med feature engineering to obtain independent 
variables for future price prediction. Bitcoin prices are driven by a combination of various 
endogenous and exogenous factors (Bouri et al. 2017) . Bitcoin time series data in USD were obtained 
from bitcoincharts.com. The key features considered in the present study were Bitcoin price, Bitcoin 
daily lag returns, price volatility, miners’ revenue,  transaction volume, transaction fees, hash rate, 
money supply, block size, and Metcalfe-UTXO. A dditional features of broader economic and 
financial indicators that may impact the prices are interest rates in the U.S. treasury bond-yields, gold price, VIX volatility index, S&P dollar returns, U.S. treasury bonds, and VIX volatility data were used 
to investigate the characteristics of Bitcoin investors. Moving average convergence divergence 
(MACD) was constructed to explore how moving aver ages can predict future Bitcoin prices. The roles 
of Bitcoin as a financial asset, medium of exchange, and as a hedge have been studied in the past (Selmi et al. 2018; Dyhrberg 2016). Dyhrberg (2016) proved that there are several similarities of Bitcoin 
with that of gold and dollar indicating short term hedging capabilities. Selmi et al. (2018) studied the role of Bitcoin and gold in hedging against oil price movements and concluded that Bitcoin can be 
used for diversification and for risk management purposes. 
The speculative bubble in cryptocurrency markets are often driven by internet search and 
regulatory actions by different countries (Filippi 2014). In that aspect, internet search data can be considered important for predicting Bitcoin future prices (Cheah and John 2015; Yelowitz and Wilson 2015). Search data was obtain ed from Google trends for the keyword “bitcoin”. Price of 
cryptocurrency Ripple (XRP), which is the third biggest cryptocurrency in terms of market capitalization, was also considered as an exogenous factor for Bitcoin price prediction (Cagli 2019). Bitcoin data for all the exogenous and endogeno us factors for the period 01/01/2010 to 30/06/2019 
were collected and a total of 3469 time series obse rvations were obtained. Figure 3 depicts the time 
series plot for Bitcoin prices. We provide the defin itions of the 20 features and the data sources in 
Appendix A. 
 
Figure 3. Time series plot of Bitcoin price in USD. 
3.1. Data Pre-Processing 
Data from different sources were merged an d certain assumptions were made. Since, 
cryptocurrencies get traded twenty-four hours a da y and seven days a week, we set the end of day 
price at 12 a.m. midnight for each trading day. It is also assumed that the stock, bond, and commodity prices maintain Friday’s price on the weekends, th us ignoring after-market trading. The data-set 
values were normalized by first demeaning each da ta-series and then dividing it by its standard 
Figure 3. Time series plot of Bitcoin price in USD.
3.1. Data Pre-Processing
Data from di erent sources were merged and certain assumptions were made. Since,
cryptocurrencies get traded twenty-four hours a day and seven days a week, we set the end of
day price at 12 a.m. midnight for each trading day. It is also assumed that the stock, bond, and
commodity prices maintain Friday’s price on the weekends, thus ignoring after-market trading. The
data-set values were normalized by ﬁrst demeaning each data-series and then dividing it by its standard
deviation. After normalizing the data, the dataset is divided into a training set: observations between

==== Page 6 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 6 of 16
1 January 2010–30 June 2018; a validation set: observations between 1 July 2018–31 December 2018;
and a test set: observations between 1 January 2019–30 June 2019. A lookback period of 15, 30, 45, and
60 days were considered to predict the future one-day price and the returns are evaluated accordingly.
3.2. Feature Selection
One of the most important aspects of data mining process is feature selection. Feature selection is
basically concerned with extracting useful features /patterns from data to make it easier for machine
learning models to perform their predictions. To check the behavior of the features with respect to
Bitcoin prices, we plotted the data for all the 20 features for the entire time period, as shown in Figure 4
below. A closer look at the plot reveals that the endogenous features are more correlated with Bitcoin
prices than the exogenous features. For the exogenous features, Google trends, interest-rates, and
Ripple price seems to be the most correlated.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 17 
 deviation.  After normalizing the data, the dataset is divided into a training set: observations between 
1 January 2010–30 June 2018; a validation set: ob servations between 1 July 2018–31 December 2018; 
and a test set: observations between 1 January 2019–30 June 2019. A lookback period of 15, 30, 45, and 
60 days were considered to predict the futu re one-day price and the returns are evaluated 
accordingly. 
3.2. Feature Selection 
One of the most important aspects of data mining process is feature selection. Feature selection 
is basically concerned with extracting useful features /patterns from data to make it easier for machine 
learning models to perform their predictions. To ch eck the behavior of the features with respect to 
Bitcoin prices, we plotted the data for all the 20 feat ures for the entire time period, as shown in Figure 
4 below. A closer look at the plot reveals that the endogenous features are more correlated with 
Bitcoin prices than the exogenous features. For the exogenous features, Google trends, interest-rates, 
and Ripple price seems to be the most correlated.  
 
Figure 4. Plot showing the behavior of independent vari ables with Bitcoin price. The blue line plots 
the different features used for Bitcoin price predicti on and the orange line plots the Bitcoin price over 
time. Abbreviations: MACD, Moving  average convergence divergence. 
Multicollinearity is often an issue in statistical learning when the features are highly correlated 
among themselves, and thus, the final prediction ou tput is based on a much smaller number of 
features, which may lead to biased inferences (Nawata and Nagase 1996).  To find the most 
Figure 4. Plot showing the behavior of independent variables with Bitcoin price. The blue line plots
the di erent features used for Bitcoin price prediction and the orange line plots the Bitcoin price over
time. Abbreviations: MACD, Moving average convergence divergence.
Multicollinearity is often an issue in statistical learning when the features are highly correlated
among themselves, and thus, the ﬁnal prediction output is based on a much smaller number of features,
which may lead to biased inferences (Nawata and Nagase). To ﬁnd the most appropriate features for
Bitcoin price prediction, the variance inﬂation factor (VIF) was calculated for the predictor variables
(see Table 1). VIF provides a measure of how much the variance of an estimated regression coe cient is

==== Page 7 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 7 of 16
increased due to multicollinearity. Features with VIF values greater than 10 (Hair et al. 1992; Kennedy
1992; Marquardt 1970; Neter et al. 1989) is not considered for analysis. A set of 15 features were ﬁnally
selected after dropping Bitcoin miner revenue, Metcalf-UTXO, interest rates, lock size and U.S. bond
yields 2-years, and 10-years di erence.
Table 1. Variance inﬂation factor (VIF) for predictor variables.
Predictor Variables VIF Predictor Variables VIF
Bitcoin daily lag returns 1.023 Block size 30.208
Daily transaction volume 2.823 MACD histogram 1.27
Price volatility 1.13 S&P lag returns 1.005
Transaction fees 4.671 VIX 1.671
Miner revenue 28.664 Dollar index 6.327
Hash rate 2.694 Gold 5.267
Interest rates 49.718 2 Yr yield 3.074
Google trend 9.847 10 Yr yield 8.101
Money supply 8.462 Ripple price 5.866
Metcalf UTXO 12.003 Di 2 yr–10 yr di  11.283
4. Model Implementation and Results
Even though Bitcoin prices follow a time series sequence, machine learning models are considered
due to their performance reported in the literature (Karasu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020). This approach
serves the purpose to measure the relative prediction power of the shallow /deep learning models, as
compared to the traditional models. The Bitcoin price graph in Figure 3 appears to be non-stationary
with an element of seasonality and trend, and neural network models are the best to capture that. At
ﬁrst, a simple NN architecture was trained to explore the prediction power of non-linear architectures.
A set of shallow learning models was then used to predict the Bitcoin prices using various variants of
the RNN, as described in Section 2. RNN with a LSTM and GRU with dropout and recurrent dropouts
were trained and implemented. Keras package (Chollet 2015) was used with Python 3.6 to build, train,
and analyze the models on the test set. A deep learning model implementation approach to forecasting
is a trade-o between bias and variance, the two main sources of forecast errors (Yu et al. 2006). Bias
error is attributed to inappropriate data assumptions, while variance error is attributed to model data
sensitivity (Yu et al. 2006). A low-variance high-bias model leads to underﬁtting, while a low-bias
high-variance model leads to overﬁtting (Lawrence et al. 1997). Hence, the forecasting approach aimed
to ﬁnd an optimum balance between bias and variance to simultaneously achieve low bias and low
variance. In the present study, a high training loss denotes a higher bias, while a higher validation
loss represents a higher variance. RMSE is preferred over mean absolute error (MAE) for model error
evaluation because RMSE gives relatively high weight to large errors.
Each of the individual models were optimized with hyperparameter tuning for price prediction.
The main hyperparameters which require subjective inputs are the learning rate alpha, number of
iterations, number of hidden layers, choice of activation function, number of input nodes, drop-out
ratio, and batch-size. A set of activation functions were tested, and hyperbolic tangent (TanH) was
chosen for optimal learning based on the RMSE error on the test set. TanH su ers from vanishing
gradient problem; however, the second derivative can sustain for a long time before converging to
zero, unlike the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), which improves RNN model prediction. Initially, the
temporal length, i.e., the look-back period, was taken to be 30 days for the RNN models. The 30-day
period was kept in consonance with the standard trading calendar of a month for investment portfolios.
Additionally, the best models were also evaluated with a lookback period for 15, 45, and 60 days.
The Learning rate is one of the most important hyperparameters that can e ectively be used for
bias-variance trade-o . However, not much improvement in training was observed by altering the
learning rate, thus the default value in the Keras package (Chollet 2015) wa used. We trained all the
models with the Adam optimization method (Kingma and Ba 2015). To reduce complex co-adaptations

==== Page 8 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 8 of 16
in the hidden units resulting in overﬁtting (Srivastava et al. 2014), dropout was introduced in the
LSTM and GRU layers. Thus, for each training sample the network was re-adjusted and a new set of
neurons were dropped out. For both LSTM and GRU architecture, a recurrent dropout rate (Gal and
Ghahramani 2016) of 0.1 was used. For the two hidden layers GRU, a dropout of 0.1 was additionally
used along with the recurrent dropout of 0.1. The dropout and recurrent dropout rates were optimized
to ensure that the training data was large enough to not be memorized in spite of the noise, and to
avoid overﬁtting (Srivastava et al. 2014). For the simple NN, two dense layers were used with hidden
nodes 25 and 1. The LSTM layer was modelled with one LSTM layer (50 nodes) and one dense layer (1
node). The simple GRU and the GRU with recurrent dropout architecture comprised of one GRU layer
(50 nodes) and one dense layer with 1 node. The ﬁnal GRU architecture was tuned with two GRU
layers (50 nodes and 10 nodes) with a dropout and recurrent dropout of 0.1. The optimized batch size
for the neural network and the RNN models are determined to be 125 and 100, respectively. A higher
batch size led to a higher training and validation loss during the learning process.
Figure 5 shows the training and validation loss for the neural network models. The di erence
between training loss and validation loss reduces with a dropout and a recurrent dropout for the one
GRU layer model (Figure 5, bottom middle). However, with the addition of an extra GRU layer, the
dierence between the training and validation loss increased. After training, all the neural network
models were tested on the test data. The RMSE for all the models on the train and test data are shown in
Table 1. As seen from Table 2, the LSTM architecture performed better than the simple NN architecture
due to memory retention capabilities (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). As seen from Table 2 the
GRU model with a recurrent dropout generates an RMSE of 0.014 on the training set and 0.017 on the
test set. RNN-GRU performs better than LSTM, and a plausible explanation is the fact that GRUs
are computationally faster with a lesser number of gates and tensor operations. The GRU controls
the ﬂow of information like the LSTM unit; however, the GRU has no memory unit and it exposes
the full hidden content without any control (Chung et al. 2014). GRUs also tend to perform better
than LSTM on less training data (Kaiser and Sutskever 2016) as in the present case, while LSTMs are
more e cient in remembering longer sequences (Yin et al. 2017). We also found that the recurrent
dropout in the GRU layer helped reduce the RMSE on the test data, and the di erence of RMSE
between training and test data was the minimum for the GRU model with recurrent dropout. These
results indicate that the GRU with recurrent dropout is the best performing model for our problem.
Recurrent dropouts help to mask some of the output from the ﬁrst GRU layer, which can be thought as
a variational inference in RNN (Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Merity et al. 2017). The Diebold-Mariano
statistical test (Diebold and S 1995 ) was conducted to analyze if the di erence in prediction accuracy
between a pair of models in decreasing order of RMSE is statistically signiﬁcant. The p-values, as
reported in Tables 2 and 3, indicate that each of the models reported in decreasing order of RMSE, has
a signiﬁcantly improved RMSE than its previous model in predicting Bitcoin prices. We also trained
the GRU recurrent dropout model with a lookback period of 15, 45, and 60 days and the results are
reported in Table 3. It can be concluded from Table 3 that the lookback period for 30 days is the optimal
period for the best RMSE results. Figure 6 shows the GRU model with recurrent dropout predicted
Bitcoin price in the test data, as compared to the original data. The model predicted price is higher
than the original price in the ﬁrst few months of 2019; however, when the Bitcoin price shot up in
June–July 2019, the model was able to learn this trend e ectively.
Table 2. Train test root mean squared error (RMSE) of 30 days lookback period for di erent models.
Models RMSE Train RMSE Test p-Value
Neural Network 0.020 0.031
LSTM 0.010 0.024 0.0000
GRU 0.010 0.019 0.0000
GRU-Dropout 0.014 0.017 0.0012
GRU-Dropout-GRU 0.012 0.034 0.0000

==== Page 9 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 9 of 16
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17 
 the learning rate, thus the default value in the Ke ras package (Chollet 2015) wa used. We trained all 
the models with the Adam optimization method (Kingma and Ba 2015). To reduce complex co-
adaptations in the hidden units resulting in overfitting (Srivastava et al. 2014), dropout was 
introduced in the LSTM and GRU layers. Thus, for each training sample the network was re-adjusted 
and a new set of neurons were dropped out. For both LSTM and GRU architecture, a recurrent dropout rate (Gal and Ghahramani 2016a) of 0.1 was used. For the two hidden layers GRU, a dropout 
of 0.1 was additionally used along with the recu rrent dropout of 0.1. Th e dropout and recurrent 
dropout rates were optimized to ensure that the tr aining data was large enough to not be memorized 
in spite of the noise, and to avoid overfitting (S rivastava et al. 2014). For the simple NN, two dense 
layers were used with hidden nodes 25 and 1. The LSTM layer was modelled with one LSTM layer 
(50 nodes) and one dense layer (1 node). The simple GRU and the GRU with recurrent dropout 
architecture comprised of one GRU layer (50 nodes)  and one dense layer with 1 node. The final GRU 
architecture was tuned with two GRU layers (50 nodes and 10 nodes) with a dropout and recurrent 
dropout of 0.1. The optimized ba tch size for the neural network and the RNN models are determined 
to be 125 and 100, respectively. A higher batch size led to a higher training and validation loss during the learning process.  
 
Figure 5. Training and validation loss for simple neural network (NN) (top left), LSTM with dropout 
(top right), GRU (bottom left), GRU with a recurre nt dropout (bottom middle), and GRU with dropout 
and recurrent dropout (bottom right). 
Figure 5 shows the training and validation loss for the neural network models. The difference 
between training loss and validation loss reduces with a dropout and a recurrent dropout for the one 
GRU layer model (Figure 5, bottom middle). However, with the addition of an extra GRU layer, the 
difference between the training and validation loss  increased. After training, all the neural network 
models were tested on the test data. The RMSE for all the models on the train and test data are shown in Table 1. As seen from Table 2, the LSTM ar chitecture performed better than the simple NN 
architecture due to memory retention capabilities (Hochreiter and Schmidhube r 1997). As seen from 
Table 2 the GRU model with a recurrent dropout gene rates an RMSE of 0.014 on the training set and 
0.017 on the test set. RNN-GRU performs better than LSTM, and a plausible explanation is the fact that GRUs are computationally faster with a lesser number of gates and tensor operations. The GRU 
Figure 5. Training and validation loss for simple neural network (NN) (top left), LSTM with dropout
(top right), GRU (bottom left), GRU with a recurrent dropout (bottom middle), and GRU with dropout
and recurrent dropout (bottom right).
Table 3. Train test RMSE for GRU recurrent model.
Lookback Period (Days) RMSE Train RMSE Test p-Value
15 0.012 0.016
45 0.011 0.019 0.0010
60 0.011 0.017 0.0006
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 17 
 Most Bitcoin exchanges, unlike stock exchanges, do  now allow short selling of Bitcoin, yet this 
results in higher volatility and regulatory risks (Filippi 2014). Additionally, volatility depends on how close the model predictions are to the actual market price of Bitcoin at every point of time. As can be 
seen from Figure 7, Bitcoin prices went down during early June 2019, and the buy-sell strategy 
correctly predicted the fall, with the trader sellin g the Bitcoins holding to keep the cash before 
investing again when the price starts rising from mid-June. In comparison, due to short selling and 
taking long positions simultaneously, the long-short strategy suffered during the same period of time 
with very slow increase in portfolio value. Howeve r, long-short strategies might be more powerful 
when we consider a portfolio consisting of multiple cryptocurrencies where investors can take simultaneous long and short positions in currencies, which have significant growth potential and 
overvalued currencies. 
 
Figure 6. Bitcoin price as predicted by the GRU one-laye r model with dropout an d recurrent dropout. 
 
Figure 7. Above shows the change in portfolio value ov er time when the strategies long-short ( Left) 
and buy-sell ( Right ) are implemented on the test data. Due to short selling, daily settlement the long-
short portfolio incurs transaction fees which reduce s growth and increases vola tility in the portfolio. 
6. Conclusions 
There have been a considerable number of studies on Bitcoin price prediction using machine 
learning and time-series analysis (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2018; Karakoyun and C ̧ibikdiken 2018; 
Jang and Lee 2017; McNally et al. 2018). However, most of these studies have been mostly based on 
Figure 6. Bitcoin price as predicted by the GRU one-layer model with dropout and recurrent dropout.

==== Page 10 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 10 of 16
5. Portfolio Strategy
We implement two trading strategies to evaluate our results in portfolio management of
cryptocurrencies. For simplicity, we considered only Bitcoin trading and we assumed that the
trader only buys and sells based on the signals derived from quantitative models. Based on our test
set evaluation, we have considered the GRU one layer with recurrent dropout as our best model for
implementing trading strategies. Two types of trading strategies were implemented, as discussed in
this section. The ﬁrst strategy was a long-short strategy, wherein the buy signal predicted from the
model will lead to buying the Bitcoin and a sell signal will essentially lead to short-selling the Bitcoin
at the beginning of the day based on the model predictions for that day. If the model predicted price
on a given day is lower than the previous day, then the trader will short sell the Bitcoin and cover them
at the end of the day. An initial portfolio value of 1 is considered and the transaction fees is taken to be
0.8% of the invested or sold amount. Due to daily settlement, the long-short strategy is expected to
incur signiﬁcant transaction costs which may reduce the portfolio value. The second strategy was a
buy-sell strategy where the trader goes long when a buy signal is triggered and sell all the Bitcoins
when a sell signal is generated. Once the trader sells all the coins in the portfolio, he /she waits for
the next positive signal to invest again. When a buy signal occurs, the trader invests in Bitcoin and
remains invested till the next sell signal is generated.
Most Bitcoin exchanges, unlike stock exchanges, do now allow short selling of Bitcoin, yet this
results in higher volatility and regulatory risks (Filippi 2014). Additionally, volatility depends on how
close the model predictions are to the actual market price of Bitcoin at every point of time. As can
be seen from Figure 7, Bitcoin prices went down during early June 2019, and the buy-sell strategy
correctly predicted the fall, with the trader selling the Bitcoins holding to keep the cash before investing
again when the price starts rising from mid-June. In comparison, due to short selling and taking long
positions simultaneously, the long-short strategy su ered during the same period of time with very
slow increase in portfolio value. However, long-short strategies might be more powerful when we
consider a portfolio consisting of multiple cryptocurrencies where investors can take simultaneous long
and short positions in currencies, which have signiﬁcant growth potential and overvalued currencies.
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 17 
 Most Bitcoin exchanges, unlike stock exchanges, do  now allow short selling of Bitcoin, yet this 
results in higher volatility and regulatory risks (Filippi 2014). Additionally, volatility depends on how close the model predictions are to the actual market price of Bitcoin at every point of time. As can be 
seen from Figure 7, Bitcoin prices went down during early June 2019, and the buy-sell strategy 
correctly predicted the fall, with the trader sellin g the Bitcoins holding to keep the cash before 
investing again when the price starts rising from mid-June. In comparison, due to short selling and 
taking long positions simultaneously, the long-short strategy suffered during the same period of time 
with very slow increase in portfolio value. Howeve r, long-short strategies might be more powerful 
when we consider a portfolio consisting of multiple cryptocurrencies where investors can take simultaneous long and short positions in currencies, which have significant growth potential and 
overvalued currencies. 
 
Figure 6. Bitcoin price as predicted by the GRU one-laye r model with dropout an d recurrent dropout. 
 
Figure 7. Above shows the change in portfolio value ov er time when the strategies long-short ( Left) 
and buy-sell ( Right ) are implemented on the test data. Due to short selling, daily settlement the long-
short portfolio incurs transaction fees which reduce s growth and increases vola tility in the portfolio. 
6. Conclusions 
There have been a considerable number of studies on Bitcoin price prediction using machine 
learning and time-series analysis (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2018; Karakoyun and C ̧ibikdiken 2018; 
Jang and Lee 2017; McNally et al. 2018). However, most of these studies have been mostly based on 
Figure 7. Above shows the change in portfolio value over time when the strategies long-short ( Left) and
buy-sell ( Right ) are implemented on the test data. Due to short selling, daily settlement the long-short
portfolio incurs transaction fees which reduces growth and increases volatility in the portfolio.
6. Conclusions
There have been a considerable number of studies on Bitcoin price prediction using machine
learning and time-series analysis (Wang et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2018; Karakoyun and Çıbıkdiken 2018;
Jang and Lee 2017; McNally et al. 2018). However, most of these studies have been mostly based on
predicting the Bitcoin prices based on pre-decided models with a limited number of features like price

==== Page 11 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 11 of 16
volatility, order book, technical indicators, price of gold, and the VIX. The present study explores
Bitcoin price prediction based on a collective and exhaustive list of features with ﬁnancial linkages, as
shown in Appendix A. The basis of any investment has always been wealth creation either through
fundamental investment, or technical speculation, and cryptocurrencies are no exception to this. In
this study, feature engineering is performed taking into account whether Bitcoin could be used as an
alternative investment that o ers investors diversiﬁcation beneﬁts and a di erent investment avenue
when the traditional means of investment are not doing well. This study considers a holistic approach
to select the predictor variables that might be helpful in learning future Bitcoin price trends. The
U.S. treasury two-year and ten-year yields are the benchmark indicators for short-term and long-term
investment in bond markets, hence a change in these benchmarks could very well propel investors
towards alternative investment avenues such as the Bitcoin. Similar methodology can be undertaken
for gold, S&P returns and dollar index. Whether it is good news or bad news, increasing attraction or
momentum-based speculation, google trends, and VIX price data are perfect for studying this aspect of
the inﬂuence on the prices.
We also conclude that recurrent neural network models such as LSTM and GRU outperform
traditional machine learning models. With limited data, neural networks like LSTM and GRU can
regulate past information to learn e ectively from non-linear patterns. Deep models require accurate
training and hyperparameter tuning to yield results, which might be computationally extensive for
large datasets unlike conventional time-series approaches. However, for stock price prediction or
cryptocurrency price prediction, market data are always limited and computational complexity is not
a concern, and thus shallow learning models can be e ectively used in practice. These beneﬁts will
likely contribute signiﬁcantly to quantitative ﬁnance in the coming years.
In deep learning literature, LSTM has been traditionally used to analyze time-series. GRU
architecture on the other hand, seems to be performing better than the LSTM model in our analysis.
The simplicity of the GRU model, where the forgetting and updating is occurring simultaneously,
was found to be working well in Bitcoin price prediction. Adding a recurrent dropout improves the
performance of the GRU architecture; however, further studies need to be undertaken to explore the
dropout phenomenon in GRU architectures. Two types of investment strategies have been implemented
with our trained GRU architecture. Results show that when machine learning models are implemented
with full understanding, it can be beneﬁcial to the investment industry for ﬁnancial gains and portfolio
management. In the present case, recurrent machine learning models performed much better than
traditional ones in price prediction; thus, making the investment strategies valuable. With proper back
testing of each of these models, they can contribute to manage portfolio risk and reduce ﬁnancial losses.
Nonetheless, a signiﬁcant improvement over the current study can be achieved if a bigger data set
is available. Convolutional neural network (CNN) has also been used to predict ﬁnancial returns in
forecasting daily oil futures prices (Luo et al. 2019). To that end, a potential future research study can
explore the performance of CNN architectures to predict Bitcoin prices.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, data curation, validation, and draft writing, S.K.; methodology, formal
analysis, draft preparation, and editing, A.D.; draft writing, plots, M.B. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the sta at the Haas School of Business, University of
California Berkeley and Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh for their support. A.D.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest. The views expressed are personal.

==== Page 12 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 12 of 16
Appendix A
Table A1. Deﬁnition of variables and data source.
Features Deﬁnition Source
Bitcoin Price Bitcoin prices. https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
BTC Price VolatilityThe annualized daily volatility of price changes. Price volatility
is computed as the standard deviation of daily returns, scaled by
the square root of 365 to annualize, and expressed as a decimal.https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
BTC Miner RevenueTotal value of Coinbase block rewards and transaction fees paid
to miners. Historical data showing (number of bitcoins mined
per day +transaction fees) * market price.https:
//www.quandl.com /data/BCHAIN /
MIREV-Bitcoin-Miners-Revenue
BTC Transaction Volume The number of transactions included in the blockchain each day. https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Transaction FeesTotal amount of Bitcoin Core (BTC) fees earned by all miners in
24-hour period, measured in Bitcoin Core (BTC).https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Hash RateThe number of block solutions computed per second by all
miners on the network.https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Money Supply The amount of Bitcoin Core (BTC) in circulation. https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Metcalfe-UTXOMetcalfe’s Law states that the value of a network is proportional
to the square of the number of participants in the network.https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Block SizeMiners collect Bitcoin Core (BTC) transactions into distinct
packets of data called blocks. Each block is cryptographically
linked to the preceding block, forming a "blockchain." As more
people use the Bitcoin Core (BTC) network for Bitcoin Core
(BTC) transactions, the block size increases.https: //charts.bitcoin.com /btc/
Google Trends This is the month-wise Google search results for the Bitcoins. https: //trends.google.com
Volatility (VIX)VIX is a real-time market index that represents the market’s
expectation of 30-day forward-looking volatility.http://www.cboe.com /products /vix-
index-volatility /vix-options-and-
futures /vix-index /vix-historical-data
Gold price Level Gold price level.https: //www.quandl.com /data/WGC /
GOLD_DAILY_USD-Gold-Prices-
Daily-Currency-USD
US Dollar IndexThe U.S. dollar index (USDX) is a measure of the value of the
U.S. dollar relative to the value of a basket of currencies of the
majority of the U.S.’ most signiﬁcant trading partners.https: //ﬁnance.yahoo.com /quote /DX-Y.
NYB/history?period1 =1262332800&
period2 =1561878000&interval =1d&
ﬁlter=history&frequency =1d
US Bond Yields 2-year /short-term yields.https: //www.quandl.com /data/
USTREASURY /YIELD-Treasury-Yield-
Curve-Rates
US Bond Yields 10-year /long term yields.https: //www.quandl.com /data/
USTREASURY /YIELD-Treasury-Yield-
Curve-Rates
US Bond YieldsDierence between 2 year and 10 year /synonymous with yield
inversion and recession predictionhttps: //www.quandl.com /data/
USTREASURY /YIELD-Treasury-Yield-
Curve-Rates
MACDMACD =12-Period EMA 26-Period EMA. We have taken the data of the MACD with the signal line.
MACD line =12-day EMA Minus 26-day EMA
Signal line =9-day EMA of MACD line
MACD Histogram =MACD line Minus Signal line
Ripple Price The price of an alternative cryptocurrency.https: //coinmarketcap.com /currencies /
ripple /historical-data /?start =20130428&
end=20190924
One Day Lagged S&P
500 Market ReturnsStock market returns.https:
//ﬁnance.yahoo.com /quote /%5EGSPC /
history?period1 =1230796800&
period2 =1568012400&interval =1d&
ﬁlter=history&frequency =1d
Interest RatesThe federal funds rate decide the shape of the future interest
rates in the economy.http://www.fedprimerate.com /
fedfundsrate /federal_funds_rate_
history.htm#current
References
Baek, Chung, and Matt Elbeck. 2015. Bitcoin as an Investment or Speculative Vehicle? A First Look. Applied
Economics Letters 22: 30–34. [CrossRef]

==== Page 13 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 13 of 16
Barrdear, John, and Michael Kumhof. 2016. The Macroeconomics of Central Bank Issued Digital Currencies. SSRN
Electronic Journal. Available online: https: //papers.ssrn.com /sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id =2811208 (accessed
on 2 February 2020).
Baronchelli, Andrea. 2018. The emergence of consensus: A primer. Royal Society Open Science 5: 172189. [CrossRef]
Bech, Morten L., and Rodney Garratt. 2017. Central Bank Cryptocurrencies. BIS Quarterly Review 2017: 5–70.
Blau, Benjamin M. 2017. Price Dynamics and Speculative Trading in Bitcoin. Research in Internatonal Business and
Finance 41: 493–99. [CrossRef]
Blundell-Wignall, Adrian. 2014. The Bitcoin Question: Currency versus Trust-less Transfer Technology. OECD
Working Papers on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions 37: 1.
Bohme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, and Tyler Moore. 2015. Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and
governance. Journal of Economic Perspectives (JEP) 29: 213–38. [CrossRef]
Bouri, Elie, Peter Moln ár, Georges Azzi, and David Roubaud. 2017. On the hedge and safe haven properties of
Bitcoin: Is it really more than a diversiﬁer? Finance Research Letters 20: 192–98. [CrossRef]
Briere, Marie, Kim Oosterlinck, and Ariane Szafarz. 2015. Virtual currency, tangible return: Portfolio diversiﬁcation
with bitcoin. Journal Asset Management 16: 365–73. [CrossRef]
Cagli, Efe C. 2019. Explosive behavior in the prices of Bitcoin and altcoins. Finance Research Letters 29: 398–403.
[CrossRef]
Casey, Michael J., and Paul Vigna. 2015. Bitcoin and the digital-currency revolution. The Wall Street Journal.
Available online: https: //www.wsj.com /articles /the-revolutionary-power-of-digital-currency-1422035061
(accessed on 2 February 2020).
Chang, Pei-Chann, Chen-Hao Liu, Chin-Yuan Fan, Jun-Lin Lin, and Chih-Ming Lai. 2009. An Ensemble of Neural
Networks for Stock Trading Decision Making. In Emerging Intelligent Computing Technology and Applications .
With Aspects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 5755 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin /Heidelberg: Springer,
pp. 1–10. Available online: https: //doi.org /10.1007 /978-3-642-04020-7_1 (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Cheah, Eng-Tuck, and John Fry. 2015. Speculative bubbles in Bitcoin markets? An empirical investigation into the
fundamental value of Bitcoin. Economics Letters 130: 32–36. [CrossRef]
Chen, Zheshi, Chunhong Li, and Wenjun Sun. 2020. Bitcoin price prediction using machine learning: An approach
to sample dimension engineering. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 365: 112395. [CrossRef]
Cho, Kyunghyun, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Bougares Fethi, Schwenk Holger,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder–Decoder for Statistical
Machine Translation. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/1406.1078.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Chollet, Francois. 2015. Keras: Deep Learning for humans. Available online: https: //github.com /keras-team /keras
(accessed on 2 February 2020).
Chong, Eunsuk, Chulwoo Han, and Frank C. Park. 2017. Deep learning networks for stock market analysis and
prediction: methodology, data representations, and case studies. Expert System with Applications 83: 187–205.
[CrossRef]
Chung, Junyoung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyung H. Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical Evaluation of Gated
Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1412.3555.pdf
(accessed on 2 February 2020).
Ciaian, Pavel, Miroslava Rajcaniova, and d’Artis Kancs. 2016. The economics of Bitcoin price formation. Applied
Economics 48: 1799–815. [CrossRef]
Corbet, Shaen, Brian Lucey, Maurice Peat, and Samuel Vigne. 2018. Bitcoin Futures—What use are they? Economics
Letters 172: 23–27. [CrossRef]
Cusumano, Michael A. 2014. The Bitcoin ecosystem. Communications of the ACM 57: 22–24. [CrossRef]
Cybenko, George. 1989. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math. Control Signals Systems
2: 303–14. [CrossRef]
Diebold, Francis X., and Mariano Roberto S. 1995. Comparing Predictive Accuracy. Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 13: 253–63.
Dow, Sheila. 2019. Monetary Reform, Central Banks and Digital Currencies. International Journal of Political
Economy 48: 153–73. [CrossRef]
Dyhrberg, Anne H. 2016. Bitcoin, gold and the dollar-A Garch volatility. Finance Research Letters 16: 85–92.
[CrossRef]

==== Page 14 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 14 of 16
Dwyer, Gerald P . 2015. The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital currencies. Journal of Financial Stability
17: 81–91. [CrossRef]
ElBahrawy, Abeer, Laura Alessandretti, Anne Kandler, Romualdo Pastor-Satorras, and Andrea Baronchelli. 2017.
Evolutionary dynamics of the cryptocurrency market. Royal Society Open Science 4: 170623. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Enke, David, and Suraphan Thawornwong. 2005. The use of data mining and neural networks for forecasting
stock market returns. Expert Systems with Applications 29: 927–40. [CrossRef]
Fama, Marco, Andrea Fumagalli, and Stefano Lucarelli. 2019. Cryptocurrencies, Monetary Policy, and New Forms
of Monetary Sovereignty. International Journal of Political Economy 48: 174–94. [CrossRef]
Fantacci, Luca. 2019. Cryptocurrencies and the Denationalization of Money. International Journal of Political
Economy 48: 105–26. [CrossRef]
Filippi, Primavera De. 2014. Bitcoin: A Regulatory Nightmare to a Libertarian Dream. Internet Policy Review 3.
[CrossRef]
Gajardo, Gabriel, Werner D. Kristjanpoller, and Marcel Minutolo. 2018. Does Bitcoin exhibit the same asymmetric
multifractal cross-correlations with crude oil, gold and DJIA as the Euro, Great British Pound and Yen? Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 109: 195–205.
Gal, Yarin, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2016. Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing Model Uncertainty
in Deep Learning. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1506.02142.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Gal, Yarin, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2016. A theoretically grounded application of dropout in recurrent neural
networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2016: 1019–27.
Gandal, Neil, and Hanna Halaburda. 2016. Can we predict the winner in a market with network e ects?
Competition in cryptocurrency market. Games 7: 16. [CrossRef]
Guo, Tian, Albert Bifet, and Nino Antulov-Fantulin. 2018. Bitcoin volatility forecasting with a glimpse into buy
and sell orders. Paper presented at 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), Singapore,
November 17–20.
Guo, Tian, and Nino Antulov-Fantulin. 2018. Predicting Short-Term Bitcoin Price Fluctuations from Buy and Sell
Orders. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1802.04065v1.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Hair, Joseph F., Rolph E. Anderson, and Ronald L. Tatham. 1992. Multivariate Data Analysis , 3rd ed. New York:
Macmillan.
Hileman, G, and M. Rauchs. 2017. Global Cryptocurrency Bench- marking Study. Cambridge Centre for Alternative
Finance. Available online: https: //www.jbs.cam.ac.uk /ﬁleadmin /user_upload /research /centres /alternative-
ﬁnance /downloads /2017-04-20-global-cryptocurrency-benchmarking-study.pdf (accessed on 2 February
2020).
Hinton, Geo rey E., Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye The. 2006. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets.
Neural Computation 18: 1527–54. [CrossRef]
Hochreiter, Sepp, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation 9: 1735–80.
[CrossRef]
Hochreiter, Sepp. 1998. The Vanishing Gradient Problem During Learning Recurrent Neural Nets and Problem
Solutions. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 6: 107–16. [CrossRef]
Huang, Wei, Yoshiteru Nakamori, and Shou-Yang Wang. 2005. Forecasting stock market movement direction with
support vector machine. Computers & Operations Research 32: 2513–22.
Huck, Nicolas. 2010. Pairs trading and outranking: The multi-step-ahead forecasting case. European Journal of
Operational Research 207: 1702–16. [CrossRef]
Jang, Huisu, and Jaewook Lee. 2017. An Empirical Study on Modeling and Prediction of Bitcoin Prices with
Bayesian Neural Networks Based on Blockchain Information. IEEE Access 6: 5427–37. [CrossRef]
Kaiser, Lukasz, and Ilya Sutskever. 2016. Neural GPUS Learn Algorithms. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/
1511.08228.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Kaiser, Lars. 2019. Seasonality in cryptocurrencies. Finance Research Letters 31: 232–38. [CrossRef]
Karakoyun, Ebru ¸ Seyma, and Ali Osman Çıbıkdiken. 2018. Comparison of ARIMA Time Series Model and
LSTM Deep Learning Algorithm for Bitcoin Price Forecasting. Paper presented at the 13th Multidisciplinary
Academic Conference in Prague 2018 (The 13th MAC 2018), Prague, Czech Republic, May 25–27.

==== Page 15 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 15 of 16
Karasu, Seçkin, Aytaç Altan, Zehra Saraç, and Rifat Hacio˘ glu. 2018. Prediction of Bitcoin prices with machine
learning methods using time series data. Paper presented at 26th Signal Processing and Communications
Applications Conference (SIU), Izmir, Turkey, May 2–5.
Katsiampa, Paraskevi. 2017. Volatility estimation for Bitcoin: A comparison of GARCH models. Economics Letters
158: 3–6. [CrossRef]
Kennedy, Peter E. 1992. A Guide to Econometrics . Oxford: Blackwell.
Kim, Young B., Jun G. Kim, Wook Kim, Jae H. Im, Tae H. Kim, Shin J. Kang, and Chang H. Kim. 2016. Predicting
Fluctuations in Cryptocurrency Transactions Based on User Comments and Replies. PLoS ONE 11: e0161197.
[CrossRef]
Kingma, Diederik P ., and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv 2015: 9.
Krat, Peter M., Nicolas D. Penna, and Alex S. Pentland. 2018. An Experimental Study of Cryptocurrency Market
Dynamics. Paper presented at CHI Conference, Montreal, QC, Canada, April 21–26.
Kristoufek, Ladoslav. 2015. What Are the Main Drivers of the Bitcoin Price? Evidence from Wavelet Coherence
Analysis. PLoS ONE 10: e0123923. [CrossRef]
Lawrence, Steve, Giles C. Lee, and Ah C. Tsoi. 1997. Lessons in Neural Network Training: Overﬁtting May be
Harder than Expected. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Menlo Park:
AAAI Press, pp. 540–45.
Lo, Stephanie, and J. Christina Wang. 2014. Bitcoin as Money? Working Paper 14. Boston, MA, USA: Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston.
Luo, Zhaojie, Xiaojing Cai, Katsuyuki Tanaka, Tetsuya Takiguchi, Takuji Kinkyo, and Shigeyuki Hamori. 2019.
Can we forecast daily oil futures prices? Experimental evidence from convolutional neural networks. Journal
of Risk and Financial Management 12: 9. [CrossRef]
Madan, Issax, Saluja Shaurya, and Zhao Aojja. 2015. Automated Bitcoin Trading via Machine Learning Algorithms.
Available online: https: //pdfs.semanticscholar.org /e065/3631b4a476abf5276a264f6bb 40b132061.pdf (accessed
on 2 February 2020).
Malherbe, Leo, Matthieu Montalban, Nicolas Bedu, and Caroline Granier. 2019. Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain:
Opportunities and Limits of a New Monetary Regime. International Journal of Political Economy 48: 127–52.
[CrossRef]
Marquardt, Donald W. 1970. Generalized inverses, ridge regression, biased linear estimation, and nonlinear
estimation. Technometrics 12: 591–612. [CrossRef]
McNally, Sean, Jason Roche, and Simon Caton. 2018. Predicting the Price of Bitcoin Using Machine Learning.
Paper presented at 26th Euromicro International Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Network-based
Processing (PDP), Cambridge, UK, March 21–23.
Merity, Stephen, Nitish S. Keskar, and Richard Socher. 2017. Regularizing and Optimizing LSTM Language
Models. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/1708.02182 (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Muzammal, Muhammad, Qiang Qu, and Bulat Nasrulin. 2019. Renovating blockchain with distributed databases:
An open source system. Future Generation Computer Systems 90: 105–17. [CrossRef]
Nakamoto, Satoshi. 2008. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Available online: https: //bitcoin.org /
bitcoin.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Nawata, Kazumitsu, and Nobuko Nagase. Estimation of sample selection bias models. Econometric Reviews 15: 4.
[CrossRef]
Neter, John, William Wasserman, and Michael H. Kutner. 1989. Applied Linear Regression Models . Homewood:
Irwin.
Pichl, Lukas, and Taisei Kaizoji. 2017. Volatility Analysis of Bitcoin Price Time Series. Quantitative Finance and
Economics 1: 474–85. [CrossRef]
Poyser, Obryan. 2017. Exploring the Determinants of Bitcoin’s Price: An Application of Bayesian Structural Time
Series. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/1706.01437 (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Pascanu, Razvan, Tomas Mikolov, and Yochus Bengio. 2013. On the Di culty of Training Recurrent Neural
Networks. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1211.5063.pdf (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Rogojanu, Angel, and Liana Badeaetal. 2014. The issue of competing currencies. Case study bitcoin. Theoretical
and Applied Economics 21: 103–14.
Selmi, Refk, Walid Mensi, Shawkat Hammoudeh, and Jamal Boioiyour. 2018. Is Bitcoin a hedge, a safe haven or a
diversiﬁer for oil price movements? A comparison with gold. Energy Economics 74: 787–801. [CrossRef]

==== Page 16 ====
J. Risk Financial Manag. 2020 ,13, 23 16 of 16
Sheta, Alaa F., Sara Elsir M. Ahmed, and Hossam Faris. 2015. A comparison between regression, artiﬁcial neural
networks and support vector machines for predicting stock market index. Soft Computing 7: 8.
Siami-Namini, Sima, and Akbar S. Namin. 2018. Forecasting Economics and Financial Time Series: ARIMA vs.
LSTM. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /abs/1803.06386v1 (accessed on 2 February 2020).
Sovbetov, Yhlas. 2018. Factors inﬂuencing cryptocurrency prices: Evidence from bitcoin, ethereum, dash, litcoin,
and monero. Available online: https: //mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de /85036 /1/MPRA_paper_85036.pdf (accessed
on 2 February 2020).
Srivastava, Nitish, Geo rey Hinton, Alex Krizhesvsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014. Dropout:
A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15: 1929–58.
Wang, Lin, Yi Zeng, and Tao Chen. 2015. Back propagation neural network with adaptive di erential evolution
algorithm for time series forecasting. Expert Systems with Applications 42: 855–63. [CrossRef]
White, Lawrence H. 2015. The market for cryptocurrencies. The Cato Journal 35: 383–402. [CrossRef]
Yin, Wenpeng, Katharina Kann, Mo Yu, and Hinrich Schutze. 2017. Comparative Study of CNN and RNN
for Natural Language Processing. Available online: https: //arxiv.org /pdf/1702.01923.pdf (accessed on 2
February 2020).
Yelowitz, Aaron, and Matthew Wilson. 2015. Characteristics of Bitcoin users: an analysis of Google search data.
Applied Economics Letters 22: 1030–36. [CrossRef]
Yu, Lean, Kin K. Lai, Shouyang Wang, and Wei Huang. 2006. A Bias-Variance-Complexity Trade-O Framework
for Complex System Modeling. In Computational Science and Its Applications-ICCSA 2006 . Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Berlin /Heidelberg: Springer, Volume 3980.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

