==== Page 1 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
Aravind Rajeswaran1 2Igor Mordatch1Vikash Kumar1
Abstract
Designing stable and efﬁcient algorithms for
model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
with function approximation has remained chal-
lenging despite growing interest in the ﬁeld. To
help expose the practical challenges in MBRL
and simplify algorithm design from the lens of ab-
straction, we develop a new framework that casts
MBRL as a game between: (1) a policy player,
which attempts to maximize rewards under the
learned model; (2) a model player, which attempts
to ﬁt the real-world data collected by the policy
player. We show that a near-optimal policy for
the environment can be obtained by ﬁnding an ap-
proximate equilibrium for aforementioned game,
and we develop two families of algorithms to ﬁnd
the game equilibrium by drawing upon ideas from
Stackelberg games. Experimental studies suggest
that the proposed algorithms achieve state of the
art sample efﬁciency, match the asymptotic per-
formance of model-free policy gradient, and scale
gracefully to high-dimensional tasks like dexter-
ous hand manipulation. Project page: https://
sites.google.com/view/mbrl-game .
1. Introduction
We study the problem of model-based reinforcement learn-
ing (MBRL) where a world model is learned from data to
aid policy search. Model-based algorithms can incorporate
historical off-policy data and generic priors like knowledge
of physics, making them highly sample efﬁcient. In addi-
tion, the learned models can also be re-purposed to solve
new tasks. As a result, there has been a recent surge of
interest in MBRL. However, a clear algorithmic framework
to understand MBRL and unify insights from recent works
has been lacking. To bridge this gap, and to facilitate the
1Google Brain, Mountain View, USA.2University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, USA. Work performed at Google Brain.. Correspon-
dence to: Aravind Rajeswaran <aravraj@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).design of stable and efﬁcient algorithms, we develop a new
framework that casts MBRL as a two-player game.
Classical frameworks for MBRL, adaptive control (Åström
& Murray, 2004), and dynamic programming (Puterman,
1994), are often conﬁned to simple linear models or tabular
representations. They also rely on building global models
through ideas like persistent excitation (Narendra & An-
naswamy, 1987) or tabular generative models (Kearns &
Singh, 1998a). Such settings and assumptions are often lim-
iting for modern applications. To obtain a globally accurate
model, we need the ability to collect data from all parts
of the state space (Agarwal et al., 2019b), which is often
impossible. Furthermore, learning globally accurate models
may be unnecessary, unsafe, and inefﬁcient. For example,
to make an autonomous car drive on the road, we should
not require accurate models in situations where it tumbles
and crashes in different ways. This motivates a class of
incremental methods for MBRL that interleave policy and
model learning to gradually construct and reﬁne models in
the task-relevant parts of the state space. This is in sharp
contrast to a two-stage approach of ﬁrst building a model of
the world, and subsequently planning in it.
A unifying framework for incremental MBRL can connect
insights from different approaches and help simplify the
algorithm design process from the lens of abstraction. As
an example, distribution ordomain shift is known to be a
major challenge for incremental MBRL. When improving
the policy using the learned model, the policy will attempt to
shift the distribution over visited states. The learned model
may be inaccurate for this modiﬁed distribution, resulting
in a greatly biased policy update. A variety of approaches
have been developed to mitigate this issue. One class of ap-
proaches (Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Sun et al., 2018a; Kakade
& Langford, 2002), inspired by trust region methods, make
conservative changes to the policy to constrain the distri-
bution between successive iterates. In sharp contrast, an
alternate set of approaches do not constrain the policy up-
dates in any way, but instead rely on data aggregation to
mitigate distribution shift (Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Chua
et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2019). Our game-theoretic
framework for MBRL reveals that these two seemingly dis-
parate approaches are essentially dual approaches to solve
the same game.

==== Page 2 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
Our Contributions:
1.We develop a novel framework that casts MBRL as a
game between: (a) a policy player , which maximizes
rewards in the learned model; and (b) a model player ,
which minimizes prediction error of data collected by
policy player. Theoretically, we establish that at equilib-
rium, the policy is near-optimal for the environment.
2.Developing learning algorithms for general continuous
games is well known to be challenging. To develop
stable and convergent algorithms, we setup a Stackelberg
game (von Stackelberg, 1934) between the two players,
which can be solved efﬁciently through (approximate)
bi-level optimization.
3.Stackelberg games are asymmetric games where play-
ers make decisions in a pre-speciﬁed order. The leader
plays ﬁrst and subsequently the follower. Due to the
asymmetric nature, the MBRL game can take two forms
depending on choice of leader player. This gives rise to
two natural families of algorithms that have complemen-
tary strengths. Together, they unify and generalize many
prior MBRL algorithms.
4.Experimentally, we show that our algorithms outperform
prior model-based and model-free algorithms in sample
efﬁciency; match the asymptotic performance of model-
free policy gradient algorithms; and scale gracefully to
high-dimensional tasks like dexterous manipulation.
2. Background and Notations
We treat the environment as an inﬁnite horizon MDP char-
acterized by:M=fS;A;R;P;;g. Per usual notation,
SRnandARmrepresent the continuous state and
action spaces. The transition dynamics is described by
s0P(js;a).R:S ! [0;Rmax],2[0;1), and
represents the reward, discount, and initial state distribution
respectively. Policy is a mapping from states to a probabil-
ity distribution over actions, i.e. :S!P(A), and in
practice we typically consider parameterized policies. The
goal is to optimize the objective:
max
J(;M) :=EM;"1X
t=0tR(st)#
(1)
Model-free methods solve this optimization by directly esti-
mating a gradient using collected samples or through value
functions. Model-based methods, in contrast, construct an
explicit world model to aid policy optimization.
2.1. Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
We represent the world model with another tuple:
cM=fS;A;R;bP;;g. The model has the same state-
action space, reward function, discount, and initial statedistribution. We parameterize the transition dynamics of the
modelbP(as a neural network) and learn the parameters so
that it approximates the environment transition dynamics,
i.e.bPP. For simplicity, we assume that the reward func-
tion and initial state distribution are known. This is a benign
assumption for many applications in control, robotics, and
operations research. If required, these quantities can also be
learned from data, and are typically easier to learn than bP.
Enormous quantities of experience can be cheaply generated
by simulating the model, without interacting with the world,
and can be used for policy optimization. Thus, model-based
methods tend to be sample efﬁcient.
Idealized Global Model Setting To motivate challenges in
MBRL, we ﬁrst consider the idealized setting of an approxi-
mate global model. This corresponds to the case where cM
is sufﬁciently expressive and approximates Meverywhere.
Lemma 1 relates the performance of a policy in the model
and environment.
Lemma 1. (Simulation Lemma) Suppose cMis such that
DTV
P(js;a);bP(js;a)
M8(s;a). Then, for any
policy, we have
J(;M) J(;cM)OM
(1 )2
8:(2)
The proof is provided in the appendix. Since Lemma 1
provides a uniform bound applicable to all policies, we can
expect good performance in the environment by optimizing
the policy in the model, i.e. maxJ(;cM).
Beyond global models A global modeling approach as
above is often impractical. To obtain a globally accurate
model, we need the ability to collect data from all parts of
the state space (Agarwal et al., 2019b; Pathak et al., 2017),
which can be difﬁcult. More importantly, learning globally
accurate models may be unnecessary, unsafe, and inefﬁcient.
For example, to make a robot walk, we should not require
accurate models in situations where it falls and crashes in
different ways. This motivates the need for incremental
MBRL, where models are gradually constructed and reﬁned
in the task-relevant parts of the state space. To formalize this
intuition, we consider the below notion of model quality.
Deﬁnition 1. (Model approximation loss) Given cMand
distribution (s;a), the model approximation loss is
`(cM;) =E(s;a)h
DKL 
P(js;a);bP(js;a)i
:(3)
We useDKLto refer to the KL divergence which can be
optimized using samples from M, and is closely related to
DTVthrough Pinsker’s inequality. In the case of isotropic
Gaussian distributions, as typically considered in continuous
control applications, DKLreduces to the familiar `2loss.
Importantly, the loss is intimately tied to the sampling distri-
bution. In general, models that are accurate in some parts

==== Page 3 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
of the state space need not generalize/transfer to other parts.
As a result, a more conservative policy learning procedure
is required, in contrast to the global model case.
3. Model Based RL as a Two Player Game
In order to capture the interactions between model and pol-
icy learning, we formulate MBRL as the following two-
player general sum game (ref. as MBRL game)
policy playerz}|{
max
J(;cM);model playerz}|{
min
cM`(cM;
M) (4)
We use
M=1
TPT
t=0P(st=s;at=a)to denote the
average state visitation distribution. The policy player maxi-
mizes performance in the learned model, while the model
player minimizes prediction error under policy player’s in-
duced state distribution. This is a game since the objective
of each player depends on the parameters of both players.
The above formulation separates MBRL into the constituent
components of policy learning (planning) and generative
model learning. At the same time, it exposes that the two
components are closely intertwined and must be considered
together in order to succeed in MBRL. We discuss algo-
rithms for solving the game in Section 4, and ﬁrst focus
on the equilibrium properties of the MBRL game. Our re-
sults establish that at (approximate) Nash equilibrium of
the MBRL game: (1) the model can accurately simulate
and predict the performance of the policy; (2) the policy is
near-optimal.
Theorem 1. (Global perf. of equilibrium pair; informal)
Suppose we have a pair of policy and model, (;cM), such
that simultaneously
`(cM;
M)MandJ(;cM)J(0;cM) 80:
For an optimal policy , we have
J(;M) J(;M)
O
+pM
(1 )2+1
1 DTV

M;
cM
:(5)
Proof. A more formal version of the theorem and proof is
provided in appendix ??.
We now make some remarks about the above result.
1.The ﬁrst two terms are related to sub-optimality in policy
optimization (planning) and model learning, and can
be made small with more compute and data, assuming
sufﬁcient capacity.
2.There may be multiple Nash equilibrium for the MBRL
game, and the third domain adaptation ortransfer learn-
ingterm in the bound captures the quality of an equi-
librium. It captures the idea that model is trained underdistribution of , i.e.
M, but evaluated under the distri-
bution of, i.e.
M. If the model can accurately sim-
ulate, we can expect to ﬁnd it in the planning phase,
since it would obtain high rewards. This domain adapta-
tion term is a consequence of the exploration problem,
and is unavoidable if we desire globally optimal policies.
Indeed, even purely model-free algorithms suffer from an
analogous divergence term (Kakade & Langford, 2002;
Munos & Szepesvári, 2008). However, Theorem 1 also
applies to locally optimal policies (see appendix ??) for
which we may expect better model transfer.
3.The domain adaptation term can be minimized by con-
sidering a wide initial state distribution (Kakade & Lang-
ford, 2002; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). This ensures the
learned model is more broadly accurate. However, in
some applications, the initial state distribution may not
be under our control. In such a case, we may draw upon
advances in domain adaptation (Ben-David et al., 2006;
Sun et al., 2015) to learn state-action representations
better suited for transfer across different policies.
4. Algorithms
So far, we have established how MBRL can be viewed as
a game that couples policy and model learning. We now
turn to developing algorithms for solving the game. Unlike
common deep learning settings (e.g. supervised learning),
there are no standard workhorses for continuous games.
Direct extensions of optimization workhorses (e.g. SGD)
are unstable for games due to non-stationarity (Wang et al.,
2019b; Fiez et al., 2019). We ﬁrst review some of these
extensions before presenting our ﬁnal algorithms.
4.1. Independent simultaneous learners
We ﬁrst consider a class of algorithms where each player
individually optimize their own objectives using gradient
descent. Thus, each player treats the setting as stochastic
optimization unaware of potential drifts in their objectives
due to the two-player nature. These algorithms are some-
times called independent learners, simultaneous learners, or
naive learners (Wang et al., 2019b; Foerster et al., 2017).
Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) In GDA, each player per-
forms an improvement step holding the parameters of the
other player ﬁxed. The resulting updates are given below.
k+1=k+krJ(k;cMk) (6)
cMk+1=cMk krcM`(cMk;k
M) (7)
Both the players update their parameters simultaneously
from iteration ktok+ 1. For simplicity, we consider stan-
dard gradient descent, which can be equivalently replaced
with momentum, Adam, natural gradient etc. Variants of
GDA have been used to solve min-max games arising in

==== Page 4 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
deep learning such as GANs. However, for certain problems,
it can exhibit poor convergence and require very small learn-
ing rates (Schäfer & Anandkumar, 2019) or domain-speciﬁc
heuristics. Furthermore, it makes sub-optimal use of data,
since it is desirable to take multiple policy improvement
steps to fully reap the beneﬁts of model learning.
Best Response (BR) The BR algorithm aims to mititage
the above drawback, where each player computes the best
response while ﬁxing the parameters of other players. The
best response can be approximated in practice using a large
number of gradient steps.
k+1= arg max
J(;cMk) (8)
cMk+1= arg min
cM`(cM;k
M) (9)
Again, both players simultaneously update their parameters.
It is known from a large body of work in online learning
that aggressive changes can destabilize learning in non-
stationary settings (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). Large
changes to the policy can dramatically alter the sampling
distribution, which renders the model incompetent. Simi-
larly, large changes in the model can bias policy learning.
In Section 5 we experimentally study the performance of
GDA and BR on a suite of control tasks and verify that they
inefﬁcient (slow) or unstable.
4.2. Stackelberg formulation and algorithms
To achieve stable and sample efﬁcient learning, we require
algorithms that take the game structure into account. While
good workhorses are lacking for general games, Stackelberg
games (von Stackelberg, 1934) are an exception. They are
asymmetric games where we impose a speciﬁc playing order
and are a generalization of min-max games. We cast the
MBRL game in the Stackelberg form, and derive gradient
based algorithms to solve the resulting game.
First, we brieﬂy review continuous Stackelberg games. Con-
sider a two player game with players AandB. LetA;B
be their parameters, and LA(A;B),LB(A;B)be their
losses. Each player would like their losses minimized. With
playerAas the leader, the Stackelberg game corresponds to
the following nested optimization:
min
ALA 
A;
B(A)
subject to
B(A) = arg min
~LB(A;~)(10)
Since the follower chooses the best response, the follower’s
parameters are implicitly a function of the leader’s param-
eters. The leader is aware of this, and can utilize this in-
formation when updating its parameters. The Stackelberg
formulation has a number of appealing properties.
Algorithm design based on optimization: From the
leader’s viewpoint, the Stackelberg formulation trans-forms a game with complex interactions into a more fa-
miliar albeit complex bi-level optimization, for which we
have gradient based workhorses (Colson et al., 2007).
Notion of stability and progress: In general games,
there exists no single function that can be used to check if
an iterative algorithm makes progress towards the equilib-
rium. This makes algorithm design and diagnosis difﬁcult.
By reducing the game to an optimization, the leader’s loss
LA(A;B)can be used to track progress.
For simplicity of exposition, we assume that the best-
response is unique for the follower. We later remark
on the possibility of multiple minimizers. To solve the
nested optimization, it sufﬁces to focus on Asince the
follower parameters 
B(A)are implicitly a function of
A. We can iteratively optimize Aas:A A 
A(dLA(A;
B(A))=dA), where the gradient is de-
scribed in Eq. 11. The key to solving a Stackelberg game is
to make the follower learn very quickly to approximate the
best response, while the leader learns slowly.
dLA(A;
B(A))
dA=d
B
dA@LA(A;B)
@B
B=
B
+@LA(A;B)
@A
B=
B(11)
The implicit Jacobian term (d
B=dA)can be obtained us-
ing the implicit function theorem (Krantz & Parks, 2002;
Rajeswaran et al., 2019). Thus, in principle, we can compute
the gradient with respect to the leader parameters and solve
the nested optimization (to at least a local minimizer). To
develop a practical algorithm based on these ideas, we use a
few relaxations and approximations. First, we approximate
the best response with multiple steps of an iterative opti-
mization algorithm. Secondly, we drop the implicit Jacobian
term and use a “ﬁrst-order” approximation of the gradient.
Such an approximation has proven effective in applications
like meta-learning (Nichol et al., 2018), GANs (Heusel et al.,
2017; Metz et al., 2017), and multiple timescale actor-critic
methods (Konda & Borkar, 1999). Finally, since the Stack-
elberg game is asymmetric, we can cast the MBRL game in
two forms based on which player we choose as the leader.
Policy As Leader (PAL): Choosing the policy player as
leader results in the following optimization:
max

J(;cM)s:t:cM2arg min
cM`(cM;
M)
:
We solve this nested optimization using the ﬁrst order gradi-
ent approximation, resulting in updates:
cMk+1arg min
cM`(cM;k
M) (12)
k+1=k+krJ(;cMk+1) (13)

==== Page 5 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
We ﬁrst aggressively improve the model to minimize the
loss under current visitation distribution. Subsequently we
take a conservative policy. The algorithmic template is de-
scribed further in Algorithm 1. Note that the PAL updates
are different from GDA even if a single gradient step is
used to approximate the arg min . In PAL, the model is ﬁrst
updated using the current visitation distribution from cMkto
cMk+1. The policy subsequently uses cMk+1for improve-
ment. In contrast, GDA uses cMkfor improving the policy.
Finally, suppose we ﬁnd an approximate solution to the PAL
optimization such that J(;cM)sup~J(~;cM~) .
Since the model is optimal for the policy by constriction,
we inherit the guarantees of Theorem 1.
Algorithm 1 Policy as Leader (PAL) meta-algorithm
1:Initialize: policy0, modelcM0, data bufferD=fg
2:fork= 0;1;2;:::forever do
3: Collect dataDkby executingkin the environment
4: Build local (policy-speciﬁc) dynamics model:
cMk+1= arg min`(cM;Dk)
5: Improve policy: k+1=k+rJ(k;cMk+1)
with a conservative algorithm like NPG or TRPO.
6:end for
Model as Leader (MAL): Conversely, choosing model as
the leader results in the optimization
min
cMn
`(cM;cM
M)s:t:cM2arg max
J(;cM)o
:
(14)
Similar to the PAL formulation, using ﬁrst order approxima-
tion to the bi-level gradient results in:
k+1arg max
J(;cMk) (15)
cMk+1=cMk krcM`(cM;k+1
M) (16)
We ﬁrst optimize a policy for the current model. Subse-
quently, we conservatively improve the model using the
data collected with the optimized policy. In practice, instead
of a single conservative model improvement step, we ag-
gregate all the historical data and perform a few epochs of
training. This has an effect similar to conservative model
improvement in a follow the regularized leader interpreta-
tion (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Ross & Bagnell, 2012; McMa-
han, 2011). The algorithmic template is described in Al-
gorithm 2. Similar to the PAL case, we again inherit the
guarantees from Theorem 1.
On distributionally robust models and policies Finally,
we illustrate how the Stackelberg framework is consistent
with commonly used robustiﬁcation heuristics. We now con-
sider the case where there could be multiple best responses
to the leader eq. 10. For instance, in PAL, there could beAlgorithm 2 Model as Leader (MAL) meta-algorithm
1:Initialize: policy0, modelcM0, data bufferD=fg
2:fork= 0;1;2;:::forever do
3: Optimizek+1= arg max J(;cMk)using any
algorithm (RL, MPC, planning etc.)
4: Collect environment data Dk+1usingk+1
5: Improve model cMk+1=cMk rcM`(cM;Dk+1)
using any conservative algorithm like mirror descent,
data aggregation etc.
6:end for
multiple models that achieve low error for the policy. Simi-
larly, in MAL, there could be multiple policies that achieve
high rewards for the speciﬁed model. In such cases, the
standard notion of Stackelberg equilibrium is to optimize
under the worst case realization (Fiez et al., 2019), which
results in:
min
Amax
B2R(A)LA(A;B);where
R(A)def=n
~jLB(A;~)LB(A;B)8Bo
:(17)
In PAL, model ensemble approaches correspond to approxi-
mating the best response set with a ﬁnite collection (ensem-
ble) of models. Algorithms inspired by robust or risk-averse
control (Zhou et al., 1996; Garcia & Fernández, 2015; Ra-
jeswaran et al., 2016) explicitly improve against the adver-
sarial choice in the ensemble, consistent with the Stackel-
berg setting. Similarly, in the MAL formulation, entropy
regularization (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Hazan et al., 2018)
and disagreement based reward bonuses (Pathak et al., 2017;
2019) lead to adversarial best response by encouraging the
policy to visit parts of the state space where the model is
likely to be inaccurate. Our Stackelberg formulation pro-
vides a principled foundation for these important compo-
nents, which have thus far been viewed as heuristics.
5. Experiments
In our experiemental evaluation, we aim to primarily answer
the following questions:
1.Do independent learning algorithms (GDA and BR) learn
slowly or suffer from instabilities?
2.Do the Stackelberg-style algorithms (PAL and MAL)
enable stable and sample efﬁcient learning?
3.Do MAL and PAL exhibit different learning character-
istics and strengths? Can we characterize the situations
where one is more preferable than the other?
Task Suite We study the behavior of algorithms on
a suite of continuous control tasks consisting of:
DClaw-Turn ,DKitty-Orient ,7DOF-Reacher ,
andInHand-Pen . The tasks are illustrated in Figure 2 and

==== Page 6 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
0 2 4 6 8
Samples (×103)020406080100Success (%)Reacher (7DOF)
0 100 200 300 400
Samples (×103)020406080100Success (%)Dexterous In-Hand Pen Manipulation
0102030405060
Samples (×103)020406080100Success (%)DClaw Turn
PAL (Ours) MAL (Ours) GDA BR SAC0102030405060
Samples (×103)020406080100Success (%)DKitty Orient
Figure 1. Comparison of the learning algorithms. We report results based on 5 random seeds, with solid lines representing the average
performance, and shaded regions indicate standard deviation across seeds. PAL and MAL exhibit stable and sample efﬁcient learning.
GDA learns very slowly due to sub-optimal use of data. BR does not lead to stable learning due to aggressive changes to both policy and
model. For the ROBEL tasks, as a point of comparison, we also include results of SAC a state of the art model-free algorithm.
further details are provided in Appendix ??. The DClaw and
DKitty tasks use physically accurate models of robots (Zhu
et al., 2018; Ahn et al., 2019). The Reacher task is a repre-
sentative whole arm manipulation task, while the in-hand
dexterous manipulation task (Rajeswaran et al., 2018) serves
as a representative high-dimensional control task. In ad-
dition, we also present results with our algorithms in the
OpenAI gym tasks in Appendix ??.
Algorithm Details For all the algorithms of interest (GDA,
BR, PAL, MAL), we represent the policy as well as the
dynamics model with fully connected neural networks. We
instantiate all of these algorithm families with model-based
natural policy gradient. Details about the implementation
are provided in Appendix ??. We use ensembles of dynam-
ics models and entropy regularization to encourage robust-
ness.
Comparison of learning algorithms We ﬁrst study the
performance of Stackelberg-style algorithms (PAL, MAL)
and compare against the performance of independent algo-
rithms (GDA and BR). Our results, summarized in Figure 1,
suggest that PAL and MAL can learn all the tasks efﬁciently.
We observe near monotonic improvement, suggesting that
the Stackelberg formulation enables stable learning. We also
observe that PAL learns faster than MAL for the tasks we
study. While GDA eventually achieves near-100% success
Figure 2. (a) Reacher task with a 7DOF arm. (b) In-hand ma-
nipulation task with a 24DOF dexterous hand. (c) DClaw-Turn
task with a 3 ﬁngered “claw”. (d) DKitty-Orient task with a
quadrupedal robot. In all the tasks, the desired goal conﬁgura-
tions are randomized every episode, which forces the RL agent to
learn generalizable policies. We measure and use success rate for
our experimental evaluations.

==== Page 7 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
012345
Samples (×103)02004006008001000ReturnInvertedPendulum
020406080100
Samples (×103)0100020003000Hopper
PAL-NPG (Ours) MAL-NPG (Ours) MBPO PETS STEVE SLBO SAC050100150200250300
Samples (×103)0100020003000400050006000Ant
Figure 3. Comparison of results on the OpenAI gym benchmark tasks. Results for the baselines are reproduced from Janner et al. (2019).
Solid lines are the average performance curves over 5 random seeds, while shaded region represents the standard deviation over these 5
runs. We observe that PAL and MAL show near-monotonic improvement, and substantially outperform the baselines.
rate, it leads to considerably slower learning. As outlined in
Section 4, this is likely due to conservative nature of updates
for both the policy and the model. Furthermore, the perfor-
mance ﬂuctuates rapidly during course of learning, since it
does not correspond to stable optimization of any objective.
Finally, we observe that BR is unable to make consistent
progress. As suggested earlier in Section 4, BR makes rapid
changes to both model and policy which exacerbates the
challenge of distribution mismatch.
As a point of comparison, we also plot results of
SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), a leading model-free algo-
rithm for the ROBEL tasks (results taken from Ahn et al.
(2019)). Although SAC is able to solve these tasks, its
sample efﬁciency is comparable to GDA, and substantially
slower than PAL and MAL. To compare against other model-
based algorithms, we turn to published results from prior
work on OpenAI gym tasks. In Figure 3, we show that PAL
and MAL signiﬁcantly outperforms prior algorithms. In
particular, PAL and MAL are 10 times as efﬁcient as other
model-based and model-free methods. PAL is also twice
as efﬁcient as MBPO (Janner et al., 2019), a state of the
art hybrid model-based and model-free algorithm. Further
details about this comparison are provided in Appendix ??.
Overall our results indicate that PAL and MAL: (a) are
substantially more sample efﬁcient than prior model-based
and model-free algorithms; (b) achieve the asymptotic per-
formance of their model-free counterparts; (c) can scale to
high-dimensional tasks with complex dynamics like dexter-
ous manipulation; (d) can scale to tasks requiring extended
rollout horizons (e.g. the OpenAI gym tasks).
Choosing between PAL and MAL Finally, we turn to
studying relative strengths of PAL and MAL. For this, we
consider two variations of the 7DOF reacher task (from
Figure 2) corresponding to environment perturbations at an
intermediate point of training. In the ﬁrst case, we perturbthe dynamics by changing the length of the forearm. In the
second case, halfway through the training, we change the
goal distribution to a different region of 3D space. Training
curves are presented in Figure 4. Note that there is a perfor-
mance drop at the time of introducing the perturbation.
For the ﬁrst case of dynamics perturbation, we observe that
PAL recovers faster. Since PAL learns the model aggres-
sively using recent data, it can forget old inconsistent data
and improve the policy using an accurate model. In contrast,
MAL adapts the model conservatively, taking longer to for-
get old inconsistent data, ultimately biasing and slowing the
policy learning. In the second experiment, the dynamics is
stationary but the goal distribution changes midway. Note
that the policy does not generalize zero-shot to the new goal
distribution, and requires additional learning or ﬁne-tuning.
Since MAL learns a more broadly accurate model, it quickly
adapts to the new goal distribution. In contrast, PAL conser-
vatively changes the policy and takes longer to adapt to the
05101520
Samples (×103)0.10.20.30.40.50.6Distance ErrorDynamics Adaptation
0 5 10 15
Samples (×103)0.10.20.30.40.50.6Distance ErrorGoal Adaptation
PAL MAL
Figure 4. PAL vs MAL in non-stationary learning environments.
Y axis is the distance between end effector and goal, averaged over
the trajectory (lower is better). The left plot corresponds to the case
where the dynamics of Mis changed after 104samples, while
the right plot corresponds to the case where we change the goal
distribution after 8103samples. We observe that PAL recovers
quickly from dynamics perturbations, while MAL recovers quickly
from goal perturbations.

==== Page 8 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
new goal distribution.
Thus, in summary, we ﬁnd that PAL is better suited for situ-
ations where the dynamics of the world can drift over time.
In contrast, MAL is better suited for situations where the
task or goal distribution can change over time, and related
settings like multi-task learning.
6. Related Work
MBRL and the closely related ﬁelds of adaptive control
and system identiﬁcation have a long and rich history
(see Åström & Murray (2004); Ljung (1987) for overview).
Early works in MBRL primarily focused on tabular re-
inforcement learning in a known generative model set-
ting (Kearns & Singh, 1998a; Agarwal et al., 2019a). How-
ever, this setting assumes access to a highly exploratory
policy to collect data, which is often not available in prac-
tice. Subsequent works like E3 (Kearns & Singh, 1998b)
and R-MAX (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2001) attempt to lift
this limitation, but rely heavily on tabular representations
which are inadequate for modern applications like robotics.
Coupled with advances in deep learning, there has been a
surge of interest in incremental MBRL algorithms with rich
function approximation. They generally fall into two sets of
approaches, as we outline below.
The ﬁrst set of approaches are largely inspired by trust re-
gion methods, and are similar to the PAL family from our
work. A highly accurate “local” model is constructed around
the visitation distribution of the current policy, which is sub-
sequently used to conservatively improve the policy. The
trust region is intended to ensure that the model is accurate
for all policies within it, thereby enabling monotonic perfor-
mance improvement. GPS (Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Mor-
datch & Todorov, 2014), DPI (Sun et al., 2018b), and related
approaches (Kumar et al., 2016) learn a time varying linear
model and perform a KL-constrained policy improvement
step. Such a model representation is convenient for an iLQG
based policy update (Todorov & Li, 2005), but might be
restrictive for complex dynamics beyond trajectory-centric
RL. To remove these limitations, recent works have started
to consider neural networks to represent both policy and the
dynamics model. However, somewhat surprisingly, a clean
version from the PAL family has not been studied with neu-
ral network models. The motivations presented by Xu et al.
(2018) and Kurutach et al. (2018) resemble PAL, however
their practical implementations do not strongly enforce the
conservative nature of the policy update.
An alternate set of MBRL approaches take a view similar to
MAL. Models are updated conservatively through data ag-
gregation, while policies are aggressively optimized. Ross
& Bagnell (2012) explicitly studied the role of data aggrega-
tion in MBRL. They presented an agnostic online learningview of MBRL and showed that data aggregation can lead to
a no-regret algorithm for learning the model, even with ag-
gressive policy optimization. Subsequent works have used
data augmentation and proposed additional components to
enhance efﬁciency and stability, such as the use of model
predictive control (Williams et al., 2017; Lowrey et al., 2019;
Nagabandi et al., 2019), uncertainty quantiﬁcation through
Bayesian models (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011), and en-
sembles of dynamics models (Rajeswaran et al., 2016; Chua
et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2019). We refer readers to
Wang et al. (2019a) for overview of recent MBRL advances.
While speciﬁc instances of PAL and MAL have been stud-
ied in the past, an overarching framework around them has
been lacking. Our descriptions of the PAL and MAL fam-
ilies generalize and unify core insights from prior work
and simplify them from the lens of abstraction. Further-
more, the game theoretic formulation enables us to form a
connection between the PAL and MAL frameworks. We
also note that the PAL and MAL families have similarities
to multiple timescale algorithms (Konda & Borkar, 1999;
Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2004; Karmakar & Bhatnagar, 2015)
studied for actor-critic temporal difference learning. These
ideas have also been extended to study min-max games like
GANs (Heusel et al., 2017). However, they have not been
extended to study model-based RL.
We presented a model-based setting where the model is used
to directly improve the policy through rollout based opti-
mization. However, models can be utilized in other ways
too. Dyna (Sutton, 1990) and MBPO (Janner et al., 2019)
use a learned model to provide additional learning targets
for an actor-critic algorithm through short-horizon synthetic
trajectories. MBVE (Feinberg et al., 2018), STEVE (Buck-
man et al., 2018), and doubly-robust methods (Jiang & Li,
2015; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Farajtabar et al., 2018)
use model-based rollouts to obtain more favorable bias-
variance trade-offs for off-policy evaluation. Some of these
works have noted that long horizon rollouts can exacerbate
model bias. However, in our experiments, we were able
to successfully perform rollouts of hundreds of steps. This
is likely due to our practical implementation closely fol-
lowing the game theoretic algorithms designed explicitly to
mitigate distribution shift and enable effective simulation.
It is straightforward to extend PAL and MAL to a hybrid
model-based and model-free algorithm, which is likely to
provide further performance gains. Similarly, approaches
that bootstrap from the model’s predictions can improve
multi-step simulation (Venkatraman et al., 2015; Bengio
et al., 2015). We leave exploration of these directions for
future work.

==== Page 9 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
7. Summary and Conclusion
In this work, we developed a new framework for MBRL
that casts it as a game between a policy player and a model
player. We established that at equilibrium: (1) the model
accurately simulates the policy and predicts its performance;
(2) the policy is near-optimal. We derived sub-optimality
bounds and made a connection to domain adaptation to
characterize the equilibrium quality.
In order to solve the MBRL game, we constructed the Stack-
elberg version of the game. This has the advantage of: (1)
effective gradient based workhorses to solve the Stackelberg
optimization problem; (2) an effective objective function
to track learning progress towards equilibrium. General
continuous games possess neither of these characteristics.
The Stackelberg game can take two forms based on which
player we choose as the leader, resulting in two natural algo-
rithm families, which we named PAL and MAL. Together
they encompass, generalize, and unify a large collection
of prior MBRL works. This greatly simpliﬁes MBRL and
particularly algorithm design from the lens of abstraction.
We developed practical versions of PAL and MAL using
model-based natural policy gradient. We demonstrated sta-
ble and sample efﬁcient learning on a suite of control tasks,
including state of the art results on OpenAI gym bench-
marks. These results suggest that our practical variants of
PAL and MAL:
are substantially more sample efﬁcient compared to prior
model-based and model-free algorithms,
can achieve the same asymptotic performance as model-
free counterparts,
can scale to high-dimensional tasks with complex dynam-
ics like dexterous manipulation,
can scale to tasks requiring long horizon rollouts (e.g.
OpenAI gym tasks which have a 1000 timestep horizon).
More broadly, our work adds to a growing body of recent
work which suggests that MBRL can be stable, sample
efﬁcient, and more generalizable or adaptable to new tasks
and non-stationary settings. For future work, we hope to
study alternate ways to solve the Stackelberg optimization;
such as using the full implicit gradient term and unrolled
optimization. Finally, although we presented our game
theoretic framework in the context of MBRL, it is more
broadly applicable for any surrogate based optimization
including actor-critic methods. It would make for interesting
future work to study broader extensions and implications.
Acknowledgements
We thank Profs. Emo Todorov, Sham Kakade, Drew Bagnell,
and Sergey Levine for valuable feedback and discussions.We thank Michael Ahn and Michael Janner for sharing the
baseline learning curves; and Ben Eysenbach and Anirudh
Vemula for feedback on the paper draft. The work was
done by Aravind Rajeswaran during internships at Google
Brain, MTV . Aravind thanks Google for providing a highly
encouraging research environment.
References
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G. Op-
timality and approximation with policy gradient methods
in markov decision processes. ArXiv , abs/1908.00261,
2019a.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., and Yang, L. F. On the optimal-
ity of sparse model-based planning for markov decision
processes. ArXiv , abs/1906.03804, 2019b.
Ahn, M., Zhu, H., Hartikainen, K., Ponte, H., Gupta, A.,
Levine, S., and Kumar, V . ROBEL: RObotics BEnch-
marks for Learning with low-cost robots. In Conference
on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019.
Åström, K. J. and Murray, R. M. Feedback systems an
introduction for scientists and engineers. 2004.
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., and Pereira, F. C.
Analysis of representations for domain adaptation. In
NIPS , 2006.
Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. Sched-
uled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neu-
ral networks. ArXiv , abs/1506.03099, 2015.
Brafman, R. I. and Tennenholtz, M. R-max - a general poly-
nomial time algorithm for near-optimal reinforcement
learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 3:213–231, 2001.
Buckman, J., Hafner, D., Tucker, G., Brevdo, E., and
Lee, H. Sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning with
stochastic ensemble value expansion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.01675 , 2018.
Cesa-Bianchi, N. and Lugosi, G. Prediction, learning, and
games. 2006.
Chua, K., Calandra, R., McAllister, R., and Levine, S. Deep
reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using proba-
bilistic dynamics models. In NeurIPS , 2018.
Colson, B., Marcotte, P., and Savard, G. An overview of
bilevel optimization. Annals of Operations Research , 153:
235–256, 2007.
Deisenroth, M. P. and Rasmussen, C. E. Pilco: A model-
based and data-efﬁcient approach to policy search. In
ICML , 2011.

==== Page 10 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
Farajtabar, M., Chow, Y ., and Ghavamzadeh, M. More
robust doubly robust off-policy evaluation. In ICML ,
2018.
Feinberg, V ., Wan, A., Stoica, I., Jordan, M. I., Gonza-
lez, J., and Levine, S. Model-based value estimation
for efﬁcient model-free reinforcement learning. CoRR ,
abs/1803.00101, 2018.
Fiez, T., Chasnov, B., and Ratliff, L. J. Convergence
of learning dynamics in stackelberg games. ArXiv ,
abs/1906.01217, 2019.
Foerster, J. N., Chen, R. Y ., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S.,
Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning with opponent-
learning awareness. In AAMAS , 2017.
Garcia, J. and Fernández, F. A comprehensive survey on
safe reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 16:
1437–1480, 2015.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha, S.,
Tan, J., Kumar, V ., Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P., and
Levine, S. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications.
ArXiv , abs/1812.05905, 2018.
Hazan, E., Kakade, S. M., Singh, K., and Soest, A. V . Prov-
ably efﬁcient maximum entropy exploration. In ICML ,
2018.
Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., and
Hochreiter, S. Gans trained by a two time-scale update
rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In NIPS , 2017.
Janner, M., Fu, J., Zhang, M., and Levine, S. When to trust
your model: Model-based policy optimization. ArXiv ,
abs/1906.08253, 2019.
Jiang, N. and Li, L. Doubly robust off-policy value evalua-
tion for reinforcement learning. In ICML , 2015.
Kakade, S. M. and Langford, J. Approximately optimal
approximate reinforcement learning. In ICML , 2002.
Karmakar, P. and Bhatnagar, S. Two time-scale stochas-
tic approximation with controlled markov noise and off-
policy temporal-difference learning. Mathematics of Op-
erations Research , 43:130–151, 2015.
Kearns, M. and Singh, S. P. Finite-sample convergence rates
for q-learning and indirect algorithms. In NIPS , 1998a.
Kearns, M. and Singh, S. P. Near-optimal reinforcement
learning in polynomial time. Machine Learning , 49:209–
232, 1998b.
Konda, V . and Borkar, V . S. Actor-critic - type learning al-
gorithms for markov decision processes. SIAM J. Control
and Optimization , 38:94–123, 1999.Konda, V . R. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. Convergence rate of linear
two-time-scale stochastic approximation. In The Annals
of Applied Probability , 2004.
Krantz, S. G. and Parks, H. R. The implicit function theorem:
History, theory, and applications. 2002.
Kumar, V ., Todorov, E., and Levine, S. Optimal control with
learned local models: Application to dexterous manipula-
tion. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 378–383, 2016.
Kurutach, T., Clavera, I., Duan, Y ., Tamar, A., and Abbeel, P.
Model-ensemble trust-region policy optimization. ArXiv ,
abs/1802.10592, 2018.
Levine, S. and Abbeel, P. Learning neural network policies
with guided policy search under unknown dynamics. In
NIPS , 2014.
Ljung, L. System identiﬁcation: Theory for the user. 1987.
Lowrey, K., Rajeswaran, A., Kakade, S., Todorov, E., and
Mordatch, I. Plan Online, Learn Ofﬂine: Efﬁcient Learn-
ing and Exploration via Model-Based Control. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,
2019.
McMahan, H. B. Follow-the-regularized-leader and mirror
descent: Equivalence theorems and l1 regularization. In
AISTATS , 2011.
Metz, L., Poole, B., Pfau, D., and Sohl-Dickstein,
J. Unrolled generative adversarial networks. ArXiv ,
abs/1611.02163, 2017.
Mordatch, I. and Todorov, E. Combining the beneﬁts of
function approximation and trajectory optimization. In
RSS, 2014.
Munos, R. and Szepesvári, C. Finite-time bounds for ﬁtted
value iteration. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
2008.
Nagabandi, A., Konoglie, K., Levine, S., and Kumar, V .
Deep dynamics models for learning dexterous manipula-
tion. ArXiv , abs/1909.11652, 2019.
Narendra, K. S. and Annaswamy, A. M. Persistent excitation
in adaptive systems. International Journal of Control ,
1987.
Nichol, A., Achiam, J., and Schulman, J. On
ﬁrst-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.02999 , 2018.
Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-
tion. In ICML , 2017.

==== Page 11 ====
A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
Pathak, D., Gandhi, D., and Gupta, A. Self-supervised
exploration via disagreement. ArXiv , abs/1906.04161,
2019.
Puterman, M. L. Markov decision processes: Discrete
stochastic dynamic programming. In Wiley Series in
Probability and Statistics , 1994.
Rajeswaran, A., Ghotra, S., Ravindran, B., and Levine, S.
Epopt: Learning robust neural network policies using
model ensembles. In ICLR , 2016.
Rajeswaran, A., Lowrey, K., Todorov, E., and Kakade, S.
Towards Generalization and Simplicity in Continuous
Control. In NIPS , 2017.
Rajeswaran, A., Kumar, V ., Gupta, A., Vezzani, G., Schul-
man, J., Todorov, E., and Levine, S. Learning Complex
Dexterous Manipulation with Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing and Demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics:
Science and Systems (RSS) , 2018.
Rajeswaran, A., Finn, C., Kakade, S. M., and Levine, S.
Meta-learning with implicit gradients. In NeurIPS , 2019.
Ross, S. and Bagnell, J. A. Agnostic system identiﬁcation
for model-based reinforcement learning. In ICML , 2012.
Schäfer, F. and Anandkumar, A. Competitive gradient de-
scent. In NeurIPS , 2019.
Shalev-Shwartz, S. Online learning and online convex op-
timization. "Foundations and Trends in Machine Learn-
ing", 2012.
Sun, B., Feng, J., and Saenko, K. Return of frustratingly
easy domain adaptation. In AAAI , 2015.
Sun, W., Gordon, G. J., Boots, B., and Bagnell, J. A. Dual
policy iteration. In NeurIPS , 2018a.
Sun, W., Gordon, G. J., Boots, B., and Bagnell, J. A. Dual
policy iteration. CoRR , abs/1805.10755, 2018b.
Sutton, R. S. Integrated architectures for learning, planning,
and reacting based on approximating dynamic program-
ming. In ICML , 1990.
Thomas, P. S. and Brunskill, E. Data-efﬁcient off-policy
policy evaluation for reinforcement learning. ArXiv ,
abs/1604.00923, 2016.
Todorov, E. and Li, W. A generalized iterative lqg method
for locally-optimal feedback control of constrained non-
linear stochastic systems. In ACC , 2005.
Venkatraman, A., Hebert, M., and Bagnell, J. A. Improving
multi-step prediction of learned time series models. In
AAAI , 2015.von Stackelberg, H. Market structure and equilibrium. 1934.
Wang, T., Bao, X., Clavera, I., Hoang, J., Wen, Y ., Langlois,
E., Zhang, S., Zhang, G., Abbeel, P., and Ba, J. Bench-
marking model-based reinforcement learning. ArXiv ,
abs/1907.02057, 2019a.
Wang, Y ., Zhang, G., and Ba, J. On solving minimax op-
timization locally: A follow-the-ridge approach. ArXiv ,
abs/1910.07512, 2019b.
Williams, G., Wagener, N., Goldfain, B., Drews, P., Rehg,
J. M., Boots, B., and Theodorou, E. Information theoretic
mpc for model-based reinforcement learning. 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , pp. 1714–1721, 2017.
Xu, H., Li, Y ., Tian, Y ., Darrell, T., and Ma, T. Algorithmic
framework for model-based reinforcement learning with
theoretical guarantees. ArXiv , abs/1807.03858, 2018.
Zhou, K., Doyle, J. C., and Glover, K. Robust and Optimal
Control . Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA, 1996. ISBN 0-13-456567-3.
Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Rajeswaran, A., Levine, S., and Ku-
mar, V . Dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement
learning: Efﬁcient, general, and low-cost. 2019 Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
pp. 3651–3657, 2018.

