==== Page 1 ====
 
1 A guide to machine learning for biologists  
 
Joe G. Greener*  
Dept of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
United Kingdom  
j.greener@ucl.ac.uk  
 
Shaun M. Kandathil*  
Dept of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
United Kingdom  
s.kandathil@ucl.ac.uk  
 
Lewis Moffat  
Dept of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
United Kingdom  
lewis.moffat@cs.ucl.ac.uk  
 
David T. Jones † 
Dept of Computer Science , University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, 
United Kingdom  
d.t.jones@ucl.ac.uk  
 
* These authors contributed equally  
† Correspondence should be addressed to: d.t.jones@ucl.ac.uk  
 
 
 
The expanding scale and inherent complexity of biological data have encouraged a growing 
use of machine learning in biology to build informative and predictive models of the 
underlying biological processes. All machine learning techniques fit models to dat a, however, 
the specific methodologies are quite varied and can at first glance seem bewildering. In this 
article, we aim to provide readers with a gentle introduction to a few key machine learning 
techniques, including those based on the most recently dev eloped and widely used techniques 
involving deep neural networks. We describe how different techniques may be suited to 
specific types of biological data, and also discuss some best practices and points to consider 
when embarking on experiments involving m achine learning. Some emerging directions in 
machine learning methodology will also be discussed.  
  

==== Page 2 ====
 
2 Introduction  
 
Humans make sense of the world around them by observing it, and  learning to predict what might 
happen next. Consider a child learning to catch a ball: the child (usually) knows nothing about the 
physical laws that govern the motion of a thrown ball, yet, by a process of observation, trial and 
error, the child adjusts their understanding of the ball’s motion, and how to move their body, until 
they are able to catch it reliably. In other words, the child has learned how to catch the ball by 
building a sufficiently accurate and useful ‘model’ of the process, by repeatedly  testing this model 
against the data, and making corrections to the model to make it better.  
 
Machine learning refers broadly to the process of fitting predictive models to data or of identifying 
informative groupings within data. The field of machine lear ning essentially attempts to 
approximate or imitate humans’ ability to recognise patterns, albeit in an objective manner, using 
computation. Machine learning is particularly useful when the dataset one wishes to analyse is too 
large (many individual data p oints), or too complex (contains a large number of features) for 
human analysis and/or when it is desired to automate the process of data analysis to establish a 
reproducible and time -efficient pipeline. Data from biological experiments frequently possess 
these properties; biological data sets have grown enormously in both size and complexity in the 
last few decades, and it is becoming increasingly important not only to have some practical means 
of making sense of this data abundance, but also to have a sou nd understanding of the techniques 
that are used. Machine learning has been used in biology for a number of decades, but it has 
steadily grown in importance to the point where it is used in nearly every field of biology. 
However, only in the last few years  has the field taken a more critical look on the available 
strategies and begun to assess which methods are most appropriate in different scenarios, or even 
if they are appropriate at all.  
 
This Review aims to inform biologists on how they can start to und erstand and use machine 
learning techniques. We do not intend to present a thorough literature review of papers using 
machine learning for biological problems [1], or to describe the detailed mathemat ics of various 
machine learning methods [2,3] . Instead, we focus on linking particular techniques to different 
types of biological data (similar reviews are available for specific biological dis ciplines e.g. [4–
11]). We also attempt to distil some best practices of how to practically go about the process of 
training and improving a model. The complex ity of biological data presents pitfalls as well as 
opportunities for their analysis using machine learning techniques. To address these, we discuss 
the widespread issues that affect the validity of studies, with guidance on how to avoid them. The 
bulk of the article is devoted to the description of a number of machine learning techniques, and 
in each case, we provide examples of the appropriate application of the method and how to 
interpret the results. These methods discussed include traditional machine l earning methods, as 
these are still the best choices in many cases, and deep learning  with artificial neural networks, 
which are emerging as the most effective methods for many tasks. We finish by describing what 

==== Page 3 ====
 
3 the future holds for incorporating machine learning in data analysis pipelines in biology.  
 
There are two goals when using machine learning in biology. The first is to make accurate 
predictions where experimental data is lacking, and use these predictions to guide future research 
efforts. However,  as scientists we seek to understand the world, and so the second goal is to use 
machine learning to further our understanding of biology. Throughout this guide we will discuss 
how these two goals often come into conflict in machine learning, and how to ex tract 
understanding from models that are often treated as "black boxes" because their inner workings 
are difficult to understand [12]. 
 
Key concepts  
 
We first introduce a number of key concepts in mach ine learning. Where possible, we illustrate 
these concepts with examples taken from biological literature.  
 
General terms . A dataset comprises a number of data points or instances , each of which can be 
thought of as a single observation from an experiment.  Each data point is described by a (usually 
fixed) number of features. Examples of such features might be length, time, concentration, and 
gene expression level. A machine learning task  is an objective specification for what we want a 
machine learning mode l to accomplish. For example, for an experiment investigating the 
expression of genes over time, we might want to predict the rate of conversion of a specific 
metabolite into another species. In this case, the features “gene expression level” and “time” co uld 
be termed input features or simply inputs for the model, and “conversion rate” would be the desired 
output of the model, that is the quantity we are interested in predicting. A model can have any 
number of input and output features. Features can be eit her continuous (taking continuous 
numerical values), or categorical (taking only discrete values). Quite often, categorical features are 
simply binary and are either true (1) or false (0).  
 
Supervised and unsupervised learning.  Supervised machine learning refers to the fitting of a model 
to data (or a subset of data) that has been labelled — where there exists some ground truth  property, 
which is usually experimentally measured or human -assigned. Examples include protein 
secondary structure prediction [13] and prediction of genome accessibility to genome -regulatory 
factors [14]. In both cases, the ground truth is derived ultimately from laboratory observations, but 
often this raw data is preprocessed in some way. In the case of secondary structure, for example, 
the ground truth data are derived from analysing protein crystal structure data in the Protein Data 
Bank, and in the latter case, the ground  truth comes from data derived from DNA sequencing 
experiments. By contrast, unsupervised learning methods are able to identify patterns in unlabelled 
data, without the need for providing the system with the ground truth information in the form of 
pre-determined labels, such as finding subsets of patients with similar expression level in a gene 
expression study [15] or predicting mutation effects from gene sequence co -variation [16]. 

==== Page 4 ====
 
4 Sometimes the two approaches are combined in semi -supervised learning, where small amounts 
of labelled data are combined with large amounts of unlabelled data. This can improve 
performance in cases where labelled data is costly to obtain.  
 
Classification, regression and clustering problems.  When a problem involves assigning data 
points to a set of discrete categories (e.g. “cancerous” or “not cancerous”), the problem is called a 
classification problem, and any algorithm  that performs such classification can be said to be a 
classifier. By contrast, regression models output a continuous set of values, such as predicting the 
free energy change of folding after mutating a residue in a protein [17]. Continuous values can be 
thresholded or otherwise discretized, meaning that it is often possible to reformulate regression 
problems as classification problems. For example, the free energy change mentioned above can be 
binned into ranges of values that are favourable or unfavourable for protein stability. Clustering 
methods are used to predict groupings of similar data points in a dataset, and are usually based on 
some measure of similarity between  data points. They are unsupervised methods that do not require 
that the examples in a dataset have labels. For example, in a gene expression study, clustering 
could find subsets of patients with similar gene expression.  
 
Classes and labels.  The discrete set of values returned by a classifier can be made to be mutually 
exclusive, in which case they are called classes. Where these values need not be mutually 
exclusive, they are termed labels. For example, a residue in a protein structure can b e in only one 
of multiple secondary structure classes, but could simultaneously be assigned the non -exclusive 
labels of being ⍺-helical and transmembrane. Classes and labels are usually represented by an 
encoding, for example a one -hot encoding.  
 
Loss or c ost functions.  The output(s) of a machine learning model are never ideal, and will diverge 
from the ground truth. The mathematical functions that measure this deviation, or in more general 
terms, that measure the amount of “disagreement” between the obtain ed and ideal outputs are 
referred to as loss or cost functions. In supervised learning settings, the loss function would be a 
measure of deviation of the output relative to the ground truth output. Examples include mean 
squared error loss for regression pr oblems and binary cross entropy for classification problems.  
 
Parameters and hyperparameters.  Models are essentially mathematical functions that operate on 
some set of input features, and produce one or more output values or features. In order to be able 
to learn on training data, models contain adjustable parameters whose values can be changed over 
the training process to achieve the most optimal performance of the model (see below). In a simple 
regression model, for example, each feature has a param eter that is multiplied by the feature value 
and these are added together to make the prediction. Hyperparameters are adjustable values that 
are not considered part of the model itself in that they are not updated during training, but which 
still have an i mpact on the training of the model and its performance. A common example of a 
hyperparameter is the learning rate, which controls the rate or speed with which the model’s 

==== Page 5 ====
 
5 parameters are altered during training.  
 
Training, validation and testing . Bef ore being used to make predictions, models require training, 
which involves automatically adjusting the parameters of a model to improve its performance. In 
a supervised learning setting, this involves modifying the parameters so the model performs well 
on a training dataset, by minimizing the average value of the loss or cost function (described 
above). Usually, a separate validation dataset is used to monitor but not influence the training 
process, in order to detect potential overfitting (see next sectio n). In unsupervised settings, a cost 
function is still minimized, though it does not operate on ground -truth outputs. Once a model is 
trained it can be tested on data not used for training. See Box 1 for a guide on the overall process 
of training and how t o split the data appropriately between training and testing sets. A flowchart 
to help the overall process is shown in Figure 1, and some of the concepts in model training are 
shown in Figure 2.  
 
Overfitting and underfitting. The purpose of fitting a  model to training data is to capture the “true” 
relationship between the variables in the data, such that the model has predictive power on unseen 
(non-training) data. Models that are either overfitted or underfitted will produce poor predictions 
on data not in the training set (Figure 2d). An overfitted model will produce excellent results on 
data in the training set (usually as a result of having too many parameters), but will produce poor 
results on unseen data. The overfitted model in Figure 2d passes exactly through every training 
point, and so its prediction error on the training set will be zero. However, it is evident that this 
model has “memorized” the training data and is unlikely to produce good results on unseen data. 
By contrast, an underfitted  model fails to adequately capture the relationships between the 
variables in the data. This could be due to an incorrect choice of model type, incomplete or 
incorrect assumptions about the data, too few parameters in the model, and/or an incomplete 
traini ng process. The underfitted model depicted in Figure 2d is inadequate for the data it is trying 
to fit; in this case it is evident that the variables have a nonlinear relationship, which cannot be 
adequately described with a simple linear model and so a no n-linear model would be more 
appropriate.  
 
Inductive bias and the bias -variance tradeoff.  The inductive bias of a model refers to the set of 
assumptions made in the learning algorithm that leads it to favour a particular solution to a learning 
problem ove r others. It can be thought of as the model’s preference for a particular type of solution 
to a learning problem over others. This preference is often programmed into the model using its 
specific mathematical form, and/or by using a particular loss functio n. For example, the inductive 
bias of recurrent neural networks (discussed below) is that there are sequential dependencies in the 
input data such as the concentration of a metabolite over time. This dependence is explicitly 
accounted for in the mathematic al form of a recurrent neural network. Different inductive biases 
in different model types make them more suitable and usually more performant for specific types 
of data. Another important concept is the tradeoff between bias and variance. A model with a h igh 

==== Page 6 ====
 
6 bias can be said to have stronger constraints on the trained model, whereas a model with low bias 
makes fewer assumptions about the property being modelled, and can, in theory, model a wide 
variety of function types. The variance of a model describes h ow much the trained model changes 
in response to training it on different training datasets. In general, we desire models with very low 
bias and low variance, though these objectives are often in conflict as a model with low bias will 
often learn different  signals on different training sets. Controlling the bias –variance tradeoff is key 
to avoiding overfitting or underfitting.  
 
Traditional machine learning  
 
We will now discuss several key machine learning methods, with an emphasis on their particular 
strengths and weaknesses. A comparison of different machine learning approaches is shown in 
Table 1. We begin with a discussion of methods not based on neural networks, sometimes called 
traditional machine learning. Figure 3 shows some of the me thods of traditional machine learning. 
Various software packages can be used to train such models, including scikit -learn in Python 
(https://scikit -learn.org/stable ) [18], caret in R ( https://topepo.github.io/caret ) [19] and MLJ in 
Julia ( https://alan -turing -institute.github.io/MLJ.jl/stable ) [20]. 
 
When developing machine learning methods for use with biological da ta, traditional machine 
learning should generally be seen as the first area to explore in finding the most appropriate method 
for a given task. Deep learning can be a powerful tool, and is undeniably trendy right now. 
However it is still limited in the app lication areas in which it excels: when large amounts of data 
are available (e.g. millions of data points); when each data point has many features; and, when the 
features are highly structured (the features have clear relationships with one another, such a s 
adjacent pixels in images) [21]. Data like DNA, RNA and protein sequences [22,23]  and 
microscopy images [24,25]  are examples of biological data where these requirements can be met 
and deep learning has been successfully applied. However, the requirement for large amounts of 
data can make deep learning a poor choice even when the  other two requirements are met.  
 
Traditional methods, in comparison to deep learning, are much faster to develop and test on a given 
problem. Developing the architecture of a deep neural network and then training it can be a time - 
and computation -expensiv e task to undertake [26] compared to traditional models like support 
vector machines (SVMs) and random forests [27]. Although some approaches ex ist, with deep 
neural networks it is still non -trivial to estimate feature importance, [28] (that is,. how important 
each feature is for contributing to the prediction), or the confidence of predictio ns of the model 
[1,28,29] , both of which are often essential in biological settings. Even if deep learning appears 
technically feasible for a particular biological prediction task, it is o ften still prudent to train a 
traditional method to compare against a neural network -based model, if possible [30].  
 

==== Page 7 ====
 
7 Traditional methods typically expect that each example in the dataset has the same  number of 
features, so this is not always possible. An obvious biological example of this is when 
protein/RNA/DNA sequences are being used and each example has a different length. In order to 
use traditional methods with this data, the data can be altered  so it is all the same size using simple 
techniques like padding and windowing. Padding means taking each example and adding 
additional values containing zero until it is the same size as the largest example in the data set. By 
contrast, windowing shortens  individual examples to a given size, e.g. only using the first 100 
residues of each protein in a dataset of protein sequences with lengths ranging from 100 upwards.  
 
Use of classification and regression models. For regression problems such as those shown  in 
Figure 3a, ridge regression (linear regression with a regularization term) is often a good starting 
point for developing a model, as it can provide a fast and well understood benchmark for a given 
task. Other variants of linear regression like LASSO re gression [31] and elastic net regression [32] 
are also worth considering when there is a desire for a model to rely on a minimal number of 
featu res within the available data. Unfortunately, the relationships between features in the data are 
often non -linear and so using a model like a SVM is often a more appropriate choice for these 
cases [33]. SVMs are a powerful type of regression and classification model that uses kernel 
functions to transform a non -separable problem into a separable problem that is easier to solve. 
SVMs can be used to perform both linear and non -linear regression depending  on the kernel 
function employed [34–37]. A good approach to developing a model is to train a linear SVM and 
a SVM with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel (a general -purpose non -linear type of SVM) in 
order to quantify what, if any, gain can be had from a non -linear model. Non -linear approaches 
can provide more powerful models but at the cost of easy interpretation of which features are 
influencing the model, a tradeoff mentioned in  the introduction.  
 
Many of the models that are commonly used in regression are also used for classification. Training 
a linear SVM and an SVM with a RBF kernel is also a good default starting point for a 
classification task. An additional method that can  be tried is k-nearest neighbours classification 
[38]. Being one of the simplest classification methods, k-nearest neighbours provides a useful 
baseline performance marker against which other more com plex models, like SVMs, can be 
compared. Another class of robust non -linear methods are ensemble -based models like random 
forests [39] and XGBoost [40,41] . Both methods are powerful non -linear models that have the 
added benefits of providing feature importance estimates and often require minimal 
hyperparameter tuning. Due to the assignment o f feature importance values and the decision tree 
structure, these models are a good choice if understanding which features contributed the most to 
a prediction is essential for biological understanding.  
 
For both classification and regression, the many a vailable models tend to have a bewildering 
variety of flavours and variants. Trying to predict how well -suited a particular method will be to a 
particular problem a priori  can be deceptive and instead taking an empirical, trial -and-error 

==== Page 8 ====
 
8 approach to findin g the best model is generally the most prudent approach. With modern machine 
learning suites such as scikit -learn [18], changing between these model variants often requires 
changing just one line of c ode, so a good overall strategy for selecting the best method is to train 
and optimize a variety of the aforementioned methods and choose the one with the best 
performance on the validation set, before finally comparing their performance on a separate test  
set.  
 
Use of clustering models. The use of clustering algorithms (Figure 3e) is pervasive within biology 
[42,43] . k-means is a strong general -purpose approach to clustering that, like many oth er clustering 
algorithms, requires the number of clusters to be set as a hyperparameter [44]. DBSCAN is an 
alternative method that does not require the number of clusters to be predefined, but has the  trade -
off of other hyperparameters to set, [45]. Dimensionality reduction can also be performed prior to 
clustering to improve performance for datasets with a large number of features.  
 
Dimensionali ty reduction.  Dimensionality reduction techniques are used to transform data with a 
large number of attributes (or dimensions) into a lower -dimensional form while preserving the 
different relationships between the data points as much as possible. For examp le, data points that 
are similar (e.g. two homologous protein sequences) should also be similar in their lower -
dimensional form and vice versa, dissimilar data points (e.g. unrelated protein sequences) should 
remain dissimilar [46,47] . Two or three dimensions are often chosen to allow visualisation of the 
data on a set of axes, though larger numbers of dimensions have uses in machine learning too. 
These techniques comprise both linear and nonline ar transformations of the data. Examples 
common in biology include principal component analysis (PCA) as shown in Figure 3d, Uniform 
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)) and t -distributed stochastic neighbour 
embedding (t -SNE) [48]. The technique to use depends on the situation: PCA retains global 
relationships between data points and is interpretable because each component is a linear 
combination of input features, meaning it is easy to under stand which features give rise to variety 
in the data. t -SNE more strongly preserves local relationships between data points and is a flexible 
method that can reveal structure in complex datasets. Applications include single -cell 
transcriptomics for t -SNE [49] and molecular dynamics trajectory analysis for PCA.  
 
Artificial neural networks  
 
Artificial neural network models get their name from the fact that the form of the mathematical 
model that is bein g fit is inspired by the connectivity and behaviour of neurons in the brain and 
was originally designed to learn about brain function [50]. However, the neural networks in 
common use in data science a re obsolete as brain models, and are now just machine learning 
models that can offer state -of-the-art performance in certain applications. Interest in neural 
network models has grown in recent decades owing to rapid advances in the architectures and 

==== Page 9 ====
 
9 traini ng of deep neural networks [26]. In this section, we describe basic neural networks, as well 
as varieties that are widely used in biological studies. Some of these are shown in Figure 4.  
 
Basic principles of neural networks. A key property of neural networks is that they are universal 
function approximators, which means that, with very few assumptions, a correctly configured 
neural network can approximate any mathematical function to an arb itrary level of accuracy. In 
other words, if any process (biological or otherwise) can be thought of as some function of a set 
of variables, then that process can be modelled to any arbitrary degree of accuracy, governed by 
just the size or complexity of t he model. The above definition of universal approximation is not 
mathematically rigorous, but does highlight one reason why interest in neural networks has 
persisted for decades. However, this guarantee does not provide a way of finding the optimal 
paramet ers of a neural network model that will produce the best approximation for a given dataset. 
There is also no guarantee that the model will provide accurate predictions for new data [51].  
 
Artificial neurons are the building blocks of all neural network models. An artificial neuron is 
simply a mathematical function that maps (converts) inputs to outputs in a specific way. A single 
artificial neuron takes in any number of input values, applies a specifi c mathematical function to 
them, and returns an output value. The function used is usually represented as   
𝑦 =𝜎(∑(𝑤𝑖𝑥𝑖)𝑛
𝑖=1+𝑏), 
where xi represents a single input variable or feature (there are n such inputs), wi represents a 
learnable weight for that input, b represents a learnable bias term, and σ represents a non -linear 
activation function that takes a single input, and returns a single  output. To create a network, 
artificial neurons are arranged in layers, with the output of one layer being the input to the next. 
The nodes of the network can be thought of as holding the y values from the above equation, which 
become the x values for the  next layer. We describe various approaches to arranging artificial 
neurons in the subsections below, which are called neural network architectures. It is also common 
to combine the different architecture types, for example in a convolutional neural networ k (CNN) 
used for classification, fully connected layers are usually used to produce the final classification 
output.  
 
Multilayer perceptrons.  The most basic layout of a neural network model is that of layers of 
artificial neurons arranged in a fully conne cted fashion, as shown in Figure 4a. In this layout, a 
fixed number of “input neurons'' represent the input feature values calculated from the data that 
are fed to the network, and each connection between a pair of neurons represents one trainable 
weight p arameter. These weights are the main adjustable parameters in a neural network, and 
optimizing these weights is what is meant by neural network training. At the other end of the 
network, a number of output neurons represent the final output values from the  network. Such a 
network, when correctly configured, can be used to make complex, hierarchical decisions about 
the input, since each neuron in a given layer receives inputs from all neurons in the previous layer. 

==== Page 10 ====
 
10 Layers of neurons in this simple arrangemen t are often called multilayer perceptrons and were the 
first networks useful for bioinformatics applications [52,53] . They are still widely used in a number 
of biological modelling applications today due to their ease and speed of training [13,54] . In many 
other applications, however, these simple architectures have been surpassed by newer model 
architectures discussed below, though so me of these newer architectures still often make use of 
fully connected layers as subcomponents.  
 
Convolutional neural networks.  CNNs are ideally suited for image -like data, where the data 
possesses some type of local structure, and where the recognition o f such structure is a key 
objective of the analysis. Using the example of images, this local structure could relate to specific 
types of objects in a field of view (e.g. cells in a microscopy image), represented by specific local 
patterns of colours and/or  edges in spatially close pixels in an input image.  
 
CNNs are composed of one or more convolutional layers (see Figure 4b), in which the output is 
the result of applying a small, one -layer fully connected neural network, called a filter or kernel, 
to local  groups of features in the input. In the case of image -like inputs, this local area would be a 
small patch of pixels in the image. The outputs of a convolutional layer are also image -like arrays, 
carrying the result of “sliding” the filter over the entire input and computing an output at each 
position. Crucially, the same filter is used across all pixels, allowing the filters to learn local 
structure in the input data. It is common in deeper CNNs to use skip connections that allow the 
input signal to bypass  one or more layers in addition to passing through the processing units in the 
layer. This type of network is called a residual network (ResNet) and allows training to converge 
more quickly on performant solutions.  
 
CNNs can be configured to operate effect ively on data of different spatial structure. For example, 
a 1D CNN would have filters that slide in just one direction (say left to right); this type of CNN 
would be suitable for data that have only one spatial dimension (such as text or biological 
sequen ces). 2D CNNs operate on data with 2 spatial dimensions, such as digital images. 3D CNNs 
operate on volumetric data, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans.  
 
CNNs have seen significant success in biology for a variety of data types. Recent advances  in 
protein structure prediction have used information on the co -evolution of residue pairs in related 
protein sequences to extract information on residue pair contacts and distances, allowing 
predictions of 3D protein structures to be built at unprecedent ed accuracy [23,55] . In this case, the 
network learns to pick out direct coupling interactions, and accurate predictions can be made even 
for sequences with few or no related sequences [56]. CNNs have also been applied successfully to 
identifying variants in genetic sequence data [57], 3D genome folding [58], DNA –protein 
interactions [22,59] , cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo -EM) image analysis [60,61]  and im age 
classification in medically -important contexts (such as detection of malignancy), where they often 
now rival expert human performance [24,62] . 

==== Page 11 ====
 
11  
Recurrent neural networks.  Recurrent neural ne tworks (RNNs) are most suited to data that is in 
the form of ordered sequences, such that there exists (at least notionally) some dependence or 
correlation between one point in the sequence and the next. Probably their main application outside 
biology is i n natural language processing, where text is treated as a sequence of words or 
characters. As shown in Figure 4c, recurrent networks can be thought of as a block of neural 
network layers that take as input the data corresponding to each entry (or time step ) in a sequence, 
and produce an output for each entry that is dependent on entries that have previously been 
processed. They can also be used to generate a representation of the whole sequence that is passed 
to later layers of the network to generate the o utput. This is useful as sequences of any length can 
be converted to a fixed size representation and input to a multilayer perceptron. Obvious examples 
for the use of RNNs in biology include analysis of gene or protein sequences, with tasks including 
ident ifying promoter regions from gene sequences, predicting protein secondary structure, or 
modelling gene expression levels over time; in the latter case, the value at a given time point would 
count as one entry in a sequence. The more advanced long short -term memory (LSTM) or gated 
recurrent unit (GRU) variants of RNNs, which have many uses in biology including protein 
structure prediction [63,64] , peptide design [65] and predicting clinical diagnosis from health 
records [66]. These more advanced methods are often used in combination with CNNs, which can 
increase accuracy [67]. RNNs can be very robust in analyzing sequence -based data. For example, 
RNNs trained on millions of protein sequences have shown an ability to capture evolutionary and 
structural information, and can be applied t o a variety of supervised tasks including tasks related 
to the design of novel protein sequences [68]. 
 
Role of attention mechanisms and the use of transformers . A problem identified with RNNs is the 
difficulty they have in examining specific parts of an input sequence, which is important in order 
to generate a highly accurate output. The addition of an attention mechanism to RNNs, which 
allows the model to acces s all parts of the input sequence when calculating each output, was 
introduced to alleviate this problem. Recently it has been shown that the RNN is not even required 
at all, and that attention alone can be used by itself; the resulting models, called tran sformers, have 
obtained state -of-the-art results on many natural language processing benchmarks [69]. 
Transformer models have recently shown better accuracy than RNNs for tasks on biological 
sequences , but it remains to be seen whether these methods, which are often trained on billions of 
sequences using thousands of GPUs, will be able to outperform existing alignment -based methods 
of sequence analysis in bioinformatics [70]. The outstanding success of AlphaFold2 at the Critical 
Assessment of protein Structure Prediction 14 (CASP14) experiment, a blind assessment of 
computational approaches to predict protein structure from sequence, suggests that models using 
attention also hold promise for tasks in structural biology [71]. 
 
Graph convolutional networks.  Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are particularly suitable for 
data that, whilst not ha ving any obvious visible structure like an image, are nonetheless composed 

==== Page 12 ====
 
12 of entities connected by arbitrary specified relationships, or interactions [72]. Examples of such 
data relevant to biology a re molecules (composed of atoms and bonds) [73–76] and protein –protein 
interaction networks (composed of proteins and interactions) [77]. A graph, in computational 
terms, is just a representation of data of this type, with each graph having a set of vertices or nodes, 
and a set of edges that represent various types of relationships or connections between the nodes. 
Using the e xamples given above, representations of atoms or proteins might be classed as node 
features, and bonds or interactions might be classed as edge features. GCNs use the structure of 
the resulting graph to determine the flow of information in the neural netwo rk model. As shown 
in Figure 4d, adjacent nodes are considered when updating the features of each node throughout 
the network, with the node features in the last layer being used as the output (e.g. interacting 
residues on a protein) or combined to form an  output for the whole graph (e.g. fold type of the 
protein). Graphs representing different associations can combine different sources of information 
when making predictions, such as combining drug –gene and food –gene relationship graphs  to 
predict foo ds for cancer prevention [78]. Software for training GCNs includes PyTorch Geometric 
(https://pytorch -geometric.readthedocs.io/en/ latest ) [79] and Graph Nets 
(https://github.com/deepmind/graph_nets ) [72]. 
 
Autoencode rs. As the name suggests, autoencoders are neural network architectures designed to 
self (auto) encode a collection of data points by representing them as points in a new space of pre -
determined dimensionality, usually far fewer than the number of input di mensions. One neural 
network (the encoder) is trained to convert the input into a compact internal representation, called 
a latent vector or latent representation, representing a single point in the new space. The second 
part of an autoencoder, called the decoder, takes the latent vector as input and is trained to produce 
as output the original data with its original dimensionality (Figure 4e). Another way of looking at 
it is that the encoder tries to compress the input, and the decoder tries to decompress it back again. 
The encoder, latent representation, and decoder are trained at the same time. Although this sounds 
like a pointless exercise, where the output just mimics the input, the idea is to learn a new 
representation of the input data that compactly encodes desirable features, such as similarity 
between the data points, while still retaining the ability to reconstruct the original data using the 
learned latent representation. Applications include predicting how closely related two data points 
are and enforcing some structure on the latent space that is useful for further prediction tasks. 
Another benefit of the encoder –decoder architecture is that, once trained, the decoder can be used 
in isolation to generate predictions of new, synthetic data samples  which can be tested in the lab 
and contribute to synthetic biology efforts [80]. Autoencoders have been applied to a range of 
biological problems including predicting DNA methylation state [81], the engineering of gene and 
protein sequences [82,83]  and single -cell RNA -sequencing analysis [84]. 
 
Training and improving neural networks.  The general procedure for training machine learning 
models has been outlined in B ox 1. However, as neural networks are structurally much more 
complex than the traditional machine learning algorithms, there are some concerns that are specific 

==== Page 13 ====
 
13 to neural networks. Having picked a neural network as an appropriate model for the intended 
application (Figure 1) it is often a good idea to train it on just a single training example, e.g. a 
single image or gene sequence. This trained model is not useful for making predictions,  but the 
training is good at revealing programming errors. The training  loss function should very quickly 
go to zero as the network simply memorizes the input; if it doesn't, there is likely an error in the 
code, or the algorithm is not complex enough to model the input data. Once the network has passed 
this basic debugging t est, training on the whole training set can proceed where the training loss 
function is minimized. This may require tuning of hyperparameters such as the learning rate 
(Figure 2e). By monitoring loss on the training and validation set s, overfitting of the network can 
be detected where the training loss continues to drop lower and the loss on the validation set starts 
to increase. Training is usually stopped at that point, a process known as early stopping (Figure 
2f). Overfitting of a neural network (or any machine learning model), visualised in Figure 2d, 
means that the model is starting to simply memorize features of the training set and thus starting 
to lose its ability to generalize to new data. Early stopping is a good way of preve nting this, but 
other techniques can be used during training, such as regularisation of the model or dropout 
techniques, where nodes in the network are randomly ignored to force the network to learn a more 
robust prediction strategy involving multiple node s. 
 
Popular software packages used to train neural networks include PyTorch ( https://pytorch.org ) 
[85] and Tensorflow ( https://www.tensorflo w.org ) [85]. Training neural networks is 
computationally demanding, usually requiring a GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) or TPU (Tensor 
Processing Unit) with sufficient memory, as these devices can prov ide a 10 -100x speedup over 
using the standard, central processing unit (CPU). This speedup is required when training the larger 
models that have shown success in recent years, and when training on large datasets. However, 
running an already trained model i s usually considerably faster and is often feasible on just an 
ordinary CPU. Cloud computing solutions from common providers exist for those without access 
to a GPU for training, and it is worth noting that for small tasks, the Colaboratory (Colab) 
(https://research.google.com/colaboratory ) allows Python code to be tested on either GPUs or 
TPUs free of charge. Using Colab is an excellent way of getting started with Python -based deep 
learning.  
 
Chal lenges for biological applications  
 
Perhaps the single biggest challenge of modelling biological data is its sheer variety [1]. Biologists 
work with data such as gene and protein sequences, gene expr ession levels over time, evolutionary 
trees, microscopy images, 3D structures, and interaction networks, to name but a few. We have 
summarised some best practices and important considerations for specific biological data types in 
Table 2. Owing to the dive rsity of data types encountered, biological data often require somewhat 
bespoke solutions for handling them effectively, and this makes it difficult to recommend off -the-
shelf tools or even general guidelines for the use of machine learning in these proble m domains, 

==== Page 14 ====
 
14 as the choice of model, training and test data will depend heavily on the exact questions one wants 
to answer. Nevertheless, there are some common issues that need to be considered for the 
successful use of machine learning in biology, but also more generally.  
 
Data availability . Biology is somewhat unique in that there exist some problem domains that have 
very large quantities of data publicly available, whereas other problem domains have very little. 
An example is the relative abundance of biological sequence data in public dat abases such as NCBI 
GenBank and UniProt, whereas reliable data on protein interactions is much harder to come by. 
The quantity of data available for a given problem has a profound impact on the choice of 
techniques that can effectively be used. As a very r ough guideline, when only small amounts of 
data (hundreds or a few thousand examples) are available, one is essentially forced to use more 
traditional machine learning methods, as these are more likely to produce robust predictions. When 
larger quantities are available, one can start to consider more highly parameterized models such as 
deep neural networks. In supervised machine learning, the relative proportions of each ground 
truth label in the dataset should also be considered, with more data required fo r machine learning 
to work if some labels are rare [86]. 
 
Data leakage. Although the scale and complexity of biological data may make it seem ideal for 
machine learning, there are some important consi derations that need to be borne in mind 
[21,87,88] . One key concern is how to validate the performance of a model. The common setup of 
training, validation and test sets can lead to proble ms such as researchers repeatedly testing on the 
same test set with a variety of models to obtain the best accuracy, and hence risking overestimating 
performance on it without generalizing to other test sets or new data. However, biological data 
presents a  further non -trivial question: in a large dataset with related entries (e.g. as a result of 
familial relationships, or evolutionary relationships), how does one ensure that two closely related 
entries don't end up split between the training and test sets? If this occurs then the ability of the 
model to remember specific cases is tested, rather than its ability to predict the property in question. 
This is one type of issue often called data leakage and leads to results that appear better than they 
are, which  is perhaps one reason researchers are reluctant to be rigorous about the issue. Other 
types of data leakage are possible, for example, using any data or features during training that 
would not be available during testing. Here, we focus on the problem of having related samples in 
the training and testing sets.  
 
What we mean by “related” here depends on the nature of the study. It might be a case of sampling 
data from the same patient, or the same organism. However, the classic situation where data 
leakage occurs in biology is seen in studies on protein sequences and structures. Typically, but 
usually not correctly, researchers try to ensure that no protein in the training set has sequence 
identity above a certain threshold to any protein in the test set, us ually at a threshold of 30% or 
25%. This is enough to exclude many homologous pairs of proteins, but it has been known for 
decades that some homologous proteins can have virtually no sequence similarity [89,90] , which 

==== Page 15 ====
 
15 would mean that simply filtering by sequence identity would be insufficient to prevent data 
leakage. This is particularly important for models that operate on sequence alignments or sequence 
profiles as input, since, although two in dividual protein sequences may not share any obvious 
similarity, their profiles could be virtually identical. This means that for a machine learning model, 
these two profiles would essentially be the same data point —. both will be describing the same 
protein family. For protein sequences, one solution to avoid this problem is to search the test data 
with a sensitive hidden Markov model (HMM) profile comparison tool such as HH -suite, which 
can find sequences distantly related to the training data [91]. In the common case where protein 
structure is being used as input or output, structural classifications such as CATH [92] or ECOD 
[93] can be used to exclude similar folds or homologous proteins. Similar issues affect studies 
predicting protein –ligand binding affinity [94]. 
 
To be clear, dat a leakage is not an intrinsic issue with any particular type of data, but rather it is a 
problem with how the data are used when training and evaluating machine learning models. One 
would certainly expect a trained model to produce very good results on dat a that are similar to the 
training set. The issue of data leakage becomes a problem when a model that appears performant 
on some benchmark set performs poorly on new data that are actually different to the training set; 
in other words, the model does not g eneralise, likely because it has not modelled the true 
relationship between the variables, but rather remembered hidden associations present in the data.  
 
Thanks to frequent complaints from reviewers, some journals are now starting to require rigorous 
benchmarking to be carried out before a paper can be considered for publication. Without proper 
testing, the performance of a model will very likely not be representative of real -world 
performance on unseen data, which undermines user confidence in the model.  Worse, authors of 
future studies may be misled into thinking that inadequate testing is defensible simply because it 
has already appeared in (possibly several) peer -reviewed papers, even though it is not. As 
mentioned in Box 2, authors, peer reviewers and  journal editors all have a responsibility for making 
sure that data leakage has been avoided. Knowingly leaving these kinds of errors in place is really 
little better than fabricating data at the end of the day.  
 
Interpretability of models.  It is usually the case that biologists want to know why a particular model 
is making a particular prediction, i.e. what features of the input data is the model responding to 
and how, and why it works in some cases but not others. In other words, biologists are often 
interested in discovering mechanisms and the factors responsible for modelling output, rather than 
just accurate modelling, as mentioned previously. The ability to interpret a model depends on the 
machine learning method used and the input data. Interpretatio n is usually easier for non -neural 
network methods, since these have feature sets more amenable to direct meaningful interpretation 
and generally have fewer learnable parameters. In the case of, say, a simple linear regression 
model, the parameter assigned  to each input feature gives a direct indication of how that feature 
affects the prediction.  

==== Page 16 ====
 
16  
The low cost of training non -neural network methods means that it is advisable to carry out ablation 
studies , where the effect on performance of removing defined  features of the input is measured. 
Ablation studies can reveal which features are most useful for the modelling task at hand, and are 
one way to possibly discover more robust, efficient and interpretable models.  
 
Interpreting a neural network (particularl y a deep neural network) is generally much harder due to 
the frequently large number of input features and parameters in the model. It is still possible to 
identify, for example, regions in an input image most responsible for a particular classification by  
building a saliency map [28]. Although saliency maps show which regions of an image are 
important, it can be more difficult to pinpoint which properties of the data in these locations were 
responsibl e for the prediction, particularly when the inputs are not easily human -interpretable like 
images and text. Nevertheless, saliency maps and similar representations can be useful as a ‘sanity 
check’ to ensure that the model is indeed looking at the relevant  parts of an image. This can help 
avoid situations where models make unintended connections, such as classifying medical images 
based on hospital or department labels in the corner of the image rather than the medical content 
of the image itself [95]. Generating adversarial examples, synthetic inputs that cause a neural 
network to produce confident incorrect predictions, can also be a good way of providing 
information on which features are being most u sed for prediction [96]. For example, CNNs often 
use textures (such as stripes in animal fur) to classify objects in images where humans would 
primarily make use of the shapes [51]. 
 
Privacy -preserving machine learning . Some biological data, most notably human genomics data 
and commercially sensitive  pharmaceutical data, has data privacy implications. There have been a 
number of efforts to allow s haring of data and distributed training of machine learning models in 
the context of data privacy. For example, modern cryptographic techniques allow training of a 
drug-target interaction model where the data and results are provably secure [97]. Simulated, 
synthetic participants that closely resemble real participants in a clinical trial can lead to results 
that are accurate for real participants without revealing identifying data [98]. Algorithms have been 
developed for efficient federated model training with data stored in different places [99]. 
 
The need for interdisciplinary collaborations . Unless publicly available  data is being used, it is 
rare that one research group will have the expertise and resources to both collect data for a machine 
learning study and also apply the most appropriate machine learning method effectively. It is 
common for experimental biologists to collaborate with computer scientists, with such 
collaborations often obtaining excellent results. It is, however, important in such collaborations 
that each side has some working knowledge of the other. In particular, computer scientists should 
make an effort to understand the data, such as the expected degree of noise and reproducibility, 
and biologists should understand the limitations of the machine learning algorithms being used. 

==== Page 17 ====
 
17 Building s uch understanding takes time and effort, but is important to prevent the often 
unintentional dissemination of poor models and misleading results.  
 
Future directions  
 
The increasing use of machine learning in biological studies looks set to continue for the 
foreseeable future. This increased uptake has been enabled by important advances in methodology, 
software and hardware, all of which keep on developing. A number of large technology companies 
are using their technical expertise and considerable resources to assist academic researchers, or 
even carry out their own research in biology with innovative machine learning strategies. To date, 
however, most success has come f rom applying algorithms developed in other fields directly to 
biological data. For example, CNNs and RNNs were developed for applications such as image 
analysis (for face recognition or in self -driving cars) and natural language processing, respectively. 
One of the most exciting prospects for machine learning in biology is algorithms tailored 
specifically to biological data and biological questions [100,101] . If the known structure of a 
biologica l system can be exploited and neural networks used to learn the unknown parts, then 
increasingly heavily parameterised models can be replaced with simpler ones that are more 
amenable to interpretation and more robust on new data [102] . Applications include biological 
reaction systems and pharmacokinetics, where systems of known differential equations can be 
exploited. This will also assist in the move from predictive machine learning to generative mode ls 
that can create new entities, such as designing proteins with novel structures and functions 
[103,104] . 
 
As the variety of useful architectures and input data types increases, the paradigm of  differentiable 
programming is emerging from the field of deep learning [105] . Differentiable programming is the 
use of automatic differentiation, the central concept in training neural networks, to c alculate 
gradients and improve parameters in any desired algorithm. This shows promise for physical 
models of biological systems in protein structure prediction [63,106] , and for learning force field 
parameters for molecular dynamics simulations [107,108] . The development of differentiable 
software packages such as Jax [109]  and p ackages tailored to specific areas of biology such as 
Selene [110] , Janggu [111]  and Jax MD [112]  will assist the development of such methods.  
 
The progress in biological data analysis with machine learning has also been enabled owing to 
deposition of trained models in publically -available repositories. In this way, researchers working 
on sim ilar problems can use these models without the need for training, and a variety of different 
models can be used with only minimal effort required for switching between them [113] . The field 
has also s een an expansion of automated machine learning pipelines, which train and tune a variety 
of models without user input and return the best performing model. These may assist non -experts 
in training models [114] . However, these resources cannot replace a thorough understanding of the 
method being used, which is important for choosing the appropriate inductive bias and interpreting 

==== Page 18 ====
 
18 the predictions of the model. It remains to be seen whether in the future automated machine 
learning will be reliable and flexible enough to allow experimentalists to routinely use complex 
machine learning algorithms independently, or whether machine learning expertise will remain a 
necessity.  
 
As has been discussed, rigorous v alidation of models and comparison of different models is 
challenging but remains necessary to identify the best performing models and inform future 
research directions. For the field to progress it will be necessary to develop benchmark datasets 
and valid ation tasks [115] , such as ProteinNet [116] , ATOM3D [117]  and TAPE [118] , and for 
these to become widely used. Of course, over -optimizing to a particular benchmark can occur and 
it is important that researchers resist the temptation to do this in order to make their results seem 
better. Blind assessments such as CASP [119]  and Critical Assessment of Functional Annotation 
(CAFA) [120]  will continue to play an important role in assessing which models perform best.  
 
Overall, the variety of biological data makes it hard to provide general guidelines for machine 
learning in biolog y. Hence, we have aimed here to give biologists an overview of the different 
methods available and to provide them with some ideas about how to carry out effective machine 
learning with their data. Of course, machine learning is not suited to every problem , and it is just 
as important to know when to avoid it: when there is not sufficient data, when understanding rather 
than prediction is required, or when it is unclear how to assess performance in a fair manner. The 
boundaries of when machine learning is u seful in biology are still being explored and will continue 
to change in accordance with the nature and volume of available experimental data. Undeniably, 
though, machine learning has had a huge impact on biology and will continue to do so.  
 
Acknowledgemen ts 
 
The authors thank members of the UCL Bioinformatics Group for valuable discussions and 
comments. This work was supported by the European Research Council Advanced Grant 
“ProCovar” (project ID 695558).  
 
Author contributions  
All authors researched data for the article, contributed substantially to discussion of the content, 
wrote the article and reviewed the manuscript before submission.  
Competing interests  
The authors declare no competing interests.  
 
  

==== Page 19 ====
 
19 Table 1 - Comparing different machi ne learning methods.  
 
Method  Type of data  Example 
applications  Advantages  Disadvantages  
Ridge (& 
LASSO/Elastic) 
Regression  Labelled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Protein variant effect 
prediction [121]  
 
Chemical/biochemica
l reaction kinetics 
[122]  Easy to interpret  
 
Easy to train  
 
Good benchmark  Can’t learn complex 
feature relationships  
Overfits with a large 
number of features  
Support -vector 
machine (SVM)  Labelled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Protein function 
prediction [123]  
 
Transmembrane 
protein topology 
prediction [124]  Can perform both 
linear and non -linear 
classification and 
regression  Scaling to large 
datasets is often 
difficult  
Random forest  Labelled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Prediction of disease -
associated genome 
mutations [125]  
 
Scoring of protein -
ligand interactions 
[39]  Learns how 
important each 
feature is to the 
prediction Individual 
decision trees are 
human -readable 
allowing 
interpretation of how 
a decision is made  
 
Less sensitive to 
feature scaling and 
normalization so 
easier to train and 
tune  Less appropriate for 
regression  
 
Many decision trees 
are hard to interpret  
Gradient 
boosting (e.g. 
XGBoost)  Labelled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Gene expression 
profiling [126]  Learns how 
important each 
feature is to the 
prediction  
 
Decision trees are 
human -readable 
allowing 
interpretation of how 
a decision is made  
 Can struggle to learn 
underlying signal if 
noise is present  
 
Less appropriate for 
regression  
 

==== Page 20 ====
 
20 Less sensitive to 
feature scaling and 
normalization so 
easier to train and 
tune 
Clustering  Unla belled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Differential gene 
expression analysis 
[15] 
 
Model selection in 
protein structure 
prediction [127]  For low -dimensional 
data, good clustering 
is easily identifiable  
 
Cluster validation 
metrics are available 
to assess 
performance  Scaling to large 
datasets is difficult 
for some methods  
 
Noisy data sets 
sometimes yield 
contradictory results  
Dimensionality 
reduction  Unlabelled  
 
Large and fixed 
number of features  Single -cell 
transcriptomics [49] 
 
Analysis of 
molecular dynamics 
trajectories [128]  Provides visual 
representation of data  
 
Goodness -of-fit 
evaluations usually 
available to assess 
performance  Hard to preserve both 
global and local 
differences in data  
 
Scaling to large 
numbers of samples 
is difficult for some 
methods  
Multilayer 
perceptrons  Labelled  
 
Fixed number of 
features  Protein secondary 
structure prediction 
[13] 
 
Drug toxicity 
prediction [54] Can fit datasets with 
fewer layers than 
architectures such as 
CNNs, making them 
easier and faster to 
train  Easy to overfit  
 
Large number of 
parameters  
 
Hard to interpret  
Convolutional 
neural networks 
(CNNs)  Spatial data arranged 
in a grid e.g. 2D 
image (pixels) or 3D 
volumes (voxels)  
 
Allows variable input 
size Protein residue –
residue contact and 
distance prediction 
[23] 
 
Medical image 
recognition [24,57]  Variable input size  
 
Learns patterns 
irrespective of 
location in input  Receptive field, the 
amount of the input 
that is considered 
when predicting the 
output for each pixel, 
can be limited  
 
Hard to train deeper 
architectures that use 
many layers to 
increase the receptive 
field and make more 
complex predictions  
Recurrent neural 
networks Sequential data, e.g. 
biological sequences Protein engineering 
[68] Variable input size  
 Long training times  
 

==== Page 21 ====
 
21 (RNNs)  or time -series data  
 
Allows variable input 
size  
Predicting clinical 
events [66] Sequences are found 
in many areas of 
biology  High co mputing 
memory 
requirements  
Graph 
convolutional 
networks 
(GCNs)  Data characterised by 
connections between 
entities (spatial, 
interaction or 
association)  
 
Allows variable input 
size Predicting drug 
properties [77] 
 
Interpreting 
molecular structures 
[73,74]  
 
Knowledge 
extraction [129]  Variable graph sizes 
supported, which is 
important because 
most graphs in 
biology have variable 
size 
 
Learns patterns by 
following graph 
connectivity so 
predictor uses most 
relevant associations  High computing 
memory 
requirements for 
large, densely 
connect ed graphs  
 
Hard to train deeper 
architectures  
Autoencoders  Labelled or 
unlabelled data  
 
Fixed or variable 
input size depending 
on architecture  Protein and gene 
engineering [82] 
 
Prediction of DNA 
methylation [81] 
 
Neural population 
dynamics [130]  Latent space pr ovides 
low-dimensional 
representation that 
can be used to 
visualise input data  
  
Can generate new 
samples, which is 
useful in areas such 
as protein design  Latent space specific 
to data in training set 
and may not be 
appropriate to other 
datasets  
 
Testing  newly 
generated samples 
often requires wet lab 
experiments  
 
Each method has types of data and applications to which it is best suited, along with advantages 
and disadvantages when compared to other methods.  
  

==== Page 22 ====
 
22 Table 2 - Recommendations for the use of machine learning strategies for different 
biological data types.  
 
Input data  Example prediction 
tasks  Recommended models  Challenges  
Gene sequence  Genome accessibility 
[14] 
 
3D genome 
organisation [58] 
 
Enhancer –promoter 
interactions [40] 1D convolutional neural 
networks (CNNs)  
 
Recurrent neural 
networks (RNNs)  
 
Transformers  Repetitive regions in 
genome  
 
Sparse regions of interest  
 
Very long sequences  
Protein sequence  Protein structure 
[23,55]  
 
Protein function [131]  
 
Protein –protein 
interaction [132] 2D CNNs and residual 
networks (ResNets) 
using covariation data  
 
Multilayer perceptrons 
with windowing  
 
Transformers  Metagenome data stored 
in many places and 
therefore hard to access  
 
Data leakage (from 
homology) can make 
validation difficult  
Protein 3D structure  Protein model 
refinement [133]  
 
Protein model quality 
assessment [134]  
 
Change in stability on 
mutation [135]  Graph convolutional 
networks (GCNs) using 
molecular graph  
 
3D CNNs using 
coordinates  
 
Traditional methods 
using structural features  
 
Clustering  Lack of data, particularly 
on protein complexes  
 
Lack of data on disordered 
proteins  
Gene expression  Intergenic interactions 
or co -expression [136]  
 
Organisation of 
transcription machinery 
[137]  Clustering  
 
CNNs 
 
Autoencoders  Unclear link between co -
expression and function  
 
High dimensionality  
 
High noise   
Mass spectrometry  Detecting peaks in 
spectra [138]  
 CNNs using spectral data  
 
Traditional methods Lack of standardised 
benchmarks [140]  
 

==== Page 23 ====
 
23 Metabolite annotation 
[139]  using derived features  Normalisation * required 
between different datasets  
Images  Medical image 
recognition [24,62]  
 
Cryo -EM image 
reconstruction [60,141]  
 
RNA -Seq profiles [142]  2D CNNs and ResNets  
 
Autoencoders  
 
Traditional methods 
using image features  Systematic differences in 
data collection affect 
prediction  
 
Hard to obtain large 
datasets of consistent data  
Molecular structure  Antibiotic activity [73] 
 
Drug toxicity [54] 
 
Protein -ligand docking 
[39] 
 
Novel drug generation 
[143]  GCNs using molecular 
graph  
 
Traditional methods or 
multilayer perceptrons 
using molecular 
properties  
 
RNNs using text -based 
representations of 
molecular structure such 
as SMILES  
 
Autoencoders  Only a tiny fraction of 
possible small molecules 
have experimental data 
available  
Protein –protein 
interaction network  Polypharmacology side 
effects [77] 
 
Protein function [144]  GCNs  
 
Graph embedding  Interaction networks can 
be incomplete  
 
Cellular location affects 
whether proteins interact  
 
High number of possible 
combinations  
Each type of biological data has prediction tasks where it has been used effectively, machine 
learning models that are appropriate and specific challenges when using machine learning. Some 
challenges, such as high dimensionality, affect most biological data types.  
*  Normalisation means rescaling or otherwise transfor ming variables from different data sets 
with the intention that their contributions should carry roughly equal weight and their ranges are  
so that they become  comparable on a joint common scale of values. The most common way of 
achieving this is by subtracting the means of each variable and dividing by their standard 
deviations, which can also be called “standardisation”.  This is required because different 
instruments, experimental protocols etc. can produce systematic differences in measurements of  
the same quantities, rendering it difficult or impossible to compare trends between experiments.  
 

==== Page 24 ====
 
24  
 
Figure 1 - Choosing and training a machine learning method. The overall procedure for 
training a machine learning method is shown along the top. A decision tree to assist researchers in 
selecting a model is given below. This flowchart is intended to be used as a visual guide linking 
the concepts outlined in the paper. However, a simple overview such as this cannot cover every 
case. For example, the number of data points required for machine learnin g to become applicable 
depends on the number of features available for each data point, with more features requiring more 
data points, and also depends on the model being used. There are also deep learning models that 
work on unlabelled data.  
 
  


==== Page 25 ====
 
25  
 
Figure 2 - Training machine learning methods.  (a) Available data is often split into training, 
validation and test sets. The training set is directly used to train the model, the validation set is 
used to monitor training, and the test set is used to assess the performance of the model. k-fold 
cross -validation with a test set can also be used. (b) One -hot encoding is a common approach for 
representing categorical inputs where a single choice is permitted from a number of possibilities, 
in this case three possible protein secondary structure cl asses. The result of the encoding is a vector 
with three numbers, all equal to 0 except the occupied class which is set to 1. This vector is used 
by the machine learning model. (c) Continuous encoding represents numerical inputs, in this case 
the red, gree n and blue values of a pixel in an image. Again the result is a vector with three numbers 
corresponding to the amount of red, green and blue in the pixel. (d) Failing to learn the underlying 
relationship between the variables  is called underfitting, whereas learning the noise in the training 
data is called overfitting. Underfitting can be caused by using a model without sufficient 
complexity to describe the signal. Overfitting can be caused by using a model with too many 
param eters or by continuing training after it has learned an approximation of the true relationship 
between the variables. (e) The learning rate of the model determines how quickly learned 
parameters are adjusted when training a neural network or some tradit ional methods such as 
gradient boosting. A low learning rate can lead to slow training, which is time consuming and 
requires considerable computing power. By contrast, a high learning rate can lead to quick 
convergence on a non -optimal solution and poor pe rformance of the model. (f) Early stopping is 
the process of terminating training at the point where the loss function on the validation set starts 
to increase, even if the loss function on the training set is still decreasing. Use of early stopping 
can pr event overfitting.  
 
  


==== Page 26 ====
 
26  
Figure 3 - Traditional machine learning methods. (a) Regression finds the relationship between 
a dependent variable (the observed property) and one or more independent variables (features), for 
example predicting the weight of a person from their height. ( b) A support -vector machine (SVM) 
transforms the original input data such that in their transformed versions (called the latent 
representation), data belonging to separate categories are divided by a clear gap that is made as 
wide as possible. In this case  we show a prediction of whether a protein is ordered or disordered, 
with the axes representing dimensions of the transformed data (c) Gradient boosting uses an 
ensemble of weak prediction models, typically decision trees, to make predictions. For example,  
active drugs can be predicted from molecular descriptors such as molecular weight and the 
presence of particular chemical groups. Individual predictors are combined in a stage -wise manner 
to make the final prediction. (d) Principal component analysis (PCA ) finds a series of feature 
combinations that best describe the data whilst being orthogonal to each other. It is commonly 
used for dimensionality reduction. In the case of the height and weight of a person, the first 
principal component (PC1), correspondi ng to a linear combination of height and weight, describes 
the strong positive correlation, whereas PC2 might describe another variables that do not correlate 
strongly with those, such as percentage body fat or muscle mass.  (e) Clustering uses one of  various 
algorithms to group sets of similar objects, for example grouping cell types based on gene 
expression profiles.  
 
  


==== Page 27 ====
 
27  
Figure 4 - Neural network methods. (a) A multilayer perceptron consists of nodes (shown as 
circles) that represent numbers: either an input value, an output value, or an in ternal (hidden) value. 
Nodes are arranged in layers with connections, indicating learned parameters, between every node 
of a layer and every node of the next layer. For example, molecular properties can be used to 
predict drug toxicity since the prediction  can be made from some complicated combination of 
independent input features. (b) A convolutional neural network (CNN) uses filters that move 
across the input layer and are used to calculate the values in the next layer. The filters operating 
across the wh ole layer mean that parameters are shared, allowing similar entities to be detected 
regardless of location. A 2D CNN is shown operating on a microscopy image but 1D and 3D CNNs 
also find applications in biology. The dimensionality, in this case, refers to how many spatial 
dimensions there are in the data, and the connectivity within the CNNs can be configured 
accordingly. For example, biological sequences can be considered 1D and Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging data can be considered 3D. (c) A recurrent neural n etwork (RNN) processes each part of 
a sequential input using the same learned parameters , giving an output and an updated hidden 
state for every input. The hidden state is used to carry information about the preceding parts of the 
sequence. In this case the probability of transcription factor binding is predicted for each base in a 
DNA sequen ce. The RNN is expanded to show how each output is generated using the same layers; 
this should not be confused with using different layers for each output. (d) A graph convolutional 
network (GCN) uses information from connected nodes in a graph, such as a  protein –protein 
interaction network, to update node properties the network by combining predictions from all 
neighbouring nodes. The updated node properties form the next layer in the network and predict 
the desired property in the output layer. (e) An au toencoder consists of an encoder neural network, 
which converts an input into a lower -dimensional latent representation, and a decoder neural 
network, which converts this latent representation back to the original input form. For example, 


==== Page 28 ====
 
28 protein sequences  can be encoded and the latent representation used to generate novel protein 
sequences. In the example 4 of the 5 residues are the same as the input after encoding and decoding 
by the autoencoder, indicating an accuracy of 80% on this sequence.  
 
  

==== Page 29 ====
 
29 Box 1 - Doing machine learning.  
 
In this box we outline the steps that should be taken when training a machine learning model. 
There is surprisingly little guidance available on the model selection and training process 
[145,146] , with descriptions of the stepping stones and failed models rarely making it into 
published research papers. The first step, before touching any machine learning code, should be to 
fully understand the data (inputs) and predi ction task (outputs) at hand. This means a biological 
understanding of the question, such as knowing the origin of the data and the sources of noise, and 
having an idea of how the output could theoretically be predicted from the input using biological 
principles. For example, it can be reasoned that different amino acids might have preferences for 
particular secondary structures in proteins, so it makes sense to predict secondary structure from 
amino acid frequencies at each position in a protein sequence. It is also important to know how the 
inputs and outputs are stored computationally. Are they normalised to prevent one feature having 
an unduly large influence on prediction? Are they encoded as binary variables or continuously? 
Are there duplicate entries ? Are there missing data elements?  
 
Next, the data should be split to allow training, validation and testing. There are a number of ways 
to do this, two of which are shown in Figure 2a. The training set is used to directly update the 
parameters of the mode l being trained. The validation set, usually around 10% of the available 
data, is used to monitor training, select hyperparameters and prevent the model overfitting to the 
training data. Often k-fold cross -validation is used: the training set is split into  k evenly sized 
partitions (e.g. 5 or 10) to form k different training and validation sets, and the performance 
compared across each partition to select the best hyperparameters. The test set, sometimes called 
the hold -out set, typically also around 10% of  the available data, is used to assess the performance 
of the model on data not used for training or validation (i.e. estimate its expected real -world 
performance). The test set should be used only once at the very end of the study or as little as 
possible  [27,38]  to avoid tuning the model to fit the test set. See the "Data leakage" subsection of 
the article for issues to consider when making a fair test set.  
 
The next step is model selecti on, which depends on the nature of the data and prediction task and 
is summarised in Figure 1. The training set is used to train the model following best practices of 
the software framework being used. Most methods have a handful of hyperparameters that ne ed to 
be tuned in order to achieve the best performance. This can be done using random search or grid 
search, and be combined with k-fold cross -validation as outlined above [27]. Model ensembling 
shou ld be considered, where the outputs of a number of similar models are simply averaged to give 
a relatively reliable way to boost overall accuracy of the modelling task. Finally, the accuracy of 
the model on the test set (see above) should be assessed.  
  

==== Page 30 ====
 
30 Box 2 - Evaluating articles that use machine learning.  
 
Here are some questions to consider when reading or reviewing papers that use machine learning 
on biological data. It is useful to bear these considerations in mind, even if the answers are not 
appare nt, and these questions can be used as the basis for a discussion with collaborators with the 
required expertise. A surprising number of papers do not pass these criteria [147] . 
 
Is the dataset adequa tely described?  Complete steps to assemble the dataset should be provided, 
ideally with the dataset or summary data (e.g.  biological database IDs) available at a persistent 
URL. In our experience, a thorough description of the machine learning methodology but with 
only a cursory reference to the data is a red flag. If a standard dataset or dataset from another study 
is being  used, then this should be adequately justified in the paper.  
 
Is the test set valid?  Based on discussion in " Challenges for biological applications " section, 
check that the test set is sufficient to benchmark the property under investigation. There shou ld be 
no data leakage between the training and test sets, the test set should be of a large enough size to 
give reliable results, and the test set should mirror the range of examples a standard user of the 
tool would be likely to use it on. The composition  and size of the training and test sets should be 
discussed in detail. Authors have a responsibility to ensure that all steps have been taken to avoid 
data leakage, and these steps should be described in the article, along with the rationale behind 
them. J ournal editors and peer reviewers should also ensure that these tasks have been performed 
to a good standard, and certainly should never just assume that they have been.  
 
Is the model choice justified?  Reasons should be given for the choice of machine lear ning 
method. Neural networks should be used because they are appropriate to the data and question in 
hand, and not just because everyone else is using them. Discussion of models that were tried and 
didn’t work should be encouraged as it may help others; to o often a complex model is presented 
without any discussion of the inevitable trial and error that will have been required to end up with 
that model.  
 
Have they compared to other methods?  A novel method should be compared to existing 
methods that show good  performance and are used in the community. Ideally methods using a 
variety of model types should be compared, which can aid in interpreting results. It is surprising 
how many complex models can be matched in performance by simple regression methods.  
 
Are the results too good to be true?  Claims of 99%+ accuracy are not uncommon in machine 
learning papers for biology. Usually, this is a sign of a problem with the cross -validation rather 
than an amazing breakthrough. Both authors and reviewers should take not e of this point.  
 

==== Page 31 ====
 
31 Is the method available?  At the very least, someone who wants to use a trained model from a 
paper should be able to run a prediction using a web service or binary file. Ideally, at least source 
code and the trained model should be availab le at a persistent URL and under a common license 
[148,149] . Also making the training code available is the ideal scenario, as this further increases 
the reproducibility of the paper and allows other researchers to build on the method without 
essentially having to start from scratch. Journals should bear some responsibility here to ensure 
that this becomes the norm.  
 
Online links  
 
Scikit -learn: https://scikit -learn.org/stable  
Caret: https://topepo.github.io/caret  
MLJ: https://alan -turing -institute.github.io/MLJ.jl/stable  
PyTorch Geometric: https://pytorch -geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest  
Graph Nets: https://github.com/deepmind/graph_nets  
PyTorch : https://pytorch.org  
Tensorflow: https://www.tensorflow.org  
Colaboratory: https://research.google.com/colabora tory  
 
Glossary  
 
Deep learning . Machine learning methods based on neural networks. The adjective “deep” refers 
to the use of many hidden layers in the network, two hidden layers as a minimum but usually 
many more than that. Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, and hence of artificial 
intelligence more broadly.  
 
Artificial neural network . A collection of connected nodes loosely representing neuron 
connectivity in a biological brain. Each node is part of a layer and represents a number calculated  
from the previous layer. The connections, or edges, allow a signal to flow from the input layer to 
the output layer via hidden layers.  
 
Ground truth . The true value that the output of a machine learning model is compared to in order 
to train the model and  test performance. This data usually comes from experimental data (e.g. 
accessibility of a region of DNA to transcription factors) or expert human annotation (e.g. 
healthy or pathological medical image).  
 

==== Page 32 ====
 
32 Encoding.  Any scheme for numerically representing ( often categorical) data in a form suitable 
for use in a machine learning model. An encoding can be a fixed numerical representation, e.g. 
one-hot or continuous encoding, or can be defined using parameters that are trained along with 
the rest of a model.  
 
One-hot encoding.  An encoding scheme that represents a fixed set of n categorical inputs using n 
unique n-dimensional vectors, each with one element set to 1 and the rest to 0. For example, the 
set of three letters (A,B,C) could be represented by the three vectors [1,0,0], [0,1,0] and [0,0,1], 
respectively.  
 
Mean squared error . A loss function which calculates the average squared difference between 
the predicted values and the ground truth. This function heavily penalises outliers because it 
increases rapid ly as the difference between a predicted value and the ground truth grows.  
 
Binary cross entropy . The most common loss function for training a binary classifier — that is 
for tasks aimed to answer a question with only two choices (such as cancer versus non -cancer); 
sometimes called log loss.  
 
Linear regression . A model that assumes that the output can be calculated from a linear 
combination of inputs, i.e.  each input feature is multiplied by a single parameter and these values 
are added. It is easy to interpret how these models make their predictions.  
 
Kernel functions . Refers to transformations applied to each data point to map the original points 
into a space in which they become separable with respect to their class.  
 
Non-linear regression . A model where the output is calculated from a non -linear combination of 
inputs, i.e. the input features can be combined during prediction using operations such a s 
multiplication. These models can describe more complex phenomena than linear regression.  
 
k-nearest neighbours . A classification approach where a data point is classified based on the 
known (ground -truth) classes of the k most similar points in the train ing set, using a majority 
voting rule. k is a parameter that can be tuned. Can also be used for regression by averaging the 
property value over the k nearest neighbours.  
 
Regularisation . Restricting the values of parameters to prevent the model from overfitting to the 
training data. For example, penalising high parameter values in regression models reduces the 
flexibility of the model and can stop it fitting to noise in the training data . 
 
Cloud computing . On-demand computing services, including processing power and data storage, 
typically available via the internet. A pay -as-you-go model is usually used. Use of cloud 

==== Page 33 ====
 
33 computing minimises up -front IT infrastructure costs.  
 
Hidden Markov mo del. A statistical model that can be used to describe the evolution of 
observable events that depend on factors that are not directly observable. They have various uses 
in biology including representing protein sequence families.  
 
Saliency map . In the cont ext of machine learning, a saliency map is an image generated to show 
which pixels in an input image contribute to the prediction made by a model. They are useful in 
interpreting models.  
 
Automatic differentiation . A set of techniques to automatically calc ulate the gradient of a 
function in a computer program. Used to train neural networks where it is called 
backpropagation.  
 
Gradients . A gradient is the rate of change of one property as another property changes. In neural 
networks the set of gradient s of the loss function with respect to the neural network parameters, 
computed via a process known as backpropagation, is used to adjust the parameters and thus 
train the model.  
 
eTOC  
Machine learning is becoming a widely used tool for the analysis of biol ogical data. However, 
for experimentalists, proper use of machine learning methods can be challenging. This article 
overviews machine learning techniques and provides guidance on their applications in biology.  
 
 
References  
1.  Ching T, Himmelstein DS, Beaulieu -Jones BK, Kalinin AA, Do BT, Way GP, et al. Opportunities and 
obstacles for deep learning in biology and medicine. J R Soc Interface. 2018;15.  
A thorough review of appli cations of deep learning to biology and medicine including many references to the 
literature.  
2.  Mitchell TM. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill; 1997.  
3.  Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep Learning. MIT Press; 2016.  
4.  Libbrecht MW, Noble WS. Machine learning applications in genetics and genomics. Nat Rev Genet. 2015;16: 
321–332. 
5.  Zou J, Huss M, Abid A, Mohammadi P, Torkamani A, Telenti A. A primer on deep learning in genomics. Nat 
Genet. 2019;51: 12 –18. 
6.  Myszczynska MA, Ojami es PN, Lacoste AMB, Neil D, Saffari A, Mead R, et al. Applications of machine 
learning to diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Neurol. 2020;16: 440 –456. 
7.  Yang KK, Wu Z, Arn old FH. Machine -learning -guided directed evolution for protein engineering. Nature 

==== Page 34 ====
 
34 Methods. 2019;16: 687 –694. 
8.  Tarca AL, Carey VJ, Chen X -W, Romero R, Drăghici S. Machine learning and its applicatio ns to biology. 
PLoS Comput Biol. 2007;3: e116.  
An introduction to machine learning concepts and applications in biology with a focus on traditional machine 
learning methods.  
9.  Silva JCF, Teixeira RM,  Silva FF, Brommonschenkel SH, Fontes EPB. Machine learning approaches and their 
current application in plant molecular biology: A systematic review. Plant Sci. 2019;284: 37 –47. 
10.  Kandoi G, Acencio ML, Lemke N. Prediction of Druggable Proteins Using Machine Learning and Systems 
Biology: A Mini -Review. Front Physiol. 2015;6: 366.  
11.  Marblestone AH, Wayne G, Kording KP. Toward an Integration of Deep Learning and Neuroscience. Front 
Comput Neurosci. 2016;10: 94.  
12.  Jiménez -Luna J, Grisoni F, Schneider G. Drug discovery wit h explainable artificial intelligence. Nature 
Machine Intelligence. 2020;2: 573 –584. 
13.  Buchan DWA, Jones DT. The PSIPRED Protein Analysis Workbench: 20 years on. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2019;47: W402 –W40 7. 
14.  Kelley DR, Snoek J, Rinn JL. Basset: learning the regulatory code of the accessible genome with deep 
convolutional neural networks. Genome Res. 2016;26: 990 –999. 
15.  Altman N, Krzywinski M. Clustering. Nat Methods. 2017;14: 545 –546. 
16.  Hopf TA, Ingraham JB, Poelwijk FJ, Schärfe CPI, Springer M, Sander C, et al.  Mutation effects predicted from 
sequence co -variation. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35: 128 –135. 
17.  Zhang Z, Wang L, Gao Y, Zhang J, Zhenirovskyy M, Alexov E. Predicting folding free energy changes upon 
single point mutations. Bioinformatics. 2012;28: 664 –671. 
18.  Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, et al. Scikit -learn: Machine Learning 
in Python. J Mach Learn Res. 2011; 12: 2825 –2830.  
19.  Kuhn M. Building Predictive Models in R Using the caret Package. Journal of Statistical Software. 2008;28: 1 –
26. 
20.  Blaom AD , Kiraly F, Lienart T, Simillides Y, Arenas D, Vollmer SJ. MLJ: A Julia package for composable 
machine learning. Journal of Open Source Software. 2020;5: 2704.  
21.  Jones DT. Setting the standards for machine learning in biology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2019;20: 659 –660. 
22.  Alipanahi B, Delong A, Weirauch MT, Frey BJ. Predicting the sequence specificities of DNA - and RNA -
binding proteins by deep le arning. Nat Biotechnol. 2015;33: 831 –838. 
23.  Senior AW, Evans R, Jumper J, Kirkpatrick J, Sifre L, Green T, et al. Improved protein structure prediction 
using potentials from deep learning. Nature. 2 020;577: 706 –710. 
Technology company DeepMind entered the CASP13 assessment in protein structure prediction and their 
method using deep learning was the most accurate of the methods entered.  
24.  Estev a A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, et al. Dermatologist -level classification of skin 
cancer with deep neural networks. Nature. 2017;542: 115 –118. 
25.  Tegunov D, Cramer P. Real -time cr yo-electron microscopy data preprocessing with Warp. Nat Methods. 

==== Page 35 ====
 
35 2019;16: 1146 –1152.  
26.  LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature. 2015;521: 436 –444. 
A review of deep learning by some of th e major figures in the deep learning revolution.  
27.  Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and 
Prediction, Second Edition. Springer Science & Business Media; 2009.  
28.  Adebayo J, Gilmer J, Muelly M, Goodfellow I, Hardt M, Kim B. Sanity Checks for Saliency Maps. NeurIPS. 
2018. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03292  
29.  Gal Y, Ghahramani  Z. Dropout as a Bayesian Approximation: Representing Model Uncertainty in Deep 
Learning. PMLR. 2016;48: 1050 –1059.  
30.  Smith AM, Walsh JR, Long J, Davis CB, Henstock P, Hodge MR, et al. Standard mach ine learning approaches 
outperform deep representation learning on phenotype prediction from transcriptomics data. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2020;21: 119.  
31.  Tibshirani R. Regression shrinkage and selectio n via the lasso. J R Stat Soc Series B. 1996;58: 267 –288. 
32.  Zou H, Hastie T. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. J R Stat Soc Series B. 2005;67: 301 –
320. 
33.  Noble WS. What is a support vector machine? Nat Biotechnol. 2006;24: 1565 –1567.  
34.  Ben-Hur A, Weston J. A User’s Guide to Support Vector Machines. Methods in Mo lecular Biology. 2010; 
223–239. 
35.  Ben-Hur A, Ong CS, Sonnenburg S, Schölkopf B, Rätsch G. Support Vector Machines and Kernels for 
Computational Biology. PLoS Computational Biology. 2008;4: e1000173.  
An introduction to support vector machines with a focus on biological data and prediction tasks.  
36.  Kircher M, Witten DM, Jain P, O’Roak BJ, Cooper GM, Shendure J. A general framework for estimating  the 
relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants. Nat Genet. 2014;46: 310 –315. 
37.  Driscoll MK, Welf ES, Jamieson AR, Dean KM, Isogai T, Fiolka R, et al. Robust and automated detection of 
subcell ular morphological motifs in 3D microscopy images. Nat Methods. 2019;16: 1037 –1044.  
38.  Bzdok D, Krzywinski M, Altman N. Machine learning: supervised methods. Nat Methods. 2018;15: 5 –6. 
39.  Wang C, Zhang Y. Improving scoring -docking -screening powers of protein -ligand scoring functions using 
random forest. J Comput Chem. 2017;38: 169 –177. 
40.  Zeng W, Wu M, Jiang R. Prediction of enhancer -promoter interactions via natural language processing. BMC 
Genomics. 2018;19: 84.  
41.  Olson RS, Cava WL, Mustahsan Z, Varik A, Moore JH. Data -driven advic e for applying machine learning to 
bioinformatics problems. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2018;23: 192 –203. 
42.  Rappoport N, Shamir R. Multi -omic  and multi -view clustering algorithms: review and cancer benchmark. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47: 1044.  
43.  Steinegger M, Söding J. MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for the analysis of massive data 
sets. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35: 1026 –1028.  
44.  Jain AK. Data clustering: 50 years beyond K -means. Pattern Recognition Letters. 2010;31: 651 –666. 

==== Page 36 ====
 
36 45.  Ester M, Kriegel H -P, Sander J, Xu X. A density -based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial 
databases with noise. KDD’96: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining. 1996;96: 226–231. 
46.  Nguyen LH, Holmes S. Ten quick tips for effective dimensionality reduction. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019;15: 
e1006907.  
47.  Moon KR, van D ijk D, Wang Z, Gigante S, Burkhardt DB, Chen WS, et al. Visualizing structure and 
transitions in high -dimensional biological data. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37: 1482 –1492.  
48.  van der Maaten L, Hinton G. V isualizing Data using t -SNE. J Mach Learn Res. 2008;9: 2579 –2605.  
49.  Kobak D, Berens P. The art of using t -SNE for single -cell transcriptomics. Nat Commun. 2019;10: 5416.  
Discussion and tips for using t -SNE as a dimensionality reduction technique on single -cell transcriptomics data.  
50.  Crick F. The recent excitement about neural networks. Nature. 1989;337: 129 –132. 
51.  Geirhos R, Jacobsen J -H, Michaelis C, Zemel R, Brendel W, Bethge M, et al. Shortcut learning in deep neural 
networks. Nature Machine Intelligence. 2020;2: 665 –673. 
A discussion of a common problem in deep learning called shortcut learning, where the model uses decision 
rules that do not transfer to real -world data.  
52.  Qian N, Sejnowski TJ. Predicting the secondary structure of globular proteins using neural network models. J 
Mol Biol. 1988;202: 865 –884. 
53.  deFigueiredo RJ, Shankle WR, Macc ato A, Dick MB, Mundkur P, Mena I, et al. Neural -network -based 
classification of cognitively normal, demented, Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia from single photon 
emission with computed tomography image data from brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 199 5;92: 5530 –5534.  
54.  Mayr A, Klambauer G, Unterthiner T, Hochreiter S. DeepTox: Toxicity Prediction using Deep Learning. 
Frontiers in Environmental Science. 2016;3.  
55.  Yang J, Anishchenko I, Park H, Peng Z, Ovchinnikov S, Baker D. Improved protein structure prediction using 
predicted interresidue orientations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020;117: 1496 –1503.  
56.  Xu J, Mcpartlon M, Li J. Improved protein structure prediction by deep learning irrespective of co -evolution 
information. bioRxiv. 2020. Available: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.10.12.336859v1  
57.  Poplin R, Chang P -C, Alexander D, Schwartz S, Colthurst T, Ku A, et al. A universal SNP and small -indel 
variant caller using deep neural networks. Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36: 983 –987. 
58.  Fudenberg G, Kelley DR, Pollard KS. Predicting 3D genome folding from DNA sequence with Akita. Nat 
Methods. 2020;17: 1111 –1117.  
59.  Zeng H, Edwards MD, Liu G, Gifford DK. Convolutional neural network architectures for predicting DNA -
protein binding. Bioinformatics. 2016;32: i121 –i127.  
60.  Yao R, Qian J, Huang Q. Deep -learning with synthetic data enables automated picking of cryo -EM particle 
images of biological macromolecules. Bioinformatics. 2020;36: 1252 –1259.  
61.  Si D, Moritz SA, Pfab J, Hou J, Cao R, Wang L, et al. Deep Learning to Predict Protein Backbone Structure 
from High -Resolution Cryo -EM Density Maps. Sci Rep. 2020;10: 4282.  
62.  Poplin R, Varadarajan A V, Blumer K, Liu Y, McConnell MV, Corrado GS, et al. Prediction of cardiovascular 
risk factors from retinal fundus photographs via deep learning. Nat Biomed Eng. 2018;2: 158 –164. 

==== Page 37 ====
 
37 63.  AlQuraishi M. End -to-End Differentiable Learning of Protein Structure. Cell Syst. 2019;8: 292 –301.e3.  
64.  Heffernan R, Yang Y, Paliwal K, Zhou Y. Capturing non -local interactions by long short -term memory 
bidirectiona l recurrent neural networks for improving prediction of protein secondary structure, backbone 
angles, contact numbers and solvent accessibility. Bioinformatics. 2017;33: 2842 –2849.  
65.  Müller AT, Hiss  JA, Schneider G. Recurrent Neural Network Model for Constructive Peptide Design. J Chem 
Inf Model. 2018;58: 472 –479. 
66.  Choi E, Bahadori MT, Schuetz A, Stewart WF, Sun J. Doctor AI: Predicting Clini cal Events via Recurrent 
Neural Networks. JMLR Workshop Conf Proc. 2016;56: 301 –318. 
67.  Quang D, Xie X. DanQ: a hybrid convolutional and recurrent deep neural network for quantifying the function 
of DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44: e107.  
68.  Alley EC, Khimulya G, Biswas S, AlQuraishi  M, Church GM. Unified rational protein engineering with 
sequence -based deep representation learning. Nat Methods. 2019;16: 1315 –1322.  
69.  Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez A N, et al. Attention Is All You Need. arXiv. 
2017;1706.03762.  
70.  Elnaggar A, Heinzinger M, Dallago C, Rihawi G, Wang Y, Jones L, et al. ProtTrans: Towards Cracking the 
Language of Life’s Code Through Self -Supervised Deep Learning and High Performance Computing. bioRxiv. 
2020. Available: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.12.199554v1  
71.  Jumper J, Evans R, Pritzel A, Green T, Figurnov M, Tunyasuvunakool K, et al. High Accuracy  Protein 
Structure Prediction Using Deep Learning. Fourteenth Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure 
Prediction (Abstract Book). 2020.  
72.  Battaglia PW, Hamrick JB, Bapst V, Sanchez -Gonzalez A, Zambaldi V, Malinowski M, et al. Relational 
inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv. 2018;1806.01261. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01261  
73.  Stokes JM, Yang K, Swanson K, Jin W, Cubillos -Ruiz A, Donghia NM, et al. A Deep Learning Approach to 
Antibiotic Discovery. Cell. 2020;181: 475 –483. 
A deep learning model predicts antibiotic activity with one candidate showin g broad -spectrum antibiotic 
activities in mice.  
74.  Gainza P, Sverrisson F, Monti F, Rodolà E, Boscaini D, Bronstein MM, et al. Deciphering interaction 
fingerprints from protein molecular surfaces usi ng geometric deep learning. Nat Methods. 2020;17: 184 –192. 
75.  Strokach A, Becerra D, Corbi -Verge C, Perez -Riba A, Kim PM. Fast and Flexible Protein Design Using Deep 
Graph Neural Networks. Cell Syst.  2020;11: 402 –411.e4.  
76.  Gligorijevic V, Douglas Renfrew P, Kosciolek T, Leman JK, Cho K, Vatanen T, et al. Structure -Based 
Function Prediction using Graph Convolutional Networks. bioRxiv. 2019. Avai lable: 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/786236v1  
77.  Zitnik M, Agrawal M, Leskovec J. Modeling polypharmacy side effects with  graph convolutional networks. 
Bioinformatics. 2018;34: i457 –i466.  
78.  Veselkov K, Gonzalez G, Aljifri S, Galea D, Mirnezami R, Youssef J, et al. HyperFoods: Machine intelligent 
mapping of cancer -beating molecules in foods. Sci Rep. 2019;9: 9237.  
79.  Fey M, Lenssen JE. Fast Graph Representation Learning with PyTorch Geometric. ICLR. 2019. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02428  

==== Page 38 ====
 
38 80.  Zhavoronkov A, Ivanenkov YA, Aliper A, Veselov MS, Aladinskiy VA, Aladinskaya AV, et al. Deep learning 
enables rapid identification of potent DDR1 kinase inhib itors. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37: 1038 –1040.  
81.  Wang Y, Liu T, Xu D, Shi H, Zhang C, Mo Y -Y, et al. Predicting DNA Methylation State of CpG Dinucleotide 
Using Genome Topological Features and Deep Networks. Scientific Reports. 2016;6: 19598.  
82.  Linder J, Bogard N, Rosenberg AB, Seelig G. A Generative Neural Network for Maximizing Fitness and 
Diversity of Synthetic DNA and Protein Sequences. Ce ll Syst. 2020;11: 49 –62.e16.  
83.  Greener JG, Moffat L, Jones DT. Design of metalloproteins and novel protein folds using variational 
autoencoders. Sci Rep. 2018;8: 16189.  
84.  Wang J, Ma A, Chang Y, Gong J, Jiang Y, Qi R, et al. scGNN is a novel graph neural network framework for 
single -cell RNA -Seq analyses. Nat Commun. 2021;12: 1882.  
85.  Abadi M, Barham P, Chen J, Chen Z, Davis A, Dean J, et al. Tensorflow: A system for large -scale machine 
learning. 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. 2016; 265 –283. 
86.  Wei Q, Dunbrack RL Jr. The role of balanced training and testing data sets for binary classifiers in 
bioinformatics. PLoS One. 2013;8: e67863.  
87.  Walsh I, Pollastri G, Tosatto SCE. Correct machine le arning on protein sequences: a peer -reviewing 
perspective. Brief Bioinform. 2016;17: 831 –840. 
A discussion of how peer reviewers can assess machine learning methods in biology, and by extension how 
scientists can design and carry out such studies properly.  
88.  Schreiber J, Singh R, Bilmes J, Noble WS. A pitfall for machine learning methods aiming to predict across cell 
types. Genome Biology. 2020;21.  
89.  Chothia C, Lesk AM. The relation between the divergence of sequence and structure in proteins. The EMBO 
Journal. 1986;5: 823 –826. 
90.  Söding J, Remmert M. Protein sequence comparison and fold recognition: progress and good -practice 
benchmarking. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2011;21: 404 –411. 
91.  Steinegger M, Meier M, Mirdita M, Vöhringer H, Haunsberger SJ, Söding J. HH -suite3 for fast remote 
homology detection and deep protein annotation. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019;20: 473.  
92.  Sillitoe I, Dawson N, Lewis TE, Das S, Lees JG, Ashford P, et al. CATH: expanding the horizons of structure -
based functional annotations for genome sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47: D280 –D284.  
93.  Cheng H, Schaeffer RD, Liao Y, Kinch LN, Pei J, Shi S, et al. ECOD: an evolutionary classification of pro tein 
domains. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;10: e1003926.  
94.  Li Y, Yang J. Structural and Sequence Similarity Makes a Significant Impact on Machine -Learning -Based 
Scoring Functions for Protein -Ligand Intera ctions. J Chem Inf Model. 2017;57: 1007 –1012.  
95.  Zech JR, Badgeley MA, Liu M, Costa AB, Titano  JJ, Oermann EK. Variable generalization performance of a 
deep learning model to detect pneumonia in chest radiographs: A cross -sectional study. PLoS Med. 2018;15: 
e1002683.  
96.  Szegedy C, Zaremba W, Sutskever I, Bruna J, Erhan D, Goodfellow I, et al. Intriguing properties of neural 
networks. ICLR. 2014. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199  
97.  Hie B, Cho H, Berger B. Realizing private and practical pharmacological collaboration. Science. 2018;362: 
347–350. 

==== Page 39 ====
 
39 98.  Beaulieu -Jones BK, Wu ZS, Williams C, Lee R, Bhavnani SP, Byrd JB, et al. Pri vacy -Preserving Generative 
Deep Neural Networks Support Clinical Data Sharing. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2019;12: e005122.  
99.  Konečný J, Brendan McMahan H, Ramage D, Richtárik P. Federated Optim ization: Distributed Machine 
Learning for On -Device Intelligence. arXiv. 2016;1610.02527. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02527  
100.  Pérez A, Martínez -Rosell G, De Fabritiis G. Simulations meet machine learning in structural biology. Curr 
Opin Struct Biol. 2018;49: 139 –144. 
101.  Noé F, Olsson S, Köhler J, Wu H. Boltzmann generators: Samplin g equilibrium states of many -body 
systems with deep learning. Science. 2019;365: 6457.  
102.  Shrikumar A, Greenside P, Kundaje A. Reverse -complement parameter sharing improves deep learning 
models for genomics. bioRxiv. 2017. Available: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/103663v1  
103.  Lopez R, Gayoso A, Yosef N. Enhancing scie ntific discoveries in molecular biology with deep generative 
models. Mol Syst Biol. 2020;16: e9198.  
104.  Anishchenko I, Chidyausiku TM, Ovchinnikov S, Pellock SJ, Baker D. De novo protein design by de ep 
network hallucination. bioRxiv. 2020. Available: 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.22.211482v1  
105.  Innes M, Edelman A, Fischer K, Rackauckas C, Saba E, Shah VB, et al. A differentiable programming 
system to bridge machine learning and scientific computing. arXiv. 2019;1907.07587. Available: 
https://arxiv.o rg/abs/1907.07587  
106.  Ingraham J, Riesselman AJ, Sander C, Marks DS. Learning Protein Structure with a Differentiable 
Simulator. ICLR. 2019. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Byg3y3C9Km  
107.  Jumper JM, Faruk NF, Freed KF, Sosnick TR. Trajectory -based training enables protein simulat ions with 
accurate folding and Boltzmann ensembles in cpu -hours. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018;14: e1006578.  
108.  Wang Y, Fass J, Chodera JD. End -to-End Differentiable Molecular Mechanics Force Field Construction. 
arXiv. 2020;2010.01196. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01196  
109.  Bradbury J, Frostig R, Hawkins P, Johnson MJ, Leary C, Maclaurin D, et al. JAX: composable 
transformations of Python+NumPy programs. 2018. Available: http://github.com/google/jax  
110.  Chen KM, Cofer EM, Zhou J, Troyanskaya OG. Selene: a PyTorch -based deep learning library for 
sequence data. Nat Methods. 2019;16: 315 –318. 
A software library based on PyTorch providing functionality fo r biological sequences.  
111.  Kopp W, Monti R, Tamburrini A, Ohler U, Akalin A. Deep learning for genomics using Janggu. Nat 
Commun. 2020;11: 3488.  
112.  Schoenholz SS, Cubuk ED. JAX, M.D.: End -to-End Differentiable, Hardware Accelerated, Molecular 
Dynamics in Pure Python. arXiv. 2019;1912.04232. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04232  
113.  Avsec Ž, Kreuzhuber R, Israeli J, Xu N, Cheng J, Shrikumar A, et al. The Kipoi repository accelerates 
community exchange and reuse of predictive models for genomics. Nature Biotechnol. 2019;37: 592 –600. 
114.  Isensee F, Jaeger PF, Kohl SAA, Petersen J, Maier -Hein KH. nnU -Net: a self -configuring method for deep 
learning -based biomedical image segmentation. Nat Methods. 2020.  
115.  Livesey BJ, Marsh JA. Using deep mutational scanning to benchmark variant effect predictors and identify 
disease mutations. Mol Syst Biol. 2020;16: e9380.  

==== Page 40 ====
 
40 116.  AlQura ishi M. ProteinNet: a standardized data set for machine learning of protein structure. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2019;20: 311.  
117.  Townshend RJL, Vögele M, Suriana P, Derry A, Powers A, Laloudakis Y, et al . ATOM3D: Tasks On 
Molecules in Three Dimensions. arXiv. 2020;2012.04035.  
118.  Rao R, Bhattacharya N, Thomas N, Duan Y, Chen P, Canny J, et al. Evaluating Protein Transfer Learning 
with TAPE. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2019;33.  
119.  Kryshtafovych A, Schwede T, Topf M, Fidelis K, Moult J. Critical assessment of methods of protein 
structure prediction (CASP) —Round XIII. Proteins: Structure, Fu nction, and Bioinformatics. 2019;87: 1011 –
1020.  
120.  Zhou N, Jiang Y, Bergquist TR, Lee AJ, Kacsoh BZ, Crocker AW, et al. The CAFA challenge reports 
improved protein function prediction and new functi onal annotations for hundreds of genes through 
experimental screens. Genome Biol. 2019;20: 244.  
121.  Munro D, Singh M. DeMaSk: a deep mutational scanning substitution matrix and its use for variant im pact 
prediction. Bioinformatics. 2020;36: 5322 –5329.  
122.  Haario H, Taavitsainen V -M. Combining soft and hard modelling in chemical kinetic models. 
Chemometrics Intellig Lab Syst. 1998;44: 77 –98. 
123.  Cozzetto D, Minneci F, Currant H, Jones DT. FFPred 3: feature -based function prediction for all Gene 
Ontology domains. Sci Rep. 2016;6: 31865.  
124.  Nugent T, Jones DT. Transmembrane protein topology prediction using support vector machines. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2009;10: 159.  
125.  Bao L, Zhou M, Cui Y. nsSNPAnalyzer: identifying disease -associa ted nonsynonymous single nucleotide 
polymorphisms. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;33: W480 –2. 
126.  Li W, Yin Y, Quan X, Zhang H. Gene Expression Value Prediction Based on XGBoost Algorithm. Front 
Genet. 2019 ;10: 1077.  
127.  Zhang Y, Skolnick J. SPICKER: a clustering approach to identify near -native protein folds. J Comput 
Chem. 2004;25: 865 –871. 
128.  Teodoro ML, Phillips GN Jr, Kavraki LE. Understanding protein flexibility through dimensionality 
reduction. J Comput Biol. 2003;10: 617 –634. 
129.  Schlichtkrull M, Kipf TN, Bloem P, van den Berg R, Titov I, Welling M. Modeling Relational Data with 
Graph Convolutional Networks. The Semantic Web. Springer International Publishing; 2018. pp. 593 –607. 
130.  Pandarinath C, O’Shea DJ, Collins J, Jozefowicz R, Stavisky SD, Kao JC, et al. Inferring single -trial neural 
population dynamics using sequential auto -encoders. Nat Methods. 2018;15: 805 –815. 
131.  Antczak M, Michaelis M, Wass MN. Environmental conditions shape the nature of a minimal bacterial 
genome. Nat Commun. 2019;10: 3100.  
132.  Sun T, Zhou B, Lai L, Pei J. Sequence -based prediction of protein protein interaction using a deep -learning 
algorithm. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017;18: 277.  
133.  Hiranuma N, Park H, Baek M, Anishchenko I,  Dauparas J, Baker D. Improved protein structure refinement 
guided by deep learning based accuracy estimation. Nat Commun. 2021;12: 1340.  
134.  Pagès G, Charmettant B, Grudinin S. Protein model quality  assessment using 3D oriented convolutional 
neural networks. Bioinformatics. 2019;35: 3313 –3319.  

==== Page 41 ====
 
41 135.  Pires DEV, Ascher DB, Blundell TL. DUET: a server for predicting effects of mutations on protein 
stability using an integrated computational approach. Nucleic Acids Research. 2014;42: W314 –W319.  
136.  Yuan Y, Bar -Joseph Z. Deep learning for inferring gene relationships from single -cell expression d ata. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019;116: 27151 –27158.  
137.  Chen L, Cai C, Chen V, Lu X. Learning a hierarchical representation of the yeast transcriptomic machinery 
using an autoencoder model. BMC Bio informatics. 2016;17.  
138.  Kantz ED, Tiwari S, Watrous JD, Cheng S, Jain M. Deep Neural Networks for Classification of LC -MS 
Spectral Peaks. Anal Chem. 2019;91: 12407 –12413.  
139.  Dührkop K, Fleischauer M, Ludwig M, Aksenov AA, Melnik AV, Meusel M, et al. SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool 
for turning tandem mass spectra into metabolite structure information. Nat Methods. 2019;16: 299 –302. 
140.  Liebal UW, Phan ANT, Sudhakar M, Raman K, Blank LM. Machine Learning Applications for Mass 
Spectrometry -Based Metabolomics. Metabolites. 2020;10: 243.  
141.  Zhong ED, Bepler T, Berger B, Davis JH. CryoDRGN: reconstruction of heterogeneous cryo -EM 
structures using neural networks. Nat Methods. 2021;18: 176 –185. 
142.  Schmauch B, Romagnoni A, Pronier E, Saillar d C, Maillé P, Calderaro J, et al. A deep learning model to 
predict RNA -Seq expression of tumours from whole slide images. Nat Commun. 2020;11: 3877.  
143.  Das P, Sercu T, Wadhawan K, Padhi I, Gehrmann  S, Cipcigan F, et al. Accelerated antimicrobial discovery 
via deep generative models and molecular dynamics simulations. Nat Biomed Eng. 2021.  
144.  Gligorijevic V, Barot M, Bonneau R. deepNF: deep ne twork fusion for protein function prediction. 
Bioinformatics. 2018;34: 3873 –3881.  
145.  Karpathy A. A Recipe for Training Neural Networks. 2019. Available: 
https://karpathy.github.io/2019/04/25/recipe  
146.  Bengio  Y. Practical Recommendations for Gradient -Based Training of Deep Architectures. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science. 2012; 437 –478. 
147.  Roberts M, Driggs D, Thorpe M, Gilbey J, Yeung M, Ursprung S, et  al. Common pitfalls and 
recommendations for using machine learning to detect and prognosticate for COVID -19 using chest 
radiographs and CT scans. Nature Machine Intelligence. 2021;3: 199 –217. 
This study assessed 62 machine learning studies that analyse me dical images for COVID -19 and none are 
found to be of clinical use, indicating the difficulties of training a useful model.  
148.  List M, Ebert P, Albrecht F. Ten Simple Rules for Developing Usable Software in Computational Biology. 
PLoS Comput Biol. 2017;13: e1005265.  
149.  Sonnenburg SÃ, Braun ML, Ong CS, Bengio S. The need for  open source software in machine learning. 
Journal of Machine Learning Research. 2007;8: 2443 –2466. 

