==== Page 1 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for
Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems
Ricardo Diniz Caldas
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Brasília, Brazil
ricardo.caldas@chalmers.seArthur Rodrigues
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
arthur.farias@aluno.unb.brEric Bernd Gil
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
ericbgil@gmail.com
Genaína Nunes Rodrigues
University of Brasília
Brasília, DF, Brazil
genaina@unb.brThomas Vogel
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Berlin, Germany
thomas.vogel@cs.hu-berlin.dePatrizio Pelliccione
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Sweden
University of L’Aquila, Italy
patrizio@chalmers.se
ABSTRACT
Control theoretical techniques have been successfully adopted as
methods for self-adaptive systems design to provide formal guar-
antees about the effectiveness and robustness of adaptation mech-
anisms. However, the computational effort to obtain guarantees
poses severe constraints when it comes to dynamic adaptation. In
order to solve these limitations, in this paper, we propose a hybrid
approach combining software engineering, control theory, and AI
to design for software self-adaptation. Our solution proposes a hi-
erarchical and dynamic system manager with performance tuning.
Due to the gap between high-level requirements specification and
the internal knob behavior of the managed system, a hierarchically
composed components architecture seek the separation of concerns
towards a dynamic solution. Therefore, a two-layered adaptive
manager was designed to satisfy the software requirements with
parameters optimization through regression analysis and evolution-
ary meta-heuristic. The optimization relies on the collection and
processing of performance, effectiveness, and robustness metrics
w.r.t control theoretical metrics at the offline and online stages. We
evaluate our work with a prototype of the Body Sensor Network
(BSN) in the healthcare domain, which is largely used as a demon-
strator by the community. The BSN was implemented under the
Robot Operating System (ROS) architecture, and concerns about
the system dependability are taken as adaptation goals. Our results
reinforce the necessity of performing well on such a safety-critical
domain and contribute with substantial evidence on how hybrid
approaches that combine control and AI-based techniques for engi-
neering self-adaptive systems can provide effective adaptation.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7962-5/20/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387939.3391595KEYWORDS
hybrid, self-adaptive software, control theory, optimization
ACM Reference Format:
Ricardo Diniz Caldas, Arthur Rodrigues, Eric Bernd Gil, Genaína Nunes
Rodrigues, Thomas Vogel, and Patrizio Pelliccione. 2020. A Hybrid Approach
Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems.
InIEEE/ACM 15th International Symposium on Software Engineering for
Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS ’20), October 7–8, 2020, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3387939.3391595
1 INTRODUCTION
There is an increasing trend in the use of control theory to guide
the software engineering design process of self-adaptive systems
(SAS) in order to provide dynamic adaptation with guarantees of
trustworthiness and robustness [ 16,34,41]. Control theory has
established solid techniques for designing controllers that enforce
controlled (or managed) systems to behave as expected. “These
controllers can provide formal guarantees about their effectiveness,
under precise assumptions on the operating conditions” [16].
At runtime, control systems are subject to inputs not known at
design-time. Based on that, they are designed to respond within
acceptable boundaries to dynamic environmental interactions. The
analysis of whether the controlled system is operating accordingly
demands metrics for comparing the performance of various con-
trol systems [ 30]. A self-adaptive system designed through control
theory must be able to quantitatively guarantee its convergence
in time to reach the adaptation goal (i.e., setpoint), and on its ro-
bustness (i.e., convergence to the setpoint) in the face of errors and
noise [ 16,34]. Additionally, due to high level of uncertainty in self-
adaptive systems, the control model following a control-theoretical
approach requires constant evolution.
Therefore, in the control-theoretical design of a self-adaptive
software system, it is paramount to support decision-making pro-
cedures that can identify appropriate adaptation strategies by effi-
ciently exploring the solution space. To avoid the problem of ex-
haustive analysis of large adaptation spaces when planning an adap-
tation, artificial intelligence (AI) techniques have been used, among
others: to determine at runtime subsets of adaptation options from aarXiv:2004.11793v1  [cs.SE]  24 Apr 2020

==== Page 2 ====
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
large adaptation space through classification and regression [ 31]; to
assess and reason about black-box adaptation decisions through on-
line learning [ 9,10]; or to find Pareto-optimal configurations of the
system with respect to the mission goals of mobile robots through
machine learning [ 21]. Moreover, control-based approaches for
self-adaptive systems often employ adaptive controllers to address
inaccuracies of the control model or radical changes of the environ-
ment/controlled system by updating the model using filters (e.g.,
Kalman or Recursive Least Square) [ 15,28,29] and by tuning the
controller parameters using feedback or machine learning [ 12,27].
Although such significant contributions in the literature have
promoted solid mathematical foundation of control theory for build-
ing SAS, there is still the need of understanding (i) how AI could
aid the parameter optimization of controllers and (ii) how to apply
AI-based techniques in the search of adaptation solutions in control-
theoretical SAS strategies. Moreover, “there are various hurdles
that need to be tackled to turn control theory into the foundation
of self-adaptation of software systems” [ 40]. Software engineers
are not usually knowledgeable of the mathematical principles on
control theory. Therefore, there is a need to turn control theory
(and its guarantees) into a scientific foundation for engineering
self-adaptation [40].
In this paper, we aim at filling those gaps by intertwining control
theory and AI in a two-phase optimization approach to support
the engineering of control-based SAS. Our controller, hereafter
named system manager, contains the mechanisms for deciding
how the self-adaptive system must behave in order to achieve the
desired goals for the managed system. Due to the gap between
high-level requirements specification and the internal knob behav-
ior of the managed system, a hierarchically composed components
architecture seek the separation of concerns towards a dynamic
solution [ 3]. Therefore, our system manager is further decomposed
into two other components: a strategy manager and a strategy
enactor. Each of these components are equipped with AI-based op-
timization techniques, namely regression model combined with the
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [ 6], for re-
spectively: (i) synthesizing adaptation strategies through high-level
reasoning upon the model that represents the managed system,
and (ii) enforcing actions through control-theoretical principles
to ensure the adaptation strategies are applied and properties of
interest guaranteed. By these means, we contribute with a hierar-
chical and adaptive system manager that relies on optimization at
all levels of the decision-making process towards a more efficient
adaptation mechanism, while also improving the self-adaptation
loop in terms of control theoretic properties: stability, overshooting
and steady-state error.
For evaluation purposes, we experimented with a healthcare
domain prototype constructed for operating volatile environments.
The prototype played the role of the target system. The Body Sensor
Network (BSN) prototype was implemented following the Robot
Operating System (ROS) framework and consists of a set of dis-
tributed sensors that collects the patients vital signs and forwards
them to a centralized unit for further processing and reporting. We
evaluated the ability of our approach to optimize the adaptation
space and to improve the self-adaptation loop w.r.t. the control the-
oretic properties. Results show that we have found nearly optimal
solutions for space and time through our hybrid approach. Not tomention, the overshoot and steady-state error were below 3% with
100% of stability.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents a glimpse over control theoretical principles and over evo-
lutionary algorithms used in this work. Section 3 presents the core
contribution of our work. Section 4 presents the evaluation of our
proposal on the BSN prototype. Section 5 presents the most related
literature work to ours. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusion
and the directions we intend to pursue as our future work.
2 BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss the background of our work, feedback
control loop and evolutionary algorithms.
Feedback Control Loop. Self-adaptation is typically realized by
a feedback loop [ 4], which originates from control engineering [ 2].
As shown in Fig. 1, the plant is the subsystem to be controlled by a
control signal from the controller . A reference (setpoint) is defined
for a property of interest observed on the plant. The goal is that
the observed property is sufficiently close to this reference despite
the disturbance affecting the plant. For this purpose, the difference
between the observation and reference is fed back to the controller
that uses this error to decide about the value of the control signal.
Figure 1: Block diagram of a closed feedback control loop.
A self-adaptive system that uses a feedback control loop to adjust
its behavior is a closed-loop system [ 20,33]. Such a system can have
different responses to a perturbation, that is, how the property of
interest observed on the plant develops over time after the pertur-
bation. Figure 2 illustrates a typical response to a sudden variation
in the observed property. Various control metrics exist to verify
how well the system is responding and if it satisfies requirements
previously defined with expert knowledge (cf. [ 16,20]). In this
work we focus on extracting four metrics to analyze the response
of the system: stability ,overshoot ,settling time , and steady-state
error [16, 20].
Stability refers to the system reaching a steady-state equilibrium,
that is, the observed property converges to a specific value, ideally
the setpoint, and stays inside a previously defined stability mar-
gin around this convergence point. An overshoot denotes that the
property exceeds the setpoint in the transient state, which should
be typically avoided. It is measured as maximum peak value of
the property relative to the setpoint. The settling time is the time
required for the system to reach the steady-state equilibrium. Fi-
nally, the steady-state error measures how far from the setpoint
the system converges, that is, the steady-state difference between
the setpoint and observed property.
In a feedback loop, one of the most popular controllers being used
is the proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller while often

==== Page 3 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
the derivative part is omitted due to difficulties in its tuning, leading
to the use of PI controllers (cf. [ 1]). Moreover, such controllers are
also widely used for adapting software systems [ 34]. Based on this
observation, we also use a PI controller throughout this work. The
continuous equation of a PI controller is shown in Equation 1, where
u(t)is its control action and e(t)the error, both at time t. In this
equation we have three constants, which are the proportional gain
Kp, the integral gain Ki. and the integral window IW.Kpmultiplies
the current measured error directly, whereas Kimultiplies the
integral of the error over the time window IW. These constants
can be defined empirically or using a tuning method of preference.
u(t)=Kpe(t)+Ki∫t
j=t−IW+1e(j) (1)
A discrete approximation of Equation 1 is shown in Equation 2,
which is adapted from the work of Stankovic et al. [39].
u(t)=Kpe(t)+KitÕ
j=t−IW+1e(j) (2)
In this equation, the integral term is transformed into a sum of
errors over the time window IW. Since a PI controller is also called
periodically, the time window IWis a tunable parameter, which
we consider in this work as the number of error measurements to
be considered in the sum. This means that in the time instant tthe
errors from e(t−IW+1)toe(t)will be used in the integral term.
Evolutionary Algorithms. Evolutionary algorithms originate
from computational intelligence, a subfield of artificial intelligence,
and refer to meta-heuristic optimization techniques that imitate
biological evolution [ 26]. A widely-used technique is the Non-
dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) [6] that has been
applied to various software engineering problems [ 19], and self-
adaptive systems to optimize the configuration of the managed
system [17, 37]. NSGA-II is a multi-objective algorithm producing
a set of Pareto-optimal solutions to a given optimization problem.
Imitating biological evolution, it evolves a population of possible
solutions encoded as chromosomes by crossover, mutation, and
Figure 2: Typical response of a system to a sudden variation
on the observed property.
Figure 3: An architectural overview of the hybrid approach.
selection. The evolution is guided by a fitness function that en-
codes the objectives of the optimization and that evaluates how
well a solution satisfies these objectives. Solutions with a higher
fitness are preferably selected for further evolution steps in the
next generation of the population. Thus, the evolution converges
to solutions with higher fitness. Moreover, NSGA-II promotes di-
versity to obtain Pareto-optimal solutions with different trade-offs
between the objectives.
3 A HYBRID APPROACH COMBINING
CONTROL THEORY AND AI
In this paper, we propose an AI-based optimization approach to
support the engineering of control-based SAS. Following principles
of control theory, our system manager decides how the system
must behave in order to achieve the desired goals for the managed
system. Moreover, our system manager is enhanced with integrated
AI-based optimization techniques, namely regression at all levels
of the decision-making process towards a more efficient adaptation
mechanism for (i) high-level reasoning upon the model that repre-
sents the managed system to synthesize adaptation strategies ( cf.
Section 3.1) and (ii) enforcing actions through control-theoretical
principles ensuring the adaptation strategies respect the properties
of interest: stability, overshooting and steady-state error ( cf. Section
3.2). In our approach, an adaptation strategy is a rule that guides
the system behavior. It consists of a goal to be reached, a condition
that defines whether the goal is reached, and one or more actions
to change the system behavior.
To provide a solution that architecturally promotes the separa-
tion of concerns in a hierarchical fashion [ 3], the proposed archi-
tecture relies on two horizontal layers being the System Manager
and the Managed System , and a third and vertical layer being the
Knowledge Repository . The corresponding architectural overview
of our approach is shown in Fig. 3.
The Managed System layer contains the Target System being
the software system to be controlled. The Knowledge Repository is
orthogonal to the other layers and responsible for maintaining the
persistent information, that is, a parametric formula , the goals , and

==== Page 4 ====
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
system information . A parametric formula evaluates a quality of
service (QoS) property of the target system at runtime. For details of
how such a formula is created, we refer to our previous work [ 38].
The goals are the objectives to be achieved by the system with
respect to functional or non-functional requirements. The system
information is a set of events and data about the status of the target
system collected from the running system.
TheSystem Manager is responsible for controlling the Target Sys-
temand realizes the combination of control-based self-adaptation
and artificial intelligence (AI), which makes our approach hybrid
and improves the self-adaptation process.
For this purpose, the system manager has four components, two
realizing self-adaptation in a hierarchical fashion and two realizing
AI-based optimization to reconfigure the self-adaptation process.
This results in a hierarchical and adaptive system manager.
The Strategy Manager synthesizes adaptation strategies by rea-
soning on the target system using the parametric formula, the goals
defined by the stakeholders and the current status of the observed
property. This synthesis process and especially the time needed
for the synthesis of adaptation strategies is monitored by the Man-
ager Optimization component. Based on the measured time, this
component optimizes the configuration of the strategy manager
by providing optimal values for two parameters ( Granularity and
Offset ) that influence the synthesis process. The goal of the opti-
mization is to reduce the required time and thus, the efficiency of
the synthesis process. The strategy manager provides a synthesized
strategy to the Strategy Enactor .
The strategy enactor enforces an adaptation strategy in a closed-
loop fashion by implementing a feedback control loop on top of
the target system. Accordingly, the strategy enactor implements a
PI controller as an actuation mechanism for enforcing behavior at
the target system, which is guided by conditions and goals. This
self-adaptation process is monitored by the Enactor Optimization
component, that computes various Control Theory Metrics based on
theSystem Information collected from the running target system.
Moreover, the component uses the metrics to tune the strategy
enactor adaptation parameters. Upon the metrics and system in-
formation, the optimizer tunes the PI controller parameters ( Kp
andKi). The goal of this optimization is to improve the adaptation
quality with respect to the control theory metrics.
As a result of combining each, the strategy manager and the
strategy enactor with an optimization, the goals of the system
are guaranteed to be constantly achieved with optimal adaptation
search time and adaptation quality, in a limited search space. Both
optimizations are realized by AI-based techniques of model learning
(regression / curve fitting) and meta-heuristic search (evolutionary
algorithms), while the strategy enactor is based on control (PI con-
troller). By this combination, the overall controller (i.e., the system
manager) implements a hybrid approach of control and AI.
We evaluate our approach with the Body Sensor Network (BSN)1,
being an exemplar for a target system that monitors and analyzes
the health of patients. The BSN is composed of a set of distributed
sensors to monitor vital signs of patients and to forward these signs
to a centralized processor for analysis. To avoid overload of the
centralized processor, the sampling rate of individual sensors can
1Access http://bodysensornetwork.herokuapp.com for an executable artifact.be adapted, which effects the amount of data sent to and analyzed
by the processor.
In the following we detail the stategy manager and strategy
enactor of our hybrid approach emphasizing their optimization.
3.1 Strategy Manager and its Optimization
Responsible for high-level reasoning, the strategy manager must
be capable of performing expensive decision-making computation.
Identifying feasible and effective adaptation strategies is particu-
larly difficult as the size of the solution space grows exponentially
with the number of individual adaptation options. For instance, for
architectural adaptation the reasoning has to take the variability of
each component (e.g., alternative components or parameters of the
component) and the composition of components into account to
evaluate whether the overall architectural configuration satisfies
the goals of the system.
In previous work [ 38] we have developed a transformation frame-
work for specifying requirements hierarchically in a goal model,
translating the goal model to parametric formulae with symbolic
model checking, and evaluating these formulae at runtime to ex-
press probabilities over the fulfillment of the goals by the running
system. Thus, these formulae provide guarantees for satisfying the
goals while their evaluation is time efficient (constant computa-
tional time) since a costly model exploration as in typical model
checking is avoided. The goal modeling and the translation of the
goal model to parametric formulae are implemented in the GODA-
MDP tool2[38]. A parametric formula is essentially an algebraic
equation that relates the probability of successfully achieving a
system’s overall goal (i.e., the root goal of the goal model) to the
combined probabilities of lower-level tasks that contribute towards
realizing the goal. Therefore, a formula can be used in the analysis
and planning stages of a feedback loop to solve a satisfiability prob-
lem, where an appropriate combination of successful local tasks
would lead to satisfying a required global property. Searching for
such a combination corresponds to the synthesis of adaptation
strategies since the combination corresponds to a configuration
that can be enacted on the target system. Although using the para-
metric formula reduces the complexity and time for reasoning, such
formulae are still not free from problem of combinatory state-space
explosion.
The pseudocode of Algorithm 1 details the search process to solve
a parametric formula captured in a model . The search process has
two input parameters, the granularity andoffset that are used for
reducing or widening the solution/search space. Lines 2-4 capture
the monitoring of a set of QoS properties Pof the target system, the
calculation of the current QoS property pcurr, and the calculation
of the error , that is, how far from the setpoint prefthe current
property value pcurr is. Then, lines 5-24 represent the search for a
combination of independent terms ( px), for each piin the set of all
properties P, that would lead to the goal ( pref). To do so, lines 6-7
reset all pxinto the value defined by the of f set and the set of new
values ( Ps) is plugged into the model. If the error turns to be positive,
then the value of each of the properties in Psshould be incremented
with the error multiplied by a factor dictated by the granularity
дranuntil they, one by one, reach values that approximate the
2https://pistar-goda.herokuapp.com/

==== Page 5 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Algorithm 1 - Strategy Manager Procedure
Input: gran,offset
Output: strategy
1:procedure Search For Strategy
2: P←MonitorSystem
3: pcurr←Apply(P,model)
4: error←pref−pcurr
5: for each piinPdo
6: Ps←ResetToStartingPoint(P, offset)
7: pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
8: iferror >0then
9: dopi←pi+gran·error until pnew >pref
10: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
11: for each PjinPs−pido
12: dopj←pj+gran·error until pnew >pref
13: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
14: end for
15: else
16: pi←pi−дran·error until pnew <pref
17: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
18: for each pjinPs−pido
19: dopj←pj−gran·error until pnew <pref
20: where pnew←Apply(Ps,model)
21: end for
22: end if
23: Strategies←Strategies +Ps
24: end for
25: return strategy from Strategies
26:end procedure
dependent value to the goal (see lines 8-15). On the other hand, the
properties in Psare decremented by the same factor (lines 15-22).
At line 23, the modified set of Psis concatenated into the valid set
ofStrategies . In the end, the best or a sufficient strategy is chosen
among the valid ones (line 25).
In this search process, the procedure Apply matches the indepen-
dent variables of the model/formula to each respective value, and
performs the calculation that results in a value for the dependent
variable, that is, the procedure evaluates the formula. Thus, it is
used for quantitative reasoning on the system state. As a result, the
algorithm relies on performing a search within the combination of
all independent variables that would lead the system into reaching
the goal. The search itself increases/decreases the value of each
independent variable at a time, by gradually changing its value
with a step dictated by a factor of granularity·error .
The granularity and the offset parameters are fundamental to
determine whether the strategy manager will be able to find a com-
bination of values (i.e., to converge to a solution) that satisfies the
goal of the system, and to find such a combination in time. The
smaller the granularity is, the algorithm will more likely find a
solution, even though it would take more time to do so. In contrast,
the offset broaden the search space boundaries, so the bigger it is
the more values will the search go through until it reaches the end
line. Consequently, we need a method to enhance the choice of suchparameters, and this is where we employ AI-based optimization.
Manager Optimization. In the following, we discuss the optimiza-
tion of the search process conducted by the strategy manager to
synthesize adaptation strategies. The optimization aims for iden-
tifying suitable values for the granularity and offset parameters
(cf. Algorithm 1). The optimization of the strategy manager is a
single-objective parameter optimization problem since the goal is to
minimize the time required by the strategy manager to synthesize
an adaptation strategy. This problem is solved by the optimization
pipeline depicted in Figure 4. This pipeline consists of the following
four steps:
Figure 4: Optimization pipeline for strategy manager.
1. Collect Data: We collect data relating the time to find a solution
(ts) with values for the granularity ( дran) and offset parameters.
The variable tsrepresents the time taken by the strategy manager
to converge to the setpoint. The data is obtained from executing
our approach without the optimization in place. Thus, we execute
our approach in different scenarios, that is, with different static
choices of parameter values for granularity and offset.
2. Learn Model: From the collected data < time, gran, offset >, we
learn a model using the curve fitting method. The learned model de-
scribes the behavior of the strategy manager as a function ts(gran, offset).
Thus, we can use the model to estimate the time to synthesize
an adaptation strategy given concrete values for the granularity
and offset parameters. An example for such a model is time =
677∗eдran∗(−3000)+eof f set∗(−2874).
3. Find Optimal Configuration: We use the learned model as
an input to an evolutionary algorithm, particularly NSGA-II, to
find optimal values for the granularity and offset parameters in
order to minimize the time to synthesize an adaptation strategy.
For the evolutionary algorithm, a candidate solution is encoded as
a chromosome or a vector two components, one component for
each parameter. The fitness function is the minimization of the
time. The fitness of a specific candidate solution, that is, a concrete
pair of two real values for the two parameters, corresponds to
computing the learned function with this pair of values. Moreover,
the optimization is constrained by the problem domain, as well as
the range of the granularity and offset parameters. The optimization
performed by evolutionary algorithm results in an optimal or near-
optimal configuration (parameter setting) for the strategy manager.
To illustrate, lets bring back our previous example model, time =
677∗eдran∗(−3000)+eof f set∗(−2874). Initially, a population of one
hundred individuals is generated randomly, having the target values
and/or input parameters limited by a given range. An individual is
composed of a combination of genes and a calculated target value. In
NSGA-II, the genes are represented by the input parameters, in this
case gran andoffset . The target value in this step is the time variable.
Better ranked solutions, i.e., solutions with the best fitness values,
are observed in individuals with a lower time to find a solution. For

==== Page 6 ====
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
the optimization of both, strategy manager and strategy enactor
stages, we have set the algorithm to process a hundred generations.
Moreover, we have applied some standard operators like Probability
Matching (PM), Simulated Binary Crossover (SBX), and Tournament
Selector based on dominance comparison (Pareto).
4. Apply optimal configuration: Finally, we apply the optimal
or near-optimal configuration, that is, a pair of values ( gran, offset ),
to the strategy manager affecting the performance of the synthesis
of adaptation strategies.
Delving into the optimization pipeline, we start describing the
first part of the learning3process: the manager optimization . As
mentioned before, the manager behavior is ruled by two features: (i)
gran, that is the granularity with which the strategy manager will
search for new solutions, and (ii) offset , representing the starting
point of the search within the solution space. Both attributes are
crucial to determine a third variable of interest, the (iii) time to
solution , i.e., how long the manager will take to find a suitable
adaptation strategy. From a naive perspective, these values are often
defined in an uninformed fashion, before the system operation, and
remain unchanged despite the characteristics of the system, or the
particularities of the domain. Our proposal tweaks this logic by
tracing the strategy manager behavior from its data collected offline.
Knowing the fact that the target variable depends on the gran and
offset values, we conduct a curve fitting process to come up with
models that explain the time to solution variable in terms of the
aforementioned parameters. Such a process returns a mathematical
function that has the best fit to the data points collected from
previous executions of the strategy manager. If the learned function
being the output of the curve fitting process is simple, it is possible
to solve the optimization problem mathematically. Otherwise, we
solve this problem using an evolutionary algorithm, like the NSGA-
II.
We should note that our approach has been conceived to provide
informed choices about granularity, offset, KpandKiat design
time. Therefore, the amount of data used for training is not a major
concern. A better description of the system behavior allows the
engineers to make better choices of control theoretical metrics. It
may be the case that the system behavior changes in face of uncer-
tainty. Clearly, learning online from data and continuously feeding
the system with new control theoretical metrics may leverage the
strength of our approach. However, adopting an online learning
approach brings additional complexity to the pipeline, which is out
of scope in this work.
3.2 Strategy Enactor and its Optimization
The strategy enactor is responsible for enforcing an adaptation
strategy on the target system. The strategies are synthesized by the
strategy manager and must be read, interpreted, and enforced by
the strategy enactor. Under the guidance of the active strategy, the
enactor continually evaluates whether the target system behaves as
it is intended to. Otherwise, it adapts the system towards achieving
its goals. Whenever the enactor cannot enforce the active strategy,
3Strictly speaking, in this stage the optimization modules do rely on previous adap-
tation data to learn the behavior and optimize the strategy manager parameters.
However, we reckon that the use of term learning to describe curve fitting methods
and evolutionary algorithms is still disputable.
Figure 5: Overview of the Strategy Enactor.
an exception is propagated to the strategy manager in an attempt
to receive a new and more adequate adaptation strategy from the
strategy manager.
Moreover, the strategy enactor realizes a negative feedback loop.
In this sense, the enactor continuously monitors the system QoS
properties, analyzes them, and checks whether its status is com-
pliant to the goal demanded by the active strategy. As previously
discussed, a strategy is defined by a goal , acondition , and a set
of actions to achieve a desired configuration of the target system.
Figure 5 depicts the configurable feedback loop for enforcing
strategies on the target system. The strategy enactor collects infor-
mation from the target system and analyzes the QoS property of
interest. If the monitored property status does not correspond to the
desired goal under the defined condition then the enactor enforces
one or more actions. Whereas the actions are optimized accordingly.
In this context, we rely on control theory to implement the function
that determines the control signal by using a PI controller. In this
work, we use the BSN exemplar as a target system, whose knobs
are the sampling rates of the sensors, which are adapted based on
the reliability of the BSN’s central processing component affected
by the load on this component.
The synthesized adaptation strategy guides the parameters of
the closed loop and how the adaptation is executed. To this extent,
the PI controller is an instance of the element that enforces the
control signal on the target system, characterized as the “perform
action” in Fig. 5. Thus, it receives as input the difference between
the current state of the observed system property and the goal of
the adaptation strategy (error), and multiplies the error by factors
of the gains Kp and Ki coming from the optimized action, according
to Eq. 2. In the case of our running example, the PI controller would
trigger an adaptation command with a description of the calculated
new sampling rate for a sensor (e.g., the thermometer of the pa-
tient). Depending on the values of Kp and Ki, the increments or
decrements on the actuation variable could not guide the property
into converging to the setpoint, they could request too much effort
from the system, or they could take too long to reach the setpoint.
Foremost, the lack of information on a model that relates Kp, Ki,
stability, overshoot and steady-state-error demands an optimization
of Kp and Ki towards optimal performance.

==== Page 7 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Enactor Optimization. The designed PI controller is not sufficient
to guarantee optimal performance. Therefore, we employ an AI-
based optimization technique to tune the controller’s parameters
with respect to the desired control-theoretical properties of settling
time,overshoot , and steady-state error . In this work, we focus on the
overshoot andsteady-state error . These parameters are the propor-
tional gain Kpand the integral gain Kiof the PI controller. Thus, the
optimization problem is to find optimal values for KpandKithat
improve the self-adaptation in terms of overshoot andsteady-state
error . These two control properties should be minimized resulting
in a multi-objective optimization problem.
Figure 6: Optimization pipeline for strategy enactor.
The optimization pipeline for the strategy enactor is shown in
Fig. 6. Except for slight differences, this pipeline and the employed
techniques are the same as for the strategy manager (cf. Fig. 4).
Considering Fig. 6, the control-theoretical metrics are collected from
the behavior of the system during execution. From this data we get
the data points relating KpandKito settling time, overshoot, and
steady-state error. Using this data, we adopt a curve fitting strategy
to come up with three mathematical functions that describe the
relationship between the parameters KpandKiand each control-
theoretical metric: overshoot ( OS) and steady-state error ( SSE) (see
second step in Fig. 6). The type of the curve (e.g., linear, polynomial,
exponential, etc.) depends on the relation revealed by the data
points. This is illustrated in Fig. 7 for the BSN case study.
Overshoot x Ki Steady State Error x Ki Steady State Error =  f(Ki)
Overshoot = f(Ki)
Figure 7: Model learning by curve fitting the behavior of the
strategy enactor.
Once we have these functions, it is possible to feed the NSGA-
II with them in order to find values of KpandKithat minimize
the overshoot and steady-state error. Since we have now a multi-
objective optimization problem, the meta-heuristic will not returnjust a single pair of optimal values for KpandKi, but a set of Pareto-
optimal solutions, i.e., several pairs of ( Kp,Ki). These results are
optimal or near-optimal solutions trading off the two objectives,
overshoot and steady-state error as depicted in Fig. 8.
Figure 8: Multi-objective optimization example
Finally, we update the parameters of the PI controller employed
in the strategy enactor with KpandKivalues that optimize the
gains that lead to lower and more balanced overshoot and steady-
state error.
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our proposal is evaluated through the execution4of an actual
prototype from the healthcare domain (BSN) as the target system
alongside an implementation5of the system manager components
upon ROS. The evaluation itself follows the Goal-Question-Metric
methodology [ 5]. Our focus is on answering the guiding questions,
from a broader perspective (i) how could AI aid the parameter opti-
mization controllers, and (ii) how to apply AI-based techniques in
the search for adaptation solutions in control-theoretical SAS strate-
gies. Thus, we narrow down the questions towards an operational
scenario without loss of generality, see Table 1.
G1: Improve time to find an eligible adaptation
Questions Metrics
Q1: How much time does the optimization
pipeline take to find a solution?Duration [s]
G2: Improve quality of the adaptation
Question Metric
Q2: How efficient is the proposed learn-
ing and optimization?CT metrics
Table 1: Goal-Question-Metric
The first goal ( G1) stems from the fact that the proposed AI-based
optimization pipeline aims at providing support to the search for
4Configurations for experiments: CPU 2x Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU @ 1.80GHz,
8192MB RAM, Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS, GNU C Compiler version 7.4.0
5https://www.github.com/lesunb/bsn

==== Page 8 ====
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
an optimal adaptation task by reducing time to solution at runtime.
Therefore, to support G1, we collect the duration of the optimiza-
tion pipeline for both components, Strategy Manager and Strategy
Enactor. The optimization pipeline relies on the identification of
parameters through the collection of control theoretical metrics
from QoS attributes of the system at runtime. Thus, with G2, we
want to guarantee that our approximation does lead to efficient
solutions. By this means, we measure the efficiency of our method
by the reached control theoretical metrics with optimized parame-
ters configuration and the best solutions given with the exhaustive
search algorithm.
Under the light of the GQM, the experiment is performed in
complementary phases (i) time and space evaluation of the search
for the optimal adaption, and (ii) evaluation of the adaptation qual-
ity with distinct configurations. Thus, following sections further
describe the experimental setup, the operational scenario under
which the experiments were conducted, and finally the results.
4.1 Time and space to find an eligible
adaptation
In this phase, we have first instrumented the pipeline with a
chronometer to measure the duration of the learning model step
and the finding an optimal configuration step, from both strategy
manager instance and strategy enactor instances.
For the strategy manager, the time to perform the curve fitting
(time to solution, gran and offset) was in average 0.3099 seconds
per execution, whereas the curve type was classified as exponential.
The NGSA-II took in average 0.0023 seconds per execution. Totaling
in 0.3123 seconds per execution for the strategy manager pipeline.
For the strategy enactor, four curve fittings had to be realized (i)
Kp-SSE, (ii) Kp-Overshoot, (iii) Ki-SSE and (iv) Ki-Overshoot. For (i)
the algorithm took 0.01295 seconds to fit the model into a quadratic
function, (ii) it took 0.0498 seconds to fit into an exponential, (iii)
it took 0.0127 seconds to fit into a quadratic and (iv) it took 0.0075
seconds to fit into a linear model. Furthermore, the NSGA-II was
executed twice (v) Kp-SSE & Kp-Overshoot and (vi) Ki-SSE & Ki-
Overshoot. For (v) the algorithm took 5.3947 seconds and (vi) it
took 4.896 seconds. Totaling in 10.374099032 seconds per execution
for the strategy manager pipeline.
Our execution of NSGA-II makes ten thousand function eval-
uations. However, this amount can be reduced to one thousand
without great quality loss if the execution time of the pipeline
needs to be improved.
4.2 Quality of the adaptation
We have deployed and executed the prototype under a scenario
where at least one adaptation was triggered for each five minutes
execution. Then, 50 randomly selected combinations of KpandKi,
namely configurations, were executed. The 50 configurations are
a product of the combination of two sets Kp = [60,150] with steps
of 10, Ki = [0.2,1] with steps of 0.2 and IW = 5. Once we select an
optimal configuration with the AI technique, another scenario is
performed, totaling 51 configuration scenarios. The configuration
selected by the optimization is Kp=114.0,Ki=0.75andIW=5.The scenario was derived from the running example, where the
stakeholders wish to maintain the system’s reliability level at 95%.
The maintenance process is held by the system manager, as follows.
The system manager must continuously monitor the target sys-
tem’s reliability status during runtime. Moreover, the prototype was
developed to satisfy complementary tasks with single responsibility
components. For that reason, the reliability is locally calculated
for each component and composed through a model that relates
their probability of success, i.e. the reliability formula from pre-
vious works [ 38]. To keep track of the system goals, the system
manager systematically analyzes whether the monitored reliability
status fulfills them. Where in case of violations to the adaptation
strategy conditions the system managers adapts the target system
to maintain the reliability level accordingly to the stipulated goal.
In the experimental sessions, we simulated a scenario where
multiple sensors flood the central processor with a higher rate than
what it can handle. On top of that, noise is generated by an exter-
nal agent that triggers random failures on the sensors preventing
them from forwarding data to the central processor. The simulated
failures reduce the number of messages received by the central
processor at a random factor, placing another layer of uncertainty
on the system execution. To cope with the disturbances into the
reliability status, the system manager delivers reconfiguration sig-
nals containing increments/decrements to the sensors’ sampling
rate that could give more or less time for the central processor to
maintain a always flowing processing queue.
Figure 9: Explored adaptation space.
The SAS was instrumented to log information regarding the
quality of the adaptations w.r.t the control theory metrics. The
outcoming data is processed accordingly to each evaluation and is
presented in Figures 9 and 10.
Figure 9 shows the results of the adaptation space explored
by the naïve (in red and blue) and our approach (in black). Our
approach was able to meet the nearly optimal adaptation space for
the threshold of steady state error and overshoot of 3%. Figures
10a and 10b provides a bigger picture of the experiments over the

==== Page 9 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
(a) Overshoot for distinct configurations.
(b) Steady-state-error for distinct configurations.
Figure 10: Boxplots for the sample of 24 configurations
50 configurations and the optimized one. For the sake of space,
we refer only to the first 24 configurations, where configuration
1 refers to our approach. Results for the overshoot and steady-
state error show that our approach managed to perform among
the best results, reaching out convergence point of 100%. In other
words, our approach not only managed to optimize steady-state
and overshoot but also the stability of our BSN. By these means, the
self-adaptation loop of the BSN from the control theoretic principles
can be considered quite robust for the scenarios evaluated.
4.3 Threats to Validity
Internal validity. The main threat to internal validity is the data
that we collected from the scenarios of executing our approach
and that we used for the model learning and the optimization.
Different scenarios may lead to different data and thus, to differentresults of our approach. Moreover, we rely on specific techniques
for the model learning (curve fitting) and optimization ( NSGA-II ).
Other techniques could be used, which may lead to different results.
In this context, we have not tuned the techniques, especially the
hyper-parameters of NSGA-II, to avoid any bias concerning BSN.
External validity. Although we present a generic self-adaptation
approach that combines AI and control-theoretical principles, our
evaluation focuses on the BSN case study with a single non-functional
requirement (reliability) as the adaptation concern. Thus, we cannot
generalize our results to other concerns (e.g., performance, security,
or costs) and target systems, which calls for further experiments.
Construct validity. The main threat is the correctness of the im-
plementation of our approach and the BSN used for the evaluation.
Concerning our approach, at least two authors of this paper have
reviewed the implementation and checked the plausibility of the
evaluation results based on the experience they have with the BSN
from earlier work [ 32,38]. With this experience we are confident
about the validity of the BSN that is publicly available.
5 RELATED WORK
As stated by Weyns [40], the use of control theory in the design
of self-adaptive software can bring several benefits since it allows
providing analytical guarantees for several system properties such
as stability and robustness. Consequently, the idea of using control-
based approaches to achieve self-adaptation for software systems
has been widely studied [ 34], and the use of control theory as
a well-suited solution for self-adaptation to systematically meet
the adaptation goals despite a certain degree of uncertainty of the
system and environment has been recognized [8, 11, 15, 16].
Control-based self-adaptation approaches typically propose con-
troller synthesis to automatically construct a controller for man-
aging the software system’s adaptation needs [ 13,14,35]. The
resulting controllers are related to the Strategy Enactor in our
work. These approaches to synthesize these controllers could be
applied for the Strategy Enactor whose focus is on using a control-
theoretical controller. However, our work presents a further module
called Strategy Manager that synthesizes an adaptation strategy
to which the controller subsequently adheres As previously stated,
the combination of these two modules is the essence of our work,
where self-adaptations is realized at two different levels: we first use
a global goal, set by users, to come up with an adaptation strategy,
and then we adapt the target system’s parameters based on goals,
used as setpoints, conditions and actions defined in the strategy.
Moreover, we use AI-based learning and optimization techniques
in our work to reduce the adaptation space at the strategy manager
level and to optimize the controller’s parameters at the strategy
enactor level. For the latter level, the focus is on meeting acceptable
system behavior with respect to control properties such as over-
shoot and steady-state error. In this context, other approaches use
learning, online or offline, and other statistical methods to reduce
the adaptation space, often called configuration space, in order to
find a configuration for the system in available time [ 9,10,18,21–
23,31]. The main difference to our work is that improve efficiency
of synthesizing adaptation strategies by optimizing the the search
process (in terms of granularity and offset) exploring the adaptation

==== Page 10 ====
SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea RD. Caldas, A. Rodrigues, EB. Gil, G. Rodrigues, T. Vogel, and P. Pelliccione
space. Thus, we optimize the exploration of the search space rather
than explicitly reducing the space.
Similarly to the strategy enactor in our work, existing control-
based approaches for self-adaptation use PI or PID controllers that
are adapted at run-time (cf. [ 34]), to compensate inaccuracies of the
model or to handle radical changes. Particularly, values of parame-
ters in the model are estimated and updated at run-time based on
measurements often processed by filter algorithms such as Kalman
or Recursive Least Square [ 13,24,25,29,35,36], or controller pa-
rameters are tuned online by relay feedback [ 12] or machine learn-
ing [ 27], or offline by experiments [ 7]. In contrast, in our approach
the controller parameters are tuned by an evolutionary algorithms
identifying (near-)optimal values for them. Evolutionary algorithms
have been applied previously to self-adaptive systems in order to
find optimal configurations of the target system [ 17,37] while we
apply them to improve the self-adaptation performed by the strat-
egy manager and strategy enactor.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is a novel approach that
combines the use of algebraic models (i.e., the parametric formulae)
of a system, which are used to synthesize adaptation strategies
based on a non-functional requirement, and control theory, which
is used to adapt the target system’s parameters systematically based
on the previously defined strategy. Also, we combine AI-based
optimization with these two approaches to adapt the system in an
efficient way while also improving the self-adaptation in terms of
the control-theoretical properties: overshoot and steady-state error.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have proposed a hybrid approach that combines
control theory principles with AI techniques to optimize the adap-
tation process in self-adaptive systems. Using curve fitting methods
aligned with a meta-heuristic technique, namely NSGA-II, we were
able to i) efficiently synthesize adaptation strategies through high-
level reasoning upon the model that represents the managed system,
and (ii) enforce actions through control-theoretical principles to en-
sure the adaptation strategies are applied and properties of interest
guaranteed. By these means, we contribute with a hierarchical and
dynamic system manager that relies on optimization at all levels of
the decision-making process towards a more efficient and robust
adaptation mechanism. We have evaluated our approach on the
BSN prototype implemented in the ROS framework. The evalua-
tion results have shown that our hybrid approach is able to find
optimal solutions for the adaptation space while also improving
the self-adaptation loop in terms of control theoretic properties:
stability, overshooting and steady-state error.
We envision that our future work will be devoted into expanding
our technique to accommodate PID controllers as well as exploiting
further evolutionary algorithms, while ensuring our approach is
also able to optimize the adaptation space at runtime. During the
experiments, we have noticed that defining a suitable data window
in which the method should train the model is a hard task. A sec-
ond issue is knowing when the learned model should be applied.
Some kind of quality monitor is likely to be incorporated to the
architecture in order to orchestrate the learning process. From a
performance perspective, this brings us to another challenge, that
is building the pipeline in a way that the continuous learning andadaptation of metrics do not affect negatively the operation of the
managed system. We plan to further investigate these issues in a
future work. Additionally, for generalization purposes, we plan to
conduct case studies with other exemplars from other domains than
healthcare as well as to further compare our solution to state-of-
the-art adaptive control algorithms with respect to time to solution
and robustness.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their utmost gratitude to Léo Moraes and
Gabriel Levi (UnB/Brazil) for implementing an accessible version
of the BSN for experimentation on SAS. This study was financed
in part by the CAPES-Brasil – Finance Code 001, through CAPES
scholarship. This work was also partially supported by the Wal-
lenberg Al, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP)
funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the FLASH
project (GR 3634/6-1) funded by the German Science Foundation
(DFG), and the EU H2020 Research and Innovation Prog. under GA
No. 731869 (Co4Robots). The authors also acknowledge financial
support from Centre of EXcellence on Connected, Geo-Localized
and Cybersecure Vehicle (EX-Emerge) funded by Italian Govern-
ment under CIPE resolution n. 70/2017 (Aug. 7, 2017). Finally, we
thank CNPq for partial support under grant number 306017/2018-0.
REFERENCES
[1]Kiam Heong Ang, Gregory Chong, and Yun Li. 2005. PID control system analysis,
design, and technology. IEEE transactions on control systems technology 13, 4
(2005), 559–576.
[2]K.J. Åström and R.M. Murray. 2010. Feedback Systems: An Introduction for Scientists
and Engineers . Princeton University Press. http://www.cds.caltech.edu/~murray/
amwiki/index.php/Main_Page
[3]Victor Braberman, Nicolas D’Ippolito, Jeff Kramer, Daniel Sykes, and Sebas-
tian Uchitel. 2015. MORPH: A Reference Architecture for Configuration and
Behaviour Self-adaptation (CTSE 2015) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9–16.
[4]Yuriy Brun, Giovanna Di Marzo Serugendo, Cristina Gacek, Holger Giese, Holger
Kienle, Marin Litoiu, Hausi Müller, Mauro Pezzè, and Mary Shaw. 2009. Engi-
neering Self-Adaptive Systems through Feedback Loops. In Software Engineering
for Self-Adaptive Systems , Betty H. C. Cheng, Rogério de Lemos, Holger Giese,
Paola Inverardi, and Jeff Magee (Eds.). Springer, 48–70.
[5]Victor R Basili1 Gianluigi Caldiera and H Dieter Rombach. 1994. The goal
question metric approach. Encyclopedia of software engineering (1994), 528–532.
[6]Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002. A
fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE transactions on
evolutionary computation 6, 2 (2002), 182–197.
[7]David Desmeurs, Cristian Klein, Alessandro Vittorio Papadopoulos, and Johan
Tordsson. 2015. Event-Driven Application Brownout: Reconciling High Uti-
lization and Low Tail Response Times. In Proceedings of the 2015 International
Conference on Cloud and Autonomic Computing (ICCAC ’15) . IEEE, 1–12.
[8]Yixin Diao, Joseph L Hellerstein, Sujay Parekh, Rean Griffith, Gail Kaiser, and Dan
Phung. 2005. Self-managing systems: A control theory foundation. In 12th IEEE
International Conference and Workshops on the Engineering of Computer-Based
Systems (ECBS’05) . IEEE, 441–448.
[9]Ahmed Elkhodary, Naeem Esfahani, and Sam Malek. 2010. FUSION: A Framework
for Engineering Self-tuning Self-adaptive Software Systems (FSE ’10) . ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 7–16.
[10] N. Esfahani, A. Elkhodary, and S. Malek. 2013. A Learning-Based Framework for
Engineering Feature-Oriented Self-Adaptive Software Systems. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 39, 11 (Nov 2013), 1467–1493.
[11] Antonio Filieri, Carlo Ghezzi, Alberto Leva, and Martina Maggio. 2011. Self-
adaptive software meets control theory: A preliminary approach supporting
reliability requirements. In Proceedings of the 2011 26th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering . IEEE Computer Society, 283–292.
[12] Antonio Filieri, Carlo Ghezzi, Alberto Leva, and Martina Maggio. 2012. Reliability-
Driven Dynamic Binding via Feedback Control. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing
Systems (SEAMS ’12) . IEEE, 43–52.
[13] Antonio Filieri, Henry Hoffmann, and Martina Maggio. 2014. Automated design of
self-adaptive software with control-theoretical formal guarantees. In Proceedings

==== Page 11 ====
A Hybrid Approach Combining Control Theory and AI for Engineering Self-Adaptive Systems SEAMS ’20, October 7–8, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering . ACM, 299–310.
[14] Antonio Filieri, Henry Hoffmann, and Martina Maggio. 2015. Automated multi-
objective control for self-adaptive software design. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th
Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering . ACM, 13–24.
[15] Antonio Filieri, Martina Maggio, Konstantinos Angelopoulos, Nicolas d’Ippolito,
Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Andreas Berndt Hempel, Henry Hoffmann, Pooyan
Jamshidi, Evangelia Kalyvianaki, Cristian Klein, et al .2015. Software engineer-
ing meets control theory. In Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on
Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems . IEEE Press, 71–82.
[16] Antonio Filieri, Martina Maggio, Konstantinos Angelopoulos, Nicolás D’ippolito,
Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Andreas Berndt Hempel, Henry Hoffmann, Pooyan
Jamshidi, Evangelia Kalyvianaki, Cristian Klein, Filip Krikava, Sasa Misailovic,
Alessandro V. Papadopoulos, Suprio Ray, Amir M. Sharifloo, Stepan Shevtsov,
Mateusz Ujma, and Thomas Vogel. 2017. Control Strategies for Self-Adaptive
Software Systems. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 11, 4, Article 24 (Feb. 2017),
31 pages.
[17] Erik Fredericks, Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Christian Krupitzer, and Thomas Vogel.
2019. Planning as Optimization: Dynamically Discovering Optimal Configura-
tions for Runtime Situations. In 13th International Conference on Self-Adaptive
and Self-Organizing Systems (SASO ’19) . IEEE, 1–10.
[18] Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Christian Prehofer, and Tomas Bures. 2018. Adapting a
system with noisy outputs with statistical guarantees. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing
Systems . ACM, 58–68.
[19] Mark Harman, S. Afshin Mansouri, and Yuanyuan Zhang. 2012. Search-Based
Software Engineering: Trends, Techniques and Applications. ACM Comput. Surv.
45, 1, Article Article 11 (2012), 61 pages.
[20] J. Hellerstein, Y. Diao, S. Parekh, and D. Tilbury. 2004. Feedback Control of
Computing Systems . John Wiley Sons, Inc., USA.
[21] Pooyan Jamshidi, Javier Cámara, Bradley Schmerl, Christian Kästner, and David
Garlan. 2019. Machine Learning Meets Quantitative Planning: Enabling Self-
adaptation in Autonomous Robots (SEAMS ’19) . IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
39–50.
[22] Pooyan Jamshidi and Giuliano Casale. 2016. An uncertainty-aware approach
to optimal configuration of stream processing systems. In 2016 IEEE 24th In-
ternational Symposium on Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Computer and
Telecommunication Systems (MASCOTS) . IEEE, 39–48.
[23] Pooyan Jamshidi, Miguel Velez, Christian Kästner, Norbert Siegmund, and Prasad
Kawthekar. 2017. Transfer learning for improving model predictions in highly
configurable software. In Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on
Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems . IEEE, 31–41.
[24] Cristian Klein, Martina Maggio, Karl-Erik Årzén, and Francisco Hernández-
Rodriguez. 2014. Brownout: Building More Robust Cloud Applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2014) .
ACM, 700–711.
[25] Cristian Klein, Alessandro Vittorio Papadopoulos, Manfred Dellkrantz, Jonas
Dürango, Martina Maggio, Karl-Erik undefinedrzén, Francisco Hernández-
Rodriguez, and Erik Elmroth. 2014. Improving Cloud Service Resilience Using
Brownout-Aware Load-Balancing. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE 33rd Interna-
tional Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS ’14) . IEEE, 31–40.
[26] Rudolf Kruse, Christian Borgelt, Christian Braune, Sanaz Mostaghim, Matthias
Steinbrecher, Frank Klawonn, and Christian Moewes. 2016. Computational Intel-
ligence: A Methodological Introduction (2nd ed.). Springer.[27] Palden Lama and Xiaobo Zhou. 2013. Autonomic Provisioning with Self-Adaptive
Neural Fuzzy Control for Percentile-Based Delay Guarantee. ACM Trans. Auton.
Adapt. Syst. 8, 2, Article Article 9 (2013), 31 pages.
[28] Martina Maggio, Henry Hoffmann, Alessandro V. Papadopoulos, Jacopo Panerati,
Marco D. Santambrogio, Anant Agarwal, and Alberto Leva. 2012. Comparison
of Decision-Making Strategies for Self-Optimization in Autonomic Computing
Systems. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 7, 4, Article Article 36 (2012), 32 pages.
[29] Martina Maggio, Cristian Klein, and Karl-Erik Årzén. 2014. Control strategies
for predictable brownouts in cloud computing. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 47, 3
(2014), 689–694. 19th IFAC World Congress.
[30] Katsuhiko Ogata. 2001. Modern Control Engineering (4th ed.). Prentice Hall PTR,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.
[31] F. Quin, D. Weyns, T. Bamelis, S. Singh Buttar, and S. Michiels. 2019. Efficient
Analysis of Large Adaptation Spaces in Self-Adaptive Systems using Machine
Learning. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 14th International Symposium on Software Engineering
for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS) . 1–12.
[32] Arthur Rodrigues, Ricardo Diniz Caldas, Genaína Nunes Rodrigues, Thomas Vo-
gel, and Patrizio Pelliccione. 2018. A learning approach to enhance assurances for
real-time self-adaptive systems. In 2018 IEEE/ACM 13th International Symposium
on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS) . IEEE,
206–216.
[33] Mazeiar Salehie and Ladan Tahvildari. 2009. Self-Adaptive Software: Landscape
and Research Challenges. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 4, 2, Article Article 14
(2009), 42 pages.
[34] Stepan Shevtsov, Mihaly Berekmeri, Danny Weyns, and Martina Maggio. 2018.
Control-Theoretical Software Adaptation: A Systematic Literature Review. IEEE
Trans. Softw. Eng. 44, 8 (Aug. 2018), 784–810.
[35] Stepan Shevtsov and Danny Weyns. 2016. Keep it simplex: Satisfying multiple
goals with guarantees in control-based self-adaptive systems. In Proceedings of
the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering . ACM, 229–241.
[36] Stepan Shevtsov, Danny Weyns, and Martina Maggio. 2017. Handling New and
Changing Requirements with Guarantees in Self-Adaptive Systems Using SimCA.
InProceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Software Engineering for
Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS ’17) . IEEE, 12–23.
[37] Seung Yeob Shin, Shiva Nejati, Mehrdad Sabetzadeh, Lionel C. Briand, Chetan
Arora, and Frank Zimmer. 2019. Dynamic Adaptive Network Configura-
tion for IoT Systems: A Search-based Approach. CoRR abs/1905.12763 (2019).
arXiv:1905.12763 http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.12763
[38] Gabriela Félix Solano, Ricardo Diniz Caldas, Genaína Nunes Rodrigues, Thomas
Vogel, and Patrizio Pelliccione. 2019. Taming Uncertainty in the Assurance
Process of Self-Adaptive Systems: A Goal-Oriented Approach. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and
Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS ’19) . IEEE, 89–99.
[39] Jack A Stankovic, Chenyang Lu, Sang Hyuk Son, and Gang Tao. 1999. The
case for feedback control real-time scheduling. In Proceedings of 11th Euromicro
Conference on Real-Time Systems. Euromicro RTS’99 . IEEE, 11–20.
[40] Danny Weyns. 2017. Software engineering of self-adaptive systems: an organised
tour and future challenges. Chapter in Handbook of Software Engineering (2017).
[41] Danny Weyns. 2018. Engineering Self-Adaptive Software Systems - An Organized
Tour. In FAS*W@SASO/ICAC . IEEE, 1–2.

