==== Page 1 ====
applied  
sciences 
Review
A Review of Deep Learning Based Speech Synthesis
Yishuang Ning1,2,3,4, Sheng He1,2,3,4, Zhiyong Wu5,6,*, Chunxiao Xing1,2and Liang-Jie Zhang3,4
1Research Institute of Information Technology Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2Department of Computer Science and Technology Institute of Internet Industry, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China
3National Engineering Research Center for Supporting Software of Enterprise Internet Services,
Shenzhen 518057, China
4Kingdee Research, Kingdee International Software Group Company Limited, Shenzhen 518057, China
5Tsinghua-CUHK Joint Research Center for Media Sciences, Technologies and Systems,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Information Science and Technology, Graduate School at Shenzhen,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
6Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
*Correspondence: zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received: 1 August 2019; Accepted: 20 September 2019; Published: 27 September 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Speech synthesis, also known as text-to-speech (TTS), has attracted increasingly more
attention. Recent advances on speech synthesis are overwhelmingly contributed by deep learning
or even end-to-end techniques which have been utilized to enhance a wide range of application
scenarios such as intelligent speech interaction, chatbot or conversational artiﬁcial intelligence (AI).
For speech synthesis, deep learning based techniques can leverage a large scale of <text, speech>
pairs to learn effective feature representations to bridge the gap between text and speech, thus better
characterizing the properties of events. To better understand the research dynamics in the speech
synthesis ﬁeld, this paper ﬁrstly introduces the traditional speech synthesis methods and highlights
the importance of the acoustic modeling from the composition of the statistical parametric speech
synthesis (SPSS) system. It then gives an overview of the advances on deep learning based speech
synthesis, including the end-to-end approaches which have achieved start-of-the-art performance in
recent years. Finally, it discusses the problems of the deep learning methods for speech synthesis,
and also points out some appealing research directions that can bring the speech synthesis research
into a new frontier.
Keywords: deep learning; speech synthesis; end-to-end; text analysis
1. Introduction
Speech synthesis, more speciﬁcally known as text-to-speech (TTS), is a comprehensive technology
that involves many disciplines such as acoustics, linguistics, digital signal processing and statistics.
The main task is to convert text input into speech output. With the development of speech synthesis
technologies, from the previous formant based parametric synthesis [ 1,2], waveform concatenation
based methods [ 3–5] to the current statistical parametric speech synthesis (SPSS) [ 6], the intelligibility
and naturalness of the synthesized speech have been improved greatly. However, there is still a long
way to go before computers can generate natural speech with high naturalness and expressiveness
like that produced by human beings. The main reason is that the existing methods are based on
shallow models that contain only one-layer nonlinear transformation units, such as hidden Markov
models (HMMs) [ 7,8] and maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) [ 9]. Related studies show that shallow models
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050; doi:10.3390/app9194050 www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 2 of 16
have good performance on data with less complicated internal structures and weak constraints.
However, when dealing with the data having complex internal structures in the real world (e.g., speech,
natural language, image, video, etc.), the representation capability of shallow models will be restricted.
Deep learning (DL) is a new research direction in the machine learning area in recent years.
It can effectively capture the hidden internal structures of data and use more powerful modeling
capabilities to characterize the data [ 10]. DL-based models have gained signiﬁcant progress in many
ﬁelds such as handwriting recognition [ 11], machine translation [ 12], speech recognition [ 13] and
speech synthesis [ 14]. To address the problems existing in speech synthesis, many researchers have
also proposed the DL-based solutions and achieved great improvements. Therefore, to summarize the
DL-based speech synthesis methods at this stage will help us to clarify the current research trends in
this area. The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of speech synthesis
including its basic concept, history and technologies. In Section 3, this paper introduces the pipeline
of SPSS. A brief introduction is given in Section 4 about the DL-based speech synthesis methods
including the end-to-end ones. Finally, Section 5 provides discussions on new research directions.
Finally, Section 6 concludes the article.
2. An Overview of Speech Synthesis
2.1. Basic Concept of Speech Synthesis
Speech synthesis or TTS is to convert any text information into standard and smooth speech in
real time. It involves many disciplines such as acoustics, linguistics, digital signal processing, computer
science, etc. It is a cutting-edge technology in the ﬁeld of information processing [ 15], especially for
the current intelligent speech interaction systems.
2.2. The History of Speech Synthesis
With the development of digital signal processing technologies, the research goal of speech
synthesis has been evolving from intelligibility and clarity to naturalness and expressiveness.
Intelligibility describes the clarity of the synthesized speech, while naturalness refers to ease of
listening and global stylistic consistency [16].
In the development of speech synthesis technology, early attempts mainly used parametric
synthesis methods. In 1971, the Hungarian scientist Wolfgang von Kempelen used a series of delicate
bellows, springs, bagpipes and resonance boxes to create a machine that can synthesize simple words.
However, the intelligibility of the synthesized speech is very poor. To address this problem, in 1980,
Klatt’s serial/parallel formant synthesizer [ 17] was introduced. The most representative one is the
DECtalk text-to-speech system of the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) (Maynard, MA, USA).
The system can be connected to a computer through a standard interface or separately connected
to the telephone network to provide a variety of speech services that can be understood by users.
However, since the extraction of the formant parameters is still a challenging problem, the quality of
the synthesized speech makes it difﬁcult to meet the practical demand. In 1990, the Pitch Synchronous
OverLap Add (PSOLA) [ 18] algorithm greatly improved the quality and naturalness of the speech
generated by the time-domain waveform concatenation synthesis methods. However, since PSOLA
requires the pitch period or starting point to be annotated accurately, the error of the two factors
will affect the quality of the synthesized speech greatly. Due to the inherent problem of this kind of
method, the synthesized speech is still not as natural as human speech. To tackle the issue, people
conducted in-depth research on speech synthesis technologies, and used SPSS models to improve
the naturalness of the synthesized speech. Typical examples are HMM-based [ 19] and DL-based [ 20]
synthesis methods. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the synthesized speech of these
models has been greatly improved in both speech quality and naturalness.

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 3 of 16
2.3. Traditional Speech Synthesis Technology
To understand why deep learning techniques are being used to generate speech today, it is
important to know how speech generation is traditionally done. There are two speciﬁc methods for
TTS conversion: concatenative TTS and parametric TTS. This paper will give a brief introduction to
the two kinds of methods in the following sections.
2.3.1. Concatenative Speech Synthesis
The waveform concatenation based synthesis method directly concatenates the waveforms in the
speech waveform database and outputs a continuous speech stream. Its basic principle is to select the
appropriate speech unit from the pre-recorded and labeled speech corpus according to the context
information analyzed from the text input, and concatenate the selected speech unit to obtain the ﬁnal
synthesized speech. With the guidance of the context infomation, the naturalness of the synthesized
speech has been improved greatly.
There are two different schemes for concatenative synthesis: one is based on linear prediction
coefﬁcients (LPCs) [ 21], the other is based on PSOLA. The ﬁrst method mainly uses the LPC coding of
speech to reduce the storage capacity occupied by the speech signal, and the synthesis is also a simple
decoding and concatenation process. The speech synthesized by this method is very natural for a single
word because the codec preserves most of the information of the speech. However, since the natural
ﬂow of words when people actually speak is not just a simple concatenation of individual isolated
speech units, the overall effect will be affected by the concatenative points. To address this problem,
PSOLA, which pays more attention to the control and modiﬁcation of prosody, has been proposed.
Different from the former method, PSOLA adjusts the prosody of the concatenation unit according to
the target context, so that the ﬁnal synthesized waveform not only maintains the speech quality of the
original pronunciation, but also makes the prosody features of the concatenation unit conform to the
target context. However, this method also has many defects: (1) as stated in Section 2.2, the quality
of the synthesized speech will be affected by the pitch period or starting point; and (2) the problem
of whether it can maintain a smooth transition has not been solved. These defects greatly limit its
application in diversiﬁed speech synthesis [22].
2.3.2. Parametric Speech Synthesis
The parametric speech synthesis refers to the method that uses digital signal processing
technologies to synthesize speech from text. In this method, it considers the human vocal process as
a simulation that uses a source of glottal state to excite a time-varying digital ﬁlter which characterizes
the resonance characteristics of the channel. The source can be a periodic pulse sequence that is
used to represent the vocal cord vibration of the voiced speech, or a random white noise to indicate
undeﬁned unvoiced speech. By adjusting the parameters of the ﬁlter, it can synthesize various types
of speeches [ 15]. Typical methods include vocal organ parametric synthesis [ 23], formant parametric
synthesis [ 24], HMM-based speech synthesis [ 25], and deep neural network (DNN)-based speech
synthesis [26,27].
3. Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis
A complete SPSS system is generally composed of three modules: a text analysis module,
a parameter prediction module which uses a statistical model to predict the acoustic feature parameters
such as fundamental frequency (F0), spectral parameters and duration, and a speech synthesis
module. The text analysis module mainly preprocesses the input text and transforms it into linguistic
features used by the speech synthesis system, including text normalization [ 28], automatic word
segmentation [ 20], and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 29]. These linguistic features usually
include phoneme, syllable, word, phrase and sentence-level features. The purpose of the parameter
prediction module is to predict the acoustic feature parameters of the target speech according to

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 4 of 16
the output of the text analysis module. The speech synthesis module generates the waveform of
the target speech according to the output of the parameter prediction module by using a particular
synthesis algorithm. The SPSS is usually divided into two phases: the training phase and the synthesis
phase. In the training phase, acoustic feature parameters such as F0 and spectral parameters are ﬁrstly
extracted from the corpus, and then a statistical acoustic model is trained based on the linguistic
features of the text analysis module as well as the extracted acoustic feature parameters. In the
synthesis phase, the acoustic feature parameters are predicted using the trained acoustic model with
the guidance of the linguistic features. Finally, the speech is synthesized based on the predicted
acoustic feature parameters using a vocoder.
3.1. Text Analysis
Text analysis is an important module of the SPSS model. Traditional text analysis methods
are mainly rule-based, which require a lot of time to collect and learn these rules. With the
rapid development of data mining technology, some data-driven methods have been gradually
developed, such as the bigram method, trigram method, HMM-based method and DNN-based
method. When using the latter two methods for text analysis, the Festival [ 4] system is usually used to
perform phoneme segmentation and annotation on the corpus, which mainly includes the following
ﬁve levels:
Phoneme level: the phonetic symbols of the previous before the previous, the previous, the current,
the next or the next after the next; the forward or backward distance of the current phoneme
within the syllable.
Syllable level: whether the previous, the current or the next syllable is stressed; the number of
phonemes contained in the previous, the current or the next syllable; the forward or the backward
distance of the current syllable within the word or phrase; the number of the stressed syllables before
or after the current syllable within the phrase; the distance from the current syllable to the forward or
backward most nearest stressed syllable; the vowel phonetics of the current syllable.
Word level: the part of speech (POS) of the previous, the current or the next word; the number of
syllables of the previous, the current or the next word; the forward or backward position of the current
word in the phrase; the forward or backward content word of the current word within the phrase;
the distance from the current word to the forward or backward nearest content word; the POS of the
previous, the current or the next word.
Phrase level: the number of syllables of the previous, the current or the next phrase; the number
of words of the previous, the current or the next phrase; the forward or backward position of the
current phrase in the sentence; the prosodic annotation of the current phrase.
Sentence level: The number of syllables, words or phrases in the current sentence.
3.2. Parameter Prediction
Parameter prediction is used to predict acoustic feature parameters based on the result of the
text analysis module and the trained acoustic model. For the SPSS, there are usually two kinds
of parameter prediction methods: HMM-based parameter prediction and DNN-based parameter
prediction. This paper will give a review of these methods in the following.
3.2.1. HMM-Based Parameter Prediction
The HMM-based parameter prediction method mainly generates the sequence of F0 and spectral
parameters from the trained HMMs. It is achieved by calculating the sequence of acoustic features
with the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) algorithm given a Gaussian distribution sequence.
Due to the differences between F0 and spectral parameters, different methods have been adopted to
model the two kinds of feature parameters. For the continuous spectral parameters, the continuous
density hidden Markov model (CD-HMM) is used and the output of each HMM state is a single
Gaussian or a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) [ 27]. However, for the variable-dimensional F0

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 5 of 16
parameters which include voiced and unvoiced regions, it is difﬁcult to apply discrete or continuous
HMMs because the values of F0 are not deﬁned in unvoiced regions. To address this problem,
the HMM-based method adopts multi-space probability distribution to model the voiced and unvoiced
regions (e.g., voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) parameters), separately. To improve the accuracy and ﬂexibility
of acoustic parameter prediction, the authors in [ 28] introduce the articulatory feature that is related to
the speech generation mechanism and integrates it with the acoustic features.
3.2.2. DNN-Based Parameter Prediction
It is well known that the acoustic features of a particular phoneme will be affected by the
context information associated with the phoneme [ 30]. It means that the context information plays
a signiﬁcant role in the prediction of the acoustic features. Researchers show that the human speech
generation process usually uses a hierarchical structure to convert the context information into a speech
waveform [ 31]. Inspired by this idea, the deep structure models have been introduced in predicting
acoustic feature parameters for speech synthesis [ 32]. The framework of the DNN-based parameter
prediction progress can be seen in [20].
To compare with the HMM-based parameter prediction methods, the DNN-based methods can
not only map complex linguistic features into acoustic feature parameters, but also use long short-term
context information to model the correlation between frames which improves the quality of speech
synthesis. In addition, for the HMM-based methods, the principal of MLE is used to maximize
the output probability which makes the parameter sequence a mean vector sequence, resulting in
a step-wise function. The jumps cause discontinuities in the synthesized speech. To address this
problem, the maximum likelihood parameter generation (MLPG) algorithm is used to smooth the
trajectory by taking the dynamic features including the delta and delta–delta coefﬁcients into account.
However, the DNN-based methods cannot suffer from this problem.
3.3. Vocoder-Based Speech Synthesis
Speech synthesizer or vocoder is an important component of statistical parametric speech
synthesis, which aims at synthesizing speech waveform based on the estimated acoustic feature
parameters. Traditional methods usually use the HTS_engine [ 33] synthesizer since it is free and
fast to synthesize speech. However, the synthesized speech usually sounds dull, thus making the
quality not good. To improve the quality of the synthesized speech, STRAIGHT [ 34,35] is proposed
and used in various studies, making it easy to manipulate speech. Other methods such as phase
vocoder [ 36], PSOLA [ 18] and sinusoidal model [ 37] are also proposed. Legacy-STRAIGHT [ 38] and
TANDEM-STRAIGHT [ 38] were developed as algorithms to meet the requirements for high-quality
speech synthesis. Although these methods can synthesize speech with good quality, the speed still
cannot meet the real-world application scenarios. To address this problem, real-time methods remain
a popular research topic. For example, the authors in [ 34] proposed the real-time STRAIGHT as a way
to meet the demand for real-time processing. The authors in [ 38] proposed a high-quality speech
synthesis system which used WORLD [ 39] to meet the requirements of not only high sound quality
but also real-time processing.
4. Deep Learning Based Speech Synthesis
It is known that the HMM-based speech synthesis method maps linguistic features into probability
densities of speech parameters with various decision trees. Different from the HMM-based method,
the DL-based method directly perform mapping from linguistic features to acoustic features with
deep neural networks which have proven extraordinarily efﬁcient at learning inherent features of
data. In the long tradition of studies that adopt DL-based method for speech synthesis, people have
proposed numerous models. To help readers better understand the development process of these
methods (Audio samples of different synthesis methods are given at: http://www.ai1000.org/sampl

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 6 of 16
es/index.html.), this paper gives a brief overview of the advantages and disadvantages in Table 1 and
makes a detailed introduction in the following.
Table 1. The advantages and disadvantages of different speech synthesis methods, including
hidden Markov model (HMM), restrictive Boltzmann machine (RBM), deep belief network (DBN),
deep mixture density network (DMDN), deep bidirectional long short-term memory (DBLSTM),
WaveNet, Tacotron and convolutional neural network (CNN).
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
HMMFlexible with changing voice characteristics and the
system is robustThe acoustic features are oversmoothed,
making the generated speech sounds mufﬂed
RBMCan better describe the distribution of high-dimensional
spectral envelopes to alleviate the over-smooth problemSuffer from the fragementation problem of
training data
DBNCannot suffer from the training data fragementation
problem and reduce the over-smoothing problemThe quality of generated speech
will be degraded
DMDN Can solve the single modality problemCan only leverage limited contexts and each
frame is mapped independently
DBLSTM Can fully leverage contextual information Still needs a vocoder to synthesize waveform
WaveNet Can produce high-quality speech waveformsToo slow and the errors from the front-end
will affect the synthesis effect
TacotronFully end-to-end speech synthesis model and
can produce high-quality speech waveformsQuite costly to train the model
CNN Fast to train the model The speech quality might be degraded
4.1. Restrictive Boltzmann Machines for Speech Synthesis
In recent years, restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) [ 40] have been widely used for
modeling speech signals, such as speech recognition, spectrogram coding and acoustic-articulatory
inversion mapping [ 40]. In these applications, RBM is often used for pre-training of deep
auto-encoders (DAEs) [ 41,42] or DNNs. In the ﬁeld of speech synthesis, RBM is usually regarded as
a density model for generating the spectral envelope of acoustic parameters. It is adopted to better
describe the distribution of high-dimensional spectral envelopes to alleviate the over-smooth problem
in HMM-based speech synthesis [ 40]. After training the HMMs, a state alignment is performed for
the acoustic features and the state boundaries are used to collect the spectral envelopes obtained from
each state. The parameters of the RBM are estimated using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
criterion. Finally, RBM–HMMs are constructed to model the spectral envelopes. In the synthesis
phase, the optimal spectral envelope sequence is estimated based on the input sentence and the
trained RBM–HMMs. Although the subjective evaluation result of this method is better than that of
traditional HMM–GMM systems, and the predicted spectral envelope is closer to the original one, this
method still cannot solve the fragementation problem of training data encountered in the traditional
HMM-based method.
4.2. Multi-Distribution Deep Belief Networks for Speech Synthesis
The multi-distribution deep belief network (DBN) [ 43] is a method of modeling the joint
distribution of context information and acoustic features. It models the coutinuous spectral, discrete
voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) parameters and the multi-space F0 simultaneously with three types of RBMs.
Due to the different data types of the 1-out-of- Kcode, the F0, the spectral and the V/UV parameters,
the method uses the 1-out-of- Kcode of the syllable and its corresponding acoustic parameters as
the visible-layer data of the RBM to train the RBMs. In DBNs, the visible unit can obey different
probability distributions; therefore, it is possible to characterize the supervectors that are composed of
these features. In the training phase, given the 1-out-of- Kcode of the syllable, the network ﬁxes the
visible-layer units to calculate the hidden-layer parameters ﬁrstly, and then uses the parameters of
the hidden layers to calculate the visible-layer parameters until convergence. Finally, the predicted
acoustic features are interpolated based on the length of the syllable.

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 7 of 16
The advantage of this method is that all the syllables are trained in the same network, and all
the data are used to train the same RBM or DBN. Therefore, it cannot suffer from the training data
fragementation problem. In addition, modeling the acoustic feature parameters of a syllable directly
can describe the correlation of each frame of the syllable and the correlation of different dimensions
of the same frame. The method avoids averaging the frames corresponding to the same syllable,
thus reducing the over-smooth phenomenon. However, since this method does not distinguish
syllables in different contexts, it still averages the acoustic parameters corresponding to the same
syllable. In addition, compared to the high-dimensional spectral parameters, the one-dimensional F0s
don’t contribute much to the model, thus making the predicted F0s contain a lot of noise that reduces
the quality of the synthesized speech.
4.3. Speech Synthesis Using Deep Mixture Density Networks
Although the DNN-based speech synthesis model can synthesize speech with high naturalness,
it still has some limitations to model acoustic feature parameters, such as the single modality
of the objective function and the inability to predict the variance. To address these problems,
the authors in [ 44] proposed the parameter prediction method based on a deep mixture density
network, which uses a mixture density output layer to predict the probability distribution of output
features under given input features.
4.3.1. Mixture Density Networks
Mixed density networks (MDNs) [ 45] can not only map input features to GMM parameters
(such as the mixture weights, mean and variance), but also give the joint probability density function
ofygiven input features x. The joint probability density function is expressed as follows:
p(yjx,M) =M
å
m=1wm(x)N 
y;mm(x),s2
m(x)
, (1)
where Mis the number of mixture components, and wm(x),mm(x)ands2
m(x)are the mixture weights,
mean and variance of the m-th Gaussian component of GMM, respectively. The parameters of the
GMM can be calculated based on MDN with Equations (2)–(4):
wm(x) =exp 
z(w)
m(x,M)
åM
l=1exp 
z(w)
l(x,M), (2)
sm(x) =exp 
z(s)
m(x,M)
, (3)
mm(x) =z(m)
m(x,M), (4)
where z(w)
m(x,M),z(m)
m(x,M)andz(s)
m(x,M)are the excitation of the MDN output layer corresponding
to the mixture weights, mean and variance of the m-th Gaussian component, respectively. Finally,
given the input/output pair of the training data in Equation (5), the model is trained by maximizing
the log likelihood of M, which is expressed as Equation (6):
D=n
x(1)
1,y(1)
1
, ...,
x(1)
T(1),y(1)
T(1)
, ...,
x(N)
1,y(N)
1
, ...,
x(N)
T(N),y(N)
T(N)o
, (5)
ˆM=arg max
MN
å
n=1T(n)
å
t=1logp
y(n)
tjx(n)
t,M
, (6)
where Nis the number of sentences and T(n)is the number of frames in the n-th sentence.

==== Page 8 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 8 of 16
4.3.2. Deep MDN-Based Speech Synthesis
When predicting speech parameters with deep MDN, the text prompt is ﬁrst converted into
a linguistic feature sequence fx1,x2, ...,xTg, and then the duration of each speech unit is predicted
using a duration prediction model. The acoustic features including the F0, spectral parameters and
their corresponding dynamic features are estimated with the forward algorithm and the trained deep
MDN. Finally, the acoustic feature parameters are generated by the parameter generation algorithm
and speech is synthesized with a vocoder.
4.4. Deep Bidirectional LSTM-Based Speech Synthesis
Although the deep MDN speech synthesis model can solve the single modality problem of the
objective function and predict the acoustic feature parameters accurately to improve the naturalness
of the synthesized speech, there are still some problems as elaborated in the following. Firstly,
MDN can only leverage limited contextual information since it can only model ﬁxed time span
(e.g., ﬁxed number of preceding or succeeding contexts) for input features. Secondly, the model
can only do frame-by-frame mapping (e.g., each frame is mapped independently). To address these
problems, the authors in [ 46] proposed a modeling method based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs).
The advantage of RNN is the ability to utilize context information when mapping inputs to outputs.
However, traditional RNNs can only access limited context information since the effects of a given
input on the hidden layer and the output layer will decay or explode as it propagates through the
network. In addition, this algorithm also cannot learn long-term dependencies.
To address these problems, the authors in [ 47] introduced a memory cell and proposed the long
short-term memory (LSTM) model. To fully leverage contextual information, bidirectional LSTM [ 48]
is mostly used for mapping the input linguistic features to acoustic features.
4.4.1. BLSTM
BLSTM-RNN is an extended architecture of bidirectional recurrent neural network (BRNN) [49].
It replaces units in the hidden layers of BRNN with LSTM memory blocks. With these memory
blocks, BLSTM can store information for long and short time lags, and leverage relevant contextual
dependencies from both forward and backward directions for machine learning tasks. With a forward
and a backward layer, BLSTM can utilize both the past and future information for modeling.
Given an input sequence x= (x1,x2, ...,xT), BLSTM computes the forward hidden sequence!
h
and the backward hidden sequence 
hby iterating the forward layer from t= 1 to Tand the backward
layer from t=Tto 1:
!
ht=f 
Wx!
hxt+W!
h!
h!
ht 1+b!
h
, (7)
 
ht=f 
Wx 
hxt+W 
h 
h 
ht+1+b 
h
. (8)
The output layer is connected to both forward and backward layers, thus the output sequence
can be written as:
yt=W!
hy!
ht+W 
hy 
ht+by. (9)
The notations of these equations are explained in [ 49] and f()is the activation function which
can be implemented by the LSTM block with equations in [49].
4.4.2. Deep BLSTM-Based Speech Synthesis
When using a deep BLSTM-based (DBLSTM) model to predict acoustic parameters, ﬁrst we need
to convert the input text prompt into a feature vector, and then use the DBLSTM model to map the

==== Page 9 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 9 of 16
input feature to acoustic parameters. Finally, the parameter generation algorithm is used to generate
the acoustic parameters and a vocoder is utilized to synthesize the corresponding speech. For instance,
the authors in [ 48] proposed a multi-task learning [ 50,51] of structured output layer (SOL) BLSTM
model for speech synthesis, which is capable of balancing the error cost functions associated with
spectral feature and pitch parameter targets.
4.5. Sequence-to-Sequence Speech Synthesis
Sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) neural networks can transduce an input sequence into an output
sequence that may have a different length and have been applied to various tasks such as machine
translation [ 52], speech recognition [ 53] and image caption generation [ 54], and achieved promising
results. Since speech synthesis is the reverse process of speech recognition, the seq2seq modeling
technique has also been applied to speech synthesis recently. For example, the authors in [ 55] employed
the structure with content-based attention [ 56] to model the acoustic features for speech synthesis.
Char2Wav [ 16] adopted location-based attention to build an encoder–decoder acoustic model. To tackle
the instability problem of missing or repeating phones that current seq2seq models still suffer from,
the authors in [ 57] proposed a forward attention approach for the seq2seq acoustic modeling of speech
synthesis. Tacotron, which is also a seq2seq model with an attention mechanism, has been proposed to
map the input text to mel-spectrogram for speech synthesis.
4.6. End-to-End Speech Synthesis
A TTS system typically consists of a text analysis front-end, an acoustic model and a speech
synthesizer. Since these components are trained independently and rely on extensive domain expertise
which are laborious, errors from each component may compound. To address these problems,
end-to-end speech synthesis methods which combine those components into a uniﬁed framework
have become mainstream in the speech synthesis ﬁeld. There are many advantages of an end-to-end
TTS system: (1) it can be trained based on a large scale of <text, speech> pairs with minimum human
annotation; (2) it doesn’t require phoneme-level alignment; and (3) errors cannot compound since
it is a single model. In the following, we will give a brief introduction to the end-to-end speech
synthesis methods.
4.6.1. Speech Synthesis Based on WaveNet
WaveNet [ 58], which is evolved from the PixelCNN [ 59] or PixelRNN [ 60] model applied in
image generation ﬁeld, is a powerful generative model of raw audio waveforms. It was proposed
by Deepmind (London, UK) in 2016 and opens the door for end-to-end speech synthesis. It is
capable of generating relatively realistic-sounding human-like voices by directly modeling waveforms
using a DNN model which is trained with recordings of real speech. It is a complete probabilistic
autoregressive model that predicts the probability distribution of the current audio sample based on
all samples that have been generated before. As an important component of WaveNet, dilated causal
convolutions are used to ensure that WaveNet can only use the sampling points from 0tot 1while
generating the tth sampling point.
The original WaveNet model uses autoregressive connections to synthesize waveforms one
sample at a time, with each new sample conditioned on the previous ones. The joint probability of
a waveform X=fx1,x2, ...,xTgcan be factorised as follows:
p(X) =T 1
Õ
i=0p(xi+1jx1,x2, ...,xi). (10)
Like other speech synthesis models, WaveNet-based models can be divided into training phase
and generation phase. At the training phase, the input sequences are real waveforms recorded from
human speakers. At the generation phase, the network is sampled to generate synthetic utterances.

==== Page 10 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 10 of 16
To generate speech of the speciﬁed speaker or the speciﬁed text, global and local conditions are usually
introduced to control the synthesis contents.
While the WaveNet model can produce high-quality audios, it still suffers from the following
problems: (1) it is too slow because the prediction of each sampling point always depends on the
predicted sampling points before; (2) it also depends on linguistic features from an existing TTS
front-end and the errors from the front-end text analysis will directly affect the synthesis effect.
To address these problems, the parallel WaveNet is proposed to improve the sampling efﬁciency.
It is capable of generating high-ﬁdelity speech samples at more than 20 times faster [ 61]. Another neural
model, Deep Voice [ 62], is also proposed to replace each component including a text analysis front-end,
an acoustic model and a speech synthesizer by a corresponding neural network. However, since each
component is trained independently, it is not a real end-to-end synthesis.
4.6.2. Speech Synthesis Based on Tacotron
Tacotron [ 63,64] is a fully end-to-end speech synthesis model. It is capable of training a speech
synthesis model given <text, audio> pairs, thus alleviating the need for laborious feature engineering.
In addition, since it is based on character level, it can be applied in almost all kinds of languages
including Chinese Mandarin.
Like WaveNet, the Tacotron model is also a generative model. Different from WaveNet, Tacotron
uses a seq2seq model with an attention mechanism to map text to a spectrogram, which is a good
representation of speech. Since a spectrogram doesn’t contain phase information, the system uses
the Grifﬁn–Lim algorithm [ 65] to reconstruct the audio by estimating the phase information from the
spectrogram iteratively. The overall framework of the Tacotron speech synthesis model can be seen
in [63].
Since Tacotron is a fully end-to-end model that directly maps the input text to mel-spectrogram,
it has received a wide amount of attention of researchers and various improved versions have been
proposed. For example, some researchers implemented open clones of Tacotron [ 66–68] to reproduce
the speech of satisfactory quality as clear as the original work [ 69]. The authors in [ 70] introduced deep
generative models, such as Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) [ 71], to Tacotron to explicitly model the
latent representation of a speaker state in a continuous space, and additionally to control the speaking
style in speech synthesis [70].
There are also some works that combine Tacotron and WaveNet for speech synthesis, such as
Deep Voice 2 [ 72]. In this system, Tacotron is used to transform the input text to the linear scale
spectrogram, while WaveNet is used to generate speech from the linear scale spectrogram output of
Tacotron. In addition, the authors in [ 73] also proposed the Tacotron2 system to generate audio signals
that resulted in a very high mean opinion score (MOS) comparable to human speech [ 74]. The authors
in [73] described a uniﬁed neural approach that combines a seq2seq Tacotron-style model to generate
mel-spectrogram and a WaveNet vocoder to synthesize speech from the generated mel-spectrogram.
4.6.3. Speech Synthesis Based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Although the Tacotron-based end-to-end system has achieved promising performance recently,
it still has a drawback that there are many recurrent units. This kind of structure makes it quite costly to
train the model and it is also infeasible for researchers without high-performance machines to conduct
further research on it. To address this problem, a lot of works have been proposed. The authors
in [69] proposed a deep convolutional network with guided attention which can be trained much faster
than the RNN-based state-of-the-art neural system. Different from the WaveNet model, which utilized
the fully-convolutional structure as a kind of vocoder or a back-end, Ref. [ 69] is rather a frond-end
(and most of back-end processing) that can synthesize a spectrogram. The authors in [ 75] used
CNN-based architecture for capturing long-term dependencies of singing voice and applied parallel
computation to accelerate the model train and acoustic feature generation processes. The authors
in [76] proposed a novel, fully-convolutional character-to-spectrogram architecture, namely Deep

==== Page 11 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 11 of 16
Voice 3, for speech synthesis, which enables fully parallel computation to make the training process
faster than that of using recurrent units.
5. Discussion
Compared with the concatenative speech synthesis method, the SPSS system can synthesize
speech with high intelligibility and naturalness. Due to the limitations of the HMM-based speech
synthesis model (such as the use of context decision trees to share speech parameters), the synthesized
speech is not vivid enough to meet the requirements of expressive speech synthesis. The DL-based
speech synthesis models adopt complete context information and distributed representation to replace
the clustering process of the context decision tree in HMM, and use multiple hidden layers to map
the context features to high-dimensional acoustic features, thus making the quality of the synthesized
speech better than the traditional methods.
However, the powerful representation capabilities of DL-based models have also brought some
new problems. To achieve better results, the models need more hidden layers and nodes, which will
undoubtedly increase the number of parameters in the network, and the time complexity and space
complexity for network training. When the training data are insufﬁcient, the models usually have
over-ﬁtting. Therefore, it requires a large amount of corpora and computing resources to train the
network. In addition, the DL-based models also require much more space to store the parameters.
There is no doubt that the existing end-to-end models are still far from perfect [ 77]. Despite many
achievements, there are still some challenging problems. Next, we will discuss some research directions:
 Investigating context features hidden in end-to-end speech synthesis. The end-to-end TTS
system, mostly back-end, has achieved state-of-the-art performance since it was proposed.
However, there is little progress in front-end text analysis, which extracts context features or
linguistic features that are very useful to bridge the gap between text and speech [ 78]. Therefore,
demonstrating what types of context information are utilized in end-to-end speech synthesis
system is a good direction in future.
 Semi-supervised or unsupervised training in end-to-end speech synthesis. Although end-to-end
TTS models have shown excellent results, they typically require large amounts of high-quality
<text, speech> pairs for training, which are expensive and time-consuming to collect.
It is important and of great signiﬁcance to improve the data efﬁciency for end-to-end TTS training
by leveraging a large scale of publicly available unpaired text and speech recordings [79].
 The application of other speech related scenarios. In addition to the application of text-to-speech
in this paper, the application to other scenarios such as voice conversion, audio-visual speech
synthesis, speech translation and cross-lingual speech synthesis is also a good direction.
 The combination of software and hardware. At present, most deep neural networks require a lot
of calculations. Therefore, parallelization will be an indispensable part of improving network
efﬁciency. In general, there are two ways to implement parallelization: one is the parallelization
of the machines; the other is to use GPU parallelization. However, since writing GPU code
is still time-consuming and laborious for most researchers, it depends on the cooperation of
hardware vendors and software vendors, to provide the industry with more and more intelligent
programming tools.
6. Conclusions
Deep learning that is capable of leveraging large amount of training data has become an important
technique for speech synthesis. Recently, increasingly more researches have been conducted on
deep learning techniques or even end-to-end frameworks and achieved state-of-the-art performance.
This paper gives an overview to the current advances on speech synthesis and compare both of the
advantages and disadvantages among different methods, and discusses possible research directions
that can promote the development of speech synthesis in the future.

==== Page 12 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 12 of 16
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing,
Y.N.; Writing—review and editing, S.H.; Resources, Writing—review and editing and funding acquisition, Z.W.;
Supervision and funding acquisition, C.X. and L.-J.Z.
Funding: This work is partially supported by the technical projects No. c1533411500138 and No. 2017YFB0802700.
This work is also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (91646202, 61433018),
joint fund of NSFC-RGC (Research Grant Council of Hong Kong) (61531166002), the 1000-Talent program and the
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M652949).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Peng Liu, Quanjie Yu and Zhiyong Wu for providing
the material.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
TTS Text-to-Speech
SPSS Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis
HMM Hidden Markov Model
DL Deep Learning
DEC Digital Equipment Corporation
POS Part-of-Speech
DNN Deep Neural Network
LPC Linear Prediction Coefﬁcient
PSOLA Pitch Synchronous OverLap Add
SPSS Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis
CD-HMM Continuous Density Hidden Markov Model
GMM Gaussian Mixture Model
RBM Restricted Boltzmann Machines
DBN Deep Belief Networks
MLE Maximum Likelihood Estimation
MDN Mixed Density Network
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
BLSTM Bidirectional Long Short-term Memory
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
DAE Deep Auto-Encoder
VAE Variational Auto-Encoder
MOS Mean Opinion Score
References
1. Klatt, D.H. Review of text-to-speech conversion for English. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 1987 ,82, 737–793. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2. Allen, J.; Hunnicutt, M.S.; Klatt, D.H.; Armstrong, R.C.; Pisoni, D.B. From Text to Speech: The MITalk System ;
Cambridge University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1987.
3. Murray, I.R.; Arnott, J.L.; Rohwer, E.A. Emotional stress in synthetic speech: Progress and future directions.
Speech Commun. 1996 ,20, 85–91. [CrossRef]
4. Festival. Available online: http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival/ (accessed on 3 July 2019).
5. Chu, M.; Peng, H.; Zhao, Y. Microsoft Mulan. A bilingual TTS system. In Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP’03), Hong Kong, China,
6–10 April 2003; pp. 264–267.
6. Tokuda, K.; Nankaku, Y.; Toda, T. Speech synthesis based on hidden Markov models. Proc. IEEE 2013 ,101,
1234–1252. [CrossRef]
7. Murray, I.R. Simulating Emotion in Synthetic Speech ; University of Dundee: Dundee, UK, 1989.
8. Tokuda, K.; Yoshimura, T.; Masuko, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Kitamura, T. Speech parameter generation algorithms
for HMM-based speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, Istanbul, Turkey, 5–9 June 2000; Volume 3, pp. 1315–1318.

==== Page 13 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 13 of 16
9. Ratnaparkhi, A. A Simple Introduction to Maximum Entropy Models for Natural Language Processing ;
University of Pennsylvania: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1997.
10. Yang, J.A.; Wang, Y.; Liu, H.; Li, J.H.; Lu, J. Deep learning theory and its application in speech recognition.
Commun. Countermeas. 2014 ,33, 1–5.
11. Graves, A. Supervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neural Networks ; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2012.
12. Sutskever, I.; Vinyals, O.; Le, Q.V . Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Proceedings of
the Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Montreal, QB, Canada, 8–13 December
2014; pp. 3104–3112.
13. Graves, A.; Mohamed, A.R.; Hinton, G. Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 6645–6649.
14. Zen, H.; Tokuda, K.; Alan, W.B. Statistical parametric speech synthesis. Speech Commun. 2009 ,51, 1039–1064.
[CrossRef]
15. Xu, S.H. Study on HMM-Based Chinese Speech Synthesis ; Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications:
Beijing, China, 2007.
16. Sotelo, J.; Mehri, S.; Kumar, K.; Santos, J.F.; Kastner, K.; Courville, A.; Bengio, Y. Char2wav: End-to-end
Speech Synthesis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations Workshop,
Toulon, France, 24–26 April 2017.
17. Klatt, D.H. Software for a cascade/parallel formant synthesizer. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 1980 ,67, 971–995.
[CrossRef]
18. Moulines, E.; Charpentier, F. Pitch-synchronous waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech synthesis
using diphone. Speech Commun. 1990 ,9, 453–456. [CrossRef]
19. Yoshimura, T.; Tokuda, K.; Masuko, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Kitamura, T. Simultaneous modeling of spectrum,
pitch and duration in HMM-based speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference
on Speech Communication and Technology (EUROSPEECH’99), Budapest, Hungary, 5–9 September 1999;
pp. 2347–2350.
20. Zen, H.; Senior, A.; Schuster, M. Statistical parametric speech synthesis using deep neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 7962–7966.
21. Atal, B.S.; Hanauer, S.L. Speech analysis and synthesis by linear prediction of the speech wave. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 1971 ,50, 637–655. [CrossRef]
22. Wu, Y.J. Study on the HMM-Based Speech Synthesis Techniques ; University of Science and Technology of China:
Hefei, China, 2006.
23. Cataldo, E.; Leta, F.R.; Lucero, J.; Nicolato, L. Synthesis of voiced sounds using low-dimensional models of
the vocal cords and time-varying subglottal pressure. Mech. Res. Commun. 2016 ,33, 250–260. [CrossRef]
24. Schröder, M. Emotional speech synthesis: A review. In Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on
Speech Communication and Technology, Aalborg, Denmark, 2–7 September 2001.
25. Zen, H.; Nose, T.; Yamagishi, J.; Sako, S.; Masuko, T.; Black, A.W.; Tokuda, K. The HMM-based speech
synthesis system (HTS) version 2.0. In Proceedings of the ISCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis, Bonn,
Germany, 22–24 August 2007; pp. 294–299.
26. Meng, F.B. Analysis and Generation of Focus in Continuous Speech ; Tsinghua University: Beijing, China, 2013.
27. Zhuang, X.; Huang, J.; Potamianos, G.; Hasegawa-Johnson, M. Acoustic fall detection using Gaussian
mixture models and GMM supervectors. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Taipei, Taiwan, 19–24 April 2009; pp. 69–72.
28. Lin, Z.H. Research on Speech Synthesis Technology Based on Statistical Acoustic Modeling ; University of Science
and Technology of China: Hefei, China, 2008.
29. Fan, Y.; Qian, Y.; Xie, F.L.; Soong, F.K. TTS synthesis with bidirectional LSTM based recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
Singapore, 14–18 September 2014.
30. Zen, H. Acoustic modeling in statistical parametric speech synthesis-from HMM to LSTM-RNN.
In Proceedings of the The First, International Workshop on Machine Learning in Spoken Language Processing
(MLSLP2015), Aizu, Japan, 19–20 September 2015.
31. Dudley, H. Remaking speech. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 1939 ,11, 169–177. [CrossRef]

==== Page 14 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 14 of 16
32. Kawahara, H.; Masuda-Katsuse, I.; Cheveigne, A. Restructuring speech representations using
a pitch-adaptive time-frequency smoothing and an instantaneous-frequency-based f0 extraction.
Speech Commun. 1999 ,27, 187–207. [CrossRef]
33. HMM/DNN-Based Speech Synthesis System (HTS). Available online: http://hts.sp.nitech.ac.jp/
(accessed on 15 March 2015).
34. Banno, H.; Hata, H.; Morise, M.; Takahashi, T.; Irino, T.; Kawahara, H. Implementation of realtime
STRAIGHT speech manipulation system: Report on its ﬁrst implementation. Acoust. Sci. Technol. 2007 ,28,
140–146. [CrossRef]
35. STRAIGHT. Available online: https://github.com/shuaijiang/STRAIGHT (accessed on 25 July 2018).
36. Flanagan, J.L.; Golden, R.M. Phase vocoder. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 1966 ,45, 1493–1509. [CrossRef]
37. McAulay, R.; Quatieri, T.F. Speech analysis/synthesis based on a sinusoidal representation. IEEE Trans.
Acoust. Speech Signal Process. 1986 ,34, 744–754. [CrossRef]
38. Morise, M.; Yokomori, F.; Ozawa, K. WORLD: A vocoder-based high-quality speech synthesis system for
real-time applications. IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. 2016 ,99, 1877–1884. [CrossRef]
39. World. Available online: https://github.com/mmorise/World (accessed on 18 May 2019).
40. Ling, Z.H.; Deng, L.; Yu, D. Modeling spectral envelopes using restricted Boltzmann machines for statistical
parametric speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 7825–7829.
41. Deng, L.; Seltzer, M.L.; Yu, D.; Acero, A.; Mohamed, A.R.; Hinton, G. Binary coding of speech spectrograms
using a deep auto-encoder. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, Makuhari, Japan, 26–30 September 2010; pp. 1692–1695.
42. Gehring, J.; Miao, Y.; Metze, F.; Waibel, A. Extracting deep bottleneck features using stacked auto-encoders.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 3377–3381.
43. Kang, S.Y.; Qian, X.J.; Meng, H. Multi-distribution deep belief network for speech synthesis. In Proceedings
of the 38th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 8012–8016.
44. Zen, H.; Senior, A. Deep mixture density networks for acoustic modeling in statistical parametric speech
synthesis. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, Florence, Italy, 4–9 May 2014; pp. 3844–4848.
45. Bishop, C. Mixture Density Networks ; Tech. Rep. NCRG/94/004; Neural Computing Research Group,
Aston University: Birmingham, UK, 1994.
46. Graves, A.; Schmidhuber, J. Framewise phoneme classiﬁcation with bidirectional LSTM networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Montreal, QC, Canada,
31 July–4 August 2005; pp. 2047–2052.
47. Graves, A.; Fernandez, S.; Gomez, F.; Schmidhuber, J. Connectionist temporal classiﬁcation: Labeling
unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Machine Learning, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 25–29 June 2006; pp. 369–376.
48. Li, R.N.; Wu, Z.Y.; Liu, X.Y.; Meng, H.; Cai, L.H. Multi-task learning of structured output layer bidirectional
LSTMs for speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing, New Orleans, LA, USA, 5–9 March 2017; pp. 5510–5514.
49. Yu, Q.J.; Liu, P .; Wu, Z.Y.; Kang, S.Y.; Meng, H.; Cai, L.H. Learning cross-lingual information with multilingual
BLSTM for speech synthesis of low-resource languages. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Shanghai, China, 20–25 March 2016; pp. 5545–5549.
50. Caruana, R. Multitask Learning ; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1998.
51. Seltzer, M.L.; Droppo, J. Multi-task learning in deep neural networks for improved phoneme recognition.
In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp. 6965–6969.
52. Luong, M.T.; Pham, H.; Manning, C.D. Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine translation.
arXiv 2015 , arXiv:1508.04025.
53. Jaitly, N.; Le, Q.V .; Vinyals, O.; Sutskever, I.; Sussillo, D.; Bengio, S. An online sequence-to-sequence
model using partial conditioning. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, Barcelona, Spain, 5–10 December 2016; pp. 5067–5075.

==== Page 15 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 15 of 16
54. Xu, K.; Ba, J.; Kiros, R.; Cho, K.; Courville, A.; Salakhudinov, R.; Bengio, Y. Show, attend and tell: Neural
image caption generation with visual attention. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, Lille, France, 6–11 July 2015; pp. 2048–2057.
55. Wang, W.; Xu, S.; Xu, B. First step towards end-to-end parametric TTS synthesis: Generating spectral
parameters with neural attention. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, San Francisco, CA, USA, 8–12 September 2016; pp. 2243–2247.
56. Bahdanau, D.; Cho, K.; Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv
2014 , arXiv:1409.0473.
57. Zhang, J.X.; Ling, Z.H.; Dai, L.R. Forward attention in sequence-to-sequence acoustic modeling for speech
synthesis. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, Calgary, AB, Canada, 15–20 April 2018; pp. 4789–4793.
58. Oord, A.V .D.; Dieleman, S.; Zen, H.; Simonyan, K.; Vinyals, O.; Graves, A.; Kavukcuoglu, K. WaveNet:
A generative model for raw audio. arXiv Preprint 2017 , arXiv:1609.03499.
59. Oord, A.V .D.; Kalchbrenner, N.; Espeholt, L.; Vinyals, O.; and Graves, A. Conditional image generation with
pixelcnn decoders. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
Barcelona, Spain, 5–10 December 2016; pp. 4790–4798.
60. Oord, A.V .D.; Kalchbrenner, N.; Kavukcuoglu, K. Pixel recurrent neural networks. arXiv 2016 ,
arXiv:1601.06759.
61. Oord, A.V .D.; Li, Y.; Babuschkin, I.; Simonyan, K.; Vinyals, O.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Casagrande, N.
Parallel wavenet: Fast high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1711.10433.
62. Arik, S.Ö.; Chrzanowski, M.; Coates, A.; Diamos, G.; Gibiansky, A.; Kang, Y.; Sengupta, S. Deep voice:
Real-time neural text-to-speech. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6–11 August 2017; pp. 195–204.
63. Wang, Y.; Skerry-Ryan, R.J.; Stanton, D.; Wu, Y.; Weiss, R.J.; Jaitly, N.; Le, Q. Tacotron: Towards end-to-end
speech synthesis. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1703.10135.
64. Wang, Y.; Skerry-Ryan, R.J.; Stanton, D.; Wu, Y.; Weiss, R.J.; Jaitly, N.; Le, Q.V . Tacotron: A fully end-to-end
text-to-speech synthesis model. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1703.10135.
65. Grifﬁn, D.; Lim, J. Signal estimation from modiﬁed short-time Fourier transform. IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech
Signal Process. 1984 ,32, 236–243. [CrossRef]
66. Barron, A. Implementation of Google’s Tacotron in TensorFlow. Available online: https://github.com/Kyu
byong/tacotron (accessed on 20 October 2018).
67. Ito, K. Tacotron Speech Synthesis Implemented in TensorFlow, with Samples and a Pre-Trained Model.
Available online: https://github.com/keithito/tacotron (accessed on 20 October 2018).
68. Yamamoto, R. PyTorch Implementation of Tacotron Speech Synthesis Model. Available online: https://gith
ub.com/r9y9/tacotron_pytorch (accessed on 20 October 2018).
69. Tachibana, H.; Uenoyama, K.; Aihara, S. Efﬁciently trainable text-to-speech system based on deep
convolutional networks with guided attention. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Calgary, AB, Canada, 15–20 April 2018; pp. 4784–4788.
70. Zhang, Y.J.; Pan, S.; He, L.; Ling, Z.H. Learning latent representations for style control and transfer in
end-to-end speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing, Brighton, UK, 12–17 May 2019; pp. 6945–6949.
71. Kingma, D.P .; Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1312.6114.
72. Gibiansky, A.; Arik, S.; Diamos, G.; Miller, J.; Peng, K.; Ping, W.; Zhou, Y. Deep voice 2: Multi-speaker
neural text-to-speech. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
Long Beach, CA, USA, 4–9 December 2017; pp. 2962–2970.
73. Shen, J.; Pang, R.; Weiss, R.J.; Schuster, M.; Jaitly, N.; Yang, Z.; Saurous, R.A. Natural TTS synthesis by
conditioning WaveNet on mel spectrogram predictions. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Calgary, AB, Canada, 15–20 April 2018;
pp. 4779–4783.
74. Yasuda, Y.; Wang, X.; Takaki, S.; Yamagishi, J. Investigation of enhanced Tacotron text-to-speech synthesis
systems with self-attention for pitch accent language. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Brighton, UK, 12–17 May 2019; pp. 6905–6909.

==== Page 16 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 16 of 16
75. Nakamura, K.; Hashimoto, K.; Oura, K.; Nankaku, Y.; Tokuda, K. Singing voice synthesis based on
convolutional neural networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1904.06868.
76. Ping, W.; Peng, K.; Gibiansky, A.; Arik, S.O.; Kannan, A.; Narang, S. Deep voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech
with convolutional sequence learning. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Learning
Representations, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30–3 May 2018; pp. 1–16.
77. Chen, H.; Liu, X.; Yin, D.; Tang, J. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent advances and new frontiers.
ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 2017 ,19, 25–35. [CrossRef]
78. Mametani, K.; Kato, T.; Yamamoto, S. Investigating context features hidden in End-to-End TTS.
In Proceedings of IEEE the 44th International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
Brighton, UK, 12–17 May 2019; pp. 6920–6924.
79. Chung, Y.A.; Wang, Y.; Hsu, W.N.; Zhang, Y.; Skerry-Ryan, R.J. Semi-supervised training for improving
data efﬁciency in end-to-end speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Brighton, UK, 12–17 May 2019; pp. 6940–6944.
c2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

