==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Zhang, Y.; Liu, J.; Shen, W.
A Review of Ensemble Learning
Algorithms Used in Remote Sensing
Applications. Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app12178654
Academic Editor: Rub én
Usamentiaga
Received: 11 July 2022
Accepted: 26 August 2022
Published: 29 August 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Review
A Review of Ensemble Learning Algorithms Used in Remote
Sensing Applications
Yuzhen Zhang1,*
, Jingjing Liu1and Wenjuan Shen2,3
1School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
Beijing 100083, China
2College of Forestry, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China
3Co-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry University,
Nanjing 210037, China
*Correspondence: yzhang@ustb.edu.cn
Abstract: Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in various remote sensing applications
due to their ability to identify nonlinear correlations. Ensemble algorithms have been included
in many practical applications to improve prediction accuracy. We provide an overview of three
widely used ensemble techniques: bagging, boosting, and stacking. We ﬁrst identify the underlying
principles of the algorithms and present an analysis of current literature. We summarize some
typical applications of ensemble algorithms, which include predicting crop yield, estimating forest
structure parameters, mapping natural hazards, and spatial downscaling of climate parameters and
land surface temperature. Finally, we suggest future directions for using ensemble algorithms in
practical applications.
Keywords: bagging; boosting; stacking; remote sensing applications; ensemble
1. Introduction
Remote sensing is widely used in applications such as military reconnaissance, analysis
of natural hazards, detection of land use and land cover change, measurement of sea ice
distribution, precision agriculture, and estimation and mapping of carbon stocks [ 1,2].
The primary properties of the target detected by the sensor in these applications are in
the form of spatial, spectral, temporal, and polarization signatures [ 3]. Many models
of physical processes have been developed that quantify the data relationships between
sensor and target. These models include radiative transfer models, radiosity models, ray-
tracing models, dynamic global vegetation models, and land surface microwave emission
models, among others [ 4–9]. However, it is generally difﬁcult to obtain the parametric
input required for a physical process model, especially at a large scale. Some studies
have coupled a physical process model with a statistical method or used a statistical
method with a machine learning algorithm to extract crucial predictions for a speciﬁc
application. Since the remote sensing signals often provide a nonlinear representation
of the target, machine learning and deep learning algorithms have been widely used in
remote sensing applications, because they are not based on some underlying assumption
regarding the distribution of the data and they have a potent capacity to capture nonlinear
correlations [ 10,11]. Support vector machines (SVM) and random forests (RF) are two well-
known nonparametric machine learning algorithms that are used in many studies [ 12–14].
Some studies have claimed that no single algorithm could outperform every other
machine learning algorithm under all situations (sometimes called the no free lunch the-
orem) [ 15]. The ensemble learning technique has been developed in response to this
claim [ 16,17]. Ensemble learning techniques create multiple hypotheses and combine them
to solve a given problem, in contrast to conventional machine learning techniques that aim
to learn a single hypothesis from training data. [ 18,19]. By combining multiple learners
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12178654 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 2 of 20
and taking full advantage of these learners, ensemble algorithms have produced improved
results and reduced the overﬁtting problem, and they possess the ﬂexibility to deal with
different tasks [ 17,20,21]. Bagging, boosting, and stacking are three well established en-
semble techniques, although there exist some variants and other ensemble algorithms that
have been used in practical applications [ 17]. Current implementations of these algorithms
in R and Python are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Implementation of ensemble learning algorithms using R and Python.
AlgorithmImplementation with R and Python
R Package Python Library
Bagging ipred scikit-learn
RF randomForest/caret scikit-learn
ERT extraTrees scikit-learn
AdaBoost Adabag/fastAdaboost scikit-learn
GBM gbm scikit-learn
XGBoost xgboost/plyr xgboost
LightGBM lightgbm lightgbm
CatBoost catboost catboost/scikit-learn
Stacking stacks vecstack/scikit-learn
We present a general overview of the bagging, boosting, and stacking ensemble
techniques used in remote sensing. We ﬁrst review the principles underlying the three
types of ensemble algorithms in Section 2 and describe our literature search for publications
about bagging, boosting, and stacking ensembles in Section 3. In Section 4, we focus on
several ﬁelds of study that widely use ensemble techniques for objectives such as crop
yield prediction, estimation of forest structure parameters, mapping natural hazards, and
spatial downscaling, as well as other applications. Finally, we examine the issues related to
ensemble algorithms and future directions.
2. Principles of Ensemble Learning Algorithms
2.1. Bagging Algorithms
Bagging is an ensemble technique that combines multiple learners trained on distinct
subsamples of the original data. To build a bagging model, we generate multiple datasets by
bootstrapping the training data and then develop models based on the individual datasets
and make predictions using these models. All the predictions are then combined to produce
a representative value such as the mean, median, or majority vote for classiﬁcation and
averaging, for regression, depending on the problem to be solved. Since an individual
learner is often sensitive to noise in the training data, bagging, by aggregating multiple
results in a single prediction, should provide stable and improved results with decreased
variance [22].
RF is a modiﬁed version of bagging, in which the classiﬁcation and regression trees
(CART) technique is often used as the individual learner. RF uses subsamples of the original
data to build trees and randomly selects a subset of variables to determine each split in
the tree [ 23]. RF excludes approximately 30% of training samples from the modeling
due to bootstrapping and random subspace techniques and is often used to compute the
out-of-bag (OOB) prediction error.
Many studies have shown that RF outperforms other machine learning and statistical
regression algorithms [ 13]. It has many advantages, some of which are the following. Both
classiﬁcation and regression issues can be resolved using RF. In addition, RF is insensitive
to noise or outliers in the training data because it bins them. RF trains rapidly since it
incorporates only part of the features for training. RF is easy to use since only one or
two hyperparameters (i.e., the number of trees in the forest and the number of predictor
variables to be randomly selected at each junction) are required to be tuned. In addition,
an intrinsic estimate of the generalization error (the OOB error) is given. RF provides

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 3 of 20
a measure of variable importance as identiﬁed by the Gini index [ 24]. Despite these
advantages, the spatial correlation of nearby observable data is disregarded by RF. Thus,
RF kriging (RFK), which couples RF with residuals interpolated by conventional kriging,
was proposed and successfully used for forest biomass mapping [ 25] and prediction of
PM2.5 concentrations [26].
Extremely randomized trees (ERT) is also a tree-based ensemble method. ERT differs
from RF in the following ways: ERT uses all samples to train the base learner instead of
using bootstrap resampling; and ERT randomly selects cutting points instead of calculating
local optimal cutting points when splitting nodes, which injects more randomness than
RF [ 22]. The results from different individual trees are therefore more diverse. Some
studies have suggested that ERT produces more accurate predictions than RF [ 27]. ERT has
been used in a wide variety of applications such as aboveground biomass estimation [ 28],
prediction of ground level PM2.5 concentrations [ 29], modeling olive tree phenology [ 30],
retrieval of downward longwave radiation [ 31], streamﬂow modeling [ 32], and estimation
of terrestrial latent heat ﬂux [33].
2.2. Boosting Algorithms
Boosting algorithms use a forward stagewise process to transform weak learners
into strong learners by increasing the weights of training samples that were mistakenly
identiﬁed or wrongly calculated in a successive iteration. The ﬁnal output of boosting is
obtained by combining the results from all iterations using a weighted vote for classiﬁca-
tion or a weighted sum for regression [ 34]. Widely used boosting ensemble algorithms
include adaptive boosting (AdaBoost), gradient boosting machine (GBM), extreme gradient
boosting (XGBoost), LightGBM, and categorical boosting (CatBoost).
AdaBoost was initially developed to increase the efﬁciency of binary classiﬁers. In
GBM, all the weak learners of GBM are decision trees. XGBoost is an improved version
of GBM that implements parallel preprocessing at the node level, which makes it faster
than GBM. XGBoost also introduces a variety of regularization techniques to reduce over-
ﬁtting [ 35]. Studies have shown that of XGBoost is excellent in mapping plant species
diversity [ 36], predicting PM2.5 concentrations [ 37], forest biomass estimation [ 38], and
risk analysis for ﬂash ﬂoods [ 39]. LightGBM has many of XGBoost‘s advantages, such as
parallel training, regularization, and sparse optimization. The major difference between
the two lies in the method of constructing trees. LightGBM uses a leafwise split: after the
ﬁrst split, the node with a higher delta loss is selected for the next split [ 40]. This technique
enables LightGBM to easily handle huge amounts of data. A histogram-based method
is often adopted to select the best split in LightGBM to reduce the time used in training.
However, LightGBM cannot perform well with a small number of samples.
CatBoost is an improved gradient boosting decision tree (GBRT) algorithm and an
alternative to XGBoost. As the name suggests, CatBoost can internally handle categorical
variables in the data, and is thus suitable for dealing with machine learning tasks involving
categorical and heterogeneous data [ 41,42]. Studies have found that CatBoost is superior to
other machine learning algorithms, and it has been used to estimate forest biomass [ 28,43]
and reference evapotranspiration [44].
2.3. Stacked Generalization
Stacked generalization, also known as stacking, was proposed by Wolpert in 1992 [ 45].
It is a heterogeneous learning technique that combines diverse base learners by training a
model, unlike the homogeneous bagging and boosting methods which directly aggregate
the outputs of several learners to obtain the ﬁnal prediction. If properly designed, stacking
can take full advantage of different base learners and should perform better than an
individual base learner, whether using majority voting or weighted averaging [20,46–48].
Generally, stacking consists of several base learners (level 0) and a meta learner
(level 1), in which the outputs of base learners serve as inputs of the meta learner. Both the
precision and variety of base learners affect the performance of a stacking algorithm [ 49,50].

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 4 of 20
Diversity is a measure of the dependence or complementariness among learners [ 51]. That
base learners have high diversity implies that they are skilled in different ways, and thus
stacking them could lead to improved results. There are many measures of diversity,
such as Q-statistics in classiﬁcation, and the variance of ensemble predictions around their
weighted mean in regression [ 52]; no one measure has been shown to be the best [ 51,53,54].
In addition to the diversity and accuracy of base learners, the number of base learners also
affects the performance of stacking. More base learners are not always associated with
more accurate predictions, but they do require additional memory usage and computing
time [ 55]. Some studies have suggested that three to four base learners stacked together are
a suitable choice [ 56], and some action should be taken to ensure that an optimal subset of
base learners is used in stacking.
A two-layer stacking model is often adopted in practical applications, although stack-
ing models with more than two layers are sometimes used to further improve results [57].
A two-layer stacking model is constructed as follows (Figure 1). A k-fold cross-validation
is initially used to create k veriﬁcation datasets on all the base learners. The cross-validated
predictions are then used as new training data for the meta learner in the second layer; the
number of base learners in the ﬁrst layer is equal to the number of predictors in the second
layer, and the test data are created by adding the averages of the k-fold predictions of the
base learners [ 47,58]. In some classiﬁcation studies, class probabilities were used instead of
predicted classes as input attributes for the meta learner, which provided an effective way
of combining base model conﬁdences [ 20]. The inclusion of engineered original features in
stacking has been shown to give better performance [ 58,59]. There have also been studies
that used weighted stacking to improve results [60].
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 19  
an individual base learner, whether using majority voting or weighted averaging [20,46–
48]. 
Generally, stacking consists of several base learners (level 0) and a meta learner (level 
1), in which the outputs of base learners serve as  inputs of the meta learner. Both the pre-
cision and variety of base learners affect the performance of a stacking algorithm [49,50] . 
Diversity is a measure of the dependence or complementariness among learners  [51]. That 
base learners have high diversity implies that they are skilled in different ways, and thus 
stacking them could lead to improved results. There are  many measures of diversity, such 
as Q -statistics in classification, and the variance of ensemble predictions around their 
weighted mean in regression [52]; no one measure has been shown to be the best 
[51,53,54] . In addition to the diversity and accuracy of base learners, the number of base 
learners also affects the performance of stacking. More base learners are not always asso-
ciated with more accurate predictions, but they do require additional memory usage and 
computing time [55]. Some studies have suggested that three to four  base learners stacked 
together are a suitable choice [56], and some action should be taken to ensure that an op-
timal subset of base learners is used in stacking.  
A two -layer stacking model is of ten adopted in practical applications, although stack-
ing models with more than two layers are sometimes used to further improve results [57]. 
A two -layer stacking model is constructed as follows (Figure 1). A k -fold cross -validation 
is initially used to create k verification datasets on all the base learners. The cross -vali-
dated predictions are then used as new training data  for the meta learner in the second 
layer; the number of base learners in the first layer is equal to the number of predictors in 
the second layer, and the test data are created by adding the averages of the k -fold pre-
dictions of the base learners [47,58] . In some classification studies, class probabilities were 
used instead of predicted classes as input attributes for the meta learner, which prov ided 
an effective way of combining base model confidences [20]. The inclusion of engineere d 
original features in stacking has been shown to give better performance [58,59] . There 
have also been studies  that used weighted stacking to improve results [60]. 
 
Figure 1. Statistics of ensemble literature in the refined areas.  
3. Literature Search and Analysis  
We conducted a literature survey of the ISI Web of Science database using the search 
term TOPIC ensemble AND TOPIC remote sensing. The search was then refined to in-
clude research areas Remote Sensing, Geography, Agriculture, Forestry and Environmen-
tal Sciences Ecology and document types Articles, Meeting , and Review articles. This 
yielded a total of 2247 results that we refer to as ensemble literature.  
Research article s accounted for 84% of the records returned, conference papers for 
14% and review articles for 2% (Figure 1). The publication years of the refined search rec-
ords returned ranged from 1979 to 2022. In 2015 –2022, more than 100 papers meeting the 
search crite ria were published annually (Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Statistics of ensemble literature in the reﬁned areas.
3. Literature Search and Analysis
We conducted a literature survey of the ISI Web of Science database using the search
term TOPIC ensemble AND TOPIC remote sensing. The search was then reﬁned to include
research areas Remote Sensing, Geography, Agriculture, Forestry and Environmental
Sciences Ecology and document types Articles, Meeting, and Review articles. This yielded
a total of 2247 results that we refer to as ensemble literature.
Research articles accounted for 84% of the records returned, conference papers for 14%
and review articles for 2% (Figure 1). The publication years of the reﬁned search records
returned ranged from 1979 to 2022. In 2015–2022, more than 100 papers meeting the search
criteria were published annually (Figure 1).

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 5 of 20
We then constructed a co-occurrence network by identifying keywords in the searched
ensemble literatures, calculating the frequencies of their co-occurrences, and analyzing the
networks to ﬁnd central words and clusters of themes in the network (Figure 2). The con-
structed network showed that studies of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly related
to classiﬁcation, and studies of ensemble method use or ensemble models were primarily
concerned with RF. In addition, the co-occurrence network suggested that applications
concerning crop yield, biomass, rainfall, landslides, and satellite products were connected
to ensemble algorithms.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 19  
We then constructed a co -occurrence network by identifying keywords in the 
searched ensemble literatures, calculating the frequencies of their co -occurrences, and an-
alyzing the networks to find central words and clus ters of themes in the network (Figure 
2). The constructed network showed that studies of ensemble learning algorithms were 
mainly related to classification, and studies of ensemble method use or ensemble models 
were primarily concerned with RF. In addition, the co -occurrence network suggested that 
applications concerning crop yield, biomass, rainfall, landslides, and satellite products 
were connected to ensemble algorithms . 
 
Figure 2. Co-occurrence network of keywords in ensemble literature.  
4. App lications of Ensemble Learning Algorithms  
The co -occurrence network (Figure 2) combined with our reading of the ensemble 
literature shows that typical applications of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly 
concerned with the following issues: yield predi ction, forest structure and biomass esti-
mation, mapping of natural hazards (e.g., land susceptibility to natural disasters), and 
spatial downscaling of land surface temperature and rainfall (Table 2). RF was the most 
frequently used ensemble algorithm (30 times) in the 43 applications listed in Table 2, 
followed by stacking (13 times), while boosting algorithms were less frequently used (Ta-
ble 3). Only seven studies used XGBoost;  GBRT and AdaBoost were used four times. MLP 
and kNN often served as reference models to evaluate the performance of an ensemble 
algorithm.  
  
Figure 2. Co-occurrence network of keywords in ensemble literature.
4. Applications of Ensemble Learning Algorithms
The co-occurrence network (Figure 2) combined with our reading of the ensemble
literature shows that typical applications of ensemble learning algorithms were mainly
concerned with the following issues: yield prediction, forest structure and biomass estima-
tion, mapping of natural hazards (e.g., land susceptibility to natural disasters), and spatial
downscaling of land surface temperature and rainfall (Table 2). RF was the most frequently
used ensemble algorithm (30 times) in the 43 applications listed in Table 2, followed by
stacking (13 times), while boosting algorithms were less frequently used (Table 3). Only
seven studies used XGBoost; GBRT and AdaBoost were used four times. MLP and kNN
often served as reference models to evaluate the performance of an ensemble algorithm.

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 6 of 20
Table 2. Summary of reviewed applications that used ensemble learning algorithms.
Reference ApplicationMain Input Datasets or Causative
FactorsAlgorithms UsedAlgorithm with the
Best Accuracy
[61]Oil palm yield
predictionLandsat time series imagery RF, AdaBoost RF
[62]Flood susceptibility
mappingSlope, elevation, plan curvature,
topographic wetness index (TWI),
topographic position index,
convergence index, stream power
index (SPI), distance to stream,
drainage density, rainfall, lithology,
soil type, land use/land cover
(LULC), and normalized difference
vegetation index distance (NDVI)J48 ensemble model,
MultiBoosting J48,
AdaBoost J48, random
subspace J48Random subspace J48
[63]Drought risk
assessmentElevation, slope, distance from the
stream, drainage density,
temperature, humidity, precipitation,
evaporation, soil moisture, soil depth,
soil texture, NDVI, LULC,
geomorphology, groundwater level,
deep tone, agriculture-dependent
population, and population densitySVM, RF, SVR, and their
ensemble with bagging,
boosting and StackingSVR-stacking
[64]Downscaling climate
variablesSea surface temperature, air
temperature, geopotential height,
and sea level pressureGBRT, SVR GBRT
[65]Flash ﬂood
susceptibility
predictionAltitude, slope, aspect, plan
curvature, proﬁle curvature, distance
from river, distance from road, land
use, lithology, soil depth, rainfall, SPI,
and TWIBRT, RF, PRF, RRF, ERT ERT
[66]Winter wheat yield
predictionMODIS EVI, climate data, and the
subseasonal-to-seasonal (S2S)
atmospheric prediction dataMLR, XGBoost, RF, SVR XGBoost
[67]Estimation of canopy
height and growing
stock volumeAirborne laser scanner (ALS), phased
array type L-band synthetic aperture
radar (SAR), and Landsat dataRF —
[68]Flood susceptibility
mappingSlope, elevation, plan curvature,
NDVI, SPI, TWI, lithology, land use,
rainfall, stream density, and distance
to riverLMT, logistic regression,
Bayesian logistic
regression, RF,
Bagging-LMTBagging-LMT
[25]Forest biomass
estimationAdvanced land observing satellite 2 L
band, and Sentinel-1C band SAR,
shuttle radar topography mission
(SRTM) digital elevation model
(DEM) data, and Sentinel-2 dataRF, RF Kriging RF Kriging
[46]Spatial interpolation of
daily maximum air
temperatureLST, NDVI, elevation, slope, aspect,
solar radiation, global man-made
impervious surface, human built-up
and settlement extent, latitude,
and longitudeCokriging, MLR, SVR, RF,
stacking, simple average
ensembleStacking
[69]Individual tree
dendrometryField data, unmanned aerial
vehicle(UAV)-Lidar dataSVR, MLP , RF, XGBoost SVR

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 7 of 20
Table 2. Cont.
Reference ApplicationMain Input Datasets or Causative
FactorsAlgorithms UsedAlgorithm with the
Best Accuracy
[70]Reference
evapotranspiration
time series forecastingMaximum and minimum
temperature, wind speed at 2 m high,
average relative humidity, and
the insolationThree CNN models
CNN1, CNN2, CNN3,
ensemble-CNN1,
ensemble-CNN2,
ensemble-CNN3,
hybrid ensembleEnsemble models
[71]Short term electricity
consumption
forecastingElectricity consumptionANN, RF, GBRT, LR, DL,
DT, evolutionary
algorithms for regression
trees, ARMA,
ARIMA, stacking,Stacking
[72]Forest biomass
estimationALS data and Landsat 8 imageryELM, BPNN, RT, RF, SVR,
kNN, CNN, MLP ,
stackingStacking
[73]Prediction of
eucalyptus stand
volumeSPOT-5 raw spectral features,
spectral vegetation indices, rainfall
data, and stand ageSGB, RF, stepwise MLR SGB
[74] Alfalfa yield predictionNarrow-band indices (e.g., simple
ratio index, NDVI, chlorophyll
absorption ratio index, modiﬁed
versions of these indices) derived
from UAV-based
hyperspectral imagesRF, SVR, kNN, stacking Stacking
[75]Wheat grain yield
predictionVegetation indices derived from
UAV-based multispectral imagesRF, SVR, GP , RR, stacking Stacking
[76]Estimation of forest
variablesStatistics extracted from LiDAR dataMLR, MLP , SVR, kNN,
GP , RT, RFSVR
[77]Forest biomass
estimationMulti-temporal Sentinel-1 and 2
data-derived variables (vegetation
indices, SAR backscatter)RF, GBM, XGBoost,
ensemble model based
on weighted averagingEnsemble model
[78]Land subsidence
susceptibility mappingElevation, slope, aspect, proﬁle
curvature, plan curvature, TWI,
distance to road, distance to river,
distance to fault, precipitation, land
use, lithology, drainage density, and
groundwater drawdownLogistic regression, MLP ,
AdaBoost and LogitBoostAdaBoost
[79]Forest disturbance
detectionLandsat Thematic Mapper (TM) and
Enhanced Thematic Mapper (ETM
+) imageryEight automated change
detection algorithms,
stackingStacking
[80] Downscaling LSTtopographic variables derived from
SRTM DEM data, land cover, and
surface reﬂectance in visible red and
near-infrared bandsRF, TsHARP RF
[81]Landslide susceptibility
mappingAltitude, slope, aspect, cross sectional
curvature, proﬁle curvature, plan
curvature, longitudinal curvature,
channel network base, convergence
index, distance to fault, distance to
river, valley depth, and lithology mapFDA, GLM, GBM, RF,
ensemble based on
weighted averageEnsemble

==== Page 8 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 8 of 20
Table 2. Cont.
Reference ApplicationMain Input Datasets or Causative
FactorsAlgorithms UsedAlgorithm with the
Best Accuracy
[82]Estimating wheat
yieldsMODIS NDVI and climate data time
seriesRF, Cubist, XGBoost,
MLP , SVR, GP , kNN,
MARS, average
ensemble, bayesian data
fusionSVR
[83]Downscaling soil
moistureSentinel-1 radar, monthly NDVI, land
cover, topography, and surface soil
properties.RF —
[84]Winter wheat yield
predictionSpectral indices calculated from
UAV-based hyperspectral dataSVR, GP , RR, RF, stacking Stacking
[43]Forest biomass
estimationLandsat spectral variables, vegetation
indexes, texture measures, and
terrain factorsRF, XGBoost, CatBoost CatBoost
[47]Landslide susceptibility
mappingLithology, bedding structure,
distance to fault, slope, aspect, plan
curvature, proﬁle curvature,
elevation, distance to river, and NDVIDBN, CNN, ResNet,
stacking, simple
averaging ensemble,
weighted averaging
ensemble, boostingStacking
[85]Spatial prediction of
landslideSlope, aspect, elevation, curvature,
lithology, land use, distance to roads,
distance to faults, distance to rivers,
and rainfallLSSVM, MADT MADT
[86]Predicting ﬂood
probabilitiesElevation, slope angle, aspect, plan
curvature, SPI, TWI, sediment
transport index, drainage density,
mean annual rainfall, proximity to
rivers, proximity to roads, proximity
to the coastline, soil texture, geology,
land cover, wind speed, and mean
sea levelLWLR, random subspace,
REPTree, RF, M5P model
tree, stackingsSacking
[87]Flood susceptibility
mappingElevation, slope, aspect, NDVI, mean
monsoonal rainfall, plan curvature,
drainage density, population density,
land cover, proximity to rivers,
proximity to roads, geology, and
soil textureBayesian regularization
back propagation neural
network, CART, EBF,
weighted average
ensemble algorithmWeighted average
ensemble algorithm
[88]Forecasting agricultural
commodity pricesPrices of energy commodities,
exchange rate, interaction between
commodities prices in domestic, and
foreign marketsRF, GBM, XGBoost,
stacking, MLP , SVR, kNNXGBoost
[89] Wheat yield predictionNormalized difference red edge
index, temperature, precipitation,
relative humidity, sunshine duration,
solar radiation, growing degree days,
Shannon diversity index of
precipitation evenness, abundant and
well-distributed rainfall, and days
after plantingLR, RR, Lasso, ENR, SVR,
kNN, DT, RF, GBDT,
MLP , XGBoostXGBoost

==== Page 9 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 9 of 20
Table 2. Cont.
Reference ApplicationMain Input Datasets or Causative
FactorsAlgorithms UsedAlgorithm with the
Best Accuracy
[90]Landslide susceptibility
mappingElevation, slope, slope aspect, general
curvature, plan curvature, proﬁle
curvature, surface roughness, TWI,
SPI, slope length, NDVI, LULC, and
distance from roads, rivers, faults
and railwaysLogistic regression,
GBDT, VFI, SVM, DT,
neural networks, Naïve
bayes, RF, deep learning,
majority-based voting
ensembleMajority-based
voting ensemble
[91]Spatial downscaling of
precipitation dataEnhanced vegetation index, altitude,
slope, aspect, latitude, and longitudeRF —
[92]Downscaling soil
moistureSoil moisture related indices derived
from MODIS and a digital
elevation modelGBDT —
[93]Estimating daily
reference
evapotranspirationMaximum and minimum air
temperature, relative humidity, wind
speed at 2 m height, and
solar radiationRF, SVR, MLP , kNN,
stacking, blendingStacking
[94]Downscaling
precipitationNorth American multi-model
ensemble model outputsQuantile mapping,
wavelet SVM, wavelet RFWavelet SVM and
wavelet RF
[95] Downscaling LSTLandsat 8 and Sentinel-2A images,
SRTM data, and daily minimum and
maximum air temperaturesmulti-factor
geographically weighted
machine learning
(MFGWML), thermal
image sharpening
(TsHARP), high
resolution thermal
sharpener for citiesMFGWML
[96]Growing stem
volume estimationVegetation indices, spectral
reﬂectance variables, backscattering
coefﬁcients, and texture features
extracted from the Sentinel-1A and
Sentinel-2A image datasetsBagging (CART),
Bagging (kNN), Bagging
(SVR), Bagging (ANN),
AdaBoost (CART),
AdaBoost (kNN),
AdaBoost (SVR),
AdaBoost (ANN),
secondary ensemble with
an improved weighted
average (IWA)IWA
[28]Forest biomass
estimationLeaf area index, canopy height, net
primary production, and tree cover
data, climatic data, and
topographical dataSVR, MARS, MLP , RF,
ERT, SGB, GBRT,
CatBoostCatBoost
[58]Forest biomass
estimationSatellite-derived leaf area index, net
primary production, forest canopy
height, tree cover data, climate data,
and topographical dataCatBoost, GBRT, MLP ,
MARS, SVR, stackingStacking
[97]Mapping ﬁne spatial
resolution precipitationMODIS NDVI, daily land surface
temperature, and SRTM DRM dataRF, CART RF

==== Page 10 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 10 of 20
Table 3. Most-used ensemble learning algorithms.
Most-Used Ensemble Learning Algorithms Number of Times Used
RF 30
SVR 19
stacking 13
MLP 10
KNN 8
XGBoost 7
GBRT 4
Adaboost 4
CART 3
CatBoost 2
ERT 2
SGB 2
4.1. Yield Prediction
Machine learning algorithms have been widely used in crop yield prediction [ 98].
Van Klompenburg et al. [ 99] analyzed 50 machine learning papers and 30 deep learning
papers concerning crop yield prediction. A neural network was the most frequently used
machine learning technique in the machine learning papers; RF was used in 12 studies,
and GBRT was used four times. Ruan et al. [ 89] included eleven statistical and machine
learning techniques for predicting ﬁeld-scale wheat yield and found that the two ensemble
learning models RF and XGBoost were most accurate in prediction, with R2in the range
0.74–0.78 and RMSE in the range 0.78–0.85 t/ha. Cao et al. [ 66] adopted MLR, XGBoost,
RF, and SVR algorithms and three datasets including MODIS EVI, climate data from the
climatic research unit, and the subseasonal-to-seasonal (S2S) atmospheric prediction data,
to estimate winter wheat yield at the grid level. The results showed that among the four
models, XGBoost reached the highest skill with the S2S prediction as inputs, with an R2of
0.85 and RMSE of 0.78 t/ha. Ang et al. [ 61] employed the RF and AdaBoost algorithms to
estimate oil palm yield prediction from multi-temporal remote sensing data. Results of the
study revealed that the RF model (RMSE = 0.384; MSE = 0.148; MAE = 0.147) outperformed
the AdaBoost model (RMSE = 0.410; MSE = 0.168; MAE = 0.176). Kamir et al. [ 82] used
nine base learners and two ensemble (average ensemble and Bayesian fusion) methods
to estimate wheat yields across the Australian wheat belt from climate data, and satellite
image time series. The results showed that SVR with radial basis function merged as the
single best learner with the R2 of 0.77 and RMSE of 0.55 t/ha at the pixel level, and the
ensemble techniques did not show a signiﬁcant advantage over the single best model.
Stacking models are also increasingly used in crop yield prediction. Feng et al. [ 74]
predicted alfalfa yield from unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based hyperspectral images
using RF, SVR, k-nearest neighbors (kNN) and stacking ensemble algorithms. Comparison
of the results indicated that stacking performed the best among all the base learners, with
R2= 0.874. Fei et al. [ 75] combined four base learners (RF, SVM, Gaussian process (GP) and
ridge regression (RR)) to predict grain yield across growth stages and found that stacking
improved prediction accuracy in both full and limited irrigation scenarios with respective
R2values of 0.625 and 0.628 at the mid grain ﬁlling stage. Li et al. [ 84] developed four base
models (RF, SVM, GP , and RR) as well as stacking model, to predict winter wheat yields
from UAV-based hyperspectral image data. They found that SVM outperformed the other
learners and, compared with each base model, the stacking model was more accurate.

==== Page 11 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 11 of 20
4.2. Estimation of Forest Structure Parameters and Biomass
Forest structure parameters (e.g., forest height) and forest biomass are critical indica-
tors of carbon stocks and are increasingly important in ﬁelds related to the carbon cycle
and climate change [ 100]. Garc ía-Guti érrez et al. [ 76] compared a multiple linear regression
(MLR) model, a neural network, SVR, kNN, and RF in estimating forest parameters in the
province of Lugo (Galizia, Spain) from lidar data and found that MLR was outperformed
by ML algorithms and that SVR with Gaussian kernels outperformed the other algorithms.
Corte et al. [ 69] used SVR, ANN, RF, and XGBoost to estimate tree dendrometry parameters
such as volume, height and diameter at breast height from UAV-lidar point clouds. Their
results showed that all models were robust, with relative RMSE <29% for volume, <9% for
height and <15% for diameter at breast height; SVR performed the best in terms of minimal
error rates. SVR outperformed the ensemble algorithms in both studies and gave the most
accurate predictions.
Various ensemble algorithms have been developed to estimate forest parameters.
For example, Cartus et al. [ 67] used a two-stage model to derive forest canopy height
and growing stock volume (GSV) in Chile from a combination of airborne laser scanner
(ALS), PALSAR and Landsat data. They developed an RF model of canopy height and
GSV using ALS-derived values that were validated with in situ measurements and then
used a second RF model that used multitemporal PALSAR and Landsat data as predictor
variables and ALS-based estimates as response variables. At three test sites, the retrieval
of canopy height and GSV reached good accuracies with the R2of 0.70–0.85. Xu et al. [ 96]
developed a two-stage ensemble approach to increase the accuracy of forest GSV estimation.
They selected variables using a collinearity test and ran four base learners (CART, kNN,
SVR, and ANN) and combined them ﬁrst using bagging and then using AdaBoost to
generate eight ensemble models. The eight ensemble models were then aggregated using a
weighted average method in which the weights were determined by the validated relative
RMSE values of the eight ensemble models. The experimental results showed that the
combined ensemble approach signiﬁcantly reduced the uncertainty of GSV mapping from
the Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-2A data, with relative RMSE values in the range 18.89–21.34%.
Dube et al. [ 73] used stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) to estimate the stand volume
of eucalyptus plantations in South Africa from multisource data and found that SGB
accurately predicted stand volume, with R2= 0.78 and RMSE = 33.16 m3/ha. These results
were more accurate than the results given by RF or stepwise regression. Zhang et al. [ 28]
comprehensively assessed the performance of eight algorithms (SVR, MARS, MLP , RF,
ERT, SGB, GBRT, and CatBoost) in predicting forest biomass using several remote sensing
datasets. Their results indicated that ﬁve ensemble algorithms (RF, ERT, SGB, GBRT and
CatBoost) produced more accurate predictions than the other three individual algorithms
and that CatBoost obtained slightly more accurate results than the other four ensemble
algorithms, with R2= 0.72 and RMSE = 45.63 t/ha. In a subsequent study, they developed
a stacking model to combine several accurate base learners to further increase the accuracy
of biomass prediction, and the results indicated that the stacking ensemble increased
prediction accuracy; in particular, it decreased the biases [ 58]. Ghosh et al. [ 77] used a
stacked set of ensemble algorithms (RF, GBM, and XGBoost) to predict the aboveground
biomass of Indian mangroves from Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 time series. The results
indicated that stacking increased AGB prediction accuracy with RMSE = 72.864 t/ha and
relative RMSE = 11.38%.
Du et al. [ 72] developed a CNN model using ALS data and Landsat imagery and found
that CNN was more accurate than an extreme learning machine (ELM), a backpropagation
neural network, a regression tree, RF, SVR, KNN, and other standard machine learning
techniques. The stacking algorithm signiﬁcantly increased prediction accuracy when
compared with base models.

==== Page 12 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 12 of 20
4.3. Natural Hazards
Natural hazards such as droughts, hurricanes, tornadoes, ﬂoods, and landslides can
affect human life and property [ 101]. Accurate prediction or mapping the probabilities of
natural disasters is therefore of great importance for human survival. Machine learning
algorithms, particularly ensemble algorithms, have high prediction accuracy [ 85] and so
have become increasingly used in identifying areas of long term drought [ 63], mapping
landslide hazards [ 81,90], assessing the susceptibility of gullies to erosion [ 102,103] and
mapping land susceptible to subsidence [78].
Arabameri et al. [ 62] combined three meta classiﬁers (Real AdaBoost, Random Sub-
space, and MultiBoosting) into a hybrid ensemble framework to predict the likelihood of
ﬂooding in the Gorganroud River Basin, Iran. Band et al. [ 65] used multiple ensemble algo-
rithms (GBM, RF, parallel random forest (PRF), regularized random forest (RRF), and ERT)
to quantify the likelihood of ﬂash ﬂooding in Markazi Province, Iran and found that ERT
was the most accurate model with an area under curve (AUC) value of 0.82. Chapi et al. [68]
combined bagging with logistic model trees (LMT) and developed a bagging–LMT en-
semble model to map ﬂood susceptibility. The results showed that in terms of accurately
mapping ﬂood susceptibility, the bagging–LMT model performed better than LMT, logis-
tic regression, Bayesian logistic regression, and RF. Hakim et al. [ 78] compared logistic
regression, MLP and two meta ensemble machine learning algorithms (AdaBoost and
LogitBoost) in predicting likely subsidence based on a land subsidence inventory map
generated from Sentinel-1 synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data. The results showed that
AdaBoost gave the greatest prediction accuracy (81.1%), followed by MLP (80%), logistic
regression (79.4%), and LogitBoost (79.1%). Kalantar et al. [ 81] investigated the suitability
of ﬂexible discriminant analysis (FDA), generalized logistic models (GLM), GBM, and RF
for mapping landslide susceptibility. The test results showed that FDA was similar in pre-
diction accuracy to GLM but was less accurate than GBM, which was in turn less accurate
than RF. Rahman et al. [ 87] compared a Bayesian regularization back propagation neural
network (BRBP), CART, an evidence belief function (EBF) and their various combinations in
ensemble models to predict ﬂood likelihood in Bangladesh. They found that the ensemble
model that combined BRBP , CART, and EBF using weighted averaging was more accurate
(AUC > 90%) than other models. In another study, Rahman et al. [ 86] found that stacking
locally weighted linear regression (LWLR) and RF models increased the prediction accuracy
of ﬂood susceptibility maps in Bangladesh, with R2= 0.967–0.999, MAE = 0.022–0.117,
RMSE = 0.029–0.148. Sachdeva et al. [ 90] used a majority voting ensemble technique to
predict landslide susceptibility and found that the ensemble model that combined logistic
regression, GBDT, and voting feature intervals produced predictions that were close in
accuracy to the predictions of widely used machine learning algorithms such as decision
trees, SVM, and RF.
4.4. Spatial Downscaling
Remote sensing data are often spatially downscaled to obtain ﬁne resolution (FR) data
from coarse resolution (CR) remote sensing data. The ﬁner resolution data provide more
spatial details and thus bridge the gap between what CR data provide and what regional
applications require. Statistical downscaling methods have frequently been used in several
domains to obtain FR parameters since they require less computation and running time, and
are more accurate than other downscaling methods such as dynamic downscaling [104].
The statistical downscaling procedure for retrieving FR data from CR data is as follows:
(1) develop models relating CR parameters and predictor variables or ancillary variables at
a coarse resolution; (2) apply the CR models to the FR data, assuming that the relationships
between target parameters and predictor variables remain unchanged at different spatial
scales; and (3) obtain the target FR parameters from the models and FR predictor variables
at a ﬁne resolution. A variety of machine learning algorithms, especially the increasingly
used ensemble learning algorithms, have been used as the relationships between target
parameters and predictor variables are often nonlinear and complex.

==== Page 13 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 13 of 20
RF has been widely used to upscale large-scale precipitation, land surface temperature
(LST), and soil moisture remote sensing data. For example, Shi et al. [ 91] established
nonparametric relationships between precipitation and six indicators (EVI, altitude, slope,
aspect, latitude, and longitude) using RF and spatially downscaled annual precipitation for
2001–2012 from 0.25pixels to 1 km pixels over the Tibetan Plateau. Zhao et al. [ 97] used
RF to downscale the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) monthly precipitation
product from 25 km resolution to produce monthly precipitation data for China at 1 km
resolution. Hutengs and Vohland [ 80] developed a model relating LST to digital elevation
data, land cover type, and surface reﬂectance in the red and near-infrared bands using
RF; they downscaled the spatial resolution of LST from 1 km to 250 m, with the RMSEs
from 1.41 to 1.92 K. When compared to the widely-adopted TsHARP sharpening method,
downscaling accuracy using RF improved up to 19%. Karami et al. [ 83] created an RF-based
regression tree to downscale the daily SMAP soil moisture product at 9 km resolution
and created a 1 km soil moisture product using Sentinel-1 data, MODIS NDVI, land cover,
and auxiliary topography and soil properties. Xu et al. [ 94] combined wavelet analysis
with machine learning algorithms to create a wavelet support vector machine (WSVM)
and a wavelet random forest (WRF) algorithm to downscale North American multimodel
ensemble (NMME) precipitation forecasts. Their results showed improvement over quantile
mapping, with an average decrease in RMSE of 18–40 mm (21–33%).
Several ensemble boosting algorithms have also been used for spatial downscaling.
Wei et al. [ 92] created high resolution soil moisture maps covering the entire Tibetan
Plateau using GBRT with SMAP soil moisture data and related variables derived from
MODIS and DEM. Using GBRT, Asadollah et al. [ 64] yielded a signiﬁcant improvement
in downscaling global climate model predictions, compared to SVR that was previously
found as the most suitable for downscaling climate in Iran. Xu et al. [ 95] developed a
multifactor geographically weighted machine learning algorithm using Sentinel-2A data
that combined the results from three base learners (XGBoost, MARS, and Bayesian ridge
regression) and downscaled LST at 30 m resolution to 10 m resolution.
4.5. Other Applications
Other applications have used ensemble learning algorithms. In this section, we brieﬂy
mention some studies that recognized the importance of stacking.
Wu et al. [ 93] developed a two-layer stacking and blending ensemble method to predict
daily reference evapotranspiration in which level 0 models included RF, SVR, multilayer
perceptron neural network (MLP), and kNN. Both stacking and blending were signiﬁcantly
more accurate than the base models, and this approach is thus highly recommended for
predicting reference evapotranspiration. Cho et al. [ 46] used a stacking model to predict
daily maximum air temperature that consisted of multiple linear regression (MLR) and
support vector regression (SVR), and RF was optimized by SVR. The stacking ensemble
method produced more accurate predictions than cokriging, three distinct data-driven
methods, and a simple average ensemble model. Divina et al. [ 71] showed that stacking was
a suitable approach for short term electricity consumption forecasting. Healey et al. [ 79]
showed that stacking increased the accuracy of detection of forest change. They investigated
a stacking model using both parametric and RF-based image fusion rules as the meta learner
to combine several forest disturbance detection algorithms and found that stacking using
an RF model to build the meta learner reduced the rates of errors of omission and errors
of commission by 50% in some instances when compared to individual change detection
methods and by 25% when compared with stacking using a logistic regression model as
the meta learner.
5. Discussion and Future Directions
5.1. Combining Feature Selection with Ensemble Learning
Many studies have shown that using selected important features or variables instead
of using all extracted variables can result in more accurate and robust predictions [ 105–107].

==== Page 14 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 14 of 20
Ensemble algorithms are essentially black box models that carry the risk of overﬁtting,
and the underlying physical mechanisms can be obscure [ 108]. It is therefore critical to
identify important variables by selecting features before training a model; ﬁlter, wrapper,
and embedded algorithms are just a few of the feature selection techniques that have been
proposed [106,109].
Some studies have highlighted the importance of combining feature selection with
ensemble learning algorithms in practical applications. For example, Luo et al. [ 43] found
that recursive feature elimination (RFE) for feature selection in combination with a Cat-
Boost model produced the most accurate prediction of forest biomass for all forests in Jilin
province, China with RMSE = 25.77 t/ha. There have also been studies that used a variance
inﬂation factor (VIF) to quantify multicollinearity between independent variables, and only
variables with VIF values < 10 were ﬁnally included for modeling [ 62,110]. Of the three
types of ensemble learning methods, tree-based bagging and boosting algorithms have
identiﬁed important variables mainly by permutation importance [ 111,112]. Some other
indicators, such as mean decrease in accuracy and mean decrease in impurity, have also
been used in association with tree-based algorithms (e.g., RF) [ 113]. In contrast, stacking en-
semble algorithms appear to have difﬁculty in selecting important variables due to working
with a set of models rather than an individual model, and it can be difﬁcult to interpret the
ensemble results [ 88,114]. Feature selection should thus be implemented with care when
stacking, but this aspect of the technique has been little explored in published studies.
5.2. Other Ensemble Learning Algorithms
In this study, we primarily reviewed bagging, boosting and stacking ensemble algo-
rithms. Other ensemble learning algorithms have been developed in addition to these
well-known algorithms, such as dynamic ensemble learning [ 115] and Bayesian additive
regression trees [ 116]. The dynamic ensemble method, unlike static ensemble algorithms
which combine ﬁxed base learners, selects the single best learner or combines a subset of
learners from the pool using a just-in-time condition that depends on the particular input
pattern from which a prediction is to be made when making a prediction [117–119].
Blending is another ensemble technique that is derived from stacking. Blending differs
from stacking in that it does not use k-fold cross-validation to generate training data for
the meta learner but instead uses a one-holdout set. This technique results in only a small
portion of the training dataset being used to generate predictions to be used as inputs to a
meta model [93,120].
5.3. Deep Learning Algorithms
Deep learning algorithms are used in many ﬁelds, including agriculture and remote
sensing. The base learners in current ensemble models are mostly statistical and conven-
tional ML methods, and the possibility of combining deep learning models in several ways
is worthy of investigation. Deep learning algorithms have been used as base learners in
some studies with the intention of increasing prediction accuracy. For example, de Oliveira
e Lucas et al. [ 70] used three CNNs to predict reference evapotranspiration time series and
developed ensemble models consisting of the three CNNs. The CNN ensembles produced
predictions with high accuracy and low variance. Lv et al. [ 47] developed a heterogeneous
ensemble learning approach that combined three deep learning models (a deep belief net-
work (DBN), a CNN and a deep residual network (ResNet)) to map landslide susceptibility
in the Three Gorges reservoir area in China.
Deep learning algorithms well capture nonlinear relationships between target and
sensor signals, so an ensemble of various deep learning algorithms should produce more
accurate predictions than a single algorithm. The three principal ensemble methods we
described in this study, particularly stacking, provide a framework for leveraging differ-
ent algorithms. Future studies will investigate optimal combinations of deep learning
algorithms in various applications.

==== Page 15 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 15 of 20
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we reviewed bagging, boosting, and stacking ensemble learning algo-
rithms and their typical applications in the use of remote sensing data. RF was the most
often adopted algorithm in several ﬁelds that used remote sensing data. In contrast, the
other ensemble algorithms were often not considered for speciﬁc applications. Despite
recent progress in increasing the prediction accuracy of ensemble algorithms, there are still
some gaps in our knowledge, such as how to effectively combine feature selection with
ensemble algorithms and how to incorporate deep learning algorithms in an ensemble to
increase prediction accuracy. The understanding of ensemble algorithms deserves to be the
main focus of future study and will enable us to incorporate more advanced and diverse
algorithms in practical applications.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41801347
and 32001251), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200781).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Nomenclature
AdaBoost adaptive boosting
ANN artiﬁcial neural networks
ARMA autoregressive–moving-average
ARIMA autoregressive integrated moving average
BPNN back propagation neural network
BRT boosted regression tree
CART classiﬁcation and regression trees
CatBoost categorical boosting
CNN convolutional neural networks
DBN deep belief network
DL deep learning
DT decision tree
EBF evidence belief function
ELM extreme learning machine
ENR elastic net regression
ERT extremely randomized trees
FDA ﬂexible discriminant analysis
GBDT gradient boosting decision tree
GBRT gradient boosting regression tree
GLM generalized logistic models
GP Gaussian process
kNN k-nearest neighbor
LMT logistic model tree
LR linear regression
LSSVM least square support vector machine
LWLR locally weighted linear regression
MADT multiclass alternating decision trees
MARS multivariate adaptive regression splines
MLP multilayer perceptron
MLR multiple linear regression
PRF parallel random forest
REPT reduced error pruning tree
ResNet residual neural network
RF random forest
RR ridge regression
RRF regularized random forest
RT regression tree

==== Page 16 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 16 of 20
SGB stochastic gradient boosting
SVM support vector machine
SVR support vector regression
VFI voting feature interval
XGBoost extreme gradient boosting
References
1. Navalgund, R.R.; Jayaraman, V .; Roy, P .S. Remote sensing applications: An overview. Curr. Sci. 2007 ,93, 1747–1766.
2. Weiss, M.; Jacob, F.; Duveiller, G. Remote sensing for agricultural applications: A meta-review. Remote Sens. Environ. 2020 ,236,
111402. [CrossRef]
3. Roy, P .S.; Behera, M.D.; Srivastav, S.K. Satellite Remote Sensing: Sensors, Applications and Techniques. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. India
Sect. A Phys. Sci. 2017 ,87, 465–472. [CrossRef]
4. Myneni, R.B.; Maggion, S.; Iaquinta, J.; Privette, J.L.; Gobron, N.; Pinty, B.; Kimes, D.S.; Verstraete, M.M.; Williams, D.L. Optical
remote sensing of vegetation: Modeling, caveats, and algorithms. Remote Sens. Environ. 1995 ,51, 169–188. [CrossRef]
5. Bonan, G.B.; Levis, S.; Sitch, S.; Vertenstein, M.; Oleson, K.W. A dynamic global vegetation model for use with climate models:
Concepts and description of simulated vegetation dynamics. Glob. Change Biol. 2003 ,9, 1543–1566. [CrossRef]
6. Jacquemoud, S.; Verhoef, W.; Baret, F.; Bacour, C.; Zarco-Tejada, P .J.; Asner, G.P .; François, C.; Ustin, S.L. PROSPECT+SAIL models:
A review of use for vegetation characterization. Remote Sens. Environ. 2009 ,113, S56–S66. [CrossRef]
7. Pan, M.; Sahoo, A.K.; Wood, E.F. Improving soil moisture retrievals from a physically-based radiative transfer model. Remote
Sens. Environ. 2014 ,140, 130–140. [CrossRef]
8. Schulze, E.-D.; Beck, E.; Buchmann, N.; Clemens, S.; Müller-Hohenstein, K.; Scherer-Lorenzen, M. Dynamic Global Vegetation
Models. In Plant Ecology ; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 843–863.
9. García-Haro, F.J.; Gilabert, M.A.; Meli á, J. A radiosity model for heterogeneous canopies in remote sensing. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos.
1999 ,104, 12159–12175. [CrossRef]
10. Lary, D.; Remer, L.; MacNeill, D.; Roscoe, B.; Paradise, S. Machine learning and bias correction of MODIS aerosol optical depth.
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2009 ,6, 694–698. [CrossRef]
11. Ma, L.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Ye, Y.; Yin, G.; Johnson, B.A. Deep learning in remote sensing applications: A meta-analysis and review.
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2019 ,152, 166–177. [CrossRef]
12. Mountrakis, G.; Im, J.; Ogole, C. Support vector machines in remote sensing: A review. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2011 ,
66, 247–259. [CrossRef]
13. Belgiu, M.; Dr ăgu¸ t, L. Random forest in remote sensing: A review of applications and future directions. ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. 2016 ,114, 24–31. [CrossRef]
14. Sheykhmousa, M.; Mahdianpari, M.; Ghanbari, H.; Mohammadimanesh, F.; Ghamisi, P .; Homayouni, S. Support Vector Machine
Versus Random Forest for Remote Sensing Image Classiﬁcation: A Meta-Analysis and Systematic Review. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl.
Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2020 ,13, 6308–6325. [CrossRef]
15. Wolpert, D.H.; Macready, W.G. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 1997 ,1, 67–82. [CrossRef]
16. Lasisi, A.; Attoh-Okine, N. Machine Learning Ensembles and Rail Defects Prediction: Multilayer Stacking Methodology. ASCE-
ASME J. Risk Uncertain. Eng. Syst. Part A Civ. Eng. 2019 ,5, 04019016. [CrossRef]
17. Galar, M.; Fernandez, A.; Barrenechea, E.; Bustince, H.; Herrera, F. A Review on Ensembles for the Class Imbalance Problem:
Bagging-, Boosting-, and Hybrid-Based Approaches. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C (Appl. Rev.) 2012 ,42, 463–484.
[CrossRef]
18. Zhou, Z.-H. Ensemble Learning. In Encyclopedia of Biometrics ; Li, S.Z., Jain, A., Eds.; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2009;
pp. 270–273.
19. Mendes-Moreira, J.; Soares, C.; Jorge, A.M.; Sousa, J.F.D. Ensemble approaches for regression: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 2012 ,
45, 10. [CrossRef]
20. Ting, K.M.; Witten, I.h. Issues in stacked generalization. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 1999 ,10, 271–289. [CrossRef]
21. Sagi, O.; Rokach, L. Ensemble learning: A survey. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2018 ,8, e1249. [CrossRef]
22. Geurts, P .; Ernst, D.; Wehenkel, L. Extremely randomized trees. Mach. Learn. 2006 ,63, 3–42. [CrossRef]
23. Breiman, L. Random Forests. Mach. Learn. 2001 ,45, 5–32. [CrossRef]
24. Kuter, S. Completing the machine learning saga in fractional snow cover estimation from MODIS Terra reﬂectance data: Random
forests versus support vector regression. Remote Sens. Environ. 2021 ,255, 112294. [CrossRef]
25. Chen, L.; Wang, Y.; Ren, C.; Zhang, B.; Wang, Z. Assessment of multi-wavelength SAR and multispectral instrument data for
forest aboveground biomass mapping using random forest kriging. For. Ecol. Manag. 2019 ,447, 12–25. [CrossRef]
26. Liu, Y.; Cao, G.; Zhao, N.; Mulligan, K.; Ye, X. Improve ground-level PM2.5 concentration mapping using a random forests-based
geostatistical approach. Environ. Pollut. 2018 ,235, 272–282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Geurts, P .; Louppe, G. Learning to rank with extremely randomized trees. In Proceedings of the Learning to Rank Challenge,
PMLR; 2011; Volume 14, pp. 49–61.
28. Zhang, Y.; Ma, J.; Liang, S.; Li, X.; Li, M. An Evaluation of Eight Machine Learning Regression Algorithms for Forest Aboveground
Biomass Estimation from Multiple Satellite Data Products. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 4015. [CrossRef]

==== Page 17 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 17 of 20
29. Wei, J.; Li, Z.; Cribb, M.; Huang, W.; Xue, W.; Sun, L.; Guo, J.; Peng, Y.; Li, J.; Lyapustin, A. Improved 1 km resolution PM
2.5 estimates across China using enhanced space–time extremely randomized trees. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2020 ,20, 3273–3289.
[CrossRef]
30. Azpiroz, I.; Oses, N.; Quartulli, M.; Olaizola, I.G.; Guidotti, D.; Marchi, S. Comparison of climate reanalysis and remote-sensing
data for predicting olive phenology through machine-learning methods. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1224. [CrossRef]
31. Cao, Y.; Li, M.; Zhang, Y. Estimating the Clear-Sky Longwave Downward Radiation in the Arctic from FengYun-3D MERSI-2
Data. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14, 606. [CrossRef]
32. Galelli, S.; Castelletti, A. Assessing the predictive capability of randomized tree-based ensembles in streamﬂow modelling. Hydrol.
Earth Syst. Sci. 2013 ,17, 2669–2684. [CrossRef]
33. Shang, K.; Yao, Y.; Li, Y.; Yang, J.; Jia, K.; Zhang, X.; Chen, X.; Bei, X.; Guo, X. Fusion of Five Satellite-Derived Products Using
Extremely Randomized Trees to Estimate Terrestrial Latent Heat Flux over Europe. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 687. [CrossRef]
34. Elith, J.; Leathwick, J.R.; Hastie, T. A working guide to boosted regression trees. J. Anim. Ecol. 2008 ,77, 802–813. [CrossRef]
35. Chen, T.Q.; Guestrin, C.; Assoc Comp, M. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd Acm Sigkdd
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 13–17 August 2016; pp. 785–794.
36. Zhao, Y.; Yin, X.; Fu, Y.; Yue, T. A comparative mapping of plant species diversity using ensemble learning algorithms combined
with high accuracy surface modeling. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2022 ,29, 17878–17891. [CrossRef]
37. Joharestani, M.Z.; Cao, C.X.; Ni, X.L.; Bashir, B.; Talebiesfandarani, S. PM2.5 Prediction Based on Random Forest, XGBoost, and
Deep Learning Using Multisource Remote Sensing Data. Atmosphere 2019 ,10, 373. [CrossRef]
38. Li, Y.; Li, C.; Li, M.; Liu, Z. Inﬂuence of Variable Selection and Forest Type on Forest Aboveground Biomass Estimation Using
Machine Learning Algorithms. Forests 2019 ,10, 1073. [CrossRef]
39. Ma, M.; Zhao, G.; He, B.; Li, Q.; Dong, H.; Wang, S.; Wang, Z. XGBoost-based method for ﬂash ﬂood risk assessment. J. Hydrol.
2021 ,598, 126382. [CrossRef]
40. Ke, G.L.; Meng, Q.; Finley, T.; Wang, T.F.; Chen, W.; Ma, W.D.; Ye, Q.W.; Liu, T.Y. LightGBM: A Highly Efﬁcient Gradient Boosting
Decision Tree. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Long Beach, CA,
USA, 4–9 December 2017.
41. Prokhorenkova, L.; Gusev, G.; Vorobev, A.; Dorogush, A.V .; Gulin, A. CatBoost: Unbiased boosting with categorical features. In
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing System, Montr éal, Canada, 3–8 December 2018.
42. Hancock, J.T.; Khoshgoftaar, T.M. CatBoost for big data: An interdisciplinary review. J. Big Data 2020 ,7, 94. [CrossRef]
43. Luo, M.; Wang, Y.; Xie, Y.; Zhou, L.; Qiao, J.; Qiu, S.; Sun, Y. Combination of Feature Selection and CatBoost for Prediction: The
First Application to the Estimation of Aboveground Biomass. Forests 2021 ,12, 216. [CrossRef]
44. Huang, G.; Wu, L.; Ma, X.; Zhang, W.; Fan, J.; Yu, X.; Zeng, W.; Zhou, H. Evaluation of CatBoost method for prediction of reference
evapotranspiration in humid regions. J. Hydrol. 2019 ,574, 1029–1041. [CrossRef]
45. Wolpert, D.H. Stacked generalization. Neural Netw. 1992 ,5, 241–259. [CrossRef]
46. Cho, D.; Yoo, C.; Im, J.; Lee, Y.; Lee, J. Improvement of spatial interpolation accuracy of daily maximum air temperature in urban
areas using a stacking ensemble technique. GISci. Remote Sens. 2020 ,57, 633–649. [CrossRef]
47. Lv, L.; Chen, T.; Dou, J.; Plaza, A. A hybrid ensemble-based deep-learning framework for landslide susceptibility mapping. Int. J.
Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 2022 ,108, 102713. [CrossRef]
48. Naimi, A.I.; Balzer, L.B. Stacked generalization: An introduction to super learning. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2018 ,33, 459–464. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49. Nath, A.; Sahu, G.K. Exploiting ensemble learning to improve prediction of phospholipidosis inducing potential. J. Theor. Biol.
2019 ,479, 37–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Dai, Q.; Ye, R.; Liu, Z. Considering diversity and accuracy simultaneously for ensemble pruning. Appl. Soft Comput. 2017 ,58,
75–91. [CrossRef]
51. Kuncheva, L.I.; Whitaker, C.J. Measures of Diversity in Classiﬁer Ensembles and Their Relationship with the Ensemble Accuracy.
Mach. Learn. 2003 ,51, 181–207. [CrossRef]
52. Rooney, N. A weighted combiner of stacking based methods. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Tools 2012 ,21, 1250040. [CrossRef]
53. Zhang, H.; Cao, L. A spectral clustering based ensemble pruning approach. Neurocomputing 2014 ,139, 289–297. [CrossRef]
54. Tang, E.K.; Suganthan, P .N.; Yao, X. An analysis of diversity measures. Mach. Learn. 2006 ,65, 247–271. [CrossRef]
55. Ma, Z.; Dai, Q. Selected an Stacking ELMs for Time Series Prediction. Neural Process. Lett. 2016 ,44, 831–856. [CrossRef]
56. Breiman, L. Stacked Regressions. Mach. Learn. 1996 ,24, 49–64. [CrossRef]
57. Fei, X.; Zhang, Q.; Ling, Q. Vehicle Exhaust Concentration Estimation Based on an Improved Stacking Model. IEEE Access 2019 ,7,
179454–179463. [CrossRef]
58. Zhang, Y.; Ma, J.; Liang, S.; Li, X.; Liu, J. A stacking ensemble algorithm for improving the biases of forest aboveground biomass
estimations from multiple remotely sensed datasets. GISci. Remote Sens. 2022 ,59, 234–249. [CrossRef]
59. Zheng, H.; Cheng, Y.; Li, H. Investigation of model ensemble for ﬁne-grained air quality prediction. China Commun. 2020 ,17,
207–223. [CrossRef]
60. Tyralis, H.; Papacharalampous, G.; Burnetas, A.; Langousis, A. Hydrological post-processing using stacked generalization of
quantile regression algorithms: Large-scale application over CONUS. J. Hydrol. 2019 ,577, 123957. [CrossRef]

==== Page 18 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 18 of 20
61. Ang, Y.; Shafri, H.Z.M.; Lee, Y.P .; Abidin, H.; Bakar, S.A.; Hashim, S.J.; Che’Ya, N.N.; Hassan, M.R.; Lim, H.S.; Abdullah, R. A
novel ensemble machine learning and time series approach for oil palm yield prediction using Landsat time series imagery based
on NDVI. Geocarto Int. 2022 , 1–32. [CrossRef]
62. Arabameri, A.; Saha, S.; Mukherjee, K.; Blaschke, T.; Chen, W.; Ngo, P .T.T.; Band, S.S. Modeling Spatial Flood using Novel
Ensemble Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approaches in Northern Iran. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 3423. [CrossRef]
63. Arabameri, A.; Chandra Pal, S.; Santosh, M.; Chakrabortty, R.; Roy, P .; Moayedi, H. Drought risk assessment: Integrating
meteorological, hydrological, agricultural and socio-economic factors using ensemble models and geospatial techniques. Geocarto
Int.2021 , 1–29. [CrossRef]
64. Asadollah, S.B.H.S.; Sharafati, A.; Shahid, S. Application of ensemble machine learning model in downscaling and projecting
climate variables over different climate regions in Iran. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2022 ,29, 17260–17279. [CrossRef]
65. Band, S.S.; Janizadeh, S.; Chandra Pal, S.; Saha, A.; Chakrabortty, R.; Melesse, A.M.; Mosavi, A. Flash Flood Susceptibility Modeling
Using New Approaches of Hybrid and Ensemble Tree-Based Machine Learning Algorithms. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 3568. [CrossRef]
66. Cao, J.; Wang, H.; Li, J.; Tian, Q.; Niyogi, D. Improving the Forecasting of Winter Wheat Yields in Northern China with Machine
Learning–Dynamical Hybrid Subseasonal-to-Seasonal Ensemble Prediction. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14, 1707. [CrossRef]
67. Cartus, O.; Kellndorfer, J.; Rombach, M.; Walker, W. Mapping Canopy Height and Growing Stock Volume Using Airborne Lidar,
ALOS PALSAR and Landsat ETM+. Remote Sens. 2012 ,4, 3320–3345. [CrossRef]
68. Chapi, K.; Singh, V .P .; Shirzadi, A.; Shahabi, H.; Bui, D.T.; Pham, B.T.; Khosravi, K. A novel hybrid artiﬁcial intelligence approach
for ﬂood susceptibility assessment. Environ. Model. Softw. 2017 ,95, 229–245. [CrossRef]
69. Corte, A.P .D.; Souza, D.V .; Rex, F.E.; Sanquetta, C.R.; Mohan, M.; Silva, C.A.; Zambrano, A.M.A.; Prata, G.; Alves de Almeida,
D.R.; Trautenmüller, J.W.; et al. Forest inventory with high-density UAV-Lidar: Machine learning approaches for predicting
individual tree attributes. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,179, 105815. [CrossRef]
70. de Oliveira e Lucas, P .; Alves, M.A.; de Lima e Silva, P .C.; Guimar ães, F.G. Reference evapotranspiration time series forecasting
with ensemble of convolutional neural networks. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,177, 105700. [CrossRef]
71. Divina, F.; Gilson, A.; Gom éz-Vela, F.; Garc ía Torres, M.; Torres, J.F. Stacking Ensemble Learning for Short-Term Electricity
Consumption Forecasting. Energies 2018 ,11, 949. [CrossRef]
72. Du, C.; Fan, W.; Ma, Y.; Jin, H.-I.; Zhen, Z. The Effect of Synergistic Approaches of Features and Ensemble Learning Algorithms on
Aboveground Biomass Estimation of Natural Secondary Forests Based on ALS and Landsat 8. Sensors 2021 ,21, 5974. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
73. Dube, T.; Mutanga, O.; Abdel-Rahman, E.M.; Ismail, R.; Slotow, R. Predicting Eucalyptus spp. stand volume in Zululand, South
Africa: An analysis using a stochastic gradient boosting regression ensemble with multi-source data sets. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2015 ,
36, 3751–3772. [CrossRef]
74. Feng, L.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, Y.; Du, Q.; Williams, P .; Drewry, J.; Luck, B. Alfalfa Yield Prediction Using UAV-Based Hyperspectral
Imagery and Ensemble Learning. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2028. [CrossRef]
75. Fei, S.; Hassan, M.A.; He, Z.; Chen, Z.; Shu, M.; Wang, J.; Li, C.; Xiao, Y. Assessment of Ensemble Learning to Predict Wheat Grain
Yield Based on UAV-Multispectral Reﬂectance. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 2338. [CrossRef]
76. García-Guti érrez, J.; Mart ínez-Álvarez, F.; Troncoso, A.; Riquelme, J.C. A comparison of machine learning regression techniques
for LiDAR-derived estimation of forest variables. Neurocomputing 2015 ,167, 24–31. [CrossRef]
77. Ghosh, S.M.; Behera, M.D.; Jagadish, B.; Das, A.K.; Mishra, D.R. A novel approach for estimation of aboveground biomass of a
carbon-rich mangrove site in India. J. Environ. Manag. 2021 ,292, 112816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Hakim, W.L.; Achmad, A.R.; Lee, C.-W. Land Subsidence Susceptibility Mapping in Jakarta Using Functional and Meta-Ensemble
Machine Learning Algorithm Based on Time-Series InSAR Data. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 3627. [CrossRef]
79. Healey, S.P .; Cohen, W.B.; Yang, Z.; Kenneth Brewer, C.; Brooks, E.B.; Gorelick, N.; Hernandez, A.J.; Huang, C.; Joseph Hughes,
M.; Kennedy, R.E.; et al. Mapping forest change using stacked generalization: An ensemble approach. Remote Sens. Environ. 2018 ,
204, 717–728. [CrossRef]
80. Hutengs, C.; Vohland, M. Downscaling land surface temperatures at regional scales with random forest regression. Remote Sens.
Environ. 2016 ,178, 127–141. [CrossRef]
81. Kalantar, B.; Ueda, N.; Saeidi, V .; Ahmadi, K.; Halin, A.A.; Shabani, F. Landslide Susceptibility Mapping: Machine and Ensemble
Learning Based on Remote Sensing Big Data. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1737. [CrossRef]
82. Kamir, E.; Waldner, F.; Hochman, Z. Estimating wheat yields in Australia using climate records, satellite image time series and
machine learning methods. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2020 ,160, 124–135. [CrossRef]
83. Karami, A.; Moradi, H.R.; Mousivand, A.; van Dijk, A.I.J.M.; Renzullo, L. Using ensemble learning to take advantage of high-
resolution radar backscatter in conjunction with surface features to disaggregate SMAP soil moisture product. Int. J. Remote Sens.
2022 ,43, 894–914. [CrossRef]
84. Li, Z.; Chen, Z.; Cheng, Q.; Duan, F.; Sui, R.; Huang, X.; Xu, H. UAV-Based Hyperspectral and Ensemble Machine Learning for
Predicting Yield in Winter Wheat. Agronomy 2022 ,12, 202. [CrossRef]
85. Pham, B.T.; Tien Bui, D.; Dholakia, M.; Prakash, I.; Pham, H.V . A comparative study of least square support vector machines and
multiclass alternating decision trees for spatial prediction of rainfall-induced landslides in a tropical cyclones area. Geotech. Geol.
Eng. 2016 ,34, 1807–1824. [CrossRef]

==== Page 19 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 19 of 20
86. Rahman, M.; Chen, N.; Elbeltagi, A.; Islam, M.M.; Alam, M.; Pourghasemi, H.R.; Tao, W.; Zhang, J.; Shufeng, T.; Faiz, H.; et al.
Application of stacking hybrid machine learning algorithms in delineating multi-type ﬂooding in Bangladesh. J. Environ. Manag.
2021 ,295, 113086. [CrossRef]
87. Rahman, M.; Ningsheng, C.; Mahmud, G.I.; Islam, M.M.; Pourghasemi, H.R.; Ahmad, H.; Habumugisha, J.M.; Washakh, R.M.A.;
Alam, M.; Liu, E.; et al. Flooding and its relationship with land cover change, population growth, and road density. Geosci. Front.
2021 ,12, 101224. [CrossRef]
88. Ribeiro, M.H.D.M.; dos Santos Coelho, L. Ensemble approach based on bagging, boosting and stacking for short-term prediction
in agribusiness time series. Appl. Soft Comput. 2020 ,86, 105837. [CrossRef]
89. Ruan, G.; Li, X.; Yuan, F.; Cammarano, D.; Ata-Ui-Karim, S.T.; Liu, X.; Tian, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Cao, W.; Cao, Q. Improving wheat yield
prediction integrating proximal sensing and weather data with machine learning. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2022 ,195, 106852.
[CrossRef]
90. Sachdeva, S.; Bhatia, T.; Verma, A.K. A novel voting ensemble model for spatial prediction of landslides using GIS. Int. J. Remote
Sens. 2020 ,41, 929–952. [CrossRef]
91. Shi, Y.; Song, L. Spatial Downscaling of Monthly TRMM Precipitation Based on EVI and Other Geospatial Variables Over the
Tibetan Plateau From 2001 to 2012. Mt. Res. Dev. 2015 ,35, 180–194. [CrossRef]
92. Wei, Z.; Meng, Y.; Zhang, W.; Peng, J.; Meng, L. Downscaling SMAP soil moisture estimation with gradient boosting decision tree
regression over the Tibetan Plateau. Remote Sens. Environ. 2019 ,225, 30–44. [CrossRef]
93. Wu, T.; Zhang, W.; Jiao, X.; Guo, W.; Alhaj Hamoud, Y. Evaluation of stacking and blending ensemble learning methods for
estimating daily reference evapotranspiration. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2021 ,184, 106039. [CrossRef]
94. Xu, L.; Chen, N.; Zhang, X.; Chen, Z.; Hu, C.; Wang, C. Improving the North American multi-model ensemble (NMME)
precipitation forecasts at local areas using wavelet and machine learning. Clim. Dyn. 2019 ,53, 601–615. [CrossRef]
95. Xu, S.; Zhao, Q.; Yin, K.; He, G.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, G.; Wen, M.; Zhang, N. Spatial Downscaling of Land Surface Temperature
Based on a Multi-Factor Geographically Weighted Machine Learning Model. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 1186. [CrossRef]
96. Xu, X.; Lin, H.; Liu, Z.; Ye, Z.; Li, X.; Long, J. A Combined Strategy of Improved Variable Selection and Ensemble Algorithm to
Map the Growing Stem Volume of Planted Coniferous Forest. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 4631. [CrossRef]
97. Zhao, X.; Jing, W.; Zhang, P . Mapping Fine Spatial Resolution Precipitation from TRMM Precipitation Datasets Using an Ensemble
Learning Method and MODIS Optical Products in China. Sustainability 2017 ,9, 1912. [CrossRef]
98. Elavarasan, D.; Vincent, D.R.; Sharma, V .; Zomaya, A.Y.; Srinivasan, K. Forecasting yield by integrating agrarian factors and
machine learning models: A survey. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2018 ,155, 257–282. [CrossRef]
99. van Klompenburg, T.; Kassahun, A.; Catal, C. Crop yield prediction using machine learning: A systematic literature review.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,177, 105709. [CrossRef]
100. Houghton, R.A.; Hall, F.; Goetz, S.J. Importance of biomass in the global carbon cycle. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci. 2009 ,114, G00E03.
[CrossRef]
101. Fontaine, M.M.; Steinemann, A.C. Assessing Vulnerability to Natural Hazards: Impact-Based Method and Application to Drought
in Washington State. Nat. Hazards Rev. 2009 ,10, 11–18. [CrossRef]
102. Arabameri, A.; Yamani, M.; Pradhan, B.; Melesse, A.; Shirani, K.; Bui, D.T. Novel ensembles of COPRAS multi-criteria decision-
making with logistic regression, boosted regression tree, and random forest for spatial prediction of gully erosion susceptibility.
Sci. Total Environ. 2019 ,688, 903–916. [CrossRef]
103. Chowdhuri, I.; Pal, S.C.; Arabameri, A.; Saha, A.; Chakrabortty, R.; Blaschke, T.; Pradhan, B.; Band, S. Implementation of artiﬁcial
intelligence based ensemble models for gully erosion susceptibility assessment. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 3620. [CrossRef]
104. Wilby, R.L.; Wigley, T.M.L. Downscaling general circulation model output: A review of methods and limitations. Prog. Phys.
Geogr. Earth Environ. 1997 ,21, 530–548. [CrossRef]
105. Bolón-Canedo, V .; S ánchez-Maroño, N.; Alonso-Betanzos, A.; Ben ítez, J.M.; Herrera, F. A review of microarray datasets and
applied feature selection methods. Inf. Sci. 2014 ,282, 111–135. [CrossRef]
106. Cai, J.; Luo, J.; Wang, S.; Yang, S. Feature selection in machine learning: A new perspective. Neurocomputing 2018 ,300, 70–79.
[CrossRef]
107. Guyon, I.; Elisseeff, A. An introduction to variable and feature selection. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2003 ,3, 1157–1182.
108. Li, C.; Li, Y.; Li, M. Improving Forest Aboveground Biomass (AGB) Estimation by Incorporating Crown Density and Using
Landsat 8 OLI Images of a Subtropical Forest in Western Hunan in Central China. Forests 2019 ,10, 104. [CrossRef]
109. Chandrashekar, G.; Sahin, F. A survey on feature selection methods. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2014 ,40, 16–28. [CrossRef]
110. Kavzoglu, T.; Sahin, E.K.; Colkesen, I. Landslide susceptibility mapping using GIS-based multi-criteria decision analysis, support
vector machines, and logistic regression. Landslides 2014 ,11, 425–439. [CrossRef]
111. Auret, L.; Aldrich, C. Empirical comparison of tree ensemble variable importance measures. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 2011 ,105,
157–170. [CrossRef]
112. Altmann, A.; Tolo¸ si, L.; Sander, O.; Lengauer, T. Permutation importance: A corrected feature importance measure. Bioinformatics
2010 ,26, 1340–1347. [CrossRef]
113. Gregorutti, B.; Michel, B.; Saint-Pierre, P . Correlation and variable importance in random forests. Stat. Comput. 2017 ,27, 659–678.
[CrossRef]

==== Page 20 ====
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8654 20 of 20
114. Qureshi, A.S.; Khan, A.; Zameer, A.; Usman, A. Wind power prediction using deep neural network based meta regression and
transfer learning. Appl. Soft Comput. 2017 ,58, 742–755. [CrossRef]
115. Alam, K.M.R.; Siddique, N.; Adeli, H. A dynamic ensemble learning algorithm for neural networks. Neural Comput. Appl. 2020 ,
32, 8675–8690. [CrossRef]
116. Chipman, H.A.; George, E.I.; McCulloch, R.E. BART: Bayesian additive regression trees. Ann. Appl. Stat. 2010 ,4, 266–298.
[CrossRef]
117. Conroy, B.; Eshelman, L.; Potes, C.; Xu-Wilson, M. A dynamic ensemble approach to robust classiﬁcation in the presence of
missing data. Mach. Learn. 2016 ,102, 443–463. [CrossRef]
118. Rooney, N.; Patterson, D. A weighted combination of stacking and dynamic integration. Pattern Recognit. 2007 ,40, 1385–1388.
[CrossRef]
119. Ko, A.H.R.; Sabourin, R.; Britto, J.A.S. From dynamic classiﬁer selection to dynamic ensemble selection. Pattern Recognit. 2008 ,41,
1718–1731. [CrossRef]
120. Soman, G.; Vivek, M.V .; Judy, M.V .; Papageorgiou, E.; Gerogiannis, V .C. Precision-Based Weighted Blending Distributed Ensemble
Model for Emotion Classiﬁcation. Algorithms 2022 ,15, 55. [CrossRef]

