==== Page 1 ====
big data and 
cognitive comp uting
Review
A Review of Blockchain in Internet of Things and AI
Hany F. Atlam1,2,*
, Muhammad Ajmal Azad3, Ahmed G. Alzahrani1and Gary Wills1
1Electronic and Computer Science Department, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK;
a.g.m.alzahrani@soton.ac.uk (A.G.A.); gbw@soton.ac.uk (G.W.)
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Menouﬁa University,
Menouf 32952, Egypt
3Department of Engineering and Technology, University of Derby, Derby DE22 1GB, UK; m.azad@derby.ac.uk
*Correspondence: hfa1g15@soton.ac.uk
Received: 15 September 2020; Accepted: 12 October 2020; Published: 14 October 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: The Internet of Things (IoT) represents a new technology that enables both virtual and
physical objects to be connected and communicate with each other, and produce new digitized services
that improve our quality of life. The IoT system provides several advantages, however, the current
centralized architecture introduces numerous issues involving a single point of failure, security,
privacy, transparency, and data integrity. These challenges are an obstacle in the way of the future
developments of IoT applications. Moving the IoT into one of the distributed ledger technologies may
be the correct choice to resolve these issues. Among the common and popular types of distributed
ledger technologies is the blockchain. Integrating the IoT with blockchain technology can bring
countless beneﬁts. Therefore, this paper provides a comprehensive discussion of integrating the IoT
system with blockchain technology. After providing the basics of the IoT system and blockchain
technology, a thorough review of integrating the blockchain with the IoT system is presented by
highlighting beneﬁts of the integration and how the blockchain can resolve the issues of the IoT
system. Then, the blockchain as a service for the IoT is presented to show how various features of
blockchain technology can be implemented as a service for various IoT applications. This is followed
by discussing the impact of integrating artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) on both IoT and blockchain. In the
end, future research directions of IoT with blockchain are presented.
Keywords: Internet of Things; blockchain technology; IoT with blockchain; review; IoT and
blockchain integration
1. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a modern technology where various physical and virtual devices
can be connected and communicate with each other over the Internet often without human intervention.
IoT devices are mainly utilized to tackle our everyday problems and to facilitate our life by sensing
and collecting various kinds of information about our surrounding physical environment that are
utilized to create novel digitized services. The IoT has achieved massive success on an international
scale, with billions of devices sold and utilized globally to date across many consumer markets [1].
Despite the multiple beneﬁts introduced by the IoT system in numerous areas, the centralized IoT
architecture, such that all IoT objects are linked, managed, and dominated through a central server,
faces multiple challenges. These challenges are standing as a barrier in the way of future developments
of IoT applications. For instance, a single point of failure, in which if the server goes down, all IoT
applications and services associated with it will go down, a ects the availability and quality of service
provided by the IoT system [ 2]. Furthermore, the centralized server stores all data created form
various IoT devices in one location (central server) which makes it a desirable goal for many attackers.
Furthermore, preserving data privacy appears to be doubtful, as all IoT data, which involve sensitive
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28; doi:10.3390 /bdcc4040028 www.mdpi.com /journal /bdcc

==== Page 2 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 2 of 27
and personal information, are kept in one location in a remote server under the full control of a
third-party provider [ 3]. Besides, the scalability of the centralized architecture is another problem,
which may not be a practical solution for the IoT system that increases in billions every year [4].
With multiple issues introduced by the centralized IoT architecture, moving the IoT into one
of the distributed ledger technologies may be the correct choice. Among the common and popular
kinds of distributed ledger technologies is the blockchain. It is essentially a distributed, decentralized,
shared and immutable ledger that keeps the information of various transactions that ever happened
in a certain peer-to-peer (P2P) network [ 3]. A group of transactions were collected and assigned a
block in the ledger. Each block has a timestamp and hash function which are used to link the current
block to the previous block. This creates chains of blocks, which is why it is called the blockchain.
To store a transaction in the distributed ledger, the majority of nodes in the blockchain network should
record their agreement. Blockchain technology promotes information sharing in which all contributing
users /nodes in the blockchain network have a replica of the golden /original ledger so that all users are
updated with recently added transactions or blocks [5].
Integrating the IoT with blockchain brings numerous advantages. For example, employing
decentralized and distributed attributes of blockchain technology can handle issues of security and
a single point of failure associated with the centralized IoT architecture, as there is no need for
a central server to control IoT devices and their communications with each other. Furthermore,
blockchain delivers better security and privacy, since blockchain utilizes sophisticated cryptography
algorithms, hash functions and timestamp, which provide a secure computing environment. In addition,
the blockchain provides tamper-proof and immutable ledger to safeguard data against harmful attacks
such that any data change cannot be stored in the ledger only if the majority of contributing users
validate it [ 6]. This, in turn, delivers a trusted system where the participating IoT devices are the only
objects to accept or discard a transaction based on their consent [7].
The objective of this paper was to provide a comprehensive discussion of integrating the IoT system
with blockchain technology. This paper starts by presenting an overview of the IoT system involving its
characteristics and centralized architecture. Then, an overview of blockchain technology is presented
by highlighting its main components and features. This is followed by presenting a comprehensive
review of integrating IoT with blockchain by highlighting how blockchain resolved issues of IoT,
the architecture of IoT with blockchain, why blockchain platforms needed to implement IoT with
blockchain and the recent studies that have outlined the convergence of IoT with blockchain. Then,
blockchain as a service for the IoT is presented to show how various features of blockchain technology
can be implemented as a service for various IoT applications. This is followed by discussing the
impact of integrating artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) on both IoT and blockchain. In the end, future research
directions of IoT with blockchain are discussed.
Compared to the existing reviews conducted on integrating IoT with blockchain, this paper
provides an up-to-date comprehensive survey of IoT with blockchain. In this paper, novel and
signiﬁcant aspects of IoT with blockchain are discussed, such as blockchain as a service for the IoT
and the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain. The related survey failed to discuss the
implementation of blockchain in IoT applications. Besides, they failed to discuss implementing features
of blockchain as a service for the IoT system. Furthermore, the related survey failed to highlight the
need for integrating AI with IoT and blockchain, which is signiﬁcant especially with the huge amount
of data created by IoT devices and the scalability issues of both IoT and blockchain.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1. Investigating the state-of-the-art research and recent studies of IoT with blockchain;
2. Discussing the need for integrating IoT with blockchain and how blockchain resolved issues of
the centralized IoT architecture;
3. Introducing blockchain as a service to deploy features of blockchain as a service for the IoT system;
4. Exploring the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain;
5. Discussing future research directions of IoT with blockchain.

==== Page 3 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 3 of 27
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the IoT
system; Section 3 provides an overview of blockchain technology; Section 4 discusses the integration of
IoT with blockchain; Section 5 introduces blockchain as a service for the IoT; Section 6 discusses the
impact of integrating AI in IoT and blockchain; Section 7 presents future research directions of the IoT
with blockchain; and Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. An Overview of IoT
The term IoT refers to the modern proliferation of internet-enabled devices with embedded
computing capability. The term describes a wide range of technologies, from the internet-enabled
security cameras and surveillance devices, networked industrial equipment and sensors to domestic
products like fridges and cars. The IoT is an ever increasingly popular technology that has developed
with ubiquitous computing in today’s era of technology. IoT devices have helped to facilitate the way
we live using IoT applications like smart homes, smart cities and smart transportation [1].
With the term IoT being so broad and widely used, there is no speciﬁc deﬁnition. The IoT was
deﬁned by several organizations and researchers. It is deﬁned by the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) in 2012 as “ a global infrastructure for the information society, enabling advanced services by
interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, interoperable information and
communication technologies ” [8].
The number of IoT objects bypassed the population worldwide in 2008. With several advantages
of the IoT system, new applications and services can be established every day. According to Statista [ 9],
the number of IoT objects is anticipated to be about 31 billion worldwide by the end of 2020. This number
is expected to grow signiﬁcantly to reach about 75 billion devices by the end of 2025, as depicted in
Figure 1.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 27 
4. Exploring the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain ; 
5. Discu ssing future research directions of IoT with blockchain.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the IoT 
system; Section 3 provides an overview of blockchain technology; Section 4 discusses the integration 
of IoT with blockchain; Section 5 introduces blockchain as a service for the IoT; Section 6 discusses 
the impact of integrating AI in IoT and blockchain;  Section 7 presents future research directions of 
the IoT with blockchain ; and Section 8 concludes the pa per.  
2. An Overview of IoT  
The term IoT refers to the modern proliferation of internet -enabled devices with embedded 
computing capability. The term describes a wide range of technologies, from the internet -enabled 
security cameras and surveillance device s, networked industrial equipment and sensors to domestic 
products like fridges and cars. The IoT is an ever increasingly popular technology that has developed 
with ubiquitous computing in today’s era of technology. IoT devices have helped to facilitate th e way 
we live using IoT applications like smart homes, smart cities and smart transportation [1].  
With the term IoT being so broad and widely used, there  is no specific definition. The IoT was 
defined by several organizations and researchers. It is defined  by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) in 2012 as “ a global infrastructure for the information society, enabling 
advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, 
interoperable information and communication technologies ” [8].  
The number of IoT objects bypasse d the population worldwide in 2008. With several advantages 
of the IoT system, new applications and services can be established every day. According to Statista 
[9], the number of IoT object s is anticipated to be about 31 billion worldwide by the end of 2020. This 
number is expected to grow significantly to reach about 75 billion devices by the end of 2025, as 
depicted in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. Expected  Internet of Things (IoT) growth from 201 5 to 2025 [3] . 
In addition, the IoT market is growing almost exponentially. According to Statista, the estimat ed 
revenue of IoT in 2015 was USD 743 billion. This number is expected to i ncrease dramatically to reach 
USD 1710 billion by the end of 2019 [9].  
  
Figure 1. Expected Internet of Things (IoT) growth from 2015 to 2025 [3].
In addition, the IoT market is growing almost exponentially. According to Statista, the estimated
revenue of IoT in 2015 was USD 743 billion. This number is expected to increase dramatically to reach
USD 1710 billion by the end of 2019 [9].
2.1. Features of IoT System
The IoT system describes an innovative technology that can change our life, business, and economy.
The IoT produces countless digitized services and applications that provide several beneﬁts over
existing solutions. These applications and services share some common features, which include [ 1,5,10]:

==== Page 4 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 4 of 27
 Sensing capabilities : the main technology that promotes developments in various IoT domains is
the wireless sensor network (WSN). WSN is typically a network of sensors that sense information
about the surroundings and send this information over a communication medium for processing.
Sensors are the building blocks of the IoT that enable collecting all real-time and contextual
information about the surroundings which allow the decision-makers to make accurate and
precise decisions on time.
 Connectivity : this is among the key characteristics of the IoT system that enables billions of
devices and objects to be accessible remotely. Additionally, it allows various objects in our
environment to be connected and communicate with each other over the Internet, which allows
creating new applications and services.
 Large scale network : as stated earlier, the IoT system includes billions of devices that are expected
to reach 75 billion devices by the end of 2025 [ 9]. This large number of devices and objects create a
large-scale network that cannot be managed by traditional or classical methods.
 Dynamic system : the IoT is a dynamic system in nature. It can connect various objects in di erent
locations. In addition, with sensors that collect various real-time and contextual information about
surroundings, IoT devices can be dynamically adapted to changing circumstance and conditions.
 Intelligence capabilities : with advanced hardware, software and sensing capabilities that enable
collecting a vast volume of contextual data, IoT devices can make smart decisions in several
conditions and cooperate intelligently with other collaborating objects.
 Big data : there are billions of IoT devices, which creates a vast volume of data that cannot be
analysed using traditional data analytics methods. This refers to the term “big data”. The IoT is
among the richest sources of big data that creates a vast volume of data that needs innovative
analytics methods to have the full beneﬁts of IoT data.
 Unique identity : the IoT system enables various objects to connect over the Internet. Having the
ability to connect to the Internet can be guaranteed only if each device can have a unique identity
or identiﬁer such as the IP address. For the IoT system, manufactures give a unique identiﬁer to
each device that allows it to update devices to appropriate platforms especially in case there was a
security breach. Therefore, although IoT devices are in billions, each device has a unique identity.
 Autonomous decision : there is many sensors in the IoT system, which enable collecting huge
contextual and real-time data about the surrounding environment. These dynamic data allow IoT
devices to make context-aware and autonomous decisions.
 Heterogeneity : the IoT system allows di erent devices and objects to be addressable and
communicate with each other over the Internet. These devices come with heterogeneous
characteristics including communication protocols, operating systems, platforms, and other
software and hardware components. Despite these heterogeneous characteristics, the IoT system
allows all these devices to communicate with each other e ciently and e ectively.
2.2. Centralized IoT Architecture
Managing a set of nodes to work together to formulate a system needs to have a certain architecture
design. Among the popular designs is the centralized architecture, which is built using a centralized
server to control and manage a set of nodes. These nodes vary from an advanced computer system,
laptop, mobile phone, etc., which are capable of performing various types of operations. The centralized
server acts as the manager that deals with all requests coming from various nodes and manages task
scheduling and allocation among nodes in the network [ 11]. A simple form of a centralized architecture
is shown in Figure 2, where all nodes in the network are connected through a central server.

==== Page 5 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 5 of 27
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 27 
simple form of a centralized architecture is shown in Figure 2, where all nodes in the network are 
connected through a central server.  
 
Figure 2. Centralized architecture . 
The IoT system is among the common examples of a centralize d system, which is also called 
client–server architecture. In this approach, all IoT devices and objects are connected, managed and 
authenticated through a centralized server, which is typically a cloud server. According to 
Fernández -Caramés and Fraga -Lama s [4] and Lu et al. [12], the centralized IoT architecture consists 
of three key layers; the perception, network and application layer, as shown in Figure 3. Although 
there are several centralized architecture designs for the IoT system containing four, fi ve and six 
layers suggested by different researchers, this three -layer architecture shows the functionality of the 
IoT system smoothly and easily.  
 
Figure 3. Three -layer architecture of the IoT system . 
Figure 2. Centralized architecture.
The IoT system is among the common examples of a centralized system, which is also called
client–server architecture. In this approach, all IoT devices and objects are connected, managed
and authenticated through a centralized server, which is typically a cloud server. According to
Fernández-Caram és and Fraga-Lamas [ 4] and Lu et al. [ 12], the centralized IoT architecture consists
of three key layers; the perception, network and application layer, as shown in Figure 3. Although
there are several centralized architecture designs for the IoT system containing four, ﬁve and six layers
suggested by di erent researchers, this three-layer architecture shows the functionality of the IoT
system smoothly and easily.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 27 
simple form of a centralized architecture is shown in Figure 2, where all nodes in the network are 
connected through a central server.  
 
Figure 2. Centralized architecture . 
The IoT system is among the common examples of a centralize d system, which is also called 
client–server architecture. In this approach, all IoT devices and objects are connected, managed and 
authenticated through a centralized server, which is typically a cloud server. According to 
Fernández -Caramés and Fraga -Lama s [4] and Lu et al. [12], the centralized IoT architecture consists 
of three key layers; the perception, network and application layer, as shown in Figure 3. Although 
there are several centralized architecture designs for the IoT system containing four, fi ve and six 
layers suggested by different researchers, this three -layer architecture shows the functionality of the 
IoT system smoothly and easily.  
 
Figure 3. Three -layer architecture of the IoT system . 
Figure 3. Three-layer architecture of the IoT system.
The ﬁrst layer of the IoT architecture is the perception layer (also called the sensing layer).
This layer involves various kinds of sensors, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcations (RFIDs), actuators and

==== Page 6 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 6 of 27
WSNs. The main responsibility of this layer is to sense and perceive the surrounding environment
and collect the relevant data that can be processed and extract meaningful information to understand
and control our surrounding physical world [ 13]. Based on the collected data, IoT devices can make
context-aware and autonomous decisions using actuators. The network layer is utilized to connect
and communicate all IoT things and devices over the Internet, where the centralized server is located.
This layer incorporates gateways that represent the communication points between the perception
and network layer. Various communication technologies and protocols were employed in this layer
such as 3G /4G, ZigBee, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and Broadband to transfer the data between the perception
and application layer. The application layer comprises of diverse IoT applications that utilizes huge
amounts of data collected and processed at the perception and network layer, respectively, and produce
digitized services in diverse domains such as healthcare, smart parking, smart home, smart city,
wearables, smart grid, agriculture and many others [5,14].
The existing centralized model of the IoT system provides several advantages to connect and
communicate a wide variety of devices that are managed by the centralized server. Hence, the whole
charge of the IoT network is managed through a central server, which is simpler to manage and
maintain. In addition, it saves costs of implementing several complete workstations of hardware
and software in the network, in which most of the processing operations are only handled by the
centralized server. Therefore, most nodes in the network can be like a terminal to connect to the central
server. Besides, the centralized IoT architecture delivers better physical security as most IoT data are
kept in a single location, which is simpler to safeguard from physical harms [5].
On the other hand, the centralized IoT architecture introduces multiple challenges. For example,
it faces scalability issues as it cannot handle the constant increase in IoT devices. In addition,
it introduces numerous security and privacy challenges [ 15]. Table 1 provides a summary of issues
related to the IoT centralized architecture.
Table 1. Summary of challenges of the IoT centralized model.
Challenge Description
Single Point of
FailureAs the centralized server performs all processing operations and manages communications
between various devices, this produces a single point of failure in which if the server goes
down, the whole network of devices will be unreachable.
SecuritySecurity is among the key challenges in the IoT centralized model since all data processing
operations and data storage are done in one location and through a central server which
makes it susceptible to di erent kind of threats speciﬁcally Denial of Service (DoS) [13].
PrivacyVarious types of real-time data including sensitive information are collected from IoT
devices such as habits, passwords, personal and ﬁnancial information, etc. These collected
data are kept in one location under the full control of the centralized third-party server
which can violate the data privacy. Additionally, storing it in one location can make it
easier to be breached [16].
InﬂexibilityThe centralized server controls communications and processing operations between all
nodes linked to the IoT network, which creates a huge workload. To handle this workload,
the centralized server plans the load to evade peak-load issues. However, this limits user
ﬂexibility while doing their own tasks due to the tight agenda and delay linked to this
process [17].
CostThe central server performs all processing and communication operations between all
nodes in the network which require high hardware and software capabilities to handle this
workload.
Additionally, it needs huge retaining storages that are able to store data coming from
various IoT devices. All these high capabilities of hardware and software come with a high
cost [4].

==== Page 7 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 7 of 27
Table 1. Cont.
Challenge Description
ScalabilityAmong the topmost challenges associated with the centralized model is scalability.
Managing and controlling all nodes in the network by a central server can scale well only
in small networks. Employing the notion of a centralized system with large enterprise
organizations that involve several branches in di erent areas will be unreasonable.
The number of IoT devices is increasing constantly which means that the centralized
model is unable to scale and function e ciently [18].
Access and
DiversityAmong the important aspects of an e cient system is the capability to provide access to all
their users with diverse needs. However, the centralized system requires its users to access
the information steadily using identical processes. Furthermore, most centralized systems
utilize a particular operating system for the whole network which restricts diversity within
the network. For the IoT system that contains heterogeneous and diverse devices, this will
produce a serious issue that requires being handled [19].
3. Blockchain Technology
The world continued utilizing the centralized architecture in which a central server is needed to
control the processing and scheduling of tasks until Szabo created a decentralized digital currency
at the end of 1990. Ten years later, Bitcoin cryptocurrency was o ered. Blockchain became generally
widespread after Satoshi Nakamoto’s paper in 2009 [ 20]. This section presents an overview of
blockchain technology.
3.1. An Overview of Blockchain
Blockchain technology is among the most recent themes that attracted the attention of several
organizations and researchers due to the countless beneﬁts it provided over existing solutions [ 21].
A blockchain is essentially a distributed, decentralized and immutable ledger that keeps the information
of the various transactions that ever happened in a certain P2P network [ 22]. To store a transaction in
the distributed ledger, most of the nodes should record their agreement. This requires a consensus
mechanism. The most common and popular consensus mechanisms are Proof of Stake (PoS) and Proof
of Work (PoW). A group of transactions are collected and assigned a block in the ledger. A timestamp
and hash function associated with each block are used to link the block to the previous block. So,
multiple blocks are chained together, and given the name blockchain. The hash function is mainly
used to validate the integrity of the block’s content or data [ 3]. The blockchain technology promotes
information sharing in which all participating users /nodes in the blockchain network have a copy of
the original ledger, so all nodes are updated with newly added transactions or blocks [5].
There are various deﬁnitions for the blockchain. For instance, Coinbase, the world’s largest
cryptocurrency exchange, deﬁned blockchain as “ a distributed, public ledger that contains the history of
every bitcoin transaction ” [23]. In the same way, the Oxford dictionary deﬁnes blockchain. It stated,
“a digital ledger in which transactions made in bitcoin or another cryptocurrency are recorded chronologically
and publicly ” [24]. These deﬁnitions describe the blockchain from cryptocurrency’s viewpoint that
does not reﬂect the reality that blockchain can be utilized in numerous domains. Moreover, discussing
key components of blockchain, Sultan et al. [ 25] delivered a common description for the blockchain.
It stated, “ a decentralized database containing sequential, cryptographically linked blocks of digitally signed
asset transactions, governed by a consensus model ”.
3.2. Components of Blockchain
Blockchain technology can deliver several beneﬁts over existing solutions. There are a set of
elementary components of the blockchain, which include ledger, block, hashing, transaction, minor and
consensus mechanisms, as depicted in Figure 4. The ledger is a data structure that is utilized to store
various types of information. There are signiﬁcant di erences between the classical database and the
ledger. A database system stores data in the form of tables with columns and rows. Moreover, it uses a

==== Page 8 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 8 of 27
relational model for querying and gathering data by connecting information from several sources [ 26].
On the other hand, the ledger is utilized to store all the transactions that were ever made from all
participating users in the network. Additionally, the ledger was distributed among the participating
nodes, so each user has its own replica of the ledger.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 27 
 
Figure 4. Main components of block chain . 
Block is among  the primary components of the blockchain. Each block comprises a set of 
transactions. The blocks were chained together by storing a unique  hash value  of the preceding block 
in the existing block. This link blocks together like a chain . The hash function is used to validate the 
data integrity of the content of each block. Basically, the hash function is a mathematical problem that 
the minors need to crack to find a block. The reason to use the hash function is that it is collision -free 
in which it is very hard to create two identical hashes for two different digital data. So, assigning a 
hash value for each block can serve as a way to identify the block and also validate its contents [18].  
A transaction is the smallest unit of process or  operation in which a set of transactions are 
combined and stored in a block. A certain transaction cannot be added to the block unless the majority 
of the participating nodes in the blockchain network record their consent. The size of a transaction is 
important for minors as small transactions require less power and are easier to validate. Minors are 
computers/agents that attempt to solve a complex mathematical problem (typically, a form of hash 
functions) to explore a new block. Discovering a new block is  started by broadcasting new 
transactions to all nodes, and then each node combines a set of transactions into a block and operates 
to discover the block’s proof -of-work. If a node discovers a block, then the block will be broadcasted 
to all the nodes to b e verified [27].  
3.3. Features of Blockchain  
Blockchain can deliver numerous advantages for multiple fields and applications. This new 
technology shares some common features that involve:  
 Decentralization : blockchain is typically a decentralized and dis tributed environment that is 
based on the P2P communication between communicating nodes. The decentralization enables 
utilizing the processing power of all contributing users, which decrease s latency and remove s 
the single point of failure. This feature ov ercomes the single point of failure issue.  
 Transparency : in contra st to the centralized model where the central server is only having the 
full control and access to all data, blockchain offers a good level of transparency in which all 
nodes have access to  all the details of the transactions that ever happened in their network. 
Figure 4. Main components of blockchain.
Block is among the primary components of the blockchain. Each block comprises a set of
transactions. The blocks were chained together by storing a unique hash value of the preceding block
in the existing block. This link blocks together like a chain. The hash function is used to validate the
data integrity of the content of each block. Basically, the hash function is a mathematical problem that
the minors need to crack to ﬁnd a block. The reason to use the hash function is that it is collision-free in
which it is very hard to create two identical hashes for two di erent digital data. So, assigning a hash
value for each block can serve as a way to identify the block and also validate its contents [18].
A transaction is the smallest unit of process or operation in which a set of transactions are
combined and stored in a block. A certain transaction cannot be added to the block unless the majority
of the participating nodes in the blockchain network record their consent. The size of a transaction is
important for minors as small transactions require less power and are easier to validate. Minors are
computers /agents that attempt to solve a complex mathematical problem (typically, a form of hash
functions) to explore a new block. Discovering a new block is started by broadcasting new transactions
to all nodes, and then each node combines a set of transactions into a block and operates to discover
the block’s proof-of-work. If a node discovers a block, then the block will be broadcasted to all the
nodes to be veriﬁed [27].
3.3. Features of Blockchain
Blockchain can deliver numerous advantages for multiple ﬁelds and applications. This new
technology shares some common features that involve:

==== Page 9 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 9 of 27
 Decentralization : blockchain is typically a decentralized and distributed environment that is
based on the P2P communication between communicating nodes. The decentralization enables
utilizing the processing power of all contributing users, which decreases latency and removes the
single point of failure. This feature overcomes the single point of failure issue.
 Transparency : in contrast to the centralized model where the central server is only having the
full control and access to all data, blockchain o ers a good level of transparency in which all
nodes have access to all the details of the transactions that ever happened in their network.
Besides, each node has a copy of the distributed ledger to keep updated with changes. In addition,
the absence of a third party increases business friendliness and trust [28].
 Immutability : among the crucial characteristics of blockchain is the capability of guaranteeing
the transactions’ integrity through producing immutable ledgers. In contrast to the centralized
model where data integrity is only managed and preserved through the central authority, which
can be a threat, the blockchain uses hash functions that are collision-free to link each block to the
previous block which maintains the integrity of the block’s contents. In addition, blocks stored in
the ledger can never be changed only if most of the users conﬁrm that change [26].
 Better security : among the advantages of blockchain technology is that it provides better security
over existing solutions. With the use of public key infrastructure, blockchain provides a secure
environment against various types of attacks. In addition, the consensus mechanism provides a
trusted method that improves the security of the blockchain. Moreover, the absence of the single
point of failure in the blockchain technology, that can a ect the whole systems, provides better
security over the centralized model [29].
 Anonymity : despite blockchain utilizing a ledger that is distributed between all users, blockchain
provides an anonymous identity to protect the nodes’ privacy. The anonymity feature can be
utilized to provide a secure and private voting system [30].
 Cost reduction : in contrast to the centralized architecture in which the advanced and complete
hardware and software system is required to build the centralized server, the blockchain technology
reduces the costs related to ﬁtting and sustaining large centralized servers as it utilizes the
processing power of communicating devices [31].
 Autonomy : the ability to make autonomous decisions is among the features that the blockchain
technology can provide. It allows the manufacturing of new devices that are able to make smart
and autonomous decisions. For instance, blockchain features including tamper-proof and better
security can be used to build better and secure autonomous vehicles [7].
4. IoT with Blockchain
The IoT has become one of the unprecedented technologies that enable virtual and physical
objects to be linked together over the Internet, which in turn produce numerous opportunities in
dierent domains. The unexpected development of the IoT system has unlocked innovative chances in
various ﬁelds. However, the IoT still has some issues that stand like a wall in the face of the promised
spreading of IoT objects. Among these issues is the lack of trust and conﬁdence. The current IoT
centralized model utilizes a third-party central authority that has complete control of data collection
and processing from various IoT objects without any clear restrictions about how the collected data
are being used. Hence, the central authority is like a block box for IoT users, which is a convincing
situation for the majority of IoT devices’ owners [32].
On the other hand, blockchain technology delivers decentralized, autonomous, trustless and
distributed environment. In distinction to the centralized model where there are several issues related
to the single point of failure, trust and security, the blockchain utilizes a decentralized approach to
use the processing abilities of all the contributing users which deliver better e ciency and eliminate
the single point of failure. In addition, blockchain provides better security and data integrity through
tamper-proof and immutability features [33].

==== Page 10 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 10 of 27
There are numerous similarities and variances between IoT and blockchain. Table 2 provides a
simple comparison between IoT and blockchain.
Table 2. A simple comparison between IoT and blockchain.
Items IoT Blockchain
Privacy Lack of privacyEnsures the privacy of the
participating nodes
BandwidthIoT devices have limited bandwidth
and resourcesHigh bandwidth consumption
System Structure Centralized Decentralized
ScalabilityIoT considered to contain a large number
of devicesScales poorly with a large network
Resources Resource restricted Resource consuming
Latency Demands low latency Block mining is time-consuming
Security Security is an issue Has better security
Integrating the blockchain technology with the IoT can resolve several challenges of the centralized
IoT model. Table 3 provides a summary of the challenges of the centralized IoT system and how
integrating the blockchain with IoT could handle it.
Table 3. Blockchain can provide innovative solutions to issues of the centralized IoT model.
Challenges of
Centralized IoTHow Blockchain Can Resolve the Challenge
SecurityBlockchain o ers better security by utilizing the public key infrastructure that provides
more protection against various attacks. In addition, it o ers an immutable ledger that
cannot be updated only with the approval of the majority of contributing users in the
network, which guarantees data integrity. Moreover, all communications between
various devices are maintained and secured cryptographically [18].
ScalabilityAmong the main aspects of the IoT is the enormous number of devices which constantly
increases every day. The distributed and decentralized nature of the blockchain can
provide an e cient way to provide a scalable way to handle the constant increase in IoT
devices.
Point of FailureThe blockchain technology provides distributed and decentralized communication
between participating nodes which eliminates the necessity for a central server to
manage and control processing and communication operations. Hence, if one device
goes down, this will not a ect the entire network which overcomes the single point of
failure issue associated with the centralized model.
Address SpaceThe blockchain has a large address space that allows allocating addresses to a large
number of devices. The blockchain provides a 160-bit address space which enables the
blockchain to assign addresses for a considerable number of objects. Compared to IPv6,
blockchain o ers 4.3 billion more addresses [34].
Authentication and
Access ControlAmong the advantages provided by blockchain technology is delivering e cient identity
management that helps to build e ective authentication and access control. Moreover,
smart contracts provide several beneﬁts such as decentralized authentication rules that
can be utilized to provide an e ective authentication model for various IoT devices.
Data IntegrityBlockchain presents a tamper-proof ability such that a certain transaction cannot be
added, edited or deleted only if most of the contributing users in the network verify it.
This, in turn, guarantees data integrity.
Susceptibility to
ManipulationThe blockchain provides an immutable environment that prevents the manipulation of
data to ensure data integrity. In the blockchain, the manipulation or update is only
conﬁrmed after the agreement of the majority of participating users.

==== Page 11 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 11 of 27
Table 3. Cont.
Challenges of
Centralized IoTHow Blockchain Can Resolve the Challenge
Ownership and
IdentityBlockchain has the capability to deliver a trustworthy, authorized identity registration,
ownership tracking and monitoring. Additionally, it was implemented successfully in
various applications especially in the tracking and monitoring goods and products [ 34].
FlexibilityThe blockchain technology provides a ﬂexible environment for various IoT objects
through numerous open-source options for blockchain. Moreover, blockchain can scale
well to meet the scope and transactional volume of a ﬂexible grid.
Costs and Capacity
ConstraintsThe blockchain provides a decentralized architecture where a central authority or
third-party is not required to manage the communications between communicating
nodes. This allows for more secure data communication and exchange. In addition,
no need for the costs of installing a server with high software and hardware capabilities
[7].
4.1. IoT with Blockchain Architecture
Integrating blockchain with IoT has become a necessity to overcome the issues of the centralized
IoT architecture and utilize countless beneﬁts of blockchain technology. Implementing the blockchain
with IoT can be achieved in numerous ways. This section presents a discussion for one of the approaches
of integrating blockchain with the IoT in a layered architecture.
The simple layered blockchain with IoT architecture comprises of four layers. It is the IoT
architecture layers discussed in Section 2.2 adding blockchain as a separate layer between network and
application layers, as shown in Figure 5.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 27 
4.1. IoT with Blockchain Architecture  
Integrating blockchain with IoT has become a necessity to overcome the issues of the centralized 
IoT a rchitecture and utilize countless benefits of blockchain technology. Implementing the blockchain 
with IoT can be  achieved  in numerous ways. This section presents a discussion for one of the 
approaches of integrating blockchain with the IoT in a layered arc hitecture.  
The simple layered blockchain with IoT architecture comprises of four layers. It is the IoT 
architecture layers discussed in Section 2 .2 adding blockchain as a separate layer between network 
and application layers, as shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figur e 5. Architecture of IoT with blockchain . 
As discussed earlier, the first layer is the perception layer that contains IoT things and objects 
such as sensors and actuators that are used to sense and perceive the surrounding environment and 
collect relevant data that can help us understand our surroundings. Then, the network layer that 
performs network and routing management enable s all IoT objects to be linked and communicate 
together over the Internet. This layer includes networking and security devices tha t enable 
communication and security management.  
The newly added layer is named the IoT–blockchain layer, which involves all modules that 
enable various features of the blockchain technology to be implemented in the IoT system. These 
features include P2P c ommunication, distributed ledger, smart contracts, Application Programming  
Interface ( API), big data analytics, consensus management, and identity management. P2P protocols 
are required to enable decentralized communication between various IoT objects. A dditionally , the 
distributed ledger is among  the significant features that each IoT device will hold a copy of so that it 
can be updated with changes in minutes or even seconds within the IoT network [35]. The ledger can 
be created either with or without per mission . The type of ledger will be heavily dependent on the IoT 
context and the number of nodes in the IoT network.  
The b ig data analytics module enables the blockchain to provide efficient online data storage 
and processing since the IoT system create hu ge amounts of data that cannot be processed using 
traditional methods. In addition , many transactions are deposited in structured ways of ledgers, 
which will require further data analysis. Smart contracts are also  among the important parts of the 
Figure 5. Architecture of IoT with blockchain.
As discussed earlier, the ﬁrst layer is the perception layer that contains IoT things and objects such
as sensors and actuators that are used to sense and perceive the surrounding environment and collect
relevant data that can help us understand our surroundings. Then, the network layer that performs
network and routing management enables all IoT objects to be linked and communicate together over

==== Page 12 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 12 of 27
the Internet. This layer includes networking and security devices that enable communication and
security management.
The newly added layer is named the IoT–blockchain layer, which involves all modules that enable
various features of the blockchain technology to be implemented in the IoT system. These features
include P2P communication, distributed ledger, smart contracts, Application Programming Interface
(API), big data analytics, consensus management, and identity management. P2P protocols are required
to enable decentralized communication between various IoT objects. Additionally, the distributed
ledger is among the signiﬁcant features that each IoT device will hold a copy of so that it can be
updated with changes in minutes or even seconds within the IoT network [ 35]. The ledger can be
created either with or without permission. The type of ledger will be heavily dependent on the IoT
context and the number of nodes in the IoT network.
The big data analytics module enables the blockchain to provide e cient online data storage
and processing since the IoT system create huge amounts of data that cannot be processed using
traditional methods. In addition, many transactions are deposited in structured ways of ledgers,
which will require further data analysis. Smart contracts are also among the important parts of the
blockchain technology that used to enable automated decisions based on predetermined conditions.
Typically, a smart contract is a software code that runs using blockchain to execute a set of actions
when predetermined conditions are met or veriﬁed.
Consensus management is also among the main features needed to integrate blockchain with IoT.
It acts as the central server that maintains the trust between communicating nodes in the network.
Identity management is used to control and identify various nodes in the IoT network. In addition,
the API interface enables IoT applications to access blockchain services. The application layer is the top
layer that includes various IoT applications and provides data visualization tasks that create numerous
digitized services and help decision-makers make accurate and precise decisions based on the collected
data from physical IoT devices.
4.2. Implementation of Blockchain with IoT
Blockchain was ﬁrstly used for ﬁnancial transactions and cryptocurrency where transactions are
executed and stored by all nodes in the blockchain network. Then, blockchain is integrated in various
domains due to the enormous beneﬁts it provides. Among these domains is the IoT system. Combining
blockchain with IoT can provide countless beneﬁts for various IoT applications [ 13]. Meanwhile,
the blockchain is decentralized and trustless, as it is suitable for IoT applications such as healthcare,
smart homes, smart city, smart transportation and others.
Implementing blockchain in the IoT system is not an easy task. The ﬁrst and important step is
to choose the blockchain platform that will be adopted to merge the IoT with blockchain technology.
Ethereum, Hyperledger and IOTA are the most common platforms that can be utilized in implementing
blockchain with IoT. Not only are they open-source platforms, but they can also deliver key abilities to
connect among blocks, cryptographically secure for the hashing of di erent transactions minimally in
single blocks, advanced marks, consensus, and smart contracts [36].
4.2.1. Ethereum
Ethereum is a multipurpose blockchain platform that was announced in 2013 and then launched
in 2015. It produces a universal platform for various blockchain-based applications. It was mainly
based on implementing smart contracts, which are programmed codes that are permanently kept
on the blockchain and enable executing users’ requests. Ethereum also o ers a decentralized virtual
machine called Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) [37].
Although Ethereum is based on smart contracts, the transactions can keep di erent types of data.
This enlarges the likelihood for auditability and allows robust expansion for various IoT applications.
Among the drawbacks of Ethereum is that it needs between 10 and 20 s to send a block, which may

==== Page 13 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 13 of 27
create issues in IoT applications that use real-time data. In addition, IoT gadget operations may not
promote such a delay [29].
Some studies utilized Ethereum to integrate blockchain with IoT. For instance, Sun et al. [38]
proposed Ethereum blockchain-based rich-thin-clients IoT solution to handle issues of
resource-constrained IoT when working on the mining of blockchain in IoT applications. Additionally,
Mehedi et al. [ 39] proposed a lightweight masonry for IoT-based blockchains that overcome the memory
payload and centralized issues and at the same time improve security and privacy. The authors utilized
Ethereum as the blockchain platform to guarantee security, privacy and availability.
4.2.2. Hyperledger
Hyperledger is an open source platform that was designed to help cross-industry blockchain
technologies. It is essentially a world-wide open source collaboration involving leaders from numerous
industries (about 100 members). Hyperledger is a permissioned blockchain that applies access control,
chain code-based smart contracts and variable consensus methods. Although the majority of the
distributed records permit open deployment, the permissioned Hyperledger promotes and improves
security to avoid various types of attacks, especially Sybil attacks [ 40]. Since the implementation
of smart contracts in Hyperledger is mainly based on chain code implementation, it provides faster
execution among peers in several milliseconds. Therefore, adopting chain code smart contracts
provides a robust method to implement blockchain in IoT applications [41].
Although there are several frameworks of the Hyperledger, Hyperledger Fabric is among the
most common and widely utilized frameworks. It is an open source and modular system. Several
studies compare the performance of Ethereum and Hyperledger. For instance, in Franke et al. [ 42],
the authors compared two blockchain platforms to test their feasibility regarding the beneﬁts and
restrictions of employing blockchain for the Paris Agreement carbon market mechanism. Furthermore,
Pongnumkul et al. [ 43] performed a performance analysis to assess the performance and limitations of
Ethereum and Hyperledger. Their results indicated that Hyperledger Fabric consistently outperformed
Ethereum in terms of latency, execution time and throughput.
4.2.3. IOTA
IOTA is not considered as one of the blockchain platforms as it mainly depends on Tangle,
another distributed ledger technology. IOTA can be deﬁned as a decentralized platform that facilitates
and processes various transactions between communicating devices over the Internet. Basically,
IOTA executes a coordinated acyclic chart of transactions instead of chained blocks of numerous
transactions. This provides several beneﬁts, for instance, it provides a lightweight solution as
consensus does not require the majority of communicating nodes to approve di erent incremented
transactions, instead, two transactions can be veriﬁed by single nodes submitting a transaction
themselves. This reduces transaction time and overhead [44].
Lightweight and less overhead features of IOTA as well as the use of coordinated acyclic graphs
make it among the most adaptable implementations of a distributed record, making it mainly an
ecient solution and platform for IoT applications. Many researchers utilized IOTA to provide an
ecient platform for IoT applications. For instance, Shabandri and Maheshwari [ 45] proposed using
IOTA to enhance the privacy and security of a smart meter and smart car. The authors presented
that IOTA addressed issues related to the limitations of resources in IoT devices and indicated that
IOTA eliminated transaction fees and mining which takes large processing power. On the other
hand, some researchers indicated that IOTA maybe not the optimal solution for the IoT system.
For example, Elsts et al. [46] presented an experimental assessment of IOTA on various IoT platforms.
They concluded that the computational overhead of IOTA is high, and it is not an appropriate solution
for battery-powered IoT devices. Table 4 provides a comparison between Ethereum, Hyperledger
and IOTA.

==== Page 14 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 14 of 27
Table 4. Comparison between Ethereum, Hyperledger and IOTA.
Item Ethereum Hyperledger IOTA
Transaction Time 10–15 s 0.05–100 ms 120 s
Consensus Mechanism Proof of Work (PoW)Practical byzantine fault
tolerance (PBFT)N/A
Network Usage Less usage High usage Less usage
Computation Cost High computation cost Less computation cost Less computation cost
Smart Contracts Yes Yes No
4.3. Recent Studies of IoT with Blockchain
Integrating blockchain technology with IoT is among the most modern subjects that has attracted
the courtesy of various researchers to overcome issues of centralized IoT architecture. For example,
several studies presented the blockchain as the ultimate solution to tackle security and privacy
challenges in the IoT system. For instance, Khan and Salah [ 22] presented a review of IoT and
its security challenges concerning IoT-layered architectures. Then, the authors identiﬁed security
requirements of the IoT system and state-of-the-art solutions. The paper also presented blockchain
technology as a vital empowering to resolve most of the security issues of the IoT system. Moreover,
Sengupta et al. [ 47] provided a review of security attacks and issues in the IoT and industrial IoT (IIoT)
and classify it based on the vulnerability. Then, the authors presented the blockchain technology and
how it can resolve some of the aforementioned security issues. Besides, they presented some of the
challenges of blockchain with IIoT.
In the same way, Banejee et al. [ 48] provided a review of IoT security solutions and discussed issues
of lack of IoT datasets for researchers and practitioners. Then, the authors proposed the blockchain to
provide a secure environment for sharing IoT datasets. They also discussed some of the challenges of
blockchain technology. In addition, Dorri et al. [ 49] proposed a lightweight architecture for IoT based
on blockchain technology to provide a secure and private IoT system and at the same time eliminate
the overhead of blockchain. Moreover, Polyzos and Fotiou [ 50] review the potential of blockchain
technology to investigate the security requirements of the IoT system and how integrating the IoT with
blockchain can solve these security challenges.
Moreover, Karthikeyan et al. [ 51] provided a review of IoT security issues, then proposed the
blockchain as a suggested solution to resolve these issues. They also discussed the potentials of
integrating IoT with blockchain. In addition, Fotiou et al. [ 52] suggested a smart contract-based solution
to handle security and privacy issues in the IoT system and to make the IoT device communicate
securely. Their proposed solution enabled decentralization for access control, authentication and
payments depending on blockchain technology.
Tandon [ 53] provided a review of blockchain technology and how it provides the ultimate solution
to handle the security and privacy challenges associated with the IoT system. The paper also discussed
the beneﬁts and challenges of integrating blockchain with IoT. In the same way, Zhu and Badr [ 54]
provided a review to deﬁne the demands of creating an identity management system for IoT. Then,
they proposed that blockchain technology be integrated with the IoT to build an e cient identity
management system to provide better trust and performance. Moreover, Hang and Kim [ 35] proposed
an integrated IoT platform using blockchain technology to ensure sensing data integrity. Their platform
enabled real-time monitoring and control between the end-user and device. The results demonstrated
that their platform could be a good solution for resource-constrained IoT devices. Additionally,
Kadam and John [ 55] proposed a framework based on the Ethereum blockchain for low-power IoT
devices to solve the power issue in IoT devices while communicating, validating transactions and
providing security.
Blockchain technology was presented as a solution to provide an e cient and e ective access
control system. For example, Dukkipati et al. [ 56] proposed a blockchain-based access control model to

==== Page 15 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 15 of 27
handle security and privacy challenges in the IoT system. They employed blockchain as decentralized
access manager which provides the access decision. Moreover, Novo [ 57] suggested a blockchain-based
distributed control model for the IoT system. The author claimed that the blockchain could provide
ecient access control management in the IoT applications. Besides, Zhang et al. [ 58] have suggested a
smart contract-based access control framework that contained several access control contracts (ACCs).
They utilized smart contracts to achieve a trusted and distributed access control model for the IoT.
Blockchain was also proposed as an e cient solution to enhance the security and privacy of
healthcare data. For example, Badr et al. [ 59] utilized the blockchain to enhance the privacy of
patient data. They suggested a protocol for protecting the privacy of eHealth data (EHRs) based
on pseudonym-based encryption with di erent authorities (PBE-DA). Furthermore, they utilized
blockchain as a stage between IoT medical devices and the healthcare system. Additionally, Mishra and
Tyagi [ 60] proposed an intrusion detection system for the IoT based on blockchain technology to detect
unauthorized access and ﬁlter network tra c. They applied their proposal to the healthcare domain to
protect patient information.
Another domain in which blockchain technology was deployed was agriculture. Several
researchers proposed utilizing blockchain to overcome the issues of existing systems. For instance,
Patil et al. [ 61] suggested a lightweight architecture for smart greenhouse farms based on blockchain to
improve security and privacy in agriculture. The blockchain makes IoT devices in greenhouses act
as immutable ledgers. Moreover, Lin et al. [ 62] suggested an open, self-organized and trusted food
traceability system by integrating blockchain with IoT. Their proposed system replaced labour-intensive
recording and minimized human involvement, which created a smart agriculture system. Besides,
Dogo et al. [63] proposed a framework for utilizing blockchain in agriculture. They showed
technological beneﬁts and technical advantages of integrating blockchain and IoT in agriculture
to improve security, transparency and overall e ciency. In addition, Kamilaris et al. [ 64] provided
a discussion of the use of the blockchain in agriculture and food chain by investigating beneﬁts
and challenges.
Blockchain was adopted in the supply chain as well. Rejeb et al. [ 65] provided a review of
the deployment of blockchain technology with IoT and potential beneﬁts of this integration on the
supply chain domain. They also discussed the impact of blockchain on key features of the IoT system.
Moreover, Huckle et al. [ 66] provided a discussion of the use of the blockchain with IoT to deliver its
safe and distributed application in the economy. Additionally, blockchain was adopted in E-business
and payments, for example, Zhang and Wen [ 67] suggested an IoT E-business system based on
blockchain technology. They utilized decentralization and smart contracts to achieve integration
with the IoT system. Moreover, Ruta et al. [ 68] suggested a blockchain-based service-oriented model.
They utilized smart contracts to enable distributed and decentralized execution and trust. Besides,
Huh et al. [69] proposed using Ethereum smart contract to store the data produced by IoT devices like
smart meters and phones. They utilized Ethereum smart contracts to control the usage of electricity
through the smartphone.
Reviewing the beneﬁts, constraints and issues of integrating blockchain with IoT was among
the topics that attracted many researchers. Some researchers provided a systematic literature review
to help the reader obtain a precise knowledge about certain research questions. For example,
Conoscenti et al. [70] provided a systematic literature review to collect information and knowledge on
the present uses of blockchain technology to validate its ability to provide better security, anonymity
and adaptability over existing technologies. They also categorised the current uses of the blockchain.
Moreover, Lo et al. [71] provided a systematic literature review to analyse various solutions suggested
by di erent researchers to converge the blockchain with the IoT. They reviewed publications that
involved the implementation of blockchain with IoT. In the same way, Abadi et al. [ 72] provided a
systematic literature review of integrating blockchain with IoT.
Other researchers provided reviews and surveys to investigate the integration of blockchain with
IoT. Wang et al. [ 73] provided a survey of blockchain technologies and their e ect on IoT applications.

==== Page 16 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 16 of 27
They also explained the e ect of consensus protocols and data structure of the blockchain on improving
the IoT system by discussing some of the open issues of blockchain. In addition, Thakore et al. [ 74]
examined the integration of IoT with blockchain and how to create a mixture that provides a better
outcome. They presented the basic fundamentals of both technologies by explaining their protocols
and functioning. Besides, Ferrag et al. [ 75] provided a review paper that investigated the role of
blockchain in various applications of IoT like healthcare or smart vehicles. They also discussed the
beneﬁts of blockchain regarding security, performance and complexity.
In the same way, Dai et al. [ 76] presented a review of blockchain with IoT and the challenges
resulting from this integration in the context of IIoT and 5G. Moreover, Atlam and Wills [ 5] discussed
the integration of distributed ledger technology with the IoT system. They investigated types of
distributed ledger technologies and focused on the blockchain and its main potentials and challenges
with the IoT system. Besides, Marouﬁ et al. [ 77], Alamri et al. [ 78], and Atlam et al. [ 18] presented a
review of the integration of IoT with blockchain by investigating the advantages and shortcomings.
Moreover, Lao et al. [ 79] provided a survey of the key elements that were needed to integrate blockchain
with IoT. They focused on various consensus mechanisms that could be utilized in IoT with blockchain.
Table 5 summarizes the contribution of recent studies that examined the integration of blockchain
with IoT.
Table 5. Summarized contributions of recent studies that examined the integration of blockchain
with IoT.
Citation Summary of Contribution
Khan and Salah [22]A review of IoT security challenges and how blockchain can handle most IoT security
challenges.
Wang et al. [73] A survey of blockchain technologies and their e ect on IoT applications.
Badr et al. [59]Proposed protocol for preserving the privacy of EHRs based on pseudonym-based
encryption with di erent authorities (PBE-DA).
Kamilaris et al. [64]An examination of the use of blockchain technology in agriculture by highlighting
beneﬁts and challenges.
Sengupta et al. [47]A review of security issues in the IIoT. Authors also discussed how blockchain can
resolve these issues in the IIoT context.
Huckle et al. [66] A discussion of the use of the blockchain with IoT to deliver a secure economy.
Thakore et al. [74]Basic review of fundamentals of IoT and blockchain and how to create a mixture that
provides a better outcome.
Banejee et al. [48]A review of IoT security solutions and challenges of the lack of IoT datasets. Then,
proposed utilizing blockchain to share IoT datasets securely.
Lin et al. [62]Suggested an open, self-organized and trusted food traceability by integrating
blockchain with IoT.
Patil et al. [61]Proposed a lightweight architecture for smart greenhouse farms based on blockchain to
improve security and privacy.
Dogo et al. [63]Suggested a framework for applying blockchain in agriculture to improve security,
transparency and e ciency.
Ferrag et al. [75]A survey to investigate the role of blockchain in various applications of IoT like
healthcare and smart vehicles.
Kadam and John [55]Proposed a framework based on Ethereum blockchain for low-power IoT devices to
solve the power issue in IoT devices.
Dorri et al. [49]Suggested a blockchain-based lightweight architecture for IoT to deliver a protected
and private IoT system.
Marouﬁ et al. [77]Provided a review of the convergence of IoT with blockchain by investigating beneﬁts
and shortcomings.
Dai et al. [76]Introduced a review of blockchain with IoT and challenges results from this integration
in the context of IIoT and 5G.

==== Page 17 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 17 of 27
Table 5. Cont.
Citation Summary of Contribution
Alamri et al. [78]Provided a review of the convergence of IoT with blockchain by investigating
advantages and shortcomings.
Dukkipati et al. [56]Suggested a blockchain-based access control model to resolve IoT security and privacy
challenges.
Lao et al. [79] Presented a review of the key elements that needed to integrate blockchain with IoT.
Conoscenti et al. [70]Provided a systematic literature review to collect information and knowledge on the
present uses of the blockchain.
Polyzos and Fotiou [50] Provided a review of the potentials of blockchain to solve IoT security.
Atlam and Wills [5]Presented a review of the convergence of distributed ledger technology with the IoT
system. They also investigated the blockchain and its main potential and challenges
with the IoT system.
Novo [57] Proposed a blockchain-based distributed access control system for the IoT system.
Lo et al. [71]Presented a systematic literature review to analyse various solutions suggested by
dierent researchers to converge the blockchain with the IoT.
Abadi et al. [72] Provided a systematic literature review of integrating the blockchain with IoT.
Karthikeyan et al. [51]Presented a review of IoT security issues, then proposed the blockchain as a suggested
solution to resolve these issues.
Mishra and Tyagi [60]Proposed a blockchain-based intrusion detection system for the IoT to detect
unauthorized access and ﬁlter network tra c.
Fotiou et al. [52]Suggested a smart contract-based solution to resolve security and privacy challenges in
the IoT system and make the IoT device communicate securely.
Rejeb et al. [65]Provided a survey of the deployment of Blockchain technology with IoT and the
potential beneﬁts of this integration on the supply chain domain.
Tandon [53]Provided a review of blockchain technology and how it provides the ultimate solution
to resolve security and privacy challenges associated with the IoT system.
Atlam et al. [18]Presented a discussion of the convergence of the IoT with blockchain by explaining the
beneﬁts, opportunities and challenges of this integration.
Hang and Kim [35]Proposed an integrated IoT platform using the blockchain to ensure the data integrity
of the data collected from sensors.
Zhang and Wen [67]Suggested an IoT E-business model based on blockchain technology using features of
decentralization and smart contracts to produce an e cient business model.
Zhu and Badr [54]Provided a review to deﬁne the demands of creating an identity management system
for IoT. Then, the paper proposed blockchain to be integrated with the IoT to build an
ecient identity management system.
Ruta et al. [68]Proposed a blockchain-based service-oriented model for registration, discovery,
selection and payment.
Zhang et al. [58]Suggested a smart contract-based access control model to achieve a trusted and
distributed access model for the IoT system.
Huh et al. [69]Proposed using Ethereum smart contract to store the data produced by IoT devices
such as smart meters and phones.
Moreover, Table 6 categorises recent studies which investigated the integration of blockchain with
IoT which can help researchers to track recent studies and publications that adopted blockchain with
IoT in a certain domain.

==== Page 18 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 18 of 27
Table 6. Categorisation of the recent studies of blockchain (BC) with IoT.
Citation SurveySystematic
ReviewBC for IoT
SecurityBC for IoT
PrivacyBC for
Supply ChainBC for
HealthcareBC for
Agriculture
Khan and Salah [22]p-p- - - -
Wang et al. [73]p- - - - - -
Badr et al. [59] - - -p-p-
Kamilaris et al. [64] - - - - - -p
Sengupta et al. [47]p-p- - - -
Huckle et al. [66]p- - -p- -
Thakore et al. [74]p- - - - - -
Banejee et al. [48]p-p- - - -
Lin et al. [62] - - - - - -p
Patil et al. [61] - - - - - -p
Dogo et al. [63] - - - - - -p
Ferrag et al. [75]p- - - - - -
Kadam and John [55] - -p p- - -
Dorri et al. [49] - -p- - - -
Marouﬁ et al. [77]p- - - - - -
Dai et al. [76]p- - -p- -
Alamri et al. [78]p- - - - - -
Dukkipati et al. [56] - -p p- - -
Lao et al. [79]p- - - - - -
Conoscenti et al. [70]p- - - - - -
Polyzos and Fotiou [50]p-p- - - -
Atlam and Wills [5]p-p p- - -
Novo [57] - -p- - - -
Lo et al. [71] -p- - - - -
Abadi et al. [72] -p- - - - -
Karthikeyan et al. [51]p-p- - - -
Mishra and Tyagi [60] - -p- -p-
Fotiou et al. [52] - -p p- - -
Rejeb et al. [65]p- -p- -
Tandon [53]p-p- - - -
Atlam et al. [18]p- - - - -
Hang and Kim [35] - -p- - - -
Zhang and Wen [67] -p- - -p-
Zhu and Badr [54]p-p p- - -
Ruta et al. [68]p- - -p- -
Zhang et al. [58] - -p- - - -
Huh et al. [69]p-p- - - -
5. Blockchain as a Service for IoT
Blockchain, as a technology, has the ability to provide a service layer that makes it easier to be
integrated with the IoT architecture as described earlier in Figure 5. Blockchain technology and its
features can be implemented to the whole digital realm, not just in cryptocurrency, to strengthen
hundreds of industries by eliminating intermediaries and reduce costs. As cloud computing can
provide di erent services to their users such as Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service
(PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), blockchain can be used as a service that can be used by
dierent IoT applications. This creates what is called Blockchain as a Service (BaaS).
Typically, BaaS refers to creating, controlling, hosting and utilizing numerous features of
blockchain technology such as smart contracts, immutability, tamper-proof, and distributed ledger,
on cloud computing. Hence, blockchain can provide di erent services based on the cloud computing

==== Page 19 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 19 of 27
infrastructure. These services will be required for Fog nodes (IoT devices) to beneﬁt and utilize the
advantages of blockchain technology in the IoT context. BaaS can be implemented for IoT devices
explicitly as PaaS or implicitly as SaaS. While implementing blockchain on-premise is very costly,
as it needs high-cost equipment to build the infrastructure and performance of the distributed ledger
technology [ 80]. BaaS is currently being presented by platforms such as Amazon, Microsoft Azure,
Oracle, IBM Blockchain. The architecture of BaaS is shown in Figure 6.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 27 
technology [80]. BaaS is currently being presented by platforms  such as Amazon, Microsoft Azure, 
Oracle, IBM Blockchain. The architecture of BaaS is shown in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Typica l Architecture of BaaS . 
BaaS can be used to provide several advantages for various IoT applications. For instance, with 
the pre -built cloud platforms, BaaS can be utilized  more  easily and cheaply than on -premise 
implementation. Moreover , since BaaS exists with other cloud services (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), this will 
allow blockchain to be deployed with various cloud and IoT applications and increase the 
interoperability of blockchain technology with these different applications. In addition,  among the 
other benef its BaaS can provide is usability. In other words, implementing a blockchain using one of 
blockchain platforms needs a good level of skills in cryptography and distributed technologies. 
Alternatively, BaaS can be delivered as a full service by the service provider, which allow s the user 
to deploy, control and run blockchain technology without the need for any technical skills.  
6. AI with Blockchain and IoT  
There is no doubt that AI has become one of the topics that ha s significant effects on different 
dom ains. According to the Merriam -Webster dictionary, AI is defined as “the capability of a machine 
to imitate intelligent human behaviour” [81]. The key issue of AI is to produce new models and 
approaches that can provide smart activities. Typically, AI is m ainly based on experiments in which 
the researcher uses the computer system as a lab to execute the validation and testing of their 
hypotheses [82].  
Integrating the IoT with AI has the ability to produce a robust technology that  is able to resolve 
several IoT issues that are associated with the vast volume of data produced by billions of IoT devices. 
Analysing these vast amounts of data with traditional analytics methods will not be viable, instead , 
adopting various AI and machine learning methods will have  the ability to analyse and extract 
meaningful information to  profit from  the full benefits of IoT data [83]. With the massive analytic 
abilities of AI, numerous governments and organizations have started adopting AI methods as a way 
Figure 6. Typical Architecture of BaaS.
BaaS can be used to provide several advantages for various IoT applications. For instance,
with the pre-built cloud platforms, BaaS can be utilized more easily and cheaply than on-premise
implementation. Moreover, since BaaS exists with other cloud services (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), this will allow
blockchain to be deployed with various cloud and IoT applications and increase the interoperability of
blockchain technology with these di erent applications. In addition, among the other beneﬁts BaaS
can provide is usability. In other words, implementing a blockchain using one of blockchain platforms
needs a good level of skills in cryptography and distributed technologies. Alternatively, BaaS can be
delivered as a full service by the service provider, which allows the user to deploy, control and run
blockchain technology without the need for any technical skills.
6. AI with Blockchain and IoT
There is no doubt that AI has become one of the topics that has signiﬁcant e ects on di erent
domains. According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, AI is deﬁned as “the capability of a machine to
imitate intelligent human behaviour” [ 81]. The key issue of AI is to produce new models and approaches
that can provide smart activities. Typically, AI is mainly based on experiments in which the researcher
uses the computer system as a lab to execute the validation and testing of their hypotheses [82].
Integrating the IoT with AI has the ability to produce a robust technology that is able to resolve
several IoT issues that are associated with the vast volume of data produced by billions of IoT devices.

==== Page 20 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 20 of 27
Analysing these vast amounts of data with traditional analytics methods will not be viable, instead,
adopting various AI and machine learning methods will have the ability to analyse and extract
meaningful information to proﬁt from the full beneﬁts of IoT data [ 83]. With the massive analytic
abilities of AI, numerous governments and organizations have started adopting AI methods as a way to
unlock the value of vast amounts of IoT data. Although the invention of fog /edge computing minimized
the response time that allows real-time-based IoT applications to grow signiﬁcantly, adopting AI
approaches will have the capability to provide better performance in a very short response time.
In addition, the integration of AI with IoT can improve security, not only by combat external threat but
also provide an e ective way to predict those threats.
On the other hand, integrating AI with blockchain can have a good e ect on both technologies.
For AI, blockchain can resolve several issues of AI, for example, transparency. AI is a block-box for
users that lack explainability. With the transparency of blockchain by sharing the ledger to all its
nodes and audit trail that provides a clear method for tracking data back to the machine decision
process, this will optimize the trustworthiness of data and AI. In addition, blockchain can improve AI
eectiveness to secure data sharing that allows having more data, which in turn increases training
data and produces better AI models. Moreover, implementing AI with smart contracts can decrease
risk scenarios, as smart contracts are programmed to perform speciﬁc actions when the conditions are
met [5].
For blockchain, AI can resolve some of the limitations of blockchain technology, for instance,
consensus mechanisms. Utilizing AI in PoW or PoS can allow nodes to validate the transactions
quickly and e ciently. Furthermore, AI can improve energy consumption in blockchain since the
mining process needs huge amounts of energy by adopting AI approaches which have demonstrated
eectiveness in improving energy consumption [ 84]. Moreover, adopting AI can resolve the scalability
issues of blockchain by adopting federated learning, as an example, that is able to provide a decentralized
learning system. In addition, although blockchain provides better security over existing technologies,
AI can provide an additional layer of security [84,85].
Although the combination of the three technologies of Blockchain, AI and IoT is still in the
development stage, there are numerous expectations that it could have a signiﬁcant e ect on both the
global economy and the way we live. Integrating these technologies will provide a new perspective on
our future and world. It will create a world where the data of our environment /world are collected
through IoT devices, and analysis and decisions are on our behalf by AI, before being stored and
time-stamped on blockchain as a permanent record that is communicated and shared on our behalf [ 85].
Therefore, there is a need for research to investigate the possible and best ways of integrating these
technologies to experience from their full beneﬁts.
7. Future Research Directions of IoT with Blockchain
Despite the integration of IoT with blockchain has several advantages, it also brings multiple
issues that need to be resolved to obtain the full beneﬁts of both technologies. This section provides a
discussion of future research directions of IoT with blockchain technology.
7.1. Security
The IoT system involves billions of heterogeneous IoT objects that are designed with little security
in the consideration of their manufactures. These devices with poor built-in security procedures are a
simple mark for various security attackers. Although incorporating IoT with blockchain technology
can improve the IoT security by utilizing encryption, immutability, tamper-proof and digital signature
features of blockchain technology, the security is still one of the challenges in implementing an e cient
and e ective IoT system with blockchain [86].
With the increasing adoption of IoT devices and applications, there is an increasing direction
towards expanding the use of wireless networks, especially in industrial domains. Although wireless
communication provides several advantages, it also su ers from several security vulnerabilities like

==== Page 21 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 21 of 27
replaying attacks, passive eavesdropping, and jamming [ 51]. Besides, due to the limitations of resources
in IoT devices, sophisticated and advanced encryption algorithms cannot be utilized in the IoT system.
Meanwhile, blockchain technology has its security weaknesses. For example, there are program defects
of smart contracts and decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) attack [ 73]. Therefore, there is a
need for more research to investigate security issues in IoT and blockchain.
7.2. Scalability
Among the key issues of integrating blockchain with IoT is the ability of the blockchain to scale
and work e ciently with a large-scale network like the IoT. The throughput of transactions per second
can be used to measure the scalability of blockchain against the number of IoT devices. Blockchain
platforms provide poor throughput. For example, Bitcoin can only process seven transactions per
second. Moreover, Ethereum can only process 20 transactions per second. In contrast, VISA can process
nearly 2000 transactions per second and PayPal has a throughput of 170 transactions per second [87].
Therefore, this processing speed cannot address the demands of the IoT which contains billions of
transactions. Moreover, several IoT applications are mainly working with real-time data, with limited
throughput of blockchain, so these applications will face complications in order work e ciently.
Although there are several suggested solutions to resolve the scalability issue of blockchain technology
such as building more scalable consensus algorithms and designing private blockchain for IoT, there is
a need for more research to discover an e cient solution to this issue [88].
7.3. Data Storage
Blockchain is not built to record vast volumes of data. In contrast, the IoT system is considered as
one of the sources of big data. The storage capacity is among the major issues of blockchain technology.
The size of the entire Bitcoin blockchain is around 150 gigabytes, also, the size of the entire Ethereum
Blockchain is around 400 gigabytes. Storing all blocks of the blockchain is required. Without having
all previous blocks, IoT devices cannot validate the transactions produced by other devices. Besides,
historical data are required to produce new transactions [ 89]. Hence, all data created by IoT devices,
which are in Zettabytes, need to be stored on the blockchain, which is not feasible.
In addition, the cost of storing data on the blockchain is very expensive. For instance, the cost
of storing one Gigabyte of data is about USD 200,000 in Ethereum [ 73]. This price is not practical for
various IoT applications and services. Indeed, the convergence of IoT with blockchain removes the
necessity for a centralized server to keep IoT data, however, data storage in the blockchain is very
dicult and expensive. Hence, there is a need for more research to investigate new methods to resolve
this issue.
7.4. Legal Issues
Any new technology such as IoT and blockchain is a ected by regulation and laws of each nation.
Among the issues that stand in the way of integrating IoT and blockchain successfully is the lack of
laws, especially regarding blockchain. Since blockchain provides anonymity features, it is very di cult
to identify the real identities of their users, making it a suitable environment for criminals. Therefore,
dierent countries still have several issues about how to deal with blockchain technology and what are
suitable laws and regulations that can be used to control such a new environment [32].
In the same way, IoT devices collect a huge amount of data about their owners. This information
can include sensitive and conﬁdential data. Most IoT devices share this information with their
manufactures or service providers without having authorization from their owners. This completely
violates the privacy of the devices’ owners [90].
7.5. Limited Resources
Most IoT devices have limited resources in terms of memory, processing power and energy.
For instance , smart meters have low battery power, limited storage and low computing. Integrating

==== Page 22 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 22 of 27
such resource-constrained IoT devices with blockchain technology will face several issues. For instance,
consensus mechanisms need exhaustive processing power and consume intensive energy. Hence,
consensus mechanisms with enormous processing and power demands cannot operate with IoT
devices with limited resources. Moreover, as discussed earlier, the storage capacity is among the
major issues of blockchain, as the total size of Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains are around 150 and
400 gigabytes respectively. However, IoT devices generate data in Zettabytes. Therefore, blockchain is
not suitable for storing IoT data [3,91].
Possible solutions to this issue may be integrating cloud computing with IoT and blockchain to
resolve issues of the resource constraints of IoT objects [ 92]. The main issue will be how to integrate
centralized cloud computing with blockchain to provide e cient resultant technology.
8. Conclusions
With several challenges presented in the centralized IoT architecture, moving the IoT into one
of the distributed ledger technologies may be the correct choice. Among the common types of
distributed ledger technologies is the blockchain. It utilizes a decentralized approach which delivers
better e ciency and eliminates the single point of failure. Moreover, blockchain delivers better
security and data integrity through tamper-proof and immutability features. The integration of
blockchain with IoT can resolve issues of the IoT centralized system and provides a good way for future
developments. Therefore, the objective of this paper was to provide a comprehensive discussion of
integrating the IoT system with blockchain technology. After presenting the basis of IoT and blockchain,
the paper presented a comprehensive discussion of integrating IoT with blockchain by highlighting
how blockchain resolved issues of IoT. Besides, recent studies presenting the convergence of IoT with
blockchain are also presented. Then, blockchain as a service for the IoT is discussed to show how
various features of blockchain technology can be implemented as a service for various IoT applications.
This was followed by discussing the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain. To this end,
future research directions of IoT with blockchain were discussed.
Author Contributions: H.F.A. designed and developed the structure and writing of the manuscript. M.A.A. and
A.G.A. have been involved in drafting the manuscript, while G.W. contributed to the abstract part and reviewed
the completed manuscript before submission. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Internet of Things: State-of-the-art, Challenges, Applications, and Open
Issues. Int. J. Intell. Comput. Res. 2018 ,9, 928–938. [CrossRef]
2. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Alassaﬁ, M.O.; Alshdadi, A.A.; Wills, G.B. Security, Cybercrime and Digital
Forensics for IoT. In Greedoids ; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2019; Volume 174,
pp. 551–577.
3. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Alassaﬁ, M.O.; Wills, G.B. Blockchain with Internet of Things: Beneﬁts, Challenges,
and Future Directions. Int. J. Intell. Syst. Appl. 2018 ,10, 40–48. [CrossRef]
4. Fernandez-Carames, T.M.; Fraga-Lamas, P . A Review on the Use of Blockchain for the Internet of Things.
IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 32979–33001. [CrossRef]
5. Atlam, H.F.; Wills, G.B. Intersections between IoT and distributed ledger. In Advances in Organometallic
Chemistry Volume 60 ; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019; pp. 73–113.
6. Karaﬁloski, E.; Mishev, A. Blockchain solutions for big data challenges: A literature review. In Proceedings
of the IEEE EUROCON 2017—17th International Conference on Smart Technologies, Ohrid, Macedonia,
6–8 July 2017; pp. 763–768. [CrossRef]
7. Reyna, A.; Mart ín, C.; Chen, J.; Soler, E.; D íaz, M. On blockchain and its integration with IoT. Challenges and
opportunities. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018 ,88, 173–190. [CrossRef]

==== Page 23 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 23 of 27
8. ITU. Overview of the Internet of Things. Available online: https: //www.itu.int /ITU-T /recommendations /rec.
aspx?rec =y.2060 (accessed on 13 October 2020).
9. Statista. Internet of Things (IoT) Connected Devices Installed Base Worldwide from 2015 to 2025 (in
Billions). 2018. Available online: https: //www.statista.com /statistics /471264 /iot-number-of-connected-
devices-worldwide /(accessed on 8 October 2020).
10. Atlam, H.F.; Wills, G.B. Technical aspects of blockchain and IoT. In Advances in Organometallic Chemistry
Volume 60 ; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019; pp. 1–39.
11. Hugoson, M.Å. Centralized versus Decentralized Information Systems: A Historical Flashback. IFIP Adv.
Inf. Commun. Technol. 2008 ,303, 106–115.
12. Yin, S.; Lu, Y.; Li, Y. Design and implementation of IoT centralized management model with linkage policy.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Cyberspace Technology (CCT 2015), Beijing, China,
17–18 October 2015; pp. 5–9. [CrossRef]
13. Atlam, H.F.; Wills, G.B. IoT Security, Privacy, Safety and Ethics. In Intelligent Sensing, Instrumentation and
Measurements ; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2019; pp. 123–149.
14. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Internet of Nano Things. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Cloud and Big Data Computing (ICCBDC 2018), Barcelona, Spain, 3–5 August 2018; pp. 71–77.
[CrossRef]
15. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Intelligence of Things: Opportunities & Challenges. In Proceedings of
the 2018 3rd Cloudiﬁcation of the Internet of Things (CIoT), Paris, France, 2–4 July 2018; pp. 1–6.
16. Conoscenti, M.; Vetro, A.; De Martin, J.C. Peer to Peer for Privacy and Decentralization in the Internet
of Things. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE /ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
Companion (ICSE-C), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 20–28 May 2017; pp. 288–290.
17. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Fog Computing and the Internet of Things: A Review. Big Data
Cogn. Comput. 2018 ,2, 10. [CrossRef]
18. Atlam, H.F.; Wills, G.B. An e cient security risk estimation technique for Risk-based access control model
for IoT. Internet Things 2019 ,6, 1–20. [CrossRef]
19. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B.; Daniel, J. Developing an Adaptive Risk-Based Access
Control Model for the Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), Exeter, UK, 21–23 June 2017;
pp. 655–661. [CrossRef]
20. Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. 2009. Available online: https: //git.dhimmel.
com/bitcoin-whitepaper /(accessed on 13 October 2020).
21. Back, A.; Corallo, M.; Dashjr, L.; Friedenbach, M.; Maxwell, G.; Miller, A.; Poelstra, A.; Tim ón, J.; Wuille, P .
Enabling Blockchain Innovations with Pegged Sidechains. 2014. Available online: http: //kevinriggen.com /
ﬁles/sidechains.pdf (accessed on 13 October 2020).
22. Khan, M.A.; Salah, K. IoT security: Review, blockchain solutions, and open challenges. Future Gener.
Comput. Syst. 2018 ,82, 395–411. [CrossRef]
23. Coinbase. What Is the Bitcoin Blockchain? 2017. Available online: https: //support.coinbase.com /customer /
portal /articles /1819222-what-is-the-blockchain (accessed on 8 October 2020).
24. Oxford. Blockchain |Deﬁnition of Blockchain in English by Oxford Dictionaries. 2018. Available online:
https: //en.oxforddictionaries.com /deﬁnition /blockchain (accessed on 8 October 2020).
25. Sultan, K.; Ruhi, U.; Lakhani, R. Conceptualizing Blockchains: Characteristics & Applications. arXiv 2018 ,
arXiv:1806.03693.
26. Sikorski, J.J.; Haughton, J.; Kraft, M. Blockchain technology in the chemical industry: Machine-to-machine
electricity market. Appl. Energy 2017 ,195, 234–246. [CrossRef]
27. Biswas, K.; Muthukkumarasamy, V . Securing Smart Cities Using Blockchain Technology. In Proceedings of
the 2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications and
IEEE 14th International Conference on Smart City and IEEE 2nd International Conference on Data Science
and Systems (HPCC /SmartCity /DSS), Sydney, Australia, 12–14 December 2016; pp. 5–6.
28. Wu, H.; Li, Z.; King, B.; Ben Miled, Z.; Wassick, J.; Tazelaar, J. A Distributed Ledger for Supply Chain Physical
Distribution Visibility. Information 2017 ,8, 137. [CrossRef]

==== Page 24 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 24 of 27
29. Atlam, H.F.; Azad, M.A.; Alassaﬁ, M.O.; Alshdadi, A.A.; Alenezi, A. Risk-Based Access Control Model:
A Systematic Literature Review. Future Internet 2020 ,12, 103. [CrossRef]
30. Heilman, E.; Baldimtsi, F.; Goldberg, S. Blindly Signed Contracts: Anonymous On-Blockchain and
O-Blockchain Bitcoin Transactions. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision; Springer Science and Business
Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2016; Volume 9604, pp. 43–60.
31. Christidis, K.; Devetsikiotis, M. Blockchains and Smart Contracts for the Internet of Things. IEEE Access
2016 ,4, 2292–2303. [CrossRef]
32. Fabiano, N. Internet of Things and Blockchain: Legal Issues and Privacy. The Challenge for a Privacy
Standard. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), Exeter, UK, 21–23 June 2017; pp. 727–734.
33. Ferraro, P .; King, C.; Shorten, R. Distributed Ledger Technology for Smart Cities, the Sharing Economy,
and Social Compliance. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 62728–62746. [CrossRef]
34. Alkurdi, F.; Elgendi, I.; Munasinghe, K.S.; Sharma, D.; Jamalipour, A. Blockchain in IoT Security: A Survey.
In Proceedings of the 28th International Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference (ITNAC),
Sydney, Australia, 21–23 November 2018; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
35. Hang, L.; Kim, D.-H. Design and Implementation of an Integrated IoT Blockchain Platform for Sensing Data
Integrity. Sensors 2019 ,19, 2228. [CrossRef]
36. Panarello, A.; Tapas, N.; Merlino, G.; Longo, F.; Puliaﬁto, A. Blockchain and IoT Integration: A Systematic
Survey. Sensors 2018 ,18, 2575. [CrossRef]
37. Wood, G. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum Proj. Yellow Pap. 2014 ,
151, 1–32.
38. Sun, H.; Hua, S.; Zhou, E.; Pi, B.; Sun, J.; Yamashita, K. Using Ethereum Blockchain in Internet of Things:
A Solution for Electric Vehicle Battery Refueling. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany,
2018; Volume 10974, pp. 3–17.
39. Mehedi, S.K.T.; Shamim, A.A.M.; Miah, M.B.A. Blockchain-based security management of IoT infrastructure
with Ethereum transactions. Iran J. Comput. Sci. 2019 ,2, 189–195. [CrossRef]
40. Samaniego, M.; Deters, R. Hosting Virtual IoT Resources on Edge-Hosts with Blockchain. In Proceedings
of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (CIT), Nadi, Fiji,
8–10 December 2016; pp. 116–119.
41. Cachin, C. Architecture of the Hyperledger Blockchain Fabric. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Distributed
Cryptocurrencies and Consensus Ledgers, Chicago, Illinois, 25–29 July 2016.
42. Franke, L.A.; Schletz, M.; Salomo, S. Designing a Blockchain Model for the Paris Agreement’s Carbon Market
Mechanism. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 1068. [CrossRef]
43. Pongnumkul, S.; Siripanpornchana, C.; Thajchayapong, S. Performance Analysis of Private Blockchain
Platforms in Varying Workloads. In Proceedings of the 2017 26th International Conference on Computer
Communication and Networks (ICCCN), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 31 July–3 August 2017; pp. 1–6.
44. Raschendorfer, A.; Mörzinger, B.; Steinberger, E.; Pelzmann, P .; Oswald, R.; Stadler, M.; Bleicher, F. On IOTA
as a potential enabler for an M2M economy in manufacturing. Procedia CIRP 2019 ,79, 379–384. [CrossRef]
45. Shabandri, B.; Maheshwari, P . Enhancing IoT Security and Privacy Using Distributed Ledgers with IOTA
and the Tangle. In Proceedings of the 2019 6th International Conference on Signal Processing and Integrated
Networks (SPIN), Noida, India, 7–8 March 2019; pp. 1069–1075.
46. Elsts, A.; Mitskas, E.; Oikonomou, G. Distributed Ledger Technology and the Internet of Things.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Blockchain-enabled Networked Sensor Systems—BlockSys’18,
Shenzhen, China, 4 November 2018; pp. 7–12.
47. Sengupta, J.; Ruj, S.; Das Bit, S. A Comprehensive Survey on Attacks, Security Issues and Blockchain Solutions
for IoT and IIoT. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2020 ,149, 102481. [CrossRef]
48. Banerjee, M.; Lee, J.; Choo, K.-K.R. A blockchain future for internet of things security: A position paper.
Digit. Commun. Netw. 2018 ,4, 149–160. [CrossRef]
49. Dorri, A.; Kanhere, S.S.; Jurdak, R. Blockchain in internet of things: Challenges and Solutions. arXiv 2016 ,
arXiv:1608.05187.

==== Page 25 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 25 of 27
50. Polyzos, G.C.; Fotiou, N. Blockchain-Assisted Information Distribution for the Internet of Things.
In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse and Integration (IRI),
San Diego, CA, USA, 4–6 August 2017; pp. 75–78.
51. Karthikeyyan, P .; Velliangiri, S.; S, I.T.J. Review of Blockchain based IoT application and its security issues.
In Proceedings of the 2019 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Computing, Instrumentation and
Control Technologies (ICICICT), Kannur, India, 5–6 July 2019; pp. 6–11. [CrossRef]
52. Fotiou, N.; Siris, V .A.; Polyzos, G.C. Interacting with the Internet of Things Using Smart Contracts and
Blockchain Technologies. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2018; Volume 11342,
pp. 443–452.
53. Tandon, A. An empirical analysis of using blockchain technology with internet of things and its application.
Int. J. Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng. 2019 ,8, 1470–1475.
54. Zhu, X.; Badr, Y. Identity Management Systems for the Internet of Things: A Survey towards Blockchain
Solutions. Sensors 2018 ,18, 4215. [CrossRef]
55. Kadam, S.B.; John, S.K. Blockchain Integration with Low-Power Internet of Things Devices ; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 183–211.
56. Dukkipati, C.; Zhang, Y.; Cheng, L.C. Decentralized, BlockChain Based Access Control Framework for the
Heterogeneous Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the Third ACM Workshop on Attribute-Based Access
Control—ABAC’18, Tempe, AZ, USA, 19–21 March 2018; pp. 61–69.
57. Novo, O. Blockchain Meets IoT: An Architecture for Scalable Access Management in IoT. IEEE Int. Things J.
2018 ,5, 1184–1195. [CrossRef]
58. Zhang, Y.; Kasahara, S.; Shen, Y.; Jiang, X.; Wan, J. Smart Contract-Based Access Control for the Internet of
Things. IEEE Int. Things J. 2018 ,6, 1594–1605. [CrossRef]
59. Badr, S.; Gomaa, I.; Abd-Elrahman, E. Multi-tier Blockchain Framework for IoT-EHRs Systems. Procedia
Comput. Sci. 2018 ,141, 159–166. [CrossRef]
60. Mishra, S.; Tyagi, A.K. Intrusion Detection in Internet of Things (IoTs) Based Applications using Blockchain
Technolgy. In Proceedings of the 2019 Third International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile,
Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), Palladam, India, 12–14 December 2019; pp. 123–128.
61. Patil, A.S.; Tama, B.A.; Park, Y.; Rhee, K.H. A Framework for Blockchain Based Secure Smart Green House
Farming. In Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering ; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany,
2017; Volume 474, pp. 1162–1167.
62. Lin, J.; Shen, Z.; Zhang, A.; Chai, Y. Blockchain and IoT based food traceability system. Int. J. Inf. Technol.
2018 ,24, 1–16.
63. Dogo, E.M.; Salami, A.F.; Nwulu, N.I.; Aigbavboa, C.O. Blockchain and Internet of Things-Based Technologies
for Intelligent Water Management System ; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2019;
pp. 129–150.
64. Kamilaris, A.; Fonts, A.; Prenafeta-Bold ´, F.X. The rise of blockchain technology in agriculture and food
supply chains. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2019 ,91, 640–652. [CrossRef]
65. Rejeb, A.; Keogh, J.G.; Treiblmaier, H. Leveraging the Internet of Things and Blockchain Technology in
Supply Chain Management. Future Int. 2019 ,11, 161. [CrossRef]
66. Huckle, S.; Bhattacharya, R.; White, M.; Belo , N. Internet of Things, Blockchain and Shared Economy
Applications. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016 ,98, 461–466. [CrossRef]
67. Zhang, Y.; Wen, J. The IoT electric business model: Using blockchain technology for the internet of things.
Peer-To-Peer Netw. Appl. 2016 ,10, 983–994. [CrossRef]
68. Ruta, M.; Scioscia, F.; Ieva, S.; Capurso, G.; Di Sciascio, E. Regular research paper: Blockchain, Service-Oriented
Architecture, Semantic Web of Things, Semantic Web. J. Int.Things 2017 ,3, 46–61.
69. Huh, S.; Cho, S.; Kim, S. Managing IoT devices using blockchain platform. In Proceedings of the 2017
19th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), Bongpyeong, Korea,
19–22 February 2017; pp. 464–467. [CrossRef]
70. Conoscenti, M.; Vetro, A.; De Martin, J.C. Blockchain for the Internet of Things: A systematic literature review.
In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE /ACS 13th International Conference of Computer Systems and Applications
(AICCSA), Agadir, Morocco, 29 November–2 December 2016; pp. 1–6.

==== Page 26 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 26 of 27
71. Lo, S.K.; Liu, Y.; Chia, S.Y.; Xu, X.; Lu, Q.; Zhu, L.; Ning, H. Analysis of Blockchain Solutions for IoT:
A Systematic Literature Review. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 58822–58835. [CrossRef]
72. Abadi, F.A.; Ellul, J.; Azzopardi, G. The Blockchain of Things, Beyond Bitcoin: A Systematic Review.
In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom)
and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), Halifax, NS, Canada, 30 July–3 August 2018; pp. 1666–1672. [CrossRef]
73. Wang, X.; Zha, X.; Ni, W.; Liu, R.P .; Guo, Y.J.; Niu, X.; Zheng, K. Survey on blockchain for Internet of Things.
Comput. Commun. 2019 ,136, 10–29. [CrossRef]
74. Thakore, R.; Vaghashiya, R.; Patel, C.; Doshi, N. Blockchain—Based IoT: A Survey. Procedia Comput. Sci.
2019 ,155, 704–709. [CrossRef]
75. Ferrag, M.A.; Maglaras, L.; Janicke, H. Blockchain and Its Role in the Internet of Things. In Strategic Innovative
Marketing and Tourism ; Springer Proceedings in Business and Economics, Kavoura, A., Kefallonitis, E.,
Giovanis, A., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 151–157. [CrossRef]
76. Dai, H.-N.; Zheng, Z.; Zhang, Y. Blockchain for Internet of Things: A Survey. IEEE Int. Things J. 2019 ,6,
8076–8094. [CrossRef]
77. Marouﬁ, M.; Abdolee, R.; Tazekand, B.M. On the Convergence of Blockchain and Internet of Things (IoT)
Technologies. J. Strat. Innov. Sustain. 2019 ,14, 1–11. [CrossRef]
78. Alamri, M.; Jhanjhi, N.Z.; Humayun, M. Blockchain for Internet of Things (IoT) Research Issues Challenges
& Future Directions: A Review. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Netw. Secur. 2019 ,19, 244–258.
79. Lao, L.; Li, Z.; Hou, S.; Xiao, B.; Guo, S.; Yang, Y. A Survey of IoT Applications in Blockchain Systems. ACM
Comput. Surv. 2020 ,53, 1–32. [CrossRef]
80. Singh, J.; Michels, J.D. Blockchain as a Service (BaaS): Providers and Trust. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW), London, UK, 23–27 April 2018;
pp. 67–74.
81. Artiﬁcial Intelligence |Deﬁnition of Artiﬁcial Intelligence by Merriam-Webster. Available online: https:
//www.merriam-webster.com /dictionary /artiﬁcialintelligence (accessed on 24 April 2020).
82. Reddy, R. The challenge of artiﬁcial intelligence. Comput. Long. Beach. Calif 1996 ,29, 86–98. [CrossRef]
83. Alzahrani, A.G.; Alenezi, A.; Atlam, H.; Wills, G.B. A Framework for Data Sharing between Healthcare
Providers using Blockchain. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Internet of Things,
Big Data and Security (IoTBDS 2020), Prague, Czech Republic, 7–9 May 2020; pp. 349–358. [CrossRef]
84. Baldominos, A.; Saez, Y. Coin.AI: A Proof-of-Useful-Work Scheme for Blockchain-Based Distributed Deep
Learning. Entropy 2019 ,21, 723. [CrossRef]
85. Bilodeau, S. Massive Computing for Bitcoin Mining and AI. Available online: https: //towardsdatascience.
com/energy-smart-bitcoin-mining-dd7bd2d2a3fa (accessed on 8 October 2020).
86. Roman, R.; Zhou, J.; Lopez, J. On the features and challenges of security and privacy in distributed internet
of things. Comput. Netw. 2013 ,57, 2266–2279. [CrossRef]
87. Samaniego, M.; Jamsrandorj, U.; Deters, R. Blockchain as a Service for IoT. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData),
Chengdu, China, 15–18 December 2016; pp. 433–436.
88. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B.; Daniel, J. Fuzzy Logic with Expert Judgment to Implement an Adaptive
Risk-Based Access Control Model for IoT. Mobile Net. Appl. 2019 , 1–13. [CrossRef]
89. Alenezi, A.; Zulkipli, N.H.N.; Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. The Impact of Cloud Forensic Readiness
on Security. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Services Science,
Porto, Portugal, 24–26 April 2017; pp. 539–545.
90. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Alharthi, A.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Integration of Cloud Computing with Internet
of Things: Challenges and Open Issues. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), Exeter, UK, 21–23 June 2017;
pp. 670–675. [CrossRef]

==== Page 27 ====
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 27 of 27
91. Ziegeldorf, J.H.; Matzutt, R.; Henze, M.; Grossmann, F.; Wehrle, K. Secure and anonymous decentralized
Bitcoin mixing. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018 ,80, 448–466. [CrossRef]
92. Xu, R.; Chen, Y.; Blasch, E.; Chen, G. BlendCAC: A Smart Contract Enabled Decentralized Capability-Based
Access Control Mechanism for the IoT. Computers 2018 ,7, 39. [CrossRef]
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aliations.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

