==== Page 1 ====
Proceedings of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering International Congress 2020 
CSME Congress 2020 
June 21-24, 2020, Charlottetown, PE, Canada 
 
 
A REVIEW OF ESSENTIAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR AUTONOMOUS A ND SEMI-
AUTONOMOUS ARTICULATED HEAVY vehicles 
Amir Rahimi*, Yuping He 
Department of Automotive, Mechanical and Manufactur ing, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, Canada 
*amir.rahimi@ontariotechu.ca 
 
 
Abstract —To increase the safety of articulated heavy 
vehicles (AHVs), attention has been paid to explori ng active 
vehicle safety systems (AVSSs), e.g., anti-lock bra king 
systems. These active vehicle safety technologies a re 
classified as ‘reactive safety systems’, designed t o react to the 
current vehicle state. These systems are effective,  but do not 
consider the effect of driver error. The main cause  of traffic 
accidents is linked to human errors. A resolution t o the 
problem is autonomous driving, which removes human 
factors from the control loop.  There will be a tra nsition 
period, during which most vehicles have some capabi lities of 
autonomous driving. Since the late 1990s, lane depa rture 
warning and adaptive cruise control systems have be en 
proposed. These technologies are classified as ‘pre dictive 
safety systems’ (PSSs), considering not only the cu rrent 
vehicle state, but also the predicted vehicle state  and 
environmental hazards. For passenger vehicles, seve ral PSSs 
have been investigated. These PSSs are featured wit h semi-
autonomous driving functions. AHVs represent a 7.5 times 
higher risk than passenger cars in highway operatio ns. 
However, much less attention has been paid to explo ring the 
PSSs for AHVs. This paper reviews the current statu s of 
essential technologies proposed and examined for 
autonomous and semi-autonomous AHVs. The pros and c ons 
of the technologies are discussed and analyzed. As a result of 
the review, future research efforts are identified.   
Keywords-autonomous; semi-autonomous; state-of-the- art 
automated driving technologies; articulated heavy v ehicle. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The automotive industry is moving towards a new era  of 
autonomous ground vehicles (AGVs). The term AGV ref ers 
to a car that can do the navigation during driving through a 
highway or city traffic and even off-road paths wit hout human 
intervention. With software, computers, sensors and  
connected networks being increasingly used, the des ign of 
such vehicles is undergoing significant changes. 
Worldwide around 1.25 million people are killed per  year 
in road vehicle accidents [1]. Table 1 demonstrates  statistical 
data regarding the car crashes only in the US and C anada in 
2016. 93 per cent of serious crashes are because of  human 
errors. Considering the fact that in 2016 more than  37,000 people were killed in around 32,000 fatal motor veh icle 
accidents in North America [2], and also economic c osts of 
crashes are unbelievably high (277 billion dollars in the US), 
the lifesaving and financial benefits of driving as sistance 
technologies become undeniable. AGVs have the poten tial to 
decline human errors from the accidents, thereby le ading 
considerably protecting passengers, drivers and ped estrians 
and reducing the financial costs. Utilizing Advance d Driver 
Assistance Systems (ADAS), e.g. Adaptive Cruise Con trol 
(ACC), Traffic Jam Assistant (TJA) and Collision Av oidance 
Systems, fatal car crashes decreased in Europe betw een 2001 
and 2015 by 48% [3]. Figure 1 presents history of d riving 
assistance functions application and their potentia l future 
evolution.  
TABLE I.  THE U.S.  AND CANADA MOTOR VEHICLE CRASHES AND HUMAN 
FACTOR INVOLVEMENT [2][4] 
criteria  U.S.  Canada  
Total crashes per year 5.5 million 290,000 
Human cause s as main factor  93%  80%  
Economic costs of crashes  $277 billion  $37 billion  
Total fatal and injurious crashes per year 2.22 million  165,140 
Fatal crashes per year  32,367  1,895  
Total fatal and injurious crashes per year 
involving a heavy truck  96129 12000 
 
As the safety merits of automated driving are param ount, 
governments urgently need to develop vehicle safety  
guidelines for the design of AGVs [5]. The guidelin es are 
expected to identify design aspects for manufacture rs to 
consider when developing, testing and deploying suc h 
vehicles. Recently, many design methods for autonom ous 
vehicles have been proposed, but the literature foc uses on 
semiautonomous and autonomous driving of single-uni t 
vehicles, e.g., cars. Heavy vehicles exhibit unique  lateral 
dynamic characteristics. For example, the static ro ll-over limit 
for heavy trucks can be as low as 0.35g, whereas th e rollover 
limit for passenger cars is typically 1.1g [6]. In 1997, the US 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration repo rted 
more than 15,000 rollover accidents of commercial v ehicles, 
of which 9400 were rollovers of AHVs [7]. On the ot her hand, 
mortality due to AHV accidents in the US in 2017 ro se to 5.8 
per cent compared with 2016 [8]. However, little at tention has 
been paid to autonomous driving for these large veh icles. 

==== Page 2 ====
Figure 1.  Past and future evolution of driving assistance fun ctions 
from market perspective, reproduced from [9] 
To increase vehicle safety, AVSSs, e.g., vehicle st ability 
control, have been commercialized [10]. These AVSSs  can be 
classified as reactive safety systems (RSSs), desig ned to react 
to the current vehicle state [11]. Although RSSs ar e effective 
in increasing safety, they do not consider the effe ct of driver 
mistakes. As noted earlier, human errors cause the vast 
majority of traffic collisions [5], and the potenti al resolution 
to the human error problem is autonomous driving [1 2], 
removing human factors from the control loop. The m ass 
deployment of autonomous driving systems has been h indered 
due to the lack of formal approaches for verifying the safety 
of such systems in arbitrary situations [7][8]. Aut omated 
driving industry has come a long distance so far, a nd still there 
will be a long transition period, in which most veh icles have 
some capabilities of autonomous driving. Figure 2 d epicts a 
brief timeline of vehicles automated driving and sa fety 
functions development. Since the late 1990s, advanc ed driver 
assistance systems, e.g., lane departure prevention , have been 
developed. These systems are classified as 'predict ive safety 
systems' (PSSs), considering not only current vehic le state, but 
also predicted vehicle state and hazards. The last two decades have witnessed extensive research of semi-autonomou s 
vehicles, which are human driven vehicles with auto nomous 
driving capabilities [13]. These vehicles are level  2/3 
automated vehicles [14]. 
To date the research activities in semi-autonomous and 
autonomous driving have mainly been dedicated to pa ssenger 
cars. Heavy goods vehicles represent a 7.5 times hi gher risk 
than passenger cars in highway operations [15]. How ever, 
much less attention has been paid to exploring thes e PSSs for 
articulated vehicles and in particular, AHVs. Recen tly, few 
studies tackled autonomous driving for articulated 
construction vehicles [16]–[18], articulated vehicl es with 
automated reverse parking [17], and construction tr uck [18]. 
These autonomous systems were designed only conside ring 
low-speed trajectory planning and tracking based on  
kinematic control, neglecting the high-speed dynami c 
behaviors of articulated vehicles, e.g. trailer swa y, 
jackknifing, and rollover. The interactions of huma n-machine 
have been explored for improving the passive steeri ng of 
articulated vehicles [19][20]. But the interactions  have not 
been considered in autonomous steering. In the lite rature, 
there is no published study on semi-autonomous driv ing for 
articulated vehicles and, especially, AHVs [6]. 
This paper reviews some of the academic researches and 
technological developments in the area of autonomou s and 
semi-autonomous heavy vehicles with a focus on AHVs  over 
the recent years. Section 2 briefly introduces the required 
background knowledge for AHVs and autonomy in gener al. 
Section 3 will describe the path following as the m ain strategy 
in automated driving and the relevant control strat egies 
employed. Section 4 reviews the sensor technology n eeded for 
autonomous driving. In Section 5 some future direct ions 
regarding autonomous and semi-autonomous AHVs will be 
described. Finally, conclusions of current study ar e drawn in 
Section 6. 
 
Figure 2.     Vehicles automated driving timeline 


==== Page 3 ====
II.  BACKGROUND  
A.  Autonomy classification and necessary modules 
The ground vehicle automation needs a standard set of 
terminology and regulations with a taxonomy and def initions 
to coordinate all the efforts made in this field. I n 2014 SAE 
International introduced new standard J3016 to faci litate 
collaboration and simplify communication within tec hnical 
and policy domains. Figure 3 summarizes the levels of driving 
automation based on this standard. 
 
Figure 3.  Levels of driving automation, reproduced from [14] 
According to [21], an autonomous vehicle system 
accounts for three basic modules. 
 Sensing and prediction: to prepare real time data t o 
make the system capable to recognize instantaneous 
vehicle location and surrounding environment and 
produce row data for the system to process. 
 Planning: to utilize the provided data to design th e 
safe and feasible path to follow 
 Control: to adopt appropriate control strategies to  lead 
the vehicle to the desired path. 
After designing the appropriate control strategy, a ctuators 
work as the final stage of automated driving. In a conventional 
vehicle driver adjusts the speed by depressing the gas pedal or 
braking pedal, and turning the steering wheel to dr ive the 
vehicle in the correct and safe path. Differently, autonomous 
vehicles need some actuators to convert the input e lectrical 
signals from the controller to mechanical movements  to 
control the steering, engine throttle and so on. 
B.  Types of AHVs 
As mentioned earlier an AHV is a combination of two  or 
more rigid vehicles units, which are connected to e ach other 
by mechanical couplings, termed hitches, at articul ation 
points. Figure 4 shows important units of AHV [22].  
The two most popular AHVs use just one trailer, i.e ., the 
tractor-semitrailer and the truck-full trailer. Mul ti-trailer 
combinations are usually formed by connecting one o r more 
additional trailers to a tractor-semitrailer combin ation. 
Combinations with more than one trailer are often n amed 
vehicle trains. They are referred to as A-, B-, or C-trains 
relying on the type of coupling between trailers [2 2]. Figure 5 
illustrates the three configurations.  
Figure 4.  Different types of vehicle units and couplings used  in AHVs [22] 
A-train   B-train    
C-train  
Figure 5.  different ways that two trailers are hooked to one another in North 
America  [23] . 
C.  Maneuvering characteristics of AHVs 
Some regulations for AHVs are established based on 
performance-based standards (PBSs). These regulatio ns 
incorporate specific performance criteria in which required 
level of performance is quantified [6]. One instanc e of 
performance-based characteristics defined for AHVs 
movement in lateral and longitudinal directions can  be found 
in [24] and are classified in two categories. 
 The characteristics for longitudinal direction 
including startability, gradeability, acceleration 
capability, stopping distance, and down-grade 
holding capability.  
 The characteristics for lateral direction comprisin g 
rearward amplification (RWA), swept path width 
(SPW), high-speed transient off-tracking (HSTO), 
high-speed steady-state off- tracking (HSSO), yaw 
damping coefficient (YDC), straight line off-tracki ng 
(SLO), lateral clearance time (LCT), steady-state 
rollover threshold (SRT), and deceleration capabili ty 
in a turn.  
The most significant lateral characteristics for hi gh-speed 
maneuvering are RWA, HSTO, HSSO and YDC, which are 
described as follows [6]: 
 RWA is the relationship between the maximum 
motion of the first and last vehicle units during a  
specified steering maneuver and vehicle speed. It 


==== Page 4 ====
denotes the increased risk of a semi-trailer roll-o ver 
or swing-out. The maximum rearward amplification 
allowed by the Australian PBS is 5.7 times the stat ic 
rollover threshold expressed in g’s where g = 9.81 
m/s 2.  
 The off-tracking characteristics, HSTO and HSSO, 
describe the lateral deviation between the path of the 
front axle and the path of the most severely off-
tracking axle of the semi-trailer. Examples of HSTO  
and HSSO are given in Figures 6 and 7. These 
measures indicate the additional space needed for t he 
semi-trailer in a specific steering maneuver and 
vehicle speed. 
 The YDC is the damping ratio of the least damped 
articulation joint’s angle during free-yaw oscillat ions 
of the vehicle combination, after a specific steeri ng 
maneuver and vehicle speed. A longer decay time 
might result in higher driver workload and increase d 
risk of the safety of other road users. 
 
Figure 6.  Lane-change maneuver illustrating HSTO, RA and YDC [6] 
 
Figure 7.  Steady -state  maneuver illustrating HSSO  [6]  
D.  Vehicle models used in automated driving controller  
design 
During the decades of vehicle lateral dynamics stud ies, 
linear handling model known as bicycle model has be en used 
predominantly. Vehicle models usually presume the v ehicle 
body as a rigid body with concentrated sprung mass at the 
center of gravity. A commonly used model that only considers 
lateral and yaw motions is known as a handling mode l. There 
are three major vehicle models including geometric,  kinematic 
and dynamic models. In geometric model, only the 
geometrical dimensions of the vehicle are considere d. 
Kinematic model just considers the motion of vehicl e in terms 
of acceleration, velocity and position. Dynamic mod el, 
differently, considers the vehicle motion in terms of its 
internal forces, inertia and energy properties.  
Models used for tractor-semitrailers vary in a vast  range of 
complexity from large multi-body combinations with numerous degrees of freedom, which demand costly 
calculations compared against simple 3-DOF bicycle models 
[25]. In many of the published research works such as [7], 
[26]–[28] a simplified 5-DOF, 3-wheel linear model has been 
used. This simple model seems quite sufficient for analyzing 
lateral stability of a tractor-semitrailer in path following 
control strategy design which is an integral part o f any 
autonomous AHV design. Figure 8 shows a scheme of t his 
model. 
 
Figure 8.  Schematic representation of the AHV model 
E.  Advantages of autonomous AHVs and barriers to 
implementation 
Table 1 highlights the magnitude of motor vehicle c rashes 
in North America and indicates that a majority numb er of 
crashes happen because of human errors including in attention, 
distraction, or speeding. Besides, it denotes that a considerable 
part of the fatal crashes involves heavy vehicles c omprising 
AHVs. As a result, the more the heavy vehicle utili ze 
autonomy, the less fatal crashes would occur. Poor weather, 
such as fog and snow, is another challenging situat ion for 
drivers, which can be tackled by using sensors and artificial 
intelligence as an essential part of automated driv ing in AHVs. 
Apart from making AHVs safer, researchers believe u sing just 
ACC function as a primitive feature of autonomy can  increase 
fuel economy and traffic congestion by 23-39% and 8 -13% 
respectively, for all vehicles in the highway trave l stream [29]. 
Furthermore, it is estimated that 5-20% of all driv ing is either 
autonomous or semi-autonomous by 2025 and the resul ting 
global financial impact would be $200 billion to $1 .9 trillion 
[30]. 
 The first barrier on the way of large-scale market  of 
autonomous AHVs is the cost, due to the technology that 
requires additional new sensors, communication netw orks, 
navigation devices, and specific software design. F or 
example, LiDAR systems on top of other sensors cost  up to 
$70,000 for long-range LiDAR, which seems to be vit al at 
least for AHVs current automated driving technology . Other 
issues include lack of legislations pertaining driv ing 
autonomous AHVs, restrictions in giving certificati on to AVs, 
arising insurance and liability concerns and worrie s about 
electronic security, computer hackers and terrorist  
applications [29]. 


==== Page 5 ====
III.  PATH FOLLOWING AND LATERAL CONTROL OF AHV S 
There are two main goals for AHVs control within an  
autonomous and semi-autonomous driving [31]. To con trol 
both the longitudinal and lateral dynamics using th e embedded 
control system with sophisticated software that are  actually 
codes written to do the job. The control algorithms  involve a 
higher level of control (strategy control) and a lo wer level of 
control (vehicle control). The former makes decisio ns based 
on the data received from the infrastructure and ot her vehicles 
by which are affected through maneuver. The later i ncludes 
vehicle steering, throttle and brake control. 
Longitudinal dynamics control of AHVs mainly refers  to 
regulating vehicle speed in order to retain enough space 
between vehicles. For implementing a successful lon gitudinal 
control four types of data are needed. Speed and ac celeration 
of the host vehicle, speed and acceleration of the preceding 
vehicle, the distance from the leading vehicle and in the case 
of platooning speed and acceleration of the first v ehicle. 
Lateral control of AHVs is to drive the vehicle clo se to the 
center of the desired lane, which includes not only  straight 
road section, but also curved path, and roundabout way (lane-
keeping maneuver). Under such complicated operating  
conditions, rollover is a common accident that AHVs  may 
experience during lane changes or cornering maneuve rs, 
which often causes harsh results, e.g., considerabl e financial 
costs and fatalities. This is usually because of hi gher center of 
gravity (CG) of heavy vehicles compared with passen ger cars. 
Hence, effective control strategies like active sus pension 
control, active steering and active braking should be employed 
to increase the roll stability. 
Path following is a vital issue for autonomous driv ing. The 
path following control for AGVs involves maneuverin g the 
vehicle autonomously through the steering control. This 
targets to help the vehicle follow the desirable pa th defined by 
the navigation system via sensors. There are differ ent 
strategies for the lateral control of AHVs during p ath 
following. Some researchers proposed the use of an active 
trailer steering system to enhance the path followi ng and 
stability control of AGVs. 
For example, in a study [32] a model predictive con troller 
was utilized to make the vehicle follow a path and yaw angle 
predicted for the trailer while minimizing the side  slip angle 
for different vehicle conditions. The designed cont roller 
efficiently improved the lateral stability and off- tracking of 
the trailer through numerical simulations. In anoth er study 
[33] a LQR-based active trailer steering controller  designed to 
improve tractor-semitrailer lateral stability at hi gh speeds and 
the maneuverability in low speeds. The researchers used a 3-
DOF linear model and a simulated annealing particle  swarm 
optimization algorithm based on TruckSim-Simulink 
environment and the results were interesting. 
A lateral-longitudinal control method was proposed to 
avoid jackknifing during automated steering [34]. T he 
jackknifing was prevented by employing an anti-wind up 
mechanism in that controlled the articulation angle  from 
exceeding the limit. Reference [35] reported a rese arch work, 
in which a control strategy adopted to make both tr actor and semitrailer of an AHV follow different paths at dif ferent 
vehicle speeds and in the presence of external dist urbances. 
They used nonlinear kinematics-based controller for  low 
speed, while it was not appropriate for high speeds  because of 
high changes in side-slip characteristics. Hence, t hey 
combined both low and high-speed controllers using a speed-
dependent gain in mid speed range. The simulation r esults 
proved an improvement in maneuverability at low spe eds and 
an enhancement of stability at high speeds. 
In another research work [36], a new lane-keeping 
controller was introduced to keep an AHV position ( lateral 
and angular) aligned with the lane, as well as main taining its 
stability in critical situation. They utilized an o ptimal control 
technique and a fuzzy supervisory strategy to adapt  the 
controller to the various driving behaviors of driv ers. The 
system was basically a human driven AHV which react ed 
appropriately in a case that the AHV deviated from the desired 
path. Different testing maneuvers were used to show  the 
effectiveness of the controllers designed. 
A controller design was proposed to deal with the p ath 
following issue for articulated robotic vehicles, w hich had 
been equipped with a number of off-axle hitched tra ilers [37]. 
The controller was highly scalable nonlinear cascad e-like that 
did not require to set the shortest distance to an ideal path. 
Instead, it used a segment-platooning reference pat h 
(introduced by the researchers) to ensure asymptoti c path 
following. Empirical results exhibited the small se nsitivity of 
designed controller to the parameters uncertainties . 
In another research study [38], a new sliding mode control 
(SMC) strategy was introduced to do the trajectory tracking 
for articulated vehicles. The designed controller t argeted to 
attain better tracking capability while minimizing the tracking 
error and declining the chattering phenomenon. The SMC was 
derived based on a nonlinear kinematic model of the  
articulated vehicle, and the stability of the contr ol strategy was 
tested using the Lyapunov’s stability method. Final ly, the 
investigators evaluated their controller performanc e in various 
paths scenarios using a small-scale model. 
As for the rollover prevention in heavy vehicles, r eference 
[39] documented a combined active anti-roll bar (AA RB) and 
active braking controller. Reference [40] introduce d a linear 
quadratic static output feedback control strategy u sing both 
AARB and electronic stability program to handle the  rollover 
issue more efficiently.  
In one research study [41], a MPC-based control str ategy 
was designed to improve the roll stability in a pat h following 
maneuver. While the brake and steering interconnect ed in the 
upper layer controller (UPC), the simulation result s 
demonstrated that this multilayer control structure  guarantees 
the path tracking with small error. Researchers int roduced an 
AARB including four electronic servo-valve hydrauli c 
actuator to actively control a heavy vehicle by sol ving a LQ 
optimization problem where the front steering consi dered to 
be an uncertain disturbance [42]. The simulation re sults in the 
frequency and time domains confirmed a remarkable 
improvement in terms of rollover stability. 

==== Page 6 ====
A novel roll stability control strategy for heavy v ehicles, 
termed dynamic game theory-based path following act ive 
anti-roll (AAR) interactive shared control strategy  was 
proposed in [43]. It was indeed a cooperative path following-
roll stability controller that had two players, i.e . AARB and 
AS, determined via a closed-loop feedback Nash equi librium 
theory. Simulations based on various driving scenar ios were 
conducted to investigate the effectiveness of the m ethod. 
IV.  SENSOR TECHNOLOGY FOR AUTONOMOUS AHV S 
The way by which an autonomous vehicle learns about  its 
environment is through its sensors. Sensors should be capable 
of providing both perceptive and locational view of  the 
environment so that the vehicle can make decisions in real-
time. Sensors are utilized to detect roads, traffic  participants 
including vehicles and pedestrians, obstacles throu gh their 
paths and the peripheral environment. In most situa tions these 
sensors should be capable of determining the distan ce between 
the vehicle and other adjacent objects as well as t heir relative 
velocities.  
Generally, there is no difference in type of sensor s used for 
passenger vehicles and AHVs. Differences are mostly  related 
to the arrangement of sensors and their number. For  instance, 
one of the differences is the spots on the body of vehicles in 
which the sensors should be embedded because of the  variety 
in size, application and level of autonomy of diffe rent classes 
of vehicles. There are many types of sensors design ed to be 
used in autonomous driving, some of them are more c ommon 
which can be classified in two main categories as 
demonstrated in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9.  Main sensors employed in automated driving  
LiDAR (Light Detecting & Ranging) is a surveying 
method that measures distance to a target by illumi nating the 
target with laser light and measuring the reflected  light with a 
sensor. Differences in laser return times and wavel engths can 
then be used to make digital 3-D representations of  the target. 
A significant parameter of LiDAR sensors is the dis tance 
range which they can detect to recognize the object s. Weather 
condition, e.g., level of humidity and the reflecti vity level of 
object, affects the range detection considerably [4 4]. Today's 
LiDAR sensors are capable of measuring distances at  rates 
greater than 150 kilohertz (150,000 pulses per seco nd) and 
would be classified as a long-range sensor with a r ange of over 
250m or short range [45]. 
The full potential of these sensors has not been fu lly 
explored yet due to their high cost and low availab ility. They are complex mechanical mirror systems that offer fu ll 360° 
visibility and can cost a fortune. Today, there is a shift towards 
the development of lower cost LiDAR sensors that ar e more 
appropriate for extensive use. For example, solid-s tate LiDAR 
and infrared LiDAR [46]. Figure 10 illustrates sens or 
technologies including LiDAR, which can be used to make an 
AHV capable of driving itself. 
 
Figure 10.  Sensor technologies which can be used in autonomous AHV  [47]  
Radar is a technology that uses electromagnetic rad iation 
to measure the distance, angle and velocity of obje cts. It works 
on the principle of radio frequencies that can be u sed in several 
frequency bands. (e.g. 24 GHz, 79 GHz) [46]. Higher  
resolution of detection is achieved by higher frequ encies, and 
it allows the system to differentiate among many ob jects in the 
environment. Unlike LiDAR, radar has the virtue of being less 
affected by weather condition [44].  
Radar sensors are classified in short-range to mid- range 
from 50 m to 100-150 m and long-range capable of de tecting 
objects in 250 m distance [46]. As these kinds of s ensors are 
much cheaper than LiDAR ones and able to detect obj ects in 
all weather conditions, radar sensors are more suit able for 
autonomous driving purposes. However, their small f ield of 
view (FOV), which is usually 45 , is deemed as a negative 
point compared with LiDAR. The important benefit of  radars 
is that they are capable of determining the relativ e velocity of 
the observed objects which is advantageous for auto matic 
braking or adaptive cruise control purposes in AGVs . 
A camera works based on passive light sensors to pr oduce 
a digital image of a covered region of space. Camer as can 
detect both moving and static objects within their 
surroundings. One of the major capabilities of came ras is that 
they can identify colors and textures. This can inc rease the 
autonomous driving perception. They are also cheap and 
easily accessible. The negative point of this senso r is that they 
are sensitive to adverse weather conditions and low  intensity 
light. In addition, since the image is 2D, recogniz ing distance 
to an object using the image can only be determined  by 
employing complex processing algorithms [46]. Table  2 
presents a comparison between major sensing technol ogies of 
exteroceptive environment perception.  
Despite the drawbacks of cameras, in a 2019 confere nce, 
TESLA announced that they have found very successfu l 
methods (a combination of deep learning algorithms,  artificial 
intelligence and powerful GPUs) to use just a few c ameras in 
order to efficiently recognize the vehicle surround ing 
environment instead of using very expensive LiDAR o r Radar 
sensors. They believe that the next generation of a utonomous 
vehicles just need cameras mounted at different spo ts of 
vehicle body and use the image processing and deep learning 
sensors used 
in AGVs 
Exteroceptive 
sensors 
LiDAR 
 Radar 
Camera 
 Ultrasonic 
Proprioceptive 
sensors 
GPS 
 IMU 
Encoders 


==== Page 7 ====
to teach the central processor unit for making the best decision 
in every specific driving situation. 
TABLE II.  COMPARISON BETWEEN FUNCTIONALITIES OF MAJOR 
SENSOR TECHNOLOGIES  [44] 
 Criteria  Radar LiDAR Ultrasound  Camera  
Very short-range 
detection (up to 1 m)  ok Poor Very good  Ok 
Short-range detection  
(1-30 m) Very good  Very good  Poor Good 
Long-range detection  
(30 -100 m)  Very good  Medium No Poor 
Angle < 10  Good Very good  Poor Good 
Angular resolution Good Very good  Poor Good 
Velocity measurement Yes No No No 
Poor weather condition  Very good  Poor  Good  Poor  
Night  Very good  Very good  Very good  limited  
 
GPSs (satellite-based radio-navigation systems) are  
common sensors for geolocation and navigation. Iner tial 
Measurement Units (IMUs) are electronic devices tha t can 
measure a body's force, angular velocity and magnet ic field. 
IMUs combined with encoders are electro-mechanical devices 
that can convert linear or angular position of a sh aft to an 
analogue or digital signal. GPSs, IMUs and encoders  are three 
vital sensors to help vehicles to drive autonomousl y. 
V.  CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS  
AHVs and especially multi-trailer AHVs (MTAHVs) are  
increasingly used around the world due to their eco nomic and 
environmental benefits. Despite the benefits, MTAHV s 
exhibit poor maneuverability and low lateral stabil ity 
compared to the heavy trucks and passenger vehicles  due to 
their multi-unit structures, large sizes and high c enters of 
gravity[48]. Past studies on semi-autonomous and 
autonomous driving used simple driver and yaw-plane  vehicle 
models [5][9][14]. To simulate MTAHV dynamics effec tively 
and to predict driver behaviors accurately, computa tionally 
efficient yaw-roll vehicle models and driver models  
considering the motion cues of trailing units need to be 
derived. To date, rare systematic threat assessment  has been 
conducted for MTAHV motion planning in high-speed 
operations, and in the case of MTAHVs almost no res earch 
has been done. The multi-unit structures and roll d ynamics of 
MTAHVs imposes more challenges in threat assessment  and 
path planning compared against the cases of passeng er cars 
[49]. Past studies on autonomous driving for articu lated 
vehicles focused on automatic steering without auto mated 
braking [50]. To design autonomous driving for AHVs  in 
highway operations, it is reasonable to take into a ccount both 
automatic steering and braking. A study has been co nducted 
to identify distinct AHV dynamic characteristics be tween 
manual and automated driving in lane changes, but t he 
interactions of driver-automation-environment in au tomation 
intervention have not been examined [51].  
VI.  CONCLUSIONS  
Contemporary progresses in autonomous vehicles yiel d 
bright future autonomous driving. Official future p rognoses 
about autonomous vehicles point out that a vast num ber of 
automotive companies will launch products with semi  and 
fully autonomous features in near future. It is exp ected that by 2035 the majority of vehicles including heavy comme rcial 
vehicles will be fully automated. This paper review s the 
historical and current developments of automated dr iving 
features and necessary technologies with a focus on  AHVs. It 
is disclosed that little attention has been paid to  exploring 
autonomous driving for AHVs and, in particular, MTA HVs. 
In the limited studies on automotive driving for AH Vs, the 
threat assessment due to the poor maneuverability a nd low 
lateral stability of these large vehicles has not b een addressed. 
REFERENCES  
[1]  Z. Ni and Y. He, “Design and validation of a robust  active trailer 
steering system for multi-trailer articulated heavy  vehicles,” Veh. Syst. 
Dyn. , vol. 3114, 2018. 
[2]  “U.S. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. Large Trucks and 
bus crash facts 2016.” [Online]. Available: 
https://cms8.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statisti cs/large-truck-and-
bus-crash-facts-2016#A8. 
[3]  OECD/ITF, Road Safety Annual Report 2015 . 2015. 
[4]  P. GUTOSKIE, Road Safety in Canada , vol. 25, no. 1. 2001. 
[5]  Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communic ations Senate, 
“Driving Change-Technology and Future of Autonomous  Vehicles,” 
no. January, 2018. 
[6]  P. Nilsson, Traffic Situation Management for Driving Automation  of 
Articulated Heavy Road Transports From driver behav iour towards 
highway autopilot . 2017. 
[7]  C. Cheng and D. Cebon, “Improving roll stability of  articulated heavy 
vehicles using active semi-trailer steering,” Veh. Syst. Dyn. , vol. 46, no. 
SUPPL.1, pp. 373–388, 2008. 
[8]  World Health Organization. GLOBAL STATUS REPORT ON ROAD 
SAFETY , no. 1. 2018. 
[9]  K. Bengler, K. Dietmayer, B. Färber, M. Maurer, C. Stiller, and H. 
Winner, “Three Decades of Driver Assistance Systems ,” IEEE Intell. 
Transp. Syst. Mag. , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6–22, 2014. 
[10]  A. T. Van Zanten, “Bosch ESP systems: 5 years of ex perience,” SAE 
Tech. Pap. , no. 724, 2000. 
[11]  S. J. Anderson, S. B. Karumanchi, K. Iagnemma, and J. M. Walker, 
“The Intelligent CoPilot,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. , no. April 
2013, pp. 45–54, 2013. 
[12]  V. A. Shia et al. , “Semiautonomous vehicular control using driver 
modeling,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2696–
2709, 2014. 
[13]  A. Gray, Y. Gao, T. Lin, J. K. Hedrick, and F. Borr elli, “Stochastic 
predictive control for semi-autonomous vehicles wit h an uncertain 
driver model,” IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. Proceedings, ITSC , no. 
1239323, pp. 2329–2334, 2013. 
[14]  SAE International Surface Vehicle Information Repor t, “Taxonomy 
and Definitions for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle 
Automated Driving Systems,” SAE Standard J3016 , 2016. . 
[15]  N. Christie, A review of accidents and injuries to road transpor t 
drivers . 1831. 
[16]  B. J. Alshaer, T. T. Darabseh, and M. A. Alhanouti,  “Path planning, 
modeling and simulation of an autonomous articulate d heavy 
construction machine performing a loading cycle,” Appl. Math. Model. , 
vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 5315–5325, 2013. 
[17]  A. Elhassan, “Autonomous driving system for reversi ng an articulated 
vehicle SCHOOL OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING,” 2015. 
[18]  P. F. Lima, Optimization-Based Motion Planning and Model 
Predictive Control for Autonomous Driving: With Exp erimental 
Evaluation on a Heavy-Duty Construction Truck . 2018. 
[19]  S. Taheri, “Steering Control Characteristics of Hum an Driver Coupled 
with an Articulated Commercial Vehicle,” no. Januar y, 2014. 
[20]  S. Siregar, “A New Design of Human-Machine Interact ion A Leap 
Towards Safe Driving,” 2015. 

==== Page 8 ====
[21]  N. H. Amer, H. Zamzuri, K. Hudha, and Z. A. Kadir, “Modelling and 
Control Strategies in Path Tracking Control for Aut onomous Ground 
Vehicles: A Review of State of the Art and Challeng es,” J. Intell. 
Robot. Syst. Theory Appl. , vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 225–254, 2017. 
[22]  P. Fancher and C. Winkler, “Directional performance  issues in 
evaluation and design of articulated heavy vehicles ,” User Model. 
User-adapt. Interact. , vol. 45, no. 7–8, pp. 607–647, 2007. 
[23]   “Difference between A B C Trains.” [Online]. Avail able: 
https://www.bigtruckguide.com/get-your-a-b-cs-strai ght/. [Accessed: 
23-Oct-2019]. 
[24]  M. S. Kati, “Definitions of Performance Based Chara cteristics for Long 
Heavy Vehicle Combinations Prepared by : Improving landfill 
monitoring programs with the aid of geoelectrical -  imaging techniques 
and geographical information systems,” 2013. 
[25]  M. Gäfvert and O. Lindgärde, “A 9-DOF tractor-semit railer dynamic 
handling model for advanced chassis control studies ,” Veh. Syst. Dyn. , 
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 51–82, 2004. 
[26]  M. M. Islam, X. Ding, and Y. He, “A closed-loop dyn amic simulation-
based design method for articulated heavy vehicles with active trailer 
steering systems,” Veh. Syst. Dyn. , vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 675–697, 2012. 
[27]  M. M. Islam and Y. He, “A parallel design optimisat ion method for 
articulated heavy vehicles with active safety syste ms,” Int. J. Heavy 
Veh. Syst. , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 327–341, 2013. 
[28]  S. Cheng, L. Li, H.-Q. Guo, Z.-G. Chen, and P. Song , “Longitudinal 
Collision Avoidance and Lateral Stability Adaptive Control System 
Based on MPC of Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. 
Syst. , vol. PP, pp. 1–10, 2019. 
[29]  D. J. Fagnant and K. Kockelman, “Preparing a nation  for autonomous 
vehicles: Opportunities, barriers and policy recomm endations,” 
Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. , vol. 77, pp. 167–181, 2015. 
[30]  J. Manyika, M. Chui, and J. Bughin, “Disruptive tec hnologies: 
Advances that will transform life, business, and th e global economy,” 
McKinsey Glob. … , no. May, p. 163, 2013. 
[31]  A. Khodayari, A. Ghaffari, S. Ameli, and J. Flahatg ar, “A historical 
review on lateral and longitudinal control of auton omous vehicle 
motions,” ICMET 2010 - 2010 Int. Conf. Mech. Electr. Technol.  Proc. , 
no. Icmet, pp. 421–429, 2010. 
[32]  H. V. Systems, “Comprehensive path and attitude con trol of articulated 
vehicles for varying vehicle conditions Hsin Guan, Kyongil Kim and 
Bo Wang*,” vol. 24, no. 1, 2017. 
[33]  [33] K. il Kim, H. Guan, B. Wang, R. Guo, and F. Li ang, “Active 
steering control strategy for articulated vehicles, ” Front. Inf. Technol. 
Electron. Eng. , vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 576–586, 2016. 
[34]  H. Yuan and H. Zhu, “Anti-jackknife reverse trackin g control of 
articulated vehicles in the presence of actuator sa turation,” Veh. Syst. 
Dyn. , vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1428–1447, 2016. 
[35]  B. A. Jujnovich and D. Cebon, “Path-following steer ing control for 
articulated vehicles,” J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control. Trans. ASME , vol. 
135, no. 3, pp. 1–15, 2013. 
[36]  A. Goodarzi and M. Ghajar, “Integrating lane-keepin g system with 
direct yaw moment control tasks in a novel driver a ssistance system,” 
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part K J. Multi-body Dyn. , vol. 229, no. 1, pp. 
16–38, 2015. 
[37]  M. M. Michałek, “A highly scalable path-following c ontroller for N-
trailers with off-axle hitching,” Control Eng. Pract. , vol. 29, pp. 61–
73, 2014. 
[38]  T. Nayl, G. Nikolakopoulos, T. Gustafsson, D. Komin iak, and R. 
Nyberg, “Design and experimental evaluation of a no vel sliding mode 
controller for an articulated vehicle,” Rob. Auton. Syst. , vol. 103, pp. 
213–221, 2018. 
[39]  P. Gaspar, I. Szaszi, and J. Bokor, “The design of a combined control 
structure to prevent the rollover of heavy vehicles ,” Eur. J. Control , 
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 148–162, 2004. 
[40]  S. Yim, K. Jeon, and K. Yi, “An investigation into vehicle rollover 
prevention by coordinated control of active anti-ro ll bar and electronic 
stability program,” Int. J. Control. Autom. Syst. , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 275–
287, 2012. [41]  M. Ghazali, M. Durali, and H. Salarieh, “Path-follo wing in model 
predictive rollover prevention using front steering  and braking,” Veh. 
Syst. Dyn. , vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 121–148, 2017. 
[42]  V. T. Vu, O. Sename, L. Dugard, and P. Gaspar, “Act ive anti-roll bar 
control using electronic servo valve hydraulic damp er on single unit 
heavy vehicle,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 418–425, 
2016. 
[43]  Y. Liu, K. Yang, X. He, and X. Ji, “Active steering  and anti-roll shared 
control for enhancing roll stability in path follow ing of autonomous 
heavy vehicle,” SAE Tech. Pap. , vol. 2019-April, no. April, pp. 1–10, 
2019. 
[44]  C. Ilas, “Electronic sensing technologies for auton omous ground 
vehicles: A review,” 2013 - 8th Int. Symp. Adv. Top. Electr. Eng. ATEE 
2013 , pp. 0–5, 2013. 
[45]  C. Ilas, “Perception in autonomous ground vehicles:  A review,” 2013 
Int. Conf. Electron. Comput. Artif. Intell. ECAI 20 13 , no. June 2013, 
2013. 
[46]  S. Campbell et al. , “Sensor Technology in Autonomous Vehicles : A 
review,” 29th Irish Signals Syst. Conf. ISSC 2018 , pp. 1–4, 2018. 
[47]  R. Agencies and U. S. Senate, “AUTOMATED Federal Ag encies 
Should Take Additional Steps to Prepare for Potenti al Workforce 
Effects,” 2019. 
[48]  Y. He, M. M. Islam, S. Zhu, and T. Hu, “A design sy nthesis framework 
for directional performance optimization of multi-t railer articulated 
heavy vehicles with trailer lateral dynamic control  systems,” Proc. Inst. 
Mech. Eng. Part D J. Automob. Eng. , vol. 231, no. 8, pp. 1096–1125, 
2017. 
[49]  T. Nayl, DOC TOR A L T H E S I S On Autonomous Articulated 
Vehicles Thaker Nayl , no. June 2015. 2017. 
[50]  N. And En, A. G. Martín, K. Hoogendijk, L. Niklasso n, F. Sandblom, 
and F. S. Seholm, “Predictive Control for Autonomou s Articulated 
Vehicles,” 2017. 
[51]  P. Nilsson, L. Laine, and B. Jacobson, “A Simulator  Study Comparing 
Characteristics of Manual and Automated Driving dur ing Lane 
Changes of Long Combination Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. 
Syst. , vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 2514–2524, 2017. 
 

