==== Page 1 ====
 ORCA – Online Research @
Cardiff
This is an Open Access document downloaded from ORCA, Cardiff University's institutional
repository:https://orca.cardiff.ac.uk/id/eprint/134968/
This is the author’s version of a work that was submitted to / accepted for publication.
Citation for final published version:
Li, Li, Fan, Yuxi, Tse, Mike and Lin, Kuo-Yi 2020. A review of applications in federated learning.
Computers and Industrial Engineering 149 , 106854. 10.1016/j.cie.2020.106854 
Publishers page: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106854 
Please note: 
Changes made as a result of publishing processes such as copy-editing, formatting and page numbers may
not be reflected in this version. For the definitive version of this publication, please refer to the published
source. You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite this paper.
This version is being made available in accordance with publisher policies. See 
http://orca.cf.ac.uk/policies.html for usage policies. Copyright and moral rights for publications made
available in ORCA are retained by the copyright holders.


==== Page 2 ====
A review of applications in federated learning  
 
Li Li1,2, Yuxi Fan1, Mike Tse3, Kuo -Yi Lin1,2,* 
1College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji  
University, Shanghai 201804, China  
2Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Science and Technology, Tongji  
University, Shanghai 201804, China  
3 Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK  
Acknowledgements  
This research was supported by National Key R&D Program of China, No. 
2018YFE0105000, 2018YFB1305304, the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under Grant No. 51475334, the  Shanghai Municipal Commission of science and 
technology No. 19511132100 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 
Universities of China u nder Grant No. 22120170077.  
 
Correspondence addressee: Kuo -Yi Lin, Ph.D.  
Associate Professor  
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 
201804, China  
Tel: +86 18217097362  
Email: 19603@tongji.edu.cn  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 3 ====
A review of applications in federated learning  
Federated Learning (FL) is a collaboratively decentralized privacy -preserving 
technology to overcome challenges of data silos and data sensibility. Exactly what 
research is carrying the research momentum forward is a question of interest to 
research commun ities as well as industrial engineering. This study reviews FL and 
explores the main evolution path for issues exist in FL development process to 
advance the understanding of FL. This study aims to review prevailing application in 
industrial engineering to  guide for the future landing application. This study also 
identifies six research fronts to address FL literature and help advance our 
understanding of FL for future optimization. This study contributes to conclude 
application in industrial engineering an d computer science and summarize a review of 
applications in FL.  
Keywords : Federated learning, Literature review, Citation analysis, Research front.  
  

==== Page 4 ====
1.Introduction  
With the development of storage capacity and processing power, the importance 
of data sci ence in industrial engineering becomes more apparent. Recent years have 
seen the explosive development of artificial intelligence, machine learning, smart 
production and deep learning in industrial engineering (Li, Wang and Lin, 2020; Lin, 
2018). However, there are two major challenges in this area as data science 
development. Firstly, data governance is the most significant aspect. Some data is 
privatized based on the legal concern. With the promulgation of General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU, 20 18), users become the absolute owner of their 
own data. Any institutions or organizations do not have authority to employ user’s 
own data unless they have agreement. Secondly, data silo is also a confronting 
problem that puts a limit on the development of modern industry since more training 
data would improve the training performance. For example, compared with the 
earliest AlphaGo, which used 160,000 sets of human chess data and could beat entry -
level professional players. Alpha Zero (Holcomb et al., 2018)  used 28.6 billion sets of 
human and machine -generated chess data, which could easily beat professional 
players. Besides, data annotation relies on experienced workers in some fields such as 
medical industry which may cause rareness of valid data. The scar city of labeled data 
is also detrimental to industrial development. However, the emergence of FL 
happened to overcome these challenges in industry.  
FL is a burgeoning machine learning scheme, aiming at tackling the problem of 
data island while preserving data privacy. It refers to multiple clients (such as mobile 
devices, institutions, organizations, etc.) coordinated with one or more central servers 
for decentralized machine learning settings. It was first put forward by Google in 

==== Page 5 ====
2016 to predict user’s t ext input within tens of thousands Android devices while 
keeping data on devices (McMahan et al., 2017). The original process of FL is 
generally described as Figure 1 shows. This kind of federated training approach called 
federated average (FedAvg), which is the baseline of FL in many other researches. 
Firstly, each device downloads a generic global model for the following local training. 
Secondly, the download global model will be improved by multiple local updates with 
local data, which belong to differen t mobile devices separately and then upload 
related gradient information to cloud in an encryption mode. Thirdly, the averaged 
update of local models implemented in the cloud will be dispatched to device as a 
renewed global model. Finally, the above proced ures repeat until the model achieves a 
certain desired performance or the final deadline arrives. The emergence of this 
technology will solve the contradiction between data privacy and data sharing for 
dispersed devices. Due to the property that data are n ot exposed to third central server, 
FL is appropriate for application when data are privacy -sensitive. These includes 
cases in health care or mobile devices that data are not available to be aggregated with 
legal concern.  
(Please insert Fig. 1 about here)  
Recently, many scholars band together to publish papers to review advances and 
open problems in FL. The studies provide several further aspects to enhance FL 
contribution (Kairouz et al., 2019). Motivated by the promising prospects and 
increasing growth of  FL research in industrial field, this study aims to review 
prevailing application of FL in industrial engineering to guide for the future landing 
application. This study concluded characteristic of FL and remained challenges to 
clarify various solutions t hat researchers have done to optimize FL. This study 

==== Page 6 ====
reviewed related studies of FL to base on the baseline a universal definition to identify 
fronts to address FL literature and help advance our understanding of FL for future 
optimization.  
This paper is organized as follows. Beside the introduction, we sketch the 
overview of FL which include characteristics and mainstream open -source framework 
as well as categories in section 2. In section 3, we point out three challenges in FL 
along with relative improve ment. Furthermore, we conclude indirect information 
leakage in FL and existing privacy -preserving method employed in FL. Section 4 
discusses realistic applications in IOT devices and grounding application in industry 
engineering and healthcare. At the end,  some frontier achievements are given, around 
these discussions we describe some promising direction of FL to give a guiding for 
future work.  
2.Overview of Federate Learning  
2.1 Characteristics of FL  
FL is highly related to distributed learning. Tradition al distributed system is 
made up of distributed computation, distributed storage. The first proposed FL of 
model update for Android clients is to some extent similar to distributed computation. 
Although FL put a great deal of emphasis on privacy protection , the latest researches 
of distributed machine learning also pay close attention to privacy -preserving 
distributed system. Distributed processing is to connect multiple computers in 
different locations via communication network under the control of center server, so 
that each computer undertakes different parts of the same task to complete it. Thus, 
the distributed processing is mainly aimed at accelerating processing stage, while FL 

==== Page 7 ====
focus on build a collaborative model without privacy leakage. To reveal di fference 
between FL and distributed learning more specifically, we highlight following 
characteristics in FL.  
Universality for cross -organizational scenarios.  Essentially, FL proposed by Google 
is an encrypted distributed machine learning technology, that allows participants to 
build a joint training model but maintain underlying data locally. Then the original 
concept of FL was extended to refer to all privacy -preserving decentralized 
collaborative machine learning techniques (Yang, Qb et al., 2019). Therefore, FL is 
able to tackle not only horizontally partitioned data according to samples but also 
vertically partitioned data according to features in collaborative -learning setting. FL 
could be extended to bring cross -organizational ent erprise into federal framework. For 
instance, bank that possess data of clients’ purchasing power could cooperate with 
electronic business platform which possess data of product features, to recommend 
products. Thus, intelligently construct joint model for  multiple entities, multiple data 
sources, different feature dimensions. This enable all to realize cross -platform and 
regional co -creation value on the premise of protecting data privacy.  
Massively Non -Identically Independent Distribution (Non -IID). In FL , data is 
widespread in tens of thousands edge node or mobile devices. Available data in each 
node may no more than the total number of nodes. While in distributed system, the 
main purpose is to increase degree of parallelism to alleviate computation or st orage 
pressure in central server. The number of nodes in distributed system couldn’t reach 
the same order of magnitude as the FL. Nowadays, the world has entered an era of 
wearable devices which are used extensively for health monitoring (Edwards, 2019). 
Each device only generate several data and it cannot be compared with the total 

==== Page 8 ====
number of devices. Obviously, in this case, FL is more suitable for model 
improvement. In contrast with distributed system, which works primarily on balanced 
and IID data distri bution, FL is concentrated on unbalanced and non -IID data because 
of the heterogeneity among device resources.  
Decentralized technology. Decentralization, in a strictly technical sense, does not 
means complete decentralization, but there is no definitive center. Decentralization is 
only to dilute the awareness of the central node. There is no center to determine each 
client, and each client goes to influence central model. The influence between nodes 
will generate a non -linear relationship through the netw ork formed by client. 
Parameter server, a typical distributed and centralized technology, mainly make use of 
central server which is dominating to dispatch data distribution and computation 
resource to obtain an efficient collaborative model (Ho et al., 20 13). This kind of 
centralized data processing method result in a double communication overhead. 
Because if some dataset scattered in different database are collected for training, these 
data should be copied and then transmitted to central server at first.  And then central 
server will allocate data to each distributed client for distributed computation. It adds 
additional severe tests to system on computing power, storage and bandwidth. For 
cases in FL, each client is completely autonomous, data is not allo cated by center and 
the training process is not governed by server. Therefore, FL is an integrated 
technology to combine machine learning models and data fusion through 
decentralized collaboration.  
Equality of status for each node. In this cooperation fram ework, all parties enjoy 
equal status and certain dominion to achieve common prosperity. In terms of equality, 
whoever possesses the great mass of data has the dominant position in traditional 

==== Page 9 ====
distributed collaborative training. Thus, the development of co llaborative learning in 
industrial field could be adversely affected by the preference on organizations with 
bulk of data or images with types of label. For joint training in deep learning network, 
those institutions with big data could manipulate the pred iction model thus small and 
medium -sized organizations do not have impetus in joint training. However, in FL, 
position of these clients with small data sets would be promoted due to equality in all 
parties.  
To sum up, FL is a decentralized technology that enable scattered clients or 
organizations to train a collaborative model autonomously, while keeping data 
localized. This method can support corporate organizations to share collaborative 
models without sharing any raw data.  
2.2 Open Source Framework  
Ther e have been two mainstream open -source frameworks for FL up to now and 
they are starting to take shape. One is TensorFlow Federated (TFF) framework at the 
service of machine learning or other computation demand for decentralized data 
(Google, 2019). It is the first self -contained framework designed at production level 
mainly for mobile devices. Specially, TFF integrates FedAvg for model update and 
Secure Aggregation for privacy concern (Bonawitz et al., 2017). This TTF consists of 
FL API and Federated Core (FC) API. In detail, FL API offers a set of high -order 
interfaces make users can apply the included machine learning method to process 
federated training. FC API, the basic layer for federation learning, serving for 
distributed computation. Furthermore, it  has been successfully applied in next word 
prediction or Emoji prediction in a mobile keyboard (Ramaswamy et al., 2019). In 

==== Page 10 ====
real application, it has achieved implementation over ten million of devices while 
hope to be highly scalable to deal with computat ion over billion of devices.  
The other one is Federated AI Technology Enabler (FATE) created by Webank 
team (Webanka, 2019). As the first open source industrial -level framework, it 
primarily serves for cross -organizational architecture. It provides enough privacy for 
client based on homomorphic encryption and secure multiparty computing. Besides, 
various machine learnin g algorithms such as logistic regression and deep learning, as 
well as transfer learning are able to be built on this federation system. In addition to 
these out of the box algorithms, most traditional methods can be adapted to this 
federal frame. At prese nt, the Webank team has promoted the implementation of a 
series of FATE in credit risk control, object detection and anti -money laundering 
(Webankb, 2019). These two frameworks are popular for FL in real application and 
further development on algorithm imp rovement.   
2.3 Categorization of FL  
Based on paper presented by Yang, Qb et al., (2019), FL largely falls into three 
groups, respectively, horizontal FL, vertical FL and federated transfer learning. Since 
data stored in different nodes or institutions mainly exist in a feature matrix form. 
Commonly, data consists many instance s, and the horizontal axis of the sheet is 
regarded as client, while the vertical axis represents the characteristics of clients. Then 
we can divide FL based on data partition mode.  
Horizontal FL . In the case of horizontal FL, there is a certain amount of overlap 
between the feature of data spread across various nodes, while the data are quite 
different in sample space. At present, the existing FL algorithms primarily aimed at 

==== Page 11 ====
application in smart devices or devices in the internet of things (IOT). FL in th ese 
scenarios usually could be classified into horizontal FL. Because data may 
significantly differ in sample space but have similar feature space simultaneously. As 
is mentioned above, the federated model solution for Android mobile phone update 
raised by  Google  (McMahan et al., 2017)  is typically a kind of horizontal FL since the 
data has the same feature dimension. In addition, to meet the challenge of limited 
labeled entities, Gao et al., (2019) introduced hierarchical heterogeneous horizontal 
FL frame.  The shortage of lack of label can be solved because heterogeneous domain 
adaptation would be adapted multiple times by using each participant as the target 
domain each time. This would do benefit to lack of data annotation in 
Electroencephalography (EEG) classification. In real application such as medical 
care, a large amount of work is inseparable from data collection. When it comes to 
cross -regional cooperation, it is almost impossible for each hospital to build a data 
pool for sharing. Thus, FL could co nstruct a federal network for cross -regional 
hospitals with similar medical information to improve joint model as Figure 2 shows.  
(Please insert Fig. 2 about here)  
Vertical FL . Vertical FL is suitable for cases in which data is partitioned in the 
vertical direction according to feature dimension. All the parties hold homogeneous 
data which means they have partial overlap on sample ID whereas differ in feature 
space. For example , there was a medical institution, and they intend to identify 
illnesses such as diabetes mellitus in a predictive way. According to research, people 
who suffer from high blood pressure and obesity may be prone to developing type2 
diabetes (Lee et al., 202 0). Therefore, it could be analyzed in view of some rough 
dimensions, such as patients’ age and weight as well as medical history. If there is a 

==== Page 12 ====
young man without obesity or high blood pressure, but intake more calories and lack 
of physical activity. He is  also prone to get diabetes, but it couldn’t be predicted and 
personalized due to lack of information. With development of FL, it can work with 
some companies which holds smartphone application data sets such as step counter or 
dietary structure. Further. They can cooperate with each other without demand for raw 
data transmission as Figure 3 shows. Generally, scholars deal with this problem 
through taking out the same entities with various characteristics to get a joint training. 
By contrast with horizontal  FL, it is a more challenging work due to entity 
resolution （Gascón et al., 2017). Not quite as simple as situation in horizontal FL, 
aggregating all the dataset in a common server to learn from the global model doesn’t 
work on vertical FL since the corresp ondence between different owners is still an 
urgently need to be addressed. There comes a modified token -based entity resolution 
algorithm to preprocess vertical partitioned data, powered by Nock et al., (2018). 
Hardy et al., (2017) designed an end -to-end scheme on linear classifier and applied 
additive homomorphic encryption to defense honest -but-curious adversary for vertical 
FL. It is reported that current applications for parties with common sample space 
including traffic violation assessment and small enterprise credit risk assessment are 
based on FATE created by Webank team. In addition, Cheng et al., (2019) designed a 
secure framework called SecureBoost in the setting of vertically partitioned data set. 
However, the abovementioned methods could only b e applied in simple machine 
learning models such as logistic regression. Therefore, vertical FL still has much more 
room for improvement to be applied in more complicated machine learning 
approaches.  
(Please insert Fig. 3 about here)  

==== Page 13 ====
Federated transfer le arning . Unlike the scenarios in horizontal FL and vertical FL, in 
most cases, data shares neither sample space nor feature space. Thus, the main 
problem in this setting is lack of data labels with poor data quality. Transfer learning 
enables to move the kn owledge of one domain (i.e., the source domain) to another 
domain (i.e., the target domain) to achieve better learning results, which is appropriate 
for this situation (Pan et al., 2010). In this way, Liu, Chen and Yang (2018) conceived 
federated transfer learning (FTL) to generalize FL to have broader application when it 
comes to common parties with small intersection. This is the first complete stack for 
FL based on transfer learning, including training, evaluation and cross validation. 
Besides this, the neural networks with additive homomorphic encryption technology 
in this frame could not only prevent privacy leakage but also provide comparable 
accuracy with traditional non -privacy -preserving method. However, communication 
efficiency remains an issue. Ac cordingly, Sharma et al., (2019) work hard on 
improvement for FTL. They made use of secret sharing technology instead of HE to 
further reduce overhead without decreasing the accurate rate. Furthermore, it could be 
extended to hinder malicious server. While  in the previous work they assume that they 
the model is semi -honest. For a real application, Chen et al.,  (2019) constructed a 
FedHealth model that gather data owned by different organizations via FL and offer 
personalized service for healthcare through t ransfer learning. As shown in Figure 4, 
some disease diagnosis and treatment information in one hospital could be transferred 
to another hospital to help other disease diagnosis by FTL. The research in FTL is not 
yet mature, thereby there is still plenty o f room for growth to make it more flexible 
with different data structure. Data islands and privacy protection issues are prominent 
problems encountered in the current large -scale industrialization of machine learning. 

==== Page 14 ====
However, federated transfer learning i s an effective way to protect both data security 
and user privacy while breaking the barriers of data islands.  
(Please insert Fig. 4 about here)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
3.  Evolution of FL   
The primitive framework of FL is FedAvg. Though it could deal with some 
lightweight Non -IID data. It is still faced with challenges of high communication 
overhead and structural heterogeneity. Recent works focus on algorithm optimization 
to improve efficie ncy and accuracy and participants’ privacy to enhance data 
protection. In this section, this study discusses about the evolution and optimization in 
the following. We mainly explore development path in algorithm optimization level 
as well as security level . 
3.1 Optimization  
(Please insert Fig. 5 about here)  
Since the term of FL was first proposed in 2016, drawing people’s extensive 
attention, study about it has progressed. Although a lot of work had been done, there 
are still some challenges fail to be overcame for practical application. In terms of 
optimizat ion for grounding application, high communication cost, statistical and 
structural heterogeneity are major issues faced by researchers currently (Li et al., 
2020). In this section, we summarize the optimization path of FL according to 
development process a nd method categories to overcome these challenges. As Figure 
5 shows, the algorithm optimization all based on the paper presented by McMahan et 
al., (2017). The first branch denotes the studies to deal with high communication cost. 

==== Page 15 ====
The second one represent s the evolution of overcome the challenge of statistical 
heterogeneity, while the third denotes structural heterogeneity. In the same branch, 
different symbols represent different ways to tackle the issue. The thickness of the 
line shows reference frequenc y of these papers in Google Scholar by other papers. 
The thicker the line, the higher reference frequency of the paper. The details of this 
optimization path are as follows.  
(1) High communication cost.  
By far, the key bottleneck of FL has been the difficulty  of decreasing 
communication overhead when proceeding federal training (Yang et al., 2019). The 
most important feature of modern data is timeliness since the life cycle of this data is 
short and data iterative update speed is fast. To tackle with large mas ses of data and 
make FL flexible with explosive increasing data, reducing communication overhead 
should be given top priority. Meanwhile, effective efforts have been made in work 
including reducing communication rounds and improving model upload speed furt her 
reduce update time.  
Reducing communication rounds. Due to unmatched download and upload 
speed, communication between server and clients is willing to be as little as possible 
to reduce upload times. The research of McMahan et al., (2017) is considered  as the 
pioneering work on FL to make communication more efficient by increasing 
calculated quantity on each client between each communication round. They also 
pointed out that increase parallelism which means motivate more clients to join 
training on each  round is an effective way. Inspired by Google, Nishio and Yonetani 
(2019) built FedCs framework to integrate the available clients to the utmost extent in 
each training round to make it efficiently in practice. Maximum mean discrepancy 

==== Page 16 ====
was inserted to FL algorithm to enforce local model to acquire more knowledge from 
other in training devices thus speed up convergence (Yao et al, 2018). Yurochkin et 
al., (2019) designed Bayesian Nonparametric FL framework, which is state of the art 
since it can aggregate l ocal models into a federated model without extra parameters 
thus avoid unwanted communication rounds. The experiment shows that they can 
obtain satisfactory accuracy rating with only one communication round.  
Decrease model update time.  Even if the communic ation rounds are optimized, 
how to accelerate model update is a remained problem. Initially, McMahan et.al. 
proposed two strategies to reduce model update time (Konečný, 2017). One is 
structured update, which means transmit only part of the update model  by means of 
low-rank model or in a random mask way. Likewise, an end -to-end neural network is 
a kind of structured update mode which maps update information into a lower -
dimension space thus relieve pressure of communication (Li and Han, 2019). The 
other is sketched update, which refer to make use of compressed update model. Zhu 
and Jin (2019) optimized sparse evolutionary training (SET) thus convey only piece 
of parameters to server, which resemble the sketched update. Since in each round, 
each client manipu lates fixed epochs, Jiang and Ying (2020) designed an adaptive 
method for local training. The local training epochs is decided by server according to 
training time and training loss, thus it will reduce local training time when loss is 
getting small. The a bove -mentioned algorithms all based on stochastic gradient 
descent (SGD), but this method could be inefficient if the function is anisotropic. 
Therefore, Liu et al., (2020) utilized momentum gradient descent to consider previous 
gradient information in eac h local training epoch to accelerate convergence speed. 
These algorithms are not fully suitable for all federal setting. Therefore, a more 

==== Page 17 ====
flexible communication -efficient method needs to be explored for high efficiency 
demand in medical industry.  
(2) Stat istical heterogeneity.  
Traditional machine learning approach, implicitly or explicitly, assumes the data 
distribution is identically independent. This scenario is suitable for collecting all data 
and then training in a distributed way. However, data are collected from various 
devices or institutions thereby do not follow Identically Independent Distribution 
(IID). Skew characteristic and clinical validation may vary among different 
equipment version (Godinho et al., 2016). And data record form in across multiple 
horizontals could  be totally different. Besides, there’s may be a huge variety of data 
size in different nodes result in an unbalanced distribution. To tackle this problem, the 
general resolution is to focus on global model, or modify local training mode, or 
adding some ex tra procedure on data pre -processing stage.  
Focus on global model . The first proposed FedAvg algorithm resolve this issue by 
averaging local upgrade on each device directly. In addition, Mohri et al., (2019) 
noticed previous work ignore the importance of fairness which may lead to bias 
centralized model. They improved global model to cope with any target distribution 
comprised by a mixture of different clients. As for aggregation stage, convergence 
behavior is another stressed issue. The existence of heter ogeneity may lead to 
misconvergence of global model. Further Wang et al., (2019) discussed convergence 
bound of FL based on gradient -descent in Non -IID data background, and further bring 
forward an improved adaptive method to reduce loss function within co nstraints of 
resource budget. Moreover, Li, X. et al (2019). gave four kinds of convergence 
theorems with different parameters setting or premises for FedAvg in Non -IID 

==== Page 18 ====
situations. These studies fill a part of the theoretical gap in the research of 
converg ence speed of a FL algorithm. Besides, it provides the effect of parameter 
adjustment on the convergence speed for the guidance.  
Add extra data preprocessing procedure . For data pre -processing, Huanga et al., 
(2019) introduced clustering thought with FL and constructed a community -based FL 
method. By separating independent data into different clusters, then processing 
federated training on each community, the non -IID problem is thus can be resolved. 
However, one drawback is that it’s not suitable for massively data training due to high 
parameter conversion overhead. In hierarchical heterogeneous horizontal framework, 
it projects each embedding submanifold into a common embedding space to 
overcome data h eterogeneity (Gao et al., 2019).  
Modify local training mode . Another idea is to optimize modeling way to achieve 
personalization for individual devices such as MOCHA, which introduced multi -task 
learning to make utilization of shared representation (Smith et al., 2017). Zhao et al., 
(2018) did the similar work, they considered a solution to deal with non -iid data by 
sharing a small set of data among each local model. Huangb et al., (2019) also gained 
a good deal of enlightenment from the previous data shari ng ideology to overcome 
Non-IID problem. They put cross -entropy loss into transmission process and assign 
different local update times for each client in each round.  
(3) Structural heterogeneity.  
In terms of structural heterogeneity, it mainly refers to two aspects. On the one 
hand, the competence of computing and storage vary from nodes to nodes since 
different devices use various kinds of chip, thereby cause unbalanced training time. 

==== Page 19 ====
On the other  hand, clients differ in network environment. The unreliable and unstable 
network may lead to devices’ drop out. Up to now, methods to deal with structural 
heterogeneity mainly focus on resource allocation for heterogeneous devices and fault 
tolerance for devices prone to be offline.  
Fault tolerance.  The federated multi -task learning was constructed in the wake of 
Google’s research on decentralized data training (Smith et al., 2017). To address the 
issue of stragglers (who is drop out or still training with  an outdated global 
parameters), they considered influence with low participation in training process to 
resist device drop out. Enable FL system to be robust to dropped participants, scholars 
also designed secure aggregation protocol (Haoa et al., 2019) w hich is tolerant with 
arbitrary dropouts as long as surviving users are enough to join federate update. Lib et 
al., (2019) take stragglers into account and allow these devices to implement different 
locally update computation times. Wu et al., (2019) also fully considered device 
straggling phenomenon in heterogeneous network. They made use of a cache structure 
to store those unreliable user update thus alleviates their trustless impact on global 
model.  
Resource allocation. For the sake of resource constrain t, most of foregoing work 
devote to allocate resources properly to heterogeneous devices. For instance, Kang et 
al., (2019) took overhead in heterogeneous clients into consideration to motivate more 
high-quality devices to participate training process. And  Tran et al., (2019) studied 
training accuracy and convergence time with influence of heterogeneous power 
constraints. Meanwhile, Chai et al., (2019) considered the impact of resource (e.g. 
CPU, memory, and network resources) heterogeneity on training time  of FL. To 
address this issue, Li, T. et al., (2020) designed a fairness metrics to measure loss in 

==== Page 20 ====
devices and a q -Fair optimization goal to impel fair resource allocation in FL. In a 
nutshell, stragglers and heterogeneity run through FL framework. Theref ore, in the 
future, optimization should continue to contribute to fault -tolerance and properly 
resource allocation to address this issue.  
3.2 Security Analysis  
(Please insert Fig. 6 about here)  
In this section, we elaborate the evolution of privacy attack and enhancement in FL. 
As shown in Figure 6, the first branch indicates indirect privacy leakage in FL. And 
the other two branches show improvement trace for privacy enhancement for FL. One 
is privacy -preserving method on client side, and the other one is on the server side. 
These two branches intersect at a node which derive another branch to denote hybrid 
approach to enhance privacy. The thickness of the line also shows reference 
frequency of t hese papers. The thicker the line, the higher reference frequency of the 
paper. The details are as follows.  
3.2.1 Privacy Risk  
Though patients’ private data never come out of the local storage during federated 
training process which may alleviate privacy concerns. Nevertheless, the system is not 
sufficiently secure because the transmission of gradients and partial parameters may 
lead to indirect privacy leakage (Bos et al., 2014). Since original data under the risk of 
being cracked by back deduction. Some investigators have considered to retrieve data 
in FL framework. The general attack types are mainly divided into three categorie s as 
bellow:  

==== Page 21 ====
Data poisoning attack.  Aiming at embedding some tainted data such as 
malicious samples or disguised data to destroy data integrity or give rise to the bias of 
training results. There are two main types of ‘data poisoning’ attack modes includin g 
model skew and feedback weaponization. Traditional machine learning approaches 
are vulnerable to data poisoning since adversarial could directly manipulate the 
triggers to misguide the global model. Nevertheless, these traditional data poisonings 
methods  are less effective or may need many malicious participants when it comes to 
FL since malicious attackers have no direct access to raw data (Bagdasaryan et al., 
2018). On the basis research of Bagdasaryan et al., (2018), Yang, Qb. et al., (2019) 
studied a novel and effective distributed backdoor attack. They divided an attack 
trigger into many slices and embedded each slice into different attackers instead of 
embedding a complete trigger into only one attacker. This new -fashioned mode 
throws a wrench in the old argument that FL is possible to avoid data poisoning. It 
also gives a new evaluation form for security analysis in FL.  
Model poisoning （Also known as Adversarial attack) . Model poisoning refer 
to make machine learning model t o generate a wrong result by designing a specific 
input. Furthermore, it can be subdivided into Non -targeted adversarial attack and 
Targeted adversarial attack. The former one is a common type which lead to an 
incorrect consequence, and the other one is re latively difficult that aiming at injecting 
a specific type for input. In FL, secure aggregation is implemented, and aggregator is 
not familiar with the local update modes thus are not able to detect anomalies or 
verify correctness of local updates. Accord ing to this drawback, the backdoor can be 
inserted into federated environment by malicious participant through model -
replacement methodology thus misunderstand the joint model. This novel attack 
method can be successfully employed in federated training tas ks including image 

==== Page 22 ====
classification and word prediction (Bagdasaryan et al., 2018). Similarly, Bhagoji et 
al., (2019) attacked global model through few malicious adversaries to wrongly 
classified targeted model. This kind of attack obviously belong to target ed adversarial 
attack. In this case, they ensure convergence of integrated model and accuracy of 
most tasks. In addition, the results show Byzantine -resilient aggregation technology is 
weak to offense this type of attack in the federated setting. Then Zhan g et al., (2019) 
give first attempt to generate model poisoning attack based on Generative Adversarial 
Nets (GAN). In this work, malicious participant pretended to be a benign agent. Then 
they assign a GAN architecture to generate training data as well as distributed a 
wrong label to induce benign client to be damaged. The existing methodologies 
aiming at defending poisoning attack are quite invalid in federated settings. In the 
future work, to mitigate this type of attack for FL, anomaly detection in serve r side 
and concealment of classification results is a promising direction.  
Inferring attack. The value of this type of attack mainly used to detect privacy 
records or restore training data through a white box or a black box. It can be broken 
down into trac ing attacks (also known as membership inference attacks) and 
reconstruction attacks. The first mentioned of two indicates to infer whether a client is 
contained in the data set. The latter advocates recover some features about an 
individual participant. Wi th utilization of vulnerability of SGD, Nasr et al., (2019) 
designed a white -box membership inference attack method direct at neural network. 
Then it was successfully applied to federated setting to infer information via a curious 
server or any of a partic ipant. The previous work focuses on malicious server 
assumption and unable to recover information on specific client because of invisibility 
of client update. In cases of this kind, Wang, Z. et al., (2019) built a general attack 
frame called mGAN -AI which could reconstruct private information for target client. 

==== Page 23 ====
To hinder this kind of attack, more stronger protection method should be explored, 
and data could be encrypted before upload to cloud.  
3.2.2 privacy -preserving technology in FL  
The indirect privacy disclosure poses immense challenges on development of FL. 
Potential threats are usually from insider adversaries and outsider adversaries. Insider 
adversaries including honest -but-curious aggregator, colluding parties and malicious 
participants steal privacy during training process. The honest -but-curious aggregator 
means that the server will keep to the privacy agreement but have a try to explore 
more information about clients. Colluding parties or malicious participants are 
unreliable  to transmit incorrect updates as well as learn additional information from 
other benign clients. Outsider adversaries refer to those who can peep intermediate 
outputs or users that have access to final model. Faced with these vulnerabilities, the 
existing  privacy -preserving methods to enhance privacy guarantees mainly focus on 
information encryption for client or secure aggregation at server side as well as 
security protection for FL framework (Ma et al., 2019). This study discusses novel 
privacy -preservin g technologies based on this classification as bellows.  
Privacy -preserving at client side. Differential privacy often acts as a means of 
enhancing privacy preservation for client. When querying data from database, it will 
reduce chances for records to be i dentified while maximize query accuracy as much 
as possible by introducing noise to blur raw data. For instance, since FedAvg is prone 
to be violated by differential attack, Geyer et al., (2019) leveraged differential privacy 
on FL to conceal whether a cli ent participant in the training process. Likewise, to 
improve FedAvg, McMahan et al., (2018) also applied DP to this process by adding 
Gaussian noise to the global model. In federated online training for ranker using 

==== Page 24 ====
feedback from users, Kharitonov (2019) introduced ε -local differential privacy. 
Opposite to common algorithms, it is stricter since they protect user -lever privacy 
instead of imposing privacy -preserving technology after data aggregation.  
In addition, homomorphic encryption is also a privacy po licy applied in FL 
frequently to hinder information leakage during parameter exchange process among 
clients. Homomorphic encryption refers to an encryption mechanism that parameters 
are encoded before adding or multiplying operation and performs equivalent  result 
compare to uncode function. Liu et al., (2018) employed additively homomorphic 
encryption to modify neural network model and minimize the impact on training 
accuracy. Ilias and Georgios (2019) also added homomorphic encryption to a more 
robust FL f ramework, which make it possible to compute aggregation on encrypted 
client. Training on these cryptographic models may raise additional communication 
overhead since more data such as private key should be conveyed.  
Locality -sensitive hashing (LSH) is als o a prevalent way to keep confidentiality 
(Gionis et al., 1999). All features would be mapped into an encryption form via p -
stable hash function. The main advantage of this encryption mode is that similarity 
between two samples will be retained after hash representation. However, two 
different samples virtually impossible to hold similar hash values. Raw data wouldn’t 
be exposed because many samples may have same outputs. Besides, LSH would not 
cause overmuch communication overhead like homomorphic encrypti on and reduce 
accuracy like differential privacy. Lee  et al., (2018) make use of LSH to detect similar 
patients in federated settings. Recently, Li  et al., (2020) build a practical gradient 
boosting decision trees rely on LSH. In the pre -processing stage, LSH would help find 
similar samples dispersed in different clients, and they will use the sum gradients of 

==== Page 25 ====
similar instances instead of only use the  gradient of one instance when processing 
gradient updating.  
Secure aggregation.  Secure multi -party computation (SMC) is employed, which 
mainly concentrate on how to safely calculate a function for various client without a 
reliable third party. Bonawitz e t al., (2017) proposed the first secure aggregation 
protocol with utilization of secure multiparty computation. In this agreement, model 
update information of each device is unrevealed to central server. Only after enough 
devices update their model, can se rver receive the aggregated model.  Owing to the 
quadratic communication cost, the above -mentioned protocol is not applicable for 
larger scale situations. By this way, Haoa et al., (2019) envisioned a more efficient 
privacy -preserving scheme for FL, which integrate differential privacy and 
lightweight homomorphic encryption technology. This protocol, mainly for stochastic 
gradient descent approach, is robust to curious -but-honest server and collusion 
between the cloud and server. Occasionally, global model returned by clouds may not 
reliable or complete. Because unreliable cloud server may be malicious to return a 
totally wronged model or may be lazy to convey a compressed but inaccurate model 
due to computational pressure. Thereafter Xu et al., (2020) devis ed VerifyNet, the 
first protocol that can verify correctness of returned model from cloud. For privacy 
guarantee, they implemented variation of secret sharing combined with key agreement 
protocol to enhance confidentiality of gradients. The up -to-date appr oach proposed by 
Chen et al., (2020) also concentrated on secure aggregation scheme. They add an 
extra public parameter dispatch to each client to force them training in a same way, 
thus detect malicious client easily when making an aggregation stage.  

==== Page 26 ====
Protection method for FL framework.  Although aforementioned algorithms could 
avoid adversary to invade central server or clients, the encrypted parameters may still 
cause information leakage by means of novel attack methods as 3.2.1 mentioned. To 
enhance priv acy for the framework, many hybrid approaches have been proposed. 
However, the introduced noise of differential privacy may lead to decreased accuracy. 
To reduce noise, the Hybrid -One scheme combine the use of DP with MPC without 
compromising accuracy rate , which protect communication messages rely on MPC 
thus introduce less noise than traditional local DP (Truex et al.,2019). But this method 
often result in unaffordable communication cost and long convergence time as 
homomorphic encryption can be. Then the  efficient HybridAlpha emerged at the right 
moment, which combined functional encryption with SMC protocol to achieve the 
highly -performance model without privacy sacrifice (Xu et al.,2019). Additionally, 
sketched algorithms are inherently suitable for FL since data identities are not stored, 
and extra mechanisms are needed to trace back original data. Inspired by this, Liu, Li, 
Smith and Sekar (2019) established relationship between FL and sketching algorithm 
to strength confidentiality.  
4.Application  
(Please insert Table. 1 about here)  
 
FL takes hold as a prevailing scheme with the construction of collaborative 
model without legal concern. Even facing with the forementioned limitations and 
severe challenges, early participants have seen significant opportunities of FL and 
have launched a series of related explorations and attempts to apply FL in real life. In 

==== Page 27 ====
this section, we discuss several applications related to industry engineering or 
computer science.  
4.1 Application for mobile devices  
FL has been paid much attention to by the resear chers since the concept was first 
put forward by Google to predict users’ input from Gboard on Android devices. 
Further improvement for prediction on keyboard has been made through Chen, 
Mathews, Ouyang and Beaufays (2019), Leroy et al., (2019), Hard et al ., (2019) and 
Yang, T. et al., (2018). Besides, emoji prediction is also a research hotspot 
(Ramaswamy et al.,2019). In addition, bring FL model to smart devices to predict 
human trajectory (Feng et al., 2020) or human behavior (Sozinov et al., 2018) is al so a 
potential application.  
Nowadays, although there is a rapid growth in storage capacity and computing 
power of mobile devices. It’s difficult to satisfy the growing quality demand from 
mobile subscribers due to communication bandwidth limitation. Thus, most of 
comprehensive provider prefer to offer a service environment at the edge of the 
cellular network close to the customer instead of integrate cloud computing and cloud 
storage in core network so as to reduce network congestion. This technology is 
dubbed mobile edge computing (MEC), but it also faces increased risk of information 
leakage. One possible solution is the combination of FL and MEC, Wang, X. et al., 
(2019) investigate an ‘In -Edge AI’ framework which combine FL based on deep 
reinforcement lea rning with MEC system and further optimize resource allocation 
problem. Further, Qian et al., (2019) devoted to utilizing FL on MEC. They developed 
a privacy -aware service placement scheme to provide high -quality service by caching 
desired service on the e dge server close to the users.  

==== Page 28 ====
In this case, mobile devices not only refer to common smart phones but also refer 
to devices in IOT settings. Smart home is one of the important applicable fields of 
IoT. To better learn users’ preference, devices in smart h ome architecture would 
upload some related data to cloud server which may lead to data breach. Therefore, 
Aïvodji et al., (2019) present a sufficient secure federated architecture to build joint 
models. Similarly, Yu et al., (2020) build a federated multi -task learning framework 
for smart home IOT to automatically learn users’ behavior patterns, which could 
effectively detect physical hazards. Furthermore, Liu, B. et al., (2020) proposed a data 
fusion approach based on FL for robots imitation learning in ro bot networking. This 
method could be leveraged on self -driving cars to generate guide models and foresee 
various emergencies.  
4.2Application in Industrial Engineering  
Driven by the achievement of FL in data privacy protection, it is logical for 
industrial engineering to follow it with applications of FL. Since data in these areas 
are not available directly due to some constraints of laws and regulations. However, 
only when FL is leveraged to these areas, can we make use of these disperse dataset to 
acquire infinite benefits.  
To the best of our knowledge, following with the rise of and maturation of FL, it 
could have widely popularization and application prospects in data -sensitive fields for 
industrial engineering. Take environment protection as a case in p oint, Hu et al., 
(2018) designed a novel environmental monitoring frame based on federated region 
learning FRL) for the sake of inconvenient interchangeable monitor data. Thus, 
monitoring data dispersed from various sensors could be utilized for superior 
performance of collaborative model. FL is also applied to visual inspection task (Han 

==== Page 29 ====
et al.,2019). It could not only help us solve the problem of lacking defective samples 
to detect defects in production tasks but also offered privacy guarantees for 
manufa cturers. In image fields, vision -and-language is also a flashpoint, Liu, Wu, Ge, 
Fan and Zhou (2020) bring FL to acquire diversiform representation from federated 
tasks for better grounding applications. Apart from image detection and 
representation, FL i s suitable for malicious attacks detection in communication 
system composed by Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) (Mowla et al., 2020). Since 
the features of UAVs such as unbalanced data distribution and unreliable 
communication conditions are quite matching with challenges in FL. With the 
popularization of electric vehicles, Saputra et al., (2019) designed a federated energy 
demand prediction method for various charging stations to prevent energy congestion 
in transmission process. Moreover, Yang, Zhang, Ye, Li and C. -Z. Xu (2019) 
leveraged FL to transactions owned by different banks in order to detect credit card 
fraud efficiently, which is also a significant contribution to financial field. For text 
mining, Wang, Y. et al., (2020) exploit an industrial grade  federated framework based 
on Latent Dirichlet Allocation. It has passed the assessment on real data for spam 
filtering and sentiment analysis.  
To summarize, FL enable data owner to broaden the scope of data applications 
and improve model performance throu gh iteration among different entities. In the 
future, FL technology would also support more industries to become more intelligent. 
The incorporation with FL in AI will build a federal ecosystem without data privacy 
concern.  
4.3 Application in HealthCare  

==== Page 30 ====
As a disruptive method to preserve data privacy, FL has great prospect in health 
care. Each medical institute might have a lot of patient data, but that may be far from 
enough to train their own prediction models (Szegedi, Kiss and Horváth,2019) . 
Combination  of FL and disease prediction is one of the good solutions to break down 
the barriers of analysis throughout different hospitals.       
Electronic health records (EMR) contain lots of meaningful clinical concepts, 
Kim, et al., (2017) gave an attempt to use tensor factorization models for phenotyping 
analysis to obtain information concealed in health records without sharing patient -
level da ta. It could be regarded as the first attempt for FL application in medical 
industry. Pfohl et al., (2019) explored differentially private learning for EMR in 
federated setting. And they further demonstrated the performance is comparable with 
training in a  centralized setting. Huanga et al., (2019) make use of EMRs scattered 
across hospitals to predict mortality rate for heart disease patients. During training 
process, there is not any form of data or parameters transmission among hospitals’ 
databases. Besi des this, data consolidated from multiple remote clients into a central 
server is encoded in advance and the decoder will be abandoned at the end of training. 
In addition, Brisimi et al., (2018) also use EMRs to evaluate whether a patient with 
heart diseas e will be hospitalized based on a FL algorithm called cluster Primal Dual 
Splitting (cPDS). This prediction work can be accomplished either on health 
monitoring devices or hospitals holding these medical data without information 
leakage. With utilization o f health records, Lee et al., (2018) proposed a federated 
patient hashing framework to detect similar patients scattered in different hospitals 
without sharing patient -level information. This patient matching method could help 
doctors to summarize general character and direct them to treat patient with more 
experience. In addition, Huangb et al., (2019) leveraged Loss -based adaptive boosting 

==== Page 31 ====
Federated Averaging algorithm on drug usage extracted from MIMIC -III database to 
predict patient mortality rate. This  research concerned computation complexity and 
communication cost as well as accuracy for each client therefore outperform 
baselines.  
Studies also demonstrated that FL can be applied in the domain of Natural 
language processing (NLP) to analyze valid info rmation from health records. Liu, 
Dligach and Miller (2019) focus on need for unstructured data processing of clinical 
notes. It was the first attempt of NLP based on FL. They performed a two -stage 
federated training model contains pre -processing stage to predict a representation 
model for each patient and phenotyping training stage to study each kind of illness.  
Recently, FL is also widely used in the area of biomedical imaging analysis. 
Federated principal components analysis (fPCA) has been put forward b y Silva et al., 
(2019) to extract features from magnetic resonance images (MRI) come from 
different medical centers. Furthermore, Gao et al., (2019) proposed a hierarchical 
heterogeneous horizontal FL (HHHFL) framework for Electroencephalography 
(EEG) clas sification to overcome the challenge of limited labeled instances as well as 
the privacy constraint.  
To the best of our knowledge, following with the rise of and maturation of FL, it 
could have very wide popularization and application prospects in data -sensitive fields 
in addition to the abovementioned fields. Table 1 shows application of FL has grown 
by leaps and bounds in 2019. Thus, it is optimistic that FL would have great potential 
in the future development. Currently, FL mainly contributes to horizont ally 
collaborative training for landing applications, which means feature dimensions of 
each data are similar to each other. In the future, medical data in hospitals could be 

==== Page 32 ====
cooperated with other institutions such as insurance agent to obtain reasonable 
pricing. Therefore, vertically FL is a promising direction to be explored. Moreover, 
one problem is existing federal training mostly base on small set of organizations and 
is not able to extend to collaborative training for huge number of devices or 
institu tions. Therefore, analysis of mobile devices data based on FL in an effective 
way should be progressed to generate more meaningful information.  
 
5. Frontier achievements and Future work  
 
FL is in great potential with sustainable development for landing application in 
industrial engineering and health care. Admittedly, many scholars have done arduous 
efforts to tackle challenges mentioned in section 3. To satisfy the situation with rapid 
development of IOT and increasing privacy concerns, it put forward rigorous 
demands for federated system design. Several research frontiers remain to be explored 
with FL. Current main trends are committed to security compliance establishment, 
attack defense and efficiency promotion as well as heterogeneities processing. In this 
section, we focus on some remarkable cutting -edge results to solve remained 
problems for better FL implementation in practical manufacturing application. 
Additionally, we also briefly introduce some promising direction to lead future 
improvement in this area.  
Asynchronous training mode . A basic choice on global model training mode is 
whether to take asynchronous or synchronous method. Recently, the synchronous 
training has already beco me the major form for FL due to superior performance of 
SGD in the central server settings compared to asynchronous way ( Chen, Ning and 
Rangwala , 2019; Mohammad and Sorour, 2019) Prior optimization of FL mainly 

==== Page 33 ====
focusses on evolution of FedAvg in a synchron ous fashion. However, this method 
relies on strong assumption of which is not realistic in practice. The heterogeneous 
resource in terms of different computation ability and various network settings and 
unbalanced data distribution would result in differen t training time and unknown 
communication cost. Based on previous work on asynchronous gradient descent, 
Sprague et al., (2019) compared asynchronous aggregation scheme with FedAvg and 
obtained basically satisfactory results. Generous asynchronous training  mode in FL 
refer to asynchronous local update or asynchronous aggregation. At the client side, 
Chen, Sun and Jin (2019) designed an asynchronous approach for client model 
update. Layers in deep neural network are divided into deep layers and shallow layer s 
with different update frequency. At the server side, asynchronous aggregation could 
be implemented. For instance, asynchronous online FL framework presented by Chen 
et al., (2019) updates central model in an asynchronous way by introducing feature 
learni ng and dynamic learning step size. Considering trade -off between advantages of 
synchronous update and asynchronous training, Wu et al., (2019) proposed a semi -
asynchronous protocol which allow straggling clients don’t always go together with 
central server . The main idea is that make stragglers join training properly to speed up 
training process with utilization of their slowly update model. Gaining a good deal of 
enlightenment from this semi -asynchronous method, a combination of asynchronous 
mode and synch ronous scheme is a promising direction. In this way, can we reduce 
unwanted overhead and give little fault -tolerance to stragglers.  
Gradient aggregation. Usually, in gradient aggregation stage, the gradient of global 
model is the sum of weighted gradient produced by each client. And the weight of 
each client is decided by the sample ratio. However, there is no evidence demonstrate 
that this weighted averagi ng gradient acquired from local clients is equivalent to real 

==== Page 34 ====
global gradient information due to biased estimation in local clients. Xiao et al., 
(2020) detect that the mutual information is increased which implies correlation 
between clients, while the di stance of parameters is getting greater with increased 
iteration. This study shows gradient averaging is possible not a good manner for 
gradient aggregation. To eliminate gradient bias in local training stage, Yao et al., 
(2019) keep trace of dispatched gl obal parameters in each local training epoch. Since 
local gradient update is a function of global parameters, then gradients can be 
aggregated in an unbiased way. To better learn aggregation mode in FL, Ji et al., 
(2019) introduce a recurrent neural networ k aggregator to automatically get an 
optimized way for gradient aggregation. In addition, Wang et al., (2019 ) designed a 
layer -wise aggregation mode to serially generate layer parameters in neural network 
for global model. Considering Non -iid distribution on clients, gradient aggregation in 
a simply averaging way isn’t a good choice. It would be better if researchers can bring 
in some adaptive weight for each client or some machine learning method to learn 
how to aggregate these gradients in an effective wa y.  
Incentive mechanism . For performance improvement, apart from optimization of 
resource allocation or novel architecture design, to establish an incentive mechanism 
to encourage more parties join into the training is also an effective way. The original 
FedAvg would select clients randomly. It seems that all clients are equally likely to go 
into the training. In fact, some lazy clients with high quality or some selfish clients 
afraid of power consumption may not attend the whole training process with a cer tain 
probability. Incentive mechanism could be established to motivate such clients. The 
cloud server would allocate the reward to each participant according to their 
contribution. And the client would maximize their utility to obtain more revenue. In 
this way, a benign cyclic effect would be formulated to obtain a satisfied model. The 

==== Page 35 ====
frameworks such as Stackelberg -based game theory enjoy wide popularity in 
motivation mechanism design. Sarikaya and Ercetin (2019) explore inventive 
mechanism in Stackelberg perspective to inspire workers to allocate more CPU for 
local training. Khan et al., (2019) discussed Stackelberg -based incentive mechanism 
to set local iteration times adaptively to be effective as much as possible. The 
crowdsourcing framework adopted two -stage stackelberg model to acquire utility 
maximization among clients and server ( Pandey et al., 2019).  For future work, more 
frameworks like matching theory and auction theory can be introduced to cope with 
trade -off between number of participants and up date latency.  
Verification for returned model . Most privacy -preserving method in FL rely on a 
strong assumption that clients are semi -honest which obey training rules but keeping 
curious about private data acquisition. However, realistic application gets t he other 
kind. Client may wittingly or unwittingly transmit an erroneous model compel global 
model to deviate from normal trace. For instance, in wearable medical system, 
adversaries may generate plausible but not accurate data to attack the entire model 
(Cai and Venkatasubramanian, 2018). This kind of Byzantine problem is always 
encountered in FL. Thus, Byzantine fault -tolerant system should be developed which 
means even if certain clients don’t follow training protocol or be malicious to attack 
global mod el, the collaborative training can still work well.  
To detect this anomalous model update, Li et al., (2019) considered an 
autoencoder enable model parameters to be replaced by low -dimension vector as well 
as discover irregular weights update. Muñoz -Gonzál ez and Lupu (2019) discussed 
adaptive FL to grub abnormal updates via a Hidden Markov Model to evaluate model 
quality. Traditional Byzantine fault -tolerant system is supported by some defense 
mechanism rather than malicious client detection. Considering lo ss of accuracy in 

==== Page 36 ====
federated setting, it is better to design much more Byzantine fault -tolerant system 
based on fault detection to eliminate or reduce threats.  
FL with block -chain technology.  As a novel technology, block -chain is 
developing fast abroad. In short, Block -chain is essentially a distributed ledger, 
derived from Bitcoin (Nakamoto. S, 2008), which is characterized by decentralization, 
immutability, traceability, collective maintenance, openness and transparency. Several 
blockchain -assisted schemes  for industrial data sharing have been proposed, including 
quality surveillance of 3D -printed articles (Kennedy et al., 2017), consumption 
monitoring and privacy -preserving energy trading for smart grids (Aitzhan and 
Svetinovic, 2018) and emergency medical  service for pre -hospital care (Hasavari and 
Song 2019). Existing studies based on block chain mainly focus on innovate medical 
information sharing system but training collaboratively to maximize data utilization 
has not been implemented. Recent research h as proofed that block chain has potential 
to significantly transform some issues in FL. Blockchain and FL are auxiliary to each 
other. As an inherently secure distributed system, blockchain naturally suitable for 
developed with FL. Since blockchain framewo rk is tolerant with malicious node and 
work normally as long as malicious nodes do not exceed 51% of the total.  
Injecting block -chain technology into FL, Majeed and Hong (2019) envisioned a 
robust Fl -chain that could verify local model update. Although the  security of entire 
architecture can be guaranteed with block chain technology, this security has nothing 
to do with privacy protection. There is no privacy concern in allusion to individual 
node. If there is a malicious clinic or hospital join in the coll aborative training, it may 
spare no effort to snoop other participants’ privacy information. Hence Ilias and 
Georgios (2019) utilized blockchain smart convention to coordinate all clients and 
additionally used homomorphic encryption to provide extra privac y guarantee. The 

==== Page 37 ====
blockchain -based privacy -preserving FL framework designed by Awan et al., (2019) 
also added a variation of the Paillier cryptosystem as an excess measure to forestall 
privacy leakage. Furthermore, take advantage of block chain, the contrib ution of each 
party to optimize global model could be traced, which make it possible for an 
incentive mechanism. Aforementioned FL frames based on block chain didn’t give 
specific rewarding mechanism for clients to join training. To improve performance for  
FL, a dynamic weighting method had been proposed (Kim and Hong, 2019). It 
considered learning accuracy and participation frequency as training weight to 
motivate high -quality client to get involved in the training. Besides, Block -Fl 
proposed by Kim, H. et  al., (2019) award client holding number of samples to reduce 
convergence time. To sum up, incorporate block chain with FL is auspicious since it 
is a decentralized technology thus doesn’t need central server to predict global model 
anymore. Therefore, it could overcome the limitation of bandwidth in FL. Further, it 
could not only exchange updates while verify correctness to enhance security but also 
employ some activate mechanism to improve FL service. But introducing blockchain 
may cause more latency when  exchange learning model. It would be better to design a 
blockchain -based FL to with low latency.  
Federated training for unsupervised machine learning.  According to the analysis 
of research on FL, existing FL frameworks construct based on supervised learni ng 
method. For instance, FL have been effectively leveraged in neural network (Wang, S. 
et al., 2019; Haob et al., 2019; Bonawitz et al., 2019 ) and SVM ( Liu et al., 2019) , as 
well as linear classifier ( Hardy et al., 2017) .  
Actually, in most of cases where  labeled data either do not exist, or with little 
existence, unsupervised learning methods are supposed to be applied. Thus, 
unsupervised learning is reasonable to be used to infer potential information in these 

==== Page 38 ====
messy data. For example, it has been widely used for image registration ( Dalca, 
Balakrishnan, Guttag and Sabuncu, 2019 ; de Vos et al., 2019 ) and image 
classification ( Ahn et al., 2019) . Although researchers have made great progress on 
federated transfer learning to handle with dispersive data with f ew labels, the landing 
applications remain a bottleneck for unsupervised learning in federated framework. 
To tackle the challenge of limited number of labels, collaborative training has been 
employed in unsupervised area. Such method like Collaborative and  Adversarial 
Network (CAN), a novel unsupervised domain adaptation approach, shows 
effectiveness and high performance (Zhang et al., 2018). Therefore, as a kind of 
collaborative training approach, FL has great potential on unsupervised learning area. 
Recen tly, van Berlo  et al., (2020) introduced Federated Unsupervised Representation 
Learning which is a breakthrough in unsupervised FL. Through unsupervised 
representation learning during pre -training stage, the requirement of labeled data 
significantly reduce d. This study also shows competitive performance compared with 
supervised learning and transfer learning. Therefore, it motivates future work towards 
the extension of federated framework on unsupervised learning.  
 
6. Conclusion  
This study contributes to conclude application in industrial engineering and 
computer science and summarize review of FL but not limited to applications. To our 
best knowledge, this work is the first time to summarize the development prospects of 
FL on ind ustrial field. Amidst masses of literature, we have concluded characteristic 
of FL and remained challenges. Further, we give the main path of optimization trace 
to clarify various solutions that researchers have done to optimize FL mainly 
including privacy  concerns and algorithm efficiency. Besides, we also sum up some 

==== Page 39 ====
applications in federated settings and some develop area with great potential. As a 
burgeoning technology, FL attracts increasing attention these days. This work benefits 
to researchers to ov ercome the remained challenges of FL.  
 
REFERENCE  
Ahn, E., Kumar, A., Feng, D., Fulham, M. and Kim, J. (2019). Unsupervised Deep Transfer 
Feature Learning for Medical Image Classification. 2019 IEEE 16th International 
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2 019), 1915 –1918. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2019.8759275  
Aitzhan, N. Z. and Svetinovic, D. (2018). Security and Privacy in Decentralized Energy Trading 
Through Multi -Signatures, Blockchain and Anonymous Messaging Streams. IEEE 
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 15(5), 840 –852. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2016.2616861  
Aïvodji, U. M., Gambs, S. and Martin, A. (2019). IOTFLA: A Secured and Privacy -Preserving 
Smart Home Architecture Implementing Federated Learning. 2019 IEEE Security and 
Privacy Workshops (SPW), 175 –180. https://doi.org/10.1109/SPW.2019.00041  
Awan, S., Li, F., Luo, B. and Liu, M. (2019). Poster: A Reliable and Accountable Privacy -
Preserving Federated Learning Framework using the Blockchain. Proceedings of the 2019 
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer an d Communications Security - CCS ’19, 2561 –
2563. https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3363256  
Bagdasaryan, E., Veit, A., Hua, Y., Estrin, D. and Shmatikov, V. (2018). How To Backdoor 
Federated Learning. ArXiv:1807.00459 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00459  
Bhagoji, A. N., Chakrabort y, S., Mittal, P. and Calo, S. (2019). Analyzing Federated Learning 
through an Adversarial Lens. International Conference on Machine Learning, 634 –643. 
Retrieved from http://proceedings.ml r.press/v97/bhagoji19a.html  
Bonawitz, K., Eichner, H., Grieskamp, W., Huba, D., Ingerman, A., Ivanov, V., … Roselander, J. 
(2019). Towards Federated Learning at Scale: System Design. ArXiv:1902.01046 [Cs, 

==== Page 40 ====
Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.01046  
Bonawitz, K., Ivanov, V., Kreuter, B., Marcedone, A., McMahan, H. B., Patel, S., … Seth, K. 
(2017). Practical Secure Aggregation for Privacy Preserving Machine Learning (No. 
281). Retrieved from http://eprint.iacr.org/2017/281  
Bos, J. W., Lauter, K. and Naehrig, M. (2014). Private predictive analysis on encrypted medical 
data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 50, 234 –243. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.04.003  
Brisimi, T. S., Chen, R., Mela, T., Olshevsky, A., Paschalidis, I. C. and Shi, W. (2018). Federated 
learning of predictive models from federated Electronic Health Records. Internation al 
Journal of Medical Informatics, 112, 59 –67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.01.007  
Cai, H. and Venkatasubramanian, K. K. (2018). Detecting data manipulation attacks on 
physiologic al sensor measurements in wearable medical systems. EURASIP Journal on 
Information Security, 2018(1), 13. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13635 -018-0082 -y 
Chai, Z., Fayyaz, H., Fayyaz, Z., Anwar, A., Zh ou, Y., Baracaldo, N., … Cheng, Y. (2019). 
Towards Taming the Resource and Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning. 19 –21. 
Retrieved from https://www.usenix.org/conference/opml1 9/presentation/chai  
Chen, J., Pan, X., Monga, R., Bengio, S. and Jozefowicz, R. (2017). Revisiting Distributed 
Synchronous SGD. ArXiv:1604.00981 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.00981  
Chen, M ., Mathews, R., Ouyang, T. and Beaufays, F. (2019). Federated Learning Of Out -Of-
Vocabulary Words. ArXiv:1903.10635 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.10635  
Chen, Y., Luo, F., Li, T., Xiang, T. , Liu, Z. and Li, J. (2020). A training -integrity privacy -
preserving federated learning scheme with trusted execution environment. Information 
Sciences, 522, 69 –79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins. 2020.02.037  
Chen, Y., Ning, Y. and Rangwala, H. (2019). Asynchronous Online Federated Learning for Edge 
Devices. ArXiv:1911.02134 [Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02134  
Chen, Y., Sun, X. and Jin, Y. (2019). Communication -Efficient Federated Deep Learning with 

==== Page 41 ====
Asynchronous Model Update and Temporally Weighted Aggregation. ArXiv:1903.07424 
[Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.07424  
Chen, Y., Wang, J., Yu, C., Gao, W. and Qin, X. (2019). FedHealth: A Federated Transfer 
Learning Framework for Wearable Healthcare. ArXiv:1907.09173 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.09173  
Cheng, K., Fan, T., Jin, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, T. and Yang, Q. (2019). SecureBoost: A Lossless 
Federated Learning Framework. ArXiv:1901.08755 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from 
http://arx iv.org/abs/1901.08755  
Dalca, A. V., Balakrishnan, G., Guttag, J. and Sabuncu, M. R. (2019). Unsupervised learning of 
probabilistic diffeomorphic registration for images and surfaces. Medical Image Analysis, 
57, 226 –236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.07.006  
de Vos, B. D., Berendsen, F. F., Viergever, M. A., Sokooti, H., Staring, M. and Išgum, I. (2019). 
A deep learning framework for unsupervised affine and deformable image registration. 
Medical Image Analysis, 52, 128 –143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2018.11.010  
Edwards, J. (2019). Medicine on the Move: Wearable devices supply health -care providers with 
the data and insights  necessary to diagnose medical issues and create optimal treatment 
plans [Special Reports]. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36(6), 8 –11. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2019.2930767  
EU. Regulation of  the European Parliament and of the council on the protection of natural persons 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and 
repealing directive (general data protection regulation).(2018). 
https://eurlex.europ a.eu/legal - content/EN/TXT. Accessed 26 December 2018.  
Feng, J., Rong, C., Sun, F., Guo, D. and Li, Y. (2020). PMF: A Privacy -preserving Human 
Mobility Prediction Framework via Federated Learning. Proceedings of the ACM on 
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and  Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(1), 10:1 –10:21. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3381006  
Gao, D., Ju, C., Wei, X., Liu, Y., Chen, T. and Yang, Q. (2019). HHHFL: Hierarchical 
Heterogeneous Horizontal Federated Learning for Electroencephalography. 
ArXiv:1909.05784 [Cs, Eess]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05784  

==== Page 42 ====
Gascón, A., Schoppmann, P., Balle, B., Raykova, M., Doerner, J., Zahur, S. and Evans, D. (2017). 
Privacy -Preserving Distributed Linear Regression on High -Dimensional Data. 
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2017(4), 345 –364. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/popets -2017 -0053 
Geyer, R. C., Klein, T. and Nabi, M. (2018). Differentially Private Federated Learning: A Client 
Level Perspective. ArXiv:1712.07557 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.07557  
Gionis, A.,Indyk, P., Motwani, R., et al., (1999). Similarity search in high dimensions via hashing. 
In Vldb, volume 99, 518 –529. 
Godinho, C., Domingos, J., Cunha, G., Santos, A. T., Fern andes, R. M., Abreu, D., … Ferreira, J. 
J. (2016). A systematic review of the characteristics and validity of monitoring 
technologies to assess Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Neuroengineering and 
Rehabilitation, 13, 24. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12984 -016-0136 -7 
Google. Tensorflow federated. (2019) https://www.tensorflow.org/federated . Accessed 2019.  
Han, X., Yu, H. and Gu, H. (2019). Visual Inspection with Federated Learning. In F. Karray, A. 
Campilho and A. Yu (Eds.), Image Analysis and Recognition (pp. 52 –64). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-27272 -2_5 
Haoa, M., Li, H., Luo, X., Xu, G., Yang, H. and Liu, S. (2019). Efficient and Privacy -enhanced 
Federated Learning for Industrial Artificial Intelligence. IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Informatics, 1 –1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2945367  
Haob, M., Li, H., Xu, G., Liu, S. and Yang, H. (2019). Towards Efficient and Privacy -Preserving 
Federated Deep Learning. ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC) , 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2019.8761267  
Hard, A., Rao, K., Mathews, R., Ramaswamy, S., Beaufays, F., Augenstein, S., … Ramage, D. 
(2019). Federated Learning for Mobile Keyboard Prediction.  ArXiv:1811.03604 [Cs]. 
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03604  
Hardy, S., Henecka, W., Ivey -Law, H., Nock, R., Patrini, G., Smith, G. and Thorne, B. (2017). 
Private federated learning on vertically  partitioned data via entity resolution and 
additively homomorphic encryption. ArXiv:1711.10677 [Cs]. Retrieved from 

==== Page 43 ====
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10677  
Hasavari, S. and Song, Y. T. (2019). A Secure and Scalab le Data Source for Emergency Medical 
Care using Blockchain Technology. 2019 IEEE 17th International Conference on 
Software Engineering Research, Management and Applications (SERA), 71 –75. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1109/SERA.2019.8886792  
Ho, Q., Cipar, J., Cui, H., Lee, S., Kim, J. K., Gibbons, P. B., … Xing, E. P. (2013). More 
Effective Distributed ML via a Stale Synchronous Parallel Parameter Server. In C. J. C. 
Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahram ani and K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems 26 (pp. 1223 –1231). Retrieved from 
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4894 -more -effective -distributed -ml-via-a-stale-synchronous -
parallel -parameter -server.pdf  
Holcomb, S. D., Porter, W. K., Ault, S. V., Mao, G. and Wang, J. (2018). Overview on DeepMind 
and Its AlphaGo Zero AI. Proceedings of the 201 8 International Conference on Big Data 
and Education  - ICBDE ’18, 67 –71. https://doi.org/10.1145/3206157.3206174  
Hu, B., Gao, Y., Liu, L. and Ma, H. (2018). Federated Region -Learning: An Edge Computing 
Based Framework for Urban Environment Sensing. 2018 IEEE Global Communications 
Conference (GLOBECOM), 1 –7. https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2018.8647649  
Huanga, L., Shea, A. L., Qian, H., Masurkar, A., Deng, H. and Liu, D. (2019). Patient clustering 
improves efficiency of federated machine learning to predict mortality and hospital stay 
time using distributed electronic medical records. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 99, 
103291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103291  
Huangb, L., Yin, Y., Fu, Z., Zhang, S., Deng, H. and Liu, D. (2019). LoAdaBoos t:Loss -Based 
AdaBoost Federated Machine Learning on medical Data. ArXiv:1811.12629 [Cs, Stat]. 
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12629  
Ilias, C. and Georgios, S. (2019). Machine Learning for All: A More Robust Federated Learning 
Framework. 544 –551. Retrieved from 
http://www.scitepress.org/DigitalLibrary/Link.aspx?doi=10.5220/0007571705440551  
Ji, J., Che n, X., Wang, Q., Yu, L. and Li, P. (2019). Learning to Learn Gradient Aggregation by 
Gradient Descent. Proceedings of the Twenty -Eighth International Joint Conference on 

==== Page 44 ====
Artificial Intelligence, 2614 –2620. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/363  
Jiang, P. and Ying, L. (2020). An Optimal Stopping Approach for Iterative Training in Federated 
Learning. 2020 54th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), 1 –
6. https://doi.org/10.1109/CISS48834.2020.1570616094  
Kairouz, P., McMahan, H. B., Avent, B., Bellet, A., Bennis, M., Bhagoji, A. N., … Zhao, S. 
(2019). Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning. ArXiv:1912.0 4977 [Cs, 
Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04977  
Kang, J., Xiong, Z., Niyato, D., Yu, H., Liang, Y. -C. and Kim, D. I. (2019). Incentive Design for 
Efficient Federated Learning in Mobile Netw orks: A Contract Theory Approach. 2019 
IEEE VTS Asia Pacific Wireless Communications Symposium (APWCS), 1 –5. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/VTS -APWCS.2019.8851649  
Kennedy, Z. C., Stephenson, D. E.,  Christ, J. F., Pope, T. R., Arey, B. W., Barrett, C. A. and 
Warner, M. G. (2017). Enhanced anti -counterfeiting measures for additive 
manufacturing: Coupling lanthanide nanomaterial chemical signatures with blockchain 
technology. Journal of Materials Chemi stry C, 5(37), 9570 –9578. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TC03348F  
Khan, L. U., Tran, N. H., Pandey, S. R., Saad, W., Han, Z., Nguyen, M. N. H. and Hong, C. S. 
(2019). Federated Learning for Edge Networks: Re source Optimization and Incentive 
Mechanism. ArXiv:1911.05642 [Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05642  
Kharitonov, E. (2019). Federated Online Learning to Rank with Evolution Strategies. WSDM 
2019,249 –257. https://doi.org/10.1145/3289600.3290968  
Kim, H., Park, J., Bennis, M. and Kim, S. -L. (2019). B lockchained On -Device Federated 
Learning. ArXiv:1808.03949 [Cs, Math]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.03949  
Kim, Y. J. and Hong, C. S. (2019). Blockchain -based Node -aware Dynamic Weighting Method s 
for Improving Federated Learning Performance. 2019 20th Asia -Pacific Network 
Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), 1 –4. 
https://doi.org/10.23919/APNOMS.2019.8893114  
Kim, Y., Sun, J.,  Yu, H. and Jiang, X. (2017). Federated Tensor Factorization for Computational 
Phenotyping. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 

==== Page 45 ====
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 887 –895. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098118  
Konečný, J., McMahan, H. B., Yu, F. X., Richtárik, P., Suresh, A. T. and Bacon, D. (2017). 
Federated Learning: Strategies for Improving Communication Efficiency. 
ArXiv:1610.05492 [Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492  
Lee, J., Sun, J., Wang, F., Wang, S., Jun, C. -H. and Jiang, X. (2018). Privacy -Preserving Patient 
Similarity Learning in a Federated Environment: Development and Analysis. JMIR 
Medical Informatics, 6(2), e20. https://doi.org/10.2196/medinform.7744  
Lee, S., Lacy, M. E., Jankowich, M., Correa, A. and Wu, W. -C. (2020). Association between 
obesity phenotypes of insulin resistance and risk of type 2 diabetes in African Americans: 
The Jackson Heart Study. Journal of Clinical & Translational Endocrinology, 19, 100210. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcte.2019.100210  
Leroy, D., Coucke , A., Lavril, T., Gisselbrecht, T. and Dureau, J. (2019). Federated Learning for 
Keyword Spotting. ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 6341 –6345. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2019.8683546  
Li, H. and Han, T. (2019). An End -to-End Encrypted Neural Network for Gradient Updates 
Transmission in Federated Learning. 2019 Data Compression Conference (DCC), 589 –
589. https://doi.org/10.1109/DCC.2019.00101  
Li, L., Wang, Y. and Lin, K. (2020). Preventive maintenance scheduling optimization based on 
opportunistic production -maintenance synchronization. Journal of Intelligent 
Manufactur ing, 10.1007/s10845 -020-01588 -9. 
Li, Q., Wen, Z. and He, B. (2020). Practical Federated Gradient Boosting Decision Trees. ICLR 
2020 -International Conference on Learning Representations.  
Li, S., Cheng, Y., Liu, Y., Wang, W. and Chen, T. (2019). Abnormal Cli ent Behavior Detection in 
Federated Learning. ArXiv:1910.09933 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09933  
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Talwalkar, A. and Smith, V. (2020). Federated Learning: Challe nges, 
Methods, and Future Directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3), 50 –60. 

==== Page 46 ====
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2020.2975749  
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Zaheer, M., Sanjabi, M., Talwalkar, A. and Smith,  V. (2019). Federated 
Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks. ArXiv:1812.06127 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06127  
Li, T., Sanjabi, M., Beirami, A. and Smith, V. (2020). FAIR RESOURC E ALLOCATION IN 
FEDERATED LEARNING. ICLR 2020 -International Conference on Learning 
Representations.  
Li, X., Huang, K., Yang, W., Wang, S. and Zhang, Z. (2019, September 25). On the Convergence 
of FedAvg on Non -IID Data. Presented at the International Conference on Learning 
Representations. Retrieved from https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJxNAnVtDS  
Lin, K. (2018). User Experience –Based Product Design for Smart Production to Empower 
Industry 4.0 in the Glass Recycling Circular Economy. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 125, 729 –738. 
Liu, B., Wan g, L., Liu, M. and Xu, C. -Z. (2020). Federated Imitation Learning: A Novel 
Framework for Cloud Robotic Systems With Heterogeneous Sensor Data. IEEE Robotics 
and Automation Letters, 5(2), 3509 –3516. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2976321  
Liu, D., Dligach, D. and Miller, T. (2019). Two -stage Federated Phenotyping and Patient 
Representation Learning. Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task, 
283–291. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19 -5030 
Liu, F., Wu, X., Ge, S., Fan, W. and Zou, Y. (2020). Federated Learning for Vision -and-Language 
Grounding Problems.AAAI 2020 -The Thirty -Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence,11572 -11579 . 
Liu, W., Chen, L., Chen, Y. and Zhang, W. (2020). Accelerating Federated Learning via 
Momentum Gradient Descent. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 
31(8), 1754 –1766. https:/ /doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2020.2975189  
Liu, Y., Chen, T. and Yang, Q. (2018). Secure Federated Transfer Learning. ArXiv:1812.03337 
[Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.03337  
Liu, Z., Li, T., Sm ith, V. and Sekar, V. (2019). Enhancing the Privacy of Federated Learning with 
Sketching. ArXiv:1911.01812 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01812  

==== Page 47 ====
Ma, C., Li, J., Ding, M., Yang, H. H., Shu, F., Quek, T. Q. S. and Poor, H. V. (2019). On 
Safeguarding Privacy and Security in the Framework of Federated Learning. 
ArXiv:1909.06512 [Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.06512  
Majeed, U. and Hong, C. S. (2019). FLchain: Federated Learning via MEC -enabled Blockchain 
Network. 2019 20th Asia -Pacific Network Operations and Management Symposium 
(APNOMS), 1 –4. https://doi.org/10.23919/APNOMS.2019.8892848  
McMahan, B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S. and Arcas, B. A. Y. (2017). Communication -
Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. Artificial Intelligence and 
Statistics, 12 73–1282. Retrieved from http://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html  
McMahan, H. B., Zhang, L., Ramage, D. and Talwar, K. (2018). LEARNING 
DIFFERENTIALLY PRIVATE RECURRENT LANGUAGE MOD ELS. ICLR 2018.  
Mohammad, U. and Sorour, S. (2019). Adaptive Task Allocation for Asynchronous Federated 
Mobile Edge Learning. ArXiv:1905.01656 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.01656  
Mohri, M. , Sivek, G. and Suresh, A. T. (2019). Agnostic Federated Learning. International 
Conference on Machine Learning, 4615 –4625. Retrieved from 
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/mohri19a.html  
Mowl a, N. I., Tran, N. H., Doh, I. and Chae, K. (2020). Federated Learning -Based Cognitive 
Detection of Jamming Attack in Flying Ad -Hoc Network. IEEE Access, 8, 4338 –4350. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/A CCESS.2019.2962873  
Muñoz -González, L., Co, K. T. and Lupu, E. C. (2019). Byzantine -Robust Federated Machine 
Learning through Adaptive Model Averaging. ArXiv:1909.05125 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved 
from http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05125  
Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A peer -to-peer electronic cash system(2008). https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf  
Nasr, M., Shokri, R. and Houmansadr, A. (2019). Comprehensive Privacy Analys is of Deep 
Learning: Passive and Active White -box Inference Attacks against Centralized and 
Federated Learning. 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 739 –753. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2 019.00065  
Nishio, T. and Yonetani, R. (2019). Client Selection for Federated Learning with Heterogeneous 

==== Page 48 ====
Resources in Mobile Edge. ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC), 1 –7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2019.8761315  
Nock, R., Hardy, S., Henecka, W., Ivey -Law, H., Patrini, G., Smith, G. and Thorne, B. (2018). 
Entity Resolution and Federated Learning get a Federated Resolution. ArXiv:1803.04035 
[Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04035  
Pan, S., Ni, X., Sun, J. -T., Yang, Q. and Chen, Z. (2010, January 1). Cross -Domain Sentiment 
Classification via Spectral Feature Alignment. 751 –760. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1772690.1772767  
Pandey, S. R., Tran, N. H., Bennis, M., Tun, Y. K., Manzoor, A. and Hong, C. S. (2019). A 
Crowdsourcing Framework for On -Device Federated Learning. ArXiv:1911.01046 [Cs, 
Stat]. Retriev ed from http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01046  
Pfohl, S. R., Dai, A. M. and Heller, K. (2019). Federated and Differentially Private Learning for 
Electronic Health Records. ArXiv:1911.05861 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved f rom 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05861  
Qian, Y., Hu, L., Chen, J., Guan, X., Hassan, M. M. and Alelaiwi, A. (2019). Privacy -aware 
service placement for mobile edge computing via federated learning. Informatio n 
Sciences, 505, 562 –570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.07.069  
Ramaswamy, S., Mathews, R., Rao, K. and Beaufays, F. (2019). Federated Learning for Emoji 
Prediction in a Mobile Keyboard. ArXi v:1906.04329 [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04329  
Ramaswamy, S., Mathews, R., Rao, K. and Beaufays, F. (2019). Federated Learning for Emoji 
Prediction in a Mobile Keyboard. ArXiv:1906.04329  [Cs]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04329  
Saputra, Y. M., Hoang, D. T., Nguyen, D. N., Dutkiewicz, E., Mueck, M. D. and Srikanteswara, S. 
(2019). Energy Demand Prediction with Federated Learnin g for Electric Vehicle 
Networks. 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 1 –6. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOBECOM38437.2019.9013587  
Sarikaya, Y. and Ercetin, O. (2019). Motiv ating Workers in Federated Learning: A Stackelberg 
Game Perspective. ArXiv:1908.03092 [Cs]. Retrieved from 

==== Page 49 ====
http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.03092  
Sharma, S., Chaoping, X., Liu, Y. and Kang, Y. (2019). Secure and Efficient Federated Transfer 
Learning. ArXiv:1910.13271 [Cs]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13271  
Silva, S., Gutman, B. A., Romero, E., Thompson, P. M., Altmann, A. and Lorenzi, M. (2019). 
Federated Learning in Distributed Medical Databases: Meta -Analysis of Large -Scale 
Subcortical Brain Data. 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical 
Imagin g (ISBI 2019), 270 –274. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI.2019.8759317  
Smith, V., Chiang, C. -K., Sanjabi, M. and Talwalkar, A. S. (2017). Federated Multi -Task 
Learning. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. 
Vishwanathan and R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 30 (pp. 4424 –4434). Retrieved from http://papers.n ips.cc/paper/7029 -federated -
multi -task-learning.pdf  
Sozinov, K., Vlassov, V. and Girdzijauskas, S. (2018). Human Activity Recognition Using 
Federated Learning. 2018 IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel Distributed Processing with 
Applications, Ubiquitous Computing Communications, Big Data Cloud Computing, 
Social Comp uting Networking, Sustainable Computing Communications 
(ISPA/IUCC/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 1103 –1111. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/BDCloud.2018.00164  
Sprague, M. R., Jalalirad, A., Scavuzzo, M. , Capota, C., Neun, M., Do, L. and Kopp, M. (2019). 
Asynchronous Federated Learning for Geospatial Applications. In A. Monreale, C. 
Alzate, M. Kamp, Y. Krishnamurthy, D. Paurat, M. Sayed -Mouchaweh, … R. P. Ribeiro 
(Eds.), ECML PKDD 2018 Workshops (pp. 21 –28). https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-
14880 -5_2 
Szegedi, G., Kiss, P. and Horváth, T. (2019). Evolutionary federated learning on EEG -data. ITAT 
2019 -Information technologies -- Applications and  Theory, 71 -78. 
Tran, N. H., Bao, W., Zomaya, A., N.H, N. M. and Hong, C. S. (2019). Federated Learning over 
Wireless Networks: Optimization Model Design and Analysis. IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - 
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 1387 –1395. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM.2019.8737464  

==== Page 50 ====
Truex, S., Baracaldo, N., Anwar, A., Steinke, T., Ludwig, H., Zhang, R. and Zhou, Y. (2019). A 
Hybrid Approach to Privacy -Preserving Federated Learning. Proceed ings of the 12th 
ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, 1 –11. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3338501.3357370  
van Berlo, B., Saeed, A. and Ozcelebi, T. (2020). Towards federated unsupervised  representation 
learning. Proceedings of the Third ACM International Workshop on Edge Systems, 
Analytics and Networking, 31 –36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3378679.3394530  
Wang, H., Yurochkin, M., Sun,  Y., Papailiopoulos, D. and Khazaeni, Y. (2019, September 25). 
Federated Learning with Matched Averaging. Presented at the International Conference 
on Learning Representations. Retrieved from 
https://openreview.net/forum?id=BkluqlSFDS  
Wang, S., Tuor, T., Salonidis, T., Leung, K. K., Makaya, C., He, T. and Chan, K. (2019). 
Adaptive Federated Learning in Resource Constrained Edge Computing Systems. IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 37(6), 1205 –1221. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2019.2904348  
Wang, X., Han, Y., Wang, C., Zhao, Q., Chen, X. and Chen, M. (2019). In -Edge AI: 
Intelligentizing Mobile Edge Computing, Caching and Co mmunication by Federated 
Learning. IEEE Network, 33(5), 156 –165. https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2019.1800286  
Wang, Y., Tong, Y. and Shi, D. (2020). Federated Latent Dirichlet Allocation: A Local 
Differential Privacy Based Framework. AAAI 2020,6283 -6290.  
Wang, Z., Song, M., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Wang, Q. and Qi, H. (2019). Beyond Inferring Class 
Representatives: User -Level Privacy Leakage From Federated Learning. IEEE 
INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE Conference on  Computer Communications, 2512 –2520. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM.2019.8737416  
Webanka. Federated AI Technology Enabler. (FATE).(2019) 
https://github.com/webankfintech/fate  Accessed 2019.  
Webankb.  FedAI ecosystem. (2019),  https://cn.fedai.org/cases/.2019 , Accessed 2019.  
Wu, W., He,  L., Lin, W., RuiMao and Jarvis, S. (2019). SAFA: A Semi -Asynchronous Protocol 
for Fast Federated Learning with Low Overhead. ArXiv:1910.01355 [Cs]. Retrieved from 

==== Page 51 ====
http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01355  
Xiao, P.,  Cheng, S., Stankovic, V. and Vukobratovic, D. (2020). Averaging Is Probably Not the 
Optimum Way of Aggregating Parameters in Federated Learning. Entropy, 22(3), 314. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/e22030314  
Xu, G., Li, H., Liu, S., Yang, K. and Lin, X. (2020). VerifyNet: Secure and Verifiable Federated 
Learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 15, 911 –926. 
https://doi.org/10.1 109/TIFS.2019.2929409  
Xu, R., Baracaldo, N., Zhou, Y., Anwar, A. and Ludwig, H. (2019). HybridAlpha: An Efficient 
Approach for Privacy -Preserving Federated Learning. Proceedings of the 12th ACM 
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, 13 –23. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3338501.3357371  
Yang, K., Jiang, T., Shi, Y. and Ding, Z. (2019). Federated Learning Based on Over -the-Air 
Computation. ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communica tions 
(ICC), 1 –6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2019.8761429  
Yang, Q.a, Liu, Y., Chen, T. and Tong, Y. (2019). Federated Machine Learning: Concept and 
Applications. ACM Transactions on Intelligent S ystems and Technology, 10(2), 1 –19. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3298981  
Yang, Q.b, Liu, Y., Cheng, Y., Kang, Y., Chen, T. and Yu, H. (2019). DBA: DISTRIBUTED. 
Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, 13(3), 1 –207. 
https://doi.org/10.2200/S00960ED2V01Y201910AIM043  
Yang, T., Andrew, G., Eichner, H., Sun, H., Li, W., Kong, N., Ramage, D. and Beaufays, F. 
(2018). Applied  Federated Learning: Improving Google Keyboard Query Suggestions. 
ArXiv:1812.02903 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02903  
Yang, W., Zhang, Y., Ye, K., Li, L. and Xu, C. -Z. (2019). FFD: A Federated Learning Based 
Method for Credit Card Fraud Detection. In K. Chen, S. Seshadri and L. -J. Zhang (Eds.), 
Big Data – BigData 2019 (pp. 18 –32). https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-23551 -2_2 
Yao, X., Huang, C. and Sun, L. (2018). Two -Stream Federated Learning: Reduce the 
Communication Costs. 2018 IEEE Visual Communications and Image Processing 
(VCIP), 1 –4. https://doi.org/10.1109/VCIP.2018.8698609  

==== Page 52 ====
Yao, X., Huang, T., Zhang, R. -X., Li, R. and Sun, L. (2019). Federated Learning with Unbiased 
Gradient Aggregation and Controllable Meta Updating. ArXiv:1910.08234 [Cs, Stat]. 
Retrieved from http://arxiv.o rg/abs/1910.08234  
Yu, T., Li, T., Sun, Y., Nanda, S., Smith, V., Sekar, V. and Seshan, S. (2020). Learning Context -
Aware Policies from Multiple Smart Homes via Federated Multi -Task Learning. 2020 
IEEE/ACM Fifth International Conference on Internet -of-Thing s Design and 
Implementation (IoTDI), 104 –115. https://doi.org/10.1109/IoTDI49375.2020.00017  
Yurochkin, M., Agarwal, M., Ghosh, S., Greenewald, K., Hoang, N. and Khazaeni, Y. (2019). 
Bayesian Nonparametric Federated Learning of Neural Networks. International 
Conference on Machine Learning, 7252 –7261. Retrieved from 
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/yurochkin19a.html  
Zhang, J.,  Chen, J., Wu, D., Chen, B. and Yu, S. (2019). Poisoning Attack in Federated Learning 
using Generative Adversarial Nets. 2019 18th IEEE International Conference on Trust, 
Security And Privacy In Computing And Communications/13th IEEE International 
Conferen ce On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 374 –380. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom/BigDataSE.2019.00057  
Zhang, W., Ouyang, W., Li, W. and Xu, D. (2018). Collaborat ive and Adversarial Network for 
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation. 3801 –3809. Retrieved from 
http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_c vpr_2018/html/Zhang_Collaborative_and_Advers
arial_CVPR_2018_paper.html  
Zhao, Y., Li, M., Lai, L., Suda, N., Civin, D. and Chandra, V. (2018). Federated Learning with 
Non-IID Data. ArXiv:1806.00582 [Cs, Stat]. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.00582  
Zhu, H. and Jin, Y. (2019). Multi -Objective Evolutionary Federated Learning. IEEE Transactions 
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 1 –13. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2919699  
 
 
 
 

==== Page 53 ====
 
Table 1. Application in various fields  
Researchers  Application 
domain  Studies  Pros  Constraint  
Applications in mobile devices  
Chen, Mathews, Ouyang 
and Beaufays. 2019  Smart phone 
keyboard  learn out - of-
vocabulary words  expanding the vocabulary 
of a keyboard without 
exporting sensitive text  Strongly relies on a learned 
probabilistic mode  
Leroy et al. 2019  Smart phone 
voice assistant  Learn embedded 
wake word detector  using an adaptive 
averaging strategy in place 
of standard weighted 
model averaging  Do not show robustness to 
back - ground noise  
Hard et al.2019  Smart phone 
keyboard  next-word 
prediction in a   
virtual keyboard  train an RNN model from 
scratch in the server and 
federated environments 
and achieve recall 
improvements  Still have high 
communication cost  
Yang et al. 2018  Smart phone 
keyboard  improve virtual 
keyboard search 
suggestion quality  being easily trainable 
given the convexity of the 
error function by logistic 
regression model  impractical to train models 
with a large number of 
parameters  
Ramaswamy et al. 2019  Smart phone 
keyboard  predict emoji from 
text typed on a 
keyboard  achieve better 
performance than a server 
trained model  client cache contents are 
different, and metrics 
cannot be compared across 
experiments  
Wang et al. (2019)  Mobile edge 
computing  optimizing MEC, 
caching and  
communication  discussed the potential of 
inte-grating the Deep 
Reinforcement Learning 
and FL framework with 
the mobile edge system  how to distribute the huge 
computation load   on 
heterogenous scenarios are 
still unexplored.  
Qian et al. 2019  Mobile edge 
computing  Privacy -aware 
service placement 
for mobile edge 
computing  propose a privacy -aware 
ser- vice placement (PSP) 
scheme to meet users’ 
service demands   Not able to be used for 
several edge clouds  
Feng et al.2020  Mobile devices 
motion sensors  Privacy -preserving 
Human Mobility 
Prediction  Using group optimization 
strategy, reduce the 
performance degradation   only consider the basic 
mobility model for the 
simplicity  
Sozinov et al. 2018  Smart devices 
motion sensor s  Human Activity 
Recognition   identifies and rejects 
erroneous clients   producing models with 
slightly worse, accuracy 
compared to centralized 
models  
Aïvodji et al. 2019  Smart home 
IOT Design a sufficient 
secure federated 
smart home setting  combines FL with secure 
data aggregation   rather complex 
architecture to implement  
Yu et al. 2020  Smart home 
IOT  learn users’ 
behavior patterns  effectively detect physical 
hazards  Not flexible with mapping 
mechanism for diverse 
deployment  
Liu et al. 2020  Robot network  robots imitation 
learning   increases imitation 
learning efficiency of 
local robots in cloud 
robotic systems  Need to further work on 
convergence justification 
of the fusion process  
Applications in industrial engineering  
Hu et al. 2018  environment 
protection  environmental 
monitorin g frame 
based on federated 
region learning  considers the regional 
characteristics during the 
distribution of training 
samples to improve the 
inference accuracy  Need to be extended to 
multi -layer structures 
instead of two -layer 
structure  
Han et al. 2019  Image 
detection  provide 
manufactures with 
the service in 
automated defect 
inspection  solve the problem of 
lacking defective samples 
to detect defects  need quick model 
deployment to serve 
various industries  
Liu et al. 2020  Image 
representation  obtain various types 
of image 
representations 
from diff erent tasks   Be validated on three 
kinds of FL settings  more beneficial for the 
smaller dataset than the 
larger one in horizontal FL  
Mowla et al. 2020  Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles  malicious attacks 
detection in 
communication enhance the model with a 
client group prioritization 
technique leveraging the Need to improve the 
reliability of the global 
updates in this architecture.  

==== Page 54 ====
system of UAVs  Dempster –Shafer theory  
Saputra et al. 201 9  Electrical 
vechicles  federated energy 
demand prediction  applied the clustering -
based energy demand 
learning method for to 
further improve the 
prediction accuracy   Need to be more stable 
and flexible.  
Yang et al. 2019  Financial field  detect credit card 
fraud  achieves an average of test 
AUC 10% higher than 
traditional method.  Should take more reliable 
measurements into account 
to protect the privacy  
Wang et al. 2020  text mining  spam filtering and 
sentiment analysis   Using Random Response 
with Priori (RRP), which 
provides theoretical 
guarantees on both data 
privacy and model 
accuracy.   noise from our perturbing 
mechanism will slightly 
influence the overall 
performance  
Applications in Health Care  
Brisimi et al. 2018  Predict future 
hospitalizations 
for patients  Cluster Primal Dual 
Splitting algorithm  Yield classifiers using 
relatively few features  Need more iterations for 
convergence  
Silva et al.2019  MRI Analysis  Provide federated 
analysis framework 
compatible with the 
standard ENIGMA 
pipelines  Deal with variability of 
high dimensional features 
efficiently  Only tested in limited 
dataset  
Liu et al.2019  Extraction of 
clinical notes  Two-stage 
federated NLP 
method  Adding pre -processing 
step to improve accuracy  Not suitable for small 
questionable cases  
Gao et al.2019  EEG 
Classification  Design a 
hierarchical 
heterogeneous 
horizontal FL 
framework  The first EEG classifier 
over heterogeneo us EEG 
data Only work on 3 different 
datasets  
Li and Liu 2019  Predict 
mortality and 
hospital stay 
time  Introduce 
community -based 
FL and evaluate it 
on non -iid icu 
EMRs  converged to higher 
predictive accuracy in less 
communication rounds 
than the baseline FL 
model  Model parameters of 
community will lead to 
extra communication 
overhead  
Pfohl et al.2019  Clinical 
prediction  Establish efficacy 
of FL over 
centralized and 
local learning  Perform FL in a 
differentially private 
manner  Underestimate of privacy 
cost 
Huangb et al.2019  Mortality 
prediction over 
drug utilization 
data Adaptive boosting 
method  Alleviate non -iid by 
introducing data -sharing 
technology  Training on iid data 
outperform non -iid data  
Kim et al.2017  Analysis of 
computational 
phenotypes  Federated tensor 
factorization for 
privacy preserving 
computational 
phenotyping  Summarized information 
does not disclose the 
patient data  Only Accurate with small 
or skewly distributed data  
Lee et al. 2018  Similar patient 
matching  Federated patient 
hashin g framework  Avoid security attack from 
reverse engineering  Inevitable computational 
complexity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 55 ====
 
Fig. 1. Illustration of FL framework proposed by Google  
 
 
Fig. 2. An application sample of Horizontal FL  
  


==== Page 56 ====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.  An application sample of Vertical FL  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. An application sample of federated transfer learn  
 


==== Page 57 ====
 
Fig. 5. Optimization path to overcome three challenges in FL  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. The evolution of privacy attack and enhancement in FL  


==== Page 58 ====
 

