==== Page 1 ====
 3 BULGARIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES  
 
CYBERNETICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES  Volume 19, No 1 
Sofia  2019 Print ISSN : 1311 -9702 ; Online ISSN : 1314-4081  
DOI: 10.2478/cait -2019-0001 
 
 
A Review of Feature Selection and Its Methods   
B. Venkatesh, J . Anuradha  
SCOPE , Vellore Institute of Technology,  Vellore , TN, 632014 , India  
E-mail: venkatesh.cse88@gmail.com      
Abstract : Nowadays , being in digital  era the  data generated by various applications 
are incre asing drastically both row-wise and column  wise; this crea tes a bottleneck 
for analytics  and  also increases the burden  of machine learning algorithms that work  
for pattern recogni tion. This cause of dimensionality can be handled  through 
reduction  techniques. The Dimensionality Reduction (DR) can be handled  in two 
ways namely Feature Selection (FS) and Feature Extraction (FE). This paper focuses 
on a survey  of feature selection methods, from this extensive  survey we can conclude 
that most of the FS methods use static data. However , after the emergence of IoT  and 
web-based  applications , the data are generated dynamically and grow in a fast rate, 
so it is likely to have noisy data, it also hinder s the performance  of the algorithm.  
With the incre ase in the size of  the data set, the scalab ility of the FS methods becom es 
jeopardized.  So the existing DR algorithms do not address the issues with the dynamic 
data. Using FS methods not only reduce s the burden of the data  but also avoids 
overfitting of the model.  
Keywords : Dimensionality Reduction (DR), Feature Selecti on (FS), Feature 
Extraction  (FE). 
1. Introduction  
As the data increases exponentially  the quality of data required  for processing by 
Data mining, Pattern Recognition,  Image processing,  and other Machine Learning  
algor ithms decrease gradually . Bellman  calls this scenario “Curse of 
Dimensionality ”. Higher dimension data leads to the prevalence  of noisy , irrelevant  
and redundant data. Which intern causes overfitting of the model  and increases the 
error rate of the learning algorithm. To handle these prob lems “ Dimensionality 
Reduction ” techniques are applied, and it is the part of the preprocessing  stage. So, 
Feature Selection (FS) and Feature Extraction (FE) are most commonly using 
dimensionality reduction approaches. FS is used to clean up  the noisy, red undant and 
irrelevant data. As a result , the performance is boosted .  
In FS  a subset of features are  selected  from  the original  set of feature s based on 
features redundancy and relevance. Based on the relevance  and redundant features , 
Yu and L i u  [1] in 2004  have classifie d the feature subset as four types. They are:  
1) Noisy & irrelevant; 2) Redundant & Weakly relevant ; 3) Weakl y relevant  and 


==== Page 2 ====
 4 Non-redundant; 4) Strongly relevant . The feature which did not require for predicting 
accuracy  is known  as an irrelevant  feature. Some of the popular appro aches that fit 
into filter and wrapper methods are models, search strategies , feature quality 
measures , and feature evaluation.  
Set of features are key factors for determining the hypothesis of the predicting 
models . The No of features and the hypothesis space are directly proportional to each 
other, i.e., as the number of features incre ases, then the hypothesis space is also 
incre ased. For example, if there are M features with  the binary  class label  in a dataset , 
then it has
M22 in the search space. The hypothesis space can furth er be reduce d by 
discarding redundant and irrelevant features .  
The relevancy of the feature is measured based on the characteristics  of the data 
not by its value. Statistics is such one technique which shows the relationship between 
the features and its importance.  
The distortion of irrelevant and redundant features is not due to  the presence  of 
un-useful  information ; it is because the feature s did not have  a statistical  relationship 
with other features . Individually any feature may  be irrelevant but it is relevant whe n 
joined with other features [2].  
FS methods are classified  into three types, b ased on the interaction with  the 
learning model such as  Filter, Wrapper and Embedded Methods. In the Filter method 
features are selected based on statistical measures. It is independent of the learning 
algorithm and requires less computational time.  Information  gain [3], chi-square test  
[3], Fisher  score,  correlation coefficient , and variance threshold  are some of the 
statistical measures used to understand the importance of the featur es. The 
performance of the Wrapper  method depends on the classifier . The best subset of 
features is selected  based on the results of the classifier.  Wrapper methods are 
computationally more expensive th an filter methods , due to the repeated learning 
steps and cross -validation.  However, the se methods are more accurate than the filter  
method. Some of the examples are R ecursive feature elimination  [4], Sequential 
feature selection algorithms  [5], and Genetic algorithms . The third appro ach is the 
Embedded  method w hich uses ensemb le learning and hybrid learning methods for 
feature selection. Since it has a collective decision, its performance is better than the 
other two models. Random forest is one such example . It is computationally  less 
intensive than wrapper met hods. However, this method has a drawback of specific to 
a learning model.  
1.1. FS procedure  
It is proved  from the literature that feature selection can improve the performance of 
prediction, scalability and generalization capability of the classifier. In knowledge 
discovery , FS plays a fundamental  role in reducing the computational complexity, 
storage, and cost [6]. 
Fig. 1 shows  the various stages of FS process [7] which is explained  below.  Its 
performance de pends on the decision  taken at every level.  
1. Search direction . A n g  et al. [7] state that t he first st age of the FS process 
is finding the search direction  and the starting point. The search directions are broadly 
classified into three types of forward search, backward search, and random search.  

==== Page 3 ====
 5 The search process can start with an empty set where new features are added 
recursively in every iteration such phenomenon is known as forward searching. In 
converse to it, the backward elimination search start with a complete set of feature s 
and features are removed iteratively until the desired subset of features is reached. 
The other variant approach is a random searching method, which builds the feature 
subset by both adding and removing of the features iteratively. After determining the 
search direction search strategy can be applied.  
 
Fig. 1. Stages in F S-process 
2. Determine search strategy . From the literature, we c ome to know that 
search strategies can be  randomized, exponential and sequential  search . Table 1 
enumerates the different search strategies and their algorithms. The d rawback  of 
exponential search is that it requires 2N combinations of feature selection for N 
features. It is an exhaustive search strategy, and it is an NP -hard problem [8]. To 
overcome this drawback researchers  has introduce d randomized search strategies.  
In sequential search , sequentially features are added to an empty set or remove 
features from the complete set. Which is referred to as Sequential Forward Selection 
(SFS) and Sequential Backward Selection (SBS) respectively . The drawback with 
these methods is  the features that  are eliminated will not be considered for further 
iterations. This phenomenon is known as nesting effect. To overcome this 
disadvantage, F e r r i  and P u d i l  [9] in 1994 proposed Plus -l-minus -r (l – r) search 
method. These methods have Ө (2M) complexity for selecting l feature from the set 
of M features.  
A good search strategy should obtain an optimal solution, local search  ability 
and computational effective ness [2]. Based on these requirements searching 
algorithms are further classified as optimal and suboptimal feature selection 
algorithm s. The nesting effect of SFS and SBS algorithm ar e overcome by P u d i l, 
N o v o v i č o v á  and K i t t l e r  [10] in 1994 S FFS and SBFS algorithms. Different 
search techniques, categories, their merits, and demerits are stated in Table 2.  
3. Evaluation criteria . The best features are selected based on the evaluation 
criteria. Based on the evaluation methods FS methods [23]  are classified into Filter 
1. Determine search 
direction  
3. Determine 
Evolution Criteria  
2. Determine search 
Strategy  
4. Stopping 
criteria  
5. Validate the Final 
Results  
Original  
 Data  
Feature 
Subset
Selected 
Feature Subset  
No
 Yes
Original data  

==== Page 4 ====
 6 method [24-26], Wrapper method [27-29], Embedded method [30], and Hybrid 
method [31, 32]. 
Table 1 . Categorization  of search strategies  
Search strategy  Also known a s Example  
Exponential 
search  Complete search  Exhaustive search  
Sequential 
search  Greedy hill  
climbing   Sequential Forward Selection (SFS)  
 Sequential  Backward Selection (SBS)  
 Sequential  Forward Floating Selection (SFFS) [10] 
 Sequential  Backward Floating Selection (SBFS) [10] 
 Best first search  
 Beam search  
 Plus, L Take -away r Algorithm  (PTA) [9] 
Random search  Heuristic search   Simulated annealing [11] 
 Random hill -climbing [12] 
 Genetic Algorithm  (GA) [13] 
 Las Vegas Algorithm [14] 
 Tabu search [15]. 
 Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [16] 
 Chao tic simulated annealing [17], [18]  
 Noisy , chaotic simulated annealing [19] 
 Branch -and-bound [20], [21]  
 Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [22] 
Table 2 . Merits and demerits of search algorithms  
Search 
algorith m Category  Merits  Demerits  
SFS & SBS  Suboptimal 
FS  Computational  time is very 
less 
 Simple to implement  
 Robust to multi  colinearity   Redundant features are selected  
 Nesting effect  
 Fails to provide optimal results  
SFFS & SFBS  Suboptimal 
FS  Reduce redundant features  
 Overcomes Nesting effect  
 Provide optimal results   NP-hard to search all subsets  
 A monotonic behavior  of the FS  
Plus-l-minus    
-r(l – r) Suboptimal 
FS Overcomes the nesting effect  No hypothetical method for predicting 
the values of l and r  
Exhaustive 
search  Optimal FS  Reduce the computational time   Not suitable for large dataset  
 NP-hard to search all subsets  
Branch and 
bound  Optimal FS  Reduce the computational time   Not suitable for large dataset  
 NP-hard to search all subsets  
4. Stopping criteria . Stopping criteria specif y when the FS process should 
stop. A good stopping criterion leads to low computational complexity in finding an 
optimal  feature subset and also overcomes the over-fitting  problem.  The selection of 
the stopping  criterion is influenced  by the choices made in the previous stages . Some 
of the common  stopping criteria are : 
 Pre-defined No of features  
 Pre-defined No of iterations  
 Percentage (%) of advancement over two successive iteration steps  
 Based on the evaluation  function.  

==== Page 5 ====
 7 5. Validate the results . To validate the results the feature sets validation 
techniques are used. Cross -validation , Confusion matrix, Jaccard similarity -based 
measure, Rand Index are some of the validation techniques . Cross -Validation  (CV)  
is most commonly used validation methods.  The m ain advantage of the CV method 
is that it gives  an unbiased  error estimate. Confusion Matrix is generated  for the 
evaluation  of the classifier . Some of the classification and clu stering measures 
commonly used are: 
Classificati on Measures  Clustering Measures  
Error Rate  Davies -Bouldin Index  
TP Rate/ Recall / Sensitivity  Dunn Index  
Specificity  F-Measure  
ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) Curve  Jaccard index  
Precision  Dice index  
F-Score / F -Measure  Fowlkes -Mallows index  
Further, the paper is outlined as follows: Section 2 explains how feature 
selection is divided based on the evaluation criteria. Section 3, elaborates how feature 
selection methods are applied based on the class label. Section 4 explains the 
applications areas of feature selection. Section 5 describes the summary and future 
scope of feature selection methods.  
2. Feature selection based on Evaluation criteria  
In this section , we are discussing the  FS algorithms that depend  on evaluation criteria. 
Based on evaluation criteria and interaction with learning algorithm feature selections  
are classified into three types as: 1 ) Filter method 2 ) Wrapper method, and  
3) Embedded method . 
2.1. Filter method  
In this method, the model starts with all features and select s the best features  subset  
based on statistical measures  such as  Pearson’s correlation [33], Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA ), ANOV A, Chi -square [34], Wilcoxon Mann Whitney test [35], and 
Mutual Information  (MI)  [36-39]. All these st atistical methods depend on the 
response and feature variable present in the dataset.  Pearson’s Correlation (PC) and 
Mutual Information methods are commonly using statistical methods.  
2.1.1. Pearson’s correlation  
Correlation is a method of finding the rela tionship between  two Quantities , for 
example , age and height. PC is used  for detect ing the linear relationship between two  
variables.  The next e quation  is used  to calculate t he PC (ρ) between the independent  
variable  x and dependent variable y:  
(1)    𝜌(𝑥,𝑦)=∑(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)(𝑦𝑖−𝑦)𝑖
√∑(𝑥𝑖−𝑥)2(𝑦𝑖−𝑦)2𝑖. 
Generally , the PC value lies in between [ –1, 1] if the value is –1 then the 
variables are negatively correlated otherwise if the value is 1 then the variables are 
positively correlated. In case that the value is 0, then there is no correlation between 
the variables.  

==== Page 6 ====
 8 2.1.2. Mutual information  
MI is another statistical method used in FS. It is the measure of how two variables  
(a, b) are mutually dependent. It evaluates the “measure of data ” gather ed about one 
arbitrary variable, through the other random variable . Equation 2 is used  to calculate 
MI between  two discrete random variables a and b,   
(2)   𝐼(𝐴,𝐵)=∑ ∑ 𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)log(𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)
𝑝(𝑎)𝑝(𝑏)) 𝑎𝐴 𝑏𝐵 , 
where p(a, b) is the joint probability function of A and B, and p(a) and p(b) are the 
marginal probability distribution functions of A and B respectively . 
For continuous random variables , the summation is replaced by a double 
integral  as  
(3)  𝐼(𝐴,𝐵)=∫∫𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)log(𝑝(𝑎,𝑏)
𝑝(𝑎)𝑝(𝑏))𝑑𝑎𝐴𝐵𝑑𝑏. 
In the filter  method , each feature is assigned a  scoring value  using  statistical 
measures. Features are organized  in descending order based on the scores and assign 
ranking for the features.  A subset of features is selected using threshold value. Filter 
method takes less computational time for selecting the best features. As the 
correlation between the independent variables is not considered  while selecting the 
features, this leads to selection of redundant features . 
Filter method uses characteristics such as informa tion gain, consistency, 
dependency, correlation , and distance  measures . K i r a  and R e n d e l l  [40] in 1992 
proposed a method  called Relief  work  based on instance based  learning [41]. It uses 
Euclid  distance for selecting Near -hit and Near -miss. Let X denote an instance and 
an instance Xi is call ed as Near -hit of X when it a close  neighbor  of X and also same 
class label as X. Similarly  an instance Xi is call ed as Near -miss of X when it properly 
close  neighbor  of X and different class label as X, T denotes a relevance of threshold 
ranges from 0≤𝑇≤1. The algorithm calculates feature weight based on the average 
Near -hit and Near -miss. It selects the features whose feature weight is greater than T. 
The drawback in this algorithm is that it is applicable to two classes of classification 
problems and fails to discard redundant, incomplete features.   
To overcome the problems with Relief   K o n o n e n k o  [42] in 1994 proposed 
an extension to Relief  called  Relief -A for addressing the incomplete data  problem ,  
Relief -B if at least one of two instances has unknown value for a given attribute. To 
address the multiclass problem , Relief -F is introduced . In Relief   uses only one Near -
hit/Miss for selecting the feature, whereas  in Relief -A uses k-Nearest hits/misses and 
consider the average of these k -Nearest hits/misses instead  of one near hit/miss.  In 
Relief -F instead of finding one near miss M from a different class, the algorithm finds 
one near miss for each different class and averages their contribution for updating 
feature weights. This algorithm also fails to remove the redundant data.  
Mutual Information based Feature selection was used by the Bat t i t i  [43] in 
1994 to address the above -said issue. It not only finds the relevancy between the 
target class and individual features but also finds the relevancy between the individual 
features.  In the selection process , the information gained by the variables helps to 
rule out the redundant features.  
Y a n g  and M o o d y  [44] in 1999 proposed a method called Joint Mutual 
Information  based approach (JMI) for the classification and visualization of non -

==== Page 7 ====
 9 Gaussian data. Traditional MI has a drawback that, the method  discards only a few 
redundant variables. For identifying the relevant f eature, it calculates the JMI 
between the target feature  and the individual features. To discard all redundant 
features JMI uses Conditional MI instead of normal MI.  
Similarly  P e n g, L o n g  and D i n g  [38] in 2005 , proposed  a heuristic 
algorithm called minimal -Redundancy -Maximal -Relevance (mRMR) for the 
removal of redundant data. It also finds most relevant features during  the optimal 
feature subset selection, and without compr omising  the classification accuracy . 
Based on the information  theoretic (like mutual information ) selection criterion 
M e y e r  and B o n t e m p i  [45] in 2006 proposed a new filter selection called 
Double  Input Symmetrical Relevance (DISR) for supervised classifications. These 
methods use the variable complementary measures for finding intrinsic features and 
more information about the target class than that of an individual  feature . 
S o n g, Ni, and W a n g  [46] in 2013 proposed a n algorithm for feature subset 
selection called a Fast clustering -based feature selection algorithm (FAST) based on 
graph theory. The algorithm uses the graph technique Minimum Spanning Tree 
(MST) for clustering the features. This FAST algo rithm had effect ively removed  
irrelevant features and redundant features  by using symmetric uncertainty measure 
[47]. For choosing the optimal features  FAST  algorithm uses the cluster -based 
methods.  
2.2. Wrapper method  
According to K o h a v i  and J o h n  [48] in 1997 the feature subset selection  in 
wrapper method  is made as a black box, i.e., there is no knowle dge about the 
underlying  algorithm. Feature subsets are selected based on inductive algorithms.  
This chosen  feature subset  estimates the accuracy of the training model. Depending 
on the accuracy  measured from the previous step , the method will decide wheth er to 
add or remove a feature from the selected subset. Due to this, the wrapper methods 
are computationally more complex.  
K o r f i a t i s  et al. [49] in 2013   proposed a novel wrapper FS algorithm  called 
LM-FM method ; it comprises of two stages namely Local Maximization (LM) 
followed by a Floating Maximization (FM) . In the LM stage best subset of features 
are selected from the original set of features based on credit score values between the 
features and the target class. Then this best subset of features is taken as input for the 
FM stage. In the FM stage , optimal features are selected by using floating size feature 
selection algorithm  like Sequential Floating Forward Selection (SFFS) . Korfiatis et 
al. combine the SVM  classifier with LM -FM to show better classification.  
Wrapper methods are good at classification accuracy and bad at computational 
efficiency. So, to overcome this problem , G. C h e n  and J. C h e n  [50] in 2015  
proposed a new wrapper method namely “Cosine Similarity Measure Support Vector 
Machines ” (CSMSVM). This technique  uses the SVM classifier itself for selection 
of relevant features at the time of classifier construction, by including the cosine 
distance into SVM. This technique  not only decreases the intraclass  distances for the 
reduction of classification error rate but al so it optimizes the margin in SVM. The 
proposed method  had increased the computational efficiency to a maximum extent.  

==== Page 8 ====
 10 P a n t h o n g  and S r i v i h o k  [51] in 2015  proposed an algorithm for wrapper 
FS method based on ensemble learning algorithms. In this approach, Panthong and 
Srivihok use three types of search strategies in the wrapper method namely SFS, SBS 
and Optimize selection. These methods are combined  with ensemble learner. The 
empirical analysis of different combinations of the search strategies  – Sequential and 
heuristic, bagging,  boosting, decision tree and Naïve Bayes classifiers are used . They 
are: 1) FBDT (SFS + Bagging + Decision Tree), 2) BBDT (SBS + Bagging + 
Decision Tree), 3) OBNB (Optimize selection (evolutionary) + Bagging + Naïve 
Bayes), 4) OADT (Optimize selection (evo lutionary) + Ada Boost  + Decision Tree) , 
and 5) OANB (Optimize selection (evolutionary) + Ada Boost+ Naïve Bayes). The 
study on FBDT, BBDT, OBNB, OADT , and OANB reveals that the prediction results 
are more accurate when combin ing with evolutionary algorith m ‒ heuristic search for 
feature selection.  
D a s  et al. [52] in 2017 use wrapper FS method based on harmony search . 
Harmony search is a met a-heuristic algorithm, which uses the concept of musical 
procedure for searching an idealistic harmony. In this work, instead of heuristic 
search, harmony search is used for subset section and is applied to identify the 
suitable words in native  language (B angla: Indian origin) words.  
In general, the wrapper method takes more time complexity. To overcome this, 
W a n g  et al. [53] in 2017 , proposed a novel  approach by combing the wrapper  
method and filter method. This method uses the Markov blanket technique along with 
the wrapper -based  FS for reducing the computational time. Markov blanket technique 
can explicitly remove the redundant feature by considering the relevance  is between 
the features . It uses a cross -entropy  based measure  for this purpose. The features that 
are considered  as redundant  are conditionally independent of the target class. To 
reduce the no of wrapper computations the unnecessary  features  are identified using  
the filter method rather than the wrapper  method.  
Over past years to extract meaningful  information from sensor data filter based 
FS method has been used . However,  this approach requires more time complexity, 
and less occupancy estimation. M a s o o d, S o h  and J i a n g  [54] in 2017  have 
proposed a new ranking based incremental search strategy  method -WRANK -ELM . 
This uses wrapper -ranking based feature selection, which is named  after Extreme 
Learning Machine (ELM) classifier. The time complexity of this meth od is improved  
by adopting an incremental  search strategy rather  than sequential  and exhaustive 
search. This considerably saves computational costs. The best-selected  features are 
evaluated  by using EML classifier. Experimental results of this approach outperform  
the results of an other wrapper method . 
B e r m e j o  [55] in 2017  propose another different view on wrapper method 
that is applyi ng combined wrapper methods for feature selection. This ensemble 
wrapper approach was tested  on fish age prediction. Here Bermejo  uses the ensemble 
techniques during the wrapper method, i.e., CV is calculated for each selected feature 
subsets, and the Mean  CV error is calculated based on this value.  Subset which has 
minimum CV error, that subset is considered as the best set? The collective 
performance of the wrapper method has shown good improvement in the accuracy.  

==== Page 9 ====
 11 The combination of Genetic Algorithm an d Logistic Regression (GA -LR) 
applied by the K h a m m a s s i  and K r i c h e n  [56] in 2017   was used to detect the 
intruders in the network. The heuristic search strategy using GA has derived  the best 
optimal subset of features. This is evaluated by using Logistic Regression.  By using 
this LR method , the relationship between the dependent and explanatory variables 
are desc ribed. This approach has capabilities of dealing with categorical data also.  
2.3. Embedded  method  
So far, the feature selection methods that we discussed earlier use FS at the pre-
processing  level. The following algorithms that we are going to discuss are an 
embedded method. This method works in a way that the best features are selected  
during the learning process. The blending of feature selection during learning process 
has advantages of improving  computational cost, classification accuracy and also 
avoid s training the model each time when a new feature is added.  
The Embedded method selects the feature subset , and the interactions of the 
learning algorithm were different from other feature selection methods. Filter based 
method learning algorithms are  not used for feature selection , whereas  Wrapper based 
method uses the learning algorithm for testing the quality of selected feature subsets.  
Embedded Method overcomes the computational complexity. In this method , 
appropriate  feature selection and model learni ng are performed  at the same time, and 
the features are selected  during the training stage of the model. Due to this, the 
computational cost of this method is decidedl y less compared  with the wrapper  
method. This method  avoids the training of the model eac h time when a new FS is 
explored . 
M o h s e n z a d e h  et al. [57] in 2013  proposed an algorithm called Relevant 
Sample -Feature Machine (RSFM) based on sparse Bay esian machine learning 
algorithm. The RSFM based learning model is sparse due to  the adoption  of Gaussian 
priors and Bayesian approach. RSFM is an extension of the Relevance Vector 
Machine (RVM ) [58] algorithm ; it is a sparse kernel -based  learning method. In this 
method , the output is predicted  by using the kernel function f(x), i.e., 
(4) 
  0
1| , ,M
mn
Mf x w w w k x x
  
where 
( , )n k x x are kernel function  and 
T
01( , ,..., ) ,m w w w w  the weight  vector . 
M i r z a e i, M o h s e n z a d e h  and S h e i k h z a d e h  [59] in 2017 proposed an 
Embedded FS method called Variational RSFM commonly referred  to as VRSFM  
which is based  on a Bayesian model of RSFM [57]. The proposed feature selection 
method is used for  both classification s as well as regression. It defines prior Gaussian 
distribution on the model parameters and its hyper -parameters. For finding the hyper -
parameters and posterior distributions of the parameters M i r z a e i, 
M o h s e n z a d e h  and S h e i k h z a d e h  [59] employs Variational Bayesian 
approximation . The algorithm work s well for small size dataset.  
 

==== Page 10 ====
 12 Table 3 . Merits and demerits of FS method  
FS method  Strengths  Gaps  
Filter method   Efficient and computationally faster.  
 Independent of the learning algorithm.  
 Computationally faster than the 
Wrapper and Embedded methods.  
 Suitable for low dimensional data   It does not consider the correlation 
between classifiers.  
 It does not consider the c orrelation 
between the features.  
 Fails to recogni ze the patterns properly 
during the learning  phase   
Wrapper 
method   It considers the correlation between 
the features and class labels.  Also 
Considers the dependencies between 
the features.  
 More accurate than Filter method   Computationally more complex  
 Iteratively evaluate the selected feature 
subset.  
 Some features may not be considered for  
evaluation when dropped at the initial  
stage.  
 Searching  overhead . 
 Causes overfitting  
Embedded 
method   Computationally efficient than the 
Wrapper method.  
 More accurate than Filter and 
Wrapper method   Computationally costlier than the filter 
method.  
 Not suitable for high dimensional data.  
 Poor generality  
 
Fig. 2. Overview of Filter,  Wrapper, and Embedded methods  
The strengths and gaps of the FS methods are listed  in Table 3. Fig. 2 represents 
the steps involved in the process of Filter, Wrapper, and Embedded methods.  
2.4. Findings  
From the literature  survey  above we came to know that most of the filter methods are 
using statistical  measures for feature selection. K i r a  and R e n d e l l  [40] in 1992 
use Relief method based on distance measure but this metho d fails to discard the 
redundant, incomplete feature.  To address these problems,  K o n o n e n k o  [43] in 


==== Page 11 ====
 13 1994 extended the Relief to Relief  – A, B, F for address the incomplete, unknown 
and multiclass problems respectively . But this method  also fails to remove r edundant 
data, so B a t t i t i  [43] in 1994 use MI-based  FS to rule out the redundant features. 
All these methods are computationally faster but lack in the accuracy  of the model. 
To overcome these drawbacks wrapper -based , FS are introduced.  
In the wrapper meth od, the features are selected based on the underlying 
learning algorithm but it is computationally slow due to iteratively selecting for the 
best subset of features. Initially day sequential  search strategies are used for selecting 
the subset of features. But it has a nesting  effect to overcome this P u d i l, 
N o v o v i č o v á, and K i t t l e r  [10] in 1994  came with the idea of SFFS (Sequential 
Forward  Floating  Selection) and SBFS (Sequential Backward Floating Selection). 
These methods also have the drawback of the searching overhead. To overcome this 
Heuristic Search  and optimal search strategies based on a bio-inspired  algorithm for 
selection of optimal features with less overhead are applied. So, there i s a lot of future 
scope in the optimization of the search strategies for better selection of the feature 
subsets.  
There is another scope of combining the filter and wrapper to form a hybrid  
algorithm for better  accuracy and time complexity.  
3. FS methods based on Learning method  
Based on the presence and absence of class labels  feature selection methods 
Supervised FS, Unsupervised FS follow, respectively. When the dataset  has both 
labeled  and unlabelled  data Semi -supervised  Feature selection can be used.  
3.1 Supervised FS 
This approach uses the class  label for selecting relevant features. Most of the time 
this approach causes overfitting problem due to the presence of the noisy data in the 
dataset.  Some of the widely used supervised Feature selection meth ods are the Fisher  
score [60], Hilbert -Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [61], Fisher Criterion 
[62], Pearson Correlation Coefficient [63], trace ratio criterion [64] and mutual 
information [38]. 
S o n g  et al.  [61] in 2007  proposed a supervised feature selection method called 
BAHSIC. The dependence is estimated  by using the Hilbert -Schmidt  Independence 
Criterion (HSIC) [65], and the feature s are selected using backward elimination. 
HSIC kernel is used for measuring the dependencies. Most of the feature selection 
methods are applicable either for binary classification or regression but not both. The 
BAHSIC  method has the advantage of being applied  to problems of regression, 
binary class and multi -class  classification with less computational time compared to 
other FS methods.  
T u t k a n, G a n i z  and A k y o k u ş  [66] in 2016  proposed a novel feature 
selection method called Meaning Based Feature Selection (MBFS) for text mining 
that uses Supervised and Unsupervised learning. MBFS was based  on the Helmholtz  
principle [67] and Gestalt theorem of human perception [68], for selecting the 
features it uses meaning measure. Helmholtz principle from the Gestalt theory  is used 

==== Page 12 ====
 14 for assigning a meaning  score for each word in the document. For measuring the 
meaning score  is used  the next e quation : 
(5)   meaning (𝑤,𝑐𝑗)=−1
𝑚log[𝑘
𝑚]−[(𝑚−1) log𝑁], 
where 𝑤 is a feature that appears 𝑘 times in 𝑠 dataset, 𝑚 times in a document of 𝑐𝑗 
class and 𝑁 is the rate of length of dataset.  
M a r t í n-S m i t h  et al. [69] in 2017  used supervised filter method for the 
classification of a Brain -Computer  Interface (BCI) by using Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) classifier. It extracts the fe atures from Electro Encephalo Gram 
(EEG) signals, for analy zing the extracted signals Multi -Resolution Analysis (MRA) 
method had used. The proposed Filter approach had improved the formulation of 
multi -objective FS. For obtaining an optimal  feature subset [69] had multi -objectives , 
they are first the method should increase the accuracy of the classifier and second the 
method  should have overcome the overfitting  problems. These had been achieved  by 
evaluating the classifier and adjusting the parameters suitable during the training 
phase.  
In the past Spectral Feature Selection (SFS) had been used in feature selection. 
But it fails to preserve  either local or global structure of the data -set in the  form of 
graph matrix. Another drawback is that it uses the original data for matrix learning 
every time. To overcome the problems with SFS [70] propose a novel supervised 
feature selections method by preserving  both gl obal and the local  structure  of the  data 
set. For maximizing the objective function at a fast rate, it uses an optimization  
method. The graph matrix learning and the low -dimensional feature space learning 
are coupled  as a unified framework . For pre serving the global and local structure, it 
uses subspace -learning methods like LDA and Locality Preserving Projection (LPP) 
respectively, LDA uses low -rank constraint whereas  LPP uses graph structure 
learning and for eliminating the irrelevant  features , it uses l2,1 – norm regularizer for 
sparse feature selection.  
3.2. Graph -based unsupervised FS 
In Unsupervised feature selection, the data set is unassisted  by the class  label, so it 
was the most  challenging task than Supervised and Semi -supervised FS. Based  on 
the similarity measures the redundant features are removed.  
If the features  are similar with one or more features then one of these features 
are remov ed, similarly , if a feature did not make any contribution to clustering , then 
such features  are elimin ated during feature selection process. It is essential for 
exploratory data analysis of biological data and, also useful for effectively finding 
unknown disease types . There are some demerits with this Unsupervised feature 
selection ; The selected subsets d id not consider the correlation between different 
features. Some of the well known unsupervised feature selection algorithms are 
Variance Score [71], Unsupervised Feature Selection using Feature Similarity 
measure (FSFS) [72], Laplacian Score for Feature Selection (LSFS) [73], Spectral 
analysis based feature selection [74], Multi -Cluster  Feature Selection (MCFS) [75], 
and Unsupervised Discriminative Feature Selection (UDFS) [76].  
In earlier unsupervised feature selection [73], He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006  uses 
feature ranking based techniques as fundamental  criteria for feature selections. As the 

==== Page 13 ====
 15 feature measures are calculated independently, the relationship between them is not 
considered. To overcome this issue,  Z. Li et al. [77] in 2012  and Y. Y a n g  et al. 
[76] in 2011  have proposed a spectral -based  clustering approach. In this method , the 
cluster structure of the data had been explored  by using matrix factorization. The 
features are selected by using the sparsity  regularization model  based  on learned 
graph Laplacian.  
B a n d y o p a d h y a y  et al. [78] in 2014  use dense sub -graph based on feature 
clustering for unsupervised feature selection. In this method first, the original feature 
set is represented in the form of a graph , it consist s of all features  being portray ed as 
vertices of the graph , and the edge weights are found  by using the inter-feature  
similarity.  What is computed  by using mutual information ? In this method the feature 
selection is performed in two stages, the first stage,  densest sub -graph had been 
obtained with nonredundant  features and the second  stage minimi zes the feature  sets 
by using feature clustering from the graph.  
X. W a n g  et al. [79] in 2016   propose Unsupervised Spectral Featu re Selection 
(USFS) with l1-norm graph. It is based  on the method, Spectral Embedded Clustering 
[80]. For selecting the discriminative features, USFS uses l1-norm graph and spectral 
clustering. By using spectr al clustering, the cluster indicators are obtained  from the 
unlabelled data sets. For cross -checking , the selected features l1-norm graph had been 
imposed . It is not clear whether the manifold structure with the existing spectral 
feature selection method c ould overcome this USFS manifold structure is used for 
clarity.  
W e n  et al. [81] in 2016  proposed Unsupervised Optimal Feature Selection 
(UOFS) for FS. UOFS  is based  on l2,1-norm regularization matrix instead of l1-norm 
graph . This is because in l1-norm graph has two phases namely 1) graph construction 
and 2) subspace learning before classification. But these phases are not optimal for 
classificatio n. So, W e n  et al.  [81] use l2,1-norm based sparse representation model, 
and for subspace learning , it uses l2,1-norm regularization. The sparse representation 
in this method had been used  for feature selection and extraction for classification.  
S. W a n g  and H. W a n g  [82] in 2017  proposed a novel method for 
unsupervised feature selection based on low -rank approximation and structure 
learning. Using  low-rank approximation one can provide an exact evaluation for the 
number  of Connected components of embedded graphs in struct ure learning.  The 
primary  step in this method is to  represent the feature selection problem as a matrix 
factorization with low -rank constraints by using a self-representation  of a data matrix. 
For capturing the sparsity of the feature selection matrix , l2,1-norm method had been 
used. Based on these structure d learning and low -rank approximation techniques, an 
efficient algorithm had been implemented . There are some demerits with this method  
namely, how to learn the feature subsets adaptively.  
Y. L i u  et al. [83] in 2017  proposed a novel method for Unsupervised feature 
selection called Diversity -Induced  Self-Representation  (DISR), based on Self 
representation property [84] and also used an algorithm called Augmented Lagrange 
Method (ALM) for efficient optimization. By using diversity property , more 
information about the data can be captured, which helps in discarding the similar 
features. Due to this redundant feature s are significantly removed . The similarity 

==== Page 14 ====
 16 between the m-th and n-th feature s can be calculated using dot product weight 
as 𝑠𝑚𝑛=𝑓𝑚𝑡𝑓𝑛,𝑚,𝑛=1,2,⋯,𝑖. A larger 𝑠𝑚𝑛 means  m-th and n-th feature s are 
more similar.   For selecting the most  valuable features , it uses both diversity 
properties and representativeness.  
Hu et al. [85] in 2017  proposed a novel method called Graph Self 
Representation Sparse Feature Selection (GSR -SFS) for Unsupervised Feature 
selection. For improving the stability of feature , the selection  is achieved by 
integrating a subspace -learning model , (i.e., LPP) into a sparse feature level self -
representation method.  To achieve interpretation ability the techni que uses the feature 
level self -representation loss function , similarly to produc e stability for subspace 
learning it uses l2, 1-norm regularization.  
D u  et al. [86] in 2017  proposed Robust Unsupervised Feature Selection via 
Matrix Factorization ( RUFSM ) method for unsupervised feature selection. T he data 
matrix is decomposed  into two matrices  which contai n latent cluster centers and 
sparse representation using l2,1-norm . High accurate discriminative feature selection 
is achieved  by estimating the orthogonal cluster centers. 
Qi et al. [87] in 2017  proposed a novel method called Reg ularized Matrix 
Factorization Feature Selection (RMFFS). Matrix factorization determines the 
correlation among features. For making the feature weight matrix as sparsity, it 
considers  the absolute values of the inner product of the feature weight matrix. T he 
combination of l1-norm and l2 norm  is used for matrix factorization.  
3.2.1 . Findings  
He, C a i  and N i y o g i  [73] in 2006 use rank based for feature selections , but they 
do not consider the relationship between them. Li  et al. [77] in 2012 and Y a n g  et 
al. [76] in 2011 address these issues by using spectral based clustering approach. 
Later most of the researchers use graph -based learning for feature clustering . Initially , 
l1-norm based graph learning was used. But using this the classifications are not 
optim al to overcome this l2,1-norm graph -based methods are introduced. l2,1 based 
method is gaining more popular due to its optimal feature selection.  
3.3. Semi -supervised feature selection  
In Semi -supervised feature selection , the learning data set contains both labeled  and 
unlabeled  data.  
The graph Laplacian methods have gained the attention of many researchers 
working on semi -supervised  based feature selection. The weighted graph is 
constructed  for the given data for which th e feature selection is applied [88].  
There are mainly three stages of Graph  based  on Semi -Supervised Learning 
(GSSL). Firstly, assessing the proclivity (affinity) between a pair of samples (or) sets 
the users may choose kernel or similarity function. B e l k i n  and N i y o g i  [89] in 
2008   used a Gaussian  kernel model as a similarity function, and his empirical study 
proves its performance. Secondly, the users have to choose an appropriate algorithm 
for the construction of sparse weighted subgraph  from the completely  weighted graph 
between all set of nodes. Some of the regularly used algorithms for the  development  
of sparse subgraphs  are k-Nearest Neighbour ( k-NN) and Ꜫ-Neighbourhood. F inally , 

==== Page 15 ====
 17 the user has to use a graph -based  SSL algorithm for diffusing the class labels on the 
known node of the graph to the unknown data nodes.  
Some of the graph based  SSL algorithms are graph min -cut method [90], 
Gaussian fields and harmonic methods [91], the global and local consistency method 
[92], the manifold regularization [89] and the alternating graph transduction method 
[93]. 
Most of the methods in GSSL follow neighborhood  methods like k-NN. From 
the literature , it is clear that the neighborhood  approach constructed using GSSL 
generates irregular  and imbalanced graphs for real and synthetic data. The greedy  
approach in adding n odes to the graph, which is based on k nearest points, is the cause 
for the above -said issue. To overcome the drawback of k-NN based GSSL in [93] 
proposed  a method named maximum weight  b-matching. In this method, each node 
had precise ly b nodes in the graph.  
Z h a o  and L i u  [94] in 2007  had proposed an algorithm called sSelect  for semi -
supervised  learning based on spectral graph analysis. The algorithm ranks the features 
in the way similar to Fisher score by using a regularization framework. This algorithm 
selects the features one by one without considering the relationship between the 
features.  
Generally, this graph  based semi -supervised  feature selection has broad  
applications in the area of image annotation. Ma et al. [95] in 2012  Proposed an 
algorithm called Structural Feature Selection with Sparsity (SFSS), by using 
automatic image annotation. Y. Y a n g  et al. [96] in 2012   used a joint framework by 
joining shared structure learning and graph -based  learning for annotating the web 
images. For annotating  the noisily tagged web images, T a n g  et al. [97] in 2011   
have proposed an algorithm called  a novel k-NN sparse graph -based  SSL approach.  
3.3.1 . Findings  
From the literature, we came to know that there are mainly two drawbacks to the 
graph -based  semi -supervised  feature selection. First, these methods are not suitable 
for the large -scale data set, due to the presence of a large number of training datasets 
and also due to  that they consume more time for the construction of graph like 
Laplacian matrix. Second, it selects the features independently without considering 
the correlation between the features . 
4. Appl ications  
These days there is a demand for computa tional  power, proce ssing capacity and 
storage to handle the volume  of data in various fields such as massiv e Image 
processing, Microarray  data, Graph Theory, Gene Selection, Network security and so 
on. The massive  data is the major  concern for the learning models. To improve the 
performance of the learner , it is very much essential  to apply dimensionality 
reduction techniques to generate compact  and error -free data for better results. In the 
following paragr aphs we explain in details about each application area in details.  
 

==== Page 16 ====
 18 4.1. Hyperspectral  images  
In the standard  image , only RGB spectral bands will be present  whereas  in 
Hyperspectral images there are  several hundreds of spectral bands  available . So, each 
pixel is used for the characterization of the objects.  These hyperspectral images have 
been widely us ed in applications  like remote sensing, medical imaging and so on.  In 
hyperspectral images , the data contains rich information for different applications, 
but not all the measures are crucial  for a particular application . Due to the presence 
of a large  number of spectral bands , this leads to presence of  redundancy between 
these bands. So, there is a need for feature selection method for the elimination of th e 
redundant bands.  
So, feature selection techniques are essential for selecting the relevant subset of 
features. Gabor wavelet transformation -based feature extraction has increase d the 
performance of the classifiers, but in this method , too many G abor features are 
extracted  which makes  the burden  on the computation and efficiency of the 
technique. To overcome this in [98] a multi -task joint sparse representation 
framework based Gabor cube feature selection  is proposed.  In [99] is explained about 
various issues and the challenges in FS for hyperspectral image analysis.  
4.2. Intrusion detection  
Nowadays network -based  technologies are increasing rapidly and the attacks on these 
techniques also increases. To overcome this probl em, we should have to build a high 
secured Intrusion Detection  System (IDS). These IDS need to deal with high 
dimensions of data which contain noisy, redundant and irrelevant data. This leads to 
a decrease in the intrusion detection rate and require s more computation time.  So to 
achieve high detection rate FS methods are needed.  
A m i r i  et al. [100]  in 2011  propose an FS method for IDS using Mutual  
Information  a filter method  approach. Moreover, Y. C h e n  et al. [101]  in 2006  
explain  about different feature selections availab le for IDS. From the literature , it is 
clear that hybrid based methods are more reliable and suitable  for this application 
when compared to the wrapper  method. However, wrapper based methods are useful 
when the data size  is small. Whereas the filter method is used  for the fast 
computational process, but it is less accurate.  
4.3. Microarray data  
Generally , microarray gene selection data consists of hundreds  and thousands of 
features and have few rows. This become s challe nging for the learning  models, so 
there is a need for reducing the dimensions of the data. A n g  et al. [7] in 2016  clearly 
explain  various gene selection methods for supervised, unsupervised and semi -
supervised  based learning models. M a n d a l  and M u k h o p a d h y a y  [102]  in 
2013  proposed  an improved mRMR feature selection for gene expression data. In the 
existing literature , most  of the methods use either redundancy or relevance feature 
selection methods. Whereas  Mandal and Mukhopa dhyay, 2013 proposed a method 
where redundancy and relevances are considered parallely . 
Inter estingly , semi -supervised  and unsupervised feature selection in selecting 
the gene features outperforms  the supervised feature selection models. O ther methods 

==== Page 17 ====
 19 like hybrid and ensemble frameworks  are also producing more significant and good 
classification results. Few researchers are only attempted on hybrid and ensemble 
approaches and showed that it gives the promising  result. Therefore  there is more 
scope for impro vement in this lines of selection.  
Table 4 . Applications of FS methods    
Author & Year  Application  Algorithm  Approach  
H u e r t a, D u v a l  and 
H a o  [103] , 2006   Microarray data Genetic Algorithm  Hybrid  
D u v a l, H a o  and 
H e r n a n d e z  [104] , 2009   Microarray  Genetic Algorithm and 
iterated local search  Embedded  
C h u a n g, Y a n g  and 
Y a n g  [105] , 2009   Microarray data PSO + Tabu search  Wrapper  
J i r a p e c h-U m p a i  and 
A i t k e n  [106] , 2005  Microarray  Genetic Algorithm  Wrapper  
R o f f o  and M e l z i  
[107] , (2016)  Microarrays  Eigenvector Centrality FS  Filter  
Du et al. [86], 2017   Handwritten digit RUFSM  Unsupervised 
FS 
P e n g, L o n g  and D i n g  
[38], 2005   Handwritten digits mRMR  Wrapper  
Oh, L e e  and S u e n  
[108] , 1999   Handwriting recognition  Class dependent features  FS 
K a p e t a n i o s  [109] , 
2005   Economy  Simulated Annealing and 
Genetic Algorithm  Wrapper  
Al-A n i  [110] , 2005  Texture classification  Ant Colony Optimization  Feature subset 
selection  
S h e n  et al. [111] , 2013  Hyperspectral  image 
classification  Symmetrical Uncertainty 
(SU) and Approximate 
Markov Blanket (AMB)  Filter  
Y a o  et al. [112] , 2017  Image recognition  Locally Linear Embedding 
(LLE)  Filter  
Z h a n g  et al. [113] , 2014  Spam detection  Mutation + Binary PSO  Wrapper  
A m b u s a i d i  et al. [114] , 
2016  Intrusion detection  Mutual Information  Filter  
A l o n s o-A t i e n z a  et al. 
[115] , 2014  Detection of life-
threatening  arrhythmias  F-score and mRMR  Filter  
R o f f o, M e l z i  and 
C r i s t a n i  [116] , 2015   Computer vision  Infinite F S  Filter  
Z h a n g  et al. [117] , 2015   Alzheimer’s disease  Welch’s t -test Filter  
M a r t i n-Sm i t h  et al. 
[69], 2017   Brain -computer  interface  Linear discriminant 
analysis  Supervised FS  
L i  et al. [118] , 2017   Fault detection and 
diagnosis  Information Greedy 
Feature Filte r (IGFF)  Filter  
In Table 4  the different FS methods and its applications are presented . The filter -
based  approaches are widely used methods .  
5. Conclusion and future scope  
As we are in the digital era every moment it generate s million, bi llion of data. This  
increases t he burden for processing, which in turn affect the decision making on any 

==== Page 18 ====
 20 application.  This drags the atten tion of the researchers to come  up with the best 
feature selection model that suits for any application irrespective of the constrain ts. 
So, we need to reduce the dimensions of the data by using some of the dimensionality  
reduction methods mentioned above.  
 
Fig. 3. Ratio of FS approaches used in different domains  
It is observed from the literature , that filter -based feature selections are  
computationally faster  when compared with the wrapper  method and less accurate. 
Whereas  in wrapper method the accuracy is more but computationally costlier. 
Dimension reduction provide s several advantages: it results in a low dimensional 
model, requires l ess memory space, reduces the risk of overfitting , better accuracy 
and reduces the time complexity.  
From Fig. 3 it specifies  most of the researchers use Gene selection as an 
application  area. Moreover,  from Fig. 4 correlation criteria algorithm had been used 
by most of the researchers.  
After doing a critical  literature  survey , it is clear that most of the experimental 
analysis is carried out on the static  dataset. In reality , many applications generate 
dynamic and live data, which tends to drift the concept frequently. So, there is scope 
for understanding the concept and propose suitable dimensionality reduction model.  
In wrapper feature selection methods, sequential search is using for the selection 
of feature subsets. Due to this, it incre ases the time complexity. To overcome this 
problem  some of the researchers introduce  a genetic  algorithm -based  searching 
methods lik e Ant Colony Optimization;  Practical  Swarm Optimization are some of 
the commonly used methods. By using the optimization methods , there is a 
significant  improvement  in the feature subset selection. So most of the future research 
works are carried out by us ing this methods only. There is more future scope in this 
area.  
Another area of feature scope is using hybrid methods by combining filter and 
wrapper method for better performance of the reduction techniques. Here in this 
hybrid methods the researcher is c oming with filter and wrapper method to improve 
the performance of the classification algorithms. Using this appro ach also has a more  
future scope.  
Finally , another area of future scope for dimensionality reduction is using of 
graph based feature selection  for unsupervised feature selction.  


==== Page 19 ====
 21  
Fig. 4. Comparison of FS methods  
R e f e r e n c e s  
1. Yu, L., H. Liu. Efficient Feature Selection via Analysis of Relevance and Redundancy . – J. Mach. 
Learn. Res. , Vol. 5, 2004 , No Oct, pp. 1205 -1224.  
2. G h e y a s, I. A. , L. S. S m i t h. Feature Subset  Selection  in Large  Dimensionality Domains . – 
Pattern Recognit. , Vol. 43, January 2010 , No 1, pp. 5 -13. 
3. Y a n g, Y., J. O. P e d e r s e n. A Comparative Study  on Feature Selection  in Text Categorization . 
– In: Proc. of 14th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’97, 1997,  
pp. 412 -420. 
4. Yan, K., D. Z h a n g. Feature Selection  and Analysis  on Correlated Gas Sensor Data  with 
Recursive Feature Elimination . – Sensors Actuators, B Chem. , Vol. 212, Jun  2015 ,  
pp. 353 -363. 
5. J a in, A., D. Z o n g k e r. Feature Selection: Evaluation, Application,  and Small Sample 
Performance . – IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , Vol. 19, 1997 , No 2, pp. 153 -158. 
6. G u t k i n, M., R. S h a m i r, G. D r o r. SlimPLS: A Method for Feature Selection in Gene 
Expression -Based Disease Classification . – PLoS One , Vol. 4, July 2009 , No 7, p. e6416.  
7. Ang, J. C., A. M i r z a l, H. H a r o n, H. N. A. H a m e d. Supervised, Unsupervised, and Semi -
Supervised Feature Selection: A Review on Gene Selection . – IEEE/A CM Trans. Comput. 
Biol. Bioinforma. , Vol. 13, Sep tember  2016 , No 5, pp. 971 -989. 
8. B i n s, J., B. A. D r a p e r. Feature Selection  from Huge Feature Sets . – In: Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. 
Comput. Vis. , Vol. 2, 2001 , pp. 159 -165. 
9. F e r r i, F., P. P u d i l. Comparative Study  of Techniques  for Large -Scale Feature Selection .  – 
Pattern Recognit. Pract. IV , Vol. 1994 , 1994 , pp. 403 -413. 
10. P u d i l, P., J. N o v o v i č o v á, J. K i t t l e r. Floating Search Methods  in Feature Selection . – 
Pattern Recognit. Lett. , Vol. 15, Nov ember  1994 , No 11, pp. 1119 -1125.  
11. D o a k, J. An Evaluation of Feature Selection Methodsand Their Application to Computer 
Security . CSE -92-18, 1992 . 82 p. 
12. S k a l a k, D. B.  Prototype and Feature Selection by Sampling and Random Mutation Hill Climbing 
Algorithms . – In: Proc. of 11th International Conference on Machine Learning , 1994,  
pp. 293 -301. 
13. G o l d b e r g, D. E.  Genetic Algorithms  in Search, Optimization,  and Machine Learning . Boston, 
MA, 1989 . – Read. Addison -Wesley , 1989.  
14. B r a s s a r d, P., G i l l e s, B r a t l e y. Fundamentals of Algorithmics . Englewood Cliffs , NJ, 
Prentice Hall, 1996.  
15. G l o v e r, F. Future Paths  for Integer Programming and Links  to Artificial Intelligence . – Comput. 
Oper. Res. , Vol. 13, January 1986 , No 5, pp. 533 -549. 
16. Li, B., L. W a n g, W. S o n g. Ant Colony Optimization  for the Traveling Salesman Problem Based 
on Ants with Memory . – In: Proc. of 4th International Conference on Natural Computation , 
2008, pp. 496 -501. 


==== Page 20 ====
 22 17. N o z a w a, H. A Neural Network Model  as a Globally Coupled Map  and Applications Based  on 
Chaos . Chaos an Inte rdiscip. – J. Nonlinear Sci. , Vol. 2, July 1992 , No 3, pp. 377 -386. 
18. L u o n a n, C., K. A i h a r a. Chaotic Simulated Annealing by a Neural Network Model with 
Transient Chaos . – Neural Networks , Vol. 8, 1995 , No 6, pp. 915 -930. 
19. W a n g, L., S. Li, F. T i a n, X. Fu. A Noisy Chaotic Neural Network  for Solving Combinatorial 
Optimization Problems: Stochastic Chaotic Simulated Annealing . – IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, 
Cybern. Part B Cybern. , Vol. 34, 2004 , No 5, pp. 2119 -2125.  
20. N a r e n d r a, P. M. , K. F u k u n a g a. A Branch and Bound Algorithm for Feature Subset 
Selection . – IEEE Trans. Comput. , Vol. C-26, 1977 , No 9, pp. 917 -922. 
21. L a n d, A., A. D o i g. An Automatic Method of Solving Discrete Programming Problems . – 
Econometrika , Vol. 28, 1960 , No 3, pp. 497 -520. 
22. P o l i, R., J. K e n n e d y, T. B l a c k w e l l. Particle Swarm Optimization . – Swarm Intell. , Vol. 1, 
October 2007 , No 1, pp. 33 -57. 
23. D a s h, M., H. Liu. Feature Selection for Classification . – Intell. Data Anal. , Vol. 1, January 1997 , 
No 1-4, pp. 131 -156. 
24. F a y y a d, M. U. , K. B. I r a n i.The Attribute Selection Problem in Decision Tree Generation . – 
Aaai -92, 1992 , pp. 104 -110. 
25. Liu, H., R. S e t i o n o. A Probabilistic Approach  to Feature Selection – A Filter Solution . –  
In: Proc. of 13th International Conference on Machine Learning , 1996, pp. 319 -327. 
26. S i e d l e c k i, W., J. Sk l a n s k y. On Automatic Feature Selection . – Int. J. Pattern Recognit. 
Artif. Intell. , Vol. 02, Jun 1988 , No 02, pp. 197 -220. 
27. Dy, J. G. , C. E. B r o d l e y. Feature Subset Selection and Order Identification for Unsupervised 
Learning . – In: Proc. of 17 th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn  ICML ’00, 2000 , pp. 247 -254. 
28. J o h n, G. H. , R. K o h a v i, K. P f l e g e r. Irrelevant Features and the Subset Selection Problem . 
– In: Machine Learning Proceedings 1994 , 1994, pp. 121 -129. 
29. C a r u a n a, R., D. F r e i t a g. Greedy Attribute Selection . – In: Proc. Elev. Int. Conf. Mach. 
Learn. , Vol. 48, 1994 , pp. 28 -36. 
30. A s i r, D., S. A p p a v u, E. J e b a m a l a r. Literature Review on Feature Selection Methods for 
High -Dimensional Data . – Int. J. Comput. Appl. , Vol. 136, Feb ruary  2016 , No 1, pp. 9-17. 
31. Das, S. Filters, Wrappers  and a Boosting -Based Hybrid  for Feature Selection . – Engineering , 
2001 , pp. 74 -81. 
32. T a l a v e r a, L. Feature Selection as a Preprocessing Step for Hierarchical Clustering . – In: Proc. 
of 25th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 1999 , pp. 389-397. 
33. B i e s i a d a, J., W. D u c h. Feature Selection for High -Dimensional Data – A Pearson 
Redundancy Based Filter . – In Advances in Soft Computing , Vol. 45, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 242 -249. 
34. Jin, X., A. Xu, R. Bie, P. Guo. Machine Learning Techniques and Chi -Square Feature Selection 
for Cancer Classification Using SAGE Gene Expression Profiles . – In: Proc. of 2006 
International Conference  on Data Mining for Biomedical Applications , Springer -Verlag, 2006, 
pp. 106 -115. 
35. L i a o, C., S. Li, Z. Luo. Gene Selection Using  Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test  and Support Vector 
Machine  for Cancer Classification . – Comput. Intell. Secur. , Vol. 4456 , 2007 , pp. 57 -66. 
36. V i n h, L. T. , N. D. T h a n g, Y. -K. Lee. An Improved Maximum Relevance and Minimum 
Redundancy Feature Selection Algorithm Based on Normalized Mutual Information . –  
In: Proc. of 10th IEEE/IPSJ International Symposium on Applications and the Internet , 2010,  
pp. 395 -398. 
37. E s t e v e z, P. A. , M. T e s m e r, C. A. P e r e z, J. M. Z u r a d a. Normalized Mutual Information 
Feature Selection . – IEEE Trans. Neural Networks , Vol. 20, Feb ruary  2009 , No 2,  
pp. 189 -201. 
38. P e n g, H., F. L o n g, C. D i n g. Feature Selection Based  on Mutual Information Criteria  of Max-
Dependency,  Max-Relevance , and Min-Redundancy . – IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. 
Intell. , Vol. 27, Aug ust 2005 , No 8, pp. 1226 -1238.  
39. K w a k, N., C h o n g-Ho C h o i. Input Feature Selection  by Mutual Information Based  on Parzen 
Window . – IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , Vol. 24, Dec ember  2002 , No 12,  
pp. 1667 -1671.  

==== Page 21 ====
 23 40. K i r a, K., L. R e n d e l l. A Practical Approach  to Feature Selection . – In: Proc. of 9th Int’l 
Workshop on Machine Learning , 1992, pp. 249 -256. 
41. Aha, D. W. , D. K i b l e r, M. K. A l b e r t. Instance -Based Learning Algorithms . – Mach. Learn. , 
Vol. 6, January 1991 , No 1, pp. 37 -66. 
42. K o n o n e n k o, I. Estimating  Attributes:  Analysis and  Extensions of RELIEF . Berlin, Heidelberg, 
Springer, 1994, pp. 171 -182. 
43. B a t t i t i, R. Using Mutual Information for Selecting Features  in Supervised Neural Net Learning . 
– IEEE Trans. Neural Networks , Vol. 5, July 1994 , No 4, pp. 537 -550. 
44. Y a n g, H. H. , J. M o o d y. Data Visualization and Feature Selection: New Algorithms for 
Nongaussian Data . – In: In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sy stems , 1999,  
pp. 687 -693. 
45. M e y e r, P. E. , G. B o n t e m p i. On the Use of Variable Complementarity for Feature Selection 
in Cancer Classification . – In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Including Subseries  
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) . Vol. 3907 . 
LNCS, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 91 -102. 
46. S o n g, Q., J. Ni, G. W a n g. A Fast Clustering -Based Feature Subset Selection Algorithm for 
High -Dimensional Data . – IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , Vol. 25, Jan uary 2013 , No 1,  
pp. 1 -14. 
47. P r e s s, W. H., S. A. T e u k o l s k y, W. T. V e t t e r l i n g, B. P. F l a n n e r y. – Numerical 
Recipes . 2nd Ed. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press , 1989.  
48. K o h a v i, R., G. H. J o h n. Wrappers for Feature  Subset Selection . – Artif. Intell. , Vol. 97, 
December  1997 , No 1-2, pp. 273 -324. 
49. K o r f i a t i s,V. C. , P. A.  A s v e s t a s, K. K.  D e l i b a s i s, G. K. M a t s o p o u l o s.  
A Classification System Based on a New Wrapper Feature Selection Algorithm for the 
Diagnosis of Primary and Secondary Polycythemia . – Comput. Biol. Med. , Vol. 43, Dec ember  
2013 , No 12, pp. 2118 -2126.  
50. C h e n, G., J. C h e n. A Novel Wrapper Method  for Feature Selection  and Its Applications . – 
Neurocomputing , Vol. 159, July 2015 , No 1, pp. 219 -226. 
51. P a n t h o n g, R., A. S r i v i h o k. Wrapper Feature Subset Selection for Dimension Reduction 
Based on Ensemble Learning Algorithm . – Procedia Comput. Sci. , Vol. 72, 2015 , pp. 162 -169. 
52. Das, S., P. K. S i n g h, S. B h o w m i k, R. S a r k a r, M. N a s i p u r i. A Harmony Search Based 
Wrapper Feature Selection Method for Holistic Bangla Word Recognition . – Procedia Comput. 
Sci., Vol. 89, July 2017 , pp. 395 -403. 
53. W a n g, A., N. An, J. Y a n g, G. C h e n, L. Li, G. A l t e r o v i t z. Wrapper -Based Gene 
Selection  with Markov Blanke t. – Comput. Biol. Med. , Vol. 81, 2017 , pp. 11 -23. 
54. M a s o o d, M. K. , Y. C. Soh, C. J i a n g. Occupancy  Estimation  from Environmental Parameters 
Using Wrapper  and Hybrid Feature Selection . – Appl. Soft Comput. J. , Vol. 60, Nov ember  
2017 , pp. 482 -494. 
55. B e r m e j o, S. Ensembles of Wrappers for Automated Feature Selection  in Fish Age 
Classification . – Comput. Electron. Agric. , Vol. 134, Mar ch 2017 , pp. 27 -32. 
56. K h a m m a s s i, C., S. K r i c h e n. A GA -LR Wrapper Approach for Feature Selection  in Network 
Intrusion Detection . – Comput. Secur. , Vol. 70, Sep tember  2017 , pp. 255 -277. 
57. M o h s e n z a d e h, Y., H. S h e i k h z a d e h, A. M. R e z a, N. B a t h a e e, M. M. K a l a y e h. 
The Relevance Sample -Feature Machine: A Sparse Bayesian Learning Approach  to Joint 
Feature -Sample Selection . – IEEE Trans. Cybern. , Vol. 43, 2013 , No 6, pp. 2241 -2254.  
58. T i p p i n g, M. M.  Sparse Bayesian Learning  and the Relevance Vector Machine . – J. Mach. Learn. 
Res., Vol. 1, 2001 , pp. 211 -245. 
59. M i r z a e i, A., Y. M o h s e n z a d e h, H. S h e i k h z a d e h. Variational Relevant Sample -
Feature Machine: A Fully  Bayesian Approach  for Embedded Feature Selection . – 
Neurocomputing , Vol. 241, 2017 , pp. 181 -190. 
60. Gu, Q., Z. Li, J. Han. Generalized Fisher Score for Feature Selection . February  2012.  
61. S o n g, L., A. S m o l a, A. G r e t t o n, K. M. B o r g w a r d t, J. B e d o. Supervised Feature 
Selection via Dependence Estimation . – In: Proc. of 24th International Conference on Machine 
Learning (ICML’07 ), 2007, pp. 823 -830. 

==== Page 22 ====
 24 62. L o o g, M., R. P. W. D u i n, R. H a e b-U m b a c h. Multiclass Linear Dimension Reduction by 
Weighted Pairwise  Fisher Criteria . – IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , Vol. 23, July 
2001 , No 7, pp. 762 -766. 
63. R o d g e r s, J. L., W. A. N i c e w a n d e r. Thirteen Ways to Look at the Correlation Coefficient . 
– Am. Stat. , Vol. 42, Feb ruary  1988 , No 1, p. 59.  
64. Nie, F., F. Nie, S. X i a n g, Y. Jia, C. Z h a n g, S. Yan. Trace Ratio Criterion  for Feature 
Selection . – AAAI , 2008 , pp. 671 -676. 
65. G r e t t o n, A., O. B o u s q u e t, A. S m o l a, B. S c h ö l k o pf. Measuring Statistical Dependence 
with Hilbert -Schmidt Norms . – Springer , 2005 , pp. 63 -78. 
66. T u t k a n, M., M. C. G a n i z, S. A k y o k u ş. Helmholtz Principle Based Supervised  and 
Unsupervised Feature Selection Methods for Text Mining . – Inf. Process. Manag. , Vol. 52, 
September  2016 , No 5, pp. 885 -910. 
67. B a l i n s k y, A., H. B a l i n s k y, S. S i m s k e. On the Helmholtz Principle  for Data Mining . – 
Hewlett -Packard Dev. Company, LP , 2011.  
68. D e s o l n e u x, A., L. M o i s a n, J. -M. M o r e l. From Gestal Theory to Image Analysis:  
A Probabilistic Approach . 2008.  
69. M a r t í n-S m i t h, P., J. O r t e g a, J. A s e n s i o-C u b e r o, J. Q. Gan, A. O r t i z. A Superv ised 
Filter Method  for Multi -Objective Feature Selection in EEG Classification Based on Multi -
Resolution Analysis  for BCI . – Neurocomputing , Vol. 250, Aug ust 2017 , pp. 45 -56. 
70. Zhu, Y., X. Z h a n g, R. Hu, G. Wen. Adaptive Structure Learning  for Low-Rank Supervised 
Feature Selection . – Pattern Recognition Letters , North -Holland, 16  August 2017.  
71. B i s h o p, C. M. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition . Clarendon Press, 1995.  
72. M i t r a, P., C. A. M u r t h y, S. K. Pal. Unsupervised Feature Selection Using Feature Similarity . 
– IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , Vol. 24, Mar ch 2002 , No 3, pp. 301 -312. 
73. He, X., D. Cai, P. N i y o g i. Laplacian Score for Feature Selection.  2006 , pp. 507 -514. 
74. Z h a o Z., H. Liu. Spectral Feature Selection  for Supervised and Unsupervised Learning . –  
In: Proc. of 24th  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’07 ), 2007,  
pp. 1151 -1157.  
75. Cai, D., C. Z h a n g, X. He. Unsupervised Feature Selection  for Multi -Cluster Data . – In: Proc. 
of 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge  Discovery and Data Mining 
- KDD ’10, 2010, p. 333.  
76. Y a n g, Y., H. T. S h e n, Z. Ma, Z. H u a n g, X. Z h o u. l 2,1 -Norm Regularized Discriminative 
Feature Selection for Unsupervised Learning . – In: Proc. of 22 nd Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. , 
Vol. 2, 2011 , pp. 1589 -1594.  
77. Li, Z., Y. Y a n g, J. Liu, X. Z h o u, H. Lu. Unsupervised Feature Selection Using Nonnegative 
Spectral Analysis . – In: Proc. of 26th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , AAAI Press , 
2012 , pp. 1026 -1032.  
78. B a n d y o p a d h y a y, S., T. B h a d r a, P. M i t r a, U. M a u l i k. Integration of Dense Subgraph 
Finding  with Feature Clustering for Unsupervised Feature Selection . – Pattern Recognit. Lett. , 
Vol. 40, Apr il 2014 , No 1, pp. 104 -112. 
79. W a n g, X., X. Z h a n g, Z. Z e n g, Q. Wu, J. Z h a n g. Unsupervised Spectral Featu re Selection 
with l1 -Norm Graph . – Neurocomputing , Vol. 200, Aug ust 2016 , pp. 47 -54. 
80. Nie, F., Z. Z e n g, I. W. T s a n g, D . Xu, C . Z h a n g. Spectral Embedded Clustering:  
A Framework for In -Sample and Out -of-Sample Spectral Clustering . – IEEE Trans. Neural 
Networks , Vol. 22, Nov ember  2011 , No 11, pp. 1796 -1808.  
81. Wen, J., Z. Lai, Y. Z h a n, J. Cui. The L2,1 -Norm -Based Unsupervised Optimal Feature 
Selection with Applications  to Action Recognition . – Pattern Recognit. , Vol. 60, Dec ember  
2016 , pp. 515 -530. 
82. W a n g, S., H. W a n g. Unsupervised Feature Selection  via Low-Rank Approximation and 
Structure Learning . – Knowledge -Based Syst. , Vol. 124, May 2017 , pp. 70 -79. 
83. Liu, Y., K. Liu , C. Z h a n g, J. W a n g, X. W a n g. Unsupervised Feature Selection  via 
Diversity -Induced Self-Repr esentation . – Neurocomputing , Vol. 219, Jan uary 2017 ,  
pp. 350 -363. 
84. Zhu, P., W. Zuo, L. Z h a n g, Q. Hu, S. C. K. S h i u. Unsupervised Feature Selection  by 
Regularized Self -Representation . – Pattern Recognit. , Vol. 48, Feb ruary  2015 , No 2,  
pp. 438 -446. 

==== Page 23 ====
 25 85. Hu, R. et al.  Graph Self-Representation Method  for Unsupervised Feature Selection . – 
Neurocomputing , Vol. 220, January 2017 , pp. 130 -137. 
86. Du, S., Y. Ma, S. Li, Y. Ma. Robust Unsupervised Feature Selection via Matrix Factorization . – 
Neurocomputing , Vol. 241, Jun 2017 , pp. 115 -127. 
87. Qi, M., T. W a n g, F. Liu, B.  Z h a n g, J. W a n g, Y. Yi. Unsupervised Feature Selection  by 
Regularized Matrix Factorization . – Neurocomputing , Vol. 273, 17 January 2017 , Elsevier,  
pp. 593 -610. 
88. Zhu, X. Semi -Supervised Learning Literature Survey Contents . Learning , 2006.  
89. B e l k i n, M., P. N i y o g i. Towards a Theoretical Foundation  for Laplacian -Based Manifold 
Methods . – J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , Vol. 74, Dec ember  2008 , No 8, pp. 1289 -1308.  
90. B l u m, A., S. C h a w l a. Learning from Labeled and Unlabeled Data Using Graph Mincuts . –  
In: ICML ’01, 2001.  
91. Zhu,, X., X. Zhu, Z. G h a h r a m a n i, J. L a f f e r t y. Semi -Supervised Learning Using 
Gaussian Fields and Harmonic Functions . – In: ICML ’03, 2003 , pp. 912 -919. 
92. Z h o u, D., O. B o u s q u e t, T. N. Lal, J. W e s t o n, B. S c h ö l k o p f. Learning with Local and 
Global Consistency . – In: NIPS’ 03, 2003, pp. 321 -328. 
93. W a n g, J., T. J e b a r a, S. -F. C h a n g. Graph Transduction via Alternating Minimization . –  
In: Proc. of 25th  International Conference  on Machine  Learning (ICML’08 ), 2008,  
pp. 1144 -1151.  
94. Z h a o, Z., H. Liu. Semi -Supervised Feature Selection via Spectral Analysis . – In: Proc. of 2007 
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining , Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and 
Applied Mathematics, 2007, pp. 641 -646. 
95. Ma, Z., F. Nie, Y. Y a n g, J. R. R. U i j l i n g s, N. S e b e, A. G. H a u p t m a n n. Discriminating 
Joint Feature Analysis for Multimedia Data Understanding . – IEEE Trans. Multimed. , Vol. 14, 
December  2012 , No 6, pp. 1662 -1672.  
96. Y a n g, Y., F. Wu, F. Nie, H. T. S h e n, Y. Z h u a n g, A. G. H a u p t m a n n. Web and Personal 
Image Annotation by Mining Label Correlation With Relaxed Visual Graph Embedding . – 
IEEE Trans. Image Process. , Vol. 21, Mar ch 2012 , No 3, pp. 1339 -1351.  
97. T a n g, J., R. H o n g, S. Yan, T.-S. C h u a, G. -J. Qi, R. J a in. Image  Annotation  by kNN-Sparse 
Graph -Based Label Propagation  over Noisily Tagged  Web  Images . – ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. 
Technol. , Vol. 2, Feb ruary  2011 , No 2, pp. 1 -15. 
98. Jia, S., Y. Xie, L. S h e n, L. D e n g. Hyperspectral Image Classification Using Fisher Criterion -
Based Gabor  Cube Selection  and Multi -Task Joint Sparse Representation . – In: Proc. of 7th 
Workshop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing 
(WHISPERS ’15), 2015, pp. 1 -4. 
99. Jia, X., B.-C. Kuo, M. M. C r a w f o r d. Feature Mining for Hyperspectral Image Classification . 
– Proc. IEEE , Vol. 101, Mar ch 2013 , No 3, pp. 676 -697. 
100. A m i r i, F., M. R e z a e i Y o u s e f i, C. L u c a s, A.  S h a k e r y, N. Y a z d a n i. Mutual 
Information -Based Feature Selection  for Intrusion Detection Systems . – J. Netw. Comput. 
Appl. , Vol. 34, July 2011 , No 4, pp. 1184 -1199.  
101. C h e n, Y., Y. Li, X.-Q. C h e n g, L. Guo. Survey and Taxonomy of Feature Selection Algorithms 
in Intrusion Detection System . – Inf. Secur. Cryptol. , Vol. 4318 , Nov ember  2006 , pp. 153 -167. 
102. M a n d a l, M., A. M u k h o p a d h y a y. An Improved Minimum Redundancy Maximum 
Relevance Approach for Feature Selection in Gene Expression Data . – Procedia Technol. ,  
Vol. 10, January 2013 , pp. 20 -27. 
103. H u e r t a, E. B. , B. D u v a l, J.-K. Hao. A Hybrid GA/SVM Approach for Gene Selection and 
Classification of Microarray Data . Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer, 2006, pp. 34 -44. 
104. D u v a l, B., J.-K. Hao, J. C. H e r n a n d e z  H e r n a n d e z. A Memetic Algorithm for Gene 
Selection and Molecular Classification  of Cancer . – In: Proc. of 11th Annual  Conference on 
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO ’09), 2009, p. 201.  
105. C h u a n g, L.-Y., C.-H. Y a n g, C. -H. Y a n g. Tabu Search and Binary Particle Swarm 
Optimization for Feature Selection Using Microarray Data . – J. Comput. Biol. , Vol. 16, 
December  2009 , No 12, pp. 1689 -1703.  
106. J i r a p e c h-U m p a i, T., S. A i t k e n. Feature Selection  and Classification for Microarray Data 
Analysis: Evolutionary Methods  for Identifying Predictive Genes . – BMC Bioinformatics , 
Vol. 6, Jun 2005 , No 1, p. 148.  

==== Page 24 ====
 26 107. R o f f o, G., S. M e l z i. Feature Selection  via Eigenvector Centrality , December 2016 .  
pdfs.semanticscholar.org  
108. Oh, Il-S e o k, Jin-S e o n Lee, C. Y. S u e n. Analysis of Class Separation  and Combination of 
Class -Dependent Features for Handwriting Recognition . – IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. 
Intell. , Vol. 21, 1999 , No 10, pp. 1089 -1094.  
109. K a p e t a n i o s, G. Variable Selection Using  Non-Standard Optimisation of Information Criteria , 
– Work. Pap.  Queen Hapy University of London , No 533 , 2005 . 
110. Al-Ani, A. Feature Subset Selection Using Ant Colony Optimization . – Int. J. Comput. Intell. , 
Vol. 2, 2005 , No 1, pp. 53 -58. 
111. S h e n, L., Z. Zhu, S. Jia, J. Zhu, Y . Sun. Discriminative Gabor Feature Selection for 
Hyperspectral Image Classification . – IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. , Vol. 10, Jan uary 
2013 , No 1, pp. 29 -33. 
112. Yao, C., Y.-F. Liu, B. J i a n g, J. Han, J. Han. LLE Score: A New Filter -Based Unsupervised 
Feature Selection Method Based on Nonlinear Manifold Embedding and Its Application to 
Image Recognition . – IEEE Trans. Image Process. , Vol. 26, Nov ember  2017 , No 11,  
pp. 5257 -5269.  
113. Z h a n g, Y., S. W a n g, P. P h i l l i p s, G. Ji. Binary PSO with Mutation Operator  for Feature 
Selection Using Decision Tree Applied to Spam Detection . – Knowledge -Based Syst. ,  
Vol. 64, July 2014 , pp. 22 -31. 
114. A m b u s a i d i, M. A. , X. He, P. N a n d a, Z. Tan. Building an Intrusion Detection System Using 
a Filter -Based Feature Selection Algorithm . – IEEE Trans. Comput. , Vol. 65, Oct ober 2016 , 
No 10, pp. 2986 -2998.  
115. A l o n s o-A t i e n z a, F., et al.   Detection of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias Using Feature 
Selection and Support Vector Machines.  – IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. , Vol. 61, 2014 , No 3, 
pp. 832 -40. 
116. R o f f o, G., S. M e l z i, M. C r i s t a n i. Infinite Feature Selection . – In: 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV ’15), 2015, pp. 4202 -4210.  
117. Z h a n g, Y., et al. Detection of Subjects  and Brain Regions Related to Alzheimer’s Disease Using 
3D MRI Scans Based on Eigenbrain  and Machine Learning . – Front. Comput. Neurosci. ,  
Vol. 9, Jun 2015 , p. 66.  
118. Li, D., Y. Z h o u, G.  Hu, C. J. S p a n o s. Optimal Sensor Configuration  and Feature Selection 
for AHU Fault Detection and Diagnosis . – IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics , Vol. 13, Jun 2017 , 
No 3, pp. 1369 -1380.  
 
Received: 0 2.02.2018; Second Version : 18.1 0.2018; Accepted: 07.02.2019    
 

