==== Page 1 ====
A Survey of the State of Explainable AI for Natural Language Processing
Marina Danilevsky, Kun Qian, Ranit Aharonov, Yannis Katsis, Ban Kawas, Prithviraj Sen
IBM Research – Almadem
mdanile@us.ibm.com ,fqian.kun,Ranit.Aharonov2 g@ibm.com
yannis.katsis@ibm.com ,fbkawas,senp g@us.ibm.com
Abstract
Recent years have seen important advances in
the quality of state-of-the-art models, but this
has come at the expense of models becom-
ing less interpretable. This survey presents an
overview of the current state of Explainable
AI (XAI), considered within the domain of
Natural Language Processing (NLP). We dis-
cuss the main categorization of explanations,
as well as the various ways explanations can be
arrived at and visualized. We detail the oper-
ations and explainability techniques currently
available for generating explanations for NLP
model predictions, to serve as a resource for
model developers in the community. Finally,
we point out the current gaps and encourage
directions for future work in this important re-
search area.
1 Introduction
Traditionally, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
systems have been mostly based on techniques that
are inherently explainable. Examples of such ap-
proaches, often referred to as white box techniques,
include rules, decision trees, hidden Markov mod-
els, logistic regressions, and others. Recent years,
though, have brought the advent and popularity of
black box techniques, such as deep learning mod-
els and the use of language embeddings as features.
While these methods in many cases substantially
advance model quality, they come at the expense
of models becoming less interpretable. This ob-
fuscation of the process by which a model arrives
at its results can be problematic, as it may erode
trust in the many AI systems humans interact with
daily (e.g., chatbots, recommendation systems, in-
formation retrieval algorithms, and many others).
In the broader AI community, this growing under-
standing of the importance of explainability has cre-
ated an emerging ﬁeld called Explainable AI (XAI).
However, just as tasks in different ﬁelds are more
amenable to particular approaches, explainabilitymust also be considered within the context of each
discipline. We therefore focus this survey on XAI
works in the domain of NLP, as represented in the
main NLP conferences in the last seven years. This
is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst XAI sur-
vey focusing on the NLP domain.
As will become clear in this survey, explainabil-
ity is in itself a term that requires an explanation.
While explainability may generally serve many
purposes (see, e.g., Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni,
2019), our focus is on explainability from the per-
spective of an end user whose goal is to understand
how a model arrives at its result, also referred to as
theoutcome explanation problem (Guidotti et al.,
2018). In this regard, explanations can help users
of NLP-based AI systems build trust in these sys-
tems’ predictions. Additionally, understanding the
model’s operation may also allow users to provide
useful feedback, which in turn can help developers
improve model quality (Adadi and Berrada, 2018).
Explanations of model predictions have previ-
ously been categorized in a fairly simple way that
differentiates between (1) whether the explanation
is for each prediction individually or the model’s
prediction process as a whole, and (2) determin-
ing whether generating the explanation requires
post-processing or not (see Section 3). However,
although rarely studied, there are many additional
characterizations of explanations, the most impor-
tant being the techniques used to either generate
or visualize explanations. In this survey, we ana-
lyze the NLP literature with respect to both these
dimensions and identify the most commonly used
explainability and visualization techniques , in ad-
dition to operations used to generate explanations
(Sections 4.1-Section 4.3). We brieﬂy describe
each technique and point to representative papers
adopting it. Finally, we discuss the common evalu-
ation techniques used to measure the quality of ex-
planations (Section 5), and conclude with a discus-
sion of gaps and challenges in developing success-arXiv:2010.00711v1  [cs.CL]  1 Oct 2020

==== Page 2 ====
ful explainability approaches in the NLP domain
(Section 6).
Related Surveys : Earlier surveys on XAI in-
clude Adadi and Berrada (2018) and Guidotti et al.
(2018). While Adadi and Berrada provide a com-
prehensive review of basic terminology and fun-
damental concepts relevant to XAI in general, our
goal is to survey more recent works in NLP in an
effort to understand how these achieve XAI and
how well they achieve it. Guidotti et al. adopt a
four dimensional classiﬁcation scheme to rate var-
ious approaches. Crucially, they differentiate be-
tween the “explanator” and the black-box model it
explains. This makes most sense when a surrogate
model is used to explain a black-box model. As we
shall subsequently see, such a distinction applies
less well to the majority of NLP works published in
the past few years where the same neural network
(NN) can be used not only to make predictions but
also to derive explanations. In a series of tutorials,
Lecue et al. (2020) discuss fairness and trust in ma-
chine learning (ML) that are clearly related to XAI
but not the focus of this survey. Finally, we adapt
some nomenclature from Arya et al. (2019) which
presents a software toolkit that can help users lend
explainability to their models and ML pipelines.
Our goal for this survey is to: (1) provide the
reader with a better understanding of the state of
XAI in NLP, (2) point developers interested in
building explainable NLP models to currently avail-
able techniques, and (3) bring to the attention of
the research community the gaps that exist; mainly
a lack of formal deﬁnitions and evaluation for ex-
plainability. We have also built an interactive web-
site providing interested readers with all relevant
aspects for every paper covered in this survey.1
2 Methodology
We identiﬁed relevant papers (see Appendix A) and
classiﬁed them based on the aspects deﬁned in Sec-
tions 3 and 4. To ensure a consistent classiﬁcation,
each paper was individually analyzed by at least
two reviewers, consulting additional reviewers in
the case of disagreement. For simplicity of presen-
tation, we label each paper with its main applicable
category for each aspect, though some papers may
span multiple categories (usually with varying de-
grees of emphasis.) All relevant aspects for every
1https://xainlp2020.github.io/xainlp/
(we plan to maintain this website as a contribution to the
community.)paper covered in this survey can be found at the
aforementioned website; to enable readers of this
survey to discover interesting explainability tech-
niques and ideas, even if they have not been fully
developed in the respective publications.
3 Categorization of Explanations
Explanations are often categorized along two main
aspects (Guidotti et al., 2018; Adadi and Berrada,
2018). The ﬁrst distinguishes whether the expla-
nation is for an individual prediction ( local ) or the
model’s prediction process as a whole ( global ).
The second differentiates between the explanation
emerging directly from the prediction process ( self-
explaining ) versus requiring post-processing ( post-
hoc). We next describe both of these aspects in de-
tail, and provide a summary of the four categories
they induce in Table 1.
3.1 Local vs Global
Alocal explanation provides information or justiﬁ-
cation for the model’s prediction on a speciﬁc in-
put; 46 of the 50 papers fall into this category.
Aglobal explanation provides similar justiﬁca-
tion by revealing how the model’s predictive pro-
cess works, independently of any particular input.
This category holds the remaining 4 papers cov-
ered by this survey. This low number is not surpris-
ing given the focus of this survey being on explana-
tions that justify predictions, as opposed to expla-
nations that help understand a model’s behavior in
general (which lie outside the scope of this survey).
3.2 Self-Explaining vs Post-Hoc
Regardless of whether the explanation is local or
global, explanations differ on whether they arise
as part of the prediction process, or whether their
generation requires post-processing following the
model making a prediction. A self-explaining ap-
proach, which may also be referred to as directly
interpretable (Arya et al., 2019), generates the ex-
planation at the same time as the prediction, us-
ing information emitted by the model as a result
of the process of making that prediction. Decision
trees and rule-based models are examples of global
self-explaining models, while feature saliency ap-
proaches such as attention are examples of local
self-explaining models.
In contrast, a post-hoc approach requires that
an additional operation is performed after the pre-
dictions are made. LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) is

==== Page 3 ====
an example of producing a local explanation us-
ing a surrogate model applied following the predic-
tor’s operation. A paper might also be considered
to span both categories – for example, (Sydorova
et al., 2019) actually presents both self-explaining
and post-hoc explanation techniques.
Local
Post-HocExplain a single prediction by per-
forming additional operations ( after the
model has emitted a prediction)
Local Self-
ExplainingExplain a single prediction using the
model itself (calculated from informa-
tion made available from the model as
part of making the prediction)
Global
Post-HocPerform additional operations to explain
the entire model’s predictive reasoning
Global Self-
ExplainingUse the predictive model itself to explain
the entire model’s predictive reasoning
(a.k.a. directly interpretable model)
Table 1: Overview of the high-level categories of expla-
nations (Section 3).
4 Aspects of Explanations
While the previous categorization serves as a con-
venient high-level classiﬁcation of explanations, it
does not cover other important characteristics. We
now introduce two additional aspects of explana-
tions: (1) techniques for deriving the explanation
and (2) presentation to the end user. We discuss
the most commonly used explainability techniques,
along with basic operations that enable explainabil-
ity, as well as the visualization techniques com-
monly used to present the output of associated ex-
plainability techniques. We identify the most com-
mon combinations of explainability techniques, op-
erations, and visualization techniques for each of
the four high-level categories of explanations pre-
sented above, and summarize them, together with
representative papers, in Table 2.
Although explainability techniques and visual-
izations are often intermixed, there are fundamental
differences between them that motivated us to treat
them separately. Concretely, explanation derivation
- typically done by AI scientists and engineers - fo-
cuses on mathematically motivated justiﬁcations
of models’ output, leveraging various explainabil-
ity techniques to produce “raw explanations” (such
as attention scores). On the other hand, explana-
tion presentation - ideally done by UX engineers -
focuses on how these “raw explanations” are best
presented to the end users using suitable visualiza-
tion techniques (such as saliency heatmaps).4.1 Explainability Techniques
In the papers surveyed, we identiﬁed ﬁve major
explainability techniques that differ in the mecha-
nisms they adopt to generate the raw mathematical
justiﬁcations that lead to the ﬁnal explanation pre-
sented to the end users.
Feature importance. The main idea is to derive
explanation by investigating the importance scores
of different features used to output the ﬁnal pre-
diction. Such approaches can be built on differ-
ent types of features, such as manual features ob-
tained from feature engineering (e.g., V oskarides
et al., 2015), lexical features including word/tokens
and n-gram (e.g., Godin et al., 2018; Mullenbach
et al., 2018), or latent features learned by NNs (e.g.,
Xie et al., 2017). Attention mechanism (Bahdanau
et al., 2015) and ﬁrst-derivative saliency (Li et al.,
2015) are two widely used operations to enable
feature importance-based explanations. Text-based
features are inherently more interpretable by hu-
mans than general features, which may explain the
widespread use of attention-based approaches in
the NLP domain.
Surrogate model. Model predictions are ex-
plained by learning a second, usually more explain-
able model, as a proxy. One well-known example
is LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), which learns sur-
rogate models using an operation called input per-
turbation. Surrogate model-based approaches are
model-agnostic and can be used to achieve either
local (e.g., Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2017) or
global (e.g., Liu et al., 2018) explanations. How-
ever, the learned surrogate models and the original
models may have completely different mechanisms
to make predictions, leading to concerns about the
ﬁdelity of surrogate model-based approaches.
Example-driven. Such approaches explain the
prediction of an input instance by identifying and
presenting other instances, usually from available
labeled data, that are semantically similar to the
input instance. They are similar in spirit to nearest
neighbor-based approaches (Dudani, 1976), and
have been applied to different NLP tasks such as
text classiﬁcation (Croce et al., 2019) and question
answering (Abujabal et al., 2017).
Provenance-based. Explanations are provided
by illustrating some or all of the prediction deriva-
tion process, which is an intuitive and effective ex-
plainability technique when the ﬁnal prediction is
the result of a series of reasoning steps. We observe
several question answering papers adopt such ap-

==== Page 4 ====
Category Explainability Operations to Visualization Representative
(#) Technique Enable Explainability Technique # Paper(s)
Local
Post-Hoc
(11)feature
importanceﬁrst derivative saliency, example
drivensaliency 5 (Wallace et al., 2018;
Ross et al., 2017)
surrogate model ﬁrst derivative saliency, layer-wise
relevance propagation, input pertur-
bationsaliency 4 (Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola, 2017; Poerner
et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al.,
2016)
example driven layer-wise relevance propagation,
explainability-aware architectureraw examples 2 (Croce et al., 2018; Jiang
et al., 2019)
Local
Self-Exp
(35)feature
importanceattention, ﬁrst derivative saliency,
LSTM gating signals, explainability-
aware architecturesaliency 22 (Mullenbach et al., 2018;
Ghaeini et al., 2018; Xie
et al., 2017; Aubakirova
and Bansal, 2016)
induction explainability-aware architecture,
rule inductionraw declarative
representation6 (Ling et al., 2017; Dong
et al., 2019; Pezeshkpour
et al., 2019a)
provenance template-based natural
language, other3 (Abujabal et al., 2017)
surrogate model attention, input perturbation,
explainability-aware architecturenatural
language3 (Rajani et al., 2019a;
Sydorova et al., 2019)
example driven layer-wise relevance propagation raw examples 1 (Croce et al., 2019)
Global
Post-Hoc
(3)feature
importanceclass activation mapping, attention,
gradient reversalsaliency 2 (Pryzant et al., 2018a,b)
surrogate model taxonomy induction raw declarative
representation1 (Liu et al., 2018)
Global
Self-Exp
(1)induction reinforcement learning raw declarative
representation1 (Pr ¨ollochs et al., 2019)
Table 2: Overview of common combinations of explanation aspects: columns 2, 3, and 4 capture explainability
techniques, operations, and visualization techniques, respectively (see Sections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 for details). These
are grouped by the high-level categories detailed in Section 3, as shown in the ﬁrst column. The last two columns
show the number of papers in this survey that fall within each subgroup, and a list of representative references.
proaches (Abujabal et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2018;
Amini et al., 2019).
Declarative induction. Human-readable repre-
sentations, such as rules (Pr ¨ollochs et al., 2019),
trees (V oskarides et al., 2015), and programs (Ling
et al., 2017) are induced as explanations.
As shown in Table 2, feature importance-based
and surrogate model-based approaches have been
in frequent use (accounting for 29 and 8, respec-
tively, of the 50 papers reviewed). This should not
come as a surprise, as features serve as building
blocks for machine learning models (explaining
the proliferation of feature importance-based ap-
proaches) and most recent NLP papers employ NN-
based models, which are generally black-box mod-
els (explaining the popularity of surrogate model-
based approaches). Finally note that a complex
NLP approach consisting of different componentsmay employ more than one of these explainabil-
ity techniques. A representative example is the QA
system QUINT (Abujabal et al., 2017), which dis-
plays the query template that best matches the user
input query (example-driven) as well as the instan-
tiated knowledge-base entities (provenance).
4.2 Operations to Enable Explainability
We now present the most common set of operations
encountered in our literature review that are used to
enable explainability, in conjunction with relevant
work employing each one.
First-derivative saliency. Gradient-based ex-
planations estimate the contribution of input ito-
wards output oby computing the partial derivative
ofowith respect to i. This is closely related to
older concepts such as sensitivity (Saltelli et al.,
2008). First-derivative saliency is particularly con-

==== Page 5 ====
venient for NN-based models because these can
be computed for any layer using a single call to
auto-differentiation, which most deep learning en-
gines provide out-of-the-box. Recent work has also
proposed improvements to ﬁrst-derivative saliency
(Sundararajan et al., 2017). As suggested by its
name and deﬁnition, ﬁrst-derivative saliency can be
used to enable feature importance explainability, es-
pecially on word/token-level features (Aubakirova
and Bansal, 2016; Karlekar et al., 2018).
Layer-wise relevance propagation. This is an-
other way to attribute relevance to features com-
puted in any intermediate layer of an NN. Deﬁni-
tions are available for most common NN layers in-
cluding fully connected layers, convolution layers
and recurrent layers. Layer-wise relevance propa-
gation has been used to, for example, enable feature
importance explainability (Poerner et al., 2018) and
example-driven explainability (Croce et al., 2018).
Input perturbations. Pioneered by LIME
(Ribeiro et al., 2016), input perturbations can ex-
plain the output for input xby generating ran-
dom perturbations of xand training an explainable
model (usually a linear model). They are mainly
used to enable surrogate models (e.g., Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2017).
Attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al.,
2017). Less an operation and more of a strategy to
enable the NN to explain predictions, attention lay-
ers can be added to most NN architectures and, be-
cause they appeal to human intuition, can help indi-
cate where the NN model is “focusing”. While pre-
vious work has widely used attention layers (Luo
et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2017; Mullenbach et al.,
2018) to enable feature importance explainability,
the jury is still out as to how much explainability at-
tention provides (Jain and Wallace, 2019; Serrano
and Smith, 2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019).
LSTM gating signals. Given the sequential na-
ture of language, recurrent layers, in particular
LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), are
commonplace. While it is common to mine the out-
puts of LSTM cells to explain outputs, there may
also be information present in the outputs of the
gates produced within the cells. It is possible to uti-
lize (and even combine) other operations presented
here to interpret gating signals to aid feature impor-
tance explainability (Ghaeini et al., 2018).
Explainability-aware architecture design. One
way to exploit the ﬂexibility of deep learning is to
devise an NN architecture that mimics the processhumans employ to arrive at a solution. This makes
the learned model (partially) interpretable since the
architecture contains human-recognizable compo-
nents. Implementing such a model architecture can
be used to enable the induction of human-readable
programs for solving math problems (Amini et al.,
2019; Ling et al., 2017) or sentence simpliﬁcation
problems (Dong et al., 2019). This design may also
be applied to surrogate models that generate expla-
nations for predictions (Rajani et al., 2019a; Liu
et al., 2019).
Previous works have also attempted to compare
these operations in terms of efﬁcacy with respect
to speciﬁc NLP tasks (Poerner et al., 2018). Oper-
ations outside of this list exist and are popular for
particular categories of explanations. Table 2 men-
tions some of these. For instance, Pr ¨ollochs et al.
(2019) use reinforcement learning to learn simple
negation rules, Liu et al. (2018) learns a taxonomy
post-hoc to better interpret network embeddings,
and Pryzant et al. (2018b) uses gradient reversal
(Ganin et al., 2016) to deconfound lexicons.
4.3 Visualization Techniques
An explanation may be presented in different ways
to the end user, and making the appropriate choice
is crucial for the overall success of an XAI ap-
proach. For example, the widely used attention
mechanism, which learns the importance scores
of a set of features, can be visualized as raw at-
tention scores or as a saliency heatmap (see Fig-
ure 1a). Although the former is acceptable, the lat-
ter is more user-friendly and has become the stan-
dard way to visualize attention-based approaches.
We now present the major visualization techniques
identiﬁed in our literature review.
Saliency. This has been primarily used to visu-
alize the importance scores of different types of
elements in XAI learning systems, such as show-
ing input-output word alignment (Bahdanau et al.,
2015) (Figure 1a), highlighting words in input text
(Mullenbach et al., 2018) (Figure 1b) or displaying
extracted relations (Xie et al., 2017). We observe a
strong correspondence between feature importance-
based explainability and saliency-based visualiza-
tions; namely, all papers using feature importance
to generate explanations also chose saliency-based
visualization techniques. Saliency-based visualiza-
tions are popular because they present visually per-
ceptive explanations and can be easily understood
by different types of end users. They are there-

==== Page 6 ====
(a) Saliency heatmap (Bahdanau et al.,
2015)
(b) Saliency highlighting (Mullenbach
et al., 2018)
(c) Raw declarative rules
(Pezeshkpour et al., 2019b)
(d) Raw declarative program (Amini et al., 2019)
 (e) Raw examples (Croce et al., 2019)
Figure 1: Examples of different visualization techniques
fore frequently seen across different AI domains
(e.g., computer vision (Simonyan et al., 2013) and
speech (Aldeneh and Provost, 2017)). As shown in
Table 2, saliency is the most dominant visualization
technique among the papers covered by this survey.
Raw declarative representations . As suggested
by its name, this visualization technique directly
presents the learned declarative representations,
such as logic rules, trees, and programs (Figure 1c
and 1d). Such techniques assume that end users can
understand speciﬁc representations, such as ﬁrst-
order logic rules (Pezeshkpour et al., 2019a) and
reasoning trees (Liang et al., 2016), and therefore
may implicitly target more advanced users.
Natural language explanation . The explanation
is verbalized in human-comprehensible natural lan-
guage (Figure 2). The natural language can be
generated using sophisticated deep learning mod-
els, e.g., by training a language model with human
natural language explanations and coupling with
a deep generative model (Rajani et al., 2019a). It
can also be generated by using simple template-
based approaches (Abujabal et al., 2017). In fact,
many declarative induction-based techniques can
use template-based natural language generation
(Reiter and Dale, 1997) to turn rules and programs
into human-comprehensible language, and this mi-
nor extension can potentially make the explanation
more accessible to lay users.
Table 2 references some additional visualiza-
Figure 2: Template-based natural language explanation
for a QA system (Abujabal et al., 2017).
tion techniques, such as using raw examples to
present example-driven approaches (Jiang et al.,
2019; Croce et al., 2019) (e.g., Figure 1e), and de-
pendency parse trees to represent input questions
(Abujabal et al., 2017).
5 Explanation Quality
Following the goals of XAI, a model’s quality
should be evaluated not only by its accuracy and
performance, but also by how well it provides ex-
planations for its predictions. In this section we dis-
cuss the state of the ﬁeld in terms of deﬁning and
measuring explanation quality.
5.1 Evaluation
Given the young age of the ﬁeld, unsurprisingly
there is little agreement on how explanations
should be evaluated. The majority of the works
reviewed (32 out of 50) either lack a standardized
evaluation or include only an informal evaluation,
while a smaller number of papers looked at more
formal evaluation approaches, including leverag-
ing ground truth data and human evaluation. We

==== Page 7 ====
next present the major categories of evaluation tech-
niques we encountered (summarized in Table 3).
None or Informal Comparison to Human
Examination only Ground Truth Evaluation
32 12 9
Table 3: Common evaluation techniques and number
of papers adopting them, out of the 50 papers surveyed
(note that some papers adopt more than one technique)
Informal examination of explanations. This typ-
ically takes the form of high-level discussions of
how examples of generated explanations align with
human intuition. This includes cases where the
output of a single explainability approach is exam-
ined in isolation (Xie et al., 2017) as well as when
explanations are compared to those of other refer-
ence approaches (Ross et al., 2017) (such as LIME,
which is a frequently used baseline).
Comparison to ground truth. Several works com-
pare generated explanations to ground truth data in
order to quantify the performance of explainabil-
ity techniques. Employed metrics vary based on
task and explainability technique, but commonly
encountered metrics include P/R/F1 (Carton et al.,
2018), perplexity, and BLEU (Ling et al., 2017;
Rajani et al., 2019b). While having a quantitative
way to measure explainability is a promising di-
rection, care should be taken during ground truth
acquisition to ensure its quality and account for
cases where there may be alternative valid explana-
tions. Approaches employed to address this issue
involve having multiple annotators and reporting
inter-annotator agreement or mean human perfor-
mance, as well as evaluating the explanations at
different granularities (e.g., token-wise vs phrase-
wise) to account for disagreements on the precise
value of the ground truth (Carton et al., 2018).
Human evaluation. A more direct way to assess
the explanation quality is to ask humans to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of the generated explanations.
This has the advantage of avoiding the assumption
that there is only one good explanation that could
serve as ground truth, as well as sidestepping the
need to measure similarity of explanations. Here as
well, it is important to have multiple annotators, re-
port inter-annotator agreement, and correctly deal
with subjectivity and variance in the responses. The
approaches found in this survey vary in several
dimensions, including the number of humans in-
volved (ranging from 1 (Mullenbach et al., 2018) to25 (Sydorova et al., 2019) humans), as well as the
high-level task that they were asked to perform (in-
cluding rating the explanations of a single approach
(Dong et al., 2019) and comparing explanations of
multiple techniques (Sydorova et al., 2019)).
Other operation-speciﬁc techniques. Given the
prevalence of attention layers (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Vaswani et al., 2017) in NLP, recent work
(Jain and Wallace, 2019; Serrano and Smith, 2019;
Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019) has developed speciﬁc
techniques to evaluate such explanations based on
counterfactuals or erasure-based tests (Feng et al.,
2018). Serrano and Smith repeatedly set to zero the
maximal entry produced by the attention layer. If at-
tention weights indeed “explain” the output predic-
tion, then turning off the dominant weights should
result in an altered prediction. Similar experiments
have been devised by others (Jain and Wallace,
2019). In particular, Wiegreffe and Pinter caution
against assuming that there exists only one true ex-
planation to suggest accounting for the natural vari-
ance of attention layers. On a broader note, causal-
ity has thoroughly explored such counterfactual-
based notions of explanation (Halpern, 2016).
While the above overview summarizes how ex-
plainability approaches are commonly evaluated,
another important aspect is what is being evaluated.
Explanations are multi-faceted objects that can be
evaluated on multiple aspects, such as ﬁdelity (how
much they reﬂect the actual workings of the under-
lying model), comprehensibility (how easy they are
to understand by humans), and others. Therefore,
understanding the target of the evaluation is impor-
tant for interpreting the evaluation results. We refer
interested readers to (Carvalho et al., 2019) for a
comprehensive presentation of aspects of evaluat-
ing approaches.
Many works do not explicitly state what is be-
ing evaluated. As a notable exception, (Lertvit-
tayakumjorn and Toni, 2019) outlines three goals of
explanations (reveal model behavior, justify model
predictions, and assist humans in investigating un-
certain predictions) and proposes human evaluation
experiments targeting each of them.
5.2 Predictive Process Coverage
An important and often overlooked aspect of expla-
nation quality is the part of the prediction process
(starting with the input and ending with the model
output) covered by an explanation. We have ob-
served that many explainability approaches explain

==== Page 8 ====
only part of this process, leaving it up to the end
user to ﬁll in the gaps.
As an example, consider the MathQA task of
solving math word problems. As readers may be fa-
miliar from past education experience, in math ex-
ams, one is often asked to provide a step-by-step ex-
planation of how the answer was derived. Usually,
full credit is not given if any of the critical steps
used in the derivation are missing. Recent works
have studied the explainability of MathQA models,
which seek to reproduce this process (Amini et al.,
2019; Ling et al., 2017), and have employed dif-
ferent approaches in the type of explanations pro-
duced. While (Amini et al., 2019) explains the pre-
dicted answer by showing the sequence of mathe-
matical operations leading to it, this provides only
partial coverage, as it does not explain how these
operations were derived from the input text. On
the other hand, the explanations produced by (Ling
et al., 2017) augment the mathematical formulas
with text describing the thought process behind the
derived solution, thus covering a bigger part of the
prediction process.
The level of coverage may be an artifact of ex-
plainability techniques used: provenance-based ap-
proaches tend to provide more coverage, while
example-driven approaches, may provide little to
no coverage. Moreover, while our math teacher
would argue that providing higher coverage is al-
ways beneﬁcial to the student, in reality this may
depend on the end use of the explanation. For
instance, the coverage of explanations of (Amini
et al., 2019) may be potentially sufﬁcient for ad-
vanced technical users. Thus, higher coverage,
while in general a positive aspect, should always
be considered in combination with the target use
and audience of the produced explanations.
6 Insights and Future Directions
This survey showcases recent advances of XAI
research in NLP, as evidenced by publications in
major NLP conferences in the last 7 years. We have
discussed the main categorization of explanations
(Local vs Global, Self-Explaining vs Post-Hoc)
as well as the various ways explanations can be
arrived at and visualized, together with the common
techniques used. We have also detailed operations
and explainability techniques currently available
for generating explanations of model predictions,
in the hopes of serving as a resource for developers
interested in building explainable NLP models.We hope this survey encourages the research
community to work in bridging the current gaps in
the ﬁeld of XAI in NLP. The ﬁrst research direction
is a need for clearer terminology and understand-
ing of what constitutes explainability and how it
connects to the target audience. For example, is a
model that displays an induced program that, when
executed, yields a prediction, and yet conceals the
process of inducing the program, explainable in
general? Or is it explainable for some target users
but not for others? The second is an expansion of
the evaluation processes and metrics, especially for
human evaluation. The ﬁeld of XAI is aimed at
adding explainability as a desired feature of models,
in addition to the model’s predictive quality, and
other features such as runtime performance, com-
plexity or memory usage. In general, trade-offs ex-
ist between desired characteristics of models, such
as more complex models achieving better predic-
tive power at the expense of slower runtime. In
XAI, some works have claimed that explainability
may come at the price of losing predictive quality
(Bertsimas et al., 2019), while other have claimed
the opposite (Garneau et al., 2018; Liang et al.,
2016). Studying such possible trade-offs is an im-
portant research area for XAI, but one that cannot
advance until standardized metrics are developed
for evaluating the quality of explanations. The third
research direction is a call to more critically ad-
dress the issue of ﬁdelity (or causality), and to ask
hard questions about whether a claimed explana-
tion is faithfully explaining the model’s prediction.
Finally, it is interesting to note that we found
only four papers that fall into the global explana-
tions category. This might seem surprising given
that white box models, which have been fundamen-
tal in NLP, are explainable in the global sense. We
believe this stems from the fact that because white
box models are clearly explainable, the focus of
the explicit XAI ﬁeld is in explaining black box
models, which comprise mostly local explanations.
White box models, like rule based models and de-
cision trees, while still in use, are less frequently
framed as explainable or interpretable, and are
hence not the main thrust of where the ﬁeld is going.
We think that this may be an oversight of the ﬁeld
since white box models can be a great test bed for
studying techniques for evaluating explanations.

==== Page 9 ====
References
Abdalghani Abujabal, Rishiraj Saha Roy, Mohamed
Yahya, and Gerhard Weikum. 2017. Quint: Inter-
pretable question answering over knowledge bases.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing: Sys-
tem Demonstrations , pages 61–66.
A. Adadi and M. Berrada. 2018. Peeking inside the
black-box: A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (xai). IEEE Access , 6:52138–52160.
Zakaria Aldeneh and Emily Mower Provost. 2017. Us-
ing regional saliency for speech emotion recognition.
In2017 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages
2741–2745. IEEE.
David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. 2017. A
causal framework for explaining the predictions of
black-box sequence-to-sequence models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 412–
421, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik
Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Ha-
jishirzi. 2019. MathQA: Towards interpretable
math word problem solving with operation-based
formalisms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 2357–2367, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Vijay Arya, Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Pin-Yu Chen, Amit
Dhurandhar, Michael Hind, Samuel C. Hoffman,
Stephanie Houde, Q. Vera Liao, Ronny Luss, Alek-
sandra Mojsilovic, Sami Mourad, Pablo Pedemonte,
Ramya Raghavendra, John T. Richards, Prasanna
Sattigeri, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Moninder
Singh, Kush R. Varshney, Dennis Wei, and Yi Zhang.
2019. One explanation does not ﬁt all: A toolkit and
taxonomy of ai explainability techniques. ArXiv ,
abs/1909.03012.
M. Aubakirova and M. Bansal. 2016. Interpreting neu-
ral networks to improve politeness comprehension.
InProceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (Austin,
Texas, 2016) , page 2035–2041.
AmirAli Bagher Zadeh, Paul Pu Liang, Soujanya Poria,
Erik Cambria, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2018.
Multimodal language analysis in the wild: CMU-
MOSEI dataset and interpretable dynamic fusion
graph. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2236–2246, Melbourne,
Australia. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. In ICLR .
Francesco Barbieri, Luis Espinosa-Anke, Jose
Camacho-Collados, Steven Schockaert, and Hora-
cio Saggion. 2018. Interpretable emoji prediction
via label-wise attention LSTMs. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pages 4766–4771,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Dimitris Bertsimas, Arthur Delarue, Patrick Jaillet, and
S´ebastien Martin. 2019. The price of interpretability.
ArXiv , abs/1907.03419.
Nikita Bhutani, Kun Qian, Yunyao Li, H. V . Jagadish,
Mauricio Hernandez, and Mitesh Vasa. 2018. Ex-
ploiting structure in representation of named entities
using active learning. In Proceedings of the 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 687–699, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Samuel Carton, Qiaozhu Mei, and Paul Resnick. 2018.
Extractive adversarial networks: High-recall expla-
nations for identifying personal attacks in social me-
dia posts. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 3497–3507, Brussels, Belgium. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Diogo V . Carvalho, Eduardo M. Pereira, and Jaime S.
Cardoso. 2019. Machine Learning Interpretability:
A Survey on Methods and Metrics. Electronics ,
8(8):832. Number: 8 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute.
Danilo Croce, Daniele Rossini, and Roberto Basili.
2018. Explaining non-linear classiﬁer decisions
within kernel-based deep architectures. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 16–24, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Danilo Croce, Daniele Rossini, and Roberto Basili.
2019. Auditing deep learning processes through
kernel-based explanatory models. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4037–4046, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yue Dong, Zichao Li, Mehdi Rezagholizadeh, and
Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. 2019. EditNTS: An neural
programmer-interpreter model for sentence simpliﬁ-
cation through explicit editing. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 3393–3402, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.

==== Page 10 ====
Sahibsingh A Dudani. 1976. The distance-weighted
k-nearest-neighbor rule. IEEE Transactions on Sys-
tems, Man, and Cybernetics , (4):325–327.
Shi Feng, Eric Wallace, Alvin Grissom II, Mohit Iyyer,
Pedro Rodriguez, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2018.
Pathologies of neural models make interpretations
difﬁcult. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 3719–3728, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan,
Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Franc ¸ois Lavi-
olette, Mario Marchand, , and Victor Lempitsky.
2016. Domain-adversarial training of neural net-
works. JMLR .
Nicolas Garneau, Jean-Samuel Leboeuf, and Luc Lam-
ontagne. 2018. Predicting and interpreting embed-
dings for out of vocabulary words in downstream
tasks. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Work-
shop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neu-
ral Networks for NLP , pages 331–333, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Reza Ghaeini, Xiaoli Fern, and Prasad Tadepalli. 2018.
Interpreting recurrent and attention-based neural
models: a case study on natural language infer-
ence. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 4952–4957, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Fr´ederic Godin, Kris Demuynck, Joni Dambre, Wesley
De Neve, and Thomas Demeester. 2018. Explaining
character-aware neural networks for word-level pre-
diction: Do they discover linguistic rules? In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3275–
3284, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri,
Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi.
2018. A survey of methods for explaining black box
models. ACM Comput. Surv. , 51(5).
Pankaj Gupta and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2018. LISA: Ex-
plaining recurrent neural network judgments via
layer-wIse semantic accumulation and example to
pattern transformation. In Proceedings of the 2018
EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and In-
terpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 154–164,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Joseph Y . Halpern. 2016. Actual Causality . MIT Press.
David Harbecke, Robert Schwarzenberg, and
Christoph Alt. 2018. Learning explanations from
language data. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP
Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpret-
ing Neural Networks for NLP , pages 316–318, Brus-
sels, Belgium. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997. Long
short-term memory. Neural Computation .
Shiou Tian Hsu, Changsung Moon, Paul Jones, and Na-
giza Samatova. 2018. An interpretable generative
adversarial approach to classiﬁcation of latent entity
relations in unstructured sentences. In AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention is
not Explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers) , pages 3543–3556, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yichen Jiang and Mohit Bansal. 2019. Self-assembling
modular networks for interpretable multi-hop rea-
soning. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
4474–4484, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yichen Jiang, Nitish Joshi, Yen-Chun Chen, and Mohit
Bansal. 2019. Explore, propose, and assemble: An
interpretable model for multi-hop reading compre-
hension. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 2714–2725, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Dongyeop Kang, Varun Gangal, Ang Lu, Zheng Chen,
and Eduard Hovy. 2017. Detecting and explaining
causes from text for a time series event. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2758–
2767, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Sweta Karlekar, Tong Niu, and Mohit Bansal. 2018.
Detecting linguistic characteristics of alzheimer’s
dementia by interpreting neural models. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2
(Short Papers) (New Orleans, Louisiana, Jun. 2018) ,
page 701–707.
Shun Kiyono, Sho Takase, Jun Suzuki, Naoaki
Okazaki, Kentaro Inui, and Masaaki Nagata. 2018.
Unsupervised token-wise alignment to improve in-
terpretation of encoder-decoder models. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 74–81, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Freddy Lecue, Krishna Gade, Sahin Cem Geyik, Krish-
naram Kenthapadi, Varun Mithal, Ankur Taly, Ric-
cardo Guidotti, and Pasquale Minervini. 2020. Ex-
plainable ai: Foundations, industrial applications,
practical challenges, and lessons learned. In AAAI

==== Page 11 ====
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Piyawat Lertvittayakumjorn and Francesca Toni. 2019.
Human-grounded evaluations of explanation meth-
ods for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5195–5205, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jiwei Li, Xinlei Chen, Eduard Hovy, and Dan Jurafsky.
2015. Visualizing and understanding neural models
in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01066 .
Qiuchi Li, Benyou Wang, and Massimo Melucci. 2019.
CNM: An interpretable complex-valued network for
matching. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4139–4148, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Chao-Chun Liang, Shih-Hong Tsai, Ting-Yun Chang,
Yi-Chung Lin, and Keh-Yih Su. 2016. A meaning-
based English math word problem solver with under-
standing, reasoning and explanation. In Proceedings
of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics: System Demonstra-
tions , pages 151–155, Osaka, Japan. The COLING
2016 Organizing Committee.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blun-
som. 2017. Program induction by rationale genera-
tion: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word
problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 158–167, Vancou-
ver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Hui Liu, Qingyu Yin, and William Yang Wang. 2019.
Towards explainable NLP: A generative explanation
framework for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 5570–5581, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ninghao Liu, Xiao Huang, Jundong Li, and Xia Hu.
2018. On interpretation of network embedding via
taxonomy induction. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery & Data Mining , KDD ’18, page
1812–1820, New York, NY , USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Junyu Lu, Chenbin Zhang, Zeying Xie, Guang Ling,
Tom Chao Zhou, and Zenglin Xu. 2019. Construct-
ing interpretive spatio-temporal features for multi-
turn responses selection. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 44–50, Florence, Italy. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.Ling Luo, Xiang Ao, Feiyang Pan, Jin Wang, Tong
Zhao, Ningzi Yu, and Qing He. 2018. Beyond polar-
ity: Interpretable ﬁnancial sentiment analysis with
hierarchical query-driven attention.
Seungwhan Moon, Pararth Shah, Anuj Kumar, and Ra-
jen Subba. 2019. OpenDialKG: Explainable conver-
sational reasoning with attention-based walks over
knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 845–854, Florence, Italy. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
James Mullenbach, Sarah Wiegreffe, Jon Duke, Jimeng
Sun, and Jacob Eisenstein. 2018. Explainable pre-
diction of medical codes from clinical text. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1101–1111, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
An Nguyen, Aditya Kharosekar, Matthew Lease, and
Byron Wallace. 2018. An interpretable joint graph-
ical model for fact-checking from crowds. In AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Alexander Panchenko, Fide Marten, Eugen Ruppert,
Stefano Faralli, Dmitry Ustalov, Simone Paolo
Ponzetto, and Chris Biemann. 2017. Unsupervised,
knowledge-free, and interpretable word sense dis-
ambiguation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 91–96,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Nikolaos Pappas and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2014. Ex-
plaining the stars: Weighted multiple-instance learn-
ing for aspect-based sentiment analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
455–466, Doha, Qatar. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Pouya Pezeshkpour, Yifan Tian, and Sameer Singh.
2019a. Investigating robustness and interpretability
of link prediction via adversarial modiﬁcations. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
3336–3347, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Pouya Pezeshkpour, Yifan Tian, and Sameer Singh.
2019b. Investigating robustness and interpretability
of link prediction via adversarial modiﬁcations. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 3336–
3347.

==== Page 12 ====
Nina Poerner, Hinrich Sch ¨utze, and Benjamin Roth.
2018. Evaluating neural network explanation meth-
ods using hybrid documents and morphosyntactic
agreement. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 340–350, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Nicolas Pr ¨ollochs, Stefan Feuerriegel, and Dirk Neu-
mann. 2019. Learning interpretable negation rules
via weak supervision at document level: A reinforce-
ment learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers) , pages 407–413, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Reid Pryzant, Sugato Basu, and Kazoo Sone. 2018a.
Interpretable neural architectures for attributing an
ad’s performance to its writing style. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: An-
alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,
pages 125–135, Brussels, Belgium. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Reid Pryzant, Kelly Shen, Dan Jurafsky, and Stefan
Wagner. 2018b. Deconfounded lexicon induction
for interpretable social science. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Pa-
pers) , pages 1615–1625, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming
Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019a. Explain your-
self! leveraging language models for commonsense
reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 4932–4942, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming
Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019b. Explain your-
self! leveraging language models for commonsense
reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02361 .
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 1997. Building applied
natural language generation systems. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering , 3(1):57–87.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. Why should i trust you?”: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceed-
ings of the 22Nd ACM SIGKDD International Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(New York, NY, USA, 2016) , page 1135–1144.
Andrew Slavin Ross, Michael C. Hughes, and Finale
Doshi-Velez. 2017. Right for the right reasons:
Training differentiable models by constraining their
explanations. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI-17 , pages 2662–2670.A. Saltelli, M. Ratto, T. Andres, F. Campolongo,
J. Cariboni, D. Gatelli, M. Saisana, and S. Taran-
tola. 2008. Global Sensitivity Analysis: The Primer .
John Wiley & Sons.
Robert Schwarzenberg, David Harbecke, Vivien Mack-
etanz, Eleftherios Avramidis, and Sebastian M ¨oller.
2019. Train, sort, explain: Learning to diagnose
translation models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Demonstra-
tions) , pages 29–34, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Prithviraj Sen, Yunyao Li, Eser Kandogan, Yiwei Yang,
and Walter Lasecki. 2019. HEIDL: Learning linguis-
tic expressions with deep learning and human-in-the-
loop. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Sys-
tem Demonstrations , pages 135–140, Florence, Italy.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Soﬁa Serrano and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Is attention
interpretable? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 2931–2951, Florence, Italy. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisser-
man. 2013. Deep inside convolutional networks: Vi-
sualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency
maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034 .
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017.
Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, Sydney,
Australia .
Alona Sydorova, Nina Poerner, and Benjamin Roth.
2019. Interpretable question answering on knowl-
edge bases and text. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4943–4951, Florence, Italy. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2019. Gener-
ating token-level explanations for natural language
inference. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
963–969, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Martin Tutek and Jan ˇSnajder. 2018. Iterative recur-
sive attention model for interpretable sequence clas-
siﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Work-
shop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neu-
ral Networks for NLP , pages 249–257, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In NeurIPS .

==== Page 13 ====
Nikos V oskarides, Edgar Meij, Manos Tsagkias,
Maarten de Rijke, and Wouter Weerkamp. 2015.
Learning to explain entity relationships in knowl-
edge graphs. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 564–574, Beijing, China. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, and Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2018.
Interpreting neural networks with nearest neighbors.
InProceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP , pages 136–144, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is
not not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) , pages 11–20, Hong Kong, China. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Qizhe Xie, Xuezhe Ma, Zihang Dai, and Eduard Hovy.
2017. An interpretable knowledge transfer model
for knowledge base completion. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 950–962, Vancouver, Canada. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yang Yang, Deyu Zhou, Yulan He, and Meng Zhang.
2019. Interpretable relevant emotion ranking with
event-driven attention. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 177–187, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mantong Zhou, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu.
2018. An interpretable reasoning network for multi-
relation question answering. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics , pages 2010–2022.
A Appendix A - Methodology
This survey aims to demonstrate the recent ad-
vances of XAI research in NLP, rather than to pro-
vide an exhaustive list of XAI papers in the NLP
community. To this end, we identiﬁed relevant pa-
pers published in major NLP conferences (ACL,
NAACL, EMNLP, and COLING) between 2013
and 2019. We ﬁltered for titles containing (lemma-
tized) terms related to XAI, such as “explainabil-
ity”, “interpretability”, “transparent”, etc. While
this may ignore some related papers, we argue that
representative papers are more likely to include
such terms in their titles. In particular, we assumethat if authors consider explainability to be a major
component of their work, they are more likely to
use related keywords in the title of their work. Our
search criteria yielded a set of 107 papers.
Top 3 NLP Topics
1 2 3
Question
Answering
(9)Computational
Social Science &
Social Media
(6)Syntax:
Tagging, Chunking
& Parsing
(6)
Top 3 Conferences
1 2 3
EMNLP
(21)ACL
(12)NAACL
(9)
Table 4: Top NLP topics and conferences (2013-2019)
of papers included in this survey
During the paper review process we ﬁrst veriﬁed
whether each paper truly fell within the scope of
the survey; namely, papers with a focus on explain-
ability as a vehicle for understanding how a model
arrives at its result. This process excluded 57 pa-
pers, leaving us with a total of 50 papers. Table 4
lists the top three broad NLP topics (taken verba-
tim from the ACL call for papers) covered by these
50 papers, and the top three conferences of the set.
To ensure a consistent classiﬁcation, each paper
was individually reviewed by at least two review-
ers, consulting additional reviewers in the case of
disagreement.

