==== Page 1 ====
A Survey of Data Augmentation Approaches for NLP
Steven Y. Feng,1Varun Gangal,1Jason Weiy,2Sarath Chandar,3
Soroush Vosoughi ,4Teruko Mitamura ,1Eduard Hovy1
1Carnegie Mellon University,2Google Research
3Mila - Quebec AI Institute,4Dartmouth College
{syfeng,vgangal,teruko,hovy}@cs.cmu.edu
jasonwei@google.com sarath.chandar@mila.quebec
soroush@dartmouth.edu
Abstract
Data augmentation has recently seen increased
interest in NLP due to more work in low-
resource domains, new tasks, and the popu-
larity of large-scale neural networks that re-
quire large amounts of training data. De-
spite this recent upsurge, this area is still rel-
atively underexplored, perhaps due to the chal-
lenges posed by the discrete nature of language
data. In this paper, we present a comprehen-
sive and unifying survey of data augmenta-
tion for NLP by summarizing the literature in
a structured manner. We ﬁrst introduce and
motivate data augmentation for NLP, and then
discuss major methodologically representative
approaches. Next, we highlight techniques
that are used for popular NLP applications and
tasks. We conclude by outlining current chal-
lenges and directions for future research. Over-
all, our paper aims to clarify the landscape
of existing literature in data augmentation for
NLP and motivate additional work in this area.
We also present a GitHub repository with a pa-
per list that will be continuously updated at
https://github.com/styfeng/DataAug4NLP.
1 Introduction
Data augmentation ( DA) refers to strategies for in-
creasing the diversity of training examples without
explicitly collecting new data. It has received active
attention in recent machine learning (ML) research
in the form of well-received, general-purpose tech-
niques such as UDA (Xie et al., 2020) (3.1), which
used backtranslation (Sennrich et al., 2016), Au-
toAugment (Cubuk et al., 2018), and RandAugment
(Cubuk et al., 2020), and MIXUP(Zhang et al.,
2017) (3.2). These are often ﬁrst explored in com-
puter vision (CV), and DA’s adaptation for natural
language processing (NLP) seems secondary and
Equal contribution by the two authors.
yAI Resident.comparatively underexplored, perhaps due to chal-
lenges presented by the discrete nature of language,
which rules out continuous noising and makes it
more difﬁcult to maintain invariance.
Despite these challenges, there has been in-
creased interest and demand for DAfor NLP. As
NLP grows due to off-the-shelf availability of large
pretrained models, there are increasingly more
tasks and domains to explore. Many of these are
low-resource, and have a paucity of training exam-
ples, creating many use-cases for which DAcan
play an important role. Particularly, for many non-
classiﬁcation NLP tasks such as span-based tasks
and generation, DAresearch is relatively sparse
despite their ubiquity in real-world settings.
Our paper aims to sensitize the NLP community
towards this growing area of work, which has also
seen increasing interest in ML overall (as seen in
Figure 1). As interest and work on this topic con-
tinue to increase, this is an opportune time for a
paper of our kind to (i) give a bird’s eye view of
DA for NLP, and (ii) identify key challenges to
effectively motivate and orient interest in this area.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst survey
to take a detailed look at DA methods for NLP.1
This paper is structured as follows. Section
2 discusses what DA is, its goals and trade-offs,
and why it works. Section 3 describes popular
methodologically representative DA techniques for
NLP—which we categorize into rule-based (3.1),
example interpolation-based (3.2), or model-based
(3.3). Section 4 discusses useful NLP applications
for DA, including low-resource languages (4.1),
mitigating bias (4.2), ﬁxing class imbalance (4.3),
few-shot learning (4.4), and adversarial examples
(4.5). Section 5 describes DA methods for common
1Liu et al. (2020a) present a smaller-scale text data aug-
mentation survey that is concise and focused. Our work serves
as a more comprehensive survey with larger coverage and is
more up-to-date.arXiv:2105.03075v5  [cs.CL]  1 Dec 2021

==== Page 2 ====
Figure 1: Weekly Google Trends scores for the search
term "data augmentation" , with a control, uneventful
ML search term ( "minibatch" ) for comparison.
NLP tasks including summarization (5.1), question
answering (5.2), sequence tagging tasks (5.3), pars-
ing tasks (5.4), grammatical error correction (5.5),
neural machine translation (5.6), data-to-text NLG
(5.7), open-ended and conditional text generation
(5.8), dialogue (5.9), and multimodal tasks (5.10).
Finally, Section 6 discusses challenges and future
directions in DA for NLP. Appendix A lists useful
blog posts and code repositories.
Through this work, we hope to emulate past pa-
pers which have surveyed DAmethods for other
types of data, such as images (Shorten and Khosh-
goftaar, 2019), faces (Wang et al., 2019b), and time
series (Iwana and Uchida, 2020). We hope to draw
further attention, elicit broader interest, and moti-
vate additional work in DA, particularly for NLP.
2 Background
What is data augmentation? Data augmentation
(DA) encompasses methods of increasing training
data diversity without directly collecting more data.
Most strategies either add slightly modiﬁed copies
of existing data or create synthetic data, aiming for
the augmented data to act as a regularizer and re-
duce overﬁtting when training ML models (Shorten
and Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Hernández-García and
König, 2020). DA has been commonly used in
CV , where techniques like cropping ,ﬂipping , and
color jittering are a standard component of model
training. In NLP, where the input space is discrete,
how to generate effective augmented examples that
capture the desired invariances is less obvious.
What are the goals and trade-offs? Despite
challenges associated with text, many DA tech-
niques for NLP have been proposed, ranging from
rule-based manipulations (Zhang et al., 2015) to
more complicated generative approaches (Liu et al.,2020b). As DA aims to provide an alternative to
collecting more data, an ideal DA technique should
be both easy-to-implement and improve model per-
formance. Most offer trade-offs between these two.
Rule-based techniques are easy-to-implement
but usually offer incremental performance improve-
ments (Li et al., 2017; Wei and Zou, 2019; Wei
et al., 2021b). Techniques leveraging trained mod-
els may be more costly to implement but introduce
more data variation, leading to better performance
boosts. Model-based techniques customized for
downstream tasks can have strong effects on per-
formance but be difﬁcult to develop and utilize.
Further, the distribution of augmented data
should neither be too similar nor too different from
the original. This may lead to greater overﬁtting
or poor performance through training on examples
not representative of the given domain, respectively.
Effective DA approaches should aim for a balance.
Kasheﬁ and Hwa (2020) devise a KL-
Divergence-based unsupervised procedure to pre-
emptively choose among DAheuristics, rather than
a typical "run-all-heuristics" comparison, which
can be very time and cost intensive.
Interpretation of DA Dao et al. (2019) note that
"data augmentation is typically performed in an ad-
hoc manner with little understanding of the under-
lying theoretical principles" , and claim the typical
explanation of DAasregularization to be insufﬁ-
cient. Overall, there indeed appears to be a lack of
research on whyexactly DA works. Existing work
on this topic is mainly surface-level, and rarely
investigates the theoretical underpinnings and prin-
ciples. We discuss this challenge more in §6, and
highlight some of the existing work below.
Bishop (1995) show training with noised exam-
ples is reducible to Tikhonov regularization (sub-
sumes L2). Rajput et al. (2019) show that DA can
increase the positive margin for classiﬁers, but only
when augmenting exponentially many examples
for common DA methods.
Dao et al. (2019) think of DA transformations
as kernels, and ﬁnd two ways DA helps: averaging
of features and variance regularization. Chen et al.
(2020d) show that DA leads to variance reduction
by averaging over orbits of the group that keep the
data distribution approximately invariant.
3 Techniques & Methods
We now discuss some methodologically represen-
tative DA techniques which are relevant to all tasks

==== Page 3 ====
via the extensibility of their formulation.2
3.1 Rule-Based Techniques
Here, we cover DA primitives which use easy-
to-compute, predetermined transforms sans model
components. Feature space DA approaches gen-
erate augmented examples in the model’s feature
space rather than input data. Many few-shot learn-
ing approaches (Hariharan and Girshick, 2017;
Schwartz et al., 2018) leverage estimated feature
space "analogy" transformations between exam-
ples of known classes to augment for novel classes
(see §4.4). Paschali et al. (2019) use iterative
afﬁne transformations and projections to maximally
"stretch" an example along the class-manifold.
Wei and Zou (2019) propose EASY DATAAUG-
MENTATION (EDA) , a set of token-level random
perturbation operations including random insertion,
deletion , and swap . They show improved perfor-
mance on many text classiﬁcation tasks. UDA (Xie
et al., 2020) show how supervised DAmethods can
be exploited for unsupervised data through consis-
tency training on (x;DA (x))pairs.
For paraphrase identiﬁcation, Chen et al. (2020b)
construct a signed graph over the data, with indi-
vidual sentences as nodes and pair labels as signed
edges. They use balance theory and transitivity
to infer augmented sentence pairs from this graph.
Motivated by image cropping and rotation, ¸ Sahin
and Steedman (2018) propose dependency tree mor-
phing . For dependency-annotated sentences, chil-
dren of the same parent are swapped (à la rotation)
or some deleted (à la cropping), as seen in Figure 2.
This is most beneﬁcial for language families with
rich case marking systems (e.g. Baltic andSlavic ).
3.2 Example Interpolation Techniques
Another class of DA techniques, pioneered by
MIXUP(Zhang et al., 2017), interpolates the in-
puts and labels of two or more real examples. This
class of techniques is also sometimes referred to as
Mixed Sample Data Augmentation (MSDA). Ensu-
ing work has explored interpolating inner compo-
nents (Verma et al., 2019; Faramarzi et al., 2020),
more general mixing schemes (Guo, 2020), and
adding adversaries (Beckham et al., 2019).
Another class of extensions of MIXUPwhich has
been growing in the vision community attempts to
fuse raw input image pairs together into a single
2Table 1 compares several DAmethods by various aspects
relating to their applicability, dependencies, and requirements.
Figure 2: Dependency tree morphing DA applied to a
Turkish sentence, ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018)
input image, rather than improve the continuous in-
terpolation mechanism. Examples of this paradigm
include CUTMIX(Yun et al., 2019), CUTOUT(De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017) and COPY-PASTE (Ghiasi
et al., 2020). For instance, CUTMIXreplaces a
small sub-region of Image A with a patch sampled
from Image B, with the labels mixed in proportion
to sub-region sizes. There is potential to borrow
ideas and inspiration from these works for NLP,
e.g. for multimodal work involving both images
and text (see "Multimodal challenges" in §6).
A bottleneck to using MIXUPfor NLP tasks
was the requirement of continuous inputs. This has
been overcome by mixing embeddings or higher
hidden layers (Chen et al., 2020c). Later variants
propose speech-tailored mixing schemes (Jindal
et al., 2020b) and interpolation with adversarial
examples (Cheng et al., 2020), among others.
SEQ2M IXUP(Guo et al., 2020) generalizes
MIXUPfor sequence transduction tasks in two
ways - the "hard" version samples a binary mask
(from a Bernoulli with a (;)prior) and picks
from one of two sequences at each token position,
while the "soft" version softly interpolates between
sequences based on a coefﬁcient sampled from
(;). The "soft" version is found to outperform
the "hard" version and earlier interpolation-based
techniques like SWITCH OUT(Wang et al., 2018a).
3.3 Model-Based Techniques
Seq2seq and language models have also been used
forDA. The popular BACKTRANSLATION method
(Sennrich et al., 2016) translates a sequence into
another language and then back into the original

==== Page 4 ====
Figure 3: Contextual Augmentation , Kobayashi (2018)
language. Kumar et al. (2019a) train seq2seq mod-
els with their proposed method DiPS which learns
to generate diverse paraphrases of input text using
a modiﬁed decoder with a submodular objective,
and show its effectiveness as DA for several classi-
ﬁcation tasks. Pretrained language models such as
RNNs (Kobayashi, 2018) and transformers (Yang
et al., 2020) have also been used for augmentation.
Kobayashi (2018) generate augmented examples
by replacing words with others randomly drawn
according to the recurrent language model’s dis-
tribution based on the current context (illustra-
tion in Figure 3). Yang et al. (2020) propose G-
DAUGcwhich generates synthetic examples using
pretrained transformer language models, and se-
lects the most informative and diverse set for aug-
mentation. Gao et al. (2019) advocate retaining the
full distribution through "soft" augmented exam-
ples, showing gains on machine translation.
Nie et al. (2020) augment word representations
with a context-sensitive attention-based mixture of
their semantic neighbors from a pretrained embed-
ding space, and show its effectiveness for NER
on social media text. Inspired by denoising au-
toencoders, Ng et al. (2020) use a corrupt-and-
reconstruct approach, with the corruption function
q(x0jx)masking an arbitrary number of word po-
sitions and the reconstruction function r(xjx0)un-
masking them using BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
Their approach works well on domain-shifted test
sets across 9 datasets on sentiment, NLI, and NMT.
Feng et al. (2019) propose a task called SEMAN -
TICTEXT EXCHANGE (STE) which involves ad-
justing the overall semantics of a text to ﬁt the
context of a new word/phrase that is inserted called
thereplacement entity (RE) . They do so by using a
system called SMERTI and a masked LM approach.
While not proposed directly for DA, it can be usedas such, as investigated in Feng et al. (2020).
Rather than starting from an existing exam-
ple and modifying it, some model-based DAap-
proaches directly estimate a generative process
from the training set and sample from it. Anaby-
Tavor et al. (2020) learn a label-conditioned gen-
erator by ﬁnetuning GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
on the training data, using this to generate candi-
date examples per class. A classiﬁer trained on the
original training set is then used to select top kcan-
didate examples which conﬁdently belong to the
respective class for augmentation. Quteineh et al.
(2020) use a similar label-conditioned GPT-2 gen-
eration method, and demonstrate its effectiveness
as a DA method in an active learning setup.
Other approaches include syntactic or controlled
paraphrasing (Iyyer et al., 2018; Kumar et al.,
2020), document-level paraphrasing (Gangal et al.,
2021), augmenting misclassiﬁed examples (Dreossi
et al., 2018), BERT cross-encoder labeling of new
inputs (Thakur et al., 2021), guided generation us-
ing large-scale generative language models (Liu
et al., 2020b,c), and automated text augmentation
(Hu et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020). Models can also
learn to combine together simpler DA primitives
(Cubuk et al., 2018; Ratner et al., 2017) or add
human-in-the-loop (Kaushik et al., 2020, 2021).
4 Applications
In this section, we discuss several DA methods for
some common NLP applications.2
4.1 Low-Resource Languages
Low-resource languages are an important and chal-
lenging application for DA, typically for neural
machine translation (NMT). Techniques using ex-
ternal knowledge such as WordNet (Miller, 1995)
may be difﬁcult to use effectively here.3There
are ways to leverage high-resource languages for
low-resource languages, particularly if they have
similar linguistic properties. Xia et al. (2019) use
this approach to improve low-resource NMT.
Li et al. (2020b) use backtranslation and self-
learning to generate augmented training data. In-
spired by work in CV , Fadaee et al. (2017) gener-
ate additional training examples that contain low-
frequency (rare) words in synthetically created con-
texts. Qin et al. (2020) present a DA framework to
generate multi-lingual code-switching data to ﬁne-
tune multilingual-BERT. It encourages the align-
3Low-resource language challenges discussed more in §6.

==== Page 5 ====
DA Method Ext.Know Pretrained Preprocess Level Task-Agnostic
SYNONYM REPLACEMENT (Zhang et al., 2015) 3  tok Input 3
RANDOM DELETION (Wei and Zou, 2019)   tok Input 3
RANDOM SWAP (Wei and Zou, 2019)   tok Input 3
BACKTRANSLATION (Sennrich et al., 2016)  3 Depends Input 3
SCPN (Wieting and Gimpel, 2017)  3 const Input 3
SEMANTIC TEXT EXCHANGE (Feng et al., 2019)  3 const Input 3
CONTEXTUAL AUG(Kobayashi, 2018)  3 - Input 3
LAMBADA (Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020)  3 - Input 
GECA (Andreas, 2020)   tok Input 
SEQMIXUP(Guo et al., 2020)   tok Input 
SWITCH OUT(Wang et al., 2018b)   tok Input 
EMIX (Jindal et al., 2020a)   - Emb/Hidden 3
SPEECH MIX(Jindal et al., 2020b)   - Emb/Hidden Speech/Audio
MIXTEXT (Chen et al., 2020c)   - Emb/Hidden 3
SIGNED GRAPH (Chen et al., 2020b)   - Input 
DTREEMORPH (¸ Sahin and Steedman, 2018)   dep Input 3
Sub2(Shi et al., 2021)   dep Input Substructural
DAGA (Ding et al., 2020)   tok Input+Label 
WN-H YPERS (Feng et al., 2020) 3  const+KWE Input 3
SYNTHETIC NOISE (Feng et al., 2020)   tok Input 3
UEDIN-MS (DA part) (Grundkiewicz et al., 2019) 3  tok Input 3
NONCE (Gulordava et al., 2018) 3  const Input 3
XLDA (Singh et al., 2019)  3 Depends Input 3
SEQMIX(Zhang et al., 2020)  3 tok Input+Label 
SLOT-SUB-LM (Louvan and Magnini, 2020)  3 tok Input 3
UBT & TBT (Vaibhav et al., 2019)  3 Depends Input 3
SOFT CONTEXTUAL DA (Gao et al., 2019)  3 tok Emb/Hidden 3
DATA DIVERSIFICATION (Nguyen et al., 2020)  3 Depends Input 3
DIPS (Kumar et al., 2019a)  3 tok Input 3
AUGMENTED SBERT (Thakur et al., 2021)  3 - Input+Label Sentence Pairs
Table 1: Comparing a selection of DA methods by various aspects relating to their applicability, dependencies, and
requirements. Ext.Know ,KWE ,tok,const , and depstand for External Knowledge, keyword extraction, tokeniza-
tion, constituency parsing, and dependency parsing, respectively. Ext.Know refers to whether the DA method re-
quires external knowledge (e.g. WordNet) and Pretrained if it requires a pretrained model (e.g. BERT). Preprocess
denotes preprocessing required, Level denotes the depth at which data is modiﬁed by the DA, and Task-Agnostic
refers to whether the DA method can be applied to different tasks. See Appendix B for further explanation.
ment of representations from source and multiple
target languages once by mixing their context in-
formation. They see improved performance across
5 tasks with 19 languages.
4.2 Mitigating Bias
Zhao et al. (2018) attempt to mitigate gender
bias in coreference resolution by creating an aug-
mented dataset identical to the original but biased
towards the underrepresented gender (using gen-
der swapping of entities such as replacing "he"
with "she" ) and train on the union of the two
datasets. Lu et al. (2020) formally propose COUN -
TERFACTUAL DA(CDA) for gender bias mitiga-
tion, which involves causal interventions that break
associations between gendered and gender-neutral
words. Zmigrod et al. (2019) and Hall Maudslay
et al. (2019) propose further improvements to CDA .
Moosavi et al. (2020) augment training sentences
with their corresponding predicate-argument struc-
tures, improving the robustness of transformer mod-els against various types of biases.
4.3 Fixing Class Imbalance
Fixing class imbalance typically involves a combi-
nation of undersampling and oversampling. SYN-
THETIC MINORITY OVERSAMPLING TECHNIQUE
(SMOTE) (Chawla et al., 2002), which gener-
ates augmented minority class examples through
interpolation, still remains popular (Fernández
et al., 2018). MULTILABEL SMOTE (MLSMOTE)
(Charte et al., 2015) modiﬁes SMOTE to balance
classes for multi-label classiﬁcation, where classi-
ﬁers predict more than one class at the same time.
Other techniques such as EDA (Wei and Zou, 2019)
can possibly be used for oversampling as well.
4.4 Few-Shot Learning
DA methods can ease few-shot learning by adding
more examples for novel classes introduced in the
few-shot phase. Hariharan and Girshick (2017)
use learned analogy transformations (z1;z2;x)

==== Page 6 ====
between example pairs from a non-novel class
z1!z2to generate augmented examples x!x0
for novel classes. Schwartz et al. (2018) generalize
this to beyond just linear offsets, through their " -
network" autoencoder which learns the distribution
P(z2jz1;C)from ally
z1=y
z2=Cpairs, where
Cis a class and yis the ground-truth labelling
function. Both these methods are applied only on
image tasks, but their theoretical formulations are
generally applicable, and hence we discuss them.
Kumar et al. (2019b) apply these and other
DA methods for few-shot learning of novel intent
classes in task-oriented dialog. Wei et al. (2021a)
show that data augmentation facilitates curriculum
learning for training triplet networks for few-shot
text classiﬁcation. Lee et al. (2021) use T5 to gen-
erate additional examples for data-scarce classes.
4.5 Adversarial Examples (A VEs)
Adversarial examples can be generated using
innocuous label-preserving transformations (e.g.
paraphrasing) that fool state-of-the-art NLP mod-
els, as shown in Jia et al. (2019). Speciﬁcally,
they add sentences with distractor spans to pas-
sages to construct A VEs for span-based QA. Zhang
et al. (2019d) construct A VEs for paraphrase de-
tection using word swapping. Kang et al. (2018)
and Glockner et al. (2018) create A VEs for textual
entailment using WordNet relations.
5 Tasks
In this section, we discuss several DA works
for common NLP tasks.2We focus on non-
classiﬁcation tasks as classiﬁcation is worked on
by default, and well covered in earlier sections (e.g.
§3 and §4). Numerous previously mentioned DA
techniques, e.g. (Wei and Zou, 2019; Chen et al.,
2020b; Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020), have been used
or can be used for text classiﬁcation tasks.
5.1 Summarization
Fabbri et al. (2020) investigate backtranslation as a
DA method for few-shot abstractive summarization
with the use of a consistency loss inspired by UDA.
Parida and Motlicek (2019) propose an iterative DA
approach for abstractive summarization that uses a
mix of synthetic and real data, where the former is
generated from Common Crawl. Zhu et al. (2019)
introduce a query-focused summarization (Dang,
2005) dataset collected using Wikipedia called
WIKIREFwhich can be used for DA. Pasunuru et al.(2021) use DA methods to construct two training
datasets for Query-focused Multi-Document Sum-
marization (QMDS) called QMDS CNNandQMD-
SIRby modifying CNN/DM (Hermann et al., 2015)
and mining search-query logs, respectively.
5.2 Question Answering (QA)
Longpre et al. (2019) investigate various DA and
sampling techniques for domain-agnostic QA in-
cluding paraphrasing by backtranslation . Yang
et al. (2019) propose a DA method using distant
supervision to improve BERT ﬁnetuning for open-
domain QA. Riabi et al. (2020) leverage Question
Generation models to produce augmented exam-
ples for zero-shot cross-lingual QA. Singh et al.
(2019) propose XLDA , or CROSS -LINGUAL DA,
which substitutes a portion of the input text with
its translation in another language, improving per-
formance across multiple languages on NLI tasks
including the SQuAD QA task. Asai and Hajishirzi
(2020) use logical and linguistic knowledge to gen-
erate additional training data to improve the accu-
racy and consistency of QA responses by models.
Yu et al. (2018) introduce a new QA architecture
called QANet that shows improved performance
on SQuAD when combined with augmented data
generated using backtranslation.
5.3 Sequence Tagging Tasks
Ding et al. (2020) propose DAGA , a two-step DA
process. First, a language model over sequences of
tags and words linearized as per a certain scheme is
learned. Second, sequences are sampled from this
language model and de-linearized to generate new
examples. ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018), discussed
in §3.1, use dependency tree morphing (Figure 2)
to generate additional training examples on the
downstream task of part-of-speech (POS) tagging.
Dai and Adel (2020) modify DA techniques pro-
posed for sentence-level tasks for named entity
recognition (NER), including label-wise token and
synonym replacement, and show improved perfor-
mance using both recurrent and transformer models.
Zhang et al. (2020) propose a DA method based
on M IXUPcalled S EQMIXfor active sequence la-
beling by augmenting queried samples, showing
improvements on NER and Event Detection.
5.4 Parsing Tasks
Jia and Liang (2016) propose DATA RECOMBINA -
TION for injecting task-speciﬁc priors to neural se-
mantic parsers. A synchronous context-free gram-

==== Page 7 ====
mar (SCFG) is induced from training data, and
new "recombinant" examples are sampled. Yu et al.
(2020) introduce GRAPPA , a pretraining approach
for table semantic parsing, and generate synthetic
question-SQL pairs via an SCFG. Andreas (2020)
usecompositionality to construct synthetic exam-
ples for downstream tasks like semantic parsing.
Fragments of original examples are replaced with
fragments from other examples in similar contexts.
Vania et al. (2019) investigate DA for low-
resource dependency parsing including dependency
tree morphing from ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018)
(Figure 2) and modiﬁed nonce sentence genera-
tion from Gulordava et al. (2018), which replaces
content words with other words of the same POS,
morphological features, and dependency labels.
5.5 Grammatical Error Correction (GEC)
Lack of parallel data is typically a barrier for GEC.
Various works have thus looked at DA methods
for GEC. We discuss some here, and more can be
found in Table 2 in Appendix C.
There is work that makes use of additional re-
sources. Boyd (2018) use German edits from
Wikipedia revision history and use those relating
to GEC as augmented training data. Zhang et al.
(2019b) explore multi-task transfer, or the use of
annotated data from other tasks.
There is also work that adds synthetic errors to
noise the text. Wang et al. (2019a) investigate two
approaches: token-level perturbations and training
error generation models with a ﬁltering strategy
to keep generations with sufﬁcient errors. Grund-
kiewicz et al. (2019) use confusion sets generated
by a spellchecker for noising. Choe et al. (2019)
learn error patterns from small annotated samples
along with POS-speciﬁc noising .
There have also been approaches to improve the
diversity of generated errors. Wan et al. (2020)
investigate noising through editing the latent repre-
sentations of grammatical sentences, and Xie et al.
(2018) use a neural sequence transduction model
and beam search noising procedures.
5.6 Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
There are many works which have investigated DA
for NMT. We highlighted some in §3 and §4.1,
e.g. (Sennrich et al., 2016; Fadaee et al., 2017; Xia
et al., 2019). We discuss some further ones here,
and more can be found in Table 3 in Appendix C.
Wang et al. (2018a) propose SWITCH OUT, a
DA method that randomly replaces words in bothsource and target sentences with other random
words from their corresponding vocabularies. Gao
et al. (2019) introduce SOFT CONTEXTUAL DA
that softly augments randomly chosen words in a
sentence using a contextual mixture of multiple
related words over the vocabulary. Nguyen et al.
(2020) propose DATA DIVERSIFICATION which
merges original training data with the predictions
of several forward and backward models.
5.7 Data-to-Text NLG
Data-to-text NLG refers to tasks which require gen-
erating natural language descriptions of structured
or semi-structured data inputs, e.g. game score
tables (Wiseman et al., 2017). Randomly perturb-
ing game score values without invalidating overall
game outcome is one DAstrategy explored in game
summary generation (Hayashi et al., 2019).
Two popular recent benchmarks are E2E-NLG
(Dušek et al., 2018) and WebNLG (Gardent et al.,
2017). Both involve generation from structured
inputs - meaning representation (MR) sequences
and triple sequences, respectively. Montella et al.
(2020) show performance gains on WebNLG by
DA using Wikipedia sentences as targets and
parsed OpenIE triples as inputs. Tandon et al.
(2018) propose DAfor E2E-NLG based on per-
muting the input MR sequence. Kedzie and McK-
eown (2019) inject Gaussian noise into a trained
decoder’s hidden states and sample diverse aug-
mented examples from it. This sample-augment-
retrain loop helps performance on E2E-NLG.
5.8 Open-Ended & Conditional Generation
There has been limited work on DA for open-ended
and conditional text generation. Feng et al. (2020)
experiment with a suite of DA methods for ﬁnetun-
ing GPT-2 on a low-resource domain in attempts
to improve the quality of generated continuations,
which they call GENAUG. They ﬁnd that WN-
HYPERS (WordNet hypernym replacement of key-
words) and SYNTHETIC NOISE (randomly perturb-
ing non-terminal characters in words) are useful,
and the quality of generated text improves to a peak
at3x the original amount of training data.
5.9 Dialogue
Most DA approaches for dialogue focus on task-
oriented dialogue. We outline some below, and
more can be found in Table 4 in Appendix C.
Quan and Xiong (2019) present sentence and
word-level DA approaches for end-to-end task-

==== Page 8 ====
oriented dialogue. Louvan and Magnini (2020)
propose LIGHTWEIGHT AUGMENTATION , a set of
word-span and sentence-level DA methods for low-
resource slot ﬁlling and intent classiﬁcation.
Hou et al. (2018) present a seq2seq DA frame-
work to augment dialogue utterances for dialogue
language understanding (Young et al., 2013), in-
cluding a diversity rank to produce diverse utter-
ances. Zhang et al. (2019c) propose MADA to
generate diverse responses using the property that
several valid responses exist for a dialogue context.
There is also DA work for spoken dialogue. Hou
et al. (2018), Kim et al. (2019), Zhao et al. (2019),
and Yoo et al. (2019) investigate DA methods for di-
alogue and spoken language understanding (SLU),
including generative latent variable models.
5.10 Multimodal Tasks
DA techniques have also been proposed for multi-
modal tasks where aligned data for multiple modal-
ities is required. We look at ones that involve lan-
guage or text. Some are discussed below, and more
can be found in Table 5 in Appendix C.
Beginning with speech, Wang et al. (2020) pro-
pose a DA method to improve the robustness of
downstream dialogue models to speech recognition
errors. Wiesner et al. (2018) and Renduchintala
et al. (2018) propose DA methods for end-to-end
automatic speech recognition (ASR).
Looking at images or video, Xu et al. (2020)
learn a cross-modality matching network to pro-
duce synthetic image-text pairs for multimodal clas-
siﬁers. Atliha and Šešok (2020) explore DA meth-
ods such as synonym replacement and contextual-
ized word embeddings augmentation using BERT
forimage captioning . Kaﬂe et al. (2017), Yokota
and Nakayama (2018), and Tang et al. (2020) pro-
pose methods for visual QA including question
generation and adversarial examples.
6 Challenges & Future Directions
Looking forward, data augmentation faces substan-
tial challenges, speciﬁcally for NLP, and with these
challenges, new opportunities for future work arise.
Dissonance between empirical novelties and
theoretical narrative: There appears to be a con-
spicuous lack of research on whyDA works. Most
studies might show empirically that a DA technique
works and provide some intuition, but it is currently
challenging to measure the goodness of a techniquewithout resorting to a full-scale experiment. A re-
cent work in vision (Gontijo-Lopes et al., 2020)
has proposed that afﬁnity (the distributional shift
caused by DA) and diversity (the complexity of the
augmentation) can predict DA performance, but it
is unclear how these results might translate to NLP.
Minimal beneﬁt for pretrained models on in-
domain data: With the popularization of large
pretrained language models, it has come to light
that a couple previously effective DAtechniques
for certain English text classiﬁcation tasks (Wei and
Zou, 2019; Sennrich et al., 2016) provide little ben-
eﬁt for models like BERT and RoBERTa, which
already achieve high performance on in-domain
text classiﬁcation (Longpre et al., 2020). One hy-
pothesis is that using simple DA techniques pro-
vides little beneﬁt when ﬁnetuning large pretrained
transformers on tasks for which examples are well-
represented in the pretraining data, but DA methods
could still be effective when ﬁnetuning on tasks for
which examples are scarce or out-of-domain com-
pared with the training data. Further work could
study under which scenarios data augmentation for
large pretrained models is likely to be effective.
Multimodal challenges: While there has been
increased work in multimodal DA, as discussed in
§5.10, effective DA methods for multiple modal-
ities has been challenging. Many works focus on
augmenting a single modality or multiple ones sep-
arately. For example, there is potential to further
explore simultaneous image and text augmentation
for image captioning, such as a combination of
CUTMIX(Yun et al., 2019) and caption editing.
Span-based tasks offer unique DA challenges
as there are typically many correlated classiﬁcation
decisions. For example, random token replacement
may be a locally acceptable DA method but possi-
bly disrupt coreference chains for latter sentences.
DA techniques here must take into account depen-
dencies between different locations in the text.
Working in specialized domains such as those
with domain-speciﬁc vocabulary and jargon (e.g.
medicine ) can present challenges. Many pretrained
models and external knowledge (e.g. WordNet)
cannot be effectively used. Studies have shown
that DA becomes less beneﬁcial when applied to
out-of-domain data, likely because the distribution
of augmented data can substantially differ from the
original data (Zhang et al., 2019a; Herzig et al.,
2020; Campagna et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2020).

==== Page 9 ====
Working with low-resource languages may
present similar difﬁculties as specialized domains.
Further, DA techniques successful in the high-
resource scenario may not be effective for low-
resource languages that are of a different language
family or very distinctive in linguistic and typolog-
ical terms. For example, those which are language
isolates or lack high-resource cognates.
More vision-inspired techniques: Although
many NLP DA methods have been inspired by anal-
ogous approaches in CV , there is potential for draw-
ing further connections. Many CV DA techniques
motivated by real-world invariances (e.g. many
angles of looking at the same object) may have
similar NLP interpretations. For instance, grayscal-
ingcould translate to toning down aspects of the
text (e.g. plural to singular, "awesome" →"good" ).
Morphing a dependency tree could be analogous
to rotating an image, and paraphrasing techniques
may be analogous to changing perspective. For ex-
ample, negative data augmentation (NDA) (Sinha
et al., 2021) involves creating out-of-distribution
samples. It has so far been exclusively explored for
CV , but could be investigated for text.
Self-supervised learning: More recently, DA
has been increasingly used as a key component
of self-supervised learning, particularly in vision
(Chen et al., 2020e). In NLP, BART (Lewis et al.,
2020) showed that predicting deleted tokens as a
pretraining task can achieve similar performance as
the masked LM, and ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020)
found that pretraining by predicting corrupted to-
kens outperforms BERT given the same model size,
data, and compute. We expect future work will
continue exploring how to effectively manipulate
text for both pretraining and downstream tasks.
Ofﬂine versus online data augmentation: In
CV , standard techniques such as cropping and ro-
tations are typically done stochastically, allowing
for DA to be incorporated elegantly into the train-
ing pipeline. In NLP, however, it is unclear how
to include a lightweight code module to apply DA
stochastically. This is because DA techniques for
NLP often leverage external resources (e.g. a dic-
tionary for token substitution or translation model
for backtranslation) that are not easily transferable
across training pipelines. Thus, a common prac-
tice for DA in NLP is to generate augmented data
ofﬂine and store it as additional data to be loadedduring training.4Future work on a lightweight
module for online DA in NLP could be fruitful,
though another challenge will be determining when
such a module will be helpful, which—compared
with CV , where invariances being imposed are well-
accepted—can vary substantially across NLP tasks.
Lack of uniﬁcation is a challenge for the cur-
rent literature on data augmentation for NLP, and
popular methods are often presented in an aux-
iliary fashion. Whereas there are well-accepted
frameworks for DA for CV (e.g. default augmen-
tation libraries in PyTorch, RandAugment (Cubuk
et al., 2020)), there are no such "generalized" DA
techniques for NLP. Further, we believe that DA
research would beneﬁt from the establishment of
standard and uniﬁed benchmark tasks and datasets
to compare different augmentation methods.
Good data augmentation practices would help
make DA work more accessible and reproducible
to the NLP and ML communities. On top of
uniﬁed benchmark tasks, datasets, and frame-
works/libraries mentioned above, other good prac-
tices include making code and augmented datasets
publicly available, reporting variation among re-
sults (e.g. standard deviation across random seeds),
and more standardized evaluation procedures. Fur-
ther, transparent hyperparameter analysis, explic-
itly stating failure cases of proposed techniques,
and discussion of the intuition and theory behind
them would further improve the transparency and
interpretability of DA techniques.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a comprehensive and
structured survey of data augmentation for nat-
ural language processing (NLP). We provided a
background about data augmentation and how it
works, discussed major methodologically represen-
tative data augmentation techniques for NLP, and
touched upon data augmentation techniques for
popular NLP applications and tasks. Finally, we
outlined current challenges and directions for fu-
ture research, and showed that there is much room
for further exploration. Overall, we hope our paper
can serve as a guide for NLP researchers to decide
on which data augmentation techniques to use, and
inspire additional interest and work in this area.
Please see the corresponding GitHub repository at
https://github.com/styfeng/DataAug4NLP.
4See Appendix D.

==== Page 10 ====
References
Diego Alves, Askars Salimbajevs, and M ¯arcis Pinnis.
2020. Data augmentation for pipeline-based speech
translation. In 9th International Conference on Hu-
man Language Technologies - the Baltic Perspective
(Baltic HLT 2020) , Kaunas, Lithuania.
Ateret Anaby-Tavor, Boaz Carmeli, Esther Goldbraich,
Amir Kantor, George Kour, Segev Shlomov, Naama
Tepper, and Naama Zwerdling. 2020. Do not have
enough data? Deep learning to the rescue! In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI , pages 7383–7390.
Jacob Andreas. 2020. Good-enough compositional
data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7556–7566, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Akari Asai and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2020. Logic-
guided data augmentation and regularization for con-
sistent question answering. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 5642–5650, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Viktar Atliha and Dmitrij Šešok. 2020. Text augmen-
tation using BERT for image captioning. Applied
Sciences , 10:5978.
Christopher Beckham, Sina Honari, Vikas Verma,
Alex M. Lamb, Farnoosh Ghadiri, R Devon Hjelm,
Yoshua Bengio, and Chris Pal. 2019. On adversarial
mixup resynthesis. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , pages 4346–4357.
Chris M. Bishop. 1995. Training with noise is equiv-
alent to Tikhonov regularization. Neural Computa-
tion, 7(1):108–116.
Adriane Boyd. 2018. Using Wikipedia edits in low
resource grammatical error correction. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop W-NUT: The
4th Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text , pages
79–84, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Bram Bulte and Arda Tezcan. 2019. Neural fuzzy re-
pair: Integrating fuzzy matches into neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 1800–1809, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Hengyi Cai, Hongshen Chen, Yonghao Song, Cheng
Zhang, Xiaofang Zhao, and Dawei Yin. 2020. Data
manipulation: Towards effective instance learning
for neural dialogue generation via learning to aug-
ment and reweight. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 6334–6343, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Giovanni Campagna, Agata Foryciarz, Mehrad Morad-
shahi, and Monica Lam. 2020. Zero-shot transferlearning with synthesized data for multi-domain dia-
logue state tracking. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 122–132, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
F. Charte, Antonio Rivera Rivas, María José Del Je-
sus, and Francisco Herrera. 2015. Mlsmote: Ap-
proaching imbalanced multilabel learning through
synthetic instance generation. Knowledge-Based
Systems .
Nitesh V . Chawla, Kevin W. Bowyer, Lawrence O. Hall,
and W. Philip Kegelmeyer. 2002. SMOTE: Syn-
thetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 16:321–357.
Guanhua Chen, Yun Chen, Yong Wang, and Victor O.K.
Li. 2020a. Lexical-constraint-aware neural machine
translation via data augmentation. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-20 , pages 3587–3593.
International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Organization. Main track.
Hannah Chen, Yangfeng Ji, and David Evans. 2020b.
Finding friends and ﬂipping frenemies: Automatic
paraphrase dataset augmentation using graph theory.
InFindings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 4741–4751, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jiaao Chen, Zichao Yang, and Diyi Yang. 2020c. Mix-
Text: Linguistically-informed interpolation of hid-
den space for semi-supervised text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2147–
2157, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Shuxiao Chen, Edgar Dobriban, and Jane Lee. 2020d.
A group-theoretic framework for data augmentation.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
33.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi,
and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020e. A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 1597–1607.
PMLR.
Yong Cheng, Lu Jiang, Wolfgang Macherey, and Ja-
cob Eisenstein. 2020. AdvAug: Robust adversar-
ial augmentation for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5961–
5970, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Mara Chinea-Ríos, Álvaro Peris, and Francisco
Casacuberta. 2017. Adapting neural machine trans-
lation with parallel synthetic data. In Proceedings
of the Second Conference on Machine Translation ,

==== Page 11 ====
pages 138–147, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yo Joong Choe, Jiyeon Ham, Kyubyong Park, and
Yeoil Yoon. 2019. A neural grammatical error cor-
rection system built on better pre-training and se-
quential transfer learning. In Proceedings of the
Fourteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications , pages 213–227,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V . Le, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2020. ELECTRA: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than
generators. Proceedings of ICLR .
Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane, Vijay
Vasudevan, and Quoc V . Le. 2018. Autoaugment:
Learning augmentation policies from data. Proceed-
ings of CVPR .
Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and
Quoc V . Le. 2020. Randaugment: Practical au-
tomated data augmentation with a reduced search
space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-
shops , pages 702–703.
Xiang Dai and Heike Adel. 2020. An analysis of
simple data augmentation for named entity recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3861–
3867, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Com-
mittee on Computational Linguistics.
Hao T. Dang. 2005. Overview of DUC 2005.
Tri Dao, Albert Gu, Alexander J. Ratner, Virginia
Smith, Christopher De Sa, and Christopher Ré. 2019.
A kernel theory of modern data augmentation. Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research , 97:1528.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4171–4186.
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. 2017. Im-
proved regularization of convolutional neural net-
works with cutout. arXiv preprint .
Bosheng Ding, Linlin Liu, Lidong Bing, Canasai Kru-
engkrai, Thien Hai Nguyen, Shaﬁq Joty, Luo Si, and
Chunyan Miao. 2020. DAGA: Data augmentation
with a generation approach forLow-resource tagging
tasks. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 6045–6057, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.Tommaso Dreossi, Shromona Ghosh, Xiangyu Yue,
Kurt Keutzer, Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli,
and Sanjit A. Seshia. 2018. Counterexample-guided
data augmentation. In Proceedings of IJCAI .
Sufeng Duan, Hai Zhao, Dongdong Zhang, and Rui
Wang. 2020. Syntax-aware data augmentation for
neural machine translation. arXiv preprint .
Ondˇrej Dušek, Jekaterina Novikova, and Verena Rieser.
2018. Findings of the E2E NLG challenge. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Natural Language Generation , pages 322–328,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Alexander R. Fabbri, Simeng Han, Haoyuan Li,
Haoran Li, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Shaﬁq Joty,
Dragomir Radev, and Yashar Mehdad. 2020. Im-
proving zero and few-shot abstractive summariza-
tion with intermediate ﬁne-tuning and data augmen-
tation. arXiv preprint .
Marzieh Fadaee, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz.
2017. Data augmentation for low-resource neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 567–
573, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Alex Falcon, Oswald Lanz, and Giuseppe Serra. 2020.
Data augmentation techniques for the video question
answering task. arXiv preprint .
Mojtaba Faramarzi, Mohammad Amini, Akilesh Badri-
naaraayanan, Vikas Verma, and Sarath Chandar.
2020. Patchup: A regularization technique for con-
volutional neural networks. arXiv preprint .
Mariano Felice. 2016. Artiﬁcial error generation for
translation-based grammatical error correction. Uni-
versity of Cambridge Technical Report .
Steven Y . Feng, Varun Gangal, Dongyeop Kang,
Teruko Mitamura, and Eduard Hovy. 2020. GenAug:
Data augmentation for ﬁnetuning text generators. In
Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO):
The First Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and
Integration for Deep Learning Architectures , pages
29–42, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Steven Y . Feng, Aaron W. Li, and Jesse Hoey. 2019.
Keep calm and switch on! Preserving sentiment and
ﬂuency in semantic text exchange. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2701–2711, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alberto Fernández, Salvador Garcia, Francisco Her-
rera, and Nitesh V . Chawla. 2018. SMOTE for learn-
ing from imbalanced data: progress and challenges,

==== Page 12 ====
marking the 15-year anniversary. Journal of Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence Research , 61:863–905.
Jennifer Foster and Oistein Andersen. 2009. Gen-
ERRate: Generating errors for use in grammatical
error detection. In Proceedings of the Fourth Work-
shop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Edu-
cational Applications , pages 82–90, Boulder, Col-
orado. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Varun Gangal, Steven Y . Feng, Eduard Hovy, and
Teruko Mitamura. 2021. Nareor: The narrative re-
ordering problem. arXiv preprint .
Fei Gao, Jinhua Zhu, Lijun Wu, Yingce Xia, Tao
Qin, Xueqi Cheng, Wengang Zhou, and Tie-Yan Liu.
2019. Soft contextual data augmentation for neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 5539–5544, Florence, Italy. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Silin Gao, Yichi Zhang, Zhijian Ou, and Zhou Yu.
2020. Paraphrase augmented task-oriented dialog
generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 639–649, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Claire Gardent, Anastasia Shimorina, Shashi Narayan,
and Laura Perez-Beltrachini. 2017. The WebNLG
challenge: Generating text from RDF data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Natural Language Generation , pages 124–133, San-
tiago de Compostela, Spain. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Golnaz Ghiasi, Yin Cui, Aravind Srinivas, Rui Qian,
Tsung-Yi Lin, Ekin D. Cubuk, Quoc V . Le, and
Barret Zoph. 2020. Simple copy-paste is a strong
data augmentation method for instance segmenta-
tion. arXiv preprint .
Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Sylvia J. Smullin, Ekin D.
Cubuk, and Ethan Dyer. 2020. Tradeoffs in data
augmentation: An empirical study. Proceedings of
ICLR .
Miguel Graça, Yunsu Kim, Julian Schamper, Shahram
Khadivi, and Hermann Ney. 2019. Generalizing
back-translation in neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Machine
Translation (Volume 1: Research Papers) , pages 45–
52, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.Milan Gritta, Gerasimos Lampouras, and Ignacio Ia-
cobacci. 2021. Conversation graph: Data augmen-
tation, training, and evaluation for non-deterministic
dialogue management. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics , 9:36–52.
Roman Grundkiewicz, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, and
Kenneth Heaﬁeld. 2019. Neural grammatical error
correction systems with unsupervised pre-training
on synthetic data. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications , pages 252–263, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018. Colorless
green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1195–1205, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Demi Guo, Yoon Kim, and Alexander Rush. 2020.
Sequence-level mixed sample data augmentation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 5547–5552, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Hongyu Guo. 2020. Nonlinear mixup: Out-of-
manifold data augmentation for text classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of AAAI , pages 4044–4051.
Rowan Hall Maudslay, Hila Gonen, Ryan Cotterell,
and Simone Teufel. 2019. It’s all in the name: Mit-
igating gender bias with name-based counterfactual
data substitution. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) , pages 5267–5275, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Bharath Hariharan and Ross Girshick. 2017. Low-
shot visual recognition by shrinking and hallucinat-
ing features. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3018–
3027.
Hany Hassan, Mostafa Elaraby, and Ahmed Tawﬁk.
2017. Synthetic data for neural machine translation
of spoken-dialects. arXiv preprint .
Hiroaki Hayashi, Yusuke Oda, Alexandra Birch, Ioan-
nis Konstas, Andrew Finch, Minh-Thang Luong,
Graham Neubig, and Katsuhito Sudoh. 2019. Find-
ings of the third workshop on neural generation and
translation. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
on Neural Generation and Translation , pages 1–14,
Hong Kong. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

==== Page 13 ====
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefen-
stette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman,
and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching machines to read
and comprehend. In NeurIPS , pages 1693–1701.
Alex Hernández-García and Peter König. 2020. Data
augmentation instead of explicit regularization.
arXiv preprint .
Jonathan Herzig, Pawel Krzysztof Nowak, Thomas
Müller, Francesco Piccinno, and Julian Eisenschlos.
2020. TaPas: Weakly supervised table parsing via
pre-training. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 4320–4333, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yutai Hou, Yijia Liu, Wanxiang Che, and Ting Liu.
2018. Sequence-to-sequence data augmentation for
dialogue language understanding. In Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics , pages 1234–1245, Santa Fe, New Mex-
ico, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Zhiting Hu, Bowen Tan, Russ R. Salakhutdinov,
Tom M. Mitchell, and Eric P. Xing. 2019. Learning
data manipulation for augmentation and weighting.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Jian Huang, Ya Li, Jianhua Tao, Zheng Lian, Mingyue
Niu, and Minghao Yang. 2018. Multimodal continu-
ous emotion recognition with data augmentation us-
ing recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the
2018 on Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge and Work-
shop , A VEC’18, page 57–64, New York, NY , USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Brian Kenji Iwana and Seiichi Uchida. 2020. An em-
pirical survey of data augmentation for time series
classiﬁcation with neural networks. arXiv preprint .
Mohit Iyyer, John Wieting, Kevin Gimpel, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Adversarial example generation
with syntactically controlled paraphrase networks.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1875–1885, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2016. Data recombination
for neural semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
12–22, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Robin Jia, Aditi Raghunathan, Kerem Göksel, and
Percy Liang. 2019. Certiﬁed robustness to adver-
sarial word substitutions. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th InternationalJoint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4120–4133.
Amit Jindal, Arijit Ghosh Chowdhury, Aniket Didolkar,
Di Jin, Ramit Sawhney, and Rajiv Ratn Shah. 2020a.
Augmenting NLP models using latent feature in-
terpolations. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 6931–6936, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Amit Jindal, Narayanan Elavathur Ranganatha, Aniket
Didolkar, Arijit Ghosh Chowdhury, Di Jin, Ramit
Sawhney, and Rajiv Ratn Shah. 2020b. Speechmix
- augmenting deep sound recognition using hidden
space interpolations. In INTERSPEECH , pages 861–
865.
Kushal Kaﬂe, Mohammed Yousefhussien, and Christo-
pher Kanan. 2017. Data augmentation for visual
question answering. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Natural Language Gen-
eration , pages 198–202, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dongyeop Kang, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and
Eduard Hovy. 2018. AdvEntuRe: Adversarial train-
ing for textual entailment with knowledge-guided ex-
amples. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2418–2428, Mel-
bourne, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Min-Hyung Kang. 2019. Valar nmt : Vastly lack-
ing resources neural machine translation. Stanford
CS224N .
Omid Kasheﬁ and Rebecca Hwa. 2020. Quantifying
the evaluation of heuristic methods for textual data
augmentation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work-
shop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT 2020) ,
pages 200–208, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary Lipton.
2020. Learning the difference that makes a differ-
ence with counterfactually-augmented data. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Divyansh Kaushik, Amrith Setlur, Eduard H. Hovy,
and Zachary Chase Lipton. 2021. Explaining the ef-
ﬁcacy of counterfactually augmented data. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Chris Kedzie and Kathleen McKeown. 2019. A good
sample is hard to ﬁnd: Noise injection sampling and
self-training for neural language generation models.
InProceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Natural Language Generation , pages 584–593,
Tokyo, Japan. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Hwa-Yeon Kim, Yoon-Hyung Roh, and Young-Kil
Kim. 2019. Data augmentation by data noising

==== Page 14 ====
for open-vocabulary slots in spoken language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Work-
shop , pages 97–102, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Kimn. 2020. A syntactic rule-based framework
for parallel data synthesis in japanese gec. Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Sosuke Kobayashi. 2018. Contextual augmentation:
Data augmentation by words with paradigmatic re-
lations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 452–457,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ashutosh Kumar, Kabir Ahuja, Raghuram Vadapalli,
and Partha Talukdar. 2020. Syntax-guided con-
trolled generation of paraphrases. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
8:329–345.
Ashutosh Kumar, Satwik Bhattamishra, Manik Bhan-
dari, and Partha Talukdar. 2019a. Submodular
optimization-based diverse paraphrasing and its ef-
fectiveness in data augmentation. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers) , pages 3609–3619, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Varun Kumar, Hadrien Glaude, Cyprien de Lichy, and
Wlliam Campbell. 2019b. A closer look at feature
space data augmentation for few-shot intent classi-
ﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Deep Learning Approaches for Low-Resource NLP
(DeepLo 2019) , pages 1–10, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Kenton Lee, Kelvin Guu, Luheng He, Tim Dozat, and
Hyung Won Chung. 2021. Neural data augmenta-
tion via example extrapolation. arXiv preprint .
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Daniel Li, Te I, Naveen Arivazhagan, Colin Cherry,
and Dirk Padﬁeld. 2020a. Sentence boundary aug-
mentation for neural machine translation robustness.
arXiv preprint .Yitong Li, Trevor Cohn, and Timothy Baldwin. 2017.
Robust training under linguistic adversity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Volume 2, Short Papers , pages 21–27, Va-
lencia, Spain. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yu Li, Xiao Li, Yating Yang, and Rui Dong. 2020b. A
diverse data augmentation strategy for low-resource
neural machine translation. Information , 11(5).
Zhenhao Li and Lucia Specia. 2019. Improving neu-
ral machine translation robustness via data augmen-
tation: Beyond back-translation. In Proceedings of
the 5th Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-
NUT 2019) , pages 328–336, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jared Lichtarge, Chris Alberti, Shankar Kumar, Noam
Shazeer, Niki Parmar, and Simon Tong. 2019. Cor-
pora generation for grammatical error correction. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
3291–3301, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Pei Liu, Xuemin Wang, Chao Xiang, and Weiye Meng.
2020a. A survey of text data augmentation. In 2020
International Conference on Computer Communica-
tion and Network Security (CCNS) , pages 191–195.
Ruibo Liu, Guangxuan Xu, Chenyan Jia, Weicheng
Ma, Lili Wang, and Soroush V osoughi. 2020b. Data
boost: Text data augmentation through reinforce-
ment learning guided conditional generation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 9031–9041, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ruibo Liu, Guangxuan Xu, and Soroush V osoughi.
2020c. Enhanced offensive language detection
through data augmentation. ICWSM Data Chal-
lenge .
Shayne Longpre, Yi Lu, Zhucheng Tu, and Chris
DuBois. 2019. An exploration of data augmentation
and sampling techniques for domain-agnostic ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop
on Machine Reading for Question Answering , pages
220–227, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Shayne Longpre, Yu Wang, and Christopher DuBois.
2020. How effective is task-agnostic data augmen-
tation for pretrained transformers? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.01764 .
Samuel Louvan and Bernardo Magnini. 2020. Simple
is better! lightweight data augmentation for low re-
source slot ﬁlling and intent classiﬁcation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Lan-

==== Page 15 ====
guage, Information and Computation , pages 167–
177, Hanoi, Vietnam. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kaiji Lu, Piotr Mardziel, Fangjing Wu, Preetam Aman-
charla, and Anupam Datta. 2020. Gender Bias in
Neural Natural Language Processing , pages 189–
202. Springer International Publishing, Cham.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM ,
38(11):39–41.
Tomoya Mizumoto, Mamoru Komachi, Masaaki Na-
gata, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2011. Mining revi-
sion log of language learning SNS for automated
Japanese error correction of second language learn-
ers. In Proceedings of 5th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing , pages
147–155, Chiang Mai, Thailand. Asian Federation
of Natural Language Processing.
Sebastien Montella, Betty Fabre, Tanguy Urvoy, Jo-
hannes Heinecke, and Lina Rojas-Barahona. 2020.
Denoising pre-training and data augmentation strate-
gies for enhanced RDF verbalization with transform-
ers. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation from the Se-
mantic Web (WebNLG+) , pages 89–99, Dublin, Ire-
land (Virtual). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Naﬁse Sadat Moosavi, Marcel de Boer, Prasetya Ajie
Utama, and Iryna Gurevych. 2020. Improving
robustness by augmenting training sentences with
predicate-argument structures. arXiv preprint .
Xiangyang Mou, Brandyn Sigouin, Ian Steenstra, and
Hui Su. 2020. Multimodal dialogue state tracking by
qa approach with data augmentation. AAAI DSTC8
Workshop .
Diego Moussallem, Mihael Ar ˇcan, Axel-
Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, and Paul Buitelaar.
2019. Augmenting neural machine translation with
knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint .
Nathan Ng, Kyunghyun Cho, and Marzyeh Ghassemi.
2020. SSMBA: Self-supervised manifold based data
augmentation for improving out-of-domain robust-
ness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) , pages 1268–1283, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Shaﬁq Joty, Kui Wu, and Ai Ti Aw.
2020. Data diversiﬁcation: A simple strategy for
neural machine translation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages
10018–10029. Curran Associates, Inc.
Yuyang Nie, Yuanhe Tian, Xiang Wan, Yan Song, and
Bo Dai. 2020. Named entity recognition for so-
cial media texts with semantic augmentation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 1383–1391, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yuta Nishimura, Katsuhito Sudoh, Graham Neubig,
and Satoshi Nakamura. 2018. Multi-source neural
machine translation with data augmentation. 15th
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation 2018 .
Shantipriya Parida and Petr Motlicek. 2019. Abstract
text summarization: A low resource challenge. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5994–
5998, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Magdalini Paschali, Walter Simson, Abhijit Guha Roy,
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Rüdiger Göbl, Christian
Wachinger, and Nassir Navab. 2019. Data augmen-
tation with manifold exploring geometric transfor-
mations for increased performance and robustness.
arXiv preprint .
Ramakanth Pasunuru, Asli Celikyilmaz, Michel Galley,
Chenyan Xiong, Yizhe Zhang, Mohit Bansal, and
Jianfeng Gao. 2021. Data augmentation for abstrac-
tive query-focused multi-document summarization.
arXiv preprint .
Ellie Pavlick, Pushpendre Rastogi, Juri Ganitkevitch,
Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2015. PPDB 2.0: Better paraphrase ranking, ﬁne-
grained entailment relations, word embeddings, and
style classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2:
Short Papers) , pages 425–430, Beijing, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Wei Peng, Chongxuan Huang, Tianhao Li, Yun Chen,
and Qun Liu. 2020. Dictionary-based data augmen-
tation for cross-domain neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint .
Libo Qin, Minheng Ni, Yue Zhang, and Wanxiang
Che. 2020. Cosda-ml: Multi-lingual code-switching
data augmentation for zero-shot cross-lingual nlp.
InProceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-
20, pages 3853–3860. International Joint Confer-
ences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization. Main
track.
Jun Quan and Deyi Xiong. 2019. Effective data aug-
mentation approaches to end-to-end task-oriented di-
alogue. In 2019 International Conference on Asian
Language Processing (IALP) , pages 47–52.
Husam Quteineh, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Richard
Sutcliffe. 2020. Textual data augmentation for efﬁ-
cient active learning on tiny datasets. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods

==== Page 16 ====
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
7400–7410, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
Blog , 1(8):9.
Shashank Rajput, Zhili Feng, Zachary Charles, Po-
Ling Loh, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. 2019. Does
data augmentation lead to positive margin? In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages
5321–5330. PMLR.
AJ Ratner, HR Ehrenberg, Z Hussain, J Dunnmon, and
C Ré. 2017. Learning to Compose Domain-Speciﬁc
Transformations for Data Augmentation. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 30:3239–
3249.
Adithya Renduchintala, Shuoyang Ding, Matthew
Wiesner, and Shinji Watanabe. 2018. Multi-Modal
Data Augmentation for End-to-end ASR. Proc. In-
terspeech 2018 , pages 2394–2398.
Arij Riabi, Thomas Scialom, Rachel Keraron, Benoît
Sagot, Djamé Seddah, and Jacopo Staiano. 2020.
Synthetic Data Augmentation for Zero-Shot Cross-
Lingual Question Answering. arXiv preprint .
Gözde Gül ¸ Sahin and Mark Steedman. 2018. Data aug-
mentation via dependency tree morphing for low-
resource languages. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 5004–5009, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Joseph Shtok, Sivan
Harary, Mattias Marder, Abhishek Kumar, Rogerio
Feris, Raja Giryes, and Alex M Bronstein. 2018. -
encoder: an effective sample synthesis method for
few-shot object recognition. In Proceedings of the
32nd International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , pages 2850–2860.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2016. Improving Neural Machine Translation Mod-
els with Monolingual Data. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
86–96, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Haoyue Shi, Karen Livescu, and Kevin Gimpel. 2021.
Substructure Substitution: Structured Data Augmen-
tation for NLP. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00411 .
Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. 2019.
A survey on Image Data Augmentation for Deep
Learning. Journal of Big Data , 6(1):60.
Jasdeep Singh, Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2019. Xlda:
Cross-lingual data augmentation for natural lan-
guage inference and question answering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.11471 .Abhishek Sinha, Kumar Ayush, Jiaming Song, Bu-
rak Uzkent, Hongxia Jin, and Stefano Ermon. 2021.
Negative data augmentation. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations .
Xiaohui Song, Liangjun Zang, Yipeng Su, Xing Wu,
Jizhong Han, and Songlin Hu. 2020. Data Augmen-
tation for Copy-Mechanism in Dialogue State Track-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09634 .
Amane Sugiyama and Naoki Yoshinaga. 2019. Data
augmentation using back-translation for context-
aware neural machine translation. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Workshop on Discourse in Machine
Translation (DiscoMT 2019) , pages 35–44, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Shubhangi Tandon, TS Sharath, Shereen Oraby, Lena
Reed, Stephanie Lukin, and Marilyn Walker. 2018.
TNT-NLG, System 2: Data repetition and meaning
representation manipulation to improve neural gen-
eration. E2E NLG Challenge Sfystem Descriptions .
Ruixue Tang, Chao Ma, Wei Emma Zhang, Qi Wu, and
Xiaokang Yang. 2020. Semantic equivalent adver-
sarial data augmentation for visual question answer-
ing. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 437–453. Springer.
Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Johannes Daxenberger,
and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. Augmented sbert: Data
augmentation method for improving bi-encoders for
pairwise sentence scoring tasks. Proceedings of
NAACL .
Vaibhav Vaibhav, Sumeet Singh, Craig Stewart, and
Graham Neubig. 2019. Improving Robustness of
Machine Translation with Synthetic Noise. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
ume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 1916–1920,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Clara Vania, Yova Kementchedjhieva, Anders Søgaard,
and Adam Lopez. 2019. A systematic comparison
of methods for low-resource dependency parsing on
genuinely low-resource languages. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 1105–1116, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Christopher Beckham, Amir
Najaﬁ, Ioannis Mitliagkas, David Lopez-Paz, and
Yoshua Bengio. 2019. Manifold mixup: Better rep-
resentations by interpolating hidden states. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages
6438–6447. PMLR.

==== Page 17 ====
Zhaohong Wan, Xiaojun Wan, and Wenguang Wang.
2020. Improving Grammatical Error Correction
with Data Augmentation by Editing Latent Rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the 28th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2202–2212, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguistics.
Chencheng Wang, Liner Yang, Yun Chen, Yongping
Du, and Erhong Yang. 2019a. Controllable Data
Synthesis Method for Grammatical Error Correction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13302 .
Longshaokan Wang, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, Aditya Ti-
wari, Spyros Matsoukas, and Lazaros Polymenakos.
2020. Data augmentation for training dialog models
robust to speech recognition errors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.05635 .
Xiang Wang, Kai Wang, and Shiguo Lian. 2019b. A
survey on face data augmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.11685 .
Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, and Graham Neu-
big. 2018a. SwitchOut: an Efﬁcient Data Augmen-
tation Algorithm for Neural Machine Translation.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
856–861, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Xinyi Wang, Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, and Graham Neu-
big. 2018b. SwitchOut: an Efﬁcient Data Augmen-
tation Algorithm for Neural Machine Translation.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
856–861, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Chengyu Huang, Soroush V osoughi,
Yu Cheng, and Shiqi Xu. 2021a. Few-shot text clas-
siﬁcation with triplet networks, data augmentation,
and curriculum learning. Proceedings of NAACL .
Jason Wei, Chengyu Huang, Shiqi Xu, and Soroush
V osoughi. 2021b. Text augmentation in a multi-task
view. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 2888–2894,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jason Wei and Kai Zou. 2019. EDA: Easy data aug-
mentation techniques for boosting performance on
text classiﬁcation tasks. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 6382–6388, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Max White and Alla Rozovskaya. 2020. A Compar-
ative Study of Synthetic Data Generation Methods
for Grammatical Error Correction. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLPfor Building Educational Applications , pages 198–
208, Seattle, WA, USA â†’ Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Matthew Wiesner, Adithya Renduchintala, Shinji
Watanabe, Chunxi Liu, Najim Dehak, and Sanjeev
Khudanpur. 2018. Low resource multi-modal data
augmentation for end-to-end ASR. CoRR .
John Wieting and Kevin Gimpel. 2017. Revisiting Re-
current Networks for Paraphrastic Sentence Embed-
dings. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2078–2088, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sam Wiseman, Stuart M Shieber, and Alexander M
Rush. 2017. Challenges in Data-to-Document Gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 2253–2263.
Mengzhou Xia, Xiang Kong, Antonios Anastasopou-
los, and Graham Neubig. 2019. Generalized Data
Augmentation for Low-Resource Translation. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
5786–5796, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Thang Luong,
and Quoc Le. 2020. Unsupervised data augmenta-
tion for consistency training. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 33.
Ziang Xie, Guillaume Genthial, Stanley Xie, Andrew
Ng, and Dan Jurafsky. 2018. Noising and Denois-
ing Natural Language: Diverse Backtranslation for
Grammar Correction. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) ,
pages 619–628, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
N. Xu, W. Mao, P. Wei, and D. Zeng. 2020. MDA: Mul-
timodal Data Augmentation Framework for Boost-
ing Performance on Image-Text Sentiment/Emotion
Classiﬁcation Tasks. IEEE Intelligent Systems ,
pages 1–1.
Shuyao Xu, Jiehao Zhang, Jin Chen, and Long Qin.
2019. Erroneous data generation for Grammatical
Error Correction. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building
Educational Applications , pages 149–158, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wei Yang, Yuqing Xie, Luchen Tan, Kun Xiong, Ming
Li, and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Data Augmentation for
BERT Fine-Tuning in Open-Domain Question An-
swering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.06652 .
Yiben Yang, Chaitanya Malaviya, Jared Fernandez,
Swabha Swayamdipta, Ronan Le Bras, Ji-Ping
Wang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Doug

==== Page 18 ====
Downey. 2020. G-daug: Generative data augmenta-
tion for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing: Findings , pages 1008–
1025.
Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, and
Qun Liu. 2020. Dialog State Tracking with Re-
inforced Data Augmentation. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol-
ume 34, pages 9474–9481.
Masashi Yokota and Hideki Nakayama. 2018. Aug-
menting Image Question Answering Dataset by Ex-
ploiting Image Captions. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-2018) , Miyazaki,
Japan. European Languages Resources Association
(ELRA).
Kang Min Yoo, Youhyun Shin, and Sang-goo Lee.
2019. Data Augmentation for Spoken Language Un-
derstanding via Joint Variational Generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelli-
gence , volume 33, pages 7402–7409.
S. Young, M. Gaši ´c, B. Thomson, and J. D. Williams.
2013. POMDP-Based Statistical Spoken Dialog
Systems: A Review. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
101(5):1160–1179.
Adams Wei Yu, David Dohan, Quoc Le, Thang Luong,
Rui Zhao, and Kai Chen. 2018. Fast and accurate
reading comprehension by combining self-attention
and convolution. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Tao Yu, Chien-Sheng Wu, Xi Victoria Lin, Bailin
Wang, Yi Chern Tan, Xinyi Yang, Dragomir Radev,
Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. 2020. GraPPa:
Grammar-Augmented Pre-Training for Table Se-
mantic Parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13845 .
Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh,
Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo.
2019. Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train
strong classiﬁers with localizable features. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision , pages 6023–6032.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin,
and David Lopez-Paz. 2017. mixup: Beyond em-
pirical risk minimization. Proceedings of ICLR.
Rongzhi Zhang, Yue Yu, and Chao Zhang. 2020. Se-
qMix: Augmenting Active Sequence Labeling via
Sequence Mixup. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8566–8579, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Rui Zhang, Tao Yu, Heyang Er, Sungrok Shim,
Eric Xue, Xi Victoria Lin, Tianze Shi, Caiming
Xiong, Richard Socher, and Dragomir Radev. 2019a.Editing-based SQL Query Generation for Cross-
Domain Context-Dependent Questions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5338–5349, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-Level Convolutional Networks for Text
Classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 28th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems - Volume 1 , NIPS’15, page 649–657, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA. MIT Press.
Yi Zhang, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, Ming Zhou, and Xu Sun.
2019b. Sequence-to-sequence Pre-training with
Data Augmentation for Sentence Rewriting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.06002 .
Yichi Zhang, Zhijian Ou, and Zhou Yu. 2019c. Task-
oriented dialog systems that consider multiple appro-
priate responses under the same context.
Yuan Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Luheng He. 2019d.
PAWS: Paraphrase adversaries from word scram-
bling. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
1298–1308, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018. Gender bias in
coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 15–20,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Zijian Zhao, Su Zhu, and Kai Yu. 2019. Data augmen-
tation with atomic templates for spoken language un-
derstanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10770 .
Victor Zhong, Mike Lewis, Sida I. Wang, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2020. Grounded adaptation for zero-
shot executable semantic parsing. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6869–
6882, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Haichao Zhu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, Bing Qin, and
Ting Liu. 2019. Transforming wikipedia into
augmented data for query-focused summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03324 .
Ran Zmigrod, Sebastian J. Mielke, Hanna Wallach, and
Ryan Cotterell. 2019. Counterfactual Data Aug-
mentation for Mitigating Gender Stereotypes in Lan-
guages with Rich Morphology. In Proceedings of

==== Page 19 ====
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1651–1661, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Appendices
A Useful Blog Posts and Code
Repositories
The following blog posts and code repositories
could be helpful in addition to the information pre-
sented and papers/works mentioned in the body:
•Introduction to popular text augmentation
techniques: https://towardsdatascience.com/
data-augmentation-in-nlp-2801a34dfc28
•Detailed blog post on various text DA
techniques: https://amitness.com/2020/05/
data-augmentation-for-nlp/
•Lightweight library for DA on text and audio:
https://github.com/makcedward/nlpaug
•python framework for adversarial examples:
https://github.com/QData/TextAttack
B DA Methods Table - Description of
Columns and Attributes
Table 1 in the main body compares a non-
exhaustive selection of DAmethods along various
aspects relating to their applicability, dependencies,
and requirements. Below, we provide a more ex-
tensive description of each of this table’s columns
and their attributes.
1.Ext.Know : Short for external knowledge, this
column is 3when the data augmentation pro-
cess requires knowledge resources which go
beyond the immediate input examples and
the task deﬁnition, such as WordNet (Miller,
1995) or PPDB (Pavlick et al., 2015). Note
that we exclude the case where these resources
are pretrained models under a separate point
(next) for clarity, since these are widespread
enough to merit a separate category.
2.Pretrained : Denotes that the data augmenta-
tion process requires a pretrained model, such
as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) or GPT-2 (Rad-
ford et al., 2019).
3.Preprocess : Denotes the preprocessing steps,
e.g. tokenization ( tok), dependency parsing
(dep), etc. required for the DA process. A
hyphen (-) means either no preprocessing is
required or that it was not explicitly stated.4.Level : Denotes the depth and extent to which
elements of the instance/data are modiﬁed by
theDA. Some primitives modify just the IN-
PUT(e.g. word swapping), some modify both
INPUT andLABEL (e.g. negation), while oth-
ers make changes in the embedding or hidden
space ( EMBED /HIDDEN ) or higher represen-
tation layers enroute to the task model.
5.Task-Agnostic : This is an approximate, par-
tially subjective column denoting the extent
to which a DAmethod can be applied to dif-
ferent tasks. When we say 3here, we don’t
denote a very rigid sense of the term task-
agnostic, but mean that it would possibly eas-
ily extend to most NLP tasks as understood
by the authors. Similarly, an denotes being
restricted to a speciﬁc task (or small group of
related tasks) only. There can be other labels,
denoting applicability to broad task families.
For example, SUBSTRUCTURAL denotes the
family of tasks where sub-parts of the input
are also valid input examples in their own
right, e.g. constituency parsing. SENTENCE
PAIRS denotes tasks which involve pairwise
sentence scoring such as paraphrase identiﬁ-
cation, duplicate question detection, and se-
mantic textual similarity.
C Additional DA Works by Task
See Table 2 for additional DA works for GEC, Ta-
ble 3 for additional DA works for neural machine
translation, Table 4 for additional DA works for
dialogue, and Table 5 for additional DA works for
multimodal tasks. Each work is described brieﬂy.
D Additional Figure
Figure 4: Pedro Domingos’ quip about ofﬂine data aug-
mentation.

==== Page 20 ====
Paper/Work Brief Description
Lichtarge et al. (2019) Generate synthetic noised examples of Wikipedia sentences using backtranslation through
various languages.
White and Rozovskaya (2020) Detailed comparative study of the DA for GEC systems UEdin-MS (Grundkiewicz et al., 2019)
and Kakao&Brain (Choe et al., 2019).
Foster and Andersen (2009) Introduces error generation tool called GenERRate which learns to generate ungrammatical
text with various errors by using an error analysis ﬁle.
Kimn (2020) Use a set of syntactic rules for common Japanese grammatical errors to generate augmented
error-correct sentence pairs for Japanese GEC.
Felice (2016) Thesis that surveys previous work on error generation and investigates some new approaches
using random and probabilistic methods.
Xu et al. (2019) Noises using ﬁve error types: concatenation, misspelling, substitution, deletion, and transposi-
tion. Decent performance on the BEA 2019 Shared Task.
Zhang et al. (2019b) Explore backtranslation and feature discrimination for DA.
Mizumoto et al. (2011) DA by extracting Japanese GEC training data from the revision log of a language learning SNS.
Table 2: Additional DA works for grammatical error correction (GEC), along with a brief description of each.
Paper/Work Brief Description
Vaibhav et al. (2019) Present a synthetic noise induction model which heuristically adds social media noise to text,
andlabeled backtranslation .
Hassan et al. (2017) Present a DA method to project words from closely-related high-resource languages to low-
resource languages using word embedding representations.
Cheng et al. (2020) Propose AdvAug , an adversarial augmentation method for NMT, by sampling adversarial
examples from a new vicinity distribution and using their embeddings to augment training.
Graça et al. (2019) Investigate improvements to sampling-based approaches and the synthetic data generated by
backtranslation.
Bulte and Tezcan (2019) Propose DA approaches for NMT that leverage information retrieved from a Translation
Memory (TM) and using fuzzy TM matches.
Moussallem et al. (2019) Propose an NMT model KG-NMT which is augmented by knowledge graphs to enhance
semantic feature extraction and hence the translation of entities and terminological expressions.
Peng et al. (2020) Propose dictionary-based DA ( DDA ) for cross-domain NMT by synthesizing a domain-speciﬁc
dictionary and automatically generating a pseudo in-domain parallel corpus.
Li et al. (2020a) Present a DA method using sentence boundary segmentation to improve the robustness of NMT
on ASR transcripts.
Nishimura et al. (2018) Introduce DA methods for multi-source NMT that ﬁlls in incomplete portions of multi-source
training data.
Sugiyama and Yoshinaga (2019) Investigate effectiveness of DA by backtranslation for context-aware NMT.
Li and Specia (2019) Present DA methods to improve NMT robustness to noise while keeping models small, and
explore the use of noise from external data (speech transcripts).
Chinea-Ríos et al. (2017) Propose DA method to create synthetic data by leveraging the embedding representation of
sentences.
Alves et al. (2020) Propose two methods for pipeline-based speech translation through the introduction of errors
through 1. utilizing a speech processing workﬂow and 2. a rule-based method.
Kang (2019) Investigate extremely low-resource settings for NMT and a DA approach using a noisy dictio-
nary and language models.
Chen et al. (2020a) Investigate a DA method for lexically constraint-aware NMT to construct constraint-aware
synthetic training data.
Li et al. (2020b) Propose a diversity DA method for low-resource NMT by generating diverse synthetic parallel
data on both source and target sides using a restricted sampling strategy during decoding.
Duan et al. (2020) Propose syntax-aware DA methods with sentence-speciﬁc word selection probabilities using
dependency parsing.
Table 3: Additional DA works for neural machine translation (NMT), along with a brief description of each.

==== Page 21 ====
Paper/Work Brief Description
Gao et al. (2020) Propose a paraphrase augmented response generation (PARG) framework to improve dialogue generation by
automatically constructing augmented paraphrased training examples based on dialogue state and act labels.
Gritta et al. (2021) Introduce a graph-based representation of dialogues called Conversation Graph (ConvGraph) that can be
used for DA by creating new dialogue paths.
Yin et al. (2020) Propose an RL-based DA approach for dialogue state tracking (DST).
Song et al. (2020) Propose a simple DA algorithm to improve the training of copy-mechanism models for dialogue state
tracking (DST).
Table 4: Additional DA works for dialogue, along with a brief description of each.
Paper/Work Brief Description
Huang et al. (2018) Propose a DA method for emotion recognition from a combination of audio, visual, and textual modalities.
Mou et al. (2020) Introduce a DA method for Audio-Video Scene-Aware Dialogue, which involves dialogue containing a
sequence of QA pairs about a video.
Falcon et al. (2020) Investigate DA techniques for video QA including mirroring and horizontal ﬂipping.
Table 5: Additional DA works for multimodal tasks, along with a brief description of each.

