==== Page 1 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-019-05855-6
A survey on semi-supervised learning
Jesper E. van Engelen1·Holger H. Hoos1,2
Received: 3 December 2018 / Revised: 20 September 2019 / Accepted: 29 September 2019 /
Published online: 15 November 2019© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is the branch of machine learning concerned with using labelledas well as unlabelled data to perform certain learning tasks. Conceptually situated betweensupervised and unsupervised learning, it permits harnessing the large amounts of unlabelleddata available in many use cases in combination with typically smaller sets of labelled data.In recent years, research in this area has followed the general trends observed in machinelearning, with much attention directed at neural network-based models and generative learn-ing. The literature on the topic has also expanded in volume and scope, now encompassing abroad spectrum of theory, algorithms and applications. However, no recent surveys exist tocollect and organize this knowledge, impeding the ability of researchers and engineers aliketo utilize it. Filling this void, we present an up-to-date overview of semi-supervised learn-ing methods, covering earlier work as well as more recent advances. We focus primarily onsemi-supervised classiﬁcation, where the large majority of semi-supervised learning researchtakes place. Our survey aims to provide researchers and practitioners new to the ﬁeld as wellas more advanced readers with a solid understanding of the main approaches and algorithmsdeveloped over the past two decades, with an emphasis on the most prominent and currentlyrelevant work. Furthermore, we propose a new taxonomy of semi-supervised classiﬁcationalgorithms, which sheds light on the different conceptual and methodological approaches forincorporating unlabelled data into the training process. Lastly, we show how the fundamentalassumptions underlying most semi-supervised learning algorithms are closely connected toeach other, and how they relate to the well-known semi-supervised clustering assumption.
Keywords Semi-supervised learning ·Machine learning ·Classiﬁcation
Editor: Tom Fawcett.
B Jesper E. van Engelen
jesper.van.engelen@gmail.com
Holger H. Hoos
hh@liacs.nl
1Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
2Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
123

==== Page 2 ====
374 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
1 Introduction
In machine learning, a distinction has traditionally been made between two major tasks:
supervised and unsupervised learning (Bishop 2006 ). Insupervised learning , one is presented
with a set of data points consisting of some input xand a corresponding output value y.T h e
goal is, then, to construct a classiﬁer or regressor that can estimate the output value forpreviously unseen inputs. In unsupervised learning , on the other hand, no speciﬁc output
value is provided. Instead, one tries to infer some underlying structure from the inputs. Forinstance, in unsupervised clustering, the goal is to infer a mapping from the given inputs (e.g.vectors of real numbers) to groups such that similar inputs are mapped to the same group.
Semi-supervised learning is a branch of machine learning that aims to combine these
two tasks (Chapelle et al. 2006b ;Z h u 2008 ). Typically, semi-supervised learning algorithms
attempt to improve performance in one of these two tasks by utilizing information generallyassociated with the other. For instance, when tackling a classiﬁcation problem, additionaldata points for which the label is unknown might be used to aid in the classiﬁcation process.For clustering methods, on the other hand, the learning procedure might beneﬁt from theknowledge that certain data points belong to the same class.
As is the case for machine learning in general, a large majority of the research on semi-
supervised learning is focused on classiﬁcation. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods areparticularly relevant to scenarios where labelled data is scarce. In those cases, it may bedifﬁcult to construct a reliable supervised classiﬁer. This situation occurs in applicationdomains where labelled data is expensive or difﬁcult obtain, like computer-aided diagnosis,drug discovery and part-of-speech tagging. If sufﬁcient unlabelled data is available and undercertain assumptions about the distribution of the data, the unlabelled data can help in theconstruction of a better classiﬁer. In practice, semi-supervised learning methods have alsobeen applied to scenarios where no signiﬁcant lack of labelled data exists: if the unlabelleddata points provide additional information that is relevant for prediction, they can potentiallybe used to achieve improved classiﬁcation performance.
A plethora of learning methods exists, each with their own characteristics, advantages and
disadvantages. The most recent comprehensive survey of the area was published by Zhu in2005 and last updated in 2008 [see Zhu ( 2008 )]. The book by Chapelle et al. ( 2006b )a n d
the introductory book by Zhu and Goldberg ( 2009 ) also provide good bases for studying
earlier work on semi-supervised learning. More recently, Subramanya and Talukdar ( 2014 )
provided an overview of several graph-based techniques, and Triguero et al. ( 2015 ) reviewed
and analyzed pseudo-labelling techniques, a class of semi-supervised learning methods.
Since the survey by Zhu ( 2008 ) was published, some important developments have taken
place in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning. Across the ﬁeld, new learning approacheshave been proposed, and existing approaches have been extended, improved, and analyzedin more depth. Additionally, the rise in popularity of (deep) neural networks (Goodfellow2017 ) for supervised learning has prompted new approaches to semi-supervised learning,
driven by the simplicity of incorporating unsupervised loss terms into the cost functions ofneural networks. Lastly, there has been increased attention for the development of robustsemi-supervised learning methods that do not degrade performance, and for the evaluationof semi-supervised learning methods for practical purposes.
In this survey, we aim to provide the reader with a comprehensive overview of the cur-
rent state of the research area of semi-supervised learning, covering early work and recentadvances, and providing explanations of key algorithms and approaches. We present a newtaxonomy for semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods that captures the assumptions under-
123

==== Page 3 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 375
lying each group of methods as well as the way in which they relate to existing supervised
methods. In this, we provide a perspective on semi-supervised learning that allows for amore thorough understanding of different approaches and the connections between them.Furthermore, we shed new light on the fundamental assumptions underlying semi-supervisedlearning, and show how they connect to the so-called cluster assumption.
Although we aim to provide a comprehensive survey on semi-supervised learning, we
cannot possibly cover every method in existence. Due to the sheer size of the literatureon the topic, this would not only be beyond the scope of this article, but also distractfrom the key insights which we wish to provide to the reader. Instead, we focus on themost inﬂuential work and the most important developments in the area over the past twentyyears.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. The basic concepts and assumptions of semi-
supervised learning are covered in Sect. 2, where we also make a connection to clustering.
In Sect. 3, we present our taxonomy of semi-supervised learning methods, which forms
the conceptual basis for the remainder of our survey. Inductive methods are covered inSects. 4through 6. We ﬁrst consider wrapper methods (Sect. 4), followed by unsupervised
preprocessing (Sect. 5), and ﬁnally, we cover intrinsically semi-supervised methods (Sect. 6).
Sect. 7covers transductive methods, which form the second major branch of our taxonomy.
Semi-supervised regression and clustering are discussed in Sect. 8. Finally, in Sect. 9,w e
provide some prospects for the future of semi-supervised learning.
2 Background
In traditional supervised learning problems, we are presented with an ordered collectionofllabelled data points D
L=((xi,yi))l
i=1. Each data point (xi,yi)consists of an object
xi∈Xfrom a given input space X, and has an associated label yi,w h e r e yiis real-valued in
regression problems and categorical in classiﬁcation problems. Based on a collection of thesedata points, usually called the training data , supervised learning methods attempt to infer a
function that can successfully determine the label y
∗of some previously unseen input x∗.
In many real-world classiﬁcation problems, however, we also have access to a collection
ofudata points, DU=(xi)l+u
i=l+1, whose labels are unknown. For instance, the data points for
which we want to make predictions, usually called the test data , are unlabelled by deﬁnition.
Semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods attempt to utilize unlabelled data points to constructa learner whose performance exceeds the performance of learners obtained when using onlythe labelled data. In the remainder of this survey, we denote with X
LandXUthe collection
of input objects for the labelled and unlabelled samples, respectively.1
There are many cases where unlabelled data can help in constructing a classiﬁer. Consider,
for example, the problem of document classiﬁcation, where we wish to assign topics to acollection of text documents (such as news articles). Assuming our documents are representedby the set of words that appear in it, one could train a simple supervised classiﬁer that, forexample, learns to recognize that documents containing the word “neutron” are usually aboutphysics. This classiﬁer might work well on documents containing terms that it has seen inthe training data, but will inherently fail when a document does not contain predictive wordsthat also occurred in the training set. For example, if we encounter a physics document
1We note that the collections of data points referred to here are technically lists. However, following common
usage, in this survey, we refer to them as ‘sets’ and, in a slight abuse of notation, apply standard set-theoreticconcepts to them.
123

==== Page 4 ====
376 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Fig. 1 A basic example of binary classiﬁcation in the presence of unlabelled data. The unlabelled data points
are coloured according to their true label. The coloured, unﬁlled circles depict the contour curves of the input
data distribution corresponding to standard deviations of 1, 2 and 3 (Color ﬁgure online)
about particle accelerators that does not contain the word “neutron”, the classiﬁer is unable
to recognize it as a document concerning physics. This is where semi-supervised learningcomes in. If we consider the unlabelled data, there might be documents that connect the word“neutron” to the phrase “particle accelerator”. For instance, the word “neutron” would oftenoccur in a document that also contains the word “quark”. Furthermore, the word “quark”would regularly co-occur with the phrase “particle accelerator”, which guides the classiﬁerstowards classifying these documents as revolving around physics as well, despite havingnever seen the phrase “particle accelerator” in the labelled data.
Figure 1provides some further intuition towards the use of unlabelled data for classiﬁ-
cation. We consider an artiﬁcial classiﬁcation problem with two classes. For both classes,100 samples are drawn from a 2-dimensional Gaussian distribution with identical covariancematrices. The labelled data set is then constructed by taking one sample from each class.Any supervised learning algorithm will most likely obtain as the decision boundary the solidline, which is perpendicular to the line segment connecting the two labelled data points andintersects it in the middle. However, this is quite far from the optimal decision boundary.As is clear from this ﬁgure, the clusters we can infer from the unlabelled data can help usconsiderably in placing the decision boundary: assuming that the data stems from two Gaus-sian distributions, a simple semi-supervised learning algorithm can infer a close-to-optimaldecision boundary.
2.1 Assumptions of semi-supervised learning
A necessary condition of semi-supervised learning is that the underlying marginal data distri-bution p(x)over the input space contains information about the posterior distribution p(y|x).
If this is the case, one might be able to use unlabelled data to gain information about p(x),a n d
thereby about p(y|x). If, on the other hand, this condition is not met, and p(x)contains no
information about p(y|x), it is inherently impossible to improve the accuracy of predictions
based on the additional unlabelled data (Zhu 2008 ).
123

==== Page 5 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 377
(a)Smoothness and low-density assumptions. (b)Manifold assumption.
Fig. 2 Illustrations of the semi-supervised learning assumptions. In each picture, a reasonable supervised
decision boundary is depicted, as well as the optimal decision boundary, which could be closely approximatedby a semi-supervised learning algorithm relying on the respective assumption
Fortunately, the previously mentioned condition appears to be satisﬁed in most learning
problems encountered in the real world, as is suggested by the successful application of semi-supervised learning methods in practice. However, the way in which p(x)andp(y|x)interact
is not always the same. This has given rise to the semi-supervised learning assumptions ,
which formalize the types of expected interaction (Chapelle et al. 2006b ). The most widely
recognized assumptions are the smoothness assumption (if two samples xandx
/primeare close
in the input space, their labels yandy/primeshould be the same), the low-density assumption
(the decision boundary should not pass through high-density areas in the input space), andthemanifold assumption (data points on the same low-dimensional manifold should have the
same label). These assumptions are the foundation of most, if not all, semi-supervised learningalgorithms, which generally depend on one or more of them being satisﬁed, either explicitly orimplicitly. Throughout this survey, we will elaborate on the underlying assumptions utilizedby each speciﬁc learning algorithm. The assumptions are explained in more detail below; a
visual representation is provided in Fig. 2.
2.1.1 Smoothness assumption
The smoothness assumption states that, for two input points x,x/prime∈Xthat are close by in
the input space, the corresponding labels y,y/primeshould be the same. This assumption is also
commonly used in supervised learning, but has an extended beneﬁt in the semi-supervisedcontext: the smoothness assumption can be applied transitively to unlabelled data. For exam-ple, assume that a labelled data point x
1∈XLand two unlabelled data points x2,x3∈XU
exist, such that x1is close to x2andx2is close to x3,b u t x1is not close to x3. Then, because
of the smoothness assumption, we can still expect x3to have the same label as x1,s i n c e
proximity—and thereby the label—is transitively propagated through x2.
2.1.2 Low-density assumption
The low-density assumption implies that the decision boundary of a classiﬁer should prefer-
ably pass through low-density regions in the input space. In other words, the decision
123

==== Page 6 ====
378 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
boundary should not pass through high-density regions. The assumption is deﬁned over
p(x), the true distribution of the input data. When considering a limited set of samples from
this distribution, it essentially means that the decision boundary should lie in an area wherefew data points are observed. In that light, the low-density assumption is closely related tothe smoothness assumption; in fact, it can be considered the counterpart of the smoothnessassumption for the underlying data distribution.
Suppose that a low-density area exists, i.e. an area R⊂
Xwhere p(x)is low. Then very
few observations are expected to be contained in R, and it is thus unlikely that any pair of
similar data points in Ris observed. If we place the decision boundary in this low-density
area, the smoothness assumption is not violated, since it only concerns pairs of similar datapoints. For high-density areas, on the other hand, many data points can be expected. Thus,placing the decision boundary in a high-density region violates the smoothness assumption,since the predicted labels would then be dissimilar for similar data points.
The converse is also true: if the smoothness assumption holds, then any two data points
that lie close together have the same label. Therefore, in any densely populated area of theinput space, all data points are expected to have the same label. Consequently, a decisionboundary can be constructed that passes only through low-density areas in the input space,thus satisfying the low-density assumption as well. Due to their close practical relation, wedepict the low-density assumption and the smoothness assumption in a single illustration inFig. 2.
2.1.3 Manifold assumption
In machine learning problems where the data can be represented in Euclidean space, the
observed data points in the high-dimensional input space Rdare usually concentrated along
lower-dimensional substructures. These substructures are known as manifolds : topological
spaces that are locally Euclidean. For instance, when we consider a 3-dimensional input spacewhere all points lie on the surface of a sphere, the data can be said to lie on a 2-dimensionalmanifold. The manifold assumption in semi-supervised learning states that (a) the input spaceis composed of multiple lower-dimensional manifolds on which all data points lie and (b)data points lying on the same manifold have the same label. Consequently, if we are ableto determine which manifolds exist and which data points lie on which manifold, the classassignments of unlabelled data points can be inferred from the labelled data points on thesame manifold.
2.2 Connection to clustering
In semi-supervised learning research, an additional assumption that is often included is thecluster assumption , which states that data points belonging to the same cluster belong to
the same class (Chapelle et al. 2006b ). We argue, however, that the previously mentioned
assumptions and the cluster assumption are not independent of each other but, rather, thatthe cluster assumption is a generalization of the other assumptions.
Consider an input space
Xwith some objects X⊂X, drawn from the distribution p(x).
A cluster, then, is a set of data points C⊆Xthat are more similar to each other than to other
data points in X, according to some concept of similarity (Anderberg 1973 ). Determining
clusters corresponds to ﬁnding some function f:X→ Ythat maps each input in x∈Xto
a cluster with label y=f(x), where each cluster label y∈Yuniquely identiﬁes one cluster.
Since we do not have direct access to p(x)to determine a suitable clustering, we need to rely
123

==== Page 7 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 379
on some concept of similarity between data points in X, according to which we can assign
clusters to similar data points.
The concept of similarity we choose, often implicitly, dictates what constitutes a cluster.
Although the efﬁcacy of any particular clustering method for ﬁnding these clusters dependson many other factors, the concept of similarity uniquely deﬁnes the interaction between p(x)
andp(y|x). Therefore, whether two points belong to the same cluster can be derived from
their similarity to each other and to other points. From our perspective, the smoothness, low-density, and manifold assumptions boil down to different deﬁnitions of the similarity betweenpoints: the smoothness assumption states that points that are close to each other in input spaceare similar; the low-density assumption states that points in the same high-density area aresimilar; and the manifold assumption states that points that lie on the same low-dimensionalmanifold are similar. Consequently, the semi-supervised learning assumptions can be seenas more speciﬁc instances of the cluster assumption: that similar points tend to belong to thesame group.
One could even argue that the cluster assumption corresponds to the necessary condition
for semi-supervised learning: that p(x)carries information on p(y|x). In fact, assuming the
output space
Ycontains the labels of all possible clusters, the necessary condition for semi-
supervised learning to succeed can be seen to be the necessary condition for clustering tosucceed. In other words: if the data points (both unlabelled and labelled) cannot be mean-ingfully clustered, it is impossible for a semi-supervised learning method to improve on asupervised learning method.
2.3 When does semi-supervised learning work?
The primary goal of semi-supervised learning is to harness unlabelled data for the constructionof better learning procedures. As it turns out, this is not always easy or even possible. Asmentioned earlier, unlabelled data is only useful if it carries information useful for labelprediction that is not contained in the labelled data alone or cannot be easily extracted fromit. To apply any semi-supervised learning method in practice, the algorithm then needs to beable to extract this information. For practitioners and researchers alike, this begs the question:when is this the case?
Unfortunately, it has proven difﬁcult to ﬁnd a practical answer to this question. Not only
is it difﬁcult to precisely deﬁne the conditions under which any particular semi-supervisedlearning algorithm may work, it is also rarely straightforward to evaluate to what extent theseconditions are satisﬁed. However, one can reason about the applicability of different learningmethods on various types of problems. Graph-based methods, for example, typically rely ona local similarity measure to construct a graph over all data points. To apply such methodssuccessfully, it is important that a meaningful local similarity measure can be devised. Inhigh-dimensional data, such as images, where Euclidean feature distance is rarely a goodindicator of the similarity between data points, this is often difﬁcult. As can be seen in theliterature, most semi-supervised learning approaches for images rely on a weak variant ofthe smoothness assumption that requires predictions to be invariant to minor perturbationsin the input (Rasmus et al. 2015 ; Laine and Aila 2017 ; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017 ). Semi-
supervised extensions of supervised learning algorithms, on the other hand, generally relyon the same assumption as their supervised counterparts. For instance, both supervised andsemi-supervised support vector machines rely on the low-density assumption, which statesthat the decision boundary should lie in a low-density region of the decision space. If a
123

==== Page 8 ====
380 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
supervised classiﬁer performs well in such cases, it is only natural to use the semi-supervised
extension to the algorithm.
As is the case for supervised learning algorithms, no method has yet been discovered to
determine a priori what learning method is best-suited for any particular problem. What ismore, it is impossible to guarantee that the introduction of unlabelled data will not degradeperformance. Such performance degradation has been observed in practice, and its preva-lence is likely under-reported due to publication bias (Zhu 2008 ). The problem of potential
performance degradation has been identiﬁed in multiple studies (Zhu 2008 ; Chapelle et al.
2006b ; Singh et al. 2009 ; Li and Zhou 2015 ; Oliver et al. 2018 ), but remains difﬁcult to
address. It is particularly relevant in scenarios where good performance can be achieved withpurely supervised classiﬁers. In those cases, the potential performance degradation is muchlarger than the potential performance gain.
The main takeaway from these observations is that semi-supervised learning should not be
seen as a guaranteed way of achieving improved prediction performance by the mere intro-duction of unlabelled data. Rather, it should be treated as another direction in the process ofﬁnding and conﬁguring a learning algorithm for the task at hand. Semi-supervised learningprocedures should be part of the suite of algorithms considered for use in a particular appli-cation scenario, and a combination of theoretical analysis (where possible) and empiricalevaluation should be used to choose an approach that is well suited to the given situation.
2.4 Empirical evaluation of semi-supervised learning methods
When evaluating and comparing machine learning algorithms, a multitude of decisions inﬂu-ence the relative performance of different algorithms. In supervised learning, these includethe selection of data sets, the partitioning of those data sets into training, validation and testsets, and the extent to which hyperparameters are tuned. In semi-supervised learning, addi-tional factors come into play. First, in many benchmarking scenarios, a decision has to bemade which data points should be labelled and which should remain unlabelled. Second, onecan choose to evaluate the performance of the learner on the unlabelled data used for training(which is by deﬁnition the case in transductive learning), or on a completely disjoint testset. Additionally, it is important to establish high-quality supervised baselines to allow forproper assessment of the added value of the unlabelled data. In practice, excessively limitingthe scope of the evaluation can lead to unrealistic perspectives on the performance of thelearning algorithms. Recently, Oliver et al. ( 2018 ) established a set of guidelines for the real-
istic evaluation of semi-supervised learning algorithms; several of their recommendationsare included here.
In practical use cases, the partitioning of labelled and unlabelled data is typically ﬁxed.
In research, data sets used for evaluating semi-supervised learning algorithms are usuallyobtained by simply removing the labels of a large amount of data points from an existingsupervised learning data set. In earlier research, the data sets from the UCI Machine LearningRepository were often used (Dua and Graff 2019 ). In more recent research on semi-supervised
image classiﬁcation, the CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky 2009 ) and SVHN (Netzer et al. 2011 )
data sets have been popular choices. Additionally, two-dimensional toy datasets are some-times used to demonstrate the viability of a new approach. Typically, these toy data setsconsist of an input distribution where data points from each class are concentrated alonga one-dimensional manifold. For instance, the popular half-moon data set consists of data
points drawn from two interleaved half circles, each associated with a different class.
123

==== Page 9 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 381
As has been observed in practice, the choice of data sets and their partitioning can have
signiﬁcant impact on the relative performance of different learning algorithms (see, e.g.Chapelle et al. 2006b ; Triguero et al. 2015 ). Some algorithms may work well when the
amount of labelled data is limited and perform poorly when more labelled data is available;others may excel on particular types of data sets but not on others. To provide a realisticevaluation of semi-supervised learning algorithms, researchers should thus evaluate theiralgorithms on a diverse suite of data sets with different quantities of labelled and unlabelleddata.
In addition to the choice of data sets and their partitioning, it is important that a strong
baseline is chosen when evaluating the performance of a semi-supervised learning method.After all, it is not particularly relevant to practitioners whether the introduction of unlabelleddata improves the performance of any particular learning algorithm. Rather, the central ques-tion is: does the introduction of unlabelled data yield a learner that is better than any otherlearner—be it supervised or semi-supervised. As pointed out by Oliver et al. ( 2018 ), this calls
for the inclusion of state-of-the-art, properly tuned supervised baselines when evaluating theperformance of semi-supervised learning algorithms.
Several studies have independently evaluated the performance of different semi-supervised
learning methods on various data sets. Chapelle et al. ( 2006b ) empirically compared eleven
diverse semi-supervised learning algorithms, using supervised support vector machines and k-
nearest neighbours as their baseline. They included semi-supervised support vector machines,label propagation and manifold regularization techniques, applying hyperparameter opti-mization for each algorithm. Comparing the performance of the algorithms on eight differentdata sets, the authors found that no algorithm uniformly outperformed the others. Substan-tial performance improvements over the baselines were observed on some data sets, whileperformance was found to be degraded on others. Relative performance also varied with theamount of unlabelled data.
Oliver et al. ( 2018 ) compared several semi-supervised neural networks, including the mean
teacher model, virtual adversarial training and a wrapper method called pseudo-label ,o n
two image classiﬁcation problems. They reported substantial performance improvementsfor most of the algorithms, and observed that the error rates typically declined as moreunlabelled data points were added (without removing any labelled data points). Performancedegradations were observed only when there was a mismatch between the classes present inthe labelled data and the classes present in the unlabelled data. These results are promisingindeed: they indicate that, in image classiﬁcation tasks, unlabelled data can be employedby neural networks to consistently improve performance. It is an interesting avenue forfuture research to investigate whether these consistent performance improvements can also beobtained for other types of data. Furthermore, it is an open question whether the assumptionsunderlying these semi-supervised neural networks could be exploited to consistently improvethe performance of other learning methods.
3 Taxonomy of semi-supervised learning methods
Over the past two decades, a broad variety of semi-supervised classiﬁcation algorithms hasbeen proposed. These methods differ in the semi-supervised learning assumptions they arebased on, in how they make use of unlabelled data, and in the way they relate to supervisedalgorithms. Existing categorizations of semi-supervised learning methods generally use asubset of these properties and are typically relatively ﬂat, thereby failing to capture similarities
123

==== Page 10 ====
382 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Fig. 3 Visualization of the semi-supervised classiﬁcation taxonomy. Each leaf in the taxonomy corresponds
to a speciﬁc type of approach to incorporating unlabelled data into classiﬁcation methods. In the leaf corre-sponding to transductive, graph-based methods, the dashed boxes represent distinct phases of the graph-basedclassiﬁcation process, each of which has a multitude of variations
between different groups of methods. Furthermore, the categorizations are often ﬁne-tuned
towards existing work, making them less suited for the inclusion of new approaches.
In this survey, we propose a new way to represent the spectrum of semi-supervised classiﬁ-
cation algorithms. We attempt to group them in a clear, future-proof way, allowing researchersand practitioners alike to gain insight into the way semi-supervised learning methods relateto each other, to existing supervised learning methods, and to the semi-supervised learningassumptions. The taxonomy is visualized in Fig. 3. At the highest level, it distinguishes
between inductive andtransductive methods, which give rise to distinct optimization proce-
dures: the former attempt to ﬁnd a classiﬁcation model, whereas the latter are solely concernedwith obtaining label predictions for the given unlabelled data points. At the second level, itconsiders the way the semi-supervised learning methods incorporate unlabelled data. Thisdistinction gives rise to three distinct classes of inductive methods, each of which is relatedto supervised classiﬁers in a different way.
The ﬁrst distinction we make in our taxonomy, between inductive and transductive meth-
ods, is common in the literature on semi-supervised learning (see, e.g. Chapelle et al. 2006b ;
Zhu 2008 ; Zhu and Goldberg 2009 ). The former, like supervised learning methods, yield a
classiﬁcation model that can be used to predict the label of previously unseen data points.The latter do not yield such a model, but instead directly provide predictions. In other words,given a data set consisting of labelled and unlabelled data, X
L,XU⊆X, with labels yL∈Yl
for the llabelled data points, inductive methods yield a model f:X/mapsto→ Y, whereas transduc-
123

==== Page 11 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 383
tive methods produce predicted labels ˆyUfor the unlabelled data points in XU. Accordingly,
inductive methods involve optimization over prediction models, whereas transductive meth-ods optimize directly over the predictions ˆy
U.
Inductive methods, which generally extend supervised algorithms to include unlabelled
data, are further differentiated in our taxonomy based on the way they incorporate unlabelleddata: either in a preprocessing step, directly inside the objective function, or via a pseudo-labelling step. The transductive methods are in all cases graph-based; we group these based onthe choices made in different stages of the learning process. In the remainder of this section,we will elaborate on the grouping of semi-supervised learning methods represented in thetaxonomy, which forms the basis for our discussion of semi-supervised learning methods inthe remainder of this survey.
3.1 Inductive methods
Inductive methods aim to construct a classiﬁer that can generate predictions for any object inthe input space. Unlabelled data may be used when training this classiﬁer, but the predictionsfor multiple new, previously unseen examples are independent of each other once training hasbeen completed. This corresponds to the objective in supervised learning methods: a modelis built in the training phase and can then be used for predicting the labels of new data points.
3.1.1 Wrapper methods
A simple approach to extending existing, supervised algorithms to the semi-supervised settingis to ﬁrst train classiﬁers on labelled data, and to then use the predictions of the resultingclassiﬁers to generate additional labelled data. The classiﬁers can then be re-trained on thispseudo-labelled data in addition to the existing labelled data. Such methods are known as
wrapper methods : the unlabelled data is pseudo-labelled by a wrapper procedure, and a
purely supervised learning algorithm, unaware of the distinction between originally labelledand pseudo-labelled data, constructs the ﬁnal inductive classiﬁer. This reveals a key propertyof wrapper methods: most of them can be applied to any given supervised base learner,allowing unlabelled data to be introduced in a straightforward manner. Wrapper methodsform the ﬁrst part of the inductive side of the taxonomy, and are covered in Sect. 4.
3.1.2 Unsupervised preprocessing
Secondly, we consider unsupervised preprocessing methods, which either extract useful fea-
tures from the unlabelled data, pre-cluster the data, or determine the initial parameters of asupervised learning procedure in an unsupervised manner. Like wrapper methods, they canbe used with any supervised classiﬁer. However, unlike wrapper methods, the supervisedclassiﬁer is only provided with originally labelled data points. These methods are covered inSect. 5.
3.1.3 Intrinsically semi-supervised methods
The last class of inductive methods we consider directly incorporate unlabelled data into the
objective function or optimization procedure of the learning method. Many of these methodsare direct extensions of supervised learning methods to the semi-supervised setting: they
123

==== Page 12 ====
384 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
extend the objective function of the supervised classiﬁer to include unlabelled data. Semi-
supervised support vector machines (S3VMs), for example, extend supervised SVMs bymaximizing the margin not only on labelled, but also on unlabelled data. There are intrinsicallysemi-supervised extensions of many prominent supervised learning approaches, includingSVMs, Gaussian processes and neural networks, and we describe these in Sect. 6.W ef u r t h e r
group the methods inside this category based on the semi-supervised learning assumptionson which they rely.
3.2 Transductive methods
Unlike inductive methods, transductive methods do not construct a classiﬁer for the entireinput space. Instead, their predictive power is limited to exactly those objects that it encoun-ters during the training phase. Therefore, transductive methods have no distinct training andtesting phases. Since supervised learning methods are by deﬁnition not supplied with unla-belled data until the testing phase, no clear analogies of transductive algorithms exist insupervised learning.
Since no model of the input space exists in transductive learners, information has to
be propagated via direct connections between data points. This observation naturally givesrise to a graph-based approach to transductive methods: if a graph can be deﬁned in whichsimilar data points are connected, information can then be propagated along the edges ofthis graph. In practice, all transductive methods we discuss are either explicitly graph-basedor can implicitly be understood as such. We note that inductive graph-based methods alsoexist; we cover them in Sect. 6.3. Inductive as well as transductive graph-based methods are
typically premised on the manifold assumption: the graphs, constructed based on the localsimilarity between data points, provide a lower-dimensional representation of the potentiallyhigh-dimensional input data.
Transductive graph-based methods generally consist of three steps: graph construction,
graph weighting and inference. In the ﬁrst step, the set of objects, X, is used to construct a
graph where each node represents a data point and pairwise similar data points are connectedby an edge. In the second step, these edges are weighted to represent the extent of the pairwisesimilarity between the respective data points. In the third step, the graph is used to assignlabels to the unlabelled data points. Different methods for carrying out these three steps arediscussed in detail in Sect. 7.
4 Wrapper methods
Wrapper methods are among the oldest and most widely known algorithms for semi-
supervised learning (Zhu 2008 ). They utilize one or more supervised base learners and
iteratively train these with the original labelled data as well as previously unlabelled data
that is augmented with predictions from earlier iterations of the learners. The latter is com-monly referred to as pseudo-labelled data . The procedure usually consists of two alternating
steps of training andpseudo-labelling . In the training step, one or more supervised classiﬁers
are trained on the labelled data and, possibly, pseudo-labelled data from previous iterations.In the pseudo-labelling step, the resulting classiﬁers are used to infer labels for the previ-ously unlabelled objects; the data points for which the learners were most conﬁdent of theirpredictions are pseudo-labelled for use in the next iteration.
123

==== Page 13 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 385
A signiﬁcant advantage of wrapper methods is that they can be used with virtually any
supervised base learner. The supervised base learner can be entirely unaware of the wrappermethod, which simply passes pseudo-labelled samples to the base learner as if they wereregular labelled samples. Although some wrapper methods require the base learner to provideprobabilistic predictions, many wrapper methods relying on multiple base learners do not.For any particular wrapper method, the semi-supervised learning assumptions underlying itare dependent on the base learners that are used. In that sense, a wrapper method cannot beconsidered a learning method on its own: it only becomes a complete learning method whenit is combined with a particular set of base learners.
A comprehensive survey of wrapper methods was published recently by Triguero et al.
(2015 ). In addition to providing an overview of such methods, they also proposed a catego-
rization and taxonomy of wrapper methods, which is based on (1) how many classiﬁers areused, (2) whether different types of classiﬁers are used, and (3) whether they use single-viewor multi-view data (i.e. whether the data is split into multiple feature subsets). This taxonomyprovides valuable insight into the space of wrapper methods.
We present a less complex taxonomy, focused on the three relatively independent types of
wrapper methods that have been studied in the literature. Firstly, we consider self-training ,
which uses one supervised classiﬁer that is iteratively re-trained on its own most conﬁdentpredictions. Secondly, we consider co-training , an extension of self-training to multiple
classiﬁers that are iteratively re-trained on each other’s most conﬁdent predictions. Theclassiﬁers are supposed to be sufﬁciently diverse, which is usually achieved by operatingon different subsets of the given objects or features. Lastly, we consider pseudo-labelled
boosting methods . Like traditional boosting methods, they build a classiﬁer ensemble by
constructing individual classiﬁers sequentially, where each individual classiﬁer is trained onboth labelled data and the most conﬁdent predictions of the previous classiﬁers on unlabelleddata.
4.1 Self-training
Self-training methods (sometimes also called “self-learning” methods) are the most basicof pseudo-labelling approaches (Triguero et al. 2015 ). They consist of a single supervised
classiﬁer that is iteratively trained on both labelled data and data that has been pseudo-labelledin previous iterations of the algorithm.
At the beginning of the self-training procedure, a supervised classiﬁer is trained on only
the labelled data. The resulting classiﬁer is used to obtain predictions for the unlabelleddata points. Then, the most conﬁdent of these predictions are added to the labelled data set,and the supervised classiﬁer is re-trained on both the original labelled data and the newlyobtained pseudo-labelled data. This procedure is typically iterated until no more unlabelleddata remain.
Self-training was ﬁrst proposed by Yarowsky ( 1995 ) as an approach to word sense dis-
ambiguation in text documents, predicting the meaning of words based on their context.Since then, several applications and variations of self-training have been put forward. Forinstance, Rosenberg et al. ( 2005 ) applied self-training to object detection problems, and
showed improved performance over a state-of-the-art (at that time) object detection model.Dópido et al. ( 2013 ) developed a self-training approach for hyperspectral image classiﬁ-
cation. They used domain knowledge to select a set of candidate unlabelled samples, andpseudo-labelled the most informative of these samples with the predictions made by thetrained classiﬁer.
123

==== Page 14 ====
386 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
The self-training paradigm admits a multitude of design decisions, including the selection
of data to pseudo-label, the re-use of pseudo-labelled data in later iterations of the algorithm,and stopping criteria (see, e.g. Rosenberg et al. 2005 ; Triguero et al. 2015 ). The selection
procedure for data to be pseudo-labelled is of particular importance, since it determineswhich data end up in the training set for the classiﬁer. In typical self-training settings, wherethis selection is made based on prediction conﬁdence, the quality of the conﬁdence esti-mates signiﬁcantly inﬂuences algorithm performance. In particular, the ranking of predictionprobabilities for the unlabelled samples should reﬂect the true conﬁdence ranking.
If well-calibrated probabilistic predictions are available, the respective probabilities can
be used directly. In this case, the self-training approach is iterative and not incremental, aslabel probabilities for unlabelled data points are re-estimated in each step. In that case, theapproach becomes similar to expectation-maximization (EM; Dempster et al. 1977 ). It has
been particularly well studied in the context of naïve Bayes classiﬁers, which are inherently
probabilistic (Nigam and Ghani 2000 ; Nigam et al. 2000 ,2006 ). Wu et al. ( 2012b ) recently
applied semi-supervised EM with a naïve Bayes classiﬁer to the problem of detecting fakeproduct reviews on e-commerce websites.
Algorithms that do not natively support robust probabilistic predictions may require adap-
tations to beneﬁt from self-training. Decision trees are a prime example of this: without anymodiﬁcations or pruning, prediction probability estimates, which are generally calculatedfrom the fraction of samples in a leaf with a certain label, are generally of low quality. Thiscan be mainly attributed to the fact that most decision tree learning algorithms explicitlyattempt to minimize the impurity in tree nodes, thereby encouraging small leaves and highlybiased probability estimates (Provost and Domingos 2003 ). Tanha et al. ( 2017 ) attempted to
overcome this problem in two distinct ways. Firstly, they applied several existing methods,such as grafting and Laplace correction, to directly improve prediction probability estimates.Secondly, they used a local distance-based measure to determine the conﬁdence rankingbetween instances: the prediction conﬁdence of an unlabelled data point is based on theabsolute difference in the Mahalanobis distances between that point and the labelled datafrom each class. They showed improvements in performance of both decision trees andrandom forests (ensembles of decision trees) using this method (Tanha et al. 2017 ).
Leistner et al. ( 2009 ) also utilized self-training to improve random forests. Instead of
labelling the unlabelled data x∈X
Uwith the label predicted to be most likely, they pseudo-
label each unlabelled data point independently for each tree according to the estimatedposterior distribution p(y|x). Furthermore, they proposed a stopping criterion based on the
out-of-bag-error: when the out-of-bag-error (which is an unbiased estimate of the general-ization error) increases, training is stopped.
The base learners in self-training are by deﬁnition agnostic to the presence of the wrapper
method. Consequently, they have to be completely re-trained in each self-training iteration.However, when a classiﬁer can be trained incrementally (i.e. optimizing the objective functionover individual data points or subsets of the given data), an iterative pseudo-labelling approachsimilar to self-training can be applied. Instead of re-training the entire algorithm in eachiteration, data points can be pseudo-labelled throughout the training process. This approachw a sa p p l i e dt on e u r a ln e t w o r k sb yL e e( 2013 ), who proposed the pseudo-label approach.
Since the pseudo-labels predicted in the earlier training stages are generally less reliable,the weight of the pseudo-labelled data is increased over time. The pseudo-label approach
exhibits clear similarities to self-training, but differs in the sense that the classiﬁer is notre-trained after each pseudo-labelling step: instead, it is ﬁne-tuned with new pseudo-labelleddata, and therefore technically deviates from the wrapper method paradigm.
123

==== Page 15 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 387
Limited studies regarding the theoretical properties of self-training algorithms exist. Haf-
fari and Sarkar ( 2007 ) performed a theoretical analysis of several variants of self-training and
showed a connection with graph-based methods. Culp and Michailidis ( 2008 ) analyzed the
convergence properties of a variant of self-training with several base learners, and consideredthe connection to graph-based methods as well.
4.2 Co-training
Co-training is an extension of self-training to multiple supervised classiﬁers. In co-training,two or more supervised classiﬁers are iteratively trained on the labelled data, adding theirmost conﬁdent predictions to the labelled data set of the other supervised classiﬁers in eachiteration. For co-training to succeed, it is important that the base learners are not too stronglycorrelated in their predictions. If they are, their potential to provide each other with usefulinformation is limited. In the literature, this condition is usually referred to as the diversity
criterion (Wang and Zhou 2010 ). Zhou and Li ( 2010 ) provided a survey of semi-supervised
learning methods relying on multiple base learners. They jointly refer to these methods asdisagreement-based methods , referring to the observation that co-training approaches exploit
disagreements between multiple learners: they exchange information through unlabelled data,for which different learners predict different labels.
To promote classiﬁer diversity, earlier co-training approaches mainly relied on the exis-
tence of multiple different views of the data, which generally correspond to distinct subsets of
the feature set. For instance, when handling video data, the data can be naturally decomposedinto visual and audio data. Such co-training methods belong to the broader class of multi-view learning approaches, which includes a broad range of supervised learning algorithms aswell. A comprehensive survey of multi-view learning was produced by Xu et al. ( 2013 ). We
cover multi-view co-training methods in Sect. 4.2.1 . In many real-world problem scenarios,
no distinct views of the data are known a priori. Single-view co-training methods addressthis problem either by automatically splitting the data into different views, or by promotingdiversity in the learning algorithms themselves; we cover these methods in Sect. 4.2.2 .W e
also brieﬂy discuss co-regularization methods, in which multiple classiﬁers are combined
into a single objective function, in Sect. 4.2.3 .
4.2.1 Multi-view co-training
The basic form of co-training was proposed by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ). In their seminal
paper, they proposed to construct two classiﬁers that are trained on two distinct views, i.e.subsets of features, of the given data. After each training step, the most conﬁdent predictionsfor each view are added to the set of labelled data for the other view. Blum and Mitchellapplied the co-training algorithm to the classiﬁcation for university web pages, using theweb page text and the anchor text in links to the web page from external sources as twodistinct views. This algorithm and variants thereof have been successfully applied in severalﬁelds, most notably natural language processing (Kiritchenko and Matwin 2001 ; Mihalcea
2004 ;W a n 2009 ).
The original co-training algorithm by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ) relies on two main
assumptions to succeed: (1) each individual subset of features should be sufﬁcient to obtaingood predictions on the given data set, and (2) the subsets of features should be conditionallyindependent given the class label. The ﬁrst assumption can be understood trivially: if oneof the two feature subsets is insufﬁcient to form good predictions, a classiﬁer using that set
123

==== Page 16 ====
388 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
can never contribute positively to the overall performance of the combined approach. The
second assumption is related to the diversity criterion: if the feature subsets are conditionallyindependent given the class label, the predictions of the individual classiﬁers are unlikely
to be strongly correlated. Formally, for any data point x
i=x(1)
i×x(2)
i, decomposed into
x(1)
iand x(2)
ifor the ﬁrst and second feature subset, respectively, the conditional indepen-
dence assumption amounts to p(x(1)
i|x(2)
i,yi)=p(x(1)
i|yi). Dasgupta et al. ( 2002 )s h o w e d
that, under the previously mentioned assumptions, generalization error can be decreased bypromoting agreement among the individual learners.
In practice, the second assumption is generally not satisﬁed: even if a natural split of
features exists, such as in the experimental setup used by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ), it is
unlikely that information contained in one view provides no information about the other viewwhen conditioned on the class label (Du et al. 2011 ). Considering the university web page
classiﬁcation example, the anchor text of a link to a web page can indeed be expected tocontain clues towards the content of the web page, even if it is known that the web pageis classiﬁed as a faculty member’s home page. For example, if the link’s anchor text is“Dean of the Engineering Faculty”, one is more likely to ﬁnd information about the dean ofthe engineering faculty than about any other person in the text of that page. Thus, severalalternatives to this assumption have been considered.
Abney ( 2002 ) showed that a weak independence assumption is sufﬁcient for successful
co-training. Balcan et al. ( 2005 ) further relaxed the conditional independence assumption,
showing that a much weaker assumption, which they dub the expansion assumption ,i ss u f -
ﬁcient and to some extent necessary. The expansion assumption states that the two viewsare not highly correlated, and that individual classiﬁers never conﬁdently make incorrectpredictions.
Du et al. ( 2011 ) studied empirical methods to determine to what degree the sufﬁciency and
independence assumptions hold. They proposed several methods for automatically splittingthe feature set into two views, and showed that the resulting empirical independence and suf-ﬁciency is positively correlated with the performance of the co-trained algorithm, indicatingthat feature splits optimizing sufﬁciency and independence lead to good classiﬁers.
4.2.2 Single-view co-training
A ss h o w nb yD ue ta l .( 2011 ), co-training can be successful even when no natural split in a
given feature set is known a priori. This observation is echoed throughout the literature on co-training, and many different approaches to applying co-training in this so-called single-viewsetting exist.
Chen et al. ( 2011 ) attempted to alleviate the need for pre-deﬁned disjoint feature sets by
automatically splitting the feature set in each co-training iteration. They formulated a singleoptimization problem closely related to co-training, incorporating both the requirement thatthe feature sets should be disjoint and the expansion property of Balcan et al. ( 2005 ). They
showed promising results for this approach on a partially synthetic data set, where multipleviews of each data point are automatically generated. Wang and Zhou ( 2010 ) reasoned about
sufﬁcient and necessary conditions for co-training to succeed, approaching co-training froma graph-based perspective, where label propagation is alternately applied to each learner. Adownside of this approach is that, although inspired by co-training, it cannot be applied toan arbitrary supervised learning algorithm without modiﬁcation: the operations resemblingco-training are embedded in the objective function, which is optimized directly.
123

==== Page 17 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 389
Several techniques have been proposed for splitting single-view data sets into multiple
views. For instance, Wang et al. ( 2008b ) suggested to generate krandom projections of
the data, and use these as the views for kdifferent classiﬁers. Zhang and Zheng ( 2009 )
proposed to project the data onto a lower-dimensional subspace using principal componentanalysis and to construct the pseudo-views by greedily selecting the transformed featureswith maximal variance. Yaslan and Cataltepe ( 2010 ) do not transform the data to a different
basis, but select the features for each view iteratively, with preference given to features withhigh mutual information with respect to the given labels.
Further approaches to apply algorithms resembling co-training to data sets where no
explicit views are available focus on other ways of introducing diversity among the clas-siﬁers. For example, one can use different hyperparameters for the supervised algorithms(Wang and Zhou 2007 ; Zhou and Li 2005a ), or use different algorithms altogether (Goldman
and Zhou 2000 ;X ue ta l . 2012 ; Zhou and Goldman 2004 ). Wang and Zhou ( 2007 ) provided
both theoretical and empirical analyses on why co-training can work in single-view settings.They showed that the diversity between the learners is positively correlated with their jointperformance. Zhou and Li ( 2005b ) proposed tri-training , where three classiﬁers are alter-
nately trained. When two of the three classiﬁers agree on their prediction for a given datapoint, that data point is passed to the other classiﬁer along with the respective label. Crucially,tri-training does not rely on probabilistic predictions of individual classiﬁers, and can thusbe applied to a much broader range of supervised learning algorithms.
The authors of the tri-training approach proposed to extend it to more than three learners—
notably, to random forests (Li and Zhou 2007 ). The approach, known as co-forest ,s t a r t sb y
training the decision trees independently on all labelled data. Then, in each iteration, eachclassiﬁer receives pseudo-labelled data based on the joint prediction of all other classiﬁerson the unlabelled data: if the fraction of classiﬁers predicting a class ˆy
ifor an unlabelled
data point xiexceeds a certain threshold, the pseudo-labelled data point (xi,yi)is passed to
the classiﬁer. The decision trees are then all re-trained on their labelled and pseudo-labelleddata. In the next iteration, all previously pseudo-labelled data is treated as unlabelled again.We note that, as the number of trees approaches inﬁnity, this approach becomes a form ofself-training.
Co-forest includes a mechanism for reducing the inﬂuence of possibly mislabelled data
points in the pseudo-labelling step by weighting the newly labelled data based on predic-tion conﬁdence. Deng and Zu Guo ( 2011 ) attempted to further prevent the inﬂuence of
possibly mislabelled data points by removing “suspicious” pseudo-labellings. After eachpseudo-labelling step, the prediction for each pseudo-labelled data point x
iis compared to
the (pseudo-)labels of its knearest neighbours (both labelled and pseudo-labelled); in case
of a mismatch, the pseudo-label is removed from xi.
We note that in existing literature concerning co-forest, the size of the forest has always
been limited to six trees. It has been empirically shown that, in supervised random forests,performance can substantially improve as the number of trees is increased (Oshiro et al. 2012 ).
Therefore, it is likely that increasing the number of trees in co-forest will substantially affectrelative performance compared to random forests.
4.2.3 Co-regularization
Co-training methods reduce disagreement between classiﬁers by passing informationbetween them, in the form of pseudo-labelled data. Furthermore, the implicit objective of co-training is to minimize the error rate of the ensemble of classiﬁers. Sindhwani et al. proposed
123

==== Page 18 ====
390 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
to make these properties explicit in a single objective function (Sindhwani et al. 2005 ; Sind-
hwani and Rosenberg 2008 ). They propose co-regularization , a regularization framework in
which both the ensemble quality and the disagreement between base learners are simultane-ously optimized. The key idea is to use an objective function comprised of two terms: onethat penalizes incorrect predictions made by the ensemble, and another that directly penalizesdifferent predictions of the base classiﬁers. To handle per-view noise within this framework,Yu et al. ( 2011 ) introduced Bayesian co-training , which uses a graphical model for combin-
ing data from multiple views and a kernel-based method for co-regularization. This modelwas extended to handle different noise levels per data point by Christoudias et al. ( 2009 ).
Co-training can be seen as a greedy optimization strategy for the co-regularization objec-
tive. The two components of the objective function are minimized in an alternating fashion:the prediction error of the ensemble is minimized by training the base learners independently,and the disagreement between classiﬁers is minimized by propagating predictions from oneclassiﬁer to the others as if they were ground truth. We note, however, that the general co-regularization objective does not have to be optimized using a wrapper method, and manyco-regularization algorithms use different approaches (see, e.g. Sindhwani and Rosenberg2008 ;Y ue ta l . 2011 ).
4.3 Boosting
Ensemble classiﬁers consist of multiple base classiﬁers, which are trained and then used to
form combined predictions (Zhou 2012 ). The simplest form of ensemble learning trains kbase
classiﬁers independently and aggregates their predictions. Beyond this simplistic approach,two main branches of supervised ensemble learning exist: bagging andboosting (Zhou 2012 ).
In bagging methods, each base learner is provided with a set of ldata points, which are
sampled, uniformly at random with replacement, from the original data set (bootstrapping).The base classiﬁers are trained independently. When training is completed, their outputs areaggregated to form the prediction of the ensemble. In boosting methods, on the other hand,each base learner is dependent on the previous base learners: it is provided with the full dataset, but with weights applied to the data points. The weight of a data point x
iis based on
the performance of the previous base learners on xi, such that larger weights get assigned
to data points that were incorrectly classiﬁed. The ﬁnal prediction is obtained as a linearcombination of the predictions of the base classiﬁers.
Technically, boosting methods construct a weighted ensemble of classiﬁers h
tin a greedy
fashion. Let FT−1(x)=/summationtextT−1
t=1αt·ht(x)denote the ensemble of classiﬁers htwith weight
αtat time T−1. Furthermore, let /lscript(ˆy,y)denote the loss function for predicting label ˆyfor
a data point with true label y. In each iteration of the algorithm, an additional classiﬁer hT
is added to the ensemble with a certain weight αT, such that the cost function
L(FT)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(FT(xi),yi)
=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(FT−1(xi)+αT·hT(xi),yi)
is minimized. Note that, at time T,t h ee n s e m b l e FT−1is ﬁxed. With particular choices of
loss functions, such as /lscript(ˆy,y)=exp(−ˆy·y), the optimization problem yields a weighted
classiﬁcation problem for determining hT, and allows us to express the optimal αTin terms
of the loss of hTon the training data.
123

==== Page 19 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 391
By deﬁnition, base learners in bagging methods are trained independently. Therefore,
the only truly semi-supervised bagging method would apply self-training to individual baselearners. Co-training, however, can be seen to be closely related to bagging methods: the onlyway classiﬁers interact is by the exchange of pseudo-labelled data; other than that, the classi-ﬁers can be trained independently and simultaneously. However, most co-training methods donot use bootstrapping, a deﬁning characteristic of bagging methods. In boosting, on the otherhand, there is an inherent dependency between base learners. Consequently, boosting meth-ods can be readily extended to the semi-supervised setting, by introducing pseudo-labelleddata after each learning step; this idea gives rise to the class of semi-supervised boostingmethods.
Semi-supervised boosting methods have been studied extensively over the past two
decades. The success achieved by supervised boosting methods, such as AdaBoost (Freund
and Schapire 1997 ), gradient boosting, and XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016 ), provides
ample motivation for bringing boosting to the semi-supervised setting. Furthermore, thepseudo-labelling approach of self-training and co-training can be easily extended to boostingmethods.
4.3.1 SSMBoost
The ﬁrst effort towards semi-supervised boosting methods was made by Grandvalet et al.,who extended AdaBoost to the semi-supervised setting. They proposed a semi-supervisedboosting algorithm (Grandvalet et al. 2001 ), which they later extended and motivated from
the perspective of gradient boosting (d’Alché Buc et al. 2002 ). A loss function is deﬁned for
unlabelled data, based on the predictions of the current ensemble and on the predictions of thebase learner under construction. Experiments were conducted with multiple loss functions;the authors reported the strongest results using the expected loss of the new, combinedclassiﬁer. The weighted error /epsilon1
tfor base classiﬁer htis thus adapted to include the unlabelled
data points, causing the weight term αtto depend on the unlabelled data as well.
Crucially, SSMBoost does not assign pseudo-labels to the unlabelled data points. As a
result, it requires semi-supervised base learners to make use of the unlabelled data and istherefore intrinsically semi-supervised, in contrast to most other semi-supervised boostingalgorithms, which are wrapper methods. Nevertheless, SSMBoost is included here, becauseit forms the foundation for all other forms of semi-supervised boosting algorithms, which donot require semi-supervised base learners.
4.3.2 ASSEMBLE
TheASSEMBLE algorithm, short for Adaptive Supervised Ensemble , pseudo-labels the unla-
belled data points after each iteration, and uses these pseudo-labelled data points in theconstruction of the next classiﬁer, thus alleviating the need for semi-supervised base learn-ers (Bennett et al. 2002 ). As shown by its authors, ASSEMBLE effectively maximizes the
classiﬁcation margin in function space.
Since pseudo-labels are used in ASSEMBLE, it is not trivial to decide which unla-
belled data points to pass to the next base learner. Bennett et al. ( 2002 ) proposed to use
bootstrapping—i.e. sampling, uniformly at random, with replacement, ldata points from the
l+ulabelled and unlabelled data points.
123

==== Page 20 ====
392 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
4.3.3 SemiBoost
The semi-supervised boosting algorithm SemiBoost addresses the problem of selecting data
points to be used by the base learners by relying on the manifold assumption, utilizingprinciples from graph-based methods (Mallapragada et al. 2009 ). Each unlabelled data point
is assigned a pseudo-label, and the corresponding prediction conﬁdence is calculated basedon a predeﬁned neighbourhood graph that encodes similarity between data points. Then, asubset of these pseudo-labelled data points is added to the set of labelled data points fortraining the next base learner. The probability of a sample being selected for this subsetis proportional to its prediction conﬁdence. SemiBoost was successfully applied to objecttracking in videos by Grabner et al. ( 2008 ).
SemiBoost uses the standard boosting classiﬁcation model, expressing the ﬁnal label
prediction as a linear combination of the predictions of the individual learners. Its cost func-tion, however, is highly dissimilar from the previously described semi-supervised boostingmethods. Mallapragada et al. ( 2009 ) argue that a successful labelling of the test data should
conform to the following three requirements. Firstly, the predicted labels of the unlabelleddata should be consistent for unlabelled data points that are close to each other. Secondly, thepredicted labels of the unlabelled data should be consistent with the labels of nearby labelleddata points. And, thirdly, the predicted labels for the labelled data points should correspond totheir true labels. These requirements are expressed in the form of a constrained optimizationproblem, where the ﬁrst two are captured by the objective function, and the last is imposed asa constraint. In other words, the SemiBoost algorithm uses boosting to solve the optimizationproblem
minimize
FTLL(ˆy,A,FT)+λ·LU(ˆy,A,FT)
subject to ˆyi=yi, i=1,..., l,(1)
where LUand LLare the cost functions expressing the inconsistency across the unlabelled
and the combined labelled and unlabelled data, respectively, and λ∈Ris a constant governing
the relative weight of the cost terms; Ais an n×nsymmetric matrix denoting the pairwise
similarities between data points. Lastly, FTdenotes the joint prediction function of the
ensemble of classiﬁers at time T. We note that the optimization objective in Eq. 1is very
similar to the cost functions encountered in graph-based methods (see Sects. 6.3and 7)i n
that it favours classiﬁers that consistently label data points on the same manifold. In graph-based methods, however, no distinction is generally made between labelled-unlabelled andunlabelled-unlabelled pairs.
4.3.4 Other semi-supervised boosting methods
The three previously discussed methods form the core of semi-supervised boosting research.Further work in the area includes RegBoost , which, like SemiBoost, includes local label
consistency in its objective function (Chen and Wang 2011 ). In RegBoost, this term is also
dependent on the estimated local density of the marginal distribution p(x). Several attempts
have been made to extend the label consistency regularization to the multiclass setting (Tanhaet al. 2012 ; Valizadegan et al. 2008 ).
123

==== Page 21 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 393
5 Unsupervised preprocessing
We now turn to a second category of inductive methods, known as as unsupervised prepro-
cessing , which, unlike wrapper methods and intrinsically semi-supervised methods, use the
unlabelled data and labelled data in two separate stages. Typically, the unsupervised stagecomprises either the automated extraction or transformation of sample features from the unla-belled data ( feature extraction ), the unsupervised clustering of the data ( cluster-then-label ),
or the initialization of the parameters of the learning procedure ( pre-training ).
5.1 Feature extraction
Since the early days of machine learning, feature extraction has played an important role in
the construction of classiﬁers. Feature extraction methods attempt to ﬁnd a transformation ofthe input data such that the performance of the classiﬁer improves or such that its constructionbecomes computationally more efﬁcient. Feature extraction is an expansive research topic thathas been covered by several books and surveys. We focus on a small number of particularlyprominent techniques and refer the reader to the existing literature on feature extractionmethods for further information (see, e.g. Guyon and Elisseeff 2006 ; Sheikhpour et al. 2017 ).
Many feature extraction methods operate without supervision, i.e. without taking into
account labels. Principal component analysis , for example, transforms the input data to a
different basis, such that they are linearly uncorrelated, and orders the principal componentsbased on their variance (Wold et al. 1987 ). Other traditional feature extraction algorithms
operate on the labelled data and try to extract features with high predictive power (see, e.g.Guyon and Elisseeff 2006 ).
Recent semi-supervised feature extraction methods have mainly been focused on ﬁnding
latent representations of the input data using deep neural networks (in Sect. 6.2.1 ,w ef u r t h e r
discuss neural networks). The most prominent example of this is the autoencoder : a neural
network with one or more hidden layers that has the objective of reconstructing its input. Byincluding a hidden layer with relatively few nodes, usually called the representation layer,
the network is forced to ﬁnd a way to compactly represent its input data. Once the networkis trained, features are provided by the representation layer. A schematic representation of astandard autoencoder is provided in Fig. 4.
The network can be considered to consist of two parts: the encoder h, which maps an
input vector xto its latent representation h(x), and the decoder g, which attempts to map
the latent representation back to the original x. The network is trained by optimizing a loss
function penalizing the reconstruction error : a measure of inconsistency between the input
xand the corresponding reconstruction g(h(x)). Once the network is trained, the latent
representation of any xcan be found by simply propagating it through the encoder part of
the network to obtain h(x). A popular type of autoencoders is the denoising autoencoder ,
which is trained on noisy versions of the input data, penalizing the reconstruction error ofthe reconstructions against the noiseless originals (Vincent et al. 2008 ). Another variant, the
contractive autoencoder, directly penalizes the sensitivity of the autoencoder to perturbationsin the input (Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Autoencoders attempt to ﬁnd a lower-dimensional representation of the input space
without sacriﬁcing substantial amounts of information. Thus, they inherently act on theassumption that the input space contains lower-dimensional substructures on which the datalie. Furthermore, when applied as a preprocessing step to classiﬁcation, they assume thattwo samples on the same lower-dimensional substructure have the same label. These obser-
123

==== Page 22 ====
394 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
... ... ...
Encoder
h(·)Decoder
g(·)x
h(x)g(h(x))
Fig. 4 Simpliﬁed representation of an autoencoder. The rectangles correspond to layers within the network;
the trapeziums represent the encoder and decoder portions of the network, which can consist of multiple layers
vations indicate that the assumptions underlying autoencoders are closely related to the
semi-supervised manifold assumption .
In some domains, data is not inherently represented as a meaningful feature vector. Since
many common classiﬁcation methods require such a representation, feature extraction is anecessity in those cases. The feature extraction step, then, consists of ﬁnding an embedding
of the given object into a vector space by taking into account the relations between differentinput objects. Examples of such approaches can be found in natural language processing(Collobert et al. 2011 ; Mikolov et al. 2013 ) and network science (Grover and Leskovec
2016 ; Perozzi et al. 2014 ;W a n ge ta l . 2016 ).
5.2 Cluster-then-label
Clustering and classiﬁcation have traditionally been regarded as relatively disjoint research
areas. However, many semi-supervised learning algorithms use principles from clustering toguide the classiﬁcation process. Cluster-then-label approaches form a group of methods that
explicitly join the clustering and classiﬁcation processes: they ﬁrst apply an unsupervised orsemi-supervised clustering algorithm to all available data, and use the resulting clusters toguide the classiﬁcation process.
Goldberg et al. ( 2009 ) ﬁrst cluster the labelled data and a subset of the unlabelled data.
A classiﬁer is then trained independently for each cluster on the labelled data contained init. Finally, the unlabelled data points are classiﬁed using the classiﬁers for their respectiveclusters. In the clustering step, a graph is constructed over the data points using the Hellingerdistance; size-constrained spectral clustering is then applied to the resulting graph. Since theclustering is only used to segment the data, after which individual learners are applied toeach cluster, the approach supports any supervised base learner.
Demiriz et al. ( 1999 ) ﬁrst cluster the data in a semi-supervised manner, favouring clusters
with limited label impurity (i.e. a high degree of consistency in the labels of the data points
123

==== Page 23 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 395
within a given cluster), and use the resulting clusters in classiﬁcation. Dara et al. ( 2002 )
proposed a more elaborate preprocessing step, applying self-organizing maps (Kohonen
1998 ) to the labelled data in an iterative fashion. The unlabelled data points are then mapped,
yielding a cluster assignment for each of them. If the cluster to which an unlabelled datapoint x
iis mapped contains only data points with the same label, that label is also assigned
toxi. This process can be iterated, after which the resulting label assignments can be used
to train an inductive classiﬁer (in the work of Dara et al., a multilayer perceptron). We notethat this approach can be regarded as a wrapper method (see Sect. 4).
5.3 Pre-training
In pre-training methods, unlabelled data is used to guide the decision boundary towards
potentially interesting regions before applying supervised training.
This approach naturally applies to deep learning methods, where each layer of the hierar-
chical model can be considered a latent representation of the input data. The most commonlyknown algorithms corresponding to this paradigm are deep belief networks andstacked
autoencoders . Both methods are based on artiﬁcial neural networks and aim to guide the
parameters (weights) of a network towards interesting regions in model space using theunlabelled data, before ﬁne-tuning the parameters with the labelled data.
Pre-training approaches have deep roots in the ﬁeld of deep learning. Since the early 2000s,
neural networks with multiple hidden layers (deep neural networks) have been gaining anincreasing amount of attention. However, due to their high number of tunable parameters,training these networks has often been challenging: convergence tended to be slow, and trainednetworks were prone to poor generalization (Erhan et al. 2010 ). Early on, these problems
were commonly addressed by employing unsupervised pre-training methods. Since then, thishas been mostly superseded by the application of weight sharing, regularization methods anddifferent activation functions. Consequently, the work we cover in this section mainly stemsfrom the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s. However, the underlying principles still apply, and arestill used in other methods (such as ladder networks, see Sect. 6.2.2 ).
Deep belief networks consist of multiple stacked restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) ,
which are trained layer-by-layer with unlabelled data in a greedy fashion (Hinton et al. 2006 ).
The resulting weights are then used as the initialization for a deep neural network with thesame architecture augmented by an additional output layer, enabling the model to be trainedin a supervised manner on the labelled data.
Stacked autoencoders are very similar to deep belief networks, but they use autoencoders
as their base models instead of RBMs. The autoencoders are trained layer-by-layer, where theencoding h(x)produced by each autoencoder is passed as the input to the next autoencoder,
which is then trained to reconstruct it with minimal error. Finally, these trained autoencodersare combined, an output layer is added (as in deep belief networks), and the resulting networkis trained on the labelled data in a supervised manner. The paradigm works with multipletypes of autoencoders, including denoising and contractive autoencoders (Vincent et al. 2008 ;
Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Based on an empirical analysis of deep belief networks and stacked autoencoders, Erhan
et al. ( 2010 ) suggested that unsupervised pre-training guides the neural network model
towards regions in model space that provide better generalization. Deep neural networksare often motivated from the perspective that they learn a higher-level representation of thedata at each layer. Thus, each layer of the network can be considered to contain a differ-ent representation of the input data. Both deep belief networks and stacked autoencoders
123

==== Page 24 ====
396 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
attempt to guide the model in the extraction of these hierarchical representations, pushing
the model towards the extraction of representations that are deemed informative. From thatperspective, pre-training methods are closely related to the unsupervised feature extractionmethods described earlier: they both use unlabelled data in an attempt to extract meaningfulinformation from the input data. Crucially, however, the parameters used for unsupervisedpreprocessing can be changed in the supervised ﬁne-tuning phase of pre-training methods,whereas they remain ﬁxed after the unsupervised phase of feature extraction approaches.
6 Intrinsically semi-supervised methods
We now turn our attention to inductive learning algorithms that directly optimize an objectivefunction with components for labelled and unlabelled samples. These methods, which wecallintrinsically semi-supervised , do not rely on any intermediate steps or supervised base
learners. Usually, they are extensions of existing supervised methods to include unlabelledsamples in the objective function.
Generally, these methods rely either explicitly or implicitly on one of the semi-supervised
learning assumptions (see Sect. 2.1). For instance, maximum-margin methods rely on the
low-density assumption, and most semi-supervised neural networks rely on the smooth-ness assumption. We begin with an overview of the earliest intrinsically semi-supervisedclassiﬁcation methods, namely maximum-margin methods. Next, we discuss perturbation-based methods, which directly incorporate the smoothness assumption. These encompassmost semi-supervised neural networks. Then, we consider manifold-based techniques, whicheither explicitly or implicitly approximate the manifolds on which the data lie. Finally, weconsider generative models.
6.1 Maximum-margin methods
Maximum-margin classiﬁers attempt to maximize the distance between the given data pointsand the decision boundary. This approach corresponds to the semi-supervised low-densityassumption: when the margin between all data points and the decision boundary is large(except for some outliers), the decision boundary must be in a low-density area (Ben-Davidet al. 2009 ). Conceptually, maximum-margin methods thus lend themselves well to extension
to the semi-supervised setting: one can incorporate knowledge from the unlabelled data todetermine where the density is low and thus, where a large margin can be achieved.
6.1.1 Support vector machines
The most prominent example of a supervised maximum-margin classiﬁer is the support
vector machine (SVM) : a classiﬁcation method that attempts to maximize the distance from
the decision boundary to the points closest to it, while encouraging data points to be classiﬁedcorrectly. It was one of the ﬁrst maximum-margin approaches to be proposed in the semi-supervised setting, and it has been studied extensively since. We brieﬂy introduce supervisedSVMs, but the reader to machine learning book by Bishop ( 2006 ) for a more extensive
introduction.
The objective of an SVM is to ﬁnd a decision boundary that maximizes the margin ,w h i c h
is deﬁned as the distance between the decision boundary and the data points closest to it.The term is also commonly used to describe the area extruding from the decision boundary
123

==== Page 25 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 397
in which no data points lie. The soft-margin SVM is a popular variant of SVMs that allows
data points to violate the margin (i.e. lie between the corresponding margin boundary andthe decision boundary, or even be misclassiﬁed) at a certain cost. SVMs supports implicitmapping of objects to higher-dimensional feature spaces using the so-called kernel trick .
Formally, when training an SVM, we endeavour to ﬁnd a weight vector w∈R
dwith
minimal magnitude and a bias variable b∈R, such that yi·(w/intercal·xi+b)≥1−ξifor
all data points xi∈XL. Here, ξi≥0 is called the “slack variable” for xi, which allows xi
to violate the margin at some cost, which is incorporated into the objective function. The
corresponding optimization problem can be formulated as follows:
minimize
w,b,ξ1
2·| |w||2+C·l/summationdisplay
i=1ξi
subject to yi·(w/intercal·xi+b)≥1−ξi,i=1,..., l,
ξ≥0, i=1,..., l,
where C∈Ris a constant scaling factor for the penalization of data points violating the
margin. If Cis large, the optimal margin will generally be narrow, and if Cis small, the
optimal margin will generally be wide. Thus, Cacts as a regularization parameter, governing
the trade-off between the complexity of the decision boundary and prediction accuracy onthe training set.
The concept of semi-supervised SVMs, or S3VMs, is similar: we want to maximize the
margin, and we want to correctly classify the labelled data. However, in the semi-supervisedsetting, an additional objective becomes relevant: we also want to minimize the number ofunlabelled data points that violate the margin. Since the labels of the unlabelled data points areunknown, those that violate (i.e. lie within) the margin are penalized based on their distanceto the closest margin boundary.
The intuitive extension of the optimization problem for S3VMs thus becomes
minimize
w,b,ξ1
2·| |w||2+C·l/summationdisplay
i=1ξi+C/prime·n/summationdisplay
i=l+1ξi
subject to yi·(w/intercal·xi+b)≥1−ξi, i=1,..., l,
|w/intercal·xi+b|≥1−ξi, i=l+1,..., n,
ξi≥0, i=1,..., n,(2)
where C/prime∈Ris the margin violation cost associated with unlabelled data points.
S3VMs were proposed by Vapnik ( 1998 ), who motivated the problem from a more trans-
ductive viewpoint: instead of optimizing only over the weight vector, bias and slack variables,he proposed to also optimize over the label predictions ˆy
U. The constraint for the unlabelled
data was formulated similarly to that for labelled data, but with the predicted labels ˆyU.
Though different at ﬁrst sight, this formulation is equivalent to optimization problem 2above,
since any labelling ˆyUcan only be optimal if, for each ˆyi∈ˆyU,xiis on the correct side
of the decision boundary (i.e. ˆyi·(w/intercal·xi+b)≥0). Otherwise, a better solution could be
obtained by simply inverting the labelling of xi.
The extension of SVMs to the semi-supervised setting carries one signiﬁcant disadvantage:
the optimization problem encountered when training S3VMs becomes non-convex and NP-hard. Consequently, most efforts in the study of S3VMs have been focused on training themefﬁciently in practice.
123

==== Page 26 ====
398 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Initial efforts showed promising results in applying S3VMs, but only to small data sets.
For instance, Bennett and Demiriz ( 1999 ) proposed to use the L1 norm instead of the L2 norm
in the objective function and posed the problem as a mixed integer programming problem.The earliest widely used optimization approach was introduced by Joachims ( 1999 ), whose
approach for solving the optimization problem starts with a random assignment of ˆy
Uand
al o wv a l u ef o r C/prime. Each iteration of the algorithm then consists of three steps. First, the
supervised SVM optimization problem corresponding to the current label assignment ˆyUis
solved. Next, the algorithm inverts the labels of each pair of data points for which this inversionimproves the objective function, until no more such pairs exist. Finally, C
/primeis increased. The
algorithm terminates when C/primereaches a predeﬁned value speciﬁed by the user.
Other approaches to solving S3VMs have been put forward. For instance, several stud-
ies have proposed convex relaxations of the objective function, which can be solved usingsemideﬁnite programming methods. The earliest such approach was introduced by de Bieand Cristianini ( 2004 ,2006 ) and later extended to the multiclass setting by Xu and Schuur-
mans ( 2005 ). However, due to their time complexity, these approaches do not scale to large
amounts of data.
Chapelle et al. ( 2008 ) provided an overview of optimization procedures for S3VMs up
until 2008 and broadly categorize S3VM optimization methods into two categories: com-
binatorial methods , ﬁnding the label assignment ˆy
Uthat minimizes the objective function,
andcontinuous methods , directly solving the optimization problem using label assignments
ˆyi=sign(w/intercal·xi+b). All the approaches we have thus far described fall into the combinatorial
category. However, the formulation in optimization problem 2corresponds to the continuous
approach; it underlies, for example, the concave-convex procedure , which decomposes the
non-convex objective function into a convex and a concave component, and iteratively solvesthe optimization problem by replacing the concave component with a linear approximationat the current solution (Chapelle et al. 2008 ; Collobert et al. 2006 ).
Other continuous methods make use of the fact that problem 2can be reformulated as an
optimization problem without constraints. This stems from the fact that, if a labelled pointx
i∈XLdoes not violate the margin, then ξi=0 in the optimal solution. If it does violate
the margin, then ξi=1−yi·(w/intercal·xi+b). For an unlabelled data point xi∈XU,ξi=0i f
it does not violate the margin, and otherwise, ξi=1−|w/intercal·xi+b|. Thus, the optimization
problem can be reformulated as
minimize
w,b1
2·| |w||2+C·l/summationdisplay
i=1max(0,1−yi·f(xi))
+C/prime·n/summationdisplay
i=l+1max(0,1−|f(xi)|),(3)
where f(xi)=w/intercal·xi+b.
This approach underlies ∇TSVM by Chapelle and Zien ( 2005 ), which is based on a smooth
approximation of the object function in Eq. 3obtained by squaring the loss for the labelled
data points, and by approximating the loss for the unlabelled data points with an exponentialfunction. This optimization problem is then solved by gradient descent, where C
/primeis gradually
increased from some value close to zero to its intended value. Chapelle et al. ( 2006a )t a k ea
similar approach, where they keep C/primeﬁxed and use a continuous approach to transform the
objective function from using only the labelled data to the ﬁnal objective function.
As is the case for most semi-supervised learning methods, S3VMs are not guaranteed
to perform better than their supervised counterparts (Singh et al. 2009 ). Speciﬁcally, if one
123

==== Page 27 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 399
of the underlying assumptions of the semi-supervised learning method is violated, there
is a large risk of degrading performance when introducing the unsupervised objective. Inthe case of S3VMs, many highly diverse decision boundaries may exist that pass througha low-density area and achieve reasonable classiﬁcation performance on the labelled data.Consequently, one can expect the generalization performance of such classiﬁers to exhibitsigniﬁcant variance.
Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) proposed to mitigate this problem by considering a diverse set of
low-density separators and choosing the separator that performs best under the worst pos-sible ground truth. Like all S3VM variants, their method is premised on the assumptionthat the optimal decision boundary lies in a low-density area. Their algorithm, called S4VM(safe S3VM), consists of two stages. Firstly, a diverse set of low-density decision boundariesis constructed. To this end, the authors propose to minimize a cost function that penalizesthe pairwise similarity between the label predictions associated with the decision bound-aries, using deterministic annealing and a heuristic sampling method. Secondly, the decisionboundary with maximal worst-case performance gain over the supervised decision boundaryis chosen as the result of S4VM training. This problem formulation limits the probability thatthe solution found by a S4VM exhibits performance worse than the corresponding supervisedSVM.
The performance gain is formulated as the resulting increase in the number of correctly
labelled data points minus the increase in the number of incorrectly labelled data. The latterterm is multiplied by a factor λ∈R, governing the amount of risk of performance degradation
one wishes to take. Formally, this is captured by a scoring function J(ˆy,y,y
svm)for a set of
predicted labels ˆy, ground truth y, and supervised SVM predictions ysvmdeﬁned as
J(ˆy,y,ysvm)=gain(ˆy,y,ysvm)−λ·lose(ˆy,y,ysvm),
where gain andlose denote the increases in correctly and incorrectly labelled data points,
respectively. The optimal label assignment ¯yin the worst-case true labelling can then be
found as
¯y∈arg max
y∈{± 1}u/bracketleftbigg
min
ˆy∈MJ(y,ˆy,ysvm)/bracketrightbigg
,
where Mis the set of all candidate label assignments such that the corresponding decision
boundary cuts through a low-density area. Due to the optimization over all possible labelassignments, this optimization problem is NP-hard. Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) proposed a con-
vex relaxation of the problem to effectively ﬁnd a good candidate solution. Based on theassumption that the true label assignment is indeed in this set, they proved that, if λ≥1,
the performance of S4VM is never lower than that of the corresponding SVM. They vali-dated this ﬁnding empirically, and showed that their implementation achieves performanceimprovements over standard SVMs similar to other S3VM approaches, but that, contrary tothose, performance never signiﬁcantly degrades relative to supervised SVMs.
The formulation of the second stage of the optimization procedure is not limited to sup-
port vector machines; indeed, it could theoretically be applied to any other semi-supervisedlearning algorithm. Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) additionally propose to perform both stages simul-
taneously in a deterministic annealing approach.
6.1.2 Gaussian processes
The notion of margin maximization is directly incorporated into support vector machines,and it should thus not come as a surprise that they are easily extended to the semi-supervised
123

==== Page 28 ====
400 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
setting. Less obviously, similar efforts have been made with other supervised methods as
well. Notably, Lawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ) have extended Gaussian processes to handle
unlabelled data.
Gaussian processes are a family of non-parametric models that estimate the posterior
probability over the function fmapping points in the input space to a continuous output
space. When used for binary classiﬁcation purposes, which are the focus of the paper byLawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ), this output is in turn mapped to the label space
Y={ − 1,1}.
In the learning phase, fis established such that the likelihood of observing the data points
((xi,yi))l
i=1is maximized. The resulting model can be considered an l-dimensional Gaussian
distribution over the label vector yof the input data points, where lis the number of labelled
data points. Predictions for previously unseen data points x∗can then be made by the model by
evaluating the posterior probability of the respective class label, conditioned on the observeddata points X, their associated labels y, and the observed data point x
∗. The associated
covariance matrix is the Gram matrix obtained from all l+1 data points using some kernel
function k.
Lawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ) extended Gaussian processes for binary classiﬁcation to
the semi-supervised case by incorporating the unlabelled data points into the likelihoodfunction. Speciﬁcally, the likelihood for an unlabelled data point xis low when it is close to
the decision boundary (i.e. when f(x)is close to 0), and high when it is far away from the
decision boundary. The space of possible labels is expanded to include a null category ;t h e
posterior probability of this null category is high around the decision boundary. By imposingthe constraint that unlabelled data points can never be mapped to the null category, the modelis explicitly discouraged from choosing a decision boundary that passes through a high-density area of unlabelled data points. In other words, unlabelled data points should be faraway from the decision boundary.
This extension of Gaussian processes to the semi-supervised setting has an interesting side
effect: contrary to supervised Gaussian processes, introducing additional (unlabelled) datacan increase the posterior variance. In other words, additional data can increase uncertainty.This effect stems from the observation that the likelihood function for a single unlabelleddata point x
∗can be bimodal if f(x∗)is close to 0.
6.1.3 Density regularization
Another way of encouraging the decision boundary to pass through a low-density area is to
explicitly incorporate the amount of overlap between the estimated posterior class probabil-ities into the cost function. When there is a large amount of overlap, the decision boundarypasses through a high-density area, and when there is a small amount of overlap, it passesthrough a low-density area. Several approaches have been proposed to use this assumptionto regularize the objective function used in the context of classiﬁcation.
Grandvalet and Bengio ( 2005 ) proposed to formalize this in the maximum a posteri-
ori(MAP) framework by imposing a prior on the model parameters, favouring parameters
inducing small class overlap in the predictive model (additionally, see Chapelle et al. 2006b ).
In particular, they used Shannon’s conditional entropy as a measure of class overlap. Theprior is weighted by a constant λ∈R. The resulting objective is generally non-convex. The
authors proposed solving the optimization problem by means of deterministic annealing.This entropy regularization method can be applied to any supervised learning method basedon maximum-likelihood; the authors conducted experiments using logistic regression.
Corduneanu and Jaakkola ( 2003 ) proposed to directly incorporate an estimate of p(x),
the distribution over the input data, into the objective function. They add a cost term to the
123

==== Page 29 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 401
objective function that reﬂects the belief that, in high-density areas, the posterior probability
ofyconditioned on xshould not vary too much. To this end, they cover the entire input
space Xwith multiple, possibly overlapping, small regions; the cost term is then calculated
as the sum of the mutual information between labels and inputs in each of these regions,weighted by the estimated density in the region. Their work is an extension of earlier workby Szummer and Jaakkola ( 2003 ).
Liu et al. ( 2013 ,2015 ) proposed to incorporate the prior density into the node splitting
criterion of decision trees. When selecting the hyperplane for splitting the data at a node ina decision tree, their approach penalizes high-density areas, using Gaussian kernel densityestimators to approximate p(x). They conducted experiments with random forests consisting
of 100 of the resulting semi-supervised decision trees and observed signiﬁcant performanceimprovements over supervised random forests for several data sets. Levati´ ce ta l .( 2017 )
introduced a more generic framework for using unlabelled data in the splitting criterion byconstructing an impurity measure for unlabelled data. In their experiments, they promotedfeature consistency within the data subsets on each side of the splitting boundary, penalizingempirical variance for numerical data and the Gini impurity for nominal data. We note thatthe speciﬁc categorization of these methods within our taxonomy depends on the choice ofsplitting criterion.
6.1.4 Pseudo-labelling as a form of margin maximization
Depending on the base learner used, the self-training approach described in Sect. 4can
also be regarded a margin-maximization method. For instance, when using self-trainingwith supervised SVMs, the decision boundary is iteratively pushed away from the unlabelledsamples. Even though the unlabelled data are not explicitly incorporated into the loss function,this amounts to exploiting the low-density assumption, as done in the case of S3VMs.
6.2 Perturbation-based methods
The smoothness assumption entails that a predictive model should be robust to local pertur-bations in its input. This means that, when we perturb a data point with a small amount ofnoise, the predictions for the noisy and the clean inputs should be similar. Since this expectedsimilarity is not dependent on the true label of the data points, we can make use of unlabelleddata.
Many different methods exist for incorporating the smoothness assumption into a given
learning algorithm. For instance, one could apply noise to the input data points, and incor-porate the difference between the clean and the noisy predictions into the loss function.Alternatively, one could implicitly apply noise to the data points by perturbing the classiﬁeritself. These two approaches give rise to the category of perturbation-based methods .
Perturbation-based methods are often implemented with neural networks. Due to their
straightforward incorporation of additional (unsupervised) loss terms into their objectivefunction, they are extendable to the semi-supervised setting with relative ease. In recentyears, neural networks have received renewed interest, due their successful application invarious application areas (see, e.g. Collobert et al. 2011 ;K r i z h e v s k ye ta l . 2012 ; LeCun et al.
2015 ). As a result, interest in semi-supervised neural networks has risen as well. In particular,
neural networks with many layers, so-called deep neural networks, have given rise to inter-esting extensions to the semi-supervised setting. These intrinsically semi-supervised neuralnetworks differ from the neural networks used for feature extraction, which we discussed in
123

==== Page 30 ====
402 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Sect. 5.1: the unlabelled data is incorporated directly into the optimization objective, rather
than being used in a separate preprocessing step. Before continuing our discussion of suchmethods, we provide a short, general introduction to neural networks targeted at readers whoare not too familiar with them. For a more extensive introduction to (deep) neural networks,we refer the interested reader to the recent book by Goodfellow et al. ( 2016 ).
6.2.1 Neural networks
A neural network is a formal system that computes an output vector by propagating an input
vector through a network of simple processing elements with weighted connections betweenthem. These simple processing elements are called nodes , and each of them contains an
activation function that ultimately determines its output. In the feedforward networks we are
considering here, nodes are usually grouped together into layers , where nodes from each
layer are only connected to nodes from adjacent layers. The output vector is calculated bypropagating the input vector through the weighted connections of the network. The outputof each node, commonly referred to as its activation , is calculated by applying its activation
function to the weighted sum of its inputs.
In supervised neural networks, the network weights are generally optimized to calculate
the desired output vector for a given input vector. Considering the classiﬁcation task, let
f:R
d/mapsto→ R|Y|denote the vector-valued function modelled by a neural network, mapping
an input vector x∈Rdto a|Y|-dimensional output vector, where Ydenotes the set of possible
classes. The function fis modelled by a neural network consisting of one or multiple layers;
nodes in consecutive layers are connected by weighted edges. The weights are stored in aweight matrix W, where the element at position (i,j)denotes the weight of the edge between
nodes iand j.W eu s e f(x;W)to denote the output obtained by propagating the input x
through the network and evaluating the activations of the ﬁnal layer.
A loss function /lscriptis then deﬁned, calculating the cost associated with output layer activa-
tions f(x;W)for a data point xwith true label y. The complete cost function is then deﬁned
as
L(W)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi;W),yi). (4)
The explicit notion of the parametrization of fbyWis often omitted for conciseness.
The weights in Ware iteratively optimized by passing input samples through the network
and propagating the share of one or more samples in the cost Lbackwards through the
network. In this process, known as backpropagation , the weights are updated, using gradient
descent or a similar method to iteratively minimize the cost (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ). To
achieve good performance (in terms of loss), the network generally needs to pass multipletimes over the entire training set, and each such pass is known as an epoch .
In the literature on neural networks, various notation styles are used. In particular, some
of the articles we discuss use θto denote the network weights, and denote the output of
the corresponding network by f
θ(x). In discussing these articles, we use this notation style
when we deem it essential for maintaining relatability between the respective article and thissurvey.
6.2.2 Semi-supervised neural networks
The simplicity and efﬁciency of the backpropagation algorithm for a great variety of loss func-tions make it attractive to simply add an unsupervised component to
L. This approach, which
123

==== Page 31 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 403
can be considered a form of regularization over the unlabelled data, is employed by virtually
all semi-supervised deep learning methods. Furthermore, the hierarchical nature of repre-sentations in deep neural networks make them a viable candidate for other semi-supervisedapproaches. If deeper layers in the network express increasingly abstract representations ofthe input sample, one can argue that unlabelled data could be used to guide the networktowards more informative abstract representations. Approaches based on this argument canbe readily implemented in deep neural networks through the smoothness assumption, givingrise to so-called perturbation-based semi-supervised neural networks.
6.2.3 Ladder networks
The ﬁrst such approach is the ladder network , proposed by Rasmus et al. ( 2015 ). It extends
a feedforward network to incorporate unlabelled data by using the feedforward part of thenetwork as the encoder of a denoising autoencoder, adding a decoder, and including a termin the cost function to penalize the reconstruction cost. The underlying idea is that latentrepresentations that are useful for input reconstruction can also facilitate class prediction.
Consider a feedforward network with Khidden layers and weights W. We denote the
inputs of a layer k(after normalization) as z
k, and the layer’s activations (i.e. after applying
the activation function) as hk. Note that for conciseness, when referring to layer inputs and
activations, we do not explicitly mention the input data xi, nor the parametrization W(e.g.
we write hkfor the activation vector of the k-th layer in a neural network with weights W
for data point xi). In a regular feedforward network, the loss for a given data point xiis
calculated by comparing the activations of the ﬁnal layer f(xi)=hKto the corresponding
label yiwith/lscript(f(xi),yi).A si ss h o w ni nE q . 4, the ﬁnal cost function for the network is then
L(W)=/summationtextl
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi).
Ladder networks add an additional term to L, in order to penalize the sensitivity of the
network to small perturbations of the input. This is achieved by treating the entire networkas the encoder part of a denoising autoencoder: isotropic Gaussian noise with mean zeroand ﬁxed variance is added to the input samples, and the existing feedforward network istreated as the encoder part. A decoder is then added alongside it, which is supposed to take
the ﬁnal-layer representation h
Kof a noisy data point ˜x, and transform it to reconstruct x.
To achieve this goal, a reconstruction cost is added to the cost function of the network. This
inherently unsupervised cost term penalizes the difference between the input data points andtheir reconstructions generated by the network; it applies to both labelled and unlabelleddata.
Although the autoencoder component of ladder networks is highly similar to regular
denoising autoencoders, it differs from those in two ways. Firstly, a ladder network injectsnoise not only at the ﬁrst layer, but at every layer. We denote the noisy inputs of a layer k
as˜z
k, and the resulting activations as ˜hk. The supervised loss component for each sample
‘omes /lscript(˜hK,y): the loss function is evaluated against the output for the noisy sample. Note
that, in the testing phase, no noise is induced at any point in the network.
Secondly, ladder networks utilize a different reconstruction cost calculation. Where reg-
ular denoising autoencoders only penalize the difference between the clean input xand the
reconstructed version ˆxof the noisy input ˜x, the ladder network also penalizes local recon-
structions of the hidden representations of the data. To do so, they enforce the decoder tohave Klayers, the same number of layers as the original network (the encoder). Each of these
layers is also required to have the same number of nodes as the corresponding layer in theencoder. As a data point passes through the encoder, noise is added to the layer inputs at eachlayer. Then, at each layer in the decoder, the reconstructed representation ˆz
kis compared to
123

==== Page 32 ====
404 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
the hidden representation zkof the clean input xat layer kin the encoder. This, of course,
requires each data point to pass through the network twice: once without noise (to obtain z),
and once with noise (to obtain ˜zand the reconstructed ˆz).
The ﬁnal semi-supervised cost function of ladder networks then becomes
L(W)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi)+n/summationdisplay
i=1K/summationdisplay
k=1ReconsCost (zk
i,ˆzk
i),
where ReconsCost (·,·)is deﬁned as the squared L2 norm of the difference between the two
normalized latent vectors and summed over the labelled and unlabelled data. For a detaileddiagram of the information ﬂow in ladder networks, which uses the same notation we do, werefer the reader to Figure 1 in the ladder network study by Pezeshki et al. ( 2016 ,p .4 ) .
Through their penalization of reconstruction errors, ladder networks effectively attempt to
push the network towards extracting interesting latent representations of the data. The methodis premised on the assumption that a latent representation h
Kthat is useful for reconstructing
xcan also facilitate the prediction of the corresponding class label. Rasmus et al. ( 2015 )
showed that ladder networks achieve state-of-the-art results on image data sets with partiallylabelled data, including MNIST. Interestingly, they also reported improvements when usingonly labelled data. Prémont-Schwarz et al. ( 2017 ) extended the ladder network architecture to
the recurrent setting by adding connections between the encoders and decoders of successiveinstances of the network.
Rasmus et al. also proposed a simpler, computationally more efﬁcient variant of ladder
networks. This method, generally referred to as the /Gamma1-model, only includes the reconstruction
cost for the last layer. Therefore, no full decoder needs to be constructed. The /Gamma1-model was
empirically shown to provide substantial performance improvements over the correspondingfully-supervised model.
Pezeshki et al. ( 2016 ) conducted an extensive empirical study of the different components
of ladder networks. Their study revealed that the reconstruction cost at the ﬁrst layer of theneural network, combined with the introduction of noise in that layer, has critical impact onoverall performance. We note that this architecture differs from the /Gamma1-model, which only
considers the last, rather than the ﬁrst, layer of the network when assessing reconstructionerror.
6.2.4 Pseudo-ensembles
Instead of explicitly perturbing the input data, one can also perturb the neural networkmodel itself. Robustness in the model can then be promoted by imposing a penalty onthe difference between the activations of the perturbed network and those of the orig-inal network for the same input. Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a general framework
for this approach, where an unperturbed parent model with parameters θis perturbed to
obtain one or more child models . In this framework, which they call pseudo-ensembles ,
the perturbation is obtained from a noise distribution /Xi1. The perturbed network ˜f
θ(x;ξ)
is then generated based on the unperturbed parent network fθ(x)and a sample ξfrom
the noise distribution. The semi-supervised cost function then consists of a supervised partand an unsupervised part. The former captures the loss of a perturbed network for labelledinput data, and the latter the consistency across perturbed networks for the unlabelled datapoints.
Based on this framework, Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a semi-supervised cost function.
Consider a neural network with Klayers, and let f
k
θ(x)and˜fk
θ(x;ξ)denote the k-th layer
123

==== Page 33 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 405
activations of the unperturbed and the perturbed network, respectively. The cost function of
the pseudo-ensemble for neural networks then becomes
E
ξ∼/Xi1/bracketleftBigg
1
l·l/summationdisplay
i=1L(˜fθ(xi;ξ),yi)/bracketrightBigg
+ E
ξ∼/Xi1/bracketleftBigg
1
n·n/summationdisplay
i=1K/summationdisplay
k=2λk·Vk/parenleftBig
fk
θ(xi),˜fk
θ(xi;ξ)/parenrightBig/bracketrightBigg
,
where the consistency loss Vkpenalizes differences between the activations of the unper-
turbed and perturbed networks at the k-th layer for the same input; λkis the relative weight
of that particular cost term.2Bachman et al. propose to gradually increase each ˘kover time,
in effect placing more weight on the supervised objective in early iterations. One particu-larly prominent method of inducing noise is dropout , which randomly sets weights to zero
(i.e. removes connections in the neural network) in each training iteration (Srivastava et al.2014 ). In its originally proposed form, it was only applied to the supervised loss component.
However, Wager et al. ( 2013 ) and Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) showed that dropout can be readily
applied to unlabelled data as well.
The framework proposed by Bachman et al. is not limited to semi-supervised settings:
the supervised term in the loss function can be applied to any supervised learning problem.Furthermore, a similar approach could be applied to other learning algorithms than neuralnetworks, although the per-layer activation comparison would have to be replaced by asuitable alternative. Of course, since neural networks are entirely parametrized by connectionweights, they offer a relatively straightforward implementation of model perturbation.
6.2.5 5-model
Instead of comparing the activations of the unperturbed parent model with those of the
perturbed models in the cost function, one can also compare the perturbed models directly.A simple variant of this approach, where two perturbed neural network models are trained,was suggested by Laine and Aila ( 2017 ). They use dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014 )a st h e
perturbation process, and penalize the differences in the ﬁnal-layer activations of the twonetworks using squared loss. The weight of the unsupervised term in the cost function startsat zero, and is gradually increased. This approach, which they name the /Pi1-model, can be
seen as a simple variant of pseudo-ensembles.
6.2.6 Temporal ensembling
Since the noise process used in the methods described thus far is stochastic, the entire neural
network model can be considered a stochastic model. With the /Pi1-model, the network is
regularized by penalizing the difference in output of two perturbed network models, drawnfrom the same distribution, on the same input. This idea can be extended to more than twoperturbed models. Such an approach was taken by Sajjadi et al. ( 2016 ), who additionally
perturbed the input data with random transformations. Of course, such pairwise compar-isons will increase the running time of each training iteration quadratically in the number
2Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) consider distributions over the input data and consequently use expectations in their
formalism; for consistency within this survey, we replaced these expectations by averages over the given data.
123

==== Page 34 ====
406 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
of perturbations. Pseudo-ensembles solve this problem by comparing the perturbed network
activations to the activations of the unperturbed network model.
In the same paper in which they propose the /Pi1-model, Laine and Aila ( 2017 ) propose a
different approach to combining multiple perturbations of a network model: they comparethe activations of the neural network at each epoch to the activations of the network atprevious epochs. In particular, after each epoch, they compare the output of the networkto the exponential moving average of the outputs of the network in previous epochs. Sincethe connection weights are changed in each iteration, this cannot be considered a form ofpseudo-ensembling, but it is conceptually related, in that the network output is smoothedover multiple model perturbations.
This approach—dubbed temporal ensembling , because it penalizes the difference in the
network outputs at different points in time during the training process—can be considered anextension of the /Pi1-model. However, instead of comparing f
θ(x;ξ)tofθ(x;ξ/prime)forξ,ξ/prime∼/Xi1,
it uses comparisons to the exponential moving average of ﬁnal-layer activations in previousepochs. Since the loss function for unlabelled data points depends on the network output inprevious iterations, temporal ensembling is closely related to pseudo-labelling methods, suchas the pseudo-label approach (Lee 2013 ) and self-training. The crucial difference, however,
is that the entire set of ﬁnal-layer activations is compared to the activations of the previousnetwork model, whereas self-training approaches and pseudo-label convert these outputs to
a single, hard prediction (the pseudo-label).
6.2.7 Mean teacher
When training a neural network using temporal ensembling, unlabelled data points are incor-porated into the learning process at large intervals. Since the activations for each input areonly generated once per epoch, it takes a long time for the activations of unlabelled datapoints to inﬂuence the inference process. Tarvainen and Valpola ( 2017 ) attempted to over-
come this problem by considering moving averages over connection weights, instead ofmoving averages over network activations.
Speciﬁcally, they suggested calculating the exponential moving average of weights at
each training iteration, and compared the resulting ﬁnal-layer activations to the ﬁnal-layeractivations when using the latest set of weights. Furthermore, they imposed noise on theinput data to increase robustness. Formally, consider a neural network with weights W
tat
iteration t, and a set of averaged weights ˆWt. The loss function /lscriptfor an unlabelled input,
then, is calculated as /lscript(x)=| | f(˜x;ˆWt)−f(˜x/prime;Wt)||2,w h e r e ˜xand˜x/primeare two noise-
augmented versions of x. After calculating Wt+1using backpropagation, ˆWt+1is calculated
byˆWt+1=α·ˆWt+(1−α)·Wt+1,w h e r e αis the decay rate. They name the model with
averaged weights ˆWtheteacher model, and the latest model with weights Wtthestudent
model. This terminology has since been adopted in the literature when constructing semi-supervised neural networks.
6.2.8 Virtual adversarial training
Most of the perturbation-based approaches we have discussed thus far aim to promote robust-ness to small perturbations in the input. In doing so, they do not take into account thedirectionality of the perturbation: the injected noise is generally isotropic. However, it hasbeen suggested in several studies that the sensitivity of neural networks to perturbations inthe input is often highly dependent on the direction of these perturbations (Szegedy et al.2013 ; Goodfellow et al. 2014b ).
123

==== Page 35 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 407
Miyato et al. ( 2018 ) proposed a regularization procedure that takes the perturbation
direction into account. For each data point, labelled or unlabelled, they approximate theperturbation to the corresponding input data that would yield the largest change in networkoutput (the so-called advesarial noise ). They then incorporate a term into the loss function
that penalizes the difference in the network outputs for the perturbed and unperturbed inputdata. For the unperturbed data point, the weights from the previous optimization iteration areused. Formally, the adversarial loss function for a sample xcan be deﬁned as
/lscript(x)=D(f(x;ˆW),f(x+γ
adv;W)),
where Dis some divergence measure, γadvis the adversarial noise, and ˆWare the previous
network weights. Their approach is called virtual adversarial training ,a f t e rt h es u p e r v i s e d
adversarial training method proposed by Goodfellow et al. ( 2014b ). In the latter approach,
the outputs for the perturbed input are compared to the respective true outputs, rather than tothe outputs of the network for the unperturbed input. As such, regular adversarial training canonly be applied in a supervised setting. Adversarial training and virtual adversarial trainingboth bear close similarity to contractive autoencoders: there, the sensitivity of the network toperturbations in the inputs is penalized by directly assessing the derivatives of the networkoutputs with respect to the inputs (Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Park et al. ( 2018 ) combined concepts from virtual adversarial training with the /Pi1-model
(see Sect. 6.2.5 ). Instead of perturbing the unlabelled data points with adversarial noise, they
apply an adversarial dropout mask to the network weights. First, they sample a random
dropout mask /epsilon1
s. Then, within some maximum distance from /epsilon1s, they ﬁnd the dropout mask
/epsilon1advthat maximizes the difference between the unperturbed network output and the network
output when the dropout mask is applied. Their loss function, then, is deﬁned as
/lscript(x)=D(f(x;W,/epsilon1s),f(x;W,/epsilon1adv)),
where the network is parameterized by the weights Was well as the dropout mask. Park et al.
(2018 ) reported small performance improvements over virtual adversarial training and the
/Pi1-model.
6.2.9 Semi-supervised mixup
The perturbation-based neural networks we have discussed thus far rely on a particularly
strong instantiation of the smoothness assumption: they encourage the predictions of thenetwork to be identical for minor perturbations in the input, regardless of the direction ofthe perturbation. Recently, several researchers have considered the possibility of applyinglarger perturbations to the input. In this scenario, the direction of the perturbation generallydoes matter: when the perturbation points towards the decision boundary, the neural networkoutputs (but not necessarily the resulting class assignment) should typically change morethan when it points away from the decision boundary.
This approach was formalized in the supervised mixup method, which was proposed by
Zhang et al. ( 2018 ). They postulate that, in a robust classiﬁer, the predictions for a linear
combination of feature vectors should be a linear combination of their labels. They incorporatethis by training on augmented data points in addition to the original labelled samples. Tothis end, they randomly select pairs of data points (x,y)and(x
/prime,y/prime)during training, and
sample an interpolation factor λfrom a symmetric beta distribution Beta(α, α) ,w h e r e αis
a predetermined hyperparameter. The network is then trained in a supervised manner on thelinearly interpolated data point (ˆx,ˆy),w h e r e
123

==== Page 36 ====
408 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
ˆx=λ·x+(1−λ)·x/prime,
ˆy=λ·y+(1−λ)·y/prime.
In their experiments, Zhang et al. ( 2018 ) report substantial performance improvements in
several training scenarios. Their best results are achieved when the beta distribution hyper-parameter, α, is relatively low, causing the distribution to be strongly biased towards the
extremes (i.e., λ=0a n dλ=1). Consequently, a large majority of interpolated samples will
lie very close to either of the two selected data points.
The interpolation used in mixup can be applied to unlabelled samples as well, by interpo-
lating the predicted labels rather than the true labels. Verma et al. ( 2019 ) combined mixup with
the mean teacher approach (see Sect. 6.2.7 ), determining the target label for the augmented
data point as the linear interpolation of the predictions of the teacher model. Interestingly,the interpolation was only applied to pairs of unlabelled data points, and not to mixed pairsof labelled and unlabelled data points. Berthelot et al. ( 2019 ) proposed a semi-supervised
neural network composed of several supervised and semi-supervised components, includ-ing a semi-supervised extension of mixup. In selecting data points for interpolation, theydo not distinguish between labelled and unlabelled data points. For labelled data points,the true label is then used in interpolation; for unlabelled data points, the predicted label isused.
Mixup exhibits similarities to graph-based methods (see Sects. 6.3and 7): rather than
employing pointwise perturbations, they apply perturbations based on combinations of dif-ferent data points. Unlike in graph-based methods, however, the pairwise similarity betweendata points is not taken into account. The precise implications of this remain an interestingavenue for future research.
6.3 Manifolds
Perturbation-based methods make direct use of the smoothness assumption, penalizing dif-ferences in the behaviour of a classiﬁer under slight changes in the input or in the classiﬁeritself. However, one can imagine that not all minor changes to the input should yield similaroutputs. In particular, if the data lie on lower-dimensional manifolds, one can expect theclassiﬁer to be insensitive only to minor changes along the manifold. This observation corre-sponds to the manifold assumption, which forms the basis of a signiﬁcant body of intrinsicallysemi-supervised learning algorithms.
Anm-dimensional manifold is a subspace of the original input space that locally resem-
bles Euclidean space R
m. Reiterating the deﬁnition from Sect. 2, the manifold assumption
states that (a) the input space is composed of multiple lower-dimensional manifolds onwhich all data points lie and (b) data points lying on the same lower-dimensional manifoldhave the same label. Formally, the ﬁrst part of the manifold assumption states that eachconditional probability distribution p(x|y)has a structure corresponding to the union of
one or more Riemannian manifolds
M. The second part, then, states that points on the
same Riemannian manifold Mshould have the same label. If these assumptions hold,
information about the manifolds present in the input space can prove useful to classiﬁca-tion.
In this section, we consider two general types of methods that are based on the manifold
assumption. Firstly, we consider manifold regularization techniques , which deﬁne a graph
over the data points and implicitly penalize differences in predictions for data points withsmall geodesic distance. Secondly, we consider manifold approximation techniques ,w h i c h
123

==== Page 37 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 409
explicitly estimate the manifolds Mon which the data lie and optimize an objective function
accordingly.
6.3.1 Manifold regularization
Consider a labelled data point xiand an unlabelled data point xj, and assume that xilies
on some manifold M.I f xjalso lies on M, the manifold assumption implies that it is
likely to have the same label as xi. Furthermore, assuming that the data is concentrated
on lower-dimensional manifolds, we can expect there to be more data points x∗located
on M.
If we have sufﬁciently many data points, we can thus expect there to be some “path”,
a so-called geodesic , from xjtoxi, passing through other labelled or unlabelled samples,
such that each path segment is relatively short. We can formalize this notion of a path bydeﬁning a graph over all data points, connecting pairs of data points that are close together
in the original input space with an edge. Edge weights may be used to express the degree ofsimilarity. This is the key principle underlying graph-based methods , which also form the
basis of transductive semi-supervised learning (see Sect. 7).
Following this motivation, Belkin et al. ( 2005 ,2006 ) formulated a general framework for
regularizing inductive learners based on manifolds. They considered a kernel K:
X×X/mapsto→ R
with a corresponding hypothesis space HKand an associated norm || · || K. For supervised
problems, then, they formulated the following general optimization problem:
minimize
f∈HKl/summationdisplay
i=1[/lscript(f(xi),yi)]+γ·| |f||2
K,
for some loss function /lscripton labelled data. Here, γdenotes the relative inﬂuence of the
smoothing term. This objective function simultaneously penalizes misclassiﬁcations andpromotes smoothness of the predictive function. For the semi-supervised setting, theyadded an unsupervised regularization term that penalizes differences in label assignmentsfor pairs of data points that have a direct edge between them in the graph. Implic-itly, they thereby encourage data points on the same manifold to receive the same labelprediction.
This unsupervised regularization term gives rise to the class of manifold regularization
methods. Consider a similarity graph with symmetric weighted adjacency matrix W,w h e r e
W
ijdenotes the similarity between data points xiand xj(Wij=0 if the points are not con-
nected). Let Ddenote the degree matrix, which is a diagonal matrix with Dii=/summationtextn
j=1Wij.
The manifold regularization term ||f||2
Iis then deﬁned as
||f||2
I=1
2·n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·(f(xi)−f(xj))2. (5)
The regularization term can be expressed as f/intercal·L·f,w h e r e L=D−Wis the graph
Laplacian, and f∈Rnis the vector of evaluations of ffor each xi. The ﬁnal optimization
problem, including the manifold regularization term from Eq. 5, becomes
123

==== Page 38 ====
410 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
minimize
f∈HK1
l·l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi)+γ·| |f||2
K+γU·| |f||2
I, (6)
where γUdetermines the relative inﬂuence of the manifold regularization term.
This general framework leads to semi-supervised extensions of popular supervised learn-
ing algorithms, such as Laplacian support vector machines (LapSVMs), where the loss
function /lscriptis deﬁned as the hinge loss, i.e. /lscript(ˆy,y)=max{1−yˆy,0}. The supervised objective
of LapSVMs maximizes the margin, and the unsupervised objective maximizes consistencyof predictions along the estimated manifolds. In the paper proposing this framework, Belkinet al. ( 2006 ) suggested to solve the resulting loss minimization problem in its dual form,
similar to popular solving techniques for supervised SVMs, in time O(n
3). Melacci and
Belkin ( 2011 ) suggested solving the optimization problem in its primal form. Combining an
early stopping criterion with a preconditioned conjugate gradient, they reduced the time com-plexity to O(c·n
2)for some cthat is empirically shown to be signiﬁcantly smaller than n.
Qi et al. ( 2012 ) suggested to extend twin SVMs , which optimize two SVM-like objective
functions to yield two non-parallel decision boundaries (one for each class) (Jayadeva et al.2007 ), to include the LapSVM regularization term. Sindhwani et al. ( 2005 ); Sindhwani and
Rosenberg ( 2008 ) extend manifold regularization to the co-regularization framework (see
Sect. 4.2). They proposed to construct two classiﬁers using an objective function similar to
that of LapSVMs for two different views. Niyogi ( 2008 ) provided some theoretical analysis
on the manifold regularization framework and analyzed its usefulness in semi-supervisedlearning.
Zhu and Lafferty ( 2005 ) proposed to incorporate a manifold regularization term in a
generative model. They expressed the data-generating distribution as a mixture model, wherethe manifold is locally approximated by a mixture model component. Their loss functionconsists of a regularizer over the graph and a generative component. Weston et al. ( 2008 )
incorporated a manifold regularization term into deep neural networks. They proposed severalmethods to incorporate the manifold structure using an auxiliary embedding task ,w h i c h
encourages the latent representations in the neural network to be similar for similar inputs.Furthermore, they suggested to include a regularization term that explicitly pushes the latentrepresentations of non-similar data points (deﬁned as not being neighbours in the underlyinggraph) further apart. This approach was applied to hyperspectral image classiﬁcation by Ratleet al. ( 2010 ). More recently, Luo et al. ( 2018 ) employed a loss function that encourages data
points with the same label, either predicted (for unlabelled data points) or true (for labelleddata points), to have similar latent representations in the penultimate layer. Additionally,it encourages the latent representations of data points with different predicted labels to bedissimilar.
The graph construction process is non-trivial and involves many hyperparameters. For
instance, one can use a variety of connectivity criteria and edge weighting schemes. Thismakes the performance of manifold regularization methods highly dependent on hyperpa-rameter settings. Geng et al. ( 2012 ) attempted to overcome this problem by ﬁrst selecting a
set of candidate Laplacians using different hyperparameter settings. They then posed the opti-mization problem as ﬁnding the linear combination of Laplacians that minimizes the manifoldregularization objective. Formally, let there be mcandidate Laplacians L
1,..., Lm. Assume
that the optimal manifold L∗lies in the convex hull of L1,..., Lm, i.e. L∗=/summationtextm
j=1μj·Lj
with/summationtextm
j=1μj=1a n dμj≥0f o r j=1,..., m. Since each Ljis a valid graph Laplacian,
their linear combination is a valid graph Laplacian as well. Using exponential weights in theLaplacian, the manifold regularization term ||f||
2
Ithen becomes
123

==== Page 39 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 411
||f||2
I=f/intercal·L·f
=f/intercal·⎛
⎝m/summationdisplay
j=1μj·Lj⎞
⎠·f
=m/summationdisplay
j=1μj·| |f||2
I(j),
where ||f||2
I(j)is the manifold regularization term for candidate Laplacian Lj. This ﬁnal
regularization term is then used in the original optimization problem from Eq. 6, with the
addition of a regularization term ||μ||2to prevent the optimizer from overﬁtting to one
manifold, and the constraint that/summationtextm
j=1μj=1. The objective function is then optimized
with respect to μand f, which Geng et al. proposed to do in an EM-like fashion (i.e.
ﬁxing one and optimizing the other alternatingly). Their approach, which they call ensemble
manifold regularization , was demonstrated to be superior to LapSVMs when applied to the
SVM objective function on both synthetic and real-world data sets (Geng et al. 2012 ).
Aside from the methods proposed by Geng et al. ( 2012 )a n dL u oe ta l .( 2018 ), graph
construction methods have mainly been studied in the context of transductive semi-supervisedlearning. We cover these methods extensively in Sect. 7.
6.3.2 Manifold approximation
Manifold regularization techniques introduce a regularization term that directly captures the
fact that manifolds locally represent lower-dimensional Euclidean space. However, one canalso consider a two-stage approach, where the manifold is ﬁrst explicitly approximated andthen used in a classiﬁcation task. This is the approach taken by manifold approximation
techniques , which construct an explicit representation of the manifold. We note that such
approaches have a close relation to, and can in some cases even be considered as, semi-supervised preprocessing (see Sect. 5).
R i f a ie ta l .( 2011a ) developed such an approach, where the manifolds are ﬁrst estimated
using contractive autoencoders (CAE, see Rifai et al. 2011a ) ,a n dt h e nu s e db yas u p e r -
vised training algorithm. CAEs are a variant of autoencoders that, in addition to the normalreconstruction cost term in autoencoders, penalize the derivatives of the output activationswith respect to the input values. By doing so, they penalize the sensitivity of the learnedfeatures to small perturbations in the input without relying on sampling these perturbations(like denoising autoencoders do). Rifai et al. ( 2011b ) claim that CAEs do not merely penalize
sensitivity to small perturbations in the input, but that they penalize small perturbations ofthe input data along the manifold. They argue that this effect occurs due to the balance ofpromoting reconstruction and penalizing sensitivity to inputs. In other words, they claim toact directly on the manifold assumption.
The loss function
Lutilized by contractive autoencoders with reconstruction cost /lscript(·,·)is
L=n/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(g(h(xi)),yi)+λ·| |J||2
F,
where ||J||Fis the Frobenius norm of the Jacobian matrix of the outputs with respect to
the inputs, i.e. the sum of the squared partial derivatives of each output activation withrespect to each input value. Rifai et al. additionally proposed to penalize the Hessian of theoutput values. Due to the computational complexity of exactly calculating the Hessian, they
123

==== Page 40 ====
412 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
propose to approximate it as the difference between the Jacobians corresponding to small
perturbations of the input.
Using singular value decomposition , they estimate the tangent plane at each input point
to approximate the actual manifolds. As a result, the distance between two data points alongthe manifold can be estimated and subsequently used in classiﬁcation, e.g. via a k-nearest
neighbour algorithm. Additionally, they suggested to use a deep neural network pre-trainedwith multiple, stacked contractive autoencoders, where an additional term is added to the lossfunction to explicitly penalize sensitivity of the outputs to perturbations along the tangentplane.
A manifold can be described as a collection of overlapping charts , each having a simple
geometry, that jointly cover the entire manifold. Such a collection of charts is known as anatlas . Pitelis et al. ( 2013 ,2014 ) suggested to approximate these charts explicitly, associating
each with an afﬁne subspace. They alternate between assigning data points to charts, andchoosing the afﬁne subspace best matching the data for each chart. The charts are initializedusing principal component analysis on a set of random subspaces. From this, a set of chartsand a soft assignment of points to charts is obtained (since points can be associated withmore than one chart). Finally, from these charts and soft assignments, kernels are generatedthat are then used in SVM-based supervised learning.
6.4 Generative models
The aforementioned methods are all discriminative : their only goal is to infer a function that
can classify data points. In some cases, they produce probabilistic predictions; in others,they only yield the most likely class to assign. In all cases, they approach the classiﬁcationproblem without explicitly modelling any of the data-generating distributions. In contrast, theprimary goal of methods based on generative models is to model the process that generated
the data. When such a generative model is conditioned on a given label y, it can also be used
for classiﬁcation.
6.4.1 Mixture models
If prior knowledge about p(x,y)is available, generative models can be very powerful. For
instance, consider the case where we know that our data p(x,y)is composed of a mixture of
kGaussian distributions, each of which corresponds to a certain class. Most discriminative
methods would not be able to properly incorporate this prior information. Instead, one wouldbe best served by simply ﬁxing the model as a mixture of kGaussian components. Each
component j=1,..., khas three parameters: a weight π
j(where/summationtextk
j=1πj=1), mean
vector μj, and covariance matrix /Sigma1j. The most likely parameters can then be inferred, for
example via expectation-maximization (Dempster et al. 1977 ). This model is generative: it
models the distribution p(x,y), from which samples (x,y)can be drawn. The model can then
also be used for classiﬁcation: since the inference procedure yields an estimate ˆp(x|y)of the
conditional distribution p(x|y), one can simply assign to an unlabelled data point xi∈XU
the class cthat maximizes ˆp(xi|yi=c)·p(yi=c). In the case of Gaussian mixture models
described earlier, p(yi=c)=πc.
The application of mixture models to generative modelling comes with several caveats
(Cozman et al. 2003 ;Z h u 2008 ). Firstly, the mixture model should be identiﬁable: each
distinct parameter choice for the mixture model should determine a distinct joint distribution,up to a permutation of the mixture components. Secondly, mixture models hinge on the
123

==== Page 41 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 413
critical assumption that the assumed model is correct. If the model is not correct, i.e. the true
distribution p(x,y)does not conform with the assumed model, unlabelled data may hurt
performance rather than improve it.
In real-world applications, the model correctness assumption rarely holds. Therefore,
using mixture models for generative modelling can prove difﬁcult. Some approaches exist tomitigate these problems; for example, Nigam et al. ( 2000 ) vary the inﬂuence of unlabelled
data in EM. However, the rigidity of mixture models has caused attention to shift to moreﬂexible classes of generative models.
6.4.2 Generative adversarial networks
Recently, a new type of learning paradigm known as generative adversarial networks (GAN)
has been proposed, based on the idea of simultaneously constructing generative and discrim-inative learners (Goodfellow et al. 2014a ). Generally implemented using neural networks,
this approach simultaneously trains a generative model, tasked with generating data pointsthat are difﬁcult to distinguish from real data, and a discriminative classiﬁer, tasked withpredicting whether a given data point is ‘real’ or ‘fake’ (i.e. artiﬁcially generated).
The discriminator D, with parameters θ
(D), and generator G, with parameters θ(G),a r e
trained simultaneously to optimize a single objective function. Crucially, the discriminator’sgoal is to minimize the objective function, whereas the generator’s goal is to maximize it. The
discriminative function Dexpresses the probability that a data point xis real; the generative
function Ggenerates a data point xfrom a noise vector zsampled from some distribution
p(z). The cost function then consists of two terms; the ﬁrst of these expresses the ability
of the discriminator to identify true data points as such, and its optimization involves onlythe discriminator. The second term expresses the discriminator’s ability to identify fake datapoints, and its optimization involves both the discriminator and the generator. Formally,treating the real data as samples from some underlying probability distribution p(x),t h e
optimization problem can be formulated as
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)=Ex∼p(x)[logD(x)]+ Ez∼p(z)[log(1−D(G(z))], (7)
where the parametrizations of Dbyθ(D)andGbyθ(G)are omitted for conciseness.
The generator and the discriminator are trained in an alternating fashion. In each training
step, multiple real data points are taken from the training data, and multiple fake data pointsare generated using Gby sampling from p(z). The respective parameters θ
(D)andθ(R)of
the discriminator and the generator are then adjusted independently to optimize the empiricalobjective function over the batches of samples using gradient descent (Goodfellow 2017 ).
GANs are naturally unsupervised: they consist of a generative model, trained on unlabelled
data, in combination with a discriminative classiﬁer used to assess the quality of the generator.However, extensions exist to support classiﬁcation in GANs. Proposed but not implementedin the original GAN paper (Goodfellow et al. 2014a ), these methods also use a generator
and a discriminator, but train the discriminator to identify different classes instead of onlydistinguishing real from fake data points. As such, GANs naturally extend to the semi-supervised case: the purely discriminative component of the loss term (the ﬁrst cost term inEq.7) can easily be extended to incorporate true labels when these are known.
Springenberg ( 2015 ) proposed to extend the GAN discriminator to use |
Y|outputs, cor-
responding to the |Y|possible classes. In their method, named CatGAN , they adapt the GAN
cost function to include a cross-entropy cost term that penalizes misclassiﬁcations of realdata by the discriminator. The ability of the discriminator to distinguish real from fake data
123

==== Page 42 ====
414 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
points is assessed by considering the entropy of its outputs: for fake data, the discrimina-
tor should be uncertain of the class to assign, whereas it should be certain of its predictionfor real data points. Furthermore, they add a cost term to encourage the generator to assignequal probability of generation to each class. We note that CatGAN can also be used in an
unsupervised setting, by leaving out the cross-entropy cost term.
Salimans et al. ( 2016 ) extended GANs to the semi-supervised setting by using |
Y|+1
outputs, where outputs 1 ,...,|Y|correspond to the individual classes, and output |Y|+1i s
used to indicate fake data points. The loss function is adapted to include the cross-entropy lossof the prediction given the true label for the labelled data points. Otherwise, the loss functiondoes not need to be changed signiﬁcantly: when presented with an unlabelled data point, the
discriminator’s estimate of the data point not being fake can be calculated as/summationtext
|Y|
c=1Dc(x)
for data point x,w h e r e Dc(x)is the value of output cof the discriminator. Odena ( 2016 )
independently proposed the same idea around the same time. Dai et al. ( 2017 ) provided
some theoretical analysis of this framework. They argued that, for the method to improveperformance over the discriminator by itself, the distribution modelled by the generatorshould complement the true data distribution: it should assign high probability density to
regions in the input space that have low density in the true distribution.
Instead of using the discriminator for determining both the class and the authenticity
of data points, one can also use a separate discriminative model for each task. This is theapproach taken in triple adversarial networks , where one discriminator is used for classifying
data points, and another is tasked with distinguishing real from fake data (Li et al. 2017 ).
For an extensive overview of GANs, their applications and their extensions, we refer the
reader to the summary of the 2016 NIPS tutorial on GANs by Goodfellow ( 2017 ).
6.4.3 Variational autoencoders
Aside from GANs, further efforts have been made in recent years towards constructing
semi-supervised deep generative models. One notable example is the proposal of variational
autoencoders (V AE) and their application to semi-supervised learning.
Proposed by Kingma and Welling ( 2013 ), variational autoencoders are a type of latent
variable model that treats each data point xas being generated from a vector of latent variables
z. Traditional latent variable models, such as autoencoders, generally yield a model with a
highly complex distribution p(z), which makes it very difﬁcult to use them for sampling.
Contrastingly, V AEs constrain p(z)to be a simple distribution, such as a standard multivariate
Gaussian distribution, from which sampling is straightforward. The transformation from p(z)
to some more complex distribution p(x|z)is then left to a decoder.
At training time, an encoder is used to determine the parameters of a distribution p(z|x)
based on a data point x. To generate reconstructions of x, latent vectors zcan then be sampled
from this distribution and passed through the decoder. The decoder and encoder are jointlytrained, minimizing a combined cost function consisting of (1) the Kullback-Leibler diver-gence between the posterior distribution p(z|x)and some simple prior distribution p(z),a n d
(2) the reconstruction cost of the output of the autoencoder for input data. The ﬁrst term iscrucial: it allows the decoder to be used as a generative model, taking in latent vectors thatare directly sampled from p(z).
For brevity, we do not go into too much detail regarding the training procedure of V AEs,
which includes a nontrivial backpropagation step due to the sampling procedure; instead, werefer the reader to the V AE tutorial by Doersch ( 2016 ).
123

==== Page 43 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 415
Kingma et al. ( 2014 ) propose a two-step model to use V AEs for semi-supervised learning.
In the ﬁrst step, a V AE is trained on both the unlabelled and labelled data to extract mean-ingful latent representations from data points. By itself, this can be seen as an unsupervisedpreprocessing step, allowing the latent representations to be used by any supervised classiﬁer.In the second step, they implement a V AE in which the latent representation is augmentedwith the label vector y
i, which contains the one-hot-encoded true labels for labelled data
points and is treated as an additional latent variable for unlabelled data. In addition to thedecoder, a classiﬁcation network is introduced that infers the label predictions (Kingma et al.2014 ).
7 Transductive methods
The semi-supervised learning methods described in the previous sections were all inductive
algorithms: their primary goal was to use both labelled and unlabelled data to construct aprocedure capable of providing label predictions for data points in the entire input space.In inductive learners, we can therefore clearly distinguish between a training phase and atesting phase: in the training phase, labelled data (X
L,yL)and unlabelled data XUare used
to construct a classiﬁer. In the testing phase, this classiﬁer is used to independently classifythe unlabelled or other, previously unseen data points.
In this section, we discuss transductive algorithms, which constitute the second major class
of semi-supervised learning methods. Unlike inductive algorithms, transductive algorithmsdo not produce a predictor that can operate over the entire input space. Instead, transductivemethods yield a set of predictions for the set of unlabelled data points provided to the learningalgorithm. Contrary to the inductive setting, we thus cannot distinguish between a trainingphase and a testing phase: transductive algorithms are provided with labelled data (X
L,yL)
and unlabelled data XU, and output exclusively predictions ˆyUfor the unlabelled data.
Transductive methods typically deﬁne a graph over all data points, both labelled and
unlabelled, encoding the pairwise similarity of data points with possibly weighted edges (Zhu2005 ). An objective function is then deﬁned and optimized, in order to achieve two goals:
1. For labelled data points, the predicted labels should match the true labels.
2. Similar data points, as deﬁned via the similarity graph, should have the same label
predictions.
In other words, these methods encourage consistent predictions for similar data points while
taking into account the known labels. A close similarity exists between these methods and theinductive manifold-based methods from Sect. 6.3. Both methods construct a graph over the
data points and use pairwise similarity between data points to approximate more complexstructures. The only major difference between them is that the inductive methods seek toobtain a classiﬁer that can operate across the entire input space, whereas transductive methodsonly yield predictions for a given set of unlabelled data points. Collectively, these methodsare often referred to as graph-based methods (Zhu 2008 ).
In Sect. 6.3, we focused on the interpretation and motivation of graph-based techniques
from the theoretical perspective of manifolds. The development of transductive graph-basedmethods, however, has generally been driven directly by the two optimization criteria outlinedabove. This section, in which we discuss transductive semi-supervised learning, follows thatline of reasoning.
123

==== Page 44 ====
416 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
7.1 A general framework for graph-based methods
Graph-based semi-supervised learning methods generally involve three separate steps: graph
creation, graph weighting and inference (Jebara et al. 2009 ; Liu et al. 2012 ). In the ﬁrst step,
nodes (representing data points) in the graph are connected to each other, based on somesimilarity measure. In the second step, the resulting edges are weighted, yielding a weightmatrix. The ﬁrst two steps together are commonly referred to as the graph construction phase .
After graph construction, we have a graph consisting of a set of nodes V={v
1,...,v n},
corresponding to the data points, and an n×nweight matrix Wcontaining the edge weights
for all pairs of nodes, where an edge weight of zero indicates that no edge is present. Inthe remainder of this section, we use the terms node anddata point interchangeably in the
context of graph-based methods.
Once the graph is constructed, it is used to obtain predictions ˆy
Ufor the unlabelled
data points. The general form of objective functions for transductive graph-based methodscontains one component for penalizing predicted labels that do not match the true label,and another component for penalizing differences in the label predictions for connected datapoints. Formally, given a supervised loss function /lscriptfor the labelled data and an unsupervised
loss function /lscript
Ufor pairs of labelled or unlabelled data points, transductive graph-based
methods attempt to ﬁnd a labelling ˆythat minimizes
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(ˆyi,yi)+n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·/lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj), (8)
where λgoverns the relative importance of the supervised term. Furthermore, some graph-
based methods impose an additional unary regularization term on the unlabelled predictions.This general framework for graph-based methods allows for a multitude of variations in eachof its steps. The formulation is commonplace in graph-based methods, and most graph-basedinference algorithms can be shown to ﬁt into this framework (Bengio et al. 2006 ; Subramanya
and Talukdar 2014 ). It is also present in the manifold regularization framework (Belkin et al.
2005 ) discussed in Sect. 6.3.
For graph construction, most graph-based methods rely on the local similarity between
data points in the input space, connecting data points with similar features. In that case,they implicitly rely on the smoothness assumption in addition to the manifold assumption. Aparallel can be drawn between such graph-based methods and supervised nearest-neighbourmethods. The latter predict the label of an unlabelled data point by looking at the labels ofsimilar (i.e. nearby) labelled data points; graph-based methods also consider the similaritybetween pairs of unlabelled data points. Using that information, labels can be propagatedtransitively from a labelled data point to an unlabelled data point through other data points,both labelled and unlabelled. In that light, some graph-based methods can be seen as semi-supervised extensions to nearest-neighbour methods.
The spectrum of graph-based semi-supervised learning methods can be effectively struc-
tured based on the different approaches in the two main phases, i.e. graph construction and
inference . Early work on graph-based methods focused mainly on the second phase, leaving
graph construction a scarcely studied topic. Zhu ( 2008 ) noted that this imbalance might be
unjust, and that graph construction can have signiﬁcant impact on classiﬁer performance.Later work has addressed this imbalance, and graph construction has since become an areaof substantial research interest (de Sousa et al. 2013 ).
Graph-based transductive methods were introduced in the early 2000s, and graph-based
inference methods were particularly intensively studied during the subsequent decade. A
123

==== Page 45 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 417
substantial portion of the research conducted in this ﬁeld is covered in the semi-supervised
learning survey by Zhu ( 2008 ) and in the doctoral thesis of Zhu ( 2005 ). Furthermore, Sub-
ramanya and Talukdar ( 2014 ) recently published a book on graph-based methods.
Following the general chronological order of research in the ﬁeld of graph-based methods,
we begin by outlining different approaches to solving the inference problem. After that, weprovide an overview of research on graph construction.
7.2 Inference in graphs
The inference process in transductive methods consists of forming predictions ˆyUfor the
unlabelled data points XU. If the predicted labels of the labelled data are not ﬁxed to the
true labels in the inference process, optimization proceeds over the entire set of predictedlabels ˆy.
Many approaches have been suggested for tackling the optimization of Expression 8;
generally, these differ in the speciﬁc choices of the loss functions /lscriptand/lscript
Uand the trade-off
parameter λ. Furthermore, some methods infer only the most likely label assignment ˆy, while
others estimate the marginal probability distributions. Jointly, these variations give rise to aplethora of different graph-based inference methods.
Although the general objective function from Expression 8applies to the multiclass setting
as well, many graph-based methods do not naturally extend beyond binary classiﬁcation. Theinference methods we focus on in the following mostly consider the binary classiﬁcation case.
7.2.1 Hard label assignments: graph min-cut
The ﬁrst graph-based semi-supervised classiﬁcation method was proposed by Blum andChawla ( 2001 ), who experimented with graph construction using a k-nearest neighbours
algorithm and the /epsilon1-neighbourhood (connecting pairs of data points with distance smaller
than/epsilon1). They kept the edge weights ﬁxed and uniform, but experimented with changing the
weight of edges between unlabelled data points relative to other edges.
Once the graph is constructed, the optimization problem is approached from a min-cut
perspective. Speciﬁcally, a single source node v
+is added and connected with inﬁnite weight
to the positive data points, and a single sink node v−, connected with inﬁnite weight to the
negative data points. Determining the minimum cut, then, corresponds to ﬁnding a set ofedges with minimal combined weight that, when removed, result in a graph with no pathsfrom the source node to the sink node. All unlabelled nodes in the resulting graph that arein the component containing v
+are labelled as positive, and all unlabelled nodes that are in
the component containing v−are labelled as negative.
The min-cut approach can be seen to minimize the general objective function of Expres-
sion 8asλapproaches inﬁnity (ﬁxing the predictions on labelled data points to their true
labels) and /lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj)= 1{ˆyi/negationslash=ˆyj},w h e r e 1is the indicator function. Note that, assuming
labels 0 and 1 are used, the loss function for unlabelled data corresponds to quadratic cost,i.e.
1{ˆyi/negationslash=ˆyj}=(ˆyi−ˆyj)2. We can write the corresponding objective function as
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·(ˆyi−ˆyj)2. (9)
Note that this objective function can be written in an alternate form, using the graph
Laplacian L=D−W(where Dis the diagonal matrix containing the degree for node iat
Dii) as follows:
123

==== Page 46 ====
418 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+2·ˆy/intercal·L·ˆy.
Pang and Lee ( 2004 ) used the min-cut approach for classiﬁcation in the context of senti-
ment analysis. They note that, instead of ﬁxing the predicted labels of labelled data to theirtrue labels, one can also assign ﬁnite weight to the edges connecting the source and sink nodesto the labelled data points, indicating conﬁdences in either classiﬁcation from the perspectiveof the individual data point.
The min-cut approach can easily lead to degenerate cuts, yielding a solution where almost
all unlabelled data fall within the same graph component. This behaviour originates from thefact that more balanced cuts generally have more potential edges to cut: when a cut yields asplit into negative nodes V
−and positive nodes V+, the number of edges to cut is potentially
|V+|·|V−|. Joachims ( 2003 ) proposed to normalize the objective function of min-cut based
on this potential number of edges being cut, using spectral methods to solve the resultingoptimization problem.
Since the min-cut algorithm optimizes over a binary vector, it does not permit the extraction
of marginal probabilities. To solve this problem, Blum et al. ( 2004 ) proposed to construct
an ensemble of min-cut classiﬁers, each ﬁnding the minimum cut on a randomly perturbedversion of the constructed graph, obtained by adding noise to the edge weights. The predictionprobabilities are then simply calculated as the fraction of classiﬁers predicting a given label.
7.2.2 Probabilistic label assignments: Markov random ﬁelds
The lack of a principled, efﬁcient way of estimating classiﬁcation probabilities is a fundamen-tal disadvantage of the min-cut approach to graph-based inference. In many cases, we wishto estimate the probability P(y
i=c)that an unlabelled data point xihas label c. Standard
min-cut, however, only provides hard classiﬁcations (i.e. it only outputs class labels and noprobabilities). Approaching graph-based methods from the perspective of Markov randomﬁelds provides a potential solution to this problem. In the following, with a slight abuse ofnotation, we use Xandxto denote random variables and their realizations, respectively,
rather than data points.
The Hammersley-Clifford theorem states that a probability distribution P(X=x)for
random variables X
1,..., Xncorresponds to a Markov random ﬁeld if a graph Gexists such
that the joint probability function P(X=x)can be factorized over the (maximal) cliques
ofG(Hammersley and Clifford 1971 ). In other words, P(X=x)corresponds to a Markov
random ﬁeld formed by Gif
P(X=x)=1
Z·/productdisplay
c∈CGψc(xc),
where Zis a normalization constant, CGis the set of cliques in G,ψcis an arbitrary function,
andxccontains the realizations of random variables in clique c.
Using the Hammersley-Clifford theorem, we can show that the general minimization for
graph-based methods, formulated in Expression 8, can be expressed in the form of a Markov
random ﬁeld. Let Gdenote the graph with weight matrix Wobtained in the graph construction
phase, and let ˆY=(ˆY1,..., ˆYn)be a collection of random variables corresponding to the
predicted labels (i.e. 0 or 1) for data points x1,..., xn.W ee x t e n d Gby connecting each
nodeˆYicorresponding to a labelled data point xito an auxiliary node Y/prime
i, corresponding to
a random variable which can only attain the true label yi. We denote the entire collection of
123

==== Page 47 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 419
Fig. 5 Example of an undirected
graphical model for graph-basedclassiﬁcation. Filled nodes andedges between them correspondto the original graph G. Unﬁlled
nodes with plus and minus signscorrespond to auxiliary nodesconnected to labelled data
random variables, or nodes, as Y=ˆY∪Y/prime,w h e r e Y/primecontains all auxiliary nodes.3Since the
auxiliary nodes can only attain the corresponding true label, P(Y=y)=P(ˆY=ˆy),w h e r e
ˆyis the set of predictions for our (labelled and unlabelled) data.
This situation is depicted in Fig. 5. The ﬁlled nodes ˆYand the edges between them
correspond to the original graph G; the unﬁlled nodes marked with plus and minus signs
represent the auxiliary nodes Y/prime, and are connected only to the corresponding ﬁlled node.
Recall that a clique is a subset of nodes within which every pair of nodes is connected by
an edge. A maximal clique, then, is a clique that cannot be expanded, i.e. to which no nodescan be added such that the resulting subset of nodes also forms a clique. We note that everypair of nodes that is connected by an edge is part of at least one clique. Thus, if we can ﬁndan expression of the form
1
Z·/productdisplay
(u,v)∈Eψ{u,v}({u,v})
forP(ˆY=ˆy), the probability distribution corresponds to a Markov random ﬁeld. We proceed
to show that we can express the cost function from Expression 8such that minimizing it
corresponds to maximizing the probability P(ˆY=ˆy). We can distinguish between two
different types of edges: those between two normal nodes u,vfromˆY, and those between a
normal node and its auxiliary node ( ufromˆY,vfrom Y/prime,o rv i c ev e r s a ) .L e tu sd e ﬁ n e ψ(·)
for these two cases independently:
ψ({ˆyi,ˆyj})=exp(−Wij·/lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj)) ifvi,vj∈ˆY,
ψ({ˆyi,y/prime
i})=exp(−/lscript(ˆyi,y/prime
i)) ifvi∈ˆY,vj∈Y/prime
orvi∈Y/prime,vj∈ˆY.
The probability P(ˆY=ˆy)then becomes
1
Z·/productdisplay
(u,v)∈Eψ{u,v}({u,v})=exp⎛
⎜⎝−/summationdisplay
y/prime
i∈Y/prime/lscript(ˆyi,y/prime
i)−/summationdisplay
ˆyi,ˆyj∈ˆY/lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj)⎞
⎟⎠,
3We note that technically, ˆY,Y/primeandYare lists rather than sets, but—following common practice in the
machine learning literature—use set notation in the following.
123

==== Page 48 ====
420 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
where the normalization constant Zcan be calculated by summing over all possible conﬁg-
urations of Y. Although this is computationally too expensive for all practical purposes, the
normalization constant is irrelevant in the context of maximum-likelihood estimation. Thenegative logarithm of the unnormalized probability, then, is exactly equal to the general lossfunction for graph-based methods from Expression 8. Maximizing the probability P(Y=y),
we obtain the mode of the Markov random ﬁeld, i.e. its most likely conﬁguration. This solu-
tion is exactly the solution found when minimizing the min-cut objective (Blum and Chawla2001 ).
In the inductive semi-supervised classiﬁcation setting, classiﬁer predictions are indepen-
dent, i.e. P(ˆY=ˆy)=p(Y
1=ˆy1)·p(ˆY2=ˆy2)·...·p(ˆYn=ˆyn). In transductive,
graph-based methods, however, this is generally not the case: predictions are dependent oneach other. Therefore, the most probable label assignment ˆygenerally does not correspond
to the label assignment minimizing the expected error rate. To ﬁnd the latter, each data pointx
iwould have to be assigned the label that maximizes the marginal probability for that data
point. Unfortunately, ﬁnding the marginal probabilities of a random ﬁeld is not trivial.
Zhu and Ghahramani ( 2002b ) attempted the calculation of the marginal probabilities via
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. They experimented with Metropolis and
Swendsen-Wang sampling and reported low computational efﬁciency. Shental and Domany(2005 ) used a multicanonical MCMC method to compute the marginal probabilities.
7.2.3 Efﬁcient probabilistic label assignments: Gaussian random ﬁelds
There is no closed-form solution for calculating the marginal probabilities in the Markov
random ﬁeld with binary labels described previously. However, when the random variables
ˆYare relaxed to take real values, a closed-form solution exists. This approach was proposed
by Zhu et al. ( 2003 ); it involves ﬁxing the labels of the labelled data points and using quadratic
cost for the pairs of predictions ˆyi,ˆyj∈R. This results in an objective function identical
to that used in the min-cut formulation (see Expression 9), except for the relaxation of the
predictions to real numbers.
Using real-valued predictions with a quadratic loss function, the exponential form for
P(ˆY=ˆy)is a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Thus, a closed-form solution for the mode
of the ﬁeld, which equals its mean, exists. Furthermore, the marginal probability distribution
P(ˆYi=ˆyi)is Gaussian as well, allowing for computation of the label predictions minimizing
the error rate. This is why the random ﬁeld is called a Gaussian random ﬁeld .
Recall from Sect. 6.3that we deﬁned the graph Laplacian as L=D−W,w h e r e D
is the degree matrix (i.e. a diagonal matrix with the vertex degrees on the diagonal). Zhuet al. ( 2003 ) showed that the prediction function is harmonic , i.e. L·ˆy=0 at unlabelled
data points, and is equal to the true label at labelled data points. The predicted label at eachunlabelled data point is equal to the average of the predictions of its neighbours, i.e.
ˆy
i=1
Dii·/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)Wij·ˆyj,fori=l+1,..., n,
where N(vi)denotes the neighbourhood of node vi,t h a ti s , N(vi)={vj:Wij/negationslash=0}.F u r -
thermore, the solution is unique and ˆyi∈[0,1]for each i. Thus, label predictions can be
easily obtained from the solution using thresholding.
Computation of the marginals of the Markov random ﬁeld involves an inversion of the
submatrix LUcorresponding to the unlabelled data points in the graph Laplacian. This is com-
putationally expensive for large numbers of unlabelled data points. Several other approaches
123

==== Page 49 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 421
have been proposed for ﬁnding the solution to the harmonic function, including loopy belief
propagation and a conjugate gradient method (Zhu et al. 2003 ).
Before proposing the Gaussian random ﬁelds approach to graph-based methods, Zhu and
Ghahramani ( 2002a ) introduced the label propagation algorithm for inference on graphs. It is
an iterative algorithm that computes soft label assignments ˆyi∈Rby pushing ( propagating )
the estimated label at each node to its neighbouring nodes based on the edge weights. In otherwords, the new estimated label at each node is calculated as the weighted sum of the labelsof its neighbours. In matrix notation, let
A
ij=Wij/summationtext
vk∈N(vi)Wik
denote the transition matrix. The label propagation algorithm then consists of two steps, which
are repeated until the label assignment ˆyconverges. Starting with an initial label assignment
ˆy, which is random for the unlabelled data points and equal to the true labels for the labelled
data points:
1. Propagate labels from each node to the neighbouring nodes: ˆy=A/intercal·ˆy.
2. Reset the predictions of the labelled data points to the corresponding true labels.
Zhu ( 2005 ) showed that the algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the harmonic function
solution described earlier. They also showed that the label propagation approach can beinterpreted as a random walk with transition matrix A, which stops when a labelled node
is hit. Wu et al. ( 2012a ) cast this procedure in a framework they call partially absorbing
random walks , where they, instead of deterministically stopping when a labelled node is hit,
stochastically determine whether to stop ( absorb ) or continue the random walk. The label
propagation approach is closely related to the Markov random walks approach by Szummer
and Jaakkola ( 2002 ). Belkin et al. ( 2004 ) considered a similar objective function and provided
some theoretical analysis. Azran ( 2007 ) proposed a random walk approach, where walks
originate in unlabelled nodes and the labelled nodes are absorbing states. The probabilitythat an unlabelled data points attains a certain label is then derived from the probability that awalk starting from the unlabelled node ends up in a labelled node of the corresponding class,as the length of the random walk approaches inﬁnity.
7.2.4 Handling label noise and irregular graphs: local and global consistency
The Gaussian random ﬁelds method has two drawbacks (Subramanya and Talukdar 2014 ).
Firstly, since the true labels are clamped to the labelled data points, it does not handle labelnoise well. Secondly, in irregular graphs, the inﬂuence of nodes with a high degree is relativelylarge. An approach closely related to the Gaussian random ﬁelds method that addresses thesetwo issues was proposed by Zhou et al. ( 2004 ). It is commonly known as the local and global
consistency (LGC) method , referring to the observation that graph-based methods promote
consistency of labels on manifolds (global) and nearby in the input space (local). Note that,in the following, we assume
Y={ − 1,1}.
To address the ﬁrst issue, LCF does not clamp the true labels to the labelled data points, but
rather penalizes the squared error between the true label and the estimated label. The secondissue is addressed by regularizing the penalty term for unlabelled data points by the nodedegrees. Furthermore, predictions for the unlabelled data points are regularized by pullingthem towards zero (Bengio et al. 2006 ). We can write the corresponding objective function
in the general form as
123

==== Page 50 ====
422 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+n/summationdisplay
i=l+1ˆy2
i+λU·n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·/parenleftBigg
ˆyi√Dii−ˆyj/radicalbigDjj/parenrightBigg2
,
where λUgoverns the weight of the penalization of inconsistencies in label predictions
between neighbours in the graph.
Note that, like for the min-cut and MRF objectives, the last term of the objective function
can be expressed using matrix notation. The only difference is that LGC uses the normalized
graph Laplacian ˜L=D−1
2·L·D−1
2instead of the unnormalized Laplacian L=D−W
in that term. Like Gaussian random ﬁelds, this formalization admits a closed-form solutionand a relatively efﬁcient iterative approach to optimization. In this algorithm, the label vector
ˆy
t+1at iteration t+1 is calculated based on that at iteration t, using the update rule
ˆyt+1=α·˜L·ˆyt+(1−α)·y,
where yis 0 for the unlabelled data points, and αgoverns the relative importance of the
calculated label vector versus the base label vector y. This algorithm is often referred to as
label spreading .
7.2.5 Further research on graph-based inference
The previously described approaches, and in particular label propagation, have been the de
facto standard approach to the inference phase in graph-based semi-supervised classiﬁca-
tion. Several variants and extensions to the approach have been proposed, which we brieﬂysummarize here.
Baluja et al. ( 2008 ) applied graph-based methods to recommender systems (in particular,
video suggestions to users). They proposed adsorption , a heuristic algorithm for predicting
the label ˆy
iof node iby performing a random walk starting at node vi. At each step in the
random walk, the process can either continue to the next step ( continue ), accept the label of
a labelled node as the prediction ( injection ), or explicitly predict no label ( abandonment ).
The last option corresponds to a dummy prediction, which speciﬁcally indicates that thelearning algorithm is unable to produce a conﬁdent prediction. The option chosen by thealgorithm is dependent on two hyperparameters governing the relative frequencies of thethree options. Heuristic approaches to hyperparameter optimization have been proposed byBaluja et al. ( 2008 ) and Talukdar et al. ( 2008 ). The algorithm has been successfully applied
to video recommendation, but is difﬁcult to analyze theoretically, due to its many heuristiccomponents. Talukdar and Crammer ( 2009 ) found that there is no objective function that is
minimized by the adsorption algorithm, and proposed a modiﬁcation to the algorithm forwhich such an objective function does exist.
The previously described graph-based methods can be sensitive to class imbalance (Zhu
2008 ). Several approaches have been proposed to mitigate this problem. Zhu et al. ( 2003 )
suggested to adjust the classiﬁcation threshold such that the predicted label proportionscorrespond to predeﬁned label proportions. Wang et al. ( 2008a ) developed an optimization
scheme that is less sensitive to noise in the true labels and that mitigates the problem ofsensitivity to class imbalance by altering the inﬂuence of labelled samples based on the labelproportions. They modiﬁed the objective function to optimize over real-valued predictions aswell as binary label assignments; their approach penalizes the difference between real-valuedand binary predictions. It then proceeds to optimize the objective function by optimizing,in an alternating fashion, the real-valued and binary label assignments. Later, Wang et al.(2013 ) considered the same approach from a graph max-cut perspective.
123

==== Page 51 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 423
Instructured output learning , the labels of data points cannot be captured using sim-
ple binary or real-valued representations. For instance, the output labels might be betterrepresented with histograms or probability distributions in some cases (e.g. when predict-ing the relative trafﬁc density at a location over a 24-hour cycle). Subramanya and Bilmes(2008 ,2011 ) propagate discrete probability distributions through a graph, based on the KL-
divergence between the distributions of different nodes. As an alternative to KL-divergence,Solomon et al. ( 2014 ) proposed to use the Wasserstein distance to measure the similarity
between the discrete distributions of neighbouring nodes.
7.3 Graph construction
Arguably, graph construction is the most important aspect of graph-based methods: in orderfor inference to work, the constructed graph must accurately capture local similarities. Initialresearch on graph-based methods was chieﬂy focused on the inference phase, and graphconstruction was not well-studied (Zhu 2008 ). In recent years, however, this has changed.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on different graph construction algorithms, andnew methods have been introduced (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al. 2009 ; Subramanya
and Talukdar 2014 ).
Since the nodes of the graph correspond to the data points (both labelled and unlabelled),
the graph construction phase amounts to forming edges between nodes (yielding the adja-cency matrix) and attaching weights to them (yielding the weight matrix). In many cases, thesimilarity measure governing the connectivity between nodes is also used to construct theweight matrix.
7.3.1 Adjacency matrix construction
The ﬁrst step in constructing the graph is the creation of an adjacency matrix, whose elementsindicate the presence of edges between pairs of nodes. Three popular methods for determiningedges exist and are outlined below. We note that the ﬁrst two methods, /epsilon1-neighbourhood and
k-nearest neighbours, are local in the sense that a set of neighbours can be determined
independently for each node. In other words, the construction of a neighbourhood for anodev
idoes not inﬂuence neighbourhood construction for another node vj(unless viis
a neighbour of vj). The third method, b-matching, on the other hand, optimizes a global
objective, and nodes that are far apart can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence each other’s connectivity.
/epsilon1-neighbourhood. One of the ﬁrst methods to be used in graph construction was the /epsilon1-
neighbourhood method, which simply connects each node to all nodes to which the distanceis at most /epsilon1(Blum and Chawla 2001 ). In other words, an edge between x
iand xjis created
if, and only if, d(xi,xj)≤/epsilon1,w h e r e d(·,·)is some distance measure (usually Euclidean
distance). The structure of the resulting graph is highly dependent on the choice of /epsilon1and the
distance measure. Furthermore, since /epsilon1is ﬁxed, it does not work well if the scale of patterns
varies across the given input data. Because of these limitations, the /epsilon1-neighbourhood method
is rarely used in practice (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al. 2009 ).
k-nearest neighbours. The most common graph construction method for transductive
methods is the k-nearest neighbours method, where each node is connected to its knearest
neighbours in the input space according to some distance measure (Blum and Chawla 2001 ).
Using vanilla k-nearest neighbours, however, gives rise to a problem: since k-nearest neigh-
bours is not symmetric, some additional processing is often required to obtain an undirected
123

==== Page 52 ====
424 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
graph. Two options are commonly considered: one ( symmetric k -nearest neighbours) con-
structs an edge if iis in the k-neighbourhood of jor vice versa, and the other ( mutual k -nearest
neighbours) constructs an edge if iandjare both in each other’s k-neighbourhood (de Sousa
et al. 2013 ). The difference between the /epsilon1-neighbours and k-nearest neighbours methods has
been extensively studied by Maier et al. ( 2009 ) in the context of clustering methods.
b-matching. The postprocessing step used when constructing the graph with k-nearest neigh-
bours generally results in a graph where not all nodes have exactly kneighbours. When
symmetric k-nearest neighbours is used, it often occurs that some nodes have much higher
degrees than others. Jebara et al. ( 2009 ) showed that this can negatively impact the ﬁnal
performance of the classiﬁer. They proposed an edge construction method that enforces theregularity of the constructed graph, i.e. ensures that each node has the same number of neigh-bours, and that the nodes have exactly the requested number of edges. Their approach isinspired by matching , a concept from graph theory where one tries to ﬁnd a subset of edges
in a graph such that the edges do not share any vertices. In their method, referred to as b-
matching, the objective is to ﬁnd the subset of edges in the complete graph such that (1) eachnode has degree band (2) the sum of the edge weights is maximized.
Note that, in the original study by Jebara et al. ( 2009 ), instead of maximizing the sum of
edge weights, the objective is to minimize the sum of the distances between the remainingedges. However, since they deﬁne the distance matrix CasC
ij=/radicalbigWii+Wjj−2Wij,
these notions are equivalent. The corresponding optimization problem is formulated as
minimize
A∈Bn×nn/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Aij·Cij
subject ton/summationdisplay
j=1Aij=bi =1,..., n,
Aii=0 i=1,..., n,
Aij=Aji i,j=1,..., n.
It can be shown that this corresponds to the optimization problem solved by the k-nearest
neighbour algorithm, with the addition of the constraint Aij=Aji, which ensures that
a symmetric graph is constructed without the need for a postprocessing step. However, themost efﬁcient known algorithm for the b-matching optimization problem has time complexity
O(n
2.5)and requires several assumptions that are not always satisﬁed in real-world scenarios
(Huang and Jebara 2011 ).
7.3.2 Graph weighting
The graph weighting phase, which forms the second step of graph construction, determines the
weights for the edges in the graph. In many cases, the weights correspond to the similaritymeasure used for constructing the edges. For instance, a Gaussian kernel is often used todetermine the connectivity of the graph via k-nearest neighbours as well as the edge weights.
In that case, the graph construction process is usually considered as consisting of weightingandsparsiﬁcation .F i r s t ,ac o m p l e t ea d j a n c e n c ym a t r i x Kis constructed using some kernel
function kfor all pairs of nodes such that K
ij=k(xi,xj); then, the weight matrix Wis
obtained by sparsiﬁcation, i.e. by removing edges from K.
Several methods for edge weighting have been suggested in the literature. One of the most
popular weighting schemes is Gaussian edge weighting (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al.
2009 ), where
123

==== Page 53 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 425
Wij=exp/parenleftbigg−|| xi−xj||2
2σ2/parenrightbigg
,
andσ2is the variance of the Gaussian kernel. Note that this corresponds to an isotropic
Gaussian kernel; a non-isotropic Gaussian kernel can also be used. Hein and Maier ( 2007 )
suggested a local variant of Gaussian edge weighting for k-nearest neighbour graph con-
struction, where the variance for a pair of nodes iand jis based on the maximum distance
toiandj’s nearest neighbours. They deﬁne the weight as
Wij=exp/parenleftbigg−|| xi−xj||2
(max{hi,hj})2/parenrightbigg
,
where hi=maxvk∈N(vi)||xi−xk||2, i.e. the maximum squared distance between iand its
neighbours. Blum and Chawla ( 2001 ) suggested altering the importance of different features
in the similarity calculation based on their information gain. Jebara et al. ( 2009 ) experimented
with binary weights, where Wij=1 if nodes iandjare connected, and Wij=0 otherwise.
We note that, in all weighting schemes described above, Wij=0 for unconnected nodes.
The approaches described above determine edge weights Wijbased solely on the pairwise
similarity of nodes xiand xj. However, it is also possible to take the entire neighbourhood
of a node into account when determining edge weights. Wang and Zhang ( 2008 ) introduced
thelinear neighbourhood propagation (LNP) algorithm , which is based on the assumption
that the graph should be constructed such that any data point xican be approximated as a
linear combination of its neighbours, i.e.
xi=/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)Wij·xj+/epsilon1i
for some vector /epsilon1iof low magnitude. In this equation, the unknowns are the weights Wij
of the contributions of each neighbour to the approximation of xi. The approach by Wang
and Zhang consists of estimating Wsuch that the difference between the approximated and
true data points is minimized, while ensuring that the weights are positive and that the edgeweights for each node sum to 1. This leads to the following optimization problem:
minimize
W∈Rn×nn/summationdisplay
i=1||xi−˜xi||2
subject to/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)Wij=1 i=1,..., n
Wij≥0 i,j=1,..., n(10)
where ˜xi=/summationtext
vj∈N(vi)Wij·xjis the reconstruction of xi. This formulation is identical to
locally linear embedding (Roweis and Saul 2000 ), with the addition of the two constraints.
LNP can be solved via a series of quadratic programming problems (one for each node).Crucially, this depends on the fact that edge weight symmetry is not enforced, i.e. it is notnecessarily the case that W
ij=Wji; because of this, the weights Wijare independent of
Wkjfork/negationslash=i.
Karasuyama and Mamitsuka ( 2013 ) combined locally linear embedding with a local sim-
ilarity measure to obtain the edge weights. In particular, given a pre-constructed graph (forinstance, using the k-nearest neighbour algorithm), they calculate the weight between two
connected nodes using a Gaussian kernel with diagonal covariance matrix. This matrix isconstructed by ﬁnding the coefﬁcients that minimize the local reconstruction error.
123

==== Page 54 ====
426 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Liu and Chang ( 2009 ) construct the weight matrix with a modiﬁcation of the symmetric
k-nearest neighbours method : two nodes are connected if either of them is in the other’s
k-neighbourhood, but the weight of the two connections is summed if they are both in each
other’s neighbourhoods. In other words, the modiﬁed weight matrix Wis constructed based
on the original weight matrix ˆWas follows:
Wij=⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩ˆWij+ˆWji, ifvi∈N(vj)andvj∈N(vi)
ˆWji, ifvi∈N(vj)andvj/∈N(vi)
ˆWij, otherwise
de Sousa et al. ( 2013 ) compared the inﬂuence of several of these methods on the perfor-
mance of transductive algorithms. In particular, they compared Gaussian weighting (whereedges are weighted using an isotropic Gaussian kernel), the locally normalized Gaussianweighting approach by Hein and Maier ( 2007 ), and LNP (Wang and Zhang 2008 ); somewhat
surprisingly, their best results were obtained using Gaussian weighting.
7.3.3 Simultaneous graph construction and weighting
The LNP algorithm described earlier (see Sect. 7.3.2 ) assumes that the graph structure (i.e.
the set of edges) is known and ﬁxed, and determines the edge weights for each node locally,based on the assumption that each node can be reconstructed as a linear combination of itsneighbours. Instead of ﬁxing the graph structure, however, one can also simultaneously inferthe graph structure and edge weights by linearly reconstructing nodes based on allother
nodes.
Such an approach was ﬁrst proposed by Yan and Wang ( 2009 ) ,b a s e do nt h e sparse coding
approach formulated for face recognition by Wright et al. ( 2009 ). The idea is to ﬁnd, for
each node x
i, a coefﬁcient vector a∈Rndenoting the contributions of all other nodes to the
reconstruction of xi. This reconstruction is then calculated as ˜xi=(X/prime)/intercal·a,w h e r e X/prime∈Rn×d
denotes the full data matrix, but with a row of zeroes at index i(since a node cannot contribute
to its own reconstruction). Note that, unlike the LNP reconstruction from Problem 10above,
where only predetermined neighbours contribute to the reconstruction, here, all n−1o t h e r
nodes can be used. The corresponding basic optimization problem attempts to minimize, foreach data point, the norm of the error vector /epsilon1
i=˜xi−xi, expressing the difference between
the reconstruction and the true data. Crucially, unlike LNP, which makes use of the L2 normand thus promotes non-sparse solutions, Yan and Wang ( 2009 ) use the L1 norm.
To avoid an underdetermined system of equations in some cases, the ﬁnal optimization
problem penalizes both the norm of the reconstruction coefﬁcients and the noise vector. Let
B=[(X
/prime)/intercal,Id]be the concatenation of the data matrix Xand the d×didentity matrix Id.
Each data point xican then be expressed as xi=B·a/prime. Here, a/primeconsists of the coefﬁcient
vector a=[a/prime
1,..., a/prime
n]and the error vector /epsilon1=[a/prime
n+1,..., a/prime
n+d]. The ﬁnal optimization
problem for ﬁnding the optimal coefﬁcients is then deﬁned as follows for each node xi:
minimize
a/prime∈Rn+d||a/prime||1
subject to B·a/prime=xi,(11)
where || · || 1is the L1 norm. Now, let aidenote the coefﬁcient vector found for node i.T h e
ﬁnal graph is then constructed by simply adding an edge between nodes iandjif, and only
if,aij/negationslash=0, and setting the edge weights to the magnitude of the coefﬁcient, i.e. Wij=|aij|.
We note that this approach does not yield an undirected graph. A variant of the sparse coding
123

==== Page 55 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 427
method was proposed by He et al. ( 2011 ), who impose a constraint that all coefﬁcients be
non-negative to the objective from Problem 11above.
The coefﬁcient vector acan be seen as an encoding of xi. From this perspective, one
would expect similar data points to have similar encodings. Zhuang et al. ( 2012 ) captured
this assumption by constructing a matrix Afrom all encodings a1,..., anand regularizing
the objective function by the rank of A. Based on a well-known clustering method called low-
rank representation (Liu et al. 2010a ), the regularization term penalizes coefﬁcient matrices
of high rank. The low-rankness of the matrix captures global structures in the data, whilesparsity captures the local structure among data points. The resulting optimization problem,which includes the non-negativity constraint and penalizes the L0 norm of the coefﬁcients, isNP-hard; Zhuang et al. ( 2012 ) proposed a convex relaxation leading to an objective function
identical to the sparse coding objective function from Problem 11, but with the addition of
the non-negativity constraint and a surrogate for the rank-regularization term.
Although this approach achieves good empirical results, the motivation for using the
contribution coefﬁcients aas graph weights remains somewhat unclear. As an alternative, Li
and Fu ( 2013 ,2015 ) use the reconstruction coefﬁcients of pairs of data points to measure
their similarity. In particular, they build a matrix of encoding vectors that is sparse and oflow rank, and base the similarity of data points on the distance between their encodings.Additionally, they impose the constraint that all nodes have equal degree, to promote sparsityand regularity of the graph.
7.4 Scalable transductive learning
Many of the graph construction and inference methods discussed thus far suffer from a lackof scalability (Liu et al. 2012 ). Graph construction methods commonly have time complexity
O(n
2)(for instance, k-nearest neighbours has time complexity O(k·n2)); inference methods
generally have time complexity O(n3)for obtaining exact solutions and O(n)for approximate
solutions. This can make it difﬁcult to apply graph-based methods in real-world applicationswith large quantities of unlabelled data. Liu et al. ( 2012 ) provided an overview of approaches
for making graph-based methods more scalable.
To tackle the scalability problem, several approaches have been proposed for efﬁciently
constructing smaller graphs on which inference can then be performed. These approachesrely on ﬁnding a set of m/lessmuchn prototype oranchor points to express the structure in the
given data more compactly. These anchor points are used in the inference phase, after whichunlabelled data points are classiﬁed based on the inferred labels of nearby anchor points.
A commonly used approach called anchor graph regularization was proposed by Liu et al.
(2010b ). Their method seeks to ﬁnd a set of anchor points u
1,..., ukand corresponding label
assignments so that each data point can be expressed as a linear combination of the labelsof nearby anchor points. They choose the positions of the anchor points using k-means
clustering, and construct a graph connecting each data point to its closest anchors. Thecorresponding weights are deﬁned via locally linear embedding (see Sect. 7.3.2 ); these are
then used to construct a graph over all data points. The inference process indirectly optimizesthe predictions for the data points, by optimizing a graph-based objective function deﬁnedover the predictions for the anchor points. Zhang et al. ( 2009 ) proposed to use a low-rank
approximation of the adjacency matrix in the unsupervised cost term in the inference phase.
123

==== Page 56 ====
428 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
7.5 From transduction to induction
To obtain a prediction for a previously unseen data point, transductive algorithms need to
be rerun in their entirety. Since transductive methods are often computationally expensive,this is undesirable in many real-world problem scenarios, where on-the-ﬂy classiﬁcation fornew data points is required. The issue of adapting and extending transductive algorithms forinductive classiﬁcation has not been studied extensively in the literature, but some potentialsolutions have been proposed.
The ﬁrst type of approach is to ﬁnd the optimal label prediction for previously unseen
data points based on the objective function of the transductive algorithm. Such approachesﬁx the transductive predictions, and use the resulting graph to predict the label of previouslyunseen data points (Bengio et al. 2006 ;Z h u 2008 ). Considering the general objective function
from Expression 8, the optimal label assignment for the new data point x
ican be calculated
efﬁciently: assuming we can calculate the graph weights Wijforj=1,..., n,w ec a n
optimize the objective function with respect to only the predicted label of the new data point.The label assignment ˆy
iminimizing the cost function is then given by the weighted majority
vote of the neighbours of the data point:
ˆyi∈arg max
c∈Y/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)∧ˆyj=cWij
The second type of approach for building an inductive classiﬁer is to treat the pseudo-
labelled predictions as true labels, and to train a supervised classiﬁer based on thesepredictions. This approach was taken by Kveton et al. ( 2010 ), who used the min-cut approach
to obtain the optimal labels, and trained a supervised SVM using the combined labelled andunlabelled data. One can consider using a transductive approach with probability estimates,such that unlabelled samples can be weighted in the supervised learning algorithm. Thisapproach can also be applied to inductive learners that have a computationally expensiveprediction phase: we can train an inductive semi-supervised learning method on all availabledata, and pass its predictions for the unlabelled data along with the labelled data to a com-putationally more efﬁcient classiﬁer (Urner et al. 2011 ). The efﬁcient predictor can then be
used to make predictions on new, previously unseen data points.
7.6 Classification in network data
In some real-world problems, data is inherently represented as a graph. Such data, whichis commonly referred to as network data , arises in the context of social networks, scientiﬁc
collaboration, spreading of infectious diseases, company structures, etc. In such networks,nodes generally represent entities (such as people), and edges represent relations betweenthem (such as friendship). The ﬁeld that studies such data is commonly known as networkscience (Barabási 2016 ).
In such network data, graph-based transductive methods are highly appropriate candidates
for performing inference. Node classiﬁcation in particular can be considered a regular trans-ductive semi-supervised learning task, and is broadly applied to problems in social networkanalysis and natural language processing (Tan et al. 2011 ;Y a n ge ta l . 2016 ). Although there
is a considerable amount of overlap between these ﬁelds, the semi-supervised learning andnetwork science communities have operated rather independently. Of course, signiﬁcant dif-ferences also exist between data that is inherently given in the form of a network and graphsthat are inferred from input vectors based on some similarity measure.
123

==== Page 57 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 429
Sen et al. ( 2008 ) provided an overview of inference techniques for node classiﬁcation
in network data. They emphasized the difference between local classiﬁcation, where each
node is classiﬁed individually based on its neighbours (possibly iteratively), and global
classiﬁcation, where a global, joint objective function is optimized. They speciﬁcally considertheiterative classiﬁcation algorithm , which constructs a local, supervised classiﬁer for each
node and assigns to the node the most likely label based on its neighbours and their labels (Luand Getoor 2003 ; Neville and Jensen 2000 ). This procedure is iterated until the predictions
in the entire network stabilize. Yang et al. ( 2016 ) proposed a neural network-based approach
that simultaneously predicts the label of a node and its context, i.e. (properties of) nearbynodes in the network, using node embedding.
They extended this approach to the inductive setting, by expressing the embedding as a
function of the features of a given node (and not its context). The context is predicted using arandom walk; similar approaches to that problem have been previously studied (Perozzi et al.2014 ;T a n ge ta l . 2015 ). Several approaches have been suggested to generalize convolutional
neural network architectures to network data (see, e.g. Bruna et al. 2014 ; Duvenaud et al.
2015 ; Kipf and Welling 2016 ).
Network-based methods generally attempt to ﬁnd a way to represent given network data
as vectors, allowing for inductive inference (Yang et al. 2016 ). Interestingly, this can be
considered the inverse task of what most semi-supervised graph-based methods attempt todo, which is to construct a graph based on vector data. These complementary approacheshighlight the difference between ‘standard’, tabular data and data speciﬁed natively in theform of a network.
8 Related areas
Although the vast majority of semi-supervised learning research has been focussed on semi-supervised classiﬁcation, other problems have also been studied. Semi-supervised regression,where the label space
Yis real-valued instead of categorical, is particularly closely related
to semi-supervised classiﬁcation; we cover it in limited detail below. Semi-supervised clus-tering, which can be considered the counterpart of semi-supervised classiﬁcation, is alsocovered in some detail later in this section.
Some other areas related to semi-supervised classiﬁcation are not covered in this survey.
They include the ﬁeld of active learning , where the learning algorithm can query the user
for the labels of previously unlabelled data points. Consequently, new labelled data canbe obtained. Since labelling data is generally costly, the challenge lies in the selection ofunlabelled data points whose labels would be most informative (Settles 2012 ). We also do not
cover learning from positive and unlabelled data , which is a special case of semi-supervised
learning where the algorithm has access to a set of unlabelled data points, but where alllabelled data points belong to a single class (see, e.g. Liu et al. 2002 ; Denis et al. 2005 ;E l k a n
and Noto 2008 ).
8.1 Semi-supervised regression
In classiﬁcation problems, the label space Yis categorical; in regression problems, on the
other hand, the output value space is continuous. Although classiﬁcation and regressionproblems are both concerned with predicting output values for input data points, most semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods cannot be naturally applied to the regression setting.
123

==== Page 58 ====
430 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
A class of methods that can be rather easily extended to the regression setting is that of
graph-based methods (see Sect. 7). Many such methods model a real-valued function in an
intermediate step and incorporate the real-valued predictions in a regularization term in theobjective function. These real-valued predictions can be readily utilized in the regressionscenario (see, e.g. Belkin et al. 2004 ; Cortes and Mohri 2007 ).
The second class of methods that is naturally equipped to deal with regression problems
is the class of wrapper methods (see Sect. 4). Although relatively little research has been
conducted in this direction, wrapper methods such as self-training and co-training to regres-sion methods can be readily applied in a semi-supervised regression setting. In fact, as inthe case of supervised classiﬁcation methods, any supervised regressor can be used within awrapper method. Zhou and Li ( 2005a ) proposed a co-training algorithm for semi-supervised
regression. They construct two k-nearest neighbour regressors on the labelled data, which
then iteratively pass pseudo-labelled data to each other. The labelling conﬁdence, which isused to select data points to pseudo-label, is based on the performance of the regressorsobtained when adding the pseudo-labelled data point to the training set, as measured on thelabelled data.
8.2 Semi-supervised clustering
Semi-supervised classiﬁcation is a relatively well-deﬁned task, where one is presented withfully labelled data as well as completely unlabelled data. In semi-supervised clustering,however, the supervised information can take different forms. For instance, there can bemust-link (two samples are known to be in the same cluster) and cannot-link (two samples
are known to be in different clusters) constraints (Lange et al. 2005 ). It is also possible that
some cluster assignments are known beforehand.
An example for incorporation of the latter type of information is the use of labelled data
forcluster seeding .B a s ue ta l .( 2002 ) proposed to initialize the clusters based on the data
points for which cluster assignments are known. For every cluster, they initialize the clustercentroid for the k-means algorithm to the mean feature values of the data points known to
belong to that cluster. They also proposed an alternative of this approach, where the clusterassignments of the labelled data points are kept ﬁxed in the k-means procedure.
Like semi-supervised regression, semi-supervised clustering is a relatively small research
area when compared to semi-supervised classiﬁcation. For a more extensive overview ofsemi-supervised clustering methods, we refer the reader to the recent survey by Bair ( 2013 )
and the older survey on clustering methods by Grira et al. ( 2004 ).
9 Conclusions and future perspectives
In this survey, we have presented an overview of the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning.
Covering methods from the early 2000s and more recent advances, our survey constitutes anup-to-date review of this important topic within machine learning. Furthermore, we have pre-sented a new taxonomy for semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods, distinguishing betweenthe primary objective of the approach ( transductive versus inductive learning )a n dt h ew a y
unlabelled data is used (i.e. wrapper methods ,unsupervised preprocessing ,a n d intrinsically
semi-supervised methods ).
Early research in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning mainly focused on wrapper methods
(Sect. 4) and semi-supervised extensions of traditional supervised algorithms (such as SVMs,
123

==== Page 59 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 431
see Sect. 6). Graph-based methods (Sects. 6.3and 7) have been extensively researched over
the past two decades. They are perhaps the most intuitive semi-supervised learning method,explicitly incorporating the similarity of different unlabelled data points in a principled way.However, they still pose computational challenges. In recent years, semi-supervised learninghas developed along similar lines as supervised learning: notably, there has been a strong focuson semi-supervised neural networks, in the form of unsupervised preprocessing (Sect. 5.3)
as well as semi-supervised regularization (Sect. 6.2). Additionally, deep generative models
have been extended to the semi-supervised setting (Sect. 6.4).
From our perspective, one of the most important issues to be resolved in semi-supervised
learning is the potential performance degradation caused by the introduction of unlabelleddata. Although this has received relatively little attention in the literature (likely due to pub-lication bias, as noted by Zhu 2008 ), many semi-supervised learning methods only perform
better than their supervised counterparts or base learners in speciﬁc cases (Li and Zhou 2015 ;
Singh et al. 2009 ). In other cases, the supervised baselines used for empirically evaluating
the performance of semi-supervised learning methods are relatively weak, causing a skewedperspective on the beneﬁts of incorporating unlabelled data (Oliver et al. 2018 ). Moreover,
the potential performance degradation is generally much more signiﬁcant than the potentialimprovement, especially in machine learning problems where strong performance is achievedwith purely supervised learning. We believe that this is one of the main reasons for the dearthof applications of semi-supervised learning methods in practice when compared to supervisedlearning.
Notable exceptions are the recent advances in semi-supervised neural networks, which are
generally perturbation-based (see Sect. 6.2). They incorporate the relatively weak smooth-
ness assumption (i.e. minor variations in the input space should only cause minor variations
in the output space). Empirically, these methods have been shown to consistently outper-form their supervised counterparts. A considerable advantage of using neural networks forsemi-supervised learning is that it is relatively straightforward to incorporate unsupervisedloss terms into the cost function, which can then be optimized using backpropagation. Thisﬂexibility also accomodates the incorporation of more complex cost terms, facilitating, forexample, graph-based regularization. For these reasons, we expect that the popularity ofsemi-supervised neural networks will continue to grow for the foreseeable future.
A second potential remedy for the lack of robustness of semi-supervised learning methods
lies in the application of automated machine learning (AutoML) to the semi-supervised
setting. Recently, there has been a steep increase in interest in the automatic selection andconﬁguration of learning algorithms for a given classiﬁcation problem. These approachesinclude meta-learning and neural architecture search as well as automated algorithm selectionand hyperparameter optimization. While AutoML techniques have been prominently andsuccessfully applied to supervised learning (see, e.g. Elsken et al. 2019 ;F e u r e re ta l . 2015 ;
Thornton et al. 2013 ), there has been no application to semi-supervised learning so far.
Another important step towards the adoption of semi-supervised in practice is the develop-
ment of standardized software packages. Several highly popular toolkits exist for supervisedlearning, such as scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011 ), but there is much less standardization
in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning. We note that some generic toolkits do exist; theKEEL software package includes a semi-supervised learning module (Triguero et al. 2017 ),
and implementations of some transductive graph-based methods exist in scikit-learn .F o r
neural networks, it is typically relatively straightforward to implement semi-supervised lossterms within popular software packages such as PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017 )a n d TensorFlow
(Abadi et al. 2016 ).
123

==== Page 60 ====
432 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Lastly, we expect the strong distinction between clustering and classiﬁcation to fade.
Fundamentally, both approaches can be seen as special cases of semi-supervised in whicheither only labelled data or only unlabelled data is present. When we can conﬁdently reasonabout the connections between the marginal distribution p(x)and the conditional distribution
p(y|x), learning algorithms can make effective use of unlabelled as well as labelled data.
The recent rise in popularity of generative models (see Sect. 6.4) can be seen as evidence for
this paradigm shift.
Ultimately, we expect the incorporation of unlabelled data to be a vital step in the progress
of machine learning and its applications. To uncover the intricate and complex structuresunderlying the data model, the machine needs to be able to infer patterns between observationsabout which it receives no explicit labelling information. Semi-supervised learning, whichaims to provide mechanisms to build such connections, will be an important tool towardsthis end.
Acknowledgements We thank Matthijs van Leeuwen for his valuable feedback on drafts of this article.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and repro-
duction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, providea link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., & Isard,
M., et al. (2016). Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX symposium
on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 16) (pp. 265–283).
Abney, S. (2002). Bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, association for computational linguistics (pp. 360–367).
Anderberg, M. R. (1973). Cluster analysis for applications . Cambridge: Academic Press.
Azran, A. (2007). The rendezvous algorithm: Multiclass semi-supervised learning with Markov random walks.
InProceedings of the 24th international conference on machine learning (pp. 49–56).
Bachman, P., Alsharif, O., & Precup, D. (2014). Learning with pseudo-ensembles. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 3365–3373).
Bair, E. (2013). Semi-supervised clustering methods. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statis-
tics,5(5), 349–361.
Balcan, M. F., Blum, A., & Yang, K. (2005). Co-training and expansion: Towards bridging theory and practice.
InAdvances in neural information processing systems (pp. 89–96).
Baluja, S., Seth, R., Sivakumar, D., Jing, Y ., Yagnik, J., Kumar, S., Ravichandran, D., & Aly, M. (2008). Video
suggestion and discovery for youtube: Taking random walks through the view graph. In Proceedings of
the 17th international conference on world wide web (pp. 895–904). ACM.
Barabási, A. L. (2016). Network science . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basu, S., Banerjee, A., & Mooney, R. (2002). Semi-supervised clustering by seeding. In Proceedings of the
19th international conference on machine learning (pp. 27–34).
Belkin, M., Matveeva, I., & Niyogi, P. (2004). Regularization and semi-supervised learning on large graphs. In
Proceedings of the international conference on computational learning theory (pp. 624–638). Springer.
Belkin, M., Niyogi, P., & Sindhwani, V . (2005). On manifold regularization. In Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 17–24).
Belkin, M., Niyogi, P., & Sindhwani, V . (2006). Manifold regularization: A geometric framework for learning
from labeled and unlabeled examples. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,7, 2399–2434.
123

==== Page 61 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 433
Ben-David, S., Lu, T., Pál, D., & Sotáková, M. (2009). Learning low density separators. In Proceedings of the
12th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 25–32).
Bengio, Y ., Delalleau, O., & Le Roux, N. (2006). Chapter 11. Label propagation and quadratic criterion. In
O. Chapelle, B. Schölkopf, & A. Zien (Eds.), Semi-supervised learning (pp. 193–216). Cambridge: The
MIT Press.
Bennett, K. P., & Demiriz, A. (1999). Semi-supervised support vector machines. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 368–374).
Bennett, K. P., Demiriz, A., & Maclin, R. (2002). Exploiting unlabeled data in ensemble methods. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp.
289–296). ACM.
Berthelot, D., Carlini, N., Goodfellow, I., Papernot, N., Oliver, A., & Raffel, C. (2019). Mixmatch: A holistic
approach to semi-supervised learning .arXiv:1905.02249 .
Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning . Berlin: Springer.
Blum, A., & Chawla, S. (2001). Learning from labeled and unlabeled data using graph mincuts. In Proceedings
of the 18th international conference on machine learning (pp. 19–26).
Blum, A., Lafferty, J., Rwebangira, M. R., & Reddy, R. (2004). Semi-supervised learning using randomized
mincuts. In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on machine learning (p. 13).
Blum, A., & Mitchell, T. (1998). Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceedings of
the 11th annual conference on computational learning theory (pp. 92–100). ACM.
Bruna, J., Zaremba, W., Szlam, A., & LeCun, Y . (2014). Spectral networks and locally connected networks
on graphs. In International conference on learning, representations .
Chapelle, O., Chi, M., & Zien, A. (2006a). A continuation method for semi-supervised SVMs. In Proceedings
of the 23rd international conference on machine learning (pp. 185–192).
Chapelle, O., Schölkopf, B., & Zien, A. (2006b). Semi-supervised learning (1st ed.). Cambridge: The MIT
Press.
Chapelle, O., Sindhwani, V ., & Keerthi, S. S. (2008). Optimization techniques for semi-supervised support
vector machines. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,9, 203–233.
Chapelle, O., & Zien, A. (2005). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation by low density separation. In Proceedings of
the 10th international workshop on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 57–64).
Chen, K., & Wang, S. (2011). Semi-supervised learning via regularized boosting working on multiple semi-
supervised assumptions. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,33(1), 129–
143.
Chen, M., Chen, Y ., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2011). Automatic feature decomposition for single view co-training.
InProceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (pp. 953–960).
Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 785–794). ACM.
Christoudias, C. M., Urtasun, R., Kapoorz, A., & Darrell, T. (2009). Co-training with noisy perceptual obser-
vations. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp.
2844–2851). IEEE.
Collobert, R., Sinz, F., Weston, J., & Bottou, L. (2006). Large scale transductive SVMs. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,7, 1687–1712.
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., & Kuksa, P. (2011). Natural language
processing (almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12, 2493–2537.
Corduneanu, A., & Jaakkola, T. (2003). On information regularization. In Proceedings of the 19th conference
on uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 151–158). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Cortes, C., & Mohri, M. (2007). On transductive regression. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (pp. 305–312).
Cozman, F. G., Cohen, I., & Cirelo, M. C. (2003) Semi-supervised learning of mixture models. In Proceedings
of the 20th international conference on machine learning (pp. 99–106).
Culp, M., & Michailidis, G. (2008). An iterative algorithm for extending learners to a semi-supervised setting.
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics ,17(3), 545–571.
Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, F., Cohen, W. W., & Salakhutdinov, R.R. (2017). Good semi-supervised learning that
requires a bad gan. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 6510–6520).
d’Alché Buc, F., Grandvalet, Y ., & Ambroise, C. (2002). Semi-supervised marginboost. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems ,1, 553–560.
Dara, R., Kremer, S. C., & Stacey, D. A. (2002). Clustering unlabeled data with SOMs improves classiﬁcation
of labeled real-world data. In Proceedings of the international joint conference on neural networks (V ol.
3, pp. 2237–2242). IEEE.
Dasgupta, S., Littman, M. L., & McAllester, D. A. (2002). PAC generalization bounds for co-training. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 375–382).
123

==== Page 62 ====
434 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
de Bie, T., & Cristianini, N. (2004). Convex methods for transduction. In Advances in neural information
processing systems (pp. 73–80).
de Bie, T., & Cristianini, N. (2006). Semi-supervised learning using semi-deﬁnite programming. In O. Chapelle,
B. Schölkopf, & A. Zien (Eds.), Semi-supervised learning (pp. 119–135). Cambridge: The MIT Press.
de Sousa, C. A. R., Rezende, S. O., & Batista, G. E. (2013) Inﬂuence of graph construction on semi-supervised
learning. In Proceedings of the joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery
in databases (pp. 160–175). Springer.
Demiriz, A., Bennett, K. P., & Embrechts, M. J. (1999). Semi-supervised clustering using genetic algorithms.
InArtiﬁcial Neural Networks in Engineering (pp. 809–814).
Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., & Rubin, D. B. (1977). Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM
algorithm. Journal of the Royal statistical society, Series B ,39, 1–38.
Deng, C., & Zu Guo, M. (2011). A new co-training-style random forest for computer aided diagnosis. Journal
of Intelligent Information Systems ,36(3), 253–281.
Denis, F., Gilleron, R., & Letouzey, F. (2005). Learning from positive and unlabeled examples. Theoretical
Computer Science ,348(1), 70–83.
Doersch, C. (2016). Tutorial on variational autoencoders .arXiv:1606.05908 .
Dópido, I., Li, J., Marpu, P. R., Plaza, A., Dias, J. M. B., & Benediktsson, J. A. (2013). Semisupervised self-
learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,
51(7), 4032–4044.
Du, J., Ling, C. X., & Zhou, Z. H. (2011). When does cotraining work in real data? IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering ,23(5), 788–799.
Dua, D., & Graff, C. (2019). UCI machine learning repository. Retrieved September 12, 2019 from http://
archive.ics.uci.edu/ml .
Duvenaud, D. K., Maclaurin, D., Iparraguirre, J., Bombarell, R., Hirzel, T., Aspuru-Guzik, A., & Adams, R.
P. (2015). Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 2224–2232).
Elkan, C., & Noto, K. (2008). Learning classiﬁers from only positive and unlabeled data. In Proceedings of the
14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 213–220).
ACM.
Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., & Hutter, F. (2019). Neural architecture search: A survey. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,20(55), 1–21.
Erhan, D., Bengio, Y ., Courville, A., Manzagol, P. A., Vincent, P., & Bengio, S. (2010). Why does unsupervised
pre-training help deep learning? Journal of Machine Learning Research ,11, 625–660.
Feurer, M., Klein, A., Eggensperger, K., Springenberg, J., Blum, M., & Hutter, F. (2015). Efﬁcient and robust
automated machine learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 2962–2970).
Freund, Y ., & Schapire, R. E. (1997). A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application
to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences ,55(1), 119–139.
Geng, B., Tao, D., Xu, C., Yang, L., & Hua, X. S. (2012). Ensemble manifold regularization. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,34(6), 1227–1233.
Goldberg, A. B., Zhu, X., Singh, A., Xu, Z., & Nowak, R. D. (2009). Multi-manifold semi-supervised learning.
InProceedings of the 12th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 169–176).
Goldman, S., & Zhou, Y . (2000) Enhancing supervised learning with unlabeled data. In Proceedings of the
17th international conference on machine learning (pp. 327–334).
Goodfellow, I. (2017). NIPS 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial networks .arXiv:1701.00160 .
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y ., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning . Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., & Bengio, Y .
(2014a). Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 2672–
2680).
Goodfellow, I., Shlens, J., & Szegedy, C. (2014b). Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples .
arXiv:1412.6572 .
Grabner, H., Leistner, C., Bischof, H. (2008). Semi-supervised on-line boosting for robust tracking. Proceed-
ings of the 10th European conference on computer vision (pp. 234–247).
Grandvalet, Y ., & Bengio, Y . (2005). Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 529–536).
Grandvalet, Y ., d’Alché Buc, F., & Ambroise, C. (2001). Boosting mixture models for semi-supervised learning.
International conference on artiﬁcial neural networks (pp. 41–48).
Grira, N., Crucianu, M., & Boujemaa, N. (2004). Unsupervised and semisupervised clustering: A brief survey.
In7th ACM SIGMM international workshop on multimedia information retrieval .
123

==== Page 63 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 435
Grover, A., & Leskovec, J. (2016). node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 855–864).
ACM.
Guyon, I., & Elisseeff, A. (2006). An introduction to feature extraction. In I. Guyon, M. Nikravesh, S. Gunn,
&L .A .Z a d e h( E d s . ) , Feature extraction (pp. 1–25). Berlin: Springer.
Haffari, G. R., & Sarkar, A. (2007). Analysis of semi-supervised learning with the Yarowsky algorithm. In
Proceedings of the 23rd conference on uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 159–166).
Hammersley, J. M., & Clifford, P. (1971). Markov ﬁelds on ﬁnite graphs and lattices. Retrieved October 27,
2019 from http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~grg/books/hammfest/hamm-cliff.pdf .
He, R., Zheng, W. S., Hu, B. G., & Kong, X. W. (2011). Nonnegative sparse coding for discriminative
semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition (pp. 2849–2856). IEEE.
Hein, M., & Maier, M. (2007). Manifold denoising. In Advances in neural information processing systems
(pp. 561–568).
Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S., & Teh, Y . W. (2006). A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural
Computation ,18(7), 1527–1554.
Huang, B., & Jebara, T. (2011). Fast b-matching via sufﬁcient selection belief propagation. In Proceedings of
the 14th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp. 361–369).
Jayadeva, K. R., & Chandra, S. (2007). Twin support vector machines for pattern classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,29(5), 905–910.
Jebara, T., Wang, J., & Chang, S. F. (2009) Graph construction and b-matching for semi-supervised learning.
InProceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning (pp. 441–448).
Joachims, T. (1999). Transductive inference for text classiﬁcation using support vector machines. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th international conference on machine learning (V ol. 99, pp. 200–209).
Joachims, T. (2003). Transductive learning via spectral graph partitioning. In Proceedings of the 20th inter-
national conference on machine learning (pp. 290–297).
Karasuyama, M., & Mamitsuka, H. (2013) Manifold-based similarity adaptation for label propagation. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1547–1555).
Kingma, D. P., Mohamed, S., Rezende, D. J., & Welling, M. (2014). Semi-supervised learning with deep
generative models. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3581–3589).
Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. (2013). Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In International conference on learn-
ing, representations .
Kipf, T. N., & Welling, M. (2016). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks .
arXiv:1609.02907 .
Kiritchenko, S., & Matwin, S. (2001). Email classiﬁcation with co-training. In Proceedings of the 2001
conference of the centre for advanced studies on collaborative research (P. 8). IBM press.
Kohonen, T. (1998). The self-organizing map. Neurocomputing ,21(1–3), 1–6.
Krizhevsky, A. (2009). Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images . Master’s thesis, University of
Toronto, Department of Computer Science.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1097–1105).
Kveton, B., Valko, M., Rahimi, A., & Huang, L. (2010). Semi-supervised learning with max-margin graph
cuts. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (pp.
421–428).
Laine, S., & Aila, T. (2017). Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. In International conference
on learning, representations .
Lange, T., Law, M. H., Jain, A. K., & Buhmann, J. M. (2005). Learning with constrained and unlabelled data.
InProceedings of the 2005 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (V ol. 1, pp.
731–738). IEEE.
Lawrence, N. D., & Jordan, M. I. (2005). Semi-supervised learning via Gaussian processes. In Advances in
neural information processing systems (pp. 753–760).
LeCun, Y ., Bengio, Y ., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature ,521(7553), 436.
Lee, D. H. (2013). Pseudo-label: The simple and efﬁcient semi-supervised learning method for deep neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 30th ICML workshop on challenges in representation learning (V ol. 3,
p. 2).
Leistner, C., Saffari, A., Santner, J., Bischof, H. (2009). Semi-supervised random forests. In Proceedings of
the IEEE 12th international conference on computer vision (pp. 506–513). IEEE.
Levati´ c, J., Ceci, M., Kocev, D., & Džeroski, S. (2017). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation trees. Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems ,49(3), 461–486.
Li, C., Xu, K., Zhu, J., & Zhang, B. (2017). Triple generative adversarial nets .arXiv:1703.02291 .
123

==== Page 64 ====
436 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Li, M., & Zhou, Z. H. (2007). Improve computer-aided diagnosis with machine learning techniques using
undiagnosed samples. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics—Part A: Systems and
Humans ,37(6), 1088–1098.
Li, S., & Fu, Y . (2013). Low-rank coding with b-matching constraint for semi-supervised classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 23rd international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 1472–1478).
Li, S., & Fu, Y . (2015). Learning balanced and unbalanced graphs via low-rank coding. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,27(5), 1274–1287.
Li, Y . F., & Zhou, Z. H. (2015). Towards making unlabeled data never hurt. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,37(1), 175–188.
Liu, B., Lee, W. S., Yu, P. S., & Li, X. (2002). Partially supervised classiﬁcation of text documents. In
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on machine learning (V ol. 2, pp. 387–394).
Liu, G., Lin, Z., & Yu, Y . (2010a). Robust subspace segmentation by low-rank representation. In Proceedings
of the 27th international conference on machine learning (pp. 663–670).
Liu, W., & Chang, S. F. (2009). Robust multi-class transductive learning with graphs. In Proceedings of the
2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 381–388). IEEE.
Liu, W., He, J., & Chang, S. F. (2010b). Large graph construction for scalable semi-supervised learning. In
Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (pp. 679–686).
Liu, X., Song, M., Tao, D., Liu, Z., Zhang, L., Chen, C., & Bu, J. (2013). Semi-supervised node splitting for
random forest construction. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition (pp. 492–499). IEEE.
Liu, W., Wang, J., & Chang, S. F. (2012). Robust and scalable graph-based semisupervised learning. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE ,100(9), 2624–2638.
Liu, X., Song, M., Tao, D., Liu, Z., Zhang, L., Chen, C., et al. (2015). Random forest construction with robust
semisupervised node splitting. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,24(1), 471–483.
Lu, Q., Getoor, L. (2003). Link-based classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
machine learning (pp. 496–503).
Luo, Y ., Zhu, J., Li, M., Ren, Y ., & Zhang, B. (2018). Smooth neighbors on teacher graphs for semi-supervised
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 8896–
8905).
Maier, M., Luxburg, U. V ., & Hein, M. (2009). Inﬂuence of graph construction on graph-based clustering
measures. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1025–1032).
Mallapragada, P. K., Jin, R., Jain, A. K., & Liu, Y . (2009). Semiboost: Boosting for semi-supervised learning.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,31(11), 2000–2014.
Melacci, S., & Belkin, M. (2011). Laplacian support vector machines trained in the primal. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,12, 1149–1184.
Mihalcea, R. (2004). Co-training and self-training for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 8th
conference on computational natural language learning .
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013) Distributed representations of words
and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3111–
3119).
Miyato, T., Maeda, S. I., Koyama, M., & Ishii, S. (2018). Virtual adversarial training: A regularization method
for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence ,41(8), 1979–1993.
Netzer, Y ., Wang, T., Coates, A., Bissacco, A., Wu, B., & Ng, A.Y . (2011). Reading digits in natural images with
unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS workshop on deep learning and unsupervised feature learning .
Neville, J., & Jensen, D. (2000). Iterative classiﬁcation in relational data. In Proceedings of the 17th AAAI
workshop on learning statistical models from relational data (pp. 13–20).
Nigam, K., & Ghani, R. (2000). Analyzing the effectiveness and applicability of co-training. In Proceedings
of the 9th international conference on information and knowledge management (pp. 86–93). ACM.
Nigam, K., McCallum, A., Mitchell, T. (2006). Semi-supervised text classiﬁcation using EM. In Semi-
Supervised Learning (pp. 33–56).
Nigam, K., McCallum, A. K., Thrun, S., & Mitchell, T. (2000). Text classiﬁcation from labeled and unlabeled
documents using EM. Machine Learning ,39(2), 103–134.
Niyogi, P. (2008). Manifold regularization and semi-supervised learning: Some theoretical analyses. Journal
of Machine Learning Research ,14(1), 1229–1250.
Odena, A. (2016). Semi-supervised learning with generative adversarial networks .arXiv:1606.01583 .
Oliver, A., Odena, A., Raffel, C., Cubuk, E. D., Goodfellow, I. J. (2018). Realistic evaluation of deep semi-
supervised learning algorithms .arXiv:1804.09170 .
123

==== Page 65 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 437
Oshiro, T. M., Perez, P. S., & Baranauskas, J. A. (2012). How many trees in a random forest? In Proceedings of
the international workshop on machine learning and data mining in pattern recognition (pp. 154–168).
Springer.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2004). A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting on association for computational
linguistics, association for computational linguistics (p. 271).
Park, S., Park, J., Shin, S., & Moon, I. (2018). Adversarial dropout for supervised and semi-supervised learning.
InProceedings of the thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 3917–3924).
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., &
Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In NIPS Autodiff workshop .
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V ., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., et al. (2011). Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12, 2825–2830.
Perozzi, B., Al-Rfou, R., & Skiena, S. (2014). Deepwalk: Online learning of social representations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining(pp. 701–710). ACM.
Pezeshki, M., Fan, L., Brakel, P., Courville, A., & Bengio, Y . (2016). Deconstructing the ladder network
architecture. In Proceedings of the 33rd international conference on machine learning (pp. 2368–2376).
Pitelis, N., Russell, C., & Agapito, L. (2013). Learning a manifold as an atlas. In Proceedings of the 2013
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 1642–1649). IEEE.
Pitelis, N., Russell, C., & Agapito, L. (2014). Semi-supervised learning using an unsupervised atlas. In Pro-
ceedings of the joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases(pp. 565–580). Springer.
Prémont-Schwarz, I., Ilin, A., Hao, T., Rasmus, A., Boney, R., & Valpola, H. (2017). Recurrent ladder networks.
In: I. Guyon, U. V . Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, R. Garnett (eds.),
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 6009–6019).
Provost, F., & Domingos, P. (2003). Tree induction for probability-based ranking. Machine Learning ,52(3),
199–215.
Qi, Z., Tian, Y ., & Shi, Y . (2012). Laplacian twin support vector machine for semi-supervised classiﬁcation.
Neural Networks ,35, 46–53.
Rasmus, A., Berglund, M., Honkala, M., Valpola, H., & Raiko, T. (2015). Semi-supervised learning with
ladder networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3546–3554).
Ratle, F., Camps-Valls, G., & Weston, J. (2010). Semisupervised neural networks for efﬁcient hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,48(5), 2271–2282.
Rifai, S., Dauphin, Y . N., Vincent, P., Bengio, Y ., & Muller, X. (2011a). The manifold tangent classiﬁer. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 2294–2302).
Rifai, S., Vincent, P., Muller, X., Glorot, X., & Bengio, Y . (2011b). Contractive auto-encoders: Explicit
invariance during feature extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine
learning (pp. 833–840).
Rosenberg, C., Hebert, M., & Schneiderman, H. (2005). Semi-supervised self-training of object detection
models. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE workshop on applications of computer vision (pp. 29–36).
Roweis, S. T., & Saul, L. K. (2000). Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. Science ,
290(5500), 2323–2326.
Sajjadi, M., Javanmardi, M., & Tasdizen, T. (2016). Regularization with stochastic transformations and per-
turbations for deep semi-supervised learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp.
1163–1171).
Salimans, T., Goodfellow, I., Zaremba, W., Cheung, V ., Radford, A., & Chen, X. (2016). Improved techniques
for training gans. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 2234–2242).
Sen, P., Namata, G., Bilgic, M., Getoor, L., Galligher, B., & Eliassi-Rad, T. (2008). Collective classiﬁcation
in network data. AI Magazine ,29(3), 93.
Settles, B. (2012). Active learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning ,6(1),
1–114.
Sheikhpour, R., Sarram, M. A., Gharaghani, S., & Chahooki, M. A. Z. (2017). A survey on semi-supervised
feature selection methods. Pattern Recognition ,64, 141–158.
Shental, N., & Domany, E. (2005). Semi-supervised learning—A statistical physics approach. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ICML workshop on learning with partially classiﬁed training data .
Sindhwani, V ., Niyogi, P., & Belkin, M. (2005). A co-regularization approach to semi-supervised learning
with multiple views. In Proceedings of the 22nd ICML workshop on learning with multiple views (pp.
74–79).
Sindhwani, V ., & Rosenberg, D. S. (2008). An RKHS for multi-view learning and manifold co-regularization.
InProceedings of the 25th international conference on machine learning (pp. 976–983).
123

==== Page 66 ====
438 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Singh, A., Nowak, R., & Zhu, X. (2009) Unlabeled data: Now it helps, now it doesn’t. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 1513–1520).
Solomon, J., Rustamov, R., Guibas, L., & Butscher, A. (2014) Wasserstein propagation for semi-supervised
learning. In Proceedings of the 31st international conference on machine learning (pp. 306–314).
Springenberg, J. T. (2015). Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning with categorical generative adversarial
networks. arXiv:1511.06390 .
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: a simple way
to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,15(1), 1929–1958.
Subramanya, A., & Bilmes, J. (2008). Soft-supervised learning for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, association for computationallinguistics (pp. 1090–1099).
Subramanya, A., & Bilmes, J. (2011). Semi-supervised learning with measure propagation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research ,12, 3311–3370.
Subramanya, A., & Talukdar, P. P. (2014). Graph-based semi-supervised learning. Synthesis Lectures on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning ,8(4), 1–125.
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I., et al. (2013). Intriguing properties
of neural networks .arXiv:1312.6199 .
Szummer, M., & Jaakkola, T. (2002) Partially labeled classiﬁcation with Markov random walks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems (pp. 945–952).
Szummer, M., & Jaakkola, T. S. (2003) Information regularization with partially labeled data. In Advances in
neural information processing systems (pp. 1049–1056).
Talukdar, P. P., & Crammer, K. (2009). New regularized algorithms for transductive learning. In Proceedings of
the joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases (pp. 442–457).
Springer.
Talukdar, P. P., Reisinger, J., Pa¸ sca, M., Ravichandran, D., Bhagat, R., & Pereira, F. (2008). Weakly-supervised
acquisition of labeled class instances using graph random walks. In Proceedings of the conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing, association for computational linguistics (pp. 582–
590).
Tan, C., Lee, L., Tang, J., Jiang, L., Zhou, M., & Li, P. (2011). User-level sentiment analysis incorporating social
networks. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining (pp. 1397–1405). ACM.
Tang, J., Qu, M., Wang, M., Zhang, M., Yan, J., & Mei, Q. (2015). Line: Large-scale information network
embedding. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, international world
wide web conferences steering committee (pp. 1067–1077).
Tanha, J., van Someren, M., & Afsarmanesh, H. (2012). An adaboost algorithm for multiclass semi-supervised
learning. In Proceedings of the 12th IEEE international conference on data mining (pp. 1116–1121).
IEEE.
Tanha, J., van Someren, M., & Afsarmanesh, H. (2017). Semi-supervised self-training for decision tree clas-
siﬁers. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics ,8(1), 355–370.
Tarvainen, A., & Valpola, H. (2017) Weight-averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep
learning results. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1195–1204).
Thornton, C., Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H., & Leyton-Brown, K. (2013) Auto-weka: Combined selection and
hyperparameter optimization of classiﬁcation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 847–855). ACM.
Triguero, I., García, S., & Herrera, F. (2015). Self-labeled techniques for semi-supervised learning: Taxonomy,
software and empirical study. Knowledge and Information Systems ,42(2), 245–284.
Triguero, I., González, S., Moyano, J. M., García López, S., Alcalá Fernández, J., Luengo Martín, J., et al.
(2017). KEEL 3.0: An open source software for multi-stage analysis in data mining. International Journal
of Computational Intelligence Systems
,10, 1238–1249.
Urner, R., Ben-David, S., & Shalev-Shwartz, S. (2011). Access to unlabeled data can speed up prediction time.
InProceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (pp. 641–648).
Valizadegan, H., Jin, R., & Jain, A. K. (2008). Semi-supervised boosting for multi-class classiﬁcation. In
Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases (pp. 522–537).
Springer.
Vapnik, V . (1998). Statistical learning theory (V ol. 1). New York: Wiley.
Verma, V ., Lamb, A., Kannala, J., Bengio, Y ., & Lopez-Paz, D. (2019). Interpolation consistency training for
semi-supervised learning .arXiv:1903.03825 .
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y ., Manzagol, P. A. (2008). Extracting and composing robust features
with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on machine learning
(pp. 1096–1103).
123

==== Page 67 ====
Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 439
Wager, S., Wang, S., & Liang, P. S. (2013). Dropout training as adaptive regularization. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (pp. 351–359).
Wan, X. (2009). Co-training for cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 47th annual
meeting of the ACL, association for computational linguistics (pp. 235–243).
Wang, D., Cui, P., Zhu, W. (2016). Structural deep network embedding. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 1225–1234). ACM.
Wang, F., & Zhang, C. (2008). Label propagation through linear neighborhoods. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering ,20(1), 55–67.
Wang, J., Jebara, T., & Chang, S. F. (2008a). Graph transduction via alternating minimization. In Proceedings
of the 25th international conference on machine learning (pp. 1144–1151).
Wang, J., Jebara, T., & Chang, S. F. (2013). Semi-supervised learning using greedy max-cut. Journal of
Machine Learning Research ,14, 771–800.
Wang, J., Luo, S. W., & Zeng. X. H. (2008b). A random subspace method for co-training. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international joint conference on neural networks (pp. 195–200). IEEE.
Wang, W., & Zhou, Z. H. (2007). Analyzing co-training style algorithms. In Proceedings of the 18th European
conference on machine learning (pp. 454–465). Springer.
Wang, W., Zhou, Z. H. (2010). A new analysis of co-training. In Proceedings of the 27th international
conference on machine learning (pp. 1135–1142).
Weston, J., Ratle, F., & Collobert, R. (2008). Deep learning via semi-supervised embedding. In Proceedings
of the 25th international conference on machine learning (pp. 1168–1175).
Wold, S., Esbensen, K., & Geladi, P. (1987). Principal component analysis. Chemometrics and Intelligent
Laboratory Systems ,2(1–3), 37–52.
Wright, J., Yang, A. Y ., Ganesh, A., Sastry, S. S., & Ma, Y . (2009). Robust face recognition via sparse
representation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,31(2), 210–227.
Wu, X. M., Li, Z., So, A. M., Wright, J., & Chang, S. F. (2012a). Learning with partially absorbing random
walks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3077–3085).
Wu, Z., Wu, J., Cao, J., & Tao, D. (2012b). Hysad: A semi-supervised hybrid shilling attack detector for
trustworthy product recommendation. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 985–993). ACM.
Xu, C., Tao, D., & Xu, C. (2013). A survey on multi-view learning .arXiv:1304.5634 .
Xu, J., He, H., & Man, H. (2012). Dcpe co-training for classiﬁcation. Neurocomputing ,86, 75–85.
Xu, L., & Schuurmans, D. (2005) Unsupervised and semi-supervised multi-class support vector machines. In
Proceedings of the 20th national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (V ol. 5, p. 13).
Yan, S., & Wang, H. (2009). Semi-supervised learning by sparse representation. In Proceedings of the 2009
SIAM international conference on data mining (pp. 792–801). SIAM.
Yang, Z., Cohen, W. W., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2016) Revisiting semi-supervised learning with graph embed-
dings. In Proceedings of the 33rd international conference on machine learning (pp. 40–48).
Yarowsky, D. (1995). Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceedings
of the 33rd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, association for computationallinguistics (pp. 189–196).
Yaslan, Y ., & Cataltepe, Z. (2010). Co-training with relevant random subspaces. Neurocomputing ,73(10),
1652–1661.
Yu, S., Krishnapuram, B., Rosales, R., & Rao, R. B. (2011). Bayesian co-training. Journal of Machine Learning
Research ,
12, 2649–2680.
Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y . N., & Lopez-Paz, D. (2018). mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization.
InInternational conference on learning representations .
Zhang, K., Kwok, J. T., & Parvin, B. (2009). Prototype vector machine for large scale semi-supervised learning.
InProceedings of the 26th international conference on machine learning (pp. 1233–1240).
Zhang, W., & Zheng, Q. (2009). Tsfs: A novel algorithm for single view co-training. In Proceedings of the 2nd
IEEE international joint conference on computational sciences and optimization (V ol. 1, pp. 492–496).
IEEE.
Zhou, D., Bousquet, O., Lal, T. N., Weston, J., & Schölkopf, B. (2004). Learning with local and global
consistency. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 321–328).
Zhou, Y ., & Goldman, S. (2004) Democratic co-learning. In Proceedings of the 16th IEEE international
conference on tools with artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 594–602). IEEE.
Zhou, Z. H. (2012). Ensemble methods: Foundations and algorithms . Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Zhou, Z. H., & Li, M. (2005a) Semi-supervised regression with co-training. In Proceedings of the 19th
international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (V ol. 5, pp. 908–913).
Zhou, Z. H., & Li, M. (2005b). Tri-training: Exploiting unlabeled data using three classiﬁers. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,17(11), 1529–1541.
123

==== Page 68 ====
440 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Zhou, Z. H., & Li, M. (2010). Semi-supervised learning by disagreement. Knowledge and Information Systems ,
24(3), 415–439.
Zhu, X. (2005). Semi-supervised learning with graphs . Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon University.
Zhu, X. (2008). Semi-supervised learning literature survey . Technical Report. 1530, University of Wisconsin-
Madison.
Zhu, X., & Ghahramani, Z. (2002a). Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propagation .
Technical Report. CMU-CALD-02-107, Carnegie Mellon University.
Zhu, X., & Ghahramani, Z. (2002b) Towards semi-supervised classiﬁcation with Markov random ﬁelds . Tech-
nival Report. CMU-CALD-02-106, Carnegie Mellon University.
Zhu, X., Ghahramani, Z., & Lafferty, J. D. (2003) Semi-supervised learning using Gaussian ﬁelds and harmonic
functions. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning (pp. 912–919).
Zhu, X., & Goldberg, A. B. (2009). Introduction to semi-supervised learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning ,3(1), 1–130.
Zhu, X., & Lafferty, J. (2005). Harmonic mixtures: Combining mixture models and graph-based methods for
inductive and scalable semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
machine learning (pp. 1052–1059). ACM.
Zhuang, L., Gao, H., Lin, Z., Ma, Y ., Zhang, X., & Yu, N. (2012) Non-negative low rank and sparse graph for
semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition (pp. 2328–2335). IEEE.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123

