==== Page 1 ====
Highlights
A Survey of Multi-Agent Human-Robot Interaction Systems
Abhinav Dahiya, Alexander M. Aroyo, Kerstin Dautenhahn, Stephen L. Smith
•Multi-agent systems in the Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) literature are surveyed
•Graph representation of interaction models is intro-
duced for multi-agent HRI systems
•Three core aspects of multi-agent HRI systems are
identied: Team structure, Interaction style, and
Computational characteristics
•Under these core aspects, HRI systems discussed un-
der ve attributes like Team composition, Interaction
model etc.
•The survey points out that multi-human { multi-robot
systems need more attention
•More research is also required on human behavioral
understanding in mixed/heterogeneous human-robot
teamsarXiv:2212.05286v1  [cs.RO]  10 Dec 2022

==== Page 2 ====
A Survey of Multi-Agent Human-Robot Interaction Systems
Abhinav Dahiyaa,, Alexander M. Aroyoa, Kerstin Dautenhahna,b, Stephen L. Smitha
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
bDepartment of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
This article presents a survey of literature in the area of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), specically on systems
containing more than two agents (i.e., having multiple humans and/or multiple robots). We identify three core aspects of
\Multi-agent" HRI systems that are useful for understanding how these systems dier from dyadic systems and from one
another. These are the Team structure, Interaction style among agents, and the system's Computational characteristics.
Under these core aspects, we present ve attributes of HRI systems, namely Team size, Team composition, Interaction
model, Communication modalities, and Robot control. These attributes are used to characterize and distinguish one
system from another. We populate resulting categories with examples from the recent literature along with a brief
discussion of their applications. We also analyze how these attributes in multi-agent systems dier from the case of
dyadic human-robot systems. Through this survey, we summarize key observations from the current literature, and
identify challenges and promising areas for future research in this domain. In order to realize the vision of robots being
part of the society and interacting seamlessly with humans, there is a need to expand research on multi-human { multi-
robot systems. Not only do these systems require coordination among several agents, they also involve multi-agent and
indirect interactions which are absent from dyadic HRI systems. Adding multiple agents in HRI systems requires more
advanced interaction schemes, behavior understanding and control methods to allow natural interactions among humans
and robots. In addition, research on human behavioral understanding in mixed human-robot teams also requires more
attention. This will help formulate and implement eective robot control policies in HRI systems with large numbers of
heterogeneous robots and humans; a team composition reecting many real-world scenarios.
Keywords: Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Multi-Agent System, Robots in Groups, Human-Robot Teams
1. Introduction
Research in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has facil-
itated the introduction of robots in human spaces, and
has gained signicant momentum in the past two decades.
Existing literature indicate that the vast majority of past
research pertains to dyadic systems where a single human
interacts with a single robot. However, this trend is chang-
ing now. With the improvement in physical and computa-
tional capabilities of robotic systems, we see robots work-
ing in teams of more than two, moving beyond the typ-
ical dyadic HRI systems. Even though multi-agent HRI
systems are built on similar infrastructure as dyadic sys-
tems, there are several dierences. Multi-agent HRI sys-
tems require more complex control strategies to coordi-
nate several agents that may be dissimilar to one another
?This research is supported in part by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), in part by the
Innovation for Defence Excellence and Security (IDEaS) Program
of the Canadian Department of National Defence through grant
CFPMN2-037, and in part by funding from the Canada 150 Research
Chairs Program.
Corresponding author.
Email address: abhinav.dahiya@uwaterloo.ca(in roles, communication modes etc.), can involve inter-
actions that connect more than two agents at once, and
need special attention to address any conicts that may
arise from their interactions. These dierences mean that
control strategies developed for dyadic systems are either
not applicable to multi-agent systems or they do not work
as intended. Therefore, in the research literature, we see
numerous studies addressing one or more aspects of multi-
agent HRI systems specically. Through this survey we
aim to organize the existing work, and suggest a structure
through which researchers can compare and contrast the
existing and future research.
A human-robot system can have a varied number of
agents, both humans and robots, interacting with each
other. Even though any human-robot system is technically
a multi-agent system (comprised of at least one human and
one robot), in the HRI literature, the terminology is used
dierently. In HRI literature, dyadic systems refer to the
ones built around interactions between exactly one robot
and one human. Triadic systems have three agents, with
either two humans and a robot, or two robots and a hu-
man (Gvirsman et al., 2020; Gombolay et al., 2015). For
systems with three or more agents, terms such as teams or
groups are used (Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten,
Preprint submitted to Robotics and Autonomous Systems December 13, 2022

==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1: Left: HRI system for robot-assisted tower construction task where the robot allocates tower pieces between two human teammates
(Jung et al., 2020). Right: The corresponding interaction graph representation of the system. In the graph, each human and robot is denoted
by a node. Each arrow represents an interaction and its direction signies the direction of information ow. When information ow between
two nodes is present in both directions, a bi-directional arrow is used. In this system, human behavior is dependent on robot's actions while
the robot's actions are independent of its human teammates (thus the uni-directional arrows). Both humans can potentially discuss their
next actions with the other human teammate (denoted by the bi-directional arrow).
2020). In this article, we use the term multi-agent to re-
fer to any human-robot system containing more than one
human (multi-human) and/or more than one robot (multi-
robot). Robots assisting humans in an industrial task, a
group of humans and robots doing a social activity, and hu-
man operators controlling multiple robots are some exam-
ples of multi-agent HRI systems. Such systems are shown
in Figures 4(b), 6(b) and 6(c) respectively. This article
frequently refers to related work on dierent multi-agent
HRI systems and illustrates the work in the subsequent
sections. Figure 1, as an example of a multi-agent HRI
system, shows a system with two humans being assisted
by a robot arm in a tower construction task.
In the literature, we nd several studies and articles that
review research in the eld of HRI and Collaboration, e.g.
(Selvaggio et al., 2021; Bartneck et al., 2020; Sheridan,
2016; Thomaz et al., 2016). There are also studies present-
ing taxonomies and classication criteria for HRI systems
in general, and reviewing the work done in dierent so-
cial and industrial applications of HRI, e.g. (Wang et al.,
2017; Yanco and Drury, 2004). Lewis (2013) reviews the
literature on human supervision of multiple robots that
are situated remotely, and analyses such systems under
the notion of command complexity . Thomaz et al. (2016)
present a detailed review of the computational aspects of
HRI studies, covering topics such as algorithms, modelling
and computational framework design. Human-Swarm In-
teraction (HSI) is another subset of multi-agent systems
where a small number of humans (commonly one) interact
with a group of robots that coordinate among themselves
and often act as an unied entity. Kolling et al. (2015)
present a comprehensive survey of Human-Swarm interac-
tion systems and discuss core concepts for their design. In
the multi-agent HRI literature, Sebo et al. (2020) present
a review of studies involving robots' interactions with a
group or team of people, and explores characteristics ofsuch systems. The article discusses the role a robot plays
in a group of humans and the inuence it has in such
groups. The main focus of their article is on human-robot
systems consisting of multiple humans irrespective of the
number of robots. In Oliveira et al. (2021), the authors
discuss methodological and transversal issues in research
on HRI in small groups from the perspective of social psy-
chology.
To extend the existing multi-agent HRI literature, in
this paper, we expand the scope of existing surveys and
reviews discussed above by including systems having mul-
tiple robots interacting with either a single human or a
group of humans, in and out of a social setting. We also
consider systems built around interactions among multiple
humans and multiple robots simultaneously. In addition,
we also include studies on the theoretical/computational
research, where actual robots or humans are not present,
but which still contain crucial aspects of an HRI system
(e.g., scheduling when to collaborate (Hari et al., 2020;
IJtsma et al., 2019), optimizing collaborative manipula-
tion (Liu et al., 2021) etc.). These systems are a valuable
part of multi-agent HRI literature and provide useful in-
sight into implementation of real systems.
Research in Human-Robot Interaction has a wide scope,
and includes various aspects of robot decision-making, hu-
man behavioral modelling and system analysis. This re-
search area includes any system where robot(s) and hu-
man(s) co-exist, in or out of a team setting, and working
towards shared or distinct objectives. This co-existence
can either be in the same physical environment, resulting
in co-located interactions, or it can emerge in a system
where remotely present agents are connected through a
virtual interface. In addition, work on developing capable
and ecient algorithms to improve interaction between
humans and robots also has an important place in HRI
research. There are three kinds of studies (or a combina-
2

==== Page 4 ====
tion of these) present in the research literature: 1) System
Design: ones that propose a system useful in the context
of HRI (direct application; e.g., Karami et al. (2020)), 2)
Observational: ones that detail a study designed to elicit
dierent features of HRI systems (to understand system
behavior; e.g., Podevijn et al. (2016)) and 3) Algorith-
mic Design: ones that present computational research, in-
cluding algorithms, models and frameworks to solve the
decision-making problems in HRI systems (e.g., Dahiya
et al. (2022)). In this survey we include all three kinds of
studies from the multi-agent HRI literature.
Our inclusion/exclusion criteria: Papers included
in this survey article, dierent from systematic reviews,
were found using online search through issues and proceed-
ings of various journals and conferences related to the HRI
research. The search was further expanded using the cita-
tions of the papers found in the rst step. To be included,
the research work must have an interaction aspect (either
real or synthetic interactions) between at least three agents
1with at least one human and one robot, and the intended
application should be in human-robot interaction. This
means we excluded some human-agent interaction studies
which may be, for example, psychology-oriented. We also
exclude studies where humans are used merely for data
collection, or where the agent is merely a computational
entity without any direct application to the human-robot
interaction aspect, e.g., studies on learning from demon-
stration, or intelligent recommendation systems.
In this survey, we identify ve attributes through which
multi-agent HRI systems can be characterized and com-
pared with each other. These attributes stem from three
core aspects of multi-agent HRI systems: the team struc-
ture/architecture, interaction style, and computational
characteristics (Section 2). Subsequent sections introduce
the resulting categorizations in detail and provide exam-
ples of human-robot interaction systems from the current
literature (Sections 3-5). Several images of multi-agent
HRI systems from the literature are also shown to illustrate
dierent categories23. Key observations regarding each
categorization are listed at the end of the corresponding
section. In Section 6, we comment on interactions between
dierent core aspects and discuss what kind of systems are
commonly seen in the literature, and how that may change
in the future. The survey concludes with a discussion on
main challenges currently being faced in multi-agent HRI
research on various fronts and our insight on possible di-
rections of future research in this eld (Section 7).
1This article does include a few studies with dyadic systems in
order to discuss relevant details.
2It is important to note that one can only show images of systems
where it is possible to capture all agents in a single frame. However,
the scope of multi-agent HRI systems goes far beyond what can
be shown in gures, e.g., systems where interactions are separated
spatially or temporally.
3Images used in the gures of this article are used with permission
from respective copyright holders (publishers/authors).2. Multi-Agent Human-Robot Interaction
In order to formally dene multi-agent Human-Robot
Interaction systems, we rst need to dene `interaction'.
The American Psychological Association (APA, Dictio-
nary of Psychology) denes a social interaction as a process
that involves reciprocal stimulation or response between
two or more individuals. In the context of multi-agent
HRI, however, reciprocity is not a necessary requirement
and an interaction can be dened as: information ow be-
tween two or more agents occurring as a result of commu-
nication, action or mere presence of any of those agents .
This information ow results in change in actions, behav-
ior or mental state of the agents on the receiving end.
Using this denition, we can express a multi-agent HRI
system using an interaction graph (Fig. 1). The gure
shows a multi-agent HRI system and the corresponding
interaction graph. Each agent is depicted as a node in a
directed graph in which each edge represents interaction
between two agents and points towards the direction of
information ow. We use this interaction graph structure
to dene multi-agent HRI systems:
Multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction systems
are the ones for which the interaction graph con-
tains three or more nodes (agents), with at least
three nodes connected via interaction edges, in-
cluding at least one interaction edge between a
human node and a robot node.
The information exchange can happen by means of
verbal/non-verbal communication or through an interac-
tion interface. The agents may be homogeneous in their
roles and identities, or they can be heterogeneous and con-
tribute dierently in the system. Moreover, these agents
can be located in separate environments interacting over
virtual channels or they can share same physical space. In
this survey, we consider the literature on multi-agent HRI
systems and try to characterize them based on dierent
properties.
Interactions in multi-agent human-robot systems do
bear similarities with interactions in human-only groups.
As we discuss in later sections, several studies in the liter-
ature try to apply understanding of human-only groups to
multi-agent human-robot systems (e.g., by using concepts
of human group interactions from social sciences). When
compared to robot-only groups, interactions in human-
robot systems come with a higher uncertainty of outcome,
and studies emphasize making human response to an inter-
action more predictable (e.g. by increasing human's trust
in robots or by making robots' intentions clearer). In this
paper, we also discuss how research from human-only and
robot-only groups can help multi-agent HRI, and open new
avenues for future research.
Human-Robot Interactions among multiple agents,
when compared to dyadic interactions, introduce a num-
ber of changes and complexities in the system. With mul-
tiple agents present, multi-agent interactions and indirect
3

==== Page 5 ====
Figure 2: The dierent categorizations for multi-agent Human-Robot Interactions originating from the three core aspects: the team structure,
the interaction style and the computational characteristics. These aspects bring forth several attributes of systems, each with its own features
and applications.
interactions can emerge in the system. It also becomes
possible to have humans interacting with other humans
and robots with other robots. These Human-Human Inter-
actions (HHI) and Robot-Robot Interactions (RRI) then
ultimately aect (or are aected by) interactions between
humans and robots. The presence of multiple agents also
require advanced communication modalities and interfaces
to enable eective interaction among all agents. As the
number of agents grow in the system, modelling their be-
havior and controlling their actions becomes increasingly
challenging. We look at each of these aspects of multi-
agent HRI systems separately.
We propose that multi-agent HRI systems can be char-
acterized and compared to one another based on three
core aspects: 1) Team structure, 2) Interaction style and
3) Computational characteristics. These aspects represent
the way a system is set up, and the way interactions take
place and methods by which agents are controlled in that
system.
Team Structure: The rst aspect relates to agents
that constitute the human-robot system. This includes
parameters such as the number and types of agents (both
humans and robots) present in the system, and homogene-
ity among dierent agents. Homogeneity is a measure of
similarities in roles, capabilities, embodiment and the au-
thorities granted to each of the agents (deciding who can
initiate an interaction, give commands, request assistance
etc.).
Interaction Style: The second aspect of multi-agent
HRI systems describes how the agents interact with each
other. This includes factors such as modality of communi-
cation happening among the agents and interaction models
being implemented. This tells us the way in which interac-
tions take place in the system (through a screen or speechetc.) and the agents involved (between two or among mul-
tiple agents).
Computational Characteristics: The third aspect
looks into the software part of HRI systems and describes
how the behavior of dierent agents is controlled or in-
uenced. This includes robot task planning algorithms,
model-based/model-free controllers and other ways of de-
ciding robots' actions in the system, and the ways in which
they are used to inuence human behavior.
These three aspects provide us a way to establish dis-
tinctions and comparisons among multi-agent HRI sys-
tems. For instance, consider a system where a human op-
erator is supervising a team of remote mobile robots (e.g.,
(Swamy et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2017)). We can char-
acterize this system as one with a single human interacting
with multiple robots (team size), and one where all robots
are similar to one another (homogeneity). The human
might be able to give high-level commands to the robot
group or control them individually (interaction model),
using a screen-based interface (communication modality).
The robot control can be made adaptive to actions of
the operator or designed to optimize some utility function
(computational characteristics).
Under these core aspects, we can characterize HRI sys-
tems based on ve dierent attributes as shown in Fig. 2.
It should be noted that these core aspects are not inde-
pendent of each other and a system attribute under one
aspect can inuence other system attributes. This inter-
action is discussed in Section 6. Also note that these core
aspects are not meant to be exhaustive or the only way of
distinguishing multi-agent HRI systems. The aspects are
chosen such that they allow for a taxonomy that is both
broad enough to be applicable to multi-agent HRI systems
from dierent areas of research, and detailed enough to
4

==== Page 6 ====
meaningfully characterize and compare those systems. In
the following sections, we consider the above three aspects
and the associated attributes in more detail, and present
the categorizations that arise under these attributes. Un-
der each category, we include examples from recent litera-
ture to understand its application, and analyze strengths
and limitations of dierent types of systems.
3. Team Structure
The most perceptible feature of a multi-agent HRI sys-
tem is the size and composition of the human-robot team.
Depending on the application, a human-robot system can
take advantage of more than one human and/or more than
one robot in the team. The task at hand may also require
to utilize a team of agents with dierent capabilities and
roles. Both number and type of robots in a group can
have signicant eects on human's perceptions and emo-
tions towards the robots (Fraune et al., 2015). Since hu-
mans and robots usually have dierent ways of acting in a
collaborative setting and interacting with their partners,
the team structure decides various other aspects of the sys-
tem including the way in which dierent agents interact,
how they can share information and how their actions are
planned (Fincannon et al., 2013, 2011). Based on team
structure, multi-agent systems can dier from dyadic sys-
tems in two (quite apparent) ways:
1. There can be several possibilities of having dierent
numbers of agents (both humans and robots) in the
team,
2. There exists a notion of homogeneity/heterogeneity
among the agents.
Therefore, we discuss in the following two factors under
team structure: Team size, and Team composition.
3.1. Team Size
Team size in an HRI system refers to the number of
humans and robots present in the system. Including single-
human { single-robot systems, the HRI systems can be
grouped into the following categories based on their team
size:
3.1.1. Single-human { single-robot
These are the conventional systems containing a single
human interacting with a single robot and are the most
common type of systems studied in HRI. This article,
however, focuses mainly on systems with a higher num-
ber of agents and we refer the readers to other articles
available in the literature for a review of single-human {
single-robot systems, and HRI in general (Bartneck et al.,
2020; Breazeal et al., 2016; Goodrich and Schultz, 2008;
Bauer et al., 2008).3.1.2. Single-human { multi-robot
These systems comprise teams with a single human in-
teracting or collaborating with multiple robots through
the task. Such systems have found their utility in appli-
cations where the task is primarily executed by a number
of (semi)autonomous robots requiring intermittent inter-
ventions/assistance from a human operator or supervisor,
either in event of a fault (Swamy et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2014) or to further increase performance of the multi-robot
team in areas like large-scale assembly (Sellner et al., 2006)
and search-and-rescue (Khasawneh et al., 2019; Wang and
Lewis, 2008). These systems are also employed in Human-
Swarm Interaction (Kolling et al., 2015) where multiple
robots coordinate among themselves while receiving inputs
from the human teammate. Many studies have also been
conducted to increase our understanding of such systems,
by providing measures for predicting the team's perfor-
mance (Lewis, 2013; Sycara and Lewis, 2012; Zheng et al.,
2011; Crandall et al., 2003).
A dierent structure of single-human { multi-robot sys-
tems is one where the human user is not in the role of
operator or supervisor. For instance, a team of robots can
be used to provide navigation instructions to the human
user (Yedidsion et al., 2019), cooperatively navigate with
them in potentially dangerous situations (Penders et al.,
2011; Saez-Pons et al., 2011), or eciently guide them in
an indoor environment (Tan et al., 2019; Khandelwal et al.,
2015). Another application of this team size is seen in
studies like Emotional Storytelling in the Classroom (Leite
et al., 2015), where multiple robots team up to execute a
storytelling task in front of a student. Several systems
have employed a team of robot actors to have more ef-
fective storytelling or drama (Swaminathan et al., 2021;
Murphy et al., 2011).
3.1.3. Multi-human { single-robot
Collaborative systems with multiple human teammates
interacting with a single robot have traditionally been used
in applications like search and exploration and operat-
ing unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) where several hu-
mans collaborate among themselves to manage a robot
(Bruemmer et al., 2005; Murphy, 2004). In such settings,
humans take dierent roles (e.g., pilots, sensor operators
etc.) and manage separate components of the robot's op-
eration (Murphy et al., 2008; Drury et al., 2006). These
applications have been important in scenarios when a sin-
gle human is unable to manage the robot, or when robot
failure can result in critical degradation of human's abil-
ity to supervise multiple robots (McCarley and Wickens,
2005). There are also several systems in which a robot is
deployed in an environment with multiple humans it can
interact with, either to assist them (Claure et al., 2020;
Carlson et al., 2015) or to get assistance itself (Rosen-
thal et al., 2012). Another interesting application of such
team size is seen in systems where a robot is used as a re-
source distribution agent within a team of multiple humans
(Jung et al., 2020; Claure et al., 2020), or as a moderator
5

==== Page 7 ====
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 3: Dierent possible congurations of multi-agent HRI systems based on team size. a) A robot in a social environment (Tseng et al.,
2016); b) Investigating eects of multiple robots on a human participant (Podevijn et al., 2016); c) Three robots interacting with each other
and with the people around them (Fraune et al., 2020).
in a group interaction setting (Short and Mataric, 2017;
V azquez et al., 2016).
More recently, with increasing research in social
robotics, we see a rapid emergence of robotic systems in
classroom and public settings. Starting with triadic inter-
actions (Salam et al., 2016; Wainer et al., 2014; Johans-
son et al., 2013), research has presented robots collaborat-
ing with multiple users in applications like autism therapy
(Kim et al., 2013; Kozima et al., 2005; Dautenhahn, 2003),
education (Fern andez-Llamas et al., 2020; Chandra et al.,
2016; Tanaka et al., 2015), interactions in public spaces
(Fortunati et al., 2018) and other multiple human-robot
social interactions (Nanavati et al., 2020; Foster et al.,
2012). For a more detailed review of systems with robots
interacting with a group of humans, readers are encour-
aged to refer to (Sebo et al., 2020).
3.1.4. Multi-human { multi-robot
This category consists of systems having both more than
one human and more than one robot in the team. This
team size results in systems that are possibly the most
challenging to understand and control due to an expo-
nential growth in uncertainty and the number of states
that the system can be in (Dahiya et al., 2022). Such
systems have been used in military applications where a
human team consisting of members of dierent roles (pi-
lots, supervisor etc.) needs to coordinate with a team of
(semi)autonomous robots to achieve task goals (Ramchurn
et al., 2015; Freedy et al., 2008).
Multi-human { multi-robot team composition is also
seen in applications like search-and-rescue tasks (Krui-
j et al., 2014; Lewis et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2010) and
other tasks involving supervisory control of heterogeneous
human-robot teams (Patel and Pinciroli, 2020; Driewer
et al., 2007; Bradshaw et al., 2004).
Multi-human { multi-robot teams have also been dis-
cussed in several theoretical/computational studies ad-
dressing the task allocation and operator scheduling prob-
lems (Dahiya et al., 2022; Lippi and Marino, 2021; IJtsma
et al., 2019; Malvankar-Mehta and Mehta, 2015). These
studies discuss dierent methods for solving robot con-
trol, or assisting human decision-making in a multi-agentsetting. As an example, Mina et al. (2020) present
a framework for adaptive workload allocation based on
agents' health conditions and work performances. Hari
et al. (2020) present an approximation algorithm for task
scheduling and sequencing, so that humans and robots are
able to work on those tasks together when necessary. An-
other application area for such systems is seen more re-
cently in social interaction settings where robots are in-
cluded as social partners in a group of humans to under-
stand the socio-emotional aspects of such teams (Oliveira
et al., 2020; Correia et al., 2018; Iqbal and Riek, 2017),
and in a classroom setting enabling group learning among
students (Alves-Oliveira et al., 2019; Leite et al., 2016,
2015).
3.2. Team Composition
Besides the number of humans and robots, another im-
portant characteristic of a human-robot team is the team
composition. This pertains to the aspect of homogene-
ity (or lack thereof) among the agents, be it humans or
robots. Homogeneity in the case of robots may simply in-
dicate whether there are dierent types of robots present
in the team, with dierent hardware design (Sellner et al.,
2006), manipulation capabilities (Karami et al., 2020) or
interaction interfaces (Kruij et al., 2014). In the case
of humans, presence of dierent roles, capabilities or au-
thority can introduce heterogeneity among team members
(Chandra et al., 2016; Gombolay et al., 2015).
Homogeneous team composition is commonly seen in ap-
plications where agents are primarily identied as a part
of a group rather than individually, such as robots in a
swarm (Kolling et al., 2015), or humans in a crowd (Chen
et al., 2019; Fortunati et al., 2018). Applications concern-
ing a group of robots navigating among humans are also
mainly making use of homogeneous robots, as shown in
Fig. 4(a) (Batista et al., 2020). In the system presented
in Fig. 3(b), the authors investigate the eects of mul-
tiple robots on the human participant. Since the study
focuses on the number of robots instead of their individ-
ual identities, homogeneous robots are used in the system
(Podevijn et al., 2016). In addition to this, homogeneous
robots are also useful in applications where each robot is
6

==== Page 8 ====
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
(d)
Figure 4: Human-robot teams with dierent composition of agents. a) Multiple homogeneous robots aimed to socially navigate around a
human (Batista et al., 2020); b) A human operator working with two heterogeneous robots in a product inspection task (Karami et al., 2020);
c) A robot (in the centre) aiming to provide emotional support during interaction between two humans (Erel et al., 2021b); d) Two humans
in a role of a leader and an assistant, working with a robot co-leader on a fetching and building task (Gombolay et al., 2017).
required to work on similar tasks, such as object transfers
in warehouse operations (Rosenfeld et al., 2016). In most
social HRI applications, humans are present as equal mem-
bers of the group and are thus considered homogeneous in
their composition, e.g., Foster et al. (2012); Erel et al.
(2021b). Heterogeneous robot teams are seen in applica-
tions where robots with dierent manipulators or mobility
are required, e.g., Karami et al. (2020); Tan et al. (2019).
In military applications, teams of heterogeneous humans
(having dierent roles, responsibilities and authority) have
been used to control one or more complex robots, e.g.,
Freedy et al. (2008).
Homogeneity in a human-robot team greatly inuences
the type, level and eciency of the interactions (Wang
et al., 2009). For instance, when managing a team of
robots, the human operator needs to put in more interac-
tion eort when the team is homogeneous as compared to
the one with heterogeneous robots (Lewis, 2013; Goodrich
et al., 2005), and this may lead to an increase in perceived
workload and decrease in situational awareness (Adams,
2009; Humphrey et al., 2007). Having homogeneous robots
may also lead to a simpler interaction interface (Yanco and
Drury, 2004). However, heterogeneous robot teams may
allow to use specic robot capabilities to carry out a vari-
ety of operations (Suh and Woo, 2009; Sellner et al., 2006).
It is generally agreed that control and operation of a team
of heterogeneous agents is more demanding compared toa homogeneous team, therefore, the literature oers a va-
riety of studies presenting ecient control strategies for
the control of heterogeneous multi-robot teams (Saribatur
et al., 2019; Rosa, 2018; Saribatur et al., 2014).
Likewise, when more than one human is involved in the
interactions, dierences or similarities among the humans
may govern system dynamics (Wang and Lewis, 2008).
One common source of introducing heterogeneity among
human teammates is through associating dierent roles
with dierent humans (Li et al., 2021; Kruij et al., 2014).
Earlier studies have presented a taxonomy with dierent
roles (Supervisor, Operator, Peer, etc.) that a robot can
assume in an HRI system (Scholtz, 2003) and similar roles
can also be assigned to human teammates. There are sev-
eral systems presenting industrial-oriented tasks that in-
volve a team of heterogeneous humans in roles of supervi-
sors and assistants (Gombolay et al., 2015; Murphy et al.,
2008; Drury et al., 2006). This team composition has also
found applications in social/educational robotics, e.g., in
systems enabling robots to engage with users from dier-
ent generations (Joshi and Sabanovi c, 2019; Short et al.,
2017), or when humans have distinct roles/jobs in the
group (Taheri et al., 2018).
Key Observations
Considering these team characteristics, it is observed
that a substantial amount of work has been done on one-
7

==== Page 9 ====
to-many systems (single-human { multi-robot and multi-
human { single-robot), while systems with both multiple
humans and multiple robots are emerging (mainly in the
planning and task scheduling literature). As collaborative
robots are envisioned to work together with and among
humans, it is essential to further the research that facilitate
robots' interactions in systems with a larger number of
humans.
Under all types of team sizes, we nd systems where hu-
mans play dierent roles in reference to the robots; from
supervisors of multiple robots to peers in a social group
to information seekers in a public setting. Robots also
show such variety of roles themselves. In the past, mul-
tiple humans were required to control a single unmanned
vehicle, especially in safety-critical settings (e.g., military
use). However, with advancements in robot autonomy,
such systems are fading away from the literature and more
systems have emerged where a single human is able to
supervise a large number of robots. Human supervision
of multiple robots has its own challenges, such as limited
human cognitive capabilities, increased workload and de-
creased situational awareness. In later sections, we discuss
several studies working towards addressing these issues, in-
cluding designing of decision support systems, improving
robots' motion legibility and predictability, and building
intuitive interaction interfaces. We expect more such stud-
ies to emerge as HRI systems with large number of agents
are becoming increasingly popular. Even though we nd
many examples of research on systems with heterogeneous
robots, implementation of such systems in a social setting
or in human-assisting applications is still limited.
4. Interaction Style
In the context of human-robot systems, interaction style
is a broad term that can be used to refer to dierent as-
pects of interaction such as the modes of communication
among agents (Feine et al., 2019), interaction models (For-
tunati et al., 2018) and the interaction interface (Gromov
et al., 2016; Rule and Forlizzi, 2012). Interaction style
also includes the method of communication (verbal/non-
verbal) (Mavridis, 2015; Stiefelhagen et al., 2004), expres-
sion of aect (Schermerhorn and Scheutz, 2011) and spa-
tial relationship (Chen et al., 2007; H uttenrauch et al.,
2006).
Interactions in multi-agent human-robot systems dier
from those in dyadic systems in three ways:
1) First, with multiple agents present, it is possible to have
interactions within a group of agents, viz. Human-Human
Interactions, e.g., Kruij et al. (2014) and Robot-Robot
Interactions, e.g., Williams et al. (2015).
2) Second, in addition to the one-to-one interactions seen
between humans and robots in dyadic HRI systems, one-
to-many interactions are also realizable in multi-agent HRI
systems, e.g., Fortunati et al. (2018).
3) Third, in multi-agent systems, there are additional
types of interactions possible among the agents. Patelet al. (2021) discussed the dierences between `direct' and
`indirect' interactions between two humans in a system in
which they can communicate either via verbal communi-
cation or through the interface. Che et al. (2020) investi-
gated the role of `explicit' and `implicit' communication in
social navigation. Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten
(2020) used the terms `the group' and `the observer' to dis-
tinguish the two perspectives of measuring group cohesion
in a multi-agent HRI setting.
Such distinctions of interaction types are useful to bet-
ter understand HRI systems and can be applied to improve
the interaction outcome. In the context of multi-agent HRI
systems, we nd it useful to distinguish `direct' and `indi-
rect' interactions. Direct interaction between a sender and
recipient occurs when the sender actively (i.e., intention-
ally and explicitly) communicates to the recipient using
any mode, verbal or non-verbal. A third party may also re-
ceive information from this direct communication, and we
refer to this \eavesdropping" as indirect interaction. Tak-
ing the example of a study presented in Tan et al. (2019), a
robot trying to transfer task information to another robot
(e.g., through speech) is an example of direct interaction,
whereas a human observing the robots interacting with
each other is an example of indirect interaction.
Making this distinction can help us understand if and
how much the agents in the system are actively trying to
communicate with each other, or if they are primarily just
co-existing in the same environment while observing each
other. Modelling the indirect interactions is necessary to
understand how direct interactions between any two agents
can aect the behavior of others, e.g., Rinski et al. (2021);
Tan et al. (2019); Short and Mataric (2017).
Examples of systems with dierent types of interactions
are given in Table 1. In the remainder of this section,
we discuss the above-mentioned dierences under two key
aspects of interaction style: 1) Interaction model present,
and 2) Communication modalities used in the system.
4.1. Interaction Models
The presence of multiple agents doesn't necessarily
mean that each interaction in the system also involves
multiple agents. Interactions in a multi-agent HRI sys-
tem can be implemented using dierent-sized communica-
tion channels (i.e., number of agents connected via a single
interaction). In a multi-agent system, an agent has the ca-
pability of interacting with one or multiple agents at the
same time, resulting in one-to-one or one-to-many interac-
tion models (Fortunati et al., 2018). Examples of several
multi-agent HRI systems with dierent interaction models
are shown in Table 1 using the interaction graph struc-
ture dened in Section 2. These interaction models are
an extension of the interaction types presented in Yanco
and Drury (2004). The presented models are able to in-
clude a variety of interaction models that are possible in
multi-agent HRI systems, especially in social interactions.
In addition, these models let us specify the direction of
information ow between agents in the system and can
8

==== Page 10 ====
Study Interaction Graph Remarks
(a) Short and Mataric
(2017); Jung et al.
(2020)
Robot actions are independent of human teammates.
Humans decide their actions based on robot's actions
and potential discussion with the other human team-
mate.
(b) Claure et al. (2020)
 Robot actions are independent of human teammates.
Humans decide their actions based on robot's ac-
tions, and observing actions of the other human
teammate (without an explicit communication).
(c) Tan et al. (2019)
 A human user directly interacts with one of the two
robots, which then conveys the required information
to the second robot while the user observes the two
robots.
(d) Swamy et al. (2020);
Rosenfeld et al. (2017)
A human operator controls each robot individually.
Human's selection of robot is decided either by ob-
servation of robots' states or based on the suggestion
shown by the interface (G).
(e) Dahiya et al. (2022)
 A central computational entity (G) collects data of
all robots and then allocates each human operator to
the robots that need assistance. Operators directly
assist each robot individually. Operators are allo-
cated only by the central computational entity and
not by any direct interaction from the robots.
(f) Patel and Pinciroli
(2020)
Commands of multiple human operators are con-
verted to actions required by individual robots. Op-
erators observe each robot directly and can also in-
teract with each other to resolve conicts.
(g) Correia et al. (2018)
 Two teams, each consisting of one human and one
robot, play a competitive card game. Each agent de-
cides on their actions based on observations of other
agents' actions. The only direct communication in
the system occurs when a robot speaks to its part-
ner to convey its emotions.
Table 1: Examples of multi-agent human-robot systems with respective interaction graphs. The orange solid arrows signify direct interactions
between agents (e.g., explicit communication), while dashed blue arrows denote the indirect interactions (observational). A maximum of two
humans and robots are shown in the gures but interaction graphs can be drawn for larger number of agents in a similar way. Note that this
table only shows examples of possible interaction graphs and is not an exhaustive list.
9

==== Page 11 ====
Figure 5: Example of a one-to-one interaction model in a single-human { multi-robot system (Yedidsion et al., 2019). Multiple robots
connected via a network to guide a human user who interacts with the robots located in dierent locations.
illustrate dierences between human-to-robot and robot-
to-human interactions.
Note: These models, in their basic form (Fig. 1), do not
describe many aspects of the complete system (e.g., they
don't show embodiment, roles or heterogeneity among
agents and modes of communication etc.). However, it is
possible to add some of this information with slight mod-
ications. In Table 1, we show one such additional infor-
mation, i.e., whether an interaction is direct or indirect
using solid and dashed arrows respectively.
As observed from Table 1, interactions between dier-
ent pairs of agents in a system can be implemented using
dierent models (one-to-one, one-to-many etc.). It is also
possible that the interaction model varies with the type of
agents involved, i.e. dierent models for human-to-robot,
robot-to-human, robot-to-robot and human-to-human in-
teractions. For instance, a human may be able to give com-
mands to a single robot at a time (one-to-one) but may
observe behavior and receive messages/information from
all robots at once (one-to-many). (Swamy et al., 2020;
Khasawneh et al., 2019). These models are discussed be-
low under three categories denoting how many agents are
connected at each end of the communication channel.
4.1.1. One-to-one
The one-to-one interaction model is similar to the one
found in dyadic human-robot systems, where one robot is
interacting with one human teammate at any given time,
even though there may be other agents present in the en-
vironment. This form of interaction is commonly seen in
systems where one can aord the commands/instructions
for an agent to be independent from others (e.g., in sys-
tems where coordination among agents is not required).
A common application is seen in systems where a human
operator manages a team of multiple robots by giving each
of them separate commands. While a eet of autonomous
robots acts in separate environments, a human operator
can monitor their states remotely, and can intervene to
help a robot via teleoperation when the robot encounters
a challenging state (Swamy et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al.,
2017).
Human commands to a robot swarm can be imple-mented both with a one-to-one and a one-to-many inter-
action model. One common strategy under the one-to-one
model is the leader-follower approach where human users
directly control the leader robots, and the control signals
for rest of the swarm are governed by the leaders' motions
(Setter et al., 2015). Human-swarm interaction can also
be designed to follow a one-to-many interaction model as
discussed later in Sec. 4.1.2.
One can easily identify the interaction model by check-
ing if an interactive action of an agent is targeted at one
or multiple agents. For instance, in the system shown in
Fig. 1, even though the robot interacts with multiple hu-
mans throughout the duration of its task, at any given
point the robot's actions are directed towards a single hu-
man (Jung et al., 2020). Figure 4(b) shows a system con-
sisting of two robots with a human co-worker. In this sys-
tem, the human interacts with each robot separately and
none of the interactions involve all three agents at once
(Karami et al., 2020). We also see examples of such HRI
systems in an oce setting, where even though multiple
humans or robots are present, each interaction is between
a single human and a single robot. An example can be
a system with a robot going around in an oce asking
help from human users at dierent times (Rosenthal et al.,
2012). In Fig. 5, we see a person being guided from one
robot to another by an indoor guidance system, where the
human interacts with only a single robot at a time (Yedid-
sion et al., 2019).
In settings where agents are located in the same environ-
ment, the system also has indirect interactions, occurring
when an agent observes other agents and interactions are
happening between those agents. These indirect interac-
tions are still following a one-to-one model as information
ow from each agent is directed towards the observer.
4.1.2. One-to-many
The one-to-many interaction model can be seen in situa-
tions where one robot is directly interacting with multiple
humans at once (Nanavati et al., 2020; Correia et al., 2018;
Alves-Oliveira et al., 2019), and where one human is si-
multaneously interacting with multiple robots (Lim et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2009; Arkin and Ali, 1994; Jones and
10

==== Page 12 ====
(a)
 (b)
(c)
Figure 6: Examples of dierent interaction models: a) One-to-many: A system where a human controls multiple robots at once using hand
gestures (Kim et al., 2020). The gestures are interpreted and translated into group commands for the robots. b) One-to-many: A robot
playing a table-top game where it interacts with two human teammates (Alves-Oliveira et al., 2019) c) Many-to-many: Multiple humans
giving commands to multiple robots using a tablet interface (Patel and Pinciroli, 2020), where each human operator can give commands to
multiple robots simultaneously. Any form of conict in commands is then resolved through the interface or verbal communication among the
operators.
11

==== Page 13 ====
Snyder, 2001). Note that while some works distinguish be-
tween many-to-one and one-to-many models based on the
direction of control commands (e.g., (Lim et al., 2018)), in
this article all such systems are discussed together under
a one-to-many model.
A simple way of implementing this interaction model is
to use verbal communication or gestures to issue group
commands to multiple agents at once, e.g., Kim et al.
(2020). Consequently, interactions under this model are
common in social settings where it naturally nds its util-
ity as the robots and humans are co-present in the same
environment. Studies such as (Nanavati et al., 2020; Cor-
reia et al., 2018) present systems where robots' actions
and behavioral cues are directed towards the whole group
of human teammates. Another similar application of this
model is seen in classroom settings where a robot acts as
a teacher/tutor for a group of students to promote group-
based learning (Leite et al., 2015; Alves-Oliveira et al.,
2019; Belpaeme et al., 2018). A robot interacting with hu-
mans in public space also naturally calls for a one-to-many
model (Fortunati et al., 2018).
In industrial or military-oriented applications, where hu-
mans and robots might be located in separate environ-
ments, interactions with one-to-many model are usually
implemented using a group command node (see interac-
tion graphs in Table 1; shown as node (G)). This group
command node is an interpreter { an interface or an al-
gorithm { that converts communication from one or more
agents to information required for each individual agent
before relaying that information to its recipient(s). For ex-
ample, when controlling multiple ground or aerial robots,
a human operator can simply give group commands to
the eet instead of telling each robot what to do, while
the interpreter converts this group command to required
actions for each robot (Lim et al., 2018; Ayanian et al.,
2014). As mentioned earlier, implementation of human
interactions with a swarm can also make use of one-to-
many model. In order to make human control ecient, a
group command node is usually implemented to convert
human intentions/commands into control signals for all
robots (Kolling et al., 2015; Podevijn et al., 2013).
4.1.3. Many-to-many
In multi-human { multi-robot systems, it is also possi-
ble to have multiple one-to-many interactions taking place
among dierent agents, resulting in a many-to-many inter-
action model. This is the most unconstrained interaction
model that can be implemented in a human-robot system.
Although it is not very common to nd such interaction
models in the literature, studies by Patel et al. (2021);
Zhang and Vaughan (2016); Tews et al. (2003) have pre-
sented interaction interfaces to facilitate many-to-many in-
teractions.
A common way of enabling interactions among the
agents in such systems is through a proxy architecture
aimed at facilitating collaboration of humans and robots
with varying levels of autonomy (Mostafa et al., 2019;Ramchurn et al., 2015; Freedy et al., 2008). Under this
setting, each agent interacts with a proxy, which can be
part of a centralized proxy architecture or connected to a
network of proxies. Such proxies are usually responsible
for receiving inputs from dierent agents, interpreting the
messages/commands and then relaying the relevant infor-
mation to other agents. Augmented Reality (AR) based
interfaces have also been used for making such interactions
more user-friendly by providing easier methods of giving
commands. For example, the system shown in Fig. 6(c)
uses an AR interface on separate tablets to enable multi-
ple users interact with multiple robots (Patel and Pinciroli,
2020). Without such proxies, the human user in the sys-
tem must resolve any conicts (in commands/decisions)
by themselves and work out a common strategy (Hwang
and Wu, 2014).
Looking at the interaction graphs in Table 1, many-
to-many interactions can be represented as a group node
(G) having multiple incoming and multiple outgoing edges.
For example, in Table 1(e), a central computational entity
{ shown as group node (G) { collects data from multiple
robots and relays allocation information to multiple hu-
man operators. In Table 1(f), the interface enables mul-
tiple users to input control commands and then decides
actions for individual robots. A many-to-many model pro-
vides a natural and ecient interaction setup in a multi-
agent system as there are minimal constraints on when
agents are allowed to communicate with each other, and
information from multiple agents can be relayed to respec-
tive recipients simultaneously.
4.2. Communication Modalities and Interfaces
Communication modalities refer to the modes through
which dierent agents interact in the system (e.g., speech,
haptics, screen etc.). Similar to the conventional dyadic
HRI systems, a multi-agent system can have agents com-
municate through verbal or non-verbal modes, or a com-
bination of multiple modes at once. The chosen modes
of communication depend on the environment, applica-
tion of the system, proximity of dierent agents and their
interaction capabilities. Each modality has its own advan-
tages, implementation requirements and limitations. As
we note below, proximity has a major inuence on which
communication modalities are feasible in a system to en-
able ecient communication among humans and robots.
Therefore, to discuss the dierent types of communication
modalities used in multi-agent systems, we nd it useful to
group the communication modalities based on proximity
of the agents.
4.2.1. Remote communication
For the systems designed to operate in environments
that can be potentially dangerous or inaccessible to hu-
mans, a screen-based interface is ubiquitous for enabling
remote communication among humans and robots. Hu-
man control of a eet of UAVs (Nam et al., 2017; Drury
12

==== Page 14 ====
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 7: Examples of interface design for control of multiple robots: a) Interface of a search-and-rescue task with multiple robots (Rosenfeld
et al., 2017). Such screen-based interface designs are common in applications where a human user controls multiple remote robots. b) A
mixed-reality based multi-robot control framework. The gure shows relation of coordinate frames of main entities of the system, including
one human and three robots (Ostanin et al., 2021). c) Teleoperation of multiple mobile robots using a joystick and a haptic device (Hong
et al., 2017).
et al., 2006), supervision during search and rescue tasks
(Khasawneh et al., 2019; Scholtz et al., 2004; Murphy,
2004) and teleoperation of underwater robots (Wang et al.,
2014) are some of the applications that make use of remote
communication techniques.
Remotely interacting with robots is shown to result in
higher cognitive workload in human users (Gittens, 2021)
that increases further with an increasing number of robots
(Fincannon et al., 2013; Adams, 2009). Furthermore,
communicating plans to team supervisors and maintain-
ing their situational awareness are important challenges
faced while collaborating with remote robots (Hastie et al.,
2019). Therefore, the development of interaction interfaces
that enable ecient and reliable human interaction with
multiple remote robots is an important area of research in
remote HRI (Rold an et al., 2017; Rule and Forlizzi, 2012;
Driewer et al., 2007). In systems with a disproportion-
ately high number of robots compared to human opera-
tors/supervisors, it becomes dicult for the human users
to interact with all robots eciently due to challenges re-
lated to perception, workload and situational awareness
(Fincannon et al., 2013). Therefore, intelligent interface
designs are required that can mitigate these challenges
(Hussein et al., 2018). So far, the literature mostly con-
sists of screen-based interface designs as they are most
convenient to implement in such systems as seen in many
of the studies discussed in 3.1.2. Conventionally, many
of the multi-robot interfaces have several common design
features such as camera feeds of multiple robots in small
cards along the screen edge, an enlarged view of one se-
lected robot and a map, or an overview, of all robots in
the environment (Rosenfeld et al., 2017; Chien et al., 2018)
as shown in Fig. 7(a). Recently, immersive interfaces us-
ing Virtual Reality (VR) or Augmented Reality (AR) have
gained popularity in multi-robot systems (Ostanin et al.,
2021; Rold an et al., 2017), and have been shown to im-
prove operator's situational awareness and decreases work-
load (Frank et al., 2017). Some systems also augment the
interaction interface with multiple communication modes
(e.g., haptics) to improve interaction outcome (Hong et al.,2017) (Fig. 7(c)).
4.2.2. Proximate communication
In systems where humans and robots are located in the
same environment, many more options are available to sys-
tem designers in terms of choosing modes of communica-
tions. These include communication via auditory channels
(speech and non-speech audio), visual channels (gestures,
facial expressions, body postures and gaze), and physical
channels (touch and force). The human guidance system
presented by Yedidsion et al. (2019) (shown in Fig. 5) uses
simple verbal instructions to communicate with the hu-
man. Figure 6 shows a human user controlling a robot
swarm using gestures (Kim et al., 2020).
It is also possible to use multiple modes at once,
resulting in a multi-modal communication architecture.
Pourmehr et al. (2014) present a system that uses a com-
bination of haptic and verbal inputs from a human user to
control multiple UAVs. In the system presented by Gro-
mov et al. (2016), a human user can communicate with
robots using speech and gestures, while robots provide vi-
sual and verbal feedback to the user.
Proximate communications are more commonly seen
(and naturally present) in social robotics as it facilitates
more personal interactions required in a social setup. This
is expected as the meaning conveyed through an inter-
action signicantly depends on social cues (verbal and
non-verbal), and not solely on the concrete message be-
ing communicated (Feine et al., 2019). When humans
and robots are co-located in the same environment, the
role of non-verbal communications becomes important to
consider. For example, the robot shown in Fig. 4(c) is
used to enhance Human-Human Interaction using only
gestures, without interfering with the interaction (Erel
et al., 2021b). There have been several other studies that
investigate dierent cues (expressions and movements) as
a mode of communicating a robot's intent, emotions and
information more clearly in a group (Correia et al., 2018;
Faria et al., 2017). Moreover, the spatial placement of
agents, in relation to each other and the environment, also
13

==== Page 15 ====
aect human behavior in a group setting (Rios-Martinez
et al., 2015; Yamaoka et al., 2009).
When the agents are located in the same environment,
it is also likely that interaction between any two agents
has an eect on behavior and future interactions of other
agents. This is an example of indirect/implicit communi-
cation between agents. Thus, Human-Human Interactions
can be aected by Human-Robot Interactions (Joshi and
Sabanovi c, 2019; Short et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2013). Like-
wise, Robot-Robot Interactions can also impact future hu-
man interactions with the robots (Yang and Kwon, 2012;
Tan et al., 2019), or can aect a human's psychological
state (Erel et al., 2021a). Moreover, the embodiment or
mere presence of a robot may inuence human behavior
and their perception of the robots (Druckman et al., 2021;
Shiomi et al., 2020).
Communication modalities can also vary depending on
the agents involved and the direction of communication.
For instance, Berg et al. (2019) present an interaction sys-
tem where the human to robot communication channel is
realized through gestures and eye tracking while the in-
formation from the robot to the human is communicated
using a projection. In the system presented by Rosenthal
et al. (2012), the robot communicates its queries using
speech and receives human input using a visual interface
on a laptop. Also, it is common to see dierent commu-
nication modalities between Human-Robot and Human-
Human Interactions (Kruij et al., 2014).
4.3. Key Observations
In the surveyed literature, we looked into dierent forms
of interaction styles present in multi-agent human-robot
systems. In terms of interaction models, a couple of trends
are noticed. Even with multiple agents present in the sys-
tem, the one-to-one interaction model is the most preva-
lent, signifying that agents mostly interact with only one
other agent at a given time. The one-to-many interaction
model has also gained popularity and has been useful to
enable more ecient interactions in multi-agent systems.
Such systems are mostly seen in the area of social robotics
and co-located settings. In order to realize more natu-
ral and smooth interactions among humans and robots, a
many-to-many model is desirable. We are beginning to see
such implementations and hopefully this will mature into
a strong interaction model in human-robot systems.
In regards to communication modalities, the systems
where humans are interacting with multiple robots, using
a screen-based interaction interface is the most common
(and possibly the most practical) one. With the advent of
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) tech-
nologies, the future multi-agent Human-Robot Interac-
tion systems may shift from conventional two-dimensional
screen-based interfaces to more immersive ones. It is still
unclear whether using VR and AR will improve system us-
ability in diverse settings and more research is required to
investigate the applicability of these technologies in multi-
agent HRI systems for dierent applications. In co-locatedand social settings, multi-modal communication is becom-
ing more popular and can enable more natural and safer
interactions between humans and robots, without the need
of enforcing physical separation.
5. Computational Characteristics: Robot Control
So far in this article, we have discussed the perceptible
aspects of an HRI system, which describe `who is present
in the system and who is interacting with whom'. Now, we
look into computational aspects of the system, specically
how system designers can choose to inuence/control the
behavior of dierent agents in the system. In an HRI sys-
tem, behavior and actions of robots are controlled directly,
either governed by an optimization-based action-policy or
via predened/rule-based methods, or a combination of
both. On the other hand, human behavior can only be in-
uenced indirectly using robots|via robots' actions, their
interactions with the humans, other robots or the environ-
ment, or by explicit communication. Some systems make
use of human behavioral models to decide robots' actions
while others take a model-free approach.
In this article, our main focus is on multi-agent sys-
tems instead of the particulars of a study. Therefore, even
though both human behavior and robot control are rele-
vant attributes under the aspect of computational charac-
teristics, in this section we primarily discuss robot control,
and only include a discussion of human behavior where re-
quired. Specically, we look into the two principal types of
robot control implemented in multi-agent HRI systems: 1)
Optimization-based control, and 2) Pre-dened and Rule-
based control. We also discuss the dierences that the
presence of multiple agents brings to the system.
5.1. Optimization-based control
Optimization-based control refers to a framework
of computing robot actions to optimize one or more
performance-dening parameters established for the sys-
tem. The performance parameters often represent factors
like time of task completion (Hari et al., 2020), cost in-
curred (resources spent) (Dahiya et al., 2022) and reward
earned (value produced) (Swamy et al., 2020). In the
multi-agent HRI literature, to pose the mathematical opti-
mization problem, we nd examples of systems being mod-
eled in the form of time-series (Wang et al., 2014), outcome
probabilities (Dahiya et al., 2022; Sellner et al., 2006) or
Dynamic Bayesian Network (Fooladi Mahani et al., 2020).
Machine-learning and other data-driven methods are also
some of the tools used in optimization-based control, e.g.,
Nam et al. (2019); Swamy et al. (2020); Li et al. (2021).
Such system models are often motivated by literature from
dierent areas of behavioral study such as psychology, eco-
nomics and social sciences. For example, Shannon et al.
(2016) present the Pew model from psychology, Swamy
et al. (2020) make use of the Luce Choice model from eco-
nomics, and Bera et al. (2018a) use entitativity related
psychology research in their system.
14

==== Page 16 ====
Optimization-based control is seen in studies where the
system behaviour can be modelled reliably using existing
theories, or where researchers are trying to validate a new
approach for the same. These systems also require that
there exist quantiable and measurable parameters that
can be used as optimizing metrics (such as task complet-
ing time, error rate, etc.). When implementing such robot
control in multi-agent systems, there are a few consider-
ations to handle. When multiple agents are present in
the system, the required information access and the possi-
bility of interactions may increase exponentially with the
number of agents. This problem has motivated a whole
segment of research on the development of computation-
ally ecient decision-making and control techniques for
multi-agent HRI systems. Among other applications, this
research is seen in systems enabling a robot inuence a
team of multiple humans (Li et al., 2021), enabling mul-
tiple robots safely navigate among other robots and hu-
mans (Bajcsy et al., 2019), predicting human behavior
while supervising multiple heterogeneous unmanned vehi-
cles (Boussemart and Cummings, 2011), and nding task
allocation and sequencing for multiple robots travelling to
collaborate with humans (Hari et al., 2020). When deal-
ing with a large number of robots, human users' ability
to maintain awareness of the system's state might be in-
sucient (Olsen Jr and Wood, 2004; Chien et al., 2013)
and thus the users may benet from a decision support
system (DSS). Applications of such DSSs are seen in sys-
tems enabling a human operator to assist multiple remote
robots (Swamy et al., 2020), and in allocating operators to
multiple navigating robots (Dahiya et al., 2022; Rosenfeld
et al., 2017; Malvankar-Mehta and Mehta, 2015). There
are also several studies on human supervision of eets or
swarms of remote robots. Lewis (2013) presents a review
of systems enabling such supervision under the construct
of command complexity, while Kolling et al. (2015) review
research on human control of robot swarms.
5.2. Predened and rule-based control
The predened and rule-based control methods pro-
vide a convenient way of implementing robot control in
an HRI system without the use of computational mod-
els or data. This includes techniques like Wizard of Oz,
expert knowledge-based if...then rules or pre-specied se-
quences of actions. These methods help simplifying the
robot's decision-making and allow the researchers to fo-
cus on other aspects of Human-Robot Interaction that the
system is designed to investigate, e.g., the outcome of a
controlled interaction (Tan et al., 2019; Yang and Kwon,
2012).
In some systems, direct use of an optimization-based
control is not possible (e.g., due to lack of a numerical
model), and a subjective interpretation of system events is
required based on expert knowledge. Such systems often
have robot action policies implemented as if...then rules
instead of numerically computed conditions. For exam-
ple, Correia et al. (2018) present an algorithm to generaterobot emotions given system events, based on knowledge
from psychology. Rule-based control is more commonly
seen in studies that deal with subjective metrics of out-
come (e.g., human perception of robots, workload, etc.). It
is to be noted that the optimization-based and rule-based
control methods are not mutually exclusive. It is possible
to implement a combination of an optimizing policy with
an expert knowledge-based model. For example, in the
system shown in Fig. 6(b), the robot's behavior is decided
by a hybrid controller that combines manually-encoded
behavioral rules and a machine learning-based mapping
function Alves-Oliveira et al. (2019).
While the use of a rule-based control can enable a sys-
tem to decide the robot's behavior based on some feedback
from the environment, it is also possible to pre-specify
robot behavior without any decision-making component.
This robot control method facilitates studies to manipu-
late dierent test conditions where feedback from the en-
vironment is not required. Such implementation is com-
monly seen in studies which investigate the eects of spe-
cic robot's behaviors on human users, e.g., users' percep-
tion of robots (Fraune et al., 2017), knowledge acquisition
(Fern andez-Llamas et al., 2020), group emotions (Bera
et al., 2018b) and perceived legibility (Faria et al., 2021).
Referring back to the interaction graphs dened in Sec-
tion 2, this type of robot control results in unidirectional
edges from robots to humans.
Under predened and rule-based control methods, the
Wizard of Oz (WoZ) is a common technique of implement-
ing human-assisted robot control in multi-agent (mainly
multi-human) systems. In this technique, a hidden human
`Wizard' (teleoperator) controls some or all of the robots'
actions, speech, gestures and behavior, unknown to other
human users in the system (Riek, 2012). Depending on the
level of robot autonomy, the Wizard can be used to replace
certain parts of the robots' perception or cognitive capa-
bilities (e.g., Johansson et al. (2013); Shiomi et al. (2009)),
thus overcoming the robots' limitations. It is also possi-
ble to have a mixed-initiative approach where either the
robots or the human user can take control of the robots'
actions (e.g., Jiang and Arkin (2015); Khasawneh et al.
(2019); Wang et al. (2014)).
Note on Group/Individual behavioral parame-
ters: Regardless of the type, robot control in multi-agent
systems can be implemented in two ways: either based on
parameters of individual agents or based on the group as
a whole. Taking the parameter of trust as an example in a
system with a single human and multiple robots, one can
either plan robots' actions by considering trust of the hu-
man in each individual robot (Wang et al., 2018), or one
can consider the human's trust in the whole robot team
(Liu et al., 2019). Other examples of robot control based
on individual parameters can be seen in studies with pa-
rameters like engagement (Leite et al., 2016) and attention
(Yang and Kwon, 2012). Such individual modelling pro-
vides a simple method to expand dyadic HRI research to
the multi-agent setting, and to test any dierences between
15

==== Page 17 ====
the two. Group-based robot control has its own benets.
Often, the humans in the system are not working inde-
pendently of other agents. So, one may nd it useful to
decide robot control as a function of group-based parame-
ters, something not possible in dyadic systems. Such con-
trol is particularly useful in systems where agents act as a
coordinating team, or in applications where performance
or behavior of the whole group is central. For example,
a robot can express group-based emotions to increase its
likability among human teammates (Correia et al., 2018),
or use audio features to aect group entitativity (Savery
et al., 2021). Figure 3(a) shows a system where the robot
determines the best way of approaching a group of humans
by extracting social cues shown by the group (Tseng et al.,
2016).
5.3. Key Observations
In this section, we looked at two types of robot control,
one that aims to optimize a performance parameter and
another that is dened using expert knowledge.
Regarding the implementation of robot control, the Wiz-
ard of Oz technique is still the most widely used control
method for studies designed to evaluate a human's re-
sponse to a particular type of interactions with a single
robot (or a limited number of robots). The prevalence of
the Wizard of Oz technique is an indicator that a majority
of the research in multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction
pertains to investigating human behavior in such systems.
Optimization-based robot control has mainly been a
part of computational research in HRI and has enabled
the development of ecient algorithms for large systems.
Even though we nd a good amount of papers implement-
ing such optimizing control policies on real systems, most
of the work in computational research in multi-agent HRI
is still seen in theoretical studies. This is expected, as
real world implementations and testing of large systems
require signicantly more resources. However, we hope
that as robotic systems become more accessible, the com-
putational research in multi-agent HRI will gain traction
with real systems.
We also discussed how robot control in multi-agent sys-
tems can be based on parameters of either individual
agents or of the group as a whole. While individual agent-
based control enables the extension of dyadic research to
the multi-agent case, group-based control allows to study
and inuence behavior of the whole group without requir-
ing exact specications for individual agents. Group-based
control has also enabled more natural robot operation
when interacting with a group of humans. In the domain
of social robots, studies are becoming popular which try
to improve understanding of behavioral parameters of the
team/group as a whole. Future work in this area is essen-
tial in normalizing robot presence in human society.6. Interactions between the Core Aspects and At-
tributes
Looking at the multi-agent HRI literature under the
three core aspects in Sections 3-5, one can observe that
system attributes chosen by researchers under one core as-
pect are somewhat inuenced by attributes under other
aspects. To understand the interaction between these core
aspects, we consider a particular set of attributes under
each core aspect as the \conguration" of the system. For
example, the team structure is dened by its size and com-
position. The categorizations under dierent core aspects
are chosen such that the conguration of each core aspect
can be set separately while designing the system, i.e, one
can choose any attribute from each column of the table
in Figure 2 to build a multi-agent HRI system4. This
means, in a viable system, we can have a system with any
of the three congurations for team size, with either ho-
mogeneous or heterogeneous agents, following one-to-one
or one-to-many interaction models, using either proximate
or remote modes of communication, and with the robot(s)
in the system following either optimization-based or rule-
based control.
However, the conguration of one core aspect can inu-
ence how another core aspect of the system should ideally
be congured. For example, if the team size is large, then a
one-to-many communication model may be more ecient,
especially in co-located settings, e.g., Kim et al. (2020).
It is also common that systems with a large number of
robots have a group command node to ensure coordination
among the robots, as it may be dicult for the human(s)
to communicate with all the robots in the system. This
interaction model and robot control is therefore common
in Human-Swarm Interaction (Kolling et al., 2015).
Similarly, the Wizard of Oz control technique is preva-
lent in systems with a limited number of robots because
of its ease of implementation (Riek, 2012). However, this
technique may limit the scalability of such systems and
restrict the researchers to use homogeneous or a limited
number of robots. This highlights the need of develop-
ing ecient tools for implementing robot decision-making
in order to facilitate HRI research in large systems. In
addition, a system requiring a human Wizard to closely
monitor the agent(s) can be a cognitively demanding and
time consuming task. The choice of conguration is also
inuenced by the target application and objective of the
study. As seen in Section 4, systems intended for social
settings are more likely to have a one-to-many interaction
model. When a human operator is required to supervise
multiple robots, a simple screen-based model is a popular
choice of system designers.
Having said that, we would like to emphasize that re-
search in multi-agent HRI is still not mature enough to
provide a guide to an ideal conguration for a system, or
4With the exception that having a many-to-many interaction
model requires both multiple humans and multiple robots.
16

==== Page 18 ====
to even determine if such an ideal conguration exists. For
instance, even though screen-based interfaces are prevalent
in systems with multiple robots so far, researchers have
started exploring VR and AR-based interfaces as poten-
tially more immersive and better options. As the litera-
ture in this eld grows, in future one might be able to tell
whether these existing congurations can be considered as
guidelines for designing multi-agent HRI systems, or as
opportunities to explore new congurations.
7. Challenges and Direction for Future Work
In this section, we discuss the main challenges faced in
the research of multi-agent HRI systems. We also note
some of the gaps in the existing literature and identify
avenues for future research which are important to full
the vision of a society where robots operate safely and
seamlessly among humans. To do this, we have divided
this section into two parts: discussing agent-related factors
and task-related factors.
7.1. Agent-related Factors
Throughout this survey, we saw that human behavior in
an HRI system is aected by the robots' actions, the in-
teractions they have with other agents and the mere pres-
ence of other agents in the environment. Understanding
how human behavior changes/adapts as a function of all
these parameters can facilitate achieving the system's goal,
whether it is to maximize a performance metric or to elicit
a particular interaction outcome. Having multiple agents
in the system not only expands the possibilities of such
behavioral inuence but also brings some additional chal-
lenges when compared to the dyadic systems. Below, we
discusses the challenges and prospects of research focused
on agent-specic factors: both robot-related factors like
physical appearance, level of autonomy and embodiment,
and human-related factors like trust, situational awareness
and workload:
1.Human behavior in groups : Our understanding
of how humans behave in a group of multiple robots and
humans is still limited, and thus the systems that make use
of this understanding are also not commonly seen in the
HRI literature. Therefore, HRI research will benet from
studies that investigate how human behavior changes due
to the addition of other agents in the environment. Simi-
larly, it is also interesting to explore if the same robot ac-
tions can result in dierent outcomes based on the number
of agents in the system. More importantly, it is imperative
that we understand how to accurately model human-robot
interactions in a group/team setting. We expect to see
signicant advances in such HRI systems resulting from
multidisciplinary research between the robotics research
community and those who study human interactions: e.g.
sociologists, psychologists and cognitive scientists. In a re-
cent work, Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten (2020)
present a framework to understand group dynamics in HRIbased on ingroup identication, cohesion and entitativity
concepts from social sciences. However, we are yet to see
implementation of such group-based behavioral concepts
in fully functioning multi-agent HRI systems.
2.Workload and Situational Awareness : In the
literature, we nd ample research on how robot control
can aect parameters like perceived human workload and
situational awareness. However, most of this research (in
multi-agent HRI) is done in teams consisting of a single hu-
man working with multiple robots (Wong and Seet, 2017).
There is a clear lack of research on how these human-
related parameters are aected when working in a mixed
team of multiple humans and robots. Gombolay et al.
(2015) studied the eects of shared decision-making au-
thority in mixed human-robot teams (a human subject
working with a robot and another human). More research
is required to investigate how the presence of other hu-
mans in dierent roles and with dierent authorities aect
each human user and how these eects change with an
increasing number of agents in the system.
3.Level of Autonomy : It is well studied how the
level of robot autonomy in the system can aect factors
like system performance, human trust and workload (Beer
et al., 2014). When multiple robots are present, an HRI
system may include robots with varied levels of autonomy,
and it might not be possible to assign a single autonomy
level to the whole system. In addition, dierent agents can
exhibit dierent roles, performance and identities. The
implication is that the relationship between a robot pa-
rameter and its inuence on the HRI becomes much more
complicated to study, especially for the human-related and
interaction-related variables (see Beer et al. (2014)). For
example, human trust has been investigated in a multi-
agent setting in several studies, e.g. (Williams et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2018). However, there is still work to be done
in understanding how trust is aected when robots dier
in levels of autonomy, and exhibit varied performance and
failure rates. Notably, we do nd some recent works to-
wards this direction (Reig et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019)
and expect to see more research done on this topic.
4.Human Predictability : Having multiple humans
brings a signicant increase in the complexity of robot con-
trol and challenges faced. A higher number of humans in
the system often results in a decrease in system observabil-
ity and predictability of its next states. Since all human
users are dierent from one another, the robots in the sys-
tem may need to adapt their actions according to each hu-
man and remember those dierences and individual inter-
action styles. Developing multi-agent systems where the
robot decision-making is aware of individual human team-
mates in relation to the whole group, can help make the
human behavior more controllable and predictable (Mar-
tins et al., 2017).
5.Partner Selection : In a proximate/co-located set-
ting, it may also be crucial for the robots to dynamically
17

==== Page 19 ====
choose their interaction partner(s), especially for a large
team size. In the literature we nd limited studies on
partner selection in human-robot teams, investigating how
humans choose their robotic partners (Correia et al., 2019)
and how robots can choose their human partners (Hasnain
et al., 2012). In addition to partner selection, it may also
be important to assess and improve the strength of inter-
action between the interacting partners (Lemaignan et al.,
2016). Advancing this research will help making robots'
interactions with human teammates more seamless and
natural, particularly in social settings.
6.Conict Resolution : With increases in the amount
of computational research being conducted in the develop-
ment of control policies in a multi-agent setting, we expect
to see an increase in real-world implementations of multi-
robot { multi-human systems in the near future. However,
this requires us to overcome challenges of establishing vi-
able interaction models among all the agents and resolving
any conicts in roles and authority that may arise (Patel
and Pinciroli, 2020). Moreover, in systems where a high
degree of coordination is required among robots, human
performance suers drastically with an increasing number
of robots that are not coordinating autonomously (Lewis,
2013).
7.2. Task-related Factors
In this part, we discuss the challenges faced on the im-
plementation front of multi-agent HRI research. These
challenges can be specic to particular tasks or to the
choice of implementation of a particular system:
1.Safety : In tasks where humans and robots share
the environment, safety of human users becomes a criti-
cal requirement. Most of the existing work on safety of
robot navigation in a shared environment propose solu-
tion frameworks built around avoiding the humans, e.g.,
Sathyamoorthy et al. (2020); Aroor et al. (2018). There
is a need to expand the work on safe robot operation to
include systems where humans and robots are working col-
laboratively on a task, e.g., handling the same objects,
sharing workspaces (and not just the environment)| like
in physical-HRI. This requirement forces the robots to op-
erate safely while working with the humans instead of try-
ing to avoid them.
2.Scalability : In tasks where agents' decisions have to
be computed online or where the control policy depends
on a large number of parameters, one important consider-
ation is the scalability, i.e., how well the robot control and
decision-making technique scale with an increasing num-
ber of humans and robots in the system. In the literature,
we nd a number of studies that address the issue of scala-
bility by proposing ecient algorithms based on heuristics
or approximations (e.g., (Dahiya et al., 2022; Hari et al.,
2020)). However, the existing research on this topic is
mostly done under a theoretical setup, and we do not seeimplementations of these proposed solutions in real sys-
tems with actual robots and humans (though there are
a limited number of studies that conduct testing on real
systems, e.g., (Rosenfeld et al., 2017)). This is important
because with real-world implementations of HRI systems,
one also needs to consider a multitude of practical factors,
and many assumptions initially made might no longer be
valid and/or applicable.
3.Transparency : In HRI, transparency is another
crucial area of research that includes the topics of mo-
tion legibility, intention recognition and decision explain-
ability, along with several other technical, ethical and le-
gal aspects (Felzmann et al., 2019). Transparency aims to
provide humans with a better understanding of robots' de-
cisions and foster human trust in the system. An increase
in transparency is shown to improve task performance
in multi-agent (especially multi-robot) systems (Mercado
et al., 2016). However, this area is still under-explored and
research has mostly been tested in situations where the
teams consist of either a single robot or only homogeneous
robots (see Table 2 in (Felzmann et al., 2019)). Although
transparency has been studied in dyadic systems, it is not
well known how those results translate to multi-agent sys-
tems. Exceptions are recent related work on legibility of
multi-robot teams (Kim and Follmer, 2021; Capelli et al.,
2019) and the use of a situational awareness-based trans-
parency framework to improve team eectiveness (Chen
et al., 2018). We believe that more research in this area
will benet mixed teams of multiple humans and robots,
particularly in direct interaction scenarios.
8. Conclusion
In this article, we surveyed Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) literature for systems comprising multiple agents,
be it humans or robots. Future robots are envisioned to
operate in the same environment as humans, and interact
and collaborate as equal partners. To full this vision, it
is crucial to promote research in multi-agent HRI systems.
Such multi-agent systems have started to gain popularity
among researchers, and are enabling more realistic and
practical scenarios in which humans and robots interact.
These systems do come with their own challenges, on top of
the challenges that dyadic human-robot systems have, and
should be considered in the development of future human-
robot systems.
Through this survey, we provide the readers with a way
to compare the diverse research works that exist in the
eld of multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction. This sur-
vey has helped us recognize key trends in the existing re-
search, and discuss the challenges that must be overcome.
Understanding the dynamics of Human-Robot Interaction
in a multi-agent setting, and development of modelling
and control strategies for such systems are crucial steps
towards fullling the vision of the society where humans
and robots exist together and interact seamlessly with each
18

==== Page 20 ====
other. Setting up multi-agent HRI systems presents a
number of challenges related to safety, scalability, coor-
dination and information transparency, which we need to
address in order to progress towards this vision. Under-
standing human behavior in a group setting among het-
erogeneous agents (both robots and humans) is important
to properly model future HRI systems. Establishing vi-
able interaction models is another key requirement for ad-
vanced multi-agent HRI systems, especially the ones en-
abling interactions among multiple humans and multiple
robots simultaneously.
References
Abrams, A.M., Rosenthal-von der P utten, A.M., 2020. I{c{e frame-
work: Concepts for group dynamics research in human-robot in-
teraction. International Journal of Social Robotics , 1{17.
Adams, J.A., 2009. Multiple robot/single human interaction: Eects
on perceived workload. Behaviour & Information Technology 28,
183{198.
Alves-Oliveira, P., Sequeira, P., Melo, F.S., Castellano, G., Paiva,
A., 2019. Empathic robot for group learning: A eld study. ACM
Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction (THRI) 8, 1{34.
APA, Dictionary of Psychology. Social Interactions. https://
dictionary.apa.org/social-interactions . Accessed: 2022-10-
04.
Arkin, R.C., Ali, K., 1994. Integration of reactive and telerobotic
control in multi-agent robotic systems, in: Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behav-
ior, pp. 473{478.
Aroor, A., Epstein, S.L., Korpan, R., 2018. Online learning for
crowd-sensitive path planning, in: Proceedings of the 17th In-
ternational Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, pp. 1702{1710.
Ayanian, N., Spielberg, A., Arbesfeld, M., Strauss, J., Rus, D., 2014.
Controlling a team of robots with a single input, in: 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
IEEE. pp. 1755{1762.
Bajcsy, A., Herbert, S.L., Fridovich-Keil, D., Fisac, J.F., Deglurkar,
S., Dragan, A.D., Tomlin, C.J., 2019. A scalable framework
for real-time multi-robot, multi-human collision avoidance, in:
2019 international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA),
IEEE. pp. 936{943.
Bartneck, C., Belpaeme, T., Eyssel, F., Kanda, T., Keijsers, M.,
Sabanovi c, S., 2020. Human-robot interaction: An introduction.
Cambridge University Press.
Batista, M.R., Macharet, D.G., Romero, R.A.F., 2020. Socially ac-
ceptable navigation of people with multi-robot teams. Journal of
Intelligent & Robotic Systems 98, 481{510.
Bauer, A., Wollherr, D., Buss, M., 2008. Human{robot collaboration:
A survey. International Journal of Humanoid Robotics 5, 47{66.
Beer, J.M., Fisk, A.D., Rogers, W.A., 2014. Toward a framework for
levels of robot autonomy in human-robot interaction. Journal of
human-robot interaction 3, 74.
Belpaeme, T., Kennedy, J., Ramachandran, A., Scassellati, B.,
Tanaka, F., 2018. Social robots for education: A review. Sci-
ence robotics 3.
Bera, A., Randhavane, T., Kubin, E., Wang, A., Gray, K., Manocha,
D., 2018a. The socially invisible robot navigation in the social
world using robot entitativity, in: 2018 ieee/rsj international con-
ference on intelligent robots and systems (iros), IEEE. pp. 4468{
4475.
Bera, A., Randhavane, T., Wang, A., Manocha, D., Kubin, E.,
Gray, K., 2018b. Classifying group emotions for socially-aware
autonomous vehicle navigation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,
pp. 1039{1047.Berg, J., Lottermoser, A., Richter, C., Reinhart, G., 2019. Human-
robot-interaction for mobile industrial robot teams. Procedia
CIRP 79, 614{619.
Boussemart, Y., Cummings, M.L., 2011. Predictive models of hu-
man supervisory control behavioral patterns using hidden semi-
markov models. Engineering Applications of Articial Intelligence
24, 1252{1262.
Bradshaw, J.M., Acquisti, A., Allen, J., Breedy, M.R., Bunch, L.,
Chambers, N., Feltovich, P., Galescu, L., Goodrich, M.A., Jef-
fers, R., et al., 2004. Teamwork-centered autonomy for extended
human-agent interaction in space applications, in: AAAI 2004
Spring Symposium, pp. 22{24.
Breazeal, C., Dautenhahn, K., Kanda, T., 2016. Social robotics.
Springer handbook of robotics , 1935{1972.
Bruemmer, D.J., Few, D.A., Boring, R.L., Marble, J.L., Walton,
M.C., Nielsen, C.W., 2005. Shared understanding for collaborative
control. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-
Part A: Systems and Humans 35, 494{504.
Capelli, B., Secchi, C., Sabattini, L., 2019. Communication through
motion: Legibility of multi-robot systems, in: 2019 International
Symposium on Multi-Robot and Multi-Agent Systems (MRS),
IEEE. pp. 126{132.
Carlson, Z., Sweet, T., Rhizor, J., Poston, J., Lucas, H., Feil-Seifer,
D., 2015. Team-building activities for heterogeneous groups of hu-
mans and robots, in: International Conference on Social Robotics,
Springer. pp. 113{123.
Chandra, S., Alves-Oliveira, P., Lemaignan, S., Sequeira, P., Paiva,
A., Dillenbourg, P., 2016. Children's peer assessment and self-
disclosure in the presence of an educational robot, in: 2016 25th
IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive
communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 539{544.
Che, Y., Okamura, A.M., Sadigh, D., 2020. Ecient and trustworthy
social navigation via explicit and implicit robot{human commu-
nication. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 36, 692{707.
Chen, C., Liu, Y., Kreiss, S., Alahi, A., 2019. Crowd-robot in-
teraction: Crowd-aware robot navigation with attention-based
deep reinforcement learning, in: 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 6015{6022.
Chen, J.Y., Haas, E.C., Barnes, M.J., 2007. Human performance
issues and user interface design for teleoperated robots. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Appli-
cations and Reviews) 37, 1231{1245.
Chen, J.Y., Lakhmani, S.G., Stowers, K., Selkowitz, A.R., Wright,
J.L., Barnes, M., 2018. Situation awareness-based agent trans-
parency and human-autonomy teaming eectiveness. Theoretical
issues in ergonomics science 19, 259{282.
Chien, S.Y., Lewis, M., Mehrotra, S., Sycara, K., 2013. Imperfect
automation in scheduling operator attention on control of multi-
robots, in: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Ange-
les, CA. pp. 1169{1173.
Chien, S.Y., Lin, Y.L., Lee, P.J., Han, S., Lewis, M., Sycara, K.,
2018. Attention allocation for human multi-robot control: Cogni-
tive analysis based on behavior data and hidden states. Interna-
tional Journal of Human-Computer Studies 117, 30{44.
Claure, H., Chen, Y., Modi, J., Jung, M., Nikolaidis, S., 2020. Multi-
armed bandits with fairness constraints for distributing resources
to human teammates, in: Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 299{
308.
Correia, F., Mascarenhas, S., Prada, R., Melo, F.S., Paiva, A., 2018.
Group-based emotions in teams of humans and robots, in: Pro-
ceedings of the ACM/IEEE international conference on human-
robot interaction, pp. 261{269.
Correia, F., Petisca, S., Alves-Oliveira, P., Ribeiro, T., Melo, F.S.,
Paiva, A., 2019. \i choose... you!" membership preferences in
human{robot teams. Autonomous Robots 43, 359{373.
Crandall, J.W., Nielsen, C.W., Goodrich, M.A., 2003. Towards pre-
dicting robot team performance, in: SMC'03 Conference Proceed-
ings. 2003 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics. Conference Theme-System Security and Assurance
19

==== Page 21 ====
(Cat. No. 03CH37483), IEEE. pp. 906{911.
Dahiya, A., Akbarzadeh, N., Mahajan, A., Smith, S., 2022. Scalable
operator allocation for multi-robot assistance: A restless bandit
approach. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems ,
1397{1408.
Dautenhahn, K., 2003. Roles and functions of robots in human so-
ciety: implications from research in autism therapy. Robotica 21,
443{452.
Driewer, F., Sauer, M., Schilling, K., 2007. Design and evaluation
of a teleoperation interface for heterogeneous human-robot teams.
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 40, 113{118.
Druckman, D., Adrian, L., Damholdt, M.F., Filzmoser, M., Koszegi,
S.T., Seibt, J., Vestergaard, C., 2021. Who is best at mediating
a social conict? comparing robots, screens and humans. Group
Decision and Negotiation 30, 395{426.
Drury, J.L., Riek, L., Racklie, N., 2006. A decomposition of uav-
related situation awareness, in: Proceedings of the 1st ACM
SIGCHI/SIGART conference on Human-robot interaction, pp.
88{94.
Erel, H., Cohen, Y., Shafrir, K., Levy, S.D., Vidra, I.D., Shem Tov,
T., Zuckerman, O., 2021a. Excluded by robots: Can robot-robot-
human interaction lead to ostracism?, in: Proceedings of the 2021
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion, pp. 312{321.
Erel, H., Trayman, D., Levy, C., Manor, A., Mikulincer, M., Zuck-
erman, O., 2021b. Enhancing emotional support: The eect of
a robotic object on human{human support quality. International
Journal of Social Robotics , 1{20.
Faria, M., Melo, F.S., Paiva, A., 2021. Understanding robots: Mak-
ing robots more legible in multi-party interactions, in: 2021 30th
IEEE International Conference on Robot & Human Interactive
Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 1031{1036.
Faria, M., Silva, R., Alves-Oliveira, P., Melo, F.S., Paiva, A., 2017.
\Me and you together" movement impact in multi-user collab-
oration tasks, in: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 2793{2798.
Feine, J., Gnewuch, U., Morana, S., Maedche, A., 2019. A taxonomy
of social cues for conversational agents. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 132, 138{161.
Felzmann, H., Fosch-Villaronga, E., Lutz, C., Tamo-Larrieux, A.,
2019. Robots and transparency: The multiple dimensions of trans-
parency in the context of robot technologies. IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine 26, 71{78.
Fern andez-Llamas, C., Conde, M. A., Rodr guez-Sedano, F.J.,
Rodr guez-Lera, F.J., Matell an-Olivera, V., 2020. Analysing the
computational competences acquired by K-12 students when lec-
tured by robotic and human teachers. International Journal of
Social Robotics 12, 1009{1019.
Fincannon, T., Jentsch, F., Sellers, B., Talone, A., 2013. Best prac-
tices in human operation of robotic/unmanned vehicles: A tech-
nical review of recommendations regarding the human-to-robot
ratio, in: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics So-
ciety Annual Meeting, SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles,
CA. pp. 1268{1272.
Fincannon, T., Keebler, J.R., Jentsch, F., Phillips, E., Evans III,
A.W., 2011. Team size, team role, communication modality, and
team coordination in the distributed operation of multiple het-
erogeneous unmanned vehicles. Journal of Cognitive Engineering
and Decision Making 5, 106{131.
Fooladi Mahani, M., Jiang, L., Wang, Y., 2020. A bayesian trust in-
ference model for human-multi-robot teams. International Journal
of Social Robotics , 1{15.
Fortunati, L., Cavallo, F., Sarrica, M., 2018. Multiple communica-
tion roles in human{robot interactions in public space. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Robotics , 1{14.
Foster, M.E., Gaschler, A., Giuliani, M., Isard, A., Pateraki, M.,
Petrick, R.P., 2012. Two people walk into a bar: Dynamic multi-
party social interaction with a robot agent, in: Proceedings of the
14th ACM international conference on Multimodal interaction,
pp. 3{10.
Frank, J.A., Krishnamoorthy, S.P., Kapila, V., 2017. Toward mo-bile mixed-reality interaction with multi-robot systems. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters 2, 1901{1908.
Fraune, M.R., Oisted, B.C., Sembrowski, C.E., Gates, K.A., Krupp,
M.M., Sabanovi c, S., 2020. Eects of robot-human versus robot-
robot behavior and entitativity on anthropomorphism and will-
ingness to interact. Computers in Human Behavior 105, 106220.
Fraune, M.R., Sabanovi c, S., Smith, E.R., Nishiwaki, Y., Okada, M.,
2017. Threatening ocks and mindful snowakes: How group en-
titativity aects perceptions of robots, in: 2017 12th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, IEEE. pp.
205{213.
Fraune, M.R., Sherrin, S., Sabanovi c, S., Smith, E.R., 2015. Rabble
of robots eects: Number and type of robots modulates attitudes,
emotions, and stereotypes, in: Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion, pp. 109{116.
Freedy, A., Sert, O., Freedy, E., McDonough, J., Weltman, G.,
Tambe, M., Gupta, T., Grayson, W., Cabrera, P., 2008. Mul-
tiagent adjustable autonomy framework (MAAF) for multi-robot,
multi-human teams, in: 2008 International Symposium on Col-
laborative Technologies and Systems, IEEE. pp. 498{505.
Gittens, C.L., 2021. Remote HRI: A methodology for maintain-
ing COVID-19 physical distancing and human interaction require-
ments in HRI studies. Information Systems Frontiers , 1{16.
Gombolay, M., Bair, A., Huang, C., Shah, J., 2017. Computational
design of mixed-initiative human{robot teaming that considers
human factors: situational awareness, workload, and workow
preferences. The International journal of robotics research 36,
597{617.
Gombolay, M.C., Gutierrez, R.A., Clarke, S.G., Sturla, G.F., Shah,
J.A., 2015. Decision-making authority, team eciency and human
worker satisfaction in mixed human{robot teams. Autonomous
Robots 39, 293{312.
Goodrich, M.A., Quigley, M., Cosenzo, K., 2005. Task switching
and multi-robot teams, in: Multi-Robot Systems. From Swarms
to Intelligent Automata Volume III. Springer, pp. 185{195.
Goodrich, M.A., Schultz, A.C., 2008. Human-robot interaction: a
survey. Now Publishers Inc.
Gromov, B., Gambardella, L.M., Di Caro, G.A., 2016. Wearable
multi-modal interface for human multi-robot interaction, in: 2016
IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue
Robotics (SSRR), IEEE. pp. 240{245.
Guo, C., Young, J.E., Sharlin, E., 2009. Touch and toys: new tech-
niques for interaction with a remote group of robots, in: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 491{500.
Gvirsman, O., Koren, Y., Norman, T., Gordon, G., 2020. Patricc:
A platform for triadic interaction with changeable characters, in:
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 399{407.
Hari, S.K.K., Nayak, A., Rathinam, S., 2020. An approximation
algorithm for a task allocation, sequencing and scheduling problem
involving a human-robot team. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters 5, 2146{2153.
Hasnain, S.K., Mostafaoui, G., Gaussier, P., 2012. A synchrony-
based perspective for partner selection and attentional mechanism
in human-robot interaction. Paladyn 3, 156{171.
Hastie, H., Robb, D.A., Lopes, J., Ahmad, M., Bras, P.L., Liu,
X., Petrick, R., Lohan, K., Chantler, M.J., 2019. Challenges
in collaborative HRI for remote robot teams. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.07379 .
Hong, A., Lee, D.G., B ultho, H.H., Son, H.I., 2017. Multimodal
feedback for teleoperation of multiple mobile robots in an outdoor
environment. Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces 11, 67{80.
Humphrey, C.M., Henk, C., Sewell, G., Williams, B.W., Adams,
J.A., 2007. Assessing the scalability of a multiple robot interface,
in: 2007 2nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI), IEEE. pp. 239{246.
Hussein, A., Ghignone, L., Nguyen, T., Salimi, N., Nguyen, H.,
Wang, M., Abbass, H.A., 2018. Towards bi-directional commu-
nication in human-swarm teaming: A survey. arXiv preprint
20

==== Page 22 ====
arXiv:1803.03093 .
H uttenrauch, H., Eklundh, K.S., Green, A., Topp, E.A., 2006. In-
vestigating spatial relationships in human-robot interaction, in:
2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, IEEE. pp. 5052{5059.
Hwang, W.Y., Wu, S.Y., 2014. A case study of collaboration with
multi-robots and its eect on children's interaction. Interactive
Learning Environments 22, 429{443.
IJtsma, M., Ma, L.M., Pritchett, A.R., Feigh, K.M., 2019. Compu-
tational methodology for the allocation of work and interaction in
human-robot teams. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Deci-
sion Making 13, 221{241.
Iqbal, T., Riek, L.D., 2017. Coordination dynamics in multihuman
multirobot teams. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 2,
1712{1717.
Jiang, S., Arkin, R.C., 2015. Mixed-initiative human-robot interac-
tion: denition, taxonomy, and survey, in: 2015 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, IEEE. pp.
954{961.
Johansson, M., Skantze, G., Gustafson, J., 2013. Head pose patterns
in multiparty human-robot team-building interactions, in: Inter-
national conference on social robotics, Springer. pp. 351{360.
Jones, H., Snyder, M., 2001. Supervisory control of multiple robots
based on a real-time strategy game interaction paradigm, in: 2001
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics.
e-Systems and e-Man for Cybernetics in Cyberspace (Cat. No.
01CH37236), IEEE. pp. 383{388.
Joshi, S., Sabanovi c, S., 2019. Robots for inter-generational interac-
tions: implications for nonfamilial community settings, in: 14th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion (HRI), IEEE. pp. 478{486.
Jung, M.F., DiFranzo, D., Shen, S., Stoll, B., Claure, H., Lawrence,
A., 2020. Robot-assisted tower construction|a method to study
the impact of a robot's allocation behavior on interpersonal
dynamics and collaboration in groups. ACM Transactions on
Human-Robot Interaction (THRI) 10, 1{23.
Karami, H., Darvish, K., Mastrogiovanni, F., 2020. A task allocation
approach for human-robot collaboration in product defects inspec-
tion scenarios, in: 2020 29th IEEE International Conference on
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE.
pp. 1127{1134.
Khandelwal, P., Barrett, S., Stone, P., 2015. Leading the way: An
ecient multi-robot guidance system, in: Proceedings of the 2015
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, p. 1625{1633.
Khasawneh, A., Rogers, H., Bertrand, J., Madathil, K.C.,
Gramopadhye, A., 2019. Human adaptation to latency in tele-
operated multi-robot human-agent search and rescue teams. Au-
tomation in Construction 99, 265{277.
Kim, E.S., Berkovits, L.D., Bernier, E.P., Leyzberg, D., Shic, F.,
Paul, R., Scassellati, B., 2013. Social robots as embedded re-
inforcers of social behavior in children with autism. Journal of
autism and developmental disorders 43, 1038{1049.
Kim, L.H., Drew, D.S., Domova, V., Follmer, S., 2020. User-dened
swarm robot control, in: Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1{13.
Kim, L.H., Follmer, S., 2021. Generating legible and glanceable
swarm robot motion through trajectory, collective behavior, and
pre-attentive processing features. ACM Transactions on Human-
Robot Interaction (THRI) 10, 1{25.
Kolling, A., Walker, P., Chakraborty, N., Sycara, K., Lewis, M.,
2015. Human interaction with robot swarms: A survey. IEEE
Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 46, 9{26.
Kozima, H., Nakagawa, C., Yasuda, Y., 2005. Interactive robots
for communication-care: A case-study in autism therapy, in: RO-
MAN 2005. IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, 2005., IEEE. pp. 341{346.
Kruij, G.J.M., Jan  cek, M., Keshavdas, S., Larochelle, B., Zen-
der, H., Smets, N.J., Mioch, T., Neerincx, M.A., Diggelen, J.V.,
Colas, F., et al., 2014. Experience in system design for human-
robot teaming in urban search and rescue, in: Field and ServiceRobotics, Springer. pp. 111{125.
Lee, P.J., Wang, H., Chien, S.Y., Lewis, M., Scerri, P., Velagapudi,
P., Sycara, K., Kane, B., 2010. Teams for teams performance in
multi-human/multi-robot teams, in: Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, SAGE Publica-
tions Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. pp. 438{442.
Leite, I., McCoy, M., Lohani, M., Salomons, N., McElvaine, K.,
Stokes, C., Rivers, S., Scassellati, B., 2016. Autonomous disen-
gagement classication and repair in multiparty child-robot inter-
action, in: 2016 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp.
525{532.
Leite, I., McCoy, M., Lohani, M., Ullman, D., Salomons, N., Stokes,
C., Rivers, S., Scassellati, B., 2015. Emotional storytelling in the
classroom: Individual versus group interaction between children
and robots, in: 2015 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), IEEE. pp. 75{82.
Lemaignan, S., Garcia, F., Jacq, A., Dillenbourg, P., 2016. From
real-time attention assessment to \with-me-ness" in human-robot
interaction, in: 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Ieee. pp. 157{164.
Lewis, M., 2013. Human interaction with multiple remote robots.
Reviews of Human Factors and Ergonomics 9, 131{174.
Lewis, M., Wang, H., Chien, S.Y., Velagapudi, P., Scerri, P., Sycara,
K., 2011. Process and performance in human-robot teams. Journal
of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 5, 186{208.
Li, M., Kwon, M., Sadigh, D., 2021. Inuencing leading and following
in human{robot teams. Autonomous Robots 45, 959{978.
Lim, Y., Ranasinghe, K., Gardi, A., Ezer, N., Sabatini, R., 2018.
Human-machine interfaces and interactions for multi uas oper-
ations, in: Proceedings of the 31st Congress of the International
Council of the Aeronautical Sciences (ICAS 2018), Belo Horizonte,
Brazil, pp. 9{14.
Lippi, M., Marino, A., 2021. A mixed-integer linear programming
formulation for human multi-robot task allocation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.06772 .
Liu, R., Cai, Z., Lewis, M., Lyons, J., Sycara, K., 2019. Trust repair
in human-swarm teams+, in: 2019 28th IEEE International Con-
ference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-
MAN), IEEE. pp. 1{6.
Liu, X., Huang, P., Ge, S.S., 2021. Optimized control for
human-multi-robot collaborative manipulation via multi-player q-
learning. Journal of the Franklin Institute .
Malvankar-Mehta, M.S., Mehta, S.S., 2015. Optimal task allocation
in multi-human multi-robot interaction. Optimization Letters 9,
1787{1803.
Martins, G.S., Santos, L., Dias, J., 2017. Bum: Bayesian user model
for distributed social robots, in: 2017 26th IEEE International
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 1279{1284.
Mavridis, N., 2015. A review of verbal and non-verbal human{robot
interactive communication. Robotics and Autonomous Systems
63, 22{35.
McCarley, J.D., Wickens, C.D., 2005. Human factors implications
of uavs in the national airspace. University of Illinois Institute
of Aviation Technical Report (AHFD-05-5/FAA-05-1), Savoy, IL.
Aviation Human Factors Division .
Mercado, J.E., Rupp, M.A., Chen, J.Y., Barnes, M.J., Barber, D.,
Procci, K., 2016. Intelligent agent transparency in human{agent
teaming for multi-uxv management. Human factors 58, 401{415.
Mina, T., Kannan, S.S., Jo, W., Min, B.C., 2020. Adaptive workload
allocation for multi-human multi-robot teams for independent and
homogeneous tasks. IEEE Access 8, 152697{152712.
Mostafa, S.A., Ahmad, M.S., Mustapha, A., 2019. Adjustable auton-
omy: a systematic literature review. Articial Intelligence Review
51, 149{186.
Murphy, R., Shell, D., Guerin, A., Duncan, B., Fine, B., Pratt,
K., Zourntos, T., 2011. A midsummer night's dream (with ying
robots). Autonomous Robots 30, 143{156.
Murphy, R.R., 2004. Human-robot interaction in rescue robotics.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C
21

==== Page 23 ====
(Applications and Reviews) 34, 138{153.
Murphy, R.R., Pratt, K.S., Burke, J.L., 2008. Crew roles and op-
erational protocols for rotary-wing micro-uavs in close urban en-
vironments, in: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/IEEE international
conference on Human robot interaction, pp. 73{80.
Nam, C., Walker, P., Lewis, M., Sycara, K., 2017. Predicting trust
in human control of swarms via inverse reinforcement learning, in:
2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 528{533.
Nam, C., Walker, P., Li, H., Lewis, M., Sycara, K., 2019. Models of
trust in human control of swarms with varied levels of autonomy.
IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 50, 194{204.
Nanavati, A., Doering, M., Br s ci c, D., Kanda, T., 2020. Au-
tonomously learning one-to-many social interaction logic from
human-human interaction data, in: Proceedings of the 2020
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion, pp. 419{427.
Oliveira, R., Arriaga, P., Correia, F., Paiva, A., 2020. Looking be-
yond collaboration: Socioemotional positive, negative and task-
oriented behaviors in human{robot group interactions. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Robotics 12, 505{518.
Oliveira, R., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., 2021. Human-robot interaction
in groups: Methodological and research practices. Multimodal
Technologies and Interaction 5, 59.
Olsen Jr, D.R., Wood, S.B., 2004. Fan-out: measuring human control
of multiple robots, in: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems, pp. 231{238.
Ostanin, M., Yagfarov, R., Devitt, D., Akhmetzyanov, A., Klimchik,
A., 2021. Multi robots interactive control using mixed reality.
International Journal of Production Research 59, 7126{7138.
Patel, J., Pinciroli, C., 2020. Improving human performance using
mixed granularity of control in multi-human multi-robot interac-
tion, in: 2020 29th IEEE International Conference on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 1135{
1142.
Patel, J., Ramaswamy, T., Li, Z., Pinciroli, C., 2021. Direct and
indirect communication in multi-human multi-robot interaction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00672 .
Penders, J., Alboul, L., Witkowski, U., Naghsh, A., Saez-Pons, J.,
Herbrechtsmeier, S., El-Habbal, M., 2011. A robot swarm assisting
a human re-ghter. Advanced Robotics 25, 93{117.
Podevijn, G., O'grady, R., Mathews, N., Gilles, A., Fantini-Hauwel,
C., Dorigo, M., 2016. Investigating the eect of increasing robot
group sizes on the human psychophysiological state in the context
of human{swarm interaction. Swarm Intelligence 10, 193{210.
Podevijn, G., O'Grady, R., Nashed, Y.S., Dorigo, M., 2013. Gestur-
ing at subswarms: Towards direct human control of robot swarms,
in: Conference Towards Autonomous Robotic Systems, Springer.
pp. 390{403.
Pourmehr, S., Monajjemi, V., Sadat, S.A., Zhan, F., Wawerla, J.,
Mori, G., Vaughan, R., 2014. \You are green" a touch-to-name
interaction in an integrated multi-modal multi-robot HRI system,
in: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM/IEEE international conference
on Human-robot interaction, pp. 266{267.
Ramchurn, S.D., Fischer, J.E., Ikuno, Y., Wu, F., Flann, J., Wal-
dock, A., 2015. A study of human-agent collaboration for multi-
uav task allocation in dynamic environments, in: Proceedings of
the 24th International Joint Conference on Articial Intelligence
(IJCAI), pp. 1184{1192.
Reig, S., Carter, E.J., Fong, T., Forlizzi, J., Steinfeld, A., 2021. Flail-
ing, hailing, prevailing: Perceptions of multi-robot failure recovery
strategies, in: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 158{167.
Riek, L.D., 2012. Wizard of oz studies in HRI: a systematic review
and new reporting guidelines. Journal of Human-Robot Interac-
tion 1, 119{136.
Rinski, D., Erel, H., Feiner, A., Homan, G., Zuckerman, O.,
2021. Human-human-robot interaction: robotic object's respon-
sive gestures improve interpersonal evaluation in human interac-
tion. Human{Computer Interaction 36, 333{359.
Rios-Martinez, J., Spalanzani, A., Laugier, C., 2015. From proxemicstheory to socially-aware navigation: A survey. International Jour-
nal of Social Robotics 7, 137{153.
Rold an, J.J., Pe~ na-Tapia, E., Mart n-Barrio, A., Olivares-M endez,
M.A., Del Cerro, J., Barrientos, A., 2017. Multi-robot interfaces
and operator situational awareness: Study of the impact of im-
mersion and prediction. Sensors 17, 1720.
Rosa, M.R., 2018. Adaptive synchronization for heterogeneous multi-
agent systems with switching topologies. Machines 6, 7.
Rosenfeld, A., Agmon, N., Maksimov, O., Kraus, S., 2017. Intel-
ligent agent supporting human{multi-robot team collaboration.
Articial Intelligence 252, 211{231.
Rosenfeld, A., Noa, A., Maksimov, O., Kraus, S., 2016. Human-
multi-robot team collaboration for ecient warehouse operation.
Autonomous Robots and Multirobot Systems (ARMS) .
Rosenthal, S., Veloso, M., Dey, A.K., 2012. Is someone in this oce
available to help me? Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems
66, 205{221.
Rule, A., Forlizzi, J., 2012. Designing interfaces for multi-user, multi-
robot systems, in: Proceedings of the seventh annual ACM/IEEE
international conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 97{
104.
Saez-Pons, J., Alboul, L., Penders, J., 2011. Experiments in cooper-
ative human multi-robot navigation, in: 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE. pp. 1{4.
Salam, H., Celiktutan, O., Hupont, I., Gunes, H., Chetouani, M.,
2016. Fully automatic analysis of engagement and its relationship
to personality in human-robot interactions. IEEE Access 5, 705{
721.
Saribatur, Z.G., Erdem, E., Patoglu, V., 2014. Cognitive factories
with multiple teams of heterogeneous robots: Hybrid reasoning
for optimal feasible global plans, in: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE. pp. 2923{
2930.
Saribatur, Z.G., Patoglu, V., Erdem, E., 2019. Finding optimal
feasible global plans for multiple teams of heterogeneous robots
using hybrid reasoning: an application to cognitive factories. Au-
tonomous Robots 43, 213{238.
Sathyamoorthy, A.J., Patel, U., Guan, T., Manocha, D., 2020.
Frozone: Freezing-free, pedestrian-friendly navigation in human
crowds. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 4352{4359.
Savery, R., Rogel, A., Weinberg, G., 2021. Emotion musical prosody
for robotic groups and entitativity, in: 2021 30th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robot & Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 440{446.
Schermerhorn, P., Scheutz, M., 2011. Disentangling the eects of
robot aect, embodiment, and autonomy on human team mem-
bers in a mixed-initiative task, in: Proceedings from the Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions,
Citeseer. pp. 236{241.
Scholtz, J., 2003. Theory and evaluation of human robot interac-
tions, in: 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of the, IEEE. pp. 10{pp.
Scholtz, J., Young, J., Drury, J.L., Yanco, H.A., 2004. Evaluation of
human-robot interaction awareness in search and rescue, in: IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004. Pro-
ceedings. ICRA'04. 2004, IEEE. pp. 2327{2332.
Sebo, S., Stoll, B., Scassellati, B., Jung, M.F., 2020. Robots in
groups and teams: A literature review. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 4, 1{36.
Sellner, B., Heger, F.W., Hiatt, L.M., Simmons, R., Singh, S., 2006.
Coordinated multiagent teams and sliding autonomy for large-
scale assembly. Proceedings of the IEEE 94, 1425{1444.
Selvaggio, M., Cognetti, M., Nikolaidis, S., Ivaldi, S., Siciliano, B.,
2021. Autonomy in physical human-robot interaction: A brief
survey. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters .
Setter, T., Fouraker, A., Egerstedt, M., Kawashima, H., 2015. Haptic
interactions with multi-robot swarms using manipulability. Jour-
nal of Human-Robot Interaction 4, 60{74.
Shannon, C.J., Johnson, L.B., Jackson, K.F., How, J.P., 2016. Adap-
tive mission planning for coupled human-robot teams, in: 2016
American Control Conference (ACC), IEEE. pp. 6164{6169.
22

==== Page 24 ====
Sheridan, T.B., 2016. Human{robot interaction: status and chal-
lenges. Human factors 58, 525{532.
Shiomi, M., Kanda, T., Glas, D.F., Satake, S., Ishiguro, H., Hagita,
N., 2009. Field trial of networked social robots in a shopping
mall, in: 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, IEEE. pp. 2846{2853.
Shiomi, M., Sumioka, H., Ishiguro, H., 2020. Survey of social touch
interaction between humans and robots. Journal of Robotics and
Mechatronics 32, 128{135.
Short, E., Mataric, M.J., 2017. Robot moderation of a collaborative
game: Towards socially assistive robotics in group interactions, in:
2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 385{390.
Short, E.S., Swift-Spong, K., Shim, H., Wisniewski, K.M., Zak, D.K.,
Wu, S., Zelinski, E., Matari c, M.J., 2017. Understanding social
interactions with socially assistive robotics in intergenerational
family groups, in: 2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), IEEE.
pp. 236{241.
Stiefelhagen, R., Fugen, C., Gieselmann, R., Holzapfel, H., Nickel,
K., Waibel, A., 2004. Natural human-robot interaction using
speech, head pose and gestures, in: 2004 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)(IEEE Cat.
No. 04CH37566), IEEE. pp. 2422{2427.
Suh, J., Woo, C.w., 2009. Design and development of a social robot
framework for providing an intelligent service, in: Proc. World
Congress on Engineering and Computer Science.
Swaminathan, J., Akintoye, J., Fraune, M.R., Knight, H., 2021.
Robots that run their own human experiments: Exploring rela-
tional humor with multi-robot comedy, in: 2021 30th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robot & Human Interactive Communica-
tion (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 1262{1268.
Swamy, G., Reddy, S., Levine, S., Dragan, A.D., 2020. Scaled au-
tonomy: Enabling human operators to control robot eets, in:
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 5942{5948.
Sycara, K., Lewis, M., 2012. Human control strategies for multi-
robot teams, in: Proceedings of the 16th WSEAS Interna-
tional Conference on Computers, World Scientic and Engineering
Academy and Society. pp. 149{154.
Taheri, A., Meghdari, A., Alemi, M., Pouretemad, H., 2018. Human{
robot interaction in autism treatment: A case study on three pairs
of autistic children as twins, siblings, and classmates. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Robotics 10, 93{113.
Tan, X.Z., Reig, S., Carter, E.J., Steinfeld, A., 2019. From one
to another: how robot-robot interaction aects users' perceptions
following a transition between robots, in: 2019 14th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
IEEE. pp. 114{122.
Tanaka, F., Isshiki, K., Takahashi, F., Uekusa, M., Sei, R., Hayashi,
K., 2015. Pepper learns together with children: Development of
an educational application, in: 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), IEEE. pp. 270{
275.
Tews, A.D., Mataric, M.J., Sukhatme, G.S., 2003. A scalable ap-
proach to human-robot interaction, in: 2003 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat. No. 03CH37422),
IEEE. pp. 1665{1670.
Thomaz, A., Homan, G., Cakmak, M., 2016. Computational
human-robot interaction. Foundations and Trends in Robotics
4, 105{223.
Tseng, S.H., Chao, Y., Lin, C., Fu, L.C., 2016. Service robots: Sys-
tem design for tracking people through data fusion and initiating
interaction with the human group by inferring social situations.
Robotics and Autonomous Systems 83, 188{202.
V azquez, M., Steinfeld, A., Hudson, S.E., 2016. Maintaining aware-
ness of the focus of attention of a conversation: A robot-centric
reinforcement learning approach, in: 2016 25th IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communica-
tion (RO-MAN), IEEE. pp. 36{43.
Wainer, J., Robins, B., Amirabdollahian, F., Dautenhahn, K., 2014.Using the humanoid robot kaspar to autonomously play tri-
adic games and facilitate collaborative play among children with
autism. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development
6, 183{199.
Wang, H., Lewis, M., Velagapudi, P., Scerri, P., Sycara, K., 2009.
How search and its subtasks scale in n robots, in: Proceedings
of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference on Human robot
interaction, pp. 141{148.
Wang, J., Lewis, M., 2008. Assessing cooperation in human control
of heterogeneous robots, in: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/IEEE
international conference on Human robot interaction, pp. 9{16.
Wang, X.V., Kem eny, Z., V ancza, J., Wang, L., 2017. Human{robot
collaborative assembly in cyber-physical production: Classica-
tion framework and implementation. CIRP annals 66, 5{8.
Wang, Y., Humphrey, L.R., Liao, Z., Zheng, H., 2018. Trust-based
multi-robot symbolic motion planning with a human-in-the-loop.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 8, 1{
33.
Wang, Y., Shi, Z., Wang, C., Zhang, F., 2014. Human-robot mutual
trust in (semi) autonomous underwater robots, in: Cooperative
Robots and Sensor Networks 2014. Springer, pp. 115{137.
Williams, T., Ayers, D., Kaufman, C., Serrano, J., Roy, S., 2021.
Deconstructed trustee theory: Disentangling trust in body and
identity in multi-robot distributed systems, in: Proceedings of
the 2021 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction, pp. 262{271.
Williams, T., Briggs, P., Scheutz, M., 2015. Covert robot-robot
communication: Human perceptions and implications for human-
robot interaction. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction 4, 24{49.
Wong, C.Y., Seet, G., 2017. Workload, awareness and automation
in multiple-robot supervision. International Journal of Advanced
Robotic Systems 14, 1729881417710463.
Yamaoka, F., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Hagita, N., 2009. A model of
proximity control for information-presenting robots. IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics 26, 187{195.
Yanco, H.A., Drury, J., 2004. Classifying human-robot interaction:
an updated taxonomy, in: 2004 IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37583),
IEEE. pp. 2841{2846.
Yang, J.Y., Kwon, D.S., 2012. The eect of multiple robot interac-
tion on human-robot interaction, in: 2012 9th International Con-
ference on Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient Intelligence (URAI),
IEEE. pp. 30{33.
Yedidsion, H., Deans, J., Sheehan, C., Chillara, M., Hart, J., Stone,
P., Mooney, R.J., 2019. Optimal use of verbal instructions for
multi-robot human navigation guidance, in: International Con-
ference on Social Robotics, Springer. pp. 133{143.
Zhang, L., Vaughan, R., 2016. Optimal robot selection by gaze direc-
tion in multi-human multi-robot interaction, in: 2016 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), IEEE. pp. 5077{5083.
Zheng, K., Glas, D.F., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Hagita, N., 2011.
How many social robots can one operator control?, in: 2011 6th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion (HRI), IEEE. pp. 379{386.
23

