==== Page 1 ====
Knowledge and Information Systems (2019) 60:617–663
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-018-1236-4
SURVEY PAPER
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media
Lin Yue1,2,3,5·Weitong Chen3·Xue Li3,4·Wanli Zuo5·Minghao Yin1,2,5
Received: 17 November 2016 / Revised: 30 March 2018 / Accepted: 27 April 2018 /
Published online: 4 July 2018
© Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2018
Abstract
Sentiments or opinions from social media provide the most up-to-date and inclusive infor-
mation, due to the proliferation of social media and the low barrier for posting the message.
Despite the growing importance of sentiment analysis, this area lacks a concise and systematic
arrangement of prior efforts. It is essential to: (1) analyze its progress over the years, (2) pro-
vide an overview of the main advances achieved so far, and (3) outline remaining limitations.
Several essential aspects, therefore, are addressed within the scope of this survey. On the
one hand, this paper focuses on presenting typical methods from three different perspectives
(task-oriented, granularity-oriented, methodology-oriented) in the area of sentiment analysis.
Speciﬁcally, a large quantity of techniques and methods are categorized and compared. On
the other hand, different types of data and advanced tools for research are introduced, as well
as their limitations. On the basis of these materials, the essential prospects lying ahead for
sentiment analysis are identiﬁed and discussed.
Keywords Sentiment analysis ·Social media ·Data mining ·Machine learning ·Survey
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis (SA) sometimes alternatively mentioned as opinion mining is a research
area which aims to analyze people’s sentiments or opinions toward entities such as topics,
events, individuals, issues, services, products, organizations, and their attributes [ 63]. Senti-
B Weitong Chen
w.chen9@uq.edu.au
B Minghao Yin
ymh@nenu.edu.cn
1School of Information Science and Technology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
2Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
3School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia
4College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, China
5Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin
University, Changchun, China
123

==== Page 2 ====
618 L. Yue et al.
ment analysis should be treated as a branch of machine learning, data mining, natural language
processing, and computational linguistics, which also borrows elements from sociology andpsychology. Although the history of natural language processing (NLP) starts in the 1950s,little attention had been paid to people’s opinions and sentiments analysis until 2005s. Forthe past few years, the prosperity of the social media propels the development of sentimentanalysis. In this section, we will mainly answer three main questions: the importance of sen-timent analysis, the differences between our survey and former ones, and the contributionsof our survey.
1.1 Reasons for caring about sentiment analysis in social media
The growth of information available in social media makes sentiment analysis more crucial;related researches have been ﬁltered into three main aspects of the application.
From the commercial perspective, sentiment analysis can provide online advices and
recommendations for both of the customers and merchants. On the one hand, user preferencesthat the data reveals can be used to help e-commerce platforms analyzing their productsand services. On the other hand, for the virtual nature of online shopping, it is not easyto understand a commodity comprehensively and objectively, and whether the consumer iswilling to learn about other consumers’ comments or opinions.
From the political perspective, the massive demand for political information can be
regarded as another important factor. Commercial application is not the only motivationbehind people seeking or expressing opinions online. For example, in the analysis of the con-versation on Twitter before the European Parliament elections, researchers have collectedmore than 1.2 million tweets in three languages (English, German, and French) during atwo-week period (May 1 to May 14, 2014),
1in which:
– For the Twitter conversation in English, 39% of the assertions on Twitter are negative toward
the European Union (EU), compared with 30% neutral and 31% positive. In French, theresult broke down the same basic way, about 39% negative, 28% neutral, and 33% positive.And while in German, conversations on Twitter are much more positive (39%) than negative(5%), these attitudes are embedded in sparse conversation that represent a mere fractionof the Twitter activity in English and French (see Fig. 1a).
– There are low-intensity conversations of English language on Twitter about the ﬁve can-
didates competing for the European Commission presidency: Jean-Claude Juncker fromLuxembourg, who is a candidate of the center-right European People’s Party; MartinSchulz from Germany, who is a candidate of the center-left Party of European Socialists;Guy Verhofstadt from Belgium, representing the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats forEurope; Alexis Tsipras from Greece, who is a candidate of the European Left Party; andSka Keller from Germany, who is a candidate of the European Green Party (see Fig. 1b).
From the perspective of public security, sociopolitical events such as the Arab Spring
and the London Riots vividly demonstrate the importance of sentiment analysis to publicsecurity. In both cases, online social medias such as Twitter and Facebook were regarded assigniﬁcant contributors to the outbreak and proliferation of the events. Sentiment analysis canhelp authorities discover those types of sensitive information in advance. If so, an action suchas shutting down Internet communication channels would prevent supporters of terrorismfrom having access to such services.
1http://www.journalism.org/2014/05/22/the-eu-elections-on-twitter/ .
123

==== Page 3 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 619
Positive˖23%
Negative: 7%
Neutral: 70%Positive˖15%
Negative: 8%
Neutral: 77%Positive˖21%
Negative: 6%
Neutral: 73%Positive˖24%
Negative: 11%
Neutral: 65%Positive˖11%
Negative: 10%
Neutral: 79%Jean-Claude Juncker
10,847 postsSka Keller
2,345 postsMartin Schulz
12,886 postsAlexis Tsipras
1,686 postsGuy Verhofstadt
5,178 posts(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 The EU elections on Twitter: mixed views about the EU and little passion for the candidates. aMixed
Twitter views on the EU in English, French, German. bEU commission presidential candidates get very
modest attention on Twitter (number of posts in English only)
To sum up, sentiment analysis or opinion mining task is important not only for tradi-
tional consumers and companies conducting surveys to gather opinions about correspondingproducts or services, but also it plays an important role on national security and publicopinion analysis.
1.2 Differences between this survey and former ones
Plenty of techniques have been developed and conduced to make sentiment analysis viable.However, to the best of our knowledge, sentiment analysis is still in its early stage andsuffers changes; few systematic reviews well shape this area and position existing worksand current progress. The main barrier is that sentiment analysis is a multi-faceted problemincluding many subproblems, but not a single task. Although some works have exploredsentiment analysis built on multi-perspectives, few have sought to provide an in-depth surveyof current researches or detail on some open problems presented in this ﬁeld. Existing surveysof sentiment analysis studies, either concentrate on enumerating technical details or justfocus on a certain aspects of sentiment analysis. Moreover, the rapid development of theﬁeld, to some extent, makes those surveys outdated. Besides, there is no survey organized
123

==== Page 4 ====
620 L. Yue et al.
for the beginners getting started quickly with the research progress, the classical algorithm,
the recent dynamics, the typical tools, the suitable databases, etc.
Of all those surveys proposed in recent years, Liu [ 63] summed up all important research
topics in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis, which is regarded as an encyclopedia on sentimentanalysis and opinion mining. As evidence of that, it involves more than 400 bibliographicreferences from major journals and conferences. Pang et al. [ 87] covered works that directly
enable opinion-oriented information-seeking systems, which sought to address the problemsraised by sentiment-aware applications and included material on issues regarding manipula-tion, privacy, and economic impact that is generated by opinion-oriented information-accessservices. Medhat et al. [ 73] provided a categorization of articles according to the used tech-
niques, which can help the researchers who are familiar with certain techniques to use them inthe sentiment analysis and choose the appropriate technique for a certain application. Vinod-hini et al. [ 131] presented a short survey that covers the techniques and challenges appeared
in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis. Wiegand et al. [ 138] presented a survey on the role of nega-
tion in sentiment analysis, in which various computational approaches modeling negationare introduced. In particular, this work focuses on aspects such as negation word detection,scope of negation, and limitation and challenges of negation modeling. Ravi et al. [ 106]i s
organized on the basis of sub-tasks to be performed, that is to say, machine learning, natu-ral language processing techniques, and applications of sentiment analysis. Saif et al. [ 109]
presented an overview of eight publicly available manually annotated evaluation datasets forTwitter sentiment analysis and a common limitation of most of these datasets. Tsytsarau et al.[125] reviewed the development of sentiment analysis in recent years and also discussed the
gradual progress of a research direction, namely contradiction analysis. Schouten et al. [ 111]
focused on aspect-level sentiment analysis, and the goal of this paper is to ﬁnd and aggregatesentiment on entities mentioned within documents or aspects of these entities. Tang et al.[121] discussed related issues and main approaches to word sentiment classiﬁcation, subjec-
tivity classiﬁcation, opinion extraction, and document sentiment classiﬁcation. Giachanouet al. [ 39] investigated and brieﬂy described the algorithms of sentiment analysis in Twitter,
in which researchers discussed tasks related to Twitter opinion retrieval, tracking sentimentsover time, irony detection, emotion detection, and tweet sentiment quantiﬁcation.
1.3 Contributions of this survey
With the constant advent of novel researches, a new inclusive survey is required for betterunderstanding of current research progress. The goal of this paper is to give an in-depthintroduction and present new insights toward this area. Our work is different from the othersby proposing novel multiple perspectives, teasing out series of works, organizing tools, andbenchmarks datasets used in various work. To our knowledge, this type of study is notavailable in the literature.
In summary, the contributions of this article are:
1. We reviewed literatures in the area of sentiment analysis from multiple perspectives
and provided the strength and weaknesses of these methods and techniques. Varioustechniques of sentiment analysis are categorized with brief details of the algorithms andtheir originating references. This work will help beginners aiming at sentiment analysisto have a panoramic view of the entire research ﬁeld.
2. The available benchmark datasets are discussed and categorized according to the usage
in certain applications. We have analyzed types of tools and lexicons that can be used insentiment analysis research as well as their limitations.
123

==== Page 5 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 621
3. On the basis of these materials, the essential prospects lying ahead for sentiment analysis
are identiﬁed and discussed. Speciﬁcally, we have summarized multimodal sentimentanalysis (MSA) techniques in sentiment analysis, which we thought will be the mainchallenge for future development.
This survey is organized as follows: In Sect. 2, we introduce main concepts and deﬁni-
tions used throughout this paper. In Sect. 3, we present researches from new perspectives
of task-oriented, granularity-oriented, methodology-oriented sentiment analysis and explorethe motivations, beneﬁts, and limitations of these techniques and methods. In Sect. 4,w e
discuss some of the benchmark datasets and tools that have been used in sentiment analysisresearch as well as their limitations. Section 5highlights possible trends and challenges in
sentiment analysis. Finally, Sect. 6concludes this survey with ﬁnal remarks.
2 Terminology and background concepts
Before we dive into the details of this survey, we start with an introduction of the termi-
nologies and background concepts, which concerns of emotion and sentiment in the ﬁeldof psychology, the deﬁnition of sentiment analysis in social media, and different types ofopinions.
2.1 Emotion and sentiment from psychological perspective
The words emotion and sentiment are usually used interchangeably in daily life. While in theﬁeld of psychology, they are treated as two different concepts. Watson and Tellegen’s well-known psychological model showed a two-dimensional structure of emotions (see Fig. 2).
Emotion is deﬁned as a complex psychological state, which plays a key role of operatingmotivators. Psychologist Paul Eckman proposed six basic emotions, i.e., happiness, sad-ness, anger, fear, surprise, and disgust. Later on, other psychologists enriched this list byadding emotions such as pride, excitement, embarrassment, contempt, shame. There arethree main components in emotion, which respectively are the subjective experience, thephysical response, and the behavioral response. Sentiment, on the other hand, refers to amental attitude, which is created based on emotion. The deﬁnition highlights that sentimentis used to convey the thoughts of the individual deriving from his emotion. Unlike emo-tion, sentiment goes a step further, which is not conﬁned to the psychological dimensions.Sentiment is usually not a primary emotion but is highly organized. McDougall stated thatsentiment usually connects primary emotion with action. To sum up, the differences betweenemotion and sentiment can be seen from four aspects (see Table 1):
All types of emotion can be treated as multiple factors together for affecting sentiment.
Most of the sentiment analysis researches are based on natural language processing so far.These traditional works focus on textual content, while we are increasingly making use ofaudios, images, and videos to air our opinions on social media platforms. Thus, it is highlycrucial to analyze opinions and identify sentiments from multiple modalities, which is calledemotion analysis. While the ﬁeld of multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) has not receivedmuch attention, the scatter of multimodal sentiment expressions requires a higher demandfor more analysis to derive useful data. We will present an overview of recent research ofdifferent models and individually and jointly ﬁnd the gaps in terms of tasks, approachestheories, and applications in Sect. 5.
123

==== Page 6 ====
622 L. Yue et al.
content
warmheartedhappy
kindly
pleased
satisfied
quiescent
quiet
stilldrowsy
dull
sleepy
sluggisharousedastonished
surpriseddistressed
fearful
hostile
littery
nervous
blue
grouchylonelysad
sorry
unhappyHIGH 
POSITIVE 
AFFECT
LOW
POSITIVE 
AFFECTSTRONG ENGAGEMENT
DISENGAGEMENTPLEASANTNESS
UNPLEASANTNESSHIGH 
NEGATIVE 
AFFECTLOW 
NEGATIVE 
AFFECTactive
elated
enthusiastic
peppy
strongat rest
calm
placid
relaxedscornful
Fig. 2 The two-dimensional structure of emotions
Table 1 The differences between emotion and sentiment
Deﬁnition Connection Dimension Nature
Emotion Complex
psychologicalstates– Psychological
dimensionRaw and natural
Sentiment Mental attitudes or
thoughtsExpression of
emotionsSocial dimension Highly organized
2.2 Sentiment analysis
The terms of sentiment analysis and opinion mining are usually used interchangeably in
research papers of data mining, machine learning, etc., although these concepts are notequivalent. The meaning of sentiment itself is still ambiguous. We will distinguish themwhen needed. To simplify the presentation, we will use the term of sentiment to denotecorresponding opinion, sentiment, appraisal, evaluation, attitude, and emotion. As sentimentanalysis was proposed to deal with product or service review, the corresponding deﬁnitionwas based on this kind of reviews as shown below:
123

==== Page 7 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 623
Posted by: John Smith   Date: September 10, 2011 
“(1) I bought a Canon G12 camera six months ago.
  (2) I simply love it.   (3) The picture quality is amazing. 
  (4) The battery life is also long.   (5) However, my wife thinks it is too heavy for her.” 
From the observation, an opinion consists of some key components:
1.Opinion holder For sentence (1), (2), (3), (4), the opinion holder is John Smith; while for
sentence (5), the holder of opinion is the wife of John Smith.
2.The date of the review September 10, 2011.
3.AA a r g e t Canon G12 camera.
4.Aspects or features of the target The picture quality and the battery life are different
aspect of the same target.
5.Sentiment on the target This review has a number of both positive and negative opinions
about Canon G12 camera. A positive opinion about the Canon camera is expressed bySentence (2); a positive opinion about its picture equality is expressed by Sentence (3);a positive opinion about its battery life is expressed by Sentence (4); a negative opinionabout the weight of the camera is expressed by Sentence (5).
In [63], the above ﬁve components are considered as essential. Researcher deﬁnes opinion
as a quintuple ( e
i,aij,sijk l ,hk,tl), where eiis the name of an entity, aijis an aspect of ei,
sijk lis the sentiment on aspect aijof entity ei,hkis the opinion holder, and tlis the time
when the opinion is expressed by hk. The sentiment sijk lis positive, negative, or neutral,
or expressed with different strength/intensity levels, e.g., 1–5 stars as used by most reviewonline.
Actually, current sentiment analysis collects all relevant data, public thoughts, opinions
and feelings, from all sorts of publicly accessible sources. Besides, it automatically predictsoutcomes or trends on different aspects of the information collected worldwide in real time.As the aforementioned examples illustrate, coordinating a series of sociopolitical events suchas the London riots and Arab Spring, or election prediction, to a large extent, are based onspatial information. We have achieved some statistical results as shown in Table 2; Dataset
1 and Dataset 2 are separately crawled from Twitter posted around Brisbane Australia fromMarch 17 to March 25, 2012 (219,933 messages) and the messages posted around USA fromJune 21 to June 27, 2012 (196,834 messages), in which spatial information could appear ingeo-tag, user proﬁle, IP address, and even tweet content.
Table 2 Different ways of spatial information appearing in Twitter
List Dataset 1 #msg % Dataset 2 #msg %
Messages with geo-tagged location 3121 1.42 5055 2.57
Messages with user proﬁle location 170,334 77.45 132,661 67.40Messages with IP address -based
location46,478 21.13 59,118 30.03
Messages that contain geographical
location in contents16,875 7.67 19,529 9.92
Messages that contain geographical
locations in contents more than 1location744 4.41 1337 6.85
123

==== Page 8 ====
624 L. Yue et al.
-100 -80 -60 - 40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100ALP TopicLNP TopicLNP            ALP
(%)
Weak  Support- ALP Strong  Support- ALP Weak  Support -LNP Strong  Support-LNP
-100 -80 -6 0 - 4 0 - 2 00 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0ALP TopicsLNP TopicsCoali/g415on (LNP)                     ALP
(%)
Weak Support-ALP Strong Support-ALP Weak Support-LNP Strong Support-LNP(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 Opinion analysis on Twitter for the Australian election (LNP /equal1Liberal National Party; ALP /equal1Australian
Labor Party). aQueensland election prediction. bAustralian federal election prediction
As different users from different geo-locations will post different tweets for their local
issues, spatial information is a baseline to catch the prominent and statistical featuresof tweets, such as to detect emerging local events, to guess the location of a user, to revealbehavioral features of local users. Spatial–temporal word spectrum (STWS) model is a lin-guistic ﬁngerprint of a geo-location on social media, which opens a new way of studyingsocial media. With STWS model, we have also discovered a series of interesting events onTwitter, e.g., people are dissatisﬁed with Orange polices’ green-lighting for drug dealers(June 25, 2015); people’s appealing for homosexual marriage legitimation in Australia (June27, 2015); people from Brisbane tend to have bad mood and talk billingsgate the most onTuesday (data collected from Twitter on an average of 2 min interval from April 23 17:00EST 2012- April 26 11:00 EST 2012).
Besides, we noticed a few important points, that is to say, Twitter has been used to study
national election results; however, very few people, to our knowledge, have yet conductedan in-depth investigation into how well this platform predicts the outcomes of the electionwith location-based information. For that reason, we performed opinion analysis on Twitterfor the Australian Election Prediction (see Fig. 3):
2
2http://www.queenslandimage.com/ .
123

==== Page 9 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 625
Queensland election prediction We collected a total number of 14,922 tweets (Tweets
collected between 00 middle night 01/01/2015 and 12 noon 30/01/2015) for predicting QLDElection Parties results. Based on the data crawled from Twitter, the Labour Party is expectedto win slightly. Speciﬁcally, the public are positive to Labor which is 12.39% higher thanLNP. In addition, others (Greens, etc.) are at 13%.
Australian federal election prediction Twitter data are collected between 00:00 12/31/2015
and 03:55 28/06/2016, in a statewide scope of Australia. About 968,966 tweets are related topolitics. A proportion of 63.13% tweets (611,691) was found relevant to this event. Amongthem, a proportion of 34.07% tweets (208,413) were subjective opinions. Based on ouranalysis on Twitter, there seems a 10% ahead of support to Coalition than ALP in AustralianFederal Election 2016.
The problem that we addressed is how to identify emerging events with location sensitivity
from a given set of Twitter messages. We have considered a set of messages, in which eachmessage is associated with an event. However, due to the characteristics of Twitter messages,several issues should be considered such as the abbreviation identiﬁcation, the short tweetstext with the semantic loss, the dynamic topic tracking. And, probably most important ofall is location-based sentiment analysis. People might share various types of content such asconversation topics, advertisements, events, opinions, and others. Our goal is to detect onlyemerging hotspot events that are happening in a particular area within a given period of time.From this review, we need to perform location identiﬁcation based on check-in information,user proﬁle, and geographical name in Twitter textual content before we analyze users’support over a speciﬁc political party.
From this review, we add spatial information element and redeﬁne opinion as a six-tuple:
Deﬁnition (opinion ) An opinion is a six-tuple,
(e
i,aij,sijk lt ,hk,tl,pt)
where eidenotes the name of an object, aijis an aspect of oi,sijk lt is the sentiment on
an aspect aijof object oi,hkis the sentiment holder, tlis the time when the sentiment is
expressed by hk,a n d ptis the place when the sentiment is expressed by hk. Note that objects
can be issues, products, organizations, services, events, individuals, topics, etc.
2.3 Different types of opinions
In [63], various types of opinions in opinion mining are introduced and compared, including
regular and comparative opinions, explicit and implicit opinions, subjectivity and emotion.In this section, we will brieﬂy sketch these basic conceptions combined with instances.
Regular and comparative opinions Direct sentiment and indirect sentiment, as two main
sub-types, are included in regular sentiment. Direct sentiment expresses opinions on an objector an aspect of the object directly. For the indirect sentiment, opinions on an object or an aspectof an object are expressed indirectly. For example, the sentence “After the election campaign,all candidates felt exhausted” describes an undesirable effect of the election on “all candi-dates,” which indirectly gives a negative opinion or sentiment to the election campaign. In thiscase, the entity is the election campaign and the aspect is the effect on all candidates. Compar-ative sentiment expresses relative or similar attribute between two objects. The superlative orcomparative form of an adjective or an adverb is usually contained in comparative opinion,e.g., “Donald Trump has higher approval ratings than Hillary Clinton does”.
Explicit and implicit opinions A subjective statement that gives a comparative or a regular
opinion is treated as an explicit opinion. While an objective statement that gives a comparative
123

==== Page 10 ====
626 L. Yue et al.
or regular opinion is treated as an implicit opinion, e.g., “Stop the boat!” is a domain-speciﬁc
phrase, which implies negative attitude to ALP and positive to LNP in Australian governmentelection in 2013. We can intuitively get the conclusion that explicit opinions are easier todetect and classify than implicit opinions.
Subjectivity and emotion A subjective sentence expresses some personal feelings, views, or
beliefs. Emotions are subjective feelings and thoughts, which are closely related to sentiments.The strength of a sentiment or an opinion is typically related to the intensity of certainemotions, e.g., “joy and anger.”
Other than all types of opinions mentioned above, there are still some challenging examples
as shown below. From the observation: The review in sentence (1) has a target restaurant,whilefood and service are two different aspects of the same target with positive and negativeopinions, constructing the corresponding relationship between one aspect of the target andits opinion is one important preparatory step; sentence (2) implies a negative attitude about acertain event or location of current speaker; sentence (3) seems like a negative opinion literally.But under some particular situations, such as between two friends, it could be positive toneas well. All these examples show more complicated proposals should be involved in opinionanalysis task, especially in natural language process, text mining, etc.
(1) “The food was great but the service was awful.”
–Object with features: [Restaurant, Food, Services]
(2) “I really think I shouldn’t be here.”
–Negative to the implied event or location of the current speaker.
(3) “You are terrible! : - )”
            –Positive to an object: [a friend of speaker]
(4) “Stop the boat!”
            –Domain specific: negative to ALP & positive to LNP in Australian government election in 2013.
3 Sentiment analysis research
Existing surveys of sentiment analysis studies either concentrate on enumerating technical
details in the areas of social media analysis, text mining, natural language processing, anddata mining or just focus on a certain aspects of sentiment analysis researches. Moreover, therapid development of the ﬁeld, to some extent, makes those surveys outdated. Besides, there isno one survey organized for the beginners getting started quickly with the research progress,the classical algorithm, the recent dynamics. In this survey, we reviewed the literatures insentiment analysis from multiple perspectives and provided the strength and weaknesses ofthese methods and techniques (see Fig. 4).
3.1 Task-oriented sentiment analysis
In this section, ﬁve different aspects in task-oriented sentiment analysis, as depicted in Fig. 4,
will be introduced and compared. These ﬁve aspects are polarity classiﬁcation, the level ofvalence or arousal at speciﬁc scale, beyond polarity, subjectivity/objectivity identiﬁcation,and feature/aspect-based sentiment analysis.
3.1.1 Polarity classiﬁcation
Basic research of sentiment analysis is polarity classiﬁcation, which explores whether theexpressed opinion in a document or a sentence, on a certain feature or aspect of a target,
123

==== Page 11 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 627
Supervised Learning Approach
Methodology-oriented Unsupervised Learning Approach
Semi-supervised Learning ApproachDocument Level Sentimant Analysis
Sentence Level Sentimant Analysis Sentiment Analysis/Opinion Mining Granularity-orientedPolarity Classification
The Level of Valence or Arousal at a Specific Scale
Beyond Polarity
Subjectivity/Objectivity Identification
Feature/Aspect-based Sentiment AnalysisTask-oriented
Word Level Sentimant Analysis
Fig. 4 Sentiment analysis researches from multiple perspectives
is positive, negative, or neutral. Early work in this area includes [ 89,126], who applied
different methods for detecting the polarity of product reviews and movie reviews. Pang et al.[89] ﬁrst explored the effectiveness of applying naïve Bayes and support vector machine to
the sentiment classiﬁcation task on movie reviews. Sentiment classiﬁcation can usually beseen as a two-class classiﬁcation problem. In this type of research, sentiment analysis isessentially a text classiﬁcation problem, in which feature selection has important effects onthe performance of classiﬁcation algorithm. As in machine learning and statistics, featureselection is the process of selecting a subset of relevant features for model construction. In textclassiﬁcation, feature selection techniques are used for simplifying the models to make themeasier to be interpreted, reducing training times, and enhancing generalization by overcomingthe problem of overﬁtting. In sentiment classiﬁcation, feature words should be sentimentwords that indicate a certain polarity, which needs to process more complex semantics.Moreover, researchers studied the several types of features and found that using unigramsfeatures gets better performance compared to other different feature selection strategies,although two machine learning methods on sentiment classiﬁcation task do not perform aswell as on traditional text classiﬁcation task. Like traditional classiﬁcation task, the key tosentiment classiﬁcation task is also selecting effective features. These effective features canbe seen in Table 3.
In recent years, Khan et al. [ 56] presented a multilingual framework for polarity classi-
ﬁcation with two aspects of contributions. On the one hand, this approach can serve as abaseline to compare other classiﬁcation systems. It considers techniques for text represen-tation such as spelling features, emoticons, word-based n-grams, character-based q-grams,and language dependent features. On the other hand, it is a framework for practitioners look-ing for a bootstrapping sentiment classiﬁer method to build more elaborated systems. As
123

==== Page 12 ====
628 L. Yue et al.
Table 3 The candidate features for sentiment classiﬁcation
Feature types Descriptions Examples
Terms and their frequency Frequency counts of individual
words and their n-gramsTF-IDF weighting scheme
Part of speech As important indicators of
opinions, adjectives are treatedas special features–
Sentiment words and phrases Words that are used to express
negative or positive sentimentsPositive sentiment words such as
good, wonderful, and amazing
Negative sentiment words such as
bad, poor, and terrible
Nouns such as rubbish, junk, and
crap
Verbs such as hate and love
Rules and opinions Individual sentiment words with
implied sentiments orcompound expressions and theirorientations determined bydomain knowledgeCompositional semantics
Sentiment shifters Expressions that could change the
sentiment orientationsNegation words of the most
common type of sentimentshifters such as not, never, none,nobody, nowhere, neither, andcannot
Modal auxiliary verbs such as
would, should, could, might,must, and ought
Words such as fail, omit, neglect,
less
Sarcasm often changes
orientations
Syntactic dependency Features with word dependency
generated from parsing or
dependency trees–
SentiWordNet (SWN) has been extensively used as a lexical resource for opinion mining,
Tellez et al. [ 122] proposed a framework named enhanced sentiment analysis and polarity
classiﬁcation (eSAP), which incorporates SWN as the labeled training corpus, where thesentiment scores are extracted based on the part of speech information. Then, SWN-basedvocabulary SWN-V generated from SWN with revised sentiment scores is used for supportvector machine model learning and classiﬁcation process.
3.1.2 The level of valence or arousal at speciﬁc scale
People also classify document polarity on multiple scales; Pang et al. [ 86] and Snyder et al.
[113] expanded the basic task of two-class classiﬁcation as either positive or negative for
predicting star ratings on either a 3 or a 4 star scale, while Snyder et al. [ 113] performed an in-
depth review analysis by predicting ratings for various aspects of the given target. Although inmost statistical classiﬁcation algorithms, the neutral category is ignored under the assumptionthat neutral objects lie near the boundary of the binary classiﬁer, a few researchers suggestthat, as in every polarity classiﬁcation task, three categories must be identiﬁed. Moreover, it
123

==== Page 13 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 629
can be proven that speciﬁc classiﬁers like max entropy and SVMs will beneﬁt from adding
neutral class and improve the effectiveness of classiﬁcation.
In opinion mining, unigram and n-gram representations of text are common ways. How-
ever, important expressions like “could have been better” that are essential for predictionmodels of ratings cannot be captured by unigrams. N-grams representations, on the otherhand, are capable of capturing such phrases, but typically occur too sparsely in the train-ing data and thus fail to yield robust performance. Qu et al. [ 105] addressed the problem
of numeric rating prediction from another perspective. They overcome the limitations ofunigrams and n-grams representations, through introducing a novel bag-of-opinions repre-sentation method, where the opinion in a review is constituted with three components: a rootword, a modiﬁer word set from the same sentence, and one or more negative words. Theprior polarity of the opinion is determined by opinion root. Then the strength of the priorpolarity will be intensiﬁed or weakened by modiﬁers. Negation words reverse or stronglyreduce the prior polarity. For each opinion, the set of negation words consists of at most onenegation valence shifter like “not” and its intensiﬁers like capitalization of the valence shifter.Each opinion component is associated with a score. By using a score function, the scores ofopinion elements are assembled into an opinion-score.
This type of sentiment analysis can also well characterize user preferences, which can be
helpful for improving the recommendation performance. Traditional recommender systems(RS) should consider factors of user’s purchase records, product category, and geographicallocation. In [ 59], researchers proposed a sentiment-based rating prediction method (RPS)
to improve prediction accuracy in recommender systems, including a social user sentimen-tal measurement approach on calculating each user’s sentiment on items or products, animportant mechanism of considering a user’s own sentimental attributes and interpersonalsentimental inﬂuences. Recommender system has made an accurate rating prediction withconsidering these factors, which is also a novel perspective of applying sentiment analysistechniques. Karyotis et al. [ 54] presented a novel emotion modeling methodology for incor-
porating human emotion into intelligent computer systems, which includes eliciting emotioninformation from users, a new representation of emotion (A V-AT model) with a geneticallyoptimized adaptive fuzzy logic technique, and a framework for predicting and tracking user’saffective trajectory over time. Compared to other existing machine learning approaches, fuzzytechnique is evaluated in terms of its ability to model affective states.
3.1.3 Beyond polarity (entity, opinion holder, spatial information, and temporal
information analysis)
The goal of researches in the area of ﬁne-grained opinion analysis is to identify subjective
expressions in text, along with their associated sources and targets. More speciﬁcally, ﬁne-grained opinion analysis aims to identify types of opinion entities such as opinion holders[55], opinion expressions [ 61], opinion targets [ 139], aspects of a target [ 98], opinion sources
[31]. In addition, we have redeﬁned opinion as a six-tuple, which brings us news sub-task of
sentiment analysis such as temporal and spatial information pattern analysis [ 101].
Opinion holder extraction is a typical task in this section. Several researches have investi-
gated on opinion holder extraction based on conditional random ﬁelds (CRF) [ 26], maximum
entropy (ME) model [ 57], convolution kernels [ 140], and dependency parser method [ 68], or
automatic semantic role labeling (ASRL) [ 108]. Recently, Katiyar et al. [ 55] investigated the
use of deep bidirectional LSTMs for joint extraction of opinion entities and the IS-FROMand IS-ABOUT relations that connect them, which is the ﬁrst attempt at using a deep learning
123

==== Page 14 ====
630 L. Yue et al.
approach and explores LSTM-based models for the joint extraction of opinion entities and
relations such as opinion expression, opinion target, and opinion holder.
Liao et al. [ 61] embedded both semantic structures and language expression features in the
representation of opinion object and its corresponding attribute and proposed the FREERLframework. This framework is domain-independent and no manually crafted linguistic rulesare needed. The framework can freely fuse any type of language expression features likestatistical co-occurrence or dependency syntax into the structure-based embedding of eachentity.
Wiegand et al. [ 139] presented a method for the new task of opinion holder and target
extraction on opinion compounds. Opinion compounds are noun compounds whose head isan opinion noun. Researchers did not only examine features known to be effective for nouncompound analysis, such as paraphrases and semantic classes of heads and modiﬁers, butalso proposed novel features tailored, in which the paraphrases of holders and targets arejointly considered, noun heads are replaced by related verbs, inferencing between differentcompounds is allowed by a global head constraint, etc.
Poria et al. [ 98] presented the ﬁrst deep learning approach for aspect extraction, which
identiﬁes opinion targets and detects the speciﬁc aspects of a service or a product that theopinion holder is either praising or complaining about. In their model, a 7-layer deep convo-lutional neural network is used to tag each word in opinionated sentences as either aspect ornon-aspect word. For the same purpose, a set of linguistic patterns and the neural networkcombined with them are developed. The ensemble classiﬁer coupled with a word-embeddingmodel allows this approach to obtain signiﬁcantly better accuracy than the state-of-the-artmethods.
Deng et al. [ 31] improved recognizing sources of opinions based on a new categorization
of opinions, i.e., non-participant opinion or participant opinion, in which transductive SVM isbuilt to classify an opinion utilizing existing limited resources. The categorization informationis then utilized by a probabilistic soft logic model to jointly recognize sources of the twotypes of opinions in a single model.
As people might create or share their content and interact with other users with many
location-based services, usually in a real-time manner, there are some special factors neededto be considered such as “spatial factor,” “temporal information.” Zhao et al. [ 152] studied
two types of user preferences, i.e., topical-region preference and category-aware topical-aspect preference. With a large amount of geo-tagged review data, researchers performeddeep analysis of user preferences by proposing a uniﬁed probabilistic model to capture thesetwo preferences simultaneously. This model is capable of capturing the interaction of dif-ferent factors, including topical aspect, sentiment, and spatial information. Moreover, it caninvestigate whether people like an aspect of an object or whether people like a topical aspectof some objects in a region, which offer explanation for recommendations. Location-basedsentiment analysis extracts, identiﬁes, or characterizes the sentiment content of a “text unit,”according to the location of origin of the text unit. In many application scenarios, it is ofteninteresting, and in some cases critical, to discover patterns and trends based on geographicaland/or temporal partitions, and keep track of how they will change overtime. Almatraﬁ et al.[4] studied the application of location-based sentiment analysis using Twitter for identifying
trends and patterns toward the Indian general elections 2014. In this work, researchers illus-trated how sentiments, both positive and negative, change from one location to the other. Paulet al. [ 90] investigated trends based on geographical and/or temporal partitions through US
Election 2016. This work aims to discover sentiment on Twitter toward either the Democraticor the Republican Party at US county and state levels over any arbitrary temporal intervals,
123

==== Page 15 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 631
S1
Snn-sentence 
reviewsubjective
sentence?m-sentence 
extract (m =n)
S1
S7subjective 
detectorS2yes
yesno
no
default 
polarity 
classifierpositive or negative?
subjective extraction
Fig. 5 Subjective extraction for improving polarity classiﬁcation
using a large collection of geo-tagged tweets from a period of 6 months leading up to the US
Presidential Election in 2016.
3.1.4 Subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation
Another research direction is subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation. Although it seems tobe an identiﬁcation problem, in fact, is often solved as a classiﬁcation problem. Pang et al.[88] deﬁned this task as allocating a given text (usually a sentence) into one of two categories:
subjective or objective. Sometimes, it can be more difﬁcult than polarity classiﬁcation prob-lem. For example, the subjectivity of words or phrases usually depends on the context, butan objective chapter such as a news article may quote people’s opinions which are subjectivesentences. Moreover, as mentioned in [ 115], analysis results largely depend on the deﬁnition
of subjectivity annotated texts. However, Pang et al. [ 85] showed that it could be helpful
to remove objective sentences from a document before classifying its sentiment polarity (asshown in Fig. 5).
In recent years, Wiebe et al. [ 136] proposed a rule-based classiﬁer, which classiﬁes a
sentence with strong subjective clues into a subjective category. This system is capable oflearning new patterns of objective sentences using the information extraction system calledAutoSlog-TS, which identiﬁes patterns in terms of some syntactic templates. Barbosa et al.[12] proposed an approach automatically detecting sentiments on Tweets, which explores
some traits of how tweets are written, and meta-information of the words composing thesemessages. Moreover, they utilized the sources of noisy labels as training data. The labels areprovided by a few sentiment detection Web sites over Twitter data. Some Twitter-speciﬁc cluessuch as hashtags, retweets, links, emoticons, uppercase words, exclamation, and questionmarks are used for subjectivity classiﬁcation. Benamara et al. [ 13] leveraged a subjectivity
classiﬁcation method at the segment level, which is more appropriate for discourse-basedsentiment analysis. This approach automatically uses local and global context features todistinguish between implicit and explicit opinions, and between subjective non-evaluativeand objective segments. Karimi et al. [ 53] proposed a language model-based structure that
can facilitate dealing with subjectivity detection by introducing a difference based scoringformula, which leads to minimizing the effect of common topic relevant words in the processof distinguishing subjective documents from objective ones.
Banea et al. [ 11] conducted a case study seeking to assess subjectivity transfer across
languages following sense aligned resources. In this model, the framework is able to predict
123

==== Page 16 ====
632 L. Yue et al.
subjectivity labeling for unseen senses by using either cross-lingual or multilingual training
enhanced with bootstrapping. Fu et al. [ 36] proposed an adaptive semi-supervised extreme
learning machine (ASELM) to solve the data imbalance between subjective and objectivequestions, which employs the different impacts on identiﬁcation performance caused by theimbalanced data. This method introduces the unlabeled data and builds a model about theratio between the number of labeled and unlabeled data based on Gaussian model, which isapplied to automatically generate the constraint on the unlabeled data.
3.1.5 Feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis
A more ﬁne-grained analysis task is known as the feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis[46], which refers to determining the opinions expressed on different aspects or features
of an entity. In the context of sentiment analysis, aspect extraction is different from entityextraction. A feature or an aspect is an attribute or a component of an entity. This prob-lem involves subproblems such as identifying relevant entities, extracting their features oraspects, and determining whether an opinion expressed on each aspect or feature is positive,negative, or neutral [ 64]. More detailed discussions about this problem also can be found in
“Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity ” chapter of Handbook of Natural Language Processing
[62]. Basically, aspect-based analysis needs to ﬁnd explicit aspect expressions, which usually
are nouns and noun phrases from the text of given domain. These nouns and phrases can beidentiﬁed by a part-of-speech tagger (POS).
All of these types of methods are based on an assumption: When people comment on
different aspects of an entity, the words that they use usually converge together. Researcherswill be more interested in frequently used nouns and consider them as signiﬁcant. This methodis quite simple, but actually effective. On this basis, many researchers tried to improve theprecision of this algorithm. Among all these work, a classic algorithm has been proposedin [96], which tried to remove redundancy noun phrases by calculating a pointwise mutual
information score (PMI) between each discovered noun phrase and meronymy discriminatorrelated to the entity class. Given a candidate aspect that is identiﬁed by using the frequencyapproach and a discriminator, the computed PMI score is denoted as:
PMI( a,d)/equal1hits( a∧d)
hits( a)hits( d)
The algorithm needs to ﬁnd the number of hits of individual terms and their co-occurrences.
Once the value of PMI is too low, the candidate aspect may not be a component of the entity.
Zhu et al. [ 153] proposed a Cvalue measure-based method to extract multi-word aspects,
which is also a frequency-based method by considering the frequency of multi-word term t,
the length of term t, and other terms that contain term t. The Cvalue score of a multi-word
term tcan be calculated:
Cvalue( t)/equal1/braceleftBigg
log(|t|)×frequency( t), iftis not contained by any other terms
log(|t|)(frequency( t)−1
n(L)/summationtext
l∈Lfrequency( l)),otherwise
where | t| represents the number of words contained in t, frequency( t) represents the frequency
of occurrence of tin the corpus, Lis the set of multi-word terms containing t, and n( L)
represents the number of terms in S. However, Cvalue is only capable of ﬁnding a set of
candidates. It still needs to be reﬁned using bootstrapping technique with a set of seed aspects.The co-occurrence of each candidate with the seeds is further considered in a reﬁnementprocess.
123

==== Page 17 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 633
Since opinion always has a target, their relationships can be exploited to extract aspect.
This method is based on the assumption: Of those sentences with some sentiment wordsand no frequent aspect, the nearest noun or noun phrase to the sentiment word is extracted.Such dependency relations were further generalized into double propagation for extractingsentiment words or aspects, at the same time, exploiting certain syntactic relations betweensentiments and targets, and a small set of seed sentiment words [ 104]. This method is also
based on bootstrapping technique.
Besides, two kinds of aspects that have been introduced in Sect. 2were identiﬁed: explicit
and implicit aspects. Limited research has been done on mapping implicit aspects to explicitaspects, although explicit aspect extraction has been studied extensively. Hai et al. [ 43] utilized
two-phase co-occurrence association rule mining to identify implicit features. Firstly, in rulegeneration phase, for the occurrence of each opinion word in an explicit sentence in thecorpus, they mined a signiﬁcant set of association rules of the form [opinion-word, explicit-feature] from a co-occurrence matrix. Secondly, in rule application phase, they clusteredrule consequents (explicit features) to generate more robust rules for each opinion wordmentioned above. Given a new opinion word with no explicit feature, they then searched amatched list of robust rules, among which the rule containing the feature cluster with thehighest frequency weight is ﬁred, and accordingly, they assigned the representative word ofthe cluster as the ﬁnal identiﬁed implicit feature.
Recently, Penalver-Martinez et al. [ 91] proposed an innovative method that takes advan-
tage of new Semantic Web-guided solutions to enhance the results obtained with traditionalsentiment analysis processes and natural language processing techniques. This methodimproves feature-based opinion mining by using ontologies at the feature selection stage,providing a new vector analysis-based method for sentiment analysis. Yang et al. [ 149]p r o -
posed a combined approach, which integrates local context information (LCI) and globalcontext information (GCI) to extract and rank features based on feature score and frequency,in which LCI uses the HITS algorithm with considering direct links between opinion wordsand nouns in a sentence, GCI uses SimRank with considering the LCI (direct) links andindirect links in the corpus. Manek et al. [ 70] proposed a statistical method using weight by
Gini index method for feature selection in sentiment analysis with SVM classiﬁer.
3.2 Granularity-oriented sentiment analysis
The rapid growth in the scale of existing applications or a surge in demand for particu-lar services may result in additional needs for sentiment analysis at different granularity.Current researches broadly handle this issue by classifying the task of sentiment analysisinto three levels: document level, sentence level, and word level. That is, models built formulti-granularity sentiment analysis assume fully labeled corpus at the ﬁne-grained level orcoarse-grained level or both. A huge amount of online reviews is not fully labeled at any par-ticular level; instead, they are partially labeled at both levels. Actual usage patterns of manyreal-world application granularities vary with strategy, and most of the time, in unpredictableways. Therefore, as we stated earlier, unexpected granularity can potentially overburden asingle task and lead to unreliable and interrupted services.
3.2.1 Document-level sentiment analysis
The major challenges on document-level sentiment analysis are cross-domain sentimentanalysis and cross-language sentiment analysis. It has been shown that speciﬁc domain-
123

==== Page 18 ====
634 L. Yue et al.
oriented sentiment analysis has achieved remarkable accuracy, which is highly sensitive to
the domain. The feature vector used in these tasks contains a bag of words, which should bespeciﬁc to a particular domain and are limited. Sentiment classiﬁer is applied as it is costlyto annotate data for each new domain. Spectral feature alignment, structural correspondencelearning, and sentiment-sensitive thesaurus are three classical techniques. They are differentin terms of feature vector expansion, words relatedness measurement, and ﬁnally classiﬁerused for classiﬁcation.
Many methods used for cross-domain classiﬁcation usually utilize labeled or unlabeled
data or both of them. Hence, the techniques give different results for different domainsas well as for different purposes. Bollegala et al. [ 15] developed a technique which uses
sentiment-sensitive thesaurus (SST) for performing cross-domain sentiment analysis. Theyproposed a cross-domain sentiment classiﬁer using an automatically extracted sentiment-sensitive thesaurus. To handle the mismatch between features in cross-domain sentimentclassiﬁcation, they utilized labeled data from multiple source domains and unlabeled datafrom target domains to compute the relatedness of features and construct a sentiment-sensitivethesaurus. Then the created thesaurus is used to expand feature vectors during training andtesting process for a binary classiﬁer. A relevant subset of the features is selected using L1regularization. Pan et al. [ 84] ﬁrst proposed spectral feature alignment (SFA). In SFA model,
the mutual information between a feature and a domain label is used to classify features intothe domain-speciﬁc or the domain-independent. SFA represents a review by considering bothunigrams and bigrams as features. Next, a bipartite graph between domain-independent anddomain-speciﬁc features is constructed. In this graph, an edge is formed between a domain-independent and a domain-speciﬁc feature, when those two features co-occur in any featurevector. After that, feature clusters are identiﬁed by conducting spectral clustering, and abinary classiﬁer based on these feature clusters is trained for positive and negative sentimentclassiﬁcation. The structural correspondence learning (SCL) is proposed in [ 14]. It selects
pivots using the mutual information between a feature (unigrams or bigrams) and the domainlabel. Next, linear classiﬁers are learned for predicting the existence of those pivots. Thelearned weight vectors are arranged in a matrix, and singular value decomposition (SVD)is performed to reduce the number of dimensions. Finally, this lower-dimensional matrix isused as project features for training a binary sentiment classiﬁer.
Another document-level sentiment analysis is cross-language sentiment analysis, which
has been studied by several researchers. Most of them focus on sentiment classiﬁcation at thedocument level. Wan [ 132] proposed an approach that ﬁrst translates Chinese reviews into
English reviews by machine translation services and then identiﬁes the sentiment polarityof English reviews by directly leveraging English resources. Furthermore, their approachperforms sentiment analysis for both Chinese reviews and English reviews and then usesensemble methods to combine the individual analysis results. Wan [ 133] proposed another
co-training method which leverages an available English corpus for Chinese sentiment clas-siﬁcation by using the English corpus as training data. Besides, limited cross-languagesentiment analysis has been done at the aspect level [ 42]. Xia et al. [ 146] proposed a three-
stage cascade model for the polarity shift problem in the context of document-level sentimentclassiﬁcation, in which each document is split into a set of sub-sentences, and a hybrid modelis built up with employing rules and statistical methods to detect explicit and implicit polarityshifts. Then, a polarity shift elimination method is used to remove polarity shift in negations.Finally, different types of polarity shifts are used to train base classiﬁers. Li et al. [ 60] proposed
a cross-lingual structural correspondence learning SCL based on the distributed representa-tion of words; it can learn meaningful one-to-many mappings for pivot words using largeamounts of monolingual data and a small dictionary.
123

==== Page 19 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 635
3.2.2 Sentence-level sentiment analysis
Sometimes document-level sentiment analysis is too coarse for some special purposes. A lot
of early work at sentence-level analysis focuses on identifying subjective sentences. But therewill be complex tasks such as dealing with conditional sentences or dealing with sarcasticsentences. In such cases, sentence-level sentiment analysis is desirable.
A conditional sentence consists of the condition clause and the consequence clause, which
describes implications or hypothetical situations and their consequences. Sarcasm is a moresophisticated form of speech act, in which the speakers say the opposite of what they reallymean. Tsur et al. [ 124] presented a novel semi-supervised algorithm called SASI for sarcasm
identiﬁcation that recognizes sarcastic sentences in product reviews. SASI has two stages:semi-supervised pattern acquisition and sarcasm classiﬁcation. For the ﬁrst stage, they used asmall set of labeled sentences as seeds and expanded this seed set through the web search. Thisenriched training set was then used for learning and classiﬁcation. González-Ibánez et al. [ 41]
tried to solve the problem of automatically detecting sarcasm in Tweets. They used a corpusannotated by the tweeters themselves as their gold standard and relied on the judgmentsof tweets because of the relatively poor performance of human coders at this task. Theysemiautomatically cleaned the corpus to address concerns about corpus noisiness resultedfrom previous work and explored the contribution of linguistic and pragmatic features oftweets to the automatic separation of sarcastic messages from positive and negative ones.Wu et al. [ 144] proposed an approach for sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation without
labeling sentence. It is a uniﬁed framework to incorporate two types of weak supervisionwith document-level and word-level sentiment labels, to learn the sentence-level sentimentclassiﬁer. Recently, recursive autoencoder (RAE) methods have been proposed for sentence-level sentiment analysis. Fu et al. [ 37] proposed a semi-supervised method CHL-PRAE
which combines HowNet lexicon to train phrase recursive autoencoders. CHL-PRAE modelcalculates the sentiment orientation of each node with the HowNet lexicon acting as sentimentand conducts bidirectional training to capture global information. Appel et al. [ 5]p r e s e n t e d
using natural language processing (NLP) essential techniques, a sentiment lexicon enhancedwith the assistance of SentiWordNet, and fuzzy sets to estimate the semantic orientationpolarity and its intensity for sentences. As using deep learning models to solve sentimentanalysis of sentences is still a challenging task, Fu et al. [ 38] proposed a model using rhetorical
structure theory (RST) for text parsing. This model builds long short-term memory (LSTM)network on RST parse structure to make full use of LSTM structural characteristics forautomatically enhancing the nucleus information and ﬁltering the satellite information. Thisapproach is capable of making the representations concerning the relations between segmentsof text, which can improve text semantic representations.
3.2.3 Word-level sentiment analysis
Document-level analysis focuses on distinguishing the entire document from subjective orobjective, and positive or negative, while sentence-level analysis is more effective thandocument-level analysis, because a document contains both subjective and objective sen-tences. While word is the basic unit of language, the polarity of a word is closely related tothe subjectivity of corresponding sentence or document. There exists a huge possibility thata sentence containing an adjective is a subjective sentence. In addition, choice of word forexpression reﬂects not only the individual’s demographic characteristic such as gender, age,but also reﬂects its motivation, personality, social status, and other psychological or socialtraits. Therefore, word is the basis of text sentiment analysis. At present, the commonly
123

==== Page 20 ====
636 L. Yue et al.
used methods include: natural language processing technology-based approach and machine
learning-based approach. For sentiment analysis of micro-blog text, most researchers sug-gest that term matching-based technique should be adopted. The emotional term is the linkbetween the emotional orientation of the text and the single word. Each word can be regardedas the collection of certain kinds of viewpoint information, which is a clue to the emotionand subjectivity of the text. There exist several studies on the emotional orientation of wordbased on using sentiment lexicon. We will discuss typical sentiment lexicons, the bases ofword-level sentiment analysis in Sect. 4.2.
3.3 Methodology-oriented sentiment analysis
The existing methods can be roughly categorized into three groups: supervised learning,
semi-supervised learning, and unsupervised learning. The idea of supervised learning is tostudy the features from both positive and negative examples. All of the existing approachesconsist of a system of reading annotated corpus, memorizing lists of entities, and creatingdisambiguation rules. The shortcoming of supervised learning is the requirement of a largeannotated corpus, which leads to two alternative learning methods: semi-supervised learningand unsupervised learning. The main technique for unsupervised learning “bootstrapping”also involves some degree of supervision such as a set of seeds for starting the learningprocess. The typical approach in unsupervised learning is clustering such as using a dictionaryto compile sentiment words. Basically, these techniques rely on resources, lexical patterns,or statistics calculated on a large unannotated corpus.
3.3.1 Supervised learning approach
In the analysis of emotion orientation, an important task is sentiment classiﬁcation. Theobjects for classifying are some subjective factors, which is different from traditional textclassiﬁcation based on themes. Supervised learning considers that the sentiment classiﬁcationis a standard statistical classiﬁcation that contains a large number of labeled instances. In thefollowing, several widely used classiﬁcation algorithms in sentiment analysis are discussed.
Rule-based algorithm Rule-based classiﬁcation can be used to any classiﬁcation scheme
that makes use of IF–THEN rules for class prediction. Asghar et al. [ 7] analyzed the semantic
orientation of words by categorizing them into +ive and -ive classes to identify and classifyemoticons, modiﬁers, general-purpose, and domain-speciﬁc words expressed in the public’sfeedback about the products, which solves the problem of previous studies becoming lessefﬁcient due to data sparseness. Lexicon enhancing sentiment analysis-based on rule-basedclassiﬁcation scheme, in this work, is an effective alternative approach for improving senti-ment classiﬁcation.
Decision tree algorithm Decision tree is a decision support tool that uses a tree-
like graph or model of decisions and their possible consequences. Phu et al. [ 94] proposed a
model for the English document-level emotional classiﬁcation, which presents a new modelby using an ID3 algorithm of a decision tree to classify semantics (positive, negative, andneutral) for the English documents. The semantic classiﬁcation of this model is based onmany rules which are generated by applying the ID3 algorithm for dataset training.
Support vector machine (SVM) SVM is supervised learning model with associated learning
algorithms that analyze data used for classiﬁcation and regression analysis. Liu et al. [ 66]
presented a multi-class sentiment classiﬁcation method based on an improved one-vs-one(OVO) strategy and SVM algorithm. For improved OVO strategy, the relative competence
123

==== Page 21 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 637
weight of each binary classiﬁer is determined according to the Knearest neighbors and the
class center of each class in the training sample set concerning the binary classiﬁer. Theimportant features for multi-class sentiment classiﬁcation are selected using the informationgain (IG) algorithm; a binary SVM classiﬁer is then trained on feature vectors training ofeach pair of sentiment classes.
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) ANNs is widely used for classiﬁcation task, which is
inspired by biological neural networks of human’s central nervous system. In the area ofsentiment analysis, document-level sentiment classiﬁcation remains a problem of encodingthe intrinsic relations between sentences in the semantic meaning of a document. To addressthis challenge, Tang et al. [ 118] introduced a neural network model to learn vector-based
document representation in a uniﬁed, bottom-up fashion, which learns sentence represen-tation with convolutional neural network or long short-term memory, and then encodes thesemantics of sentences, and their relations are adaptively in document representation withgated recurrent neural network.
Deep learning Deep learning is part of a broader family of machine learning methods
based on learning data representations, as opposed to task-speciﬁc algorithms. Learning canbe supervised, partially supervised, or unsupervised. Moreover, deep learning plays an impor-tant role in big data analysis. To date, various types of deep learning models have been appliedfor sentiment analysis such as deep belief, deep neural networks, deep convolution neuralnetworks. Tang et al. [ 119] developed a deep learning system called Coooolll for message-
level Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation. Coooolll is built on a supervised learning frameworkby concatenating the sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding (SSWE) features with the state-of-the-art hand-crafted features, in which SSWE is trained from large-scale tweets collected bypositive and negative emotions, without any manual annotation. The advantage of this systemis that Coooolll can be easily re-implemented with the publicly available sentiment-speciﬁcword embedding. As the fact that most existing algorithms for learning continuous word rep-resentations typically only model the syntactic context of words but ignore the sentiment oftext, Tang et al. [ 120] presented a method of learning word embedding for Twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation, which addresses this issue by learning sentiment speciﬁc word embedding(SSWE), which encodes sentiment information in the continuous representation of words.Moreover, the researchers developed three neural networks to effectively incorporate thesupervision from sentiment polarity of text in their loss functions.
Ensemble Ensemble methods use multiple learning algorithms to obtain better per-
formance rather than use any of the constituent learning algorithms alone. To improvethe performance of deep learning techniques by integrating them with traditional surfaceapproaches based on manually extracted features, Araque et al. [ 6] developed a deep learning-
based sentiment classiﬁer using a word-embedding model and a linear machine learningalgorithm, which serves as a baseline to compare to subsequent results. Then, the researchersproposed two ensemble techniques aggregating this baseline classiﬁer with other surfaceclassiﬁers widely used in sentiment analysis. In this work, combining both surface and deepfeatures to merge information with using different methods is also presented. Akhtar et al.[2] presented a cascaded framework of feature selection and classiﬁer ensemble using parti-
cle swarm optimization (PSO) for aspect-based sentiment analysis. Aspect-based sentimentanalysis is performed by two steps: aspect term extraction and sentiment classiﬁcation. Thispruned and compact set of features perform better than the baseline model that makes use ofthe complete set of features for aspect term extraction and sentiment classiﬁcation.
Regression Regression analysis is widely used for prediction and forecasting, and it has
substantial overlap with the ﬁeld of machine learning. Regression analysis is also used tounderstand, to what extent the independent variables are related to the dependent variables
123

==== Page 22 ====
638 L. Yue et al.
and to explore the forms of these relationships. The text on social media is usually informal
and short in length, which may not always express the sentiment clearly. Therefore, multipleraters may assign different sentiments to a tweet. So rather than employing majority votingthat ignores the strength of sentiments, the annotation can be enriched with a conﬁdencescore assigned for each sentiment. Ertugrul et al. [ 34] analyzed the effect of using regres-
sion on conﬁdence scores in sentiment analysis using Turkish tweets, in which hand-craftedfeatures including lexical features, emoticons and sentiment scores are extracted. Then, theresearchers employed word embedding of tweets for regression and classiﬁcation. The ﬁnd-ings in this work reveal that employing regression on conﬁdence scores slightly improvessentiment classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, combining word embedding with hand-craftedfeatures is capable of reducing the feature dimensionality and outperforms alternative featurecombinations.
Statistical model Above all else, there are several statistical models widely used in senti-
ment analysis task such as hidden Markov model and Gaussian mixture model, which willbe further discussed.
–Hidden Markov model (HMM) Kang et al. [ 52] presented a text-based hidden Markov
models (TextHMMs)-based method, for text classiﬁcation that uses a sequence of wordsin training texts instead of a predeﬁned sentiment lexicon, which seeks to learn text pat-terns representing sentiment through ensemble TextHMMs. In this method, the researchersdeﬁned hidden variables in TextHMMs by semantic cluster information in consideration ofthe co-occurrence of words and thus calculated the sentiment orientation of sentences byﬁtted TextHMMs. An ensemble of TextHMM-based classiﬁers is applied to reﬂect diversepatterns.
–Gaussian mixture model (GMM) Fattah [ 35] proposed multiple classiﬁers for sentiment
analysis, in which GMM is used for clustering data by allocating query data points to themultivariate normal components. Assigning data points to clusters is termed as hard clus-tering. Power of GMM clustering can be noted because it uses soft clustering techniques,assigning score to data point for each cluster.
3.3.2 Unsupervised learning approach
Clustering is a process of classifying data into different classes or clusters, so the objects inthe same cluster have the extremely high similarity, while the objects of different clustershave very high diversity. From the point of view of machine learning, clusters correspond tohidden patterns, while clustering is the unsupervised learning process of searching clusters.And unlike classiﬁcation, unsupervised learning is not dependent on a predeﬁned categoryor training instances with labels. Clustering algorithms are capable of automatically deter-mining latent patterns, which is observing learning, not sample learning. Further informationregarding clustering algorithms for sentiment analysis is discussed.
Partitional algorithm Partitional algorithm decomposes a data set into a set of disjoint
clusters. Given a data set of Npoints, a partitioning method constructs K(N≥K) partitions
of the data, with each partition representing a cluster. Riaz et al. [ 107] performed senti-
ment analysis on the customer review real-world data at phrase level to ﬁnd out customer
preference by analyzing subjective expressions. The researchers calculated the strength ofsentiment words to ﬁnd out the intensity of each expression and applied k-means clusteringfor placing the words in various clusters based on their intensity. Suresh [ 116]p r e s e n t e da
fuzzy clustering model to analyze Twitter feeds regarding the sentiments of a particular brandusing the real dataset collected over a period of 1 year. Phu et al. [ 93] proposed a model for
123

==== Page 23 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 639
big data sentiment classiﬁcation in the parallel network environment. The proposed model
uses the fuzzy c-means (FCM) method for English sentiment classiﬁcation with HadoopMAP(M)/REDUCE(R) in Cloudera.
Hierarchical algorithm Hierarchical clustering groups data over a variety of scales by
creating a cluster tree or dendrogram . The tree is not a single set of clusters, but rather
a multilevel hierarchy, where clusters at one level are joined as clusters at the next level.This allows people to decide the level or scale of clustering that is most appropriate forparticular application. Wu et al. [ 145] designed a visual analysis system OpinionFlow, which
can visually explore and trace opinion diffusion among users on Twitter. Especially, theproposed system uses a hierarchical topic structure built by Bayesian rose tree (BRT), whichdetects a multibranch hierarchy of topics from a large number of tweets and displays thetopic hierarchy by using a stacked topic tree. The tree is linked to opinion ﬂow for facilitatinganalysis of opinion diffusion on different topics. Chen et al. [ 23] developed a method called
TCOL-Miner, which integrates network structure and leadership quality analysis methodsto efﬁciently ﬁnd opinion leaders in a large social network. In this work, the two-stageclustering methods are utilized to signiﬁcantly reduce the impact of overlapping problemin social network. Vaziripour et al. [ 128] classiﬁed the sentiment of individual tweets to
determine their changing sentiments over time toward a number of trending political topics.In their work, a hierarchical representation of the vocabulary is created by tracking themerging process of clusters, which is then used as features.
Density-based algorithm Given a set of points in some space, a density-based clustering
algorithm groups together the points that are closely packed together, marking outliers inlow-density regions. Hassan et al. [ 45] proposed a framework for sentiment analysis by
using a combination of density-based clustering and distance based clustering. This proposedframework gives a high level of accuracy and it is useful for performing types of attacksprediction. It gives analyst a feasible way of dealing with terrorism attacks in advance.
3.3.3 Semi-supervised learning approach
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) techniques are capable of using unlabeled data in theirtraining processes and improving classiﬁcation in applications when labeled data are scarce.From this perspective, SSL techniques are of great practical value because a balance betweensupervised and unsupervised learning is found. Basically, there exist several classic categoriesof semi-supervised learning approaches: graph-based, wrapper-based, topic-based methods.
Graph -based method In the area of graph-based methods, semi-supervised learning can
manage either sentence or document. Lu et al. [ 69] proposed a generic framework for incor-
porating social context information by adding regularization constraints to the text-basedpredictor. Tan et al. [ 117] used social network structures to help sentiment analysis by incor-
porating link information. These links can correspond to attention, such as when a Twitteruser wants to pay attention to another’s status updates, or homophily, where people whoknow each other are connected. Pozzi et al. [ 103] proposed a framework that estimates user
polarities about a given topic by combining post contents and weighted approval relations,which are intended to better represent the contagion on social networks.
Wrapper -based method The wrapper-based method labels a certain number of unlabeled
instances using the decision function, which is then learned and incorporated into the trainingdata iteratively. The well-known types of wrapper-based method include self-training [ 67,
151] and co-training [ 50,65,150]. Self-training starts with a supervised learner that is trained
on available labeled data and then iterates several times. Instead of using a single supervised
123

==== Page 24 ====
640 L. Yue et al.
learner, co-training uses two learners, which operate on different feature sets from indepen-
dent views and build more labeled data in turn. Iosiﬁdis et al. [ 50] presented how to annotate
large-scale collections with sentiment labels, which uses self-learning and co-training, batch-and stream-processing. This work solves the problem of lacking large-scale labeled datasetsthat span large periods of time, which is especially important for stream mining research.
Topic -based method Topic information has been applied in different domains of sentiment
analysis. Si et al. [ 112] utilized a continuous Dirichlet process mixture model to learn the
daily topic set from Twitter to help predicting the stock market. Xiang et al. [ 147]p r e s e n t e da
topic-based sentiment mixture model with topic-speciﬁc data to improve sentiment analysison Twitter data, which generates topic information through topic modeling based on theimplementation of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA).
3.4 Summary of different sentiment analysis studies
Analyzing the sentiments contained in the subjective statement is one of the most activeresearch domains. This research focuses on the opinions, emotions, and subjectivity of theinformation being processed. In all kinds of emotional analysis, polarity classiﬁcation is themain task of emotional analysis, which is to analyze the positive and negative feelings of emo-tion, namely to analyze and judge the positive and negative meanings. Polarity classiﬁcationhas great commercial value and public service value, which will be very time-consuming, highcost, if such amount of research is performed artiﬁcially. Sentiment analysis, especially thepolarity classiﬁcation research, perfectly meets the potential huge demand for the customer.However, simple dichotomy point of sentiment analysis ignores the richness and diversityof human emotions, and more emotional types, dimensions, or granularities. Multiple-levelsentiment analysis has been developed to address this problem to a certain extent. Moreover,scale system calculates the positive and negative emotional strength scores of the text, whichputs sentiment into an interval. This approach has promoted the understanding of textualemotions to a more intelligent level. Subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation is sometimesmore difﬁcult than the problem of polarity classiﬁcation. Subjective words and phrases maybe based on the context, while an objective document may contain subjective statements.Feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis determines the opinions or sentiments expressedon different features or aspects of entities, which involves the extraction of entity, opinionholder, etc. Basically, almost all task orientation sentiment analysis studies have the samelimitation, which ignores the richness and diversity of human emotions, and more emotionaltypes, dimensions or granularities, mainly based on the positive and negative direction ofsentiment that should be further explored with considering more sentiment factors.
The rapid growth in the scale of existing applications or a surge in demand for partic-
ular services may result in additional needs for sentiment analysis at different granularity.Current researches broadly handle this issue by classifying the task of sentiment analysisinto three levels: document level, sentence level, and word level. That is, models built formulti-granularity sentiment analysis assume fully labeled corpus at ﬁne-grained level orcoarse-grained level or both. We will discuss both the advantages and disadvantages frommulti-granularity in this section. Speciﬁcally, we show the advantages and disadvantages ofcross-domain sentiment analysis and cross-language sentiment analysis on document level,and analysis on sentence level and word level.
In recent years, a large amount of studies has been conducted on data mining and machine
learning that bring up both advantages and disadvantages for sentiment analysis research.Machine learning is capable of extracting models and patterns in complicated data sets,
123

==== Page 25 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 641
which includes supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and semi-supervised learning
methods. Supervised learning algorithms can produce sentiment classiﬁcation by trainingmodel with labeled data, while unsupervised learning algorithms perform this procedurewith unlabeled data and get hidden structure from unlabeled data. Semi-supervised learningtakes advantage of training model with using unlabeled data and can improve classiﬁcationwhen labeled data are scarce. All the algorithms in three types of machine learning techniquesare analyzed separately in Table 4, including both pros and cons.
4 Available datasets and tools
In this section, we introduce benchmark datasets, tools and lexicons for sentiment analysis.
We aim to identify the most notable and promising ones rather than offer an exhaustive list.
4.1 Benchmark datasets
Facebook and Twitter As two main online social media, they were launched in 2004 and 2006,
respectively. Since then, Twitter service rapidly gained worldwide popularity with more than500 million users, out of which more than 284 million are active users as of September 2014.Facebook had over 1.3 billion active users as of June 2014. A large volume of data that userssubmit to the service should be the best data resource. Ideally, researchers also like to conductresearch with these direct data available on social network media. For the reasons of userprivacy and corporate policies, Facebook’s Terms of Service prohibit the distribution of anycontent to third parties; therefore, any collected data is usually prevented from being givento the researchers. Nonetheless, there are studies providing signiﬁcant insights because ofthe massive scale of the analysis that is typically conducted by employees of such services[58,129]. Recently, Ortigosa et al. [ 80] presented a new method for sentiment analysis in
Facebook. They have asked for the user’s permission by following a strict policy-orientedtoward protecting the user’s privacy. Therefore, the data accessed by their application dependson the level of user authorization. On the other hand, the majority of the contents in Twittercan be accessed since most of these contents are public. The contents from Twitter havebeen used by researchers [ 16,17,81,82]. The Twitter API provides easy access to the
site’s content through programming. Therefore, such data can be collected and analyzed byindividual researcher.
Digg Paltoglou et al. [ 83] presented another two publicly available datasets extracted from
BBC discussion forums and the Digg. The former is a complete crawl of a subsection of theBBC message boards spanning 4 years, from June 2005, when the forum went online, untilJune 2009, when part of it was shut down. It provides 97,946 separate discussion threads and2592,745 distinct comments about ethical, religious, and news-related issues. The second is
a complete crawl of the Digg Web site spanning the months of February, March, and April
in 2009, which provides 1195,808 submitted stories, 1646,153 individual comments, and14,376,742 approvals (users are allowed to publicly approve or disapprove submitted storiesand comments, processes, respectively, called “digging” and “burying”). Both datasets areavailable from the ofﬁcial CyberEmotion project web site. They have been extensively usedin researches [ 24,25,74]. Corresponding details about how to obtain these datasets can be
found in [ 83].
Cornell movie review As research in sentiment analysis has mainly focused on datasets
extracted from review sites, many prominent datasets such as movie review and general
123

==== Page 26 ====
642 L. Yue et al.Table 4 Summary of different sentiment analysis studies
Taxonomy Categories Pros Cons
Task-oriented
sentimentanalysisPolarity classiﬁcation Provide a two-class classiﬁcation with positive and
negative opinionsIgnore the richness and diversity of human
emotions, and more emotional types, dimensionsor granularities
The level of valence or arousal at
speciﬁc scaleProvide opinion classiﬁcation at speciﬁc scale Ignore the richness and diversity of human
emotions, and more emotional types, dimensionsor granularities
Beyond polarity Provide speciﬁc details of opinion Depend on methodsSubjectivity or objectivity
identiﬁcationRemoving objective sentences from a document is
helpful for improving the performance ofsentiment analysisDepend on methods
Feature or aspect-based
sentiment analysisProvide opinions on different aspects of what object
has been evaluatedDepend on methods
Granularity-
oriented
sentiment
analysisDocument-level sentiment
analysisProvide an overall opinion Ignore details of speciﬁc aspect; not easily
applicable to non-reviews
Sentence level sentiment analysis Provide an intermediate opinion Ignore details of speciﬁc aspect
Cannot deal with opinions in comparative sentencesComplex sentence has different sentiments on
different targets
Word-level sentiment analysis Provide a local opinion Cannot detect linguistic nuances such as irony or
sarcasm
Fail to capture the context of language
123

==== Page 27 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 643Table 4 continued
Taxonomy Categories Pros Cons
Methodology-
orientedsentimentanalysisSupervised learning approach Rule based: Generate descriptive models that are
easier to interpret
Decision tree: easy to implementSVM: high accuracyNeural network: handle noisy dataDeep learning: process large dataset; deal with deep
architecture; support multi-task learning
Ensemble: overcome overﬁtting
Generalization; predictive; high performanceRegression: computational cost is not high; easy to
understand and implement
Statistical model: depend on methodsRule based: Suitable for handling imbalanced data
Decision Tree: Space limitation, overﬁttingSVM: Slow training; computationally expensiveNeural network: slow; computationallyexpensive; black-box models; low accuracyDeep learning: Difﬁcult to interpret;
computationally expensive
Ensemble: hard to analyze; computationally
expensive
Regression: easy to produce underﬁttingStatistical model: depend on methods
Semi-supervised learning
approachCapable of using unlabeled data in their training
processes and improving classiﬁcation inapplications when labeled data are scarceGraph-based methods: Propagate labels to unlabeled
data, while the effectiveness of label propagationprocess depends on the computation of similaritiesamong the data instances
Wrapper-based methods: The method only works if
the highest conﬁdence predictions are effectivelycorrect
Topic-based method: Depend on the choice of the
conﬁdence threshold and the inference of thenumber of topics (clusters)
Unsupervised learning approach Partitioning: Handle large datasets, fast, simple
Hierarchical: visualizationCapabilityDensity-based: detect outliers and arbitrary shapes;
handle nonstatic and complex dataPartitioning: High sensitivity to initialization, noise
and outliers
Hierarchical: Poor visualization for large data; slow;
use huge amount of memory; low accuracy
Density-based: not well for large datasets; slow;
tricky parameter selection
123

==== Page 28 ====
644 L. Yue et al.
product reviews were conducted. Pang et al. [ 89] selected movie reviews where the author
rating was expressed either with stars or some numerical value. Moreover, they limited fewerthan 20 reviews per author per sentiment category, yielding a corpus of 752 negative and1301 positive reviews, with a total of 144 reviewers represented.
Amazon product reviews Blitzer et al. [ 14] conducted a dataset by selecting the Amazon
product reviews for books, DVDs, electronics and kitchen applications, where 1000 positiveand 1000 negative examples are involved for each domain. Hu et al. [ 47] conducted experi-
ments on the customer reviews of ﬁve electronics products: 2 digital cameras, 1 DVD player,1 mp3 player, and 1 cellular phone. The two Web sites that they collected the reviews are ww
w.amazon.com andwww.CNETdownload.com . Products in these sites have a large number
of reviews. Each of the reviews includes a text review and a title. Additional informationincludes date, time, author name, and location (for Amazon reviews), and ratings are alsoavailable. Besides, almost every e-commerce Web site has reviews for their product. Someof the famous review sites have made their data available for research purpose.
MPQA Multi-perspective question answering (MPQA) is a dataset containing news articles
and other text documents manually annotated for opinions and other private states (e.g.,opinions, emotions, sentiments, speculations, evaluations, and other private states), whichconsists of 692 documents (15,802 sentences). In [ 137,141], more details about producing
MPQA are described.
ICWSM Spinn3r datasets There are two versions of ICWSM Spinn3r Datasets [ 18], i.e.,
version 2009 and a more recent version 2011. Both of the two versions include severalmillion blog posts crawled by Spinn3r. The former dataset comprises of 44 million blogposts published between 08/2008 and 10/2008. The time span includes a number of signiﬁcantworldwide news events, such as the U.S. presidential nominating conventions, the OlympicGames, the beginning of the credit crisis. The version 2011 [ 19] comprises of 386 million
blog posts, new articles, forum posts, and social media communication published between13/01/2011 and 14/02/2011. In this span of time, there exist signiﬁcant events related to theArab Spring, including the Tunisian revolution, the Egyptians protests, etc. They have beenused in sentiment analysis studies and other corresponding research in [ 22].
TSentiment15 It is a collection of 228 million tweets without retweets and 275 million
tweets with retweets, collected from Twitter using its public streaming API which spans thewhole year of 2015.
In Table 5, we summarize the research instances based on the aforementioned datasets.
We list at least one paper for each dataset, the research content of the corresponding paper,and the type of these work. For researchers who try to ﬁnd a proper dataset, they can takethese instances as references. Details of these approaches have already been given throughoutthe text and will not be repeated again.
4.2 Tools and lexicons
Document-level analysis focuses on distinguishing the entire document from subjective toobjective, or from positive to negative. Sentence-level analysis is more effective than docu-mentation, because a document contains both subjective and objective statements. And wordis the basic unit of language; the polarity of the word is closely related to the subjectivityof a sentence or document. Word-based matching techniques judge emotional tendency bymatching the words contained in the text and emotional words in the emotional lexicon.Emotional lexicon is undoubtedly the foundation of this approach.
123

==== Page 29 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 645Table 5 Research instances based on different datasets
Datasets References Applications Availability
Facebook [ 54,80] Get information about the users’
sentiment polarity (positive, neutral, ornegative) according to the messagesthey writeFacebook’s sentiment analysis API
The data accessed by their application depends on the
level of user authorization
Twitter [ 16,17] Utilize Twitter mood to predict the stock
marketThe Twitter API ( https://dev.twitter.com/ )
[81] Build a sentiment classiﬁer to determine
positive, negative and neutralsentiments
[82] The actual levels of rainfall in a given
location and time are inferred from thecontent of tweets. Infer regional
inﬂuenza-like illness rates in the effort
of detecting timely an emergingepidemic disease
Digg [ 24] The emotions of a community member
may inﬂuence the emotions of othershttp://www.digg.com/
BBC Discussion Forums [ 25] A majority of posts contain negative
sentiments that sustain onlinediscussionshttp://www.bbc.co.uk/messageboards/
Cornell Movie Reviews [ 89] Sentiment classiﬁcation Available online
(http://cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/)
Amazon Product Reviews [ 14] Sentiment classiﬁcation Available online
(http://www.cs.jhu.edu/mdredze/datasets/sentiment)
123

==== Page 30 ====
646 L. Yue et al.Table 5 continued
Datasets References Applications Availability
CNET Product Reviews [ 47] Mine the speciﬁc features of the product
that customers have opinions on andanalyze the opinions are positive ornegativewww.CNETdownload.com
Restaurant Reviews from Yelp [ 51,59] Aspect discovery;
senti-aspect discovery;sentiment classiﬁcationwww.yelp.com
Product Reviews [ 95] Sentiment classiﬁcation www.reviewcentre.com
MPQA [ 49] Subjectivity classiﬁcation Available online http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/
ICWSM Spinn3r Datasets [ 22] The spread of media content through
blogsversion 2009 ( http://www.icwsm.org/2009/data/index.s
html ) and a more recent version 2011( http://icwsm.or
g/data/index.php )
TSentiment15 [ 50] How to annotate large-scale collections
with sentiment labelsAvailable online
(https://l3 s.de/ %7Eiosiﬁdis/TSentiment15/)
123

==== Page 31 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 647
There are lexicons and tools that are freely available for identifying subjective content
or named-entity, performing various levels of affective analysis, and generating multi-dimensional mood, etc. Sentiment lexicon is an important connection between textual contentand individual word, in which each word can be treated as a collection of opinion information.Some sentiment lexicons can be used to classify emotional orientation based on the corpus,where semantic collocations such as coordinating relation, progressive relation, and transi-tive relation divide adjectives into positive and negative. The shortcoming of this method isthat algorithm rule is limited to adjectives and adverbs. On the other hand, the polarity ofa new word only can be judged by utilizing conjunctions. Other methods utilize the syn-onyms or antonyms of seed words, the deﬁnition, and annotations of words to ﬁnd out relatedinformation.
Lexicon-based approaches can be applied without any training or human labor. There
are two common ways to construct sentiment lexicon: existing lexicon-based constructionmethod that artiﬁcially creates lexicon, and automatical or semiautomatical constructionmethod. General Inquirer (GI) is regarded as the earliest one emotional thesaurus and affec-
tive analysis program, in which emotional words derives from Harvard IV-4 Dictionary andLasswell’s Dictionary. GI labels each word with polarity, strength, parts of speech, etc, andcan be used in sentiment analysis task ﬂexibly. General Inquirer takes a pre-set list of positiveand negative words and analyzes the polarity of documents based on the prevalence of wordsfrom each category. The existing lexicon-based method is time-consuming and only includesfewer vocabularies and certain deviations. With the development of techniques, automaticalor semiautomatical construction of an emotion lexicon becomes the dominant way. Senti-
WordNet is a lexical resource for opinion mining, which assigns each synset of WordNet three
sentiment scores: positivity, negativity, objectivity. The current ofﬁcial version of SentiWord-Net is 3.0, which is based on WordNet 3.0. OpinionFinder automatically identiﬁes subjective
sentences as well as various aspects of subjectivity within sentences, including sources ofopinion, direct subjective expressions and speech events, and sentiment expressions. Twoversions of OpinionFinder can be found online. The OpinionFinder system seeks to addressdeviation problem by analyzing polarity in the context, rather than simply using single-wordtriggers. National Taiwan University Sentiment Dictionary (NTUSD) is constructed based on
the Chinese translation of GI and Chinese network sentiment dictionary (CNSD), including2812 positive words and 8276 negative words. Bing Liu’s Opinion Lexicon includes positive
words and negative 4783 words.
In above-mentioned lexicons, emotion words are simply classiﬁed into positive and nega-
tive based on dichotomy theory, which ignores the richness and diversity of human emotion.While constructing a lexicon based on the theory of emotional structure, subdivide humanemotion into more dimensions. SentiStrength can estimate the strength of positive and neg-
ative sentiment in short texts, even for informal language. It has human-level accuracy forshort social web texts in English except for political texts. SentiStrength reports two sentimentstrengths ( −1 (not negative) to −5 (extremely negative): 1 (not positive) to 5 (extremely pos-
itive)). It can also report binary (positive/negative), trinary (positive/negative/neutral), andsingle scale ( −4 to + 4) results. Moreover, SentiStrength can be conﬁgured for other lan-
guages and contexts by changing its input ﬁles. WordNet -Affect expands key words based
on WordNet, achieving sentiment lexicon of 4787 words, in which there are 4 types of basicemotion with happy, sad, anger, and fear. Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) grades
emotional words with nine levels based on PAD model, rather than a simple two-level parti-tion with positive or negative polarity. Google -Proﬁle of Mood States (GPOMS) can generate
public mood with six dimensions (calm, alert, sure, vital, kind, and happy). GPOMS’s mooddimensions and lexicon are derived from the Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS-bi). Proﬁle of
123

==== Page 32 ====
648 L. Yue et al.
Mood States (POMS) identiﬁes and assesses transient, ﬂuctuating affective mood states. The
POMS measures six identiﬁable mood or affective states, namely tension-anxiety, vigor-activity, depression-dejection, fatigue-inertia, anger-hostility, and confusion-bewilderment.Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) is a text analysis software program. LIWC cal-
culates the degree to which people use different categories of words across a wide arrayof texts, including emails, speeches, poems, or transcribed daily speech. LIWC2007 weredeveloped to assess emotional, cognitive, and structural components of text samples using apsychometrically validated internal dictionary. Two versions can be found online.
The sentiment lexicons mentioned above are domain-general, which is insensitive to some
special domain issues, e.g., positive words in one area may be negative in others. Therefore,there should be emotional lexicon which is sensitive in some special ﬁelds. For example,Financial Sentiment Dictionary (FSD) deriving from Harvard IV-4 Dictionary is used in the
accounting or ﬁnance ﬁelds. Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary (LSD) deriving from Regres-
sive Imagery Dictionary (RID) is used in the political ﬁeld. DICTION is a computer program
used for analyzing text on 5 aspects of the feature such as vigor, optimism, certainty, real-ity, citizenship. TAS/C is a computer program used for psychological treatment, including
more than 2000 emotional words divided into three dimensions of pleasure, approval, andattachment.
Besides, LingPipe is a tool kit for processing text using computational linguistics, which
can be used to ﬁnd the names of people, organizations, or locations in the news, to classifyTwitter search results into categories, or to suggest correct spellings of queries. Mallet and
Apache OpenNLP are another two ﬂedged toolkits for processing text using natural language
processing and machine learning techniques. They both provide a wealth of tools for part-of-speech tagging, sentence segmentation, etc. Although the method of analyzing lexicalpolarity based on sentiment lexicon is simple and easy to implement without training data,there are still some limitations about this type of approach (see Table 6).
5 Perspectives about the past and future
Research of sentiment analysis has studied almost all main aspects of the problems. The most
well-studied subproblem is opinion classiﬁcation on different granularity. But in other ways,existing solutions are still far from being perfect. Not much work has been done to addressthe problem on ﬁner details. The area of sentiment analysis gives us many clues of the maintasks and challenges. Based on current developments, it is believed that it needs to conductmore in-depth and reﬁned investigations aiming at multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA).
Multimodal content, as the medium of user expressions on the web, has evolved from text
content to multimedia data such as videos from YouTube, Vimeo, VideoLectures, imagesfrom Flickr, Picasa, Facebook, and audios from podcasts. Multimodal form of expressionhas become the mainstream information resource for different institutions in strategy-settingand decision-making. But the scatter of multimodal sentiment expressions requires moreanalysis to derive useful data. We present an overview on recent researches of differentmodes individually and jointly to ﬁnd the gaps in terms of approaches, theories, tasks, andapplications.
So far, most of the sentiment analysis researches are based on natural language processing
and computational linguistics. These traditional works focus on textual content, while peopleincreasingly take advantage of videos, images, and audios to air their opinions on socialmedia platforms. Thus, it is highly crucial to mine opinions and identify sentiments from the
123

==== Page 33 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 649Table 6 Summary of tools and dictionaries for opinion mining
Tools and Lexicons Brief Descriptions Limitations Availability
General Inquirer (GI) Take a pre-set list of positive and negative
words and analyze the polarity ofdocuments based on the prevalence ofwords from each categoryA+B + C http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/
SentiWordNet SentiWordNet assigns positive or
negative numerical sentiment values toWordNet synsetsA+B + C http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it/
http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it/download.p
hp
OpinionFinder OpinionFinder automatically identiﬁes
subjective sentences and marks variousaspects of the subjectivity in these
sentences, including the source (holder)
of the subjectivity and words that areincluded in phrases expressing positiveor negative sentiments.A+B http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/opinionfinder/
National Taiwan University Sentiment
Dictionary (NTUSD)Include 2812 positive words and 8276
negative words.A+B + C http://academiasinicanlplab.github.io/
Bing Liu’s Opinion Lexicon A lexicon includes positive words and
negative 4783 words with usefulproperties.A+B + C https://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentim
ent-analysis.html
SentiStrength Texts are classiﬁed with the largest
positive or negative scores of anyconstituent word unless these aremodiﬁed by any of the additionalclassiﬁcation rules.A+B + C http://sentistrength.wlv.ac.uk/
WordNet-Affect WordNet-Affect is an extension of
WordNet Domains, including a subsetof synsets suitable to represent affectiveconcepts correlated with affectivewords.A+B + C http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaffect.html
123

==== Page 34 ====
650 L. Yue et al.Table 6 continued
Tools and Lexicons Brief Descriptions Limitations Availability
Affective Norms for English Words
(ANEW)The ANEW provides a set of normative
emotional ratings for a large number ofwords in the English language. This setof verbal materials have been rated interms of pleasure, arousal, anddominance in order to create a standardfor use in studies of emotion and
attention.A+B + C http://csea.phhp.ufl.edu/media/anewmess
age.html
GPOMS GPOMS can measure human mood states
in terms of 6 different mood
dimensions, namely calm, alert, sure,vital, kind and happy.A+B + C /
LIWC A proprietary database of classiﬁed
common terms.A+B + C http://www.liwc.net/
Financial Sentiment Dictionary (FSD) A lexicon used in the accounting or
ﬁnance ﬁelds.A+B + C http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1
080/10584609.2012.671234
Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary (LSD) A lexicon used in the political ﬁeld. A + B+C http://www.lexicoder.com/
DICTION A computer programs used for analyzing
text on 5 aspects of feature.A+B + C http://www.dictionsoftware.com/
TAS/C A computer programs used for
psychological treatment.A+B + C /
123

==== Page 35 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 651Table 6 continued
Tools and Lexicons Brief Descriptions Limitations Availability
LingPipe LingPipe can perform topic classiﬁcation,
named entity recognition, part-ofspeech tagging, sentence detection,query spell checking, interseting phrasedetection, clustering, characterlanguage modeling, MEDLINEdownloading, parsing and indexing,
database text mining, Chinese word
segmentation, sentiment analysis,language identiﬁcation, etc.Fail to get better result when
training corpus and test corpus are fromdifferent data resource;
need labeled entities and type information
in training corpus, when performingnamed entity recognition.http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/
Apache OpenNLP OpenNLP supports the most common
NLP tasks, such astokenization, sentencesegmentation, part-of-speechtagging, named entityextraction, chunking, parsing, languagedetection and coreference resolution.Sentence detector cannot detect sentence
boundary based on content.http://incubator.apache.org/opennlp/
Acannot detect linguistic nuances such as irony or sarcasm, Bfail to capture the context of language, Cfail to understand a negative polarity to the phrase like “not good”
123

==== Page 36 ====
652 L. Yue et al.
diverse modalities. However, the ﬁeld of multimodal sentiment analysis has not received much
attention, there are only two well-known state-of-the-art methods in multimodal sentimentanalysis [ 21,75], and there seems to be no single approach, theory, and tool for MSA task.
Actually, the majority of such state-of-the-art frameworks rely on processing single modality.These studies showed that each mode presents different problematic issues that have not beenfully solved yet. The ensemble application of feature extraction from different types of dataand modalities enhances the performance of multimodal sentiment system [ 99]. Besides,
feature fusion is important for the development of a multimodal sentiment analysis system.In general, existing research on MSA can be categorized into two broad categories, namelyfeature extraction from each individual modality and feature fusion coming from differentmodalities.
5.1 Video modality: emotion analysis based on facial expressions
The earliest work used anger, sadness, surprise, fear, disgust, and joy as six basic emo-tion categories to describe most emotions from facial expressions. However, later on,researchers added other emotions into this list such as pride, excitement, embarrassment, con-tempt, shame. Related systems were developed such as facial action coding system (FACS)based on the reconstruction of facial expressions in terms of action units (AU) and emo-tional facial action coding system (EFACS). The active appearance model (AAM) [ 30]a n d
optical ﬂow, probabilistic principal component analysis (PCA), independent component anal-ysis (ICA), Gabor wavelet are common methods using FACS to understand expressed facialexpressions. A comparison of these techniques found that Gabor wavelet and ICA performedbetter on most datasets. Moreover, Bayesian networks, hidden Markov models (HMM),nearest neighbor, support vector machine (SVM), AdaBoost classiﬁers, and artiﬁcial neuralnetworks (ANN) have helped many researchers to infer emotions from facial expressions. Itis worth mentioning that 3D morphable models (3DMM), muscle-based models, 3D wire-frame models [ 27], elastic net model, geometry-based shape models [ 130], 3D constrained
local model (CLM-Z) [ 10], generalized adaptive view-based appearance model (GA V AM)
[76] are important facial expression recognition techniques.
With the advent of deep learning, we can extract features without prior intervention now.
Soleymani et al. [ 114] presented an approach on detecting the emotions of video viewers’
emotions from electroencephalogram (EEG) signals and facial expressions, in which longshort-term memory recurrent neural networks (LSTM-RNN) and continuous conditionalrandom ﬁelds (CCRF) were utilized on detecting emotions automatically and continuously.On this basis, it will be beneﬁcial to record multimodal data with the sole aim of understandingthe correlation and causation relationships between facial expressions and EEG signals.Research on facial expression analysis has been developed from acted facial expressions tospontaneous facial expressions. Huang et al. [ 48] proposed an approach for multimodal video-
induced emotion recognition based on facial expression and electroencephalogram (EEG)technologies. In this paper, spontaneous facial expression is utilized as an external channel.A new feature, formed by percentage of nine facial expressions, is proposed for analyzingthe valence and arousal classes. Furthermore, EEG is used as internal channel supplementingfacial expressions for more reliable emotion recognition. Finally, these two channels are fusedon feature level and decision-level for multimodal emotion recognition. Valstar et al. [ 127]
pointed out that it is hard to tell how existing expression recognition approaches performunder conditions, where faces appear in a wide range of poses (or camera views). This is also
123

==== Page 37 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 653
another challenge on automatic recognition of facial expressions, which dedicates to FACS
action unit detection and intensity estimation on the highly challenging data.
5.2 Audio modality: emotion recognition based on speech
Basic researches on emotion recognition from speech aimed at identifying several acousticfeatures such as frequency, intensity of utterance, bandwidth. Further studies are based ontypes of features including formants, Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC), pause,teager energy operated based features, log frequency power coefﬁcients (LFPC), linear pre-diction cepstral coefﬁcients (LPCC), etc. Existing methods can be categorized into twocategories: speaker-dependent approach and speaker-independent approach. In general, thespeaker-dependent approach gave much better results than the speaker-independent approachas shown in [ 77]; higher accuracy was achieved by using the Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) as a classiﬁer and Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC) as speech fea-tures. However, the speaker-dependent approach is not feasible in many applications. Forthe speaker-independent application, the best result achieved so far is only 81% [ 8], in which
features are selected by the sequential ﬂoating forward selection algorithm (SFFS).
Recently, Deep learning approaches are gaining increasing attention in audio research.
Dahake et al. [ 29] extracted the features with hybrid of pitch, formants, zero crossing, MFCC
and its statistical parameters. The pitch detection is done by cepstral algorithm after compar-ing it with autocorrelation and AMDF. The training and testing part of the SVM classiﬁer iscompared with different kernel function like linear, polynomial, quadratic, and RBF. Trigeor-gis et al. [ 123] proposed a strategy for “context-aware” emotional relevant feature extraction,
which combines convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with LSTM networks. In this novelwork, the best representation of the speech signal directly from the raw time representationis automatically learned. Usually, deep neural networks trained on simple acoustic featuresachieve good performance on this type of task, while continuous dimensional emotion recog-nition from audio has not been fully taken into account. It is treated as a sequential regressionproblem, in which the goal is to maximize the correlation between sequences of regressionoutputs and continuous-valued emotion contours, while minimizing the average deviation[135]. Han et al. [ 44] proposed a prediction-based learning framework for a continuous pre-
diction task, where the main goal is to utmostly exploit the individual advantage of differentregression models cooperatively. Researchers concatenate the two models in a tandem struc-ture by different ways, forming a united cascaded framework. The outputs predicted by theformer model are combined together with the original features as the input of the latter modelfor ﬁnal predictions.
5.3 Text modality: emotion recognition based on textual data
This type of emotion recognition is a rapidly developing area of nature language pro-
cessing and computational linguistics, which is emphatically introduced in former chaptersand sections. Basically, researches of sentiment analysis revolve mainly around this type ofemotion recognition, and will no longer be covered again here.
123

==== Page 38 ====
654 L. Yue et al.Table 7 Summary of multimodal sentiment analysis (A /equal1Audio; V /equal1Video; T /equal1Text)
Datasets References Modality Features Sentiments Availability
HUMAINE [ 33] A + V Emotion words,
authenticity, core affectdimensions, contextlabelsNA http://emotion-research.net/download/pilot-db
Belfast database [ 32] A + V Wide range of emotions NA http://www.belfast-naturalistic-db.sspnet.eu
SEMAINE [ 72] A + V Angry, happy, fear, disgust,
disgust, sadness,contempt, andamusementNA http://semaine-db.eu
IEMOCAP [ 20] A + V Happiness, anger, sadness,
frustration, and neutralstateNA http://sail.usc.edu/iemocap
eNTERFACE [ 71] A + V Happiness, anger, sadness,
surprise, disgust, and fearNA http://enterface.net
ICT-MMMO [ 143] A + T+V 1000 linguistic +1941
acoustic +20 visualStrongly negative, weakly
negative, neutral,
Weakly positive, strongly
positiveBy sending mail to Giota Stratou (stratou@ict.usc.edu)
MOUD [ 92] A + T+V 28 acoustic +40 visual Positive, negative, neutral http://web.eecs.umich.edu/mihalcea/downloads.html
YouTube dataset [ 75] A + T+V 1000 linguistic +1941
acoustic +20 visualPolarized words, smile,
look away, Pauses andPitchBy sending mail to Giota Stratou (stratou@ict.usc.edu)
123

==== Page 39 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 655
5.4 Multimodal fusion
The ability to perform multimodal fusion is the most critical step for emotion recognition. To
date, there are two main levels of fusion studied: feature-level fusion or called early fusion[100,110,134] and decision-level fusion or called late fusion [ 3,40,148]. Feature-level
fusion fuses features from various modalities before any operations are performed; decision-level fusion examines and classiﬁes the features of each modality independently, then fusesthem as a decision vector to achieve the ﬁnal decision.
Besides, there are novel fusion types such as hybrid multimodal fusion combining both
of feature-level fusion and decision-level fusion methods [ 97,99], model-level fusion using
the correlation between data under different modalities [ 9,142], rule-based fusion [ 28],
classiﬁcation-based fusion using a range of classiﬁcation algorithms to classify the multi-modal information [ 1,78], estimation-based fusion including Kalman ﬁlter, extended Kalman
ﬁlter and particle ﬁlter [ 79,102]. Mainstream multimodal emotion recognition datasets and
related works are summarized in Table 7.
6 Conclusion
Sentiment analysis became a very popular research domain and a lot of excellent researches
have been accomplished toward to this area. In this survey, a series of the state-of-the-artliteratures have been reviewed. In particular, this survey categorized and classiﬁed sentimentanalysis researches from multiple perspectives, i.e., task-oriented, granularity-oriented, andmethodology-oriented. In addition, we explored different types of data and tools that canbe used in sentiment analysis research and suggested their strength and limitations. Finally,we emphasized the prospects for future development, suggestions for possible extensions,and specially presented an overview of multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA). However,since MSA methods are, in general, not being used widely in sentiment analysis and relatedNLP research area, there are signiﬁcant and timely opportunities for future research in themulti-disciplinary ﬁeld of multimodal fusion.
This survey established a common terminology across various researches, enabling people
from different background knowledge to easily understand, and laid a foundation for advancedresearch in sentiment analysis. Current studies are intended to pave the way for furtherresearches and development activities by identifying weaknesses and deriving guidelinestoward a holistic approach.
Acknowledgments This research has been supported by Australian Research Council Discovery Project
(Grant NO. DP160104075), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant NO.2412017QD028), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2017M621192), the Scientiﬁc and Tech-nological Development Program of Jilin Province (Grant No. 20180520022JH). Besides, Dr. Lin YUE hasbeen awarded a scholarship under the State Scholarship Fund to ﬁnish this research at the University ofQueensland; this work also has been awarded by China Scholarship Council (CSC). We feel grateful to Prof.
Xiaofang Zhou at the University of Queensland and Prof. Ivor Tsang at University of Technology Sydney,
who once offered us valuable suggestions during the study period. Our sincere thanks are also given to theanonymous reviewers, from whose comments we have beneﬁted greatly.
References
1. Adams W, Iyengar G, Lin CY , Naphade MR, Neti C, Nock HJ, Smith JR (2003) Semantic indexing of
multimedia content using visual, audio, and text cues. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 2:987184
123

==== Page 40 ====
656 L. Yue et al.
2. Akhtar MS, Gupta D, Ekbal A, Bhattacharyya P (2017) Feature selection and ensemble construction: a
two-step method for aspect based sentiment analysis. Knowl Based Syst 125:116–135
3. Alam F, Riccardi G (2014) Predicting personality traits using multimodal information. In: Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM multi media on workshop on computational personality recognition, 2014. ACM, pp15–18
4. Almatraﬁ O, Parack S, Chavan B (2015) Application of location-based sentiment analysis using Twitter
for identifying trends towards Indian general elections 2014. In: Proceedings of the 9th internationalconference on ubiquitous information management and communication, 2015. ACM, p 41
5. Appel O, Chiclana F, Carter J, Fujita H (2016) A hybrid approach to the sentiment analysis problem at
the sentence level. Knowl Based Syst 108:110–124
6. Araque O, Corcuera-Platas I, Sánchez-Rada JF, Iglesias CA (2017) Enhancing deep learning sentiment
analysis with ensemble techniques in social applications. Expert Syst Appl 77:236–246
7. Asghar MZ, Khan A, Ahmad S, Qasim M, Khan IA (2017) Lexicon-enhanced sentiment analysis frame-
work using rule-based classiﬁcation scheme. PLoS ONE 12(2):e0171649
8. Atassi H, Esposito A (2008) A speaker independent approach to the classiﬁcation of emotional vocal
expressions. In: 20th IEEE international conference on tools with artiﬁcial intelligence, 2008. ICTAI’08,2008. IEEE, pp 147–152
9. Baltrušaitis T, Banda N, Robinson P (2013) Dimensional affect recognition using continuous conditional
random ﬁelds. In: 10th IEEE international conference and workshops on automatic face and gesturerecognition (FG), 2013. IEEE, pp 1–8
10. Baltrušaitis T, Robinson P, Morency LP (2012) 3D constrained local model for rigid and non-rigid facial
tracking. In: 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2012. IEEE,pp 2610–2617
11. Banea C, Mihalcea R, Wiebe J (2014) Sense-level subjectivity in a multilingual setting. Comput Speech
Lang 28(1):7–19
12. Barbosa L, Feng J (2010) Robust sentiment detection on twitter from biased and noisy data. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd international conference on computational linguistics: posters, 2010. Associationfor Computational Linguistics, pp 36–44
13. Benamara F, Chardon B, Mathieu YY , Popescu V (2011) Towards context-based subjectivity analysis.
In: IJCNLP, 2011. pp 1180–1188
14. Blitzer J, Dredze M, Pereira F (2007) Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders: domain adap-
tation for sentiment classiﬁcation. ACL 2007:440–447
15. Bollegala D, Weir D, Carroll J (2013) Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation using a sentiment sensitive
thesaurus. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 25(8):1719–1731
16. Bollen J, Mao H, Zeng X (2011) Twitter mood predicts the stock market. J Comput Sci 2(1):1–817. Bollen J, Pepe A, Mao H (2009) Modeling public mood and emotion: Twitter sentiment and socio-
economic phenomena. arXiv preprint arXiv:09111583
18. Burton K, Java A, Soboroff I (2009) The ICWSM 2009 spinn3r dataset. In: Proceedings of the 3rd annual
conference on weblogs and social media (ICWSM 2009), San Jose, CA, 2009
19. Burton K, Kasch N, Soboroff I (2011) The ICWSM 2011 spinn3r dataset. In: Proceedings of the 5th
international conference on weblogs and social media (ICWSM 2011), Barcelona, Spain, 2011
20. Busso C, Bulut M, Lee CC, Kazemzadeh A, Mower E, Kim S, Chang JN, Lee S, Narayanan SS (2008)
IEMOCAP: interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Lang Resour Eval 42(4):335
21. Cambria E, Howard N, Hsu J, Hussain A (2013) Sentic blending: Scalable multimodal fusion for the con-
tinuous interpretation of semantics and sentics. In: 2013 IEEE symposium on computational intelligencefor human-like intelligence (CIHLI), 2013. IEEE, pp 108–117
22. Cha M, Pérez J, Haddadi H (2009) Flash ﬂoods and ripples: The spread of media content through the
blogosphere. In: ICWSM 2009: proceedings of the 3rd AAAI international conference on weblogs andsocial media, 2009
23. Chen YC, Cheng JY , Hsu HH (2016) A cluster-based opinion leader discovery in social network. In: 2016
conference on technologies and applications of artiﬁcial intelligence (TAAI), 2016. IEEE, pp 78–83
24. Chmiel A, Sienkiewicz J, Thelwall M, Paltoglou G, Buckley K, Kappas A, Hołyst JA (2011) Collective
emotions online and their inﬂuence on community life. PLoS ONE 6(7):e22207
25. Chmiel A, Sobkowicz P, Sienkiewicz J, Paltoglou G, Buckley K, Thelwall M, Hołyst JA (2011) Negative
emotions boost user activity at BBC forum. Physica A 390(16):2936–2944
26. Choi Y , Breck E, Cardie C (2006) Joint extraction of entities and relations for opinion recognition.
In: Proceedings of the 2006 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2006.
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 431–439
123

==== Page 41 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 657
27. Cohen I, Sebe N, Gozman F, Cirelo MC, Huang TS (2003) Learning Bayesian network classiﬁers
for facial expression recognition both labeled and unlabeled data. In: 2003. Proceedings. 2003 IEEEcomputer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2003. IEEE, pp I–I
28. Corradini A, Mehta M, Bernsen NO, Martin J, Abrilian S (2005) Multimodal input fusion in human-
computer interaction. NATO Sci Ser Sub Ser III Comput Syst Sci 198:223
29. Dahake PP, Shaw K, Malathi P (2016) Speaker dependent speech emotion recognition using MFCC and
support vector machine. In: International conference on automatic control and dynamic optimizationtechniques (ICACDOT), 2016. IEEE, pp 1080–1084
30. Datcu D, Rothkrantz LJ (2014) Semantic audio-visual data fusion for automatic emotion recognition.
Emotion Recogn Pattern Anal Approach 411–435
31. Deng L, Wiebe J (2016) Recognizing opinion sources based on a new categorization of opinion types.
IJCAI 2016:2775–2781
32. Douglas-Cowie E, Cowie R, Schröder M (2000) A new emotion database: considerations, sources and
scope. In: ISCA tutorial and research workshop (ITRW) on speech and emotion, 2000
33. Douglas-Cowie E, Cowie R, Sneddon I, Cox C, Lowry O, Mcrorie M, Martin JC, Devillers L, Abrilian
S, Batliner A (2007) The HUMAINE database: addressing the collection and annotation of naturalisticand induced emotional data. Affect Comput Intell Interact 488–500
34. Ertugrul AM, Onal I, Acarturk C (2017) Does the strength of sentiment matter? A regression based
approach on turkish social media. In: International conference on applications of natural language toinformation systems, 2017. Springer, pp 149–155
35. Fattah MA (2015) New term weighting schemes with combination of multiple classiﬁers for sentiment
analysis. Neurocomputing 167:434–442
36. Fu H, Niu Z, Zhang C, Yu H, Ma J, Chen J, Chen Y , Liu J (2016) ASELM: adaptive semi-supervised
ELM with application in question subjectivity identiﬁcation. Neurocomputing 207:599–609
37. Fu X, Liu W, Xu Y , Cui L (2017) Combine HowNet lexicon to train phrase recursive autoencoder for
sentence-level sentiment analysis. Neurocomputing 241:18–27
38. Fu X, Liu W, Xu Y , Yu C, Wang T (2016) Long short-term memory network over rhetorical structure
theory for sentence-level sentiment analysis. Asian Conf Mach Learn 2016:17–32
39. Giachanou A, Crestani F (2016) Like it or not: a survey of twitter sentiment analysis methods. ACM
Comput Surv (CSUR) 49(2):28
40. Glodek M, Reuter S, Schels M, Dietmayer K, Schwenker F (2013) Kalman ﬁlter based classiﬁer fusion
for affective state recognition. In: International workshop on multiple classiﬁer systems, 2013. Springer,pp 85–94
41. González-Ibánez R, Muresan S, Wacholder N (2011) Identifying sarcasm in Twitter: a closer look.
In: Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: humanlanguage technologies: short papers, vol 2, 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 581–586
42. Guo H, Zhu H, Guo Z, Zhang X, Su Z (2010) OpinionIt: a text mining system for cross-lingual opinion
analysis. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledgemanagement, 2010. ACM, pp 1199–1208
43. Hai Z, Chang K, Kim JJ (2011) Implicit feature identiﬁcation via co-occurrence association rule mining.
In: Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing. Springer, pp 393–404
44. Han J, Zhang Z, Ringeval F, Schuller B (2017) Prediction-based learning for continuous emotion recog-
nition in speech. In: 42nd IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processing,ICASSP 2017, 2017
45. Hassan T, Bajwa IS, Hassan S (2016) Prediction of terrorist activities by using unsupervised learning
techniques. J Appl Emerg Sci 6(2):56–60
46. Hu M, Liu B (2004) Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In: Proceedings of the tenth ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2004. ACM, pp 168–177
47. Hu M, Liu B (2004) Mining opinion features in customer reviews. In: AAAI, 2004, vol 4. pp 755–76048. Huang X, Kortelainen J, Zhao G, Li X, Moilanen A, Seppänen T, Pietikäinen M (2016) Multi-
modal emotion analysis from facial expressions and electroencephalogram. Comput Vis Image Underst147:114–124
49. Huynh T, He Y , Rüger S (2015) Learning higher-level features with convolutional restricted Boltzmann
machines for sentiment analysis. In: Advances in information retrieval. Springer, pp 447–452
50. Iosiﬁdis V , Ntoutsi E (2017) Large scale sentiment learning with limited labels. In: Proceedings of the
23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2017. ACM,
pp 1823–1832
51. Jo Y , Oh AH (2011) Aspect and sentiment uniﬁcation model for online review analysis. In: Proceedings
of the 4th ACM international conference on web search and data mining, 2011. ACM, pp 815–824
123

==== Page 42 ====
658 L. Yue et al.
52. Kang M, Ahn J, Lee K (2018) Opinion mining using ensemble text hidden Markov models for text
classiﬁcation. Expert Syst Appl 94:218–227
53. Karimi S, Shakery A (2017) A language-model-based approach for subjectivity detection. J Inf Sci
43(3):356–377
54. Karyotis C, Doctor F, Iqbal R, James A, Chang V (2017) A fuzzy computational model of emotion for
cloud based sentiment analysis. Inf Sci 433–434:448–463
55. Katiyar A, Cardie C (2016) Investigating LSTMs for joint extraction of opinion entities and relations.
In: ACL (1), 2016
56. Khan FH, Qamar U, Bashir S (2016) eSAP: a decision support framework for enhanced sentiment
analysis and polarity classiﬁcation. Inf Sci 367:862–873
57. Kim SM, Hovy E (2006) Extracting opinions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in online news
media text. In: Proceedings of the workshop on sentiment and subjectivity in text, 2006. Association forComputational Linguistics, pp 1–8
58. Kramer AD (2010) An unobtrusive behavioral model of gross national happiness. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, 2010. ACM, pp 287–290
59. Lei X, Qian X, Zhao G (2016) Rating prediction based on social sentiment from textual reviews. IEEE
Trans Multimed 18(9):1910–1921
60. Li N, Zhai S, Zhang Z, Liu B (2017) Structural correspondence learning for cross-lingual sentiment
classiﬁcation with one-to-many mappings. AAAI 2017:3490–3496
61. Liao J, Wang S, Li D, Li X (2017) FREERL: fusion relation embedded representation learning framework
for aspect extraction. Knowl Based Syst 135:9–17
62. Liu B (2010) Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. Handb Nat Lang Process 2:627–66663. Liu B (2012) Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synth Lect Hum Lang Technol 5(1):1–16764. Liu B, Hu M, Cheng J (2005) Opinion observer: analyzing and comparing opinions on the web. In:
Proceedings of the 14th international conference on World Wide Web, 2005. ACM, pp 342–351
65. Liu S, Zhu W, Xu N, Li F, Cheng XQ, Liu Y , Wang Y (2013) Co-training and visualizing sentiment
evolvement for tweet events. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web,2013. ACM, pp 105–106
66. Liu Y , Bi JW, Fan ZP (2017) A method for multi-class sentiment classiﬁcation based on an improved
one-vs-one (OVO) strategy and the support vector machine (SVM) algorithm. Inf Sci 394:38–52
67. Liu Z, Dong X, Guan Y , Yang J (2013) Reserved self-training: a semi-supervised sentiment classiﬁcation
method for chinese microblogs. In: Proceedings of the 6th international joint conference on naturallanguage processing 2013. pp 455–462
68. Lu B (2010) Identifying opinion holders and targets with dependency parser in Chinese news texts. In:
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 student research workshop, 2010. Association for ComputationalLinguistics, pp 46–51
69. Lu Y , Tsaparas P, Ntoulas A, Polanyi L (2010) Exploiting social context for review quality prediction.
In: Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web, 2010. ACM, pp 691–700
70. Manek AS, Shenoy PD, Mohan MC, Venugopal K (2017) Aspect term extraction for sentiment analysis
in large movie reviews using Gini Index feature selection method and SVM classiﬁer. World wide web
20(2):135–154
71. Martin O, Kotsia I, Macq B, Pitas I (2006) The enterface’05 audio-visual emotion database. In: Pro-
ceedings. 22nd international conference on data engineering workshops, 2006, 2006. IEEE, pp 8–8
72. McKeown G, Valstar M, Cowie R, Pantic M, Schroder M (2012) The semaine database: annotated
multimodal records of emotionally colored conversations between a person and a limited agent. IEEETrans Affect Comput 3(1):5–17
73. Medhat W, Hassan A, Korashy H (2014) Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: a survey. Ain
Shams Eng J 5(4):1093–1113
74. Mitrovi´ c M, Paltoglou G, Tadi´ c B (2011) Quantitative analysis of bloggers’ collective behavior powered
by emotions. J Stat Mech Theory Exp 02:P02005
75. Morency LP, Mihalcea R, Doshi P (2011) Towards multimodal sentiment analysis: Harvesting opinions
from the web. In: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on multimodal interfaces, 2011.ACM, pp 169–176
76. Morency LP, Whitehill J, Movellan J (2008) Generalized adaptive view-based appearance model: inte-
grated framework for monocular head pose estimation. In: FG’08. 8th IEEE international conference onautomatic face & gesture recognition, 2008, 2008. IEEE, pp 1–8
77. Navas E, Hernaez I, Luengo I (2006) An objective and subjective study of the role of semantics and
prosodic features in building corpora for emotional TTS. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process14(4):1117–1127
123

==== Page 43 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 659
78. Neﬁan A V , Liang L, Pi X, Liu X, Murphy K (2002) Dynamic Bayesian networks for audio-visual speech
recognition. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 11:783042
79. Nickel K, Gehrig T, Stiefelhagen R, McDonough J (2005) A joint particle ﬁlter for audio-visual speaker
tracking. In: Proceedings of the 7th international conference on multimodal interfaces, 2005. ACM, pp61–68
80. Ortigosa A, Martín JM, Carro RM (2014) Sentiment analysis in Facebook and its application to e-
learning. Comput Hum Behav 31:527–541
81. Pak A, Paroubek P (2010) Twitter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. LREC
2010:1320–1326
82. Paltoglou G, Thelwall M (2012) Twitter, MySpace, Digg: unsupervised sentiment analysis in social
media. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol (TIST) 3(4):66
83. Paltoglou G, Thelwall M, Buckely K (2010) Online textual communications annotated with grades of
emotion strength. In: Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop of emotion: corpora for research onemotion and affect, 2010. pp 25–31
84. Pan SJ, Ni X, Sun JT, Yang Q, Chen Z (2010) Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation via spectral feature
alignment. In: Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web, 2010. ACM, pp751–760
85. Pang B, Lee L (2004) A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In: Proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting on Association for ComputationalLinguistics, 2004. Association for Computational Linguistics, p 271
86. Pang B, Lee L (2005) Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization with
respect to rating scales. In: Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting on Association for ComputationalLinguistics, 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 115–124
87. Pang B, Lee L (2008) Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found Trends Inf Retr 2(1–2):1–135
88. Pang B, Lee L (2008) Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found Trends Inf Retr 2(1–2):1–135
89. Pang B, Lee L, Vaithyanathan S (2002) Thumbs up?: sentiment classiﬁcation using machine learn-
ing techniques. In: Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on empirical methods in natural languageprocessing, vol 10, 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 79-86
90. Paul D, Li F, Teja MK, Yu X, Frost R (2017) Compass: Spatio Temporal Sentiment Analysis of US
Election What Twitter Says! In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference onknowledge discovery and data mining, 2017. ACM, pp 1585–1594
91. Penalver-Martinez I, Garcia-Sanchez F, Valencia-Garcia R, Rodriguez-Garcia MA, Moreno V , Fraga
A, Sanchez-Cervantes JL (2014) Feature-based opinion mining through ontologies. Expert Syst Appl41(13):5995–6008
92. Pérez-Rosas V , Mihalcea R, Morency LP (2013) Utterance-level multimodal sentiment analysis. ACL
1(2013):973–982
93. Phu VN, Dat ND, Tran VTN, Chau VTN, Nguyen TA (2017) Fuzzy C-means for english sentiment
classiﬁcation in a distributed system. Appl Intell 46(3):717–738
94. Phu VN, Tran VTN, Chau VTN, Dat ND, Duy KLD (2017) A decision tree using ID3 algorithm for
English semantic analysis. Int J Speech Technol 1-21
95. Polpinij J, Ghose AK (2008) An ontology-based sentiment classiﬁcation methodology for online
consumer reviews. In: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE/WIC/ACM international conference on web intel-ligence and intelligent agent technology, vol 01, 2008. IEEE Computer Society, pp 518–524
96. Popescu AM, Etzioni O (2007) Extracting product features and opinions from reviews. In: Natural
language processing and text mining. Springer, pp 9–28
97. Poria S, Cambria E, Gelbukh A (2015) Deep convolutional neural network textual features and multiple
kernel learning for utterance-level multimodal sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2015 conferenceon empirical methods in natural language processing, 2015. pp 2539–2544
98. Poria S, Cambria E, Gelbukh A (2016) Aspect extraction for opinion mining with a deep convolutional
neural network. Knowl Based Syst 108:42–49
99. Poria S, Cambria E, Howard N, Huang GB, Hussain A (2016) Fusing audio, visual and textual clues for
sentiment analysis from multimodal content. Neurocomputing 174:50–59
100. Poria S, Cambria E, Hussain A, Huang GB (2015) Towards an intelligent framework for multimodal
affective data analysis. Neural Netw 63:104–116
101. Poria S, Chaturvedi I, Cambria E, Hussain A (2016) Convolutional MKL based multimodal emotion
recognition and sentiment analysis. In: 2016 IEEE 16th international conference on data mining (ICDM),
2016. IEEE, pp 439–448
102. Potamitis I, Chen H, Tremoulis G (2004) Tracking of multiple moving speakers with multiple microphone
arrays. IEEE Trans Speech Audio Process 12(5):520–529
123

==== Page 44 ====
660 L. Yue et al.
103. Pozzi FA, Maccagnola D, Fersini E, Messina E (2013) Enhance user-level sentiment analysis on
microblogs with approval relations. In: Congress of the Italian Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence,2013. Springer, pp 133–144
104. Qiu G, Liu B, Bu J, Chen C (2011) Opinion word expansion and target extraction through double
propagation. Comput Linguist 37(1):9–27
105. Qu L, Ifrim G, Weikum G (2010) The bag-of-opinions method for review rating prediction from sparse
text patterns. In: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on computational linguistics, 2010.Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 913–921
106. Ravi K, Ravi V (2015) A survey on opinion mining and sentiment analysis: tasks, approaches and
applications. Knowl Based Syst 89:14–46
107. Riaz S, Fatima M, Kamran M, Nisar MW (2017) Opinion mining on large scale data using sentiment
analysis and k-means clustering. Cluster Computing:1-16
108. Ruppenhofer J, Somasundaran S, Wiebe J (2008) Finding the sources and targets of subjective expres-
sions. In: LREC, 2008
109. Saif H, Fernandez M, He Y , Alani H (2013) Evaluation datasets for Twitter sentiment analysis: a survey
and a new dataset, the STS-Gold
110. Sarkar C, Bhatia S, Agarwal A, Li J (2014) Feature analysis for computational personality recognition
using youtube personality data set. In: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM multi media on workshop oncomputational personality recognition, 2014. ACM, pp 11–14
111. Schouten K, Frasincar F (2016) Survey on aspect-level sentiment analysis. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng
28(3):813–830
112. Si J, Mukherjee A, Liu B, Li Q, Li H, Deng X (2013) Exploiting topic based twitter sentiment for stock
prediction. ACL 2(2013):24–29
113. Snyder B, Barzilay R (2007) Multiple aspect ranking using the good grief algorithm. HLT-NAACL
2007:300–307
114. Soleymani M, Asghari-Esfeden S, Fu Y , Pantic M (2016) Analysis of EEG signals and facial expressions
for continuous emotion detection. IEEE Trans Affect Comput 7(1):17–28
115. Su F, Markert K (2008) From words to senses: a case study of subjectivity recognition. In: Proceed-
ings of the 22nd international conference on computational linguistics, vol 1, 2008. Association forComputational Linguistics, pp 825–832
116. Suresh H (2016) An unsupervised fuzzy clustering method for twitter sentiment analysis. In: International
conference on computation system and information technology for sustainable solutions (CSITSS), 2016.IEEE, pp 80–85
117. Tan C, Lee L, Tang J, Jiang L, Zhou M, Li P (2011) User-level sentiment analysis incorporating social
networks. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discoveryand data mining, 2011. ACM, pp 1397–1405
118. Tang D, Qin B, Liu T (2015) Document modeling with gated recurrent neural network for sentiment
classiﬁcation. EMNLP 2015:1422–1432
119. Tang D, Wei F, Qin B, Liu T, Zhou M (2014) Coooolll: a deep learning system for twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation. In: SemEval@ COLING, 2014. pp 208–212
120. Tang D, Wei F, Yang N, Zhou M, Liu T, Qin B (2014) Learning sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding for
Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation. ACL 1(2014):1555–1565
121. Tang H, Tan S, Cheng X (2009) A survey on sentiment detection of reviews. Expert Syst Appl
36(7):10760–10773
122. Tellez ES, Miranda-Jiménez S, Graff M, Moctezuma D, Suárez RR, Siordia OS (2017) A simple approach
to multilingual polarity classiﬁcation in twitter. Pattern Recogn Lett
123. Trigeorgis G, Ringeval F, Brueckner R, Marchi E, Nicolaou MA, Schuller B, Zafeiriou S (2016) Adieu
features? End-to-end speech emotion recognition using a deep convolutional recurrent network. In:Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, 2016.IEEE, pp 5200-5204
124. Tsur O, Davidov D, Rappoport A (2010) ICWSM-a great catchy name: semi-supervised recognition of
sarcastic sentences in online product reviews. In: ICWSM, 2010
125. Tsytsarau M, Palpanas T (2012) Survey on mining subjective data on the web. Data Min Knowl Disc
24(3):478–514
126. Turney PD (2002) Thumbs up or thumbs down?: semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classiﬁca-
tion of reviews. In: Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for computational linguistics,
2002. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 417–424
127. Valstar MF, Sánchez-Lozano E, Cohn JF, Jeni LA, Girard JM, Zhang Z, Yin L, Pantic M (2017) FERA
2017-addressing head pose in the third facial expression recognition and analysis challenge. arXivpreprint arXiv:170204174
123

==== Page 45 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 661
128. Vaziripour E, Giraud-Carrier CG, Zappala D (2016) Analyzing the political sentiment of tweets in Farsi.
ICWSM 2016:699–702
129. Velikovich L, Blair-Goldensohn S, Hannan K, McDonald R (2010) The viability of web-derived polarity
lexicons. In: Human language technologies: the 2010 annual conference of the North American chapterof the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp777–785
130. Verma R, Davatzikos C, Loughead J, Indersmitten T, Hu R, Kohler C, Gur RE, Gur RC (2005) Quan-
tiﬁcation of facial expressions using high-dimensional shape transformations. J Neurosci Methods
141(1):61–73
131. Vinodhini G, Chandrasekaran R (2012) Sentiment analysis and opinion mining: a survey. Int J
2(6):282–292
132. Wan X (2008) Using bilingual knowledge and ensemble techniques for unsupervised Chinese sentiment
analysis. In: Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2008.Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 553–561
133. Wan X (2009) Co-training for cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the joint con-
ference of the 47th annual meeting of the ACL and the 4th international joint conference on naturallanguage processing of the AFNLP: vol 1–vol 1, 2009. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp235–243
134. Wang S, Zhu Y , Wu G, Ji Q (2014) Hybrid video emotional tagging using users’ EEG and video content.
Multimed Tools Appl 72(2):1257–1283
135. Weninger F, Ringeval F, Marchi E, Schuller BW (2016) Discriminatively trained recurrent neural net-
works for continuous dimensional emotion recognition from audio. IJCAI 2016:2196–2202
136. Wiebe J, Riloff E (2005) Creating subjective and objective sentence classiﬁers from unannotated texts.
In: Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing. Springer, pp 486–497
137. Wiebe J, Wilson T, Cardie C (2005) Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language. Lang
Resour Eval 39(2–3):165–210
138. Wiegand M, Balahur A, Roth B, Klakow D, Montoyo A (2010)A survey on the role of negation in
sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the workshop on negation and speculation in natural languageprocessing, 2010. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 60–68
139. Wiegand M, Bocionek C, Ruppenhofer J (2016) Opinion holder and target extraction on opinion com-
pounds—a linguistic approach. HLT-NAACL 2016:800–810
140. Wiegand M, Klakow D (2010) Convolution kernels for opinion holder extraction. In: Human language
technologies: the 2010 annual conference of the North American chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics, 2010. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 795–803
141. Wilson TA (2008) Fine-grained subjectivity and sentiment analysis: recognizing the intensity, polarity,
and attitudes of private states. ProQuest
142. Wöllmer M, Kaiser M, Eyben F, Schuller B, Rigoll G (2013) LSTM-Modeling of continuous emotions
in an audiovisual affect recognition framework. Image Vis Comput 31(2):153–163
143. Wöllmer M, Weninger F, Knaup T, Schuller B, Sun C, Sagae K, Morency LP (2013) Youtube movie
reviews: sentiment analysis in an audio-visual context. IEEE Intell Syst 28(3):46–53
144. Wu F, Zhang J, Yuan Z, Wu S, Huang Y , Yan J (2017) Sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation with
weak supervision. In: Proceedings of the 40th international ACM SIGIR conference on research anddevelopment in information retrieval, 2017. ACM, pp 973–976
145. Wu Y , Liu S, Yan K, Liu M, Wu F (2014) Opinionﬂow: visual analysis of opinion diffusion on social
media. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph 20(12):1763–1772
146. Xia R, Xu F, Yu J, Qi Y , Cambria E (2016) Polarity shift detection, elimination and ensemble: a three-stage
model for document-level sentiment analysis. Inf Process Manag 52(1):36–45
147. Xiang B, Zhou L (2014) Improving twitter sentiment analysis with topic-based mixture modeling and
semi-supervised training. In: Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, vol 2, short papers, 2014. pp 434–439
148. Yamasaki T, Fukushima Y , Furuta R, Sun L, Aizawa K, Bollegala D (2015) Prediction of user ratings of
oral presentations using label relations. In: Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on affect andsentiment in multimedia, 2015. ACM, pp 33–38
149. Yang L, Liu B, Lin H, Lin Y (2016) Combining local and global information for product feature extraction
in opinion documents. Inf Process Lett 116(10):623–627
150. Yu N (2014) Exploring Co-training strategies for opinion detection. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol
65(10):2098–2110
151. Zhao J, Lan M, Zhu T (2014) ECNU: expression-and message-level sentiment orientation classiﬁcation
in twitter using multiple effective features. In: SemEval@ COLING, 2014. pp 259–264
123

==== Page 46 ====
662 L. Yue et al.
152. Zhao K, Cong G, Yuan Q, Zhu KQ (2015) SAR: a sentiment-aspect-region model for user preference
analysis in geo-tagged reviews. In: 2015 IEEE 31st international conference on data engineering (ICDE),2015. IEEE, pp 675–686
153. Zhu J, Wang H, Tsou BK, Zhu M (2009) Multi-aspect opinion polling from textual reviews. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 18th ACM conference on information and knowledge management, 2009. ACM, pp1799–1802
Lin Yue is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Northeast Normal Uni-
versity. She received the BS and MS degrees in computer science fromNortheast Normal University, and Ph.D. degree in computer sciencefrom Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engi-neering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China. She was ajoint Ph.D. student in The University of Queensland, Australia. Hercurrent main research interests include data mining, natural languageprocessing and machine learning.
Weitong Chen is a Ph.D. candidate in the School of Information
Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland(UQ) in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. He received the BS and MSdegrees from the Grifﬁth University and The University of Queensland,Australia, in 2011 and 2013, respectively. His current main research
interests include medical data analytic, deep learning, data mining, pat-
tern recognition, and social computing.
123

==== Page 47 ====
A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 663
Xue Li is a Professor in the School of Information Technology and Elec-
trical Engineering, The University of Queensland (UQ) in Brisbane,Queensland, Australia. He received the MS and Ph.D. degrees fromThe University of Queensland and Queensland University of Technol-
ogy, Australia, in 1990 and 1997, respectively. He is honored as one
of the most powerful people in Australia on Big Data by the FinancialReview-the Power Issue 2015. His major areas of research interests andexpertise include data mining, social computing, database systems andintelligent web information systems.
Wanli Zuo is a Professor in Jilin University. He received the BS, MS
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Jilin University, China, in1982, 1984 and 2005, respectively. His current main research interestsinclude data mining, information retrieval, natural language processingand machine learning.
Minghao Yin is a Professor in Northeast Normal University. He
received the BS and MS degrees in computer science from Northeast
Normal University, China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively, and Ph.D.degree in computer science from Jilin University, China, in 2008. Hiscurrent main research interests include swarm intelligence, automatedreasoning, automated planning and algorithms.
123

