==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Javed, A.R.; Ahmed, W.;
Pandya, S.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.;
Alazab, M.; Gadekallu, T.R. A Survey
of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
for Smart Cities. Electronics 2023 ,12,
1020. https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics12041020
Academic Editor: Gwanggil Jeon
Received: 14 January 2023
Revised: 9 February 2023
Accepted: 17 February 2023
Published: 18 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
electronics
Review
A Survey of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Smart Cities
Abdul Rehman Javed1,2,*
, Waqas Ahmed1, Sharnil Pandya3,4
, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta5
,
Mamoun Alazab6
and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu2,5
1Department of Cyber Security, Air University, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lebanese American University,
Byblos P .O. Box 36, Lebanon
3Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Faculty of Technology, Linnaeus University,
351 95 Vaxjo, Sweden
4Faculty of Technology, Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International Deemed University,
Maharashtra 412115, India
5School of Information Technology and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu 632014, India
6College of Engineering, IT and Environment, Charles Darwin University, Casuarina, NT 0810, Australia
*Correspondence: abdulrehman.cs@au.edu.pk
Abstract: The emergence of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) has enhanced the lives of humans
and envisioned the concept of smart cities using informed actions, enhanced user interpretations
and explanations, and ﬁrm decision-making processes. The XAI systems can unbox the potential of
black-box AI models and describe them explicitly. The study comprehensively surveys the current
and future developments in XAI technologies for smart cities. It also highlights the societal, industrial,
and technological trends that initiate the drive towards XAI for smart cities. It presents the key to
enabling XAI technologies for smart cities in detail. The paper also discusses the concept of XAI
for smart cities, various XAI technology use cases, challenges, applications, possible alternative
solutions, and current and future research enhancements. Research projects and activities, including
standardization efforts toward developing XAI for smart cities, are outlined in detail. The lessons
learned from state-of-the-art research are summarized, and various technical challenges are discussed
to shed new light on future research possibilities. The presented study on XAI for smart cities is a
ﬁrst-of-its-kind, rigorous, and detailed study to assist future researchers in implementing XAI-driven
systems, architectures, and applications for smart cities.
Keywords: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI); smart cities; artiﬁcial intelligence; machine
learning; future cities; Internet of Things (IoT); data mining; smart health; real-time systems
1. Introduction
Information and communication technologies (ICT) and the Internet of Things (IoT) are
essential components of smart cities, which may boost operational efﬁciency and improve
services while helping residents lead sustainable lives [ 1,2]. Viably, the administration of
accessible resources beneﬁts from information and communication advances. There is a
critical purpose for developing smart technologies to enable people to experience new and
better things in their everyday lives [ 3,4]. In addition to making these technologies more
efﬁcient, increasing their efﬁciency may make them eco-friendly, more productive, and more
ﬂexible. While the digital revolution was important in many ways, it was also crucial for
businesses to think about how easy and efﬁcient it would be to run their businesses.
ICT is essential to the smart cities idea. It is not only crucial in policy formulation,
decision-making, implementation and the provision of valuable services, but it is also
essential in all other stages of the strategy. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) can help make cities
more efﬁcient in many areas of life, including their use in energy management, tempera-
ture management, education, health and human services, water management, air quality
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12041020 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics

==== Page 2 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 2 of 40
management, trafﬁc management, payments and ﬁnance, smart parking, and trash manage-
ment [ 5–7]. A smart, AI-powered city will use energy and resources more efﬁciently, protect
the environment, improve its citizens’ lives, and enable them to adopt current ICT more
quickly. Speciﬁcally, (i) technology and data availability and reliability, the dependency on
third parties and the lack of skills are limiting factors; (ii) ethical issues when using AI are
complicated; and (iii) regulatory issues when attempting to interconnect infrastructures
and data are complex.
Explainable AI (XAI) in smart city development plays a crucial part. Recent appli-
cations based on deep learning, big data, and IoT architectures need intensive use of
complicated computational solutions. Since these systems are closed to users, they are
called “black boxes.” People will fear that their tools may be untrustworthy if this is
true. In the last few years, attempts have been made to solve this problem using XAI
methodologies to make things more transparent.
1.1. Clinical Decision Support Systems
Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) are computerized systems that help health-
care providers use information more intelligently, helping to improve both patient health
and the healthcare process. In order to accomplish many goals, CDSSs are developed
with the following capabilities: diagnosis, prediction of treatment response, the suggestion
of treatments (personalization), prognosis and the prioritizing of patient care based on
risk [ 8]. In addition, CDSS can be beneﬁcial in areas with limited resources, such as the
number of healthcare facilities, equipment and physicians. CDSS may be categorized
as knowledge-based or non-knowledge-based. While non-knowledge-based CDSS are
usually based on AI, knowledge-based CDSS rely on medical guidelines and knowledge
(https://www.limswiki.org/index.php/Clinical_decision_support_system accessed date:
14 December 2022)). The AI-based CDSS examines past clinical data to produce predic-
tion models to assess new input variables. When these results are used as guidance for
doctors, these recommendations can aid them in their practices. There is tremendous
promise for AI-based CDSS in clinical practice. Using a CDSS increases clinical choices
while reducing medical mistakes since it is objective and relies only on input data and
decision-making logic.
Nonetheless, their use of data depends on the amount and quality. Bias in training
data results in skewed or inaccurate predictions for AI models. Biased or erroneous human
decisions are likely to occur if this practice is widespread [9–11].
1.2. The Need for XAI: Fair and Ethical Decision-Making
Understanding the mathematical underpinnings of existing machine learning archi-
tectures may only provide insights into how and why a result was obtained, not into the
inner workings of the models. One must use explicit modeling and reasoning techniques to
answer questions like “How did that happen?” One also knows that contextual adaptation,
e.g., systems that aid in developing explanatory models for tackling real-world issues, will
be a crucial difﬁculty for future AI. Human expertise should not be excluded, but AI should
supplement it. When classiﬁcation ﬁndings may lead to dangerous incidents for people, it
is necessary to comprehend the mechanism that is at work behind such outcomes. Complex
machine learning models are an essential focus of XAI research. Machine learning models
may be classiﬁed according to their interpretability or opacity.
1.3. Motivation
XAI has already risen to the top of research and development in the ﬁeld of smart
cities [ 1]. Large-scale decision-making will be required to carry out daily activities in smart
cities. Since these decisions are made in black boxes, people need to know how a particular
decision is made, as well as there is a developing situation amongst policymakers in smart
cities with this loss of explainability of AI-based black-box models, which is a primary
problem in the acceptability of AI-based decisions. Here, XAI comes into play to explain

==== Page 3 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 3 of 40
these decisions. XAI converts black-box to white box to make understandable, interpretable,
transparent, and explainable decisions [12].
There are a few surveys on XAI for smart cities; however, only a few go into more
depth, look at the beneﬁts of XAI for smart cities, key technologies of XAI and open research
problems, and ongoing projects in XAI for smart cities. Authors in [13] provided a survey
on explainable deep learning models for smart city solutions such as ﬂood detection and
drainage monitoring. The authors in [ 14] have broadly described the rapidly-growing ﬁeld
of XAI-related research. Authors in [ 15] provided thorough research on XAI related to
medical applications. Authors in [ 16] suggested a taxonomy and classifying the XAI ap-
proaches based on their breadth of explanations, methodology used behind the algorithms,
and explanation level of utilization.
Table 1 concisely presents a comparison of the important survey papers and also
highlights the gap in existing surveys, which is the need for a comprehensive analysis
of XAI for smart city decision-making that is trustworthy, responsible, and transparent.
Keeping in mind the limitations and gaps of existing surveys, there is a high need for
research focusing on XAI for smart cities.
Table 1. Summary of important surveys on XAI.
Ref.
XAI Driving Trends
Applications/Use Cases
Requirements/Vision
Technical Challenges
Enabling Technologies
Ongoing Activities
Research DirectionsRemarks
[13] L H L M M L M This study provides a survey on explainable deep learning for smart cities
solutions such as ﬂood detection and drainage monitoring.
[14] L M L H M L M This study serves as a stepping stone for academics and practition-
ers who want to grasp the details of the rapidly-growing ﬁeld of
XAI-related research.
[15] M M L M H M M A thorough research on XAI related to medical usage and its branches.
[16] M L M H M H H This study suggested a taxonomy and classifying the XAI approaches based
on their breadth of explanations, methodology used behind the algorithms
and explanation level of utilization.
[17] H L M H H M M By exploring different application ﬁelds, such as medical informatics, law,
the semantic web, security, robotics, and certain general-purpose systems,
the researchers elucidate how XAI Argumentation aids in the construction
of explainable systems.
[18] L L M H H M G This article shares XAI design and evaluation framework experiences from
many ﬁelds. Supporting different design goals and assessment techniques
is another purpose of this research project.
[19] L M L H H L L A survey of AI explainability research and techniques is presented in the lit-
erature. Initially, we surveyed the CS research community to locate the most
relevant studies on AI explainability, or “XAI.” Then, we researched HCI.
[20] H M H H H L M In this review, they examine and overview several XAI techniques devel-
oped utilizing approaches derived from computational argumentation.
[21] L M L H H L L This article goes into great detail on current XAI approaches of possible
importance for pathological imaging deep learning algorithms and orga-
nizes them based on three key facets. By including uncertainty analysis
methodologies as an inherent component of the XAI environment, they
provide their clients with more assurance in predictions.
[22] L M L H H L H They provide a cutting-edge, browser-based system, called XNLP , that
showcases new and relevant research in XAI through a dynamic survey
of recently published state-of-the-art work in the ﬁeld of natural language
processing (NLP).
This paper H H H H H H H This study addresses current, projected and future developments and
use cases in XAI for smart cities.
L Low Coverage M Medium Coverage H High Coverage
1.4. Contributions
As the XAI concept in smart cities is transforming with the advances in complementary
technologies, a paradigm shift is needed to drive and transform AI-driven projects into XAI-

==== Page 4 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 4 of 40
driven mode. To assist researchers in initiating their research work in the domain of XAI
for smart cities, a rigorous and informative study is required to provide current, projected,
and future insights. The presented study provides in-depth insights and analysis of various
XAI technologies for Smart cities. The presented survey discusses use cases, standard
practices, challenges, the latest trends, and future research directions. The contributions of
the presented study are:
• The presented study on XAI for smart cities is a ﬁrst-of-its-kind, rigorous, and detailed
study to assist future researchers in implementing XAI-driven systems, architectures
and applications.
• To assist readers, this paper discusses concise deﬁnitions and key technologies of XAI
and its explanation using various smart city-driven use cases (see Section 2).
• In previous studies, more focus has been given to XAI applications for smart cities.
The undertaken study discussed the concept of XAI for smart cities, various XAI tech-
nology use cases, challenges, applications, possible alternative solutions and current
and future research enhancements (see Sections 2–7).
• The core contribution of the conducted study is to discuss open research problems
and challenges (see Section 5).
• Furthermore, It also discusses ongoing smart city-driven XAI projects (see Section 6).
• Finally, security, privacy, ethical issues and regular compliance for implementing XAI
in smart cities are discussed and future directions are provided (see Section 7).
1.5. Organization
Figure 1 depicts the taxonomy of the survey paper. Table 2 provides the list of
abbreviations. The paper is further organized as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes key aspects and
technologies of XAI. Section 3 explains the XAI technologies and their implementation in
current and emerging smart cities. Section 4 identiﬁes the applications of XAI in smart
cities. Section 5 discusses the open research issues and challenges. Section 7 presents XAI’s
future development and research direction in smart cities. Finally, Section 8 concludes this
paper. Section 6 presents the ongoing XAI projects for smart cities.
Taxonomy of 
Future Smart Cities
Introduction
MotivationThe Need for XAI: Fair and
Ethical Decision-Making
Section 3
XAI for Smart City
Enabling T echnologies
XAI for Blockchain
XAI for Big DataXAI for IoT
Section 5
Open Issues and
Research Challenges 
Black-Box versus Interpretable Models-
Reconsideration of the Problem from
the Beginning
Enhancement of Explanations with
OntologiesComparison and Measuring of
ExplainabilitySection 2 
Definitions and Key
Technologies of XAI
Section 4
XAI for Smart City
Applications/Use
CasesXAI for Smart Healthcare
XAI for T ransportationXAI for Intrusion Detection Systems
Section 7
Lessons Learnt, Future
Development and Direction
of XAI in Smart CitiesSecurity Issues of XAI for Smart
Cities
Industrial W aste ManagementOrganizationContributions
XAI for 5G and BeyondXAI for Digital
Twins
XAI for Computer
VisionXAI for AR/VRXAI for A viation System
XAI for FinanceXAI for Legal Issues
XAI for Digital Forensics
XAI for Smart GovernanceXAI for Smart Grids
XAI for Smart Industry
Section 8
ConclusionTrade-of f between
Performance and
InterpretabilityAnte-Hoc MethodsSection 1 
Definitions and Key
Technologies of XA
User T raining on Explainability
Features ExplicitlyTrusting Machine Learning Models
Visualization
Security and Assurance
PrivacyEthical and Privacy issues of XAI
for Smart Cities
Scalability
Regulatory Compliance for
Implementing XAI for Smart Cities
Standard Specifications for
Implementing XAI for Smart CitiesSection 6
Ongoing XAI Projects
for Smart Cities
Figure 1. Taxonomy diagram of the explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for smart cities.

==== Page 5 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 5 of 40
Table 2. List of Abbreviations.
Abbreviation Description
5G Fifth-Generation
6G Sixth-Generation
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ADLs Activities of Daily Living
ANN Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
AR Augmented Reality
AQI Air Quality Index
AIoMT Artiﬁcial Intelligence of Medical Things
BRB Belief-Rule-Base
BRL Bayesian Rule learning
CDSS Clinical Decision Support Systems
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television
CC Cognitive Computing
DL Deep Learning
DNN Deep Neural Network
DT Digital Twin
DT Decision Tree
Grad-CAM gradient-weighted class activation mapping
ICT Information and Communication Technologies
IDS Intrusion Detection System
IoT Internet of Things
IoMT Internet of Medical Things
KNN K-Nearest Neighbours
LIME Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations
ML Machine Learning
NLP Natural Language Processing
PDPs Partial Dependence Plots
PDPs Partial Dependence Plots
QoS Quality of Service
R-CNN Region-Based Convolutional Neural Networks
SCM Supply Chain Management
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanations
SP Service Provider
VR Virtual Reality
VANET Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks
XAI Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
XML Explainable Machine Learning
YOLO You Only Look Once

==== Page 6 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 6 of 40
2. Deﬁnitions and Key Technologies of XAI
XAI is a method that helps humans understand how the output is created by the
machine/deep learning algorithm. It contributes to quantifying model correctness, fairness,
and transparency and results in AI-assisted decision-making. XAI is critical for organiza-
tions’ trust and conﬁdence when using AI models. Additionally, AI explainability enables
organizations to take a responsible approach to AI development [23].
Figure 2 shows the difference between the working methodology of AI and XAI. As AI
becomes more sophisticated, humans face difﬁculty comprehending and retracing the
algorithm’s steps. The entire calculating process is transformed into what is often referred
to as a “black box” that is impenetrable. These black-box models are constructed using
the data directly, and not even the algorithm’s developers or data scientists understand or
can describe what is occurring inside them or how the AI algorithm arrived at a particular
conclusion [ 24]. As machine learning models improve performance, explainable and inter-
pretable predictions become increasingly hard to create. Black-box models may be deﬁned
as deep learning [ 25] or ensembles [ 26–28]. On the other hand, white-box or glass-box mod-
els are known as open-source models because it is straightforward to create understandable
results using explainable examples, like the reference [ 14] and decision tree models. It is
possible to make the new models more understandable and interpretable. However, these
models still need state-of-the-art performance compared to the earlier models. It boils
down to their frugal design; when they perform poorly or are well-interpreted and quickly
explained, it is due to them having a frugal design [ 29]. Interpretability, as mentors remark,
is beneﬁcial for accomplishing other model goals, which may include establishing user
conﬁdence, recognizing the effect of certain factors, comprehending how a model would
behave given inputs and ensuring that models are fair and impartial [30].
Training Data ML Process Learned Function UserDecision/
Recommendation AI
XAI
Explainable
ModelExplanation
Interface Why did you do that?
Why not something else 
When do you succeed
When do you fail?
When can i trust you?
How do i correct an
error?   
I understand why
I understand why not  
I know when you succeed
I know when you fail
I know when to trust you
I know why you got error  
T ask
T ask
User
Training Data New ML
Process
Figure 2. Difference between the working methodology of AI and XAI.
1. Understandability : It denotes that the goal of a model is to allow a human to com-
prehend how the model works, and a model is considered to be excellent if the model
allows a human to gain understanding without being dependent on understanding
the model’s internal structure or algorithmic techniques by which the model processes
data [ 31]. Descriptions should be composed of little pieces of information, which
humans and computer algorithms can interpret and should connect quantitative and
qualitative ideas [32].
2. Comprehensibility: The capacity of a learning system to express its learned infor-
mation in a human-comprehensible manner is known as comprehensibility [ 33].
Computability is typically related to model complexity when comprehensibility is
considered [34].
3. Explainability: As an interface between people and a decision-maker, an explainabil-
ity is understandable to humans while also providing a close approximation of the
decision-maker [34].

==== Page 7 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 7 of 40
4. Transparency: For a model to be transparent, it must be comprehensible by itself.
Simulatable, decomposable and algorithmically transparent models are all types of
transparent models [35].
2.1. Ante Hoc Methods
Predictive models and explainability techniques have two fundamental connections
between them. An illustration of ante hoc is using the same model to predict and explain,
such as using feature weights to predict a linear regression. It is critical to point out
that there are assumptions associated with these approaches and they must be met if
the explanation is to operate as expected [ 36,37]. Clear indications about the underlying
prediction algorithm and data, whether transparent or opaque, should be used to have an
explainable approach. Can someone describe the workings of a predictive model without
knowing how it works? When explaining data or forecasts, is it necessary to make data
characteristics intelligible to humans ﬁrst? For example, while describing a forecast, think
of how it may be stated in terms of the temperature in a room compared to calculating
a squared sum of the room temperature and the height. Sometimes the system designer
wants to provide a list of data transformations or an example-based explanation in instances
when the input domain is not intelligible to humans [35,38].
2.2. Trade-Off between Performance and Interpretability
As with any other bold statement, the issue of interpretability versus performance
becomes bogged down in myths and misconceptions. It might be true that the more compli-
cated the model is, the better it is for predictions, but it is only sometimes true [ 39]. In such
circumstances, the prediction is wrong. This phenomenon is quite prevalent in several
industries. For example, because features must be tested in conﬁned physical settings
where all of the characteristics are closely linked and no wide range of potential values
is represented in the data, many issues have just a limited subset of features [ 40]. More
predictive models allow for more complex functions to make a prediction. Predictability
involves having speciﬁc complexity and the data is widely distributed across the world of
suitable values for each variable. There is also sufﬁcient data available to use a complex
model. Therefore, “more complex models are more accurate” appears correct. The trade-
off between performance and interpretability may be seen in this circumstance. Also, it
is essential to remember that, while attempting to resolve problems that do not follow
the abovementioned principles, an organization will risk ﬁxing too simplistic (variance)
problems. A key difference between a complicated model and a sophisticated one is that
a complicated one makes the prediction process more complicated, whereas a sophisti-
cated one keeps the model simple but accurate. The performance brings complexity with
it and as a result, interpretability confronts itself on a downhill slope. However, when
these newer techniques of explainability arise, this would ﬂip or nullify the increase in
explainability [16].
3. XAI for Smart City Enabling Technologies
In general, smart cities are deﬁned as technology-enabled, socially intensive and envi-
ronmentally friendly urban areas. This section discusses key enabling technologies of smart
cities such as blockchain, IoT, big data, 5G and beyond technologies, digital twins, AR/VR,
and computer vision. Researchers have recently attempted to address smart city problems
using predictive and advanced analytics, smart environmental monitoring and smart mo-
bility. Still, the design and development of smart cities have remained an open research
problem [ 41]. With the advancements in technologies such as computer vision, IoT, and
big data and AI, it has become feasible to address smart cities-related challenges [ 42–44].
Recently, numerous machine learning and deep learning methodologies have been applied
to applications related to smart cities. For instance, ﬁne k-nearest neighbors (KNN) [ 45],
decision tree [ 46], medium KNN [ 47], You only look once (YOLO) v4 and YOLOv5 [ 48]
and mass region-based convolutional neural networks (R-CNN) methodologies are ap-

==== Page 8 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 8 of 40
plied for image classiﬁcation, trafﬁc congestion, and autonomous driving vehicle-related
problems [ 49,50]. However, most machine learning models depend highly on training data
sets, pre-processing data methodologies, and ﬁne-tuning non-transparent machine learning
models. The current data-driven methodologies cannot understand, interpret, and explain
complex decision-making-related tasks [ 51]. Such black box-like methodologies cannot
identify and explain decision-making in smart cities. XAI algorithms can be applied to
computer vision problems, trafﬁc congestion, self-driving cars, intrusion detection systems
(IDS) [ 52–54], etc., to address the above issues. It is also essential to monitor and validate
the behavior of the smart city application before deploying advanced machine and deep
learning models.
3.1. XAI for Blockchain
Blockchain is an immutable ledger that can process various transactions and carry
out asset management and tracking. Blockchain is widely known for tracking and trading
physical assets, such as houses, cars, and real estate properties and virtual assets such as
patents, copyrights, and many more [ 51]. Furthermore, blockchain technology is suitable
for providing real-time information in a completely transparent and secure environment.
Blockchain technology can be implemented using smart contracts. Smart contracts are
predetermined constraint-based programs that are executed on a blockchain network. It
enables the automation of agreements without any interruptions.
Blockchain technology is one of the essential solutions to drive cloud-based data
centers. Moreover, blockchain technology brings reliability and trustworthiness aspects
in designing and developing secure engineering solutions [ 55]. However, the merits
of blockchain technology also bring two critical challenges: (i) cross-layer implementa-
tion of blockchain technology in cloud computing environments and (ii) the need for a
control mechanism due to the automation of tasks in most blockchain-based solutions.
Blockchain technology systematically organizes data to prevent intruders from manipu-
lating or hacking the system. The increasing complexity of data-driven AI methodologies
and their non-transparent behavior presents numerous security challenges to smart city
problems [ 56]. XAI methodologies have extended and improved the explainability of AI
models. Especially in decentralized AI applications, integrating blockchain with AI models
guarantees data privacy and security. It also provides data accessibility and traceability. In-
tegrating AI and blockchain architecture can implement a secure decentralized framework
for storing and retrieving data generated with AI models.
As every coin has two sides, combining blockchain with XAI methodologies will also
bring numerous future challenges which need to be tackled smartly. Firstly, the validation
of explanations given by XAI methodologies is a huge challenge due to the minimization of
humans in the loop. Secondly, achieving the real-timeliness of applications is a big concern,
which requires an immediate resolution [57].
Applications of XAI for Blockchain
Integrating XAI with blockchain can support diverse trusted, non-transparent, secure,
decentralized and undisputed systems and application domains.
a. Customer Proﬁle Assessment: Integrating XAI with blockchain will massively affect
banking and ﬁnance operations. The banking and ﬁnance applications are jointly
integrated with blockchain technology (BCT) and XAI-based multi-agent systems
(MAS). The XAI and blockchain-based multi-agent systems comprise various in-
telligent expert agents. The expert agents analyze bank customers’ proﬁles, credit
history, demographic information and health history. The blockchain-based multi-
agent systems also enable effective decision-making and minimize risk probabilities
in investments by fostering trust and transparency [ 57]. Furthermore, the integra-
tion of XAI with blockchain also assists in identifying creditworthy customers and
decision-making about load allotment, providing business ﬁnance, or empowering
start-ups.

==== Page 9 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 9 of 40
b. Medical Imaging: Integrating XAI with blockchain technology can implement a
secure decentralized medical diagnosis framework for medical image-based diagno-
sis. The XAI and blockchain-based medical diagnosis framework uses block-wise
encryption and histogram shifting methodology to ensure secure transmission of
historical patient data and provide trustable information about patient history, such
as how, who, when, and where the patient proﬁle data is created. This methodology
can also assist radiologists in making decisions by explaining critical patient con-
ditions. The combination of medical imaging technology, XAI and blockchain can
assist doctors in making transparent, trustable, unbiased and effective decisions for
critical patients [58].
c. Auditing: The XAI with blockchain applications can protect organizations from
money laundering, bank transaction fraud, and income and sales tax fraud. The in-
tegration of BCT and MAS uses a widely known consensus algorithm with the
SHA-256 secure hashing algorithm to ensure the safety of banking and ﬁnancial
transactions. In addition, a joint integration of BCT and XAI-based multi-agent
systems can analyze biased and disputed decisions, explain them, and assist gov-
ernment ofﬁcials, judges, and lawyers in identifying and detecting various frauds.
Furthermore, the integration of XAI with blockchain can also detect election-related
frauds, such as manipulating votes and election results. [59].
d. Real-time Decisions: Based on the intelligent sensing units connected to smart ve-
hicles, XAI with blockchain solutions can assist in making real-time decisions such
as fatal accidents and trafﬁc congestions [ 60]. The XAI and blockchain-integrated
systems contain deterministic and non-deterministic predictors. The deterministic
predictors assist in making accurate decisions based on the inputs and data of the
XAI methodology. For inexact decisions, the non-deterministic predictors produce
inexact decisions. The deterministic or probabilistic predictors can make all types of
AI-related decisions, such as frequent pattern mining, optimization-related decisions,
clustering, classiﬁcation-related decisions, and many more [ 57]. In non-real-time
situations, XAI with blockchain solutions can be a blessing in identifying fatal ac-
cidents and handling trafﬁc congestion solutions by diverting vehicles in the right
direction. Figure 3 demonstrates a use case of XAI with blockchain for smart cities.
As shown in Figure 3, XAI-based multi-agent systems integrated with blockchain
methodology in applications, such as banking and ﬁnance, medical imaging and ac-
counting, assist in identifying credit-worthy customers, and making decisions about
their loans and ﬁnance. The blockchain methodology contains block-wise encryp-
tion, histogram shifting methodology, and SHA-256 cryptography. The XAI-based
multi-agent systems integrated with blockchain methodology can explain the reasons
for customers’ credit and health history, banking, and ﬁnance transactions to make
critical real-time decisions.
+1. Banking & Finance Applications
2. Medical Imaging Applications
3. Finance & Accounting Audit
4. Real-time Decisions
XAI Models &
Interface
XAI based Multi-
Agent Systems
Blockchain
Technology
Block-Wise Encryption &
Histogram Shifting
SHA-256 Secure Hash Encryption
Predictors
Identification of credit worthy
customers and making decisions
about loan and financeMaking case base,
Textual, Patient History
based DecisionsIdentification of biased disputed decisions
frauds such as manipulation of votes,
election results, money launderingIdentification of Fatal Accidents &
Traffic ManagementXAI GOALS
Explain Customer  Requir ement
Explanation & Interpr etation of Health History of
Customers
Explain How , When, Wher e, Who Cr eated Patient Data
Explanation about Emergency Health Conditions to
Radiologist
XAI Explanation of Banking & Finance Transactions
and its History to Bank Pr ofessionals
XAI Explanation of Biased & Disputed Decisions to Govt
Officials
XAI Explanation of Realtime Decisions, Optimization
XAI Explanation of Patient Health History to Doctors
Figure 3. A Usecase of XAI with Blockchain for Smart Cities.

==== Page 10 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 10 of 40
3.2. XAI for IoT
In the development of innovative smart city solutions, Internet of things (IoT) technolo-
gies has played a vital role in shaping the life of citizens by addressing issues such as trafﬁc
congestion, theft detection, geospatial farming, telemedicine, remote healthcare monitoring,
and many more [ 61,62]. In recent times, smart city problems have been addressed using
various data sensed via smart sensing devices. Furthermore, the introduction of intelligent
edge computing and edge-AI-enabled devices and their integration with IoT technologies
have envisioned the future directions of smart city concepts [ 63,64]. Edge-AI-enabled
devices have been integrated with powerful machine and deep learning methodologies to
analyze and predict smart city-related issues, such as the air quality index (AQI), weather
prediction, accident prevention, and trafﬁc monitoring.
However, Edge-AI-enabled devices and robust machine learning methodologies can
not assist in real-time or near-real-time decision-making. To achieve this objective, XAI
methodologies can be integrated with intelligent IoT, the Internet of medical things (IoMT),
the AI of medical things (AIoMT), and edge AI-enabled smart devices to identify, interpret,
and explain a particular situation which helps in making critical decisions. Figure 4 repre-
sents a use case of integrated XAI and IoT-enabled architecture for smart cities. As shown
in Figure 4, edge-level XAI is responsible for collecting sensing information from Edge-
AI-enabled smart devices and sending it to the application servers for processing via a
cloud gateway [ 65,66]. Furthermore, the application server also notiﬁes individuals of
emergency alerts via network operators. The XAI-enabled IoT systems use methodologies
such as QARMA, CDSS, LIME, etc. Thus, for example, XAI and IoT-integrated devices can
notify the family members and explain the whole situation to them after a fatal accident,
make critical decisions based on the critical health condition of patients, provide real-time
notiﬁcation and explain trafﬁc congestion situations.
Combining XAI with blockchain and IoT infrastructure brings economic and scala-
bility challenges. The scalability issue comes from the overall size of each block and its
adaptability with the increase in the number of transactions. Along with the increase in
the number of transactions, the handling and maintenance costs will also increase due to
increased trafﬁc. Furthermore, the increase in the number of users and transactions will
also increase the latency time for processing. Still, the challenges of combining XAI with
blockchain and IoT have remained open research issues [ 67]. Researchers have introduced
methodologies such as Segwit, Sharding, Plasma, etc.
Applications of XAI for IoT
Integrating XAI with IoT can support various critical, trusted, decentralized and undis-
puted systems and application domains.
a. Preventive Healthcare: The XAI integrated clinical decision support systems (CDSS)
explain the relevance of XAI methodologies from various perspectives: (i) medical, (ii)
technological, (iii) legal, and (iv) end-user (patient) perspectives. The XAI-integrated
CDSS system uses the analysis ﬁndings to conduct a detailed ethical assessment
of patients’ proﬁles with appropriate explanations [ 68]. Integrating XAI, CDSS
and edge, and edge AI-enabled smart devices can provide real-time information
about patients, such as cardiac conditions, oxygen levels, blood pressure, diabetes,
and many more; it also assists caretakers and healthcare experts and family members
in making critical healthcare decisions. In addition, XAI and IoT-enabled frameworks
can also be applied to advanced analytics on patients’ vital health information and
can predict health diseases in advance [69].
b. Smart Building Management: XAI and IoT-enabled smart building/home archi-
tectures can autonomously control building operations [ 70,71]. The XAI systems
integrated with QARMA algorithms and models monitor smart building operations.
The QARMA methodologies can formulate quantitative rules for creating, updat-
ing, and managing smart building operations such as protection against thefts and
intrusion activities, lighting, ventilation, heating, etc. Furthermore, XAI-integrated

==== Page 11 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 11 of 40
QARMA methodologies can also identify intruders, interpret, and explain the theft
to the police, make autonomous decisions, and notify the house members about the
status and actions taken against thefts [72].
c. Accident Prevention: The XAI and IoT integrated frameworks, such as the local inter-
pretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) framework, can easily be integrated
with LoRA and the LIME framework can explain the classiﬁcation results generated
by XAI algorithms. For example, The LIME integrated XAI and IoT-based systems
can provide real-time accident updates to neighboring cars and protect against fa-
tal accident possibilities. It also assists in navigating to unknown destinations by
informing about dangers and risks in advance [73].
d. Trafﬁc Management: Based on the intelligent sensing units connected to smart vehi-
cles, XAI with IoT solutions can assist in smart vehicle management [ 74]. The XAI,
supply chain management (SCM) and blockchain-integrated heuristic search method-
ology can assist in avoiding trafﬁc congestion situations and identifying trafﬁc condi-
tions in advance. The XAI-enabled SCM system stores the information and time of
every service provider (SP). The XAI-enabled SCM system is connected with smart
networks such as vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANET). Every service provider has an
open location key against the trafﬁc information gathered by the XAI-enabled SCM
system; ﬁnally, the stored information is integrated to identify trafﬁc conditions in
advance, assist vehicles in navigation, and reduce trafﬁc congestion situations [75].
+
XAI Models &
Interface
Explanation of theft, intrusion activities,
lighting, ventilation, heating.
Explanation about r eal-time health
information of patients such as cardiac
conditions, oxygen levels, blood pr essur e,
diabetes, and pr ovide emergency health alerts
Explanation about r eal time accident updates
to neighbouring cars and assist in pr otection
against fatal accident possibilities. Assists in
navigating to unknown destinations by
informing about dangers and risks in advance
Explanation about traffic conditions in
advance, assist vehicles in navigation and
reduce traffic congestion situations
1. QARMA Algorithm
2. CDSS System
3. LIME Framework
4. Supply Chain ManagementIdentify intruders, interpr et and explain the theft
to the police, make autonomous decisions, and
notify the house members about the status and
actions taken against thefts
Making ML  decisions about patients critical health
conditions
Protection against fatal accidents and ML  decisions
about traffic management and risk
Identification of traffic conditions and making ML
decisions about traffic congestionXAI GOALS
IoT Sensors
Preventive
Healthcar eSmart
BuildingAccident
PreventionTraffic
Management
Figure 4. A use case of XAI with IoT for Smart Cities.
3.3. XAI for Big Data
Big data is a collection of structured, unstructured and semi-structured data, informa-
tion and knowledge [ 76–79]. Integrating AI and big data-enabled systems collect, interpret,
process and store large amounts of data. It also applies advanced analytics that can be used
for predictive modeling and analytics [ 80]. However, due to the black box-like behavior
of most AI methodologies, machine, and deep learning methodologies fail to interpret
and explain large volumes of data resulting in poor decision-making. Integrating XAI
algorithms with big data can assist big data systems in understanding, interpreting, and
processing diverse and large volumes of data [ 81]. It can also assist in identifying complex
patterns, categorization, dimensionality adjustments, and maintaining transparency and
accountability of data [ 15]. The big-data-based XAI integrated decision support systems,
multi-agent systems, and healthcare systems can assist organizations in explaining and
making decisions about customer’s geographical segmentation, health and personal his-
tory, selection and prediction of stocks, identiﬁcation of anomalies in lifestyles of elderlies
and planning and formulating supply chain strategies. Figure 5 represents a use case of
integrated XAI and big data applications for smart cities. Furthermore, the knowledge layer
is responsible for the timely generation of processed information to assist various big data
systems and tools in decision-making. For example, healthcare experts and clinicians can
apply medical approaches with caution based on the inputs received from XAI-integrated
big data systems, which will assist them in selecting appropriate medical practices, medical

==== Page 12 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 12 of 40
operations, and critical healthcare decisions. Finally, the service layer is responsible for
notifying the real-time updates and explaining a particular event.
However, integrating XAI with big data technologies also challenges future directions.
For instance, in applications such as healthcare, XAI can visualize the AI model and assist
healthcare experts in decision-making. However, generating accurate medical diagnosis
reports, deriving conclusions from them, and validating these reports is a major concern
for healthcare experts [82].
Applications of XAI for Big Data
Integrating XAI with big data can support diverse, decentralized, risk-oriented, unbi-
ased systems and application domains.
a. Customer Segmentation and Management: The big data-based XAI integrated deci-
sion support systems can assist organizations in geographical segmentation, under-
standing, and interpretation of various types of customers. Such systems consist of
belief-rule-base (BRB) and factual and heuristic rules. Furthermore, it can understand,
analyze, extract, and interpret historical data using supervised machine learning and
deep learning methodologies. The big data-based XAI integrated decision support
systems also assist in managing customer relationships and offering them various
customer-centric products, their explanation and beneﬁts [ 83]. Furthermore, XAI
methodologies can also assist in understanding the needs and requirements of regular
customers in offering suitable products to customers.
b. Stock Prediction and Management: The XAI integrated multi-agent stock predic-
tion systems can assist stakeholders in picking the right stocks concerning the cur-
rent know-how. Such systems are integrated with gradient boosting decision trees
methodology, which can interpret and predict stock price inclines and declines [ 84].
It can also assist ﬁnance portfolio managers in making the right decisions about
stock selection, purchase, and selling for their esteemed customers [ 85]. Furthermore,
the XAI integrated Big data systems can better understand customer ﬁnance history,
current needs, and aspirations to gain more proﬁts and make future stock decisions.
c. Health Analytic of the Elderly: The big data-enabled XAI integrated healthcare
systems can analyze activities of daily living (ADLs) of the elderly, their daily lifestyle
monitoring status and anomalies in routine activities; such systems use the concept of
data-driven AI to identify the cognitive decline of activities of daily living in a smart
home. It analyses cognitive decline and explains why a sudden decline has happened
in routine ADLs. The data-driven big data-enabled XAI systems also identify the
possibility of health diseases such as Dementia and Parkinson’s [ 86]. Furthermore,
such systems can assist healthcare experts in understanding the elderly’s mental
health conditions, cardiac conditions, blood pressure, and oxygen levels to predict
the probability of critical health conditions and diseases in advance [87].
d. Business Analytics for Supply Chain Management: The big data-integrated-XAI
supply chain systems can plan and organize supply chain operations, gain real-
time insights into customer feedback and build cost-effective business strategies for
ﬁnance and marketing. Such systems use a robust meta-heuristics base that can
analyze customers’ and vendors’ histories and formulate a cost-effective business
strategy [ 88]. Furthermore, big data-integrated-XAI supply chain systems can also
provide further recommendations for improving supply chain strategies based on
customer necessities and feedback using meta-heuristics [89].

==== Page 13 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 13 of 40
1. Customer  Segmentation
2. State information of Various customers
3. Health and Personal History of Customers
4. Order  and Pr oduct Info of Customers
XAI Models &
Interface
BRB(Belief Rule Baes)
GBDT(Gradient Boosting Decision Tree)
Map r educe and Informatica
Meta-heuristic methodology
Identification of cr edit worthy customers,
managing good r elationship and offering
customer  centric pr oductsExplanation of geographical segmentation of customers
Explanation about corr ect stocks and assistance in pr ediction
Explanation of anomalies in life style and mental health 
of elderlies
Explanation of supply chain operations and plan
Making decisions about stock
selection, pur chase and sellIdentification of anomalies in daily
routine activities of elderliesMaking decision about supply chain
strategy and automationXAI GOALS
Multi-Agent Systems
Decision Support
System
Health Care Systems
Figure 5. A Usecase of XAI with Big Data for Smart Cities.
3.4. XAI for 5G and Beyond
Recently, 5G technologies have faced challenges such as connection density, network
access issues in basements, underwater, and space, 247availability, delay in communica-
tion, quality of service (QoS), and many more. Several research works have discussed 6G
technologies, beneﬁts, and standards [ 90]. However, their practical usage and applications
still need to be completed. Standard machine and deep learning methodologies integrated
with 5G and beyond technologies can implement technologies such as remote healthcare
monitoring, telemedicine, Industry 4.0 and digital twin, but fail to understand, interpret,
and assist in real-time decision-making [91–93].
However, by integrating XAI methodologies with 5G and beyond technologies, edge-
AI-enabled smart devices can facilitate humans with various intelligent applications such
as connected robots, collaborative autonomous driving, smart and interpretable health,
remote surgery, connected restaurants, connected cars, connected assembly, and many
more [ 94]. However, XAI for 5G and beyond technologies also brings challenges and
research directions. In applications such as precision manufacturing and autonomous
vehicles, a human-computer interface-driven interface is required for smooth functioning
and communication for smart city applications [95,96].
Applications of XAI for 5G and Beyond
The integration of XAI with 5G and beyond technologies can change accessing real-
time updates, bringing humans and machines together on a trusted platform and automat-
ing information delivery. As a result, it can play a vital role in smart city design and
development and global societal development.
a. Precision Manufacturing: The 5G and XAI-enabled manufacturing systems with hu-
man and machine participation in smart factories can increase productivity, organize
production processes, automate factory operations, and increase ﬂexibility [ 97,98].
Such systems consist of a gradient-boosting decision tree methodology to identify
machine errors or any errors made by tools/soft-wares. Furthermore, the 5G and
XAI-enabled manufacturing systems can perform focused analytics using a reliable
AI-integrated prediction model for maintenance tasks. It can develop a ﬂexible
production environment for future product trends and customer needs [99].
b. Connected Robotics: The 5G-enabled explainable agents and robots can automate
restaurant operations (connected restaurants), drive and control autonomous ve-
hicles, automate and control cooking tasks and connect assembly systems [ 100].
The explainable agents and robots can explain their behavior to humans and carry
out intra-agent explanations for a particular task [ 101]. Furthermore, the 5G enabled
explainable agents and robots can understand, interpret and explain the allotted
tasks to robots and provide real-time status to the humans [102].
c. Collaborative Autonomous Driving: The vision-based autonomous driving systems,
along with 5G and beyond technologies, can enable collaborative autonomous driv-
ing, inter-vehicle, vehicle-to-infrastructure and vehicle-to-vehicle communications in
near real-time using technologies such as LoRa. The combination of behavior cloning
and reinforcement learning methodology can carry out imitation-based learning from

==== Page 14 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 14 of 40
human driving lessons and make safety-critical decisions [ 103]. Furthermore, vision-
based autonomous driving systems can also provide background insights about road
accidents, geographical conditions, alternative routes, smart car parking, platooning,
assistance for changing and merging lanes, and managing intersections [104].
d. Targeted Healthcare: The 5G enabled EMR systems connected with clinicians and
medical experts can perform feature interpretability analysis of health patients and
provide essential information, quantitative and qualitative assessment of patient
health history using methodologies such as local explanations, global explanations,
local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME), SHapley additive exPla-
nations (SHAP), Example-based Techniques, and Feature-based Techniques [ 105].
Furthermore, such intelligent methodologies, integrated with 5G-enabled smart
and connected health systems, can also assist healthcare experts in combating fatal
diseases such as COVID-19 [106].
3.5. XAI for Digital Twins
A virtual replica spans a physical system or object’s lifecycle called a digital twin (DT).
A DT is updated frequently with real-time data and uses ML simulation and reasoning
for decision-making. DT is a highly complex virtual model and replica of its physical
counterpart, which can be anything ranging from a car to a person to a building to a city
to a bridge. The data from the physical assets are collected from the sensors connected to
them and are mapped to the virtual model. The behavior of the real-world object/thing
can be understood or visualized by looking at the DT. Using DT, we can understand
how the objects are behaving presently and predict how they will behave in the future
by analyzing the data from the sensors [ 107]. Even though DTs were originally designed
to improve the manufacturing process using simulations, they are now being used in
several application domains, such as healthcare and smart cities, due to the increase in
big data generated from several IoT-based applications [ 108]. The potential applications
of DT in building/designing effective smart city services are increasing every year due to
the increased connectivity by IoT devices [ 109]. The potential applications of DTs in the
smart city include planning and developing smart cities and energy saving in smart cities.
The data from the utilities in smart buildings gives insights into the usage patterns and
distribution of the utilities, through which decisions can be taken based on the predictions
made by ML algorithms and big data analytics [ 110]. DTs can facilitate the growth of a
smart city by creating testbeds inside a virtual twin. A smart city DT can achieve two
objectives; the ﬁrst thing is that DTs can act as a testbed for testing the scenarios and the
other one is that DTs can analyze the changes in the collected data and learn from the
environment that can be used for monitoring and data analytics [ 111]. For instance, DT-
integrated clinical decision support systems can set a threshold for doctors using patient
history and meta-heuristics. The decision thresholds can assist doctors in recommending
medicines and deciding tests and treatments based on patient conditions.
A smart city DT can be created by integrating building information models with
the big data generated by sensors from IoT devices in a smart city. The public can walk
around the city’s accurate 3D model created by the DT. It can observe the proposed changes
in the policies and urban planning that will pave the way for public opinion before the
decisions come into practice [ 112,113]. AI-enabled smart city DTs can be used effectively
to plan for preparation, mitigation, and response during natural disasters and calamities
during ﬂoods and earthquakes [ 114,115]. Even though AI can help DTs simulate smart
cities, through which the authorities can take necessary actions, due to the black-box
nature of AI/Ml algorithms, it is challenging for the authorities to understand the reason
for the predictions/classiﬁcations. In mission-critical applications such as trafﬁc control
and disaster management, wrong decisions taken by authorities can affect millions of
lives and properties in urban areas. Through the transparency and justiﬁcation of the
predictions, XAI can alleviate these problems faced by the authorities in making decisions
based on the predictions given by AI algorithms in the smart city DTs. Moreover, combining

==== Page 15 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 15 of 40
XAI methodologies with digital twins brings interface and optimization challenges [ 95].
The XAI-based digital twin systems are at an initial stage and cannot handle massive data
processing and self-optimization in digital twin systems [116].
3.6. XAI for AR/VR
Augmented reality (AR) can use sounds, digital visual elements, sound, or other
sensors to enhance the physical world. The main aim of AR is to highlight some essential
features of the real world, understand those features better, and come up with smart
insights that can be applied to the applications in real-world [ 117,118]. Virtual reality
(VR) generates a virtual environment with objects and scenes, making users feel as if they
are physically immersed in the virtual environment. The virtual environment created
by VR can be perceived using a VR headset [ 119]. AR/VR coupled with AI/ML are
key enablers of the smart city through the urban planners and the general public can
view the virtual urban planning and simulations of events in a smart city. The AI/ML
algorithms’ lack of reasoning/justiﬁcation by the AI/ML algorithms on predictions of
some of the events, such as disasters/accidents, makes it difﬁcult for the concerned to
make decisions solely based on the predictions from the AI/ML algorithms in AR/VR
applications in smart cities [ 118]. XAI can address these issues by providing interpretability
and justiﬁcation for the prediction results of the AI/ML algorithms. For instance, 5G
and AR/VR-enabled recommender systems use explanation-enabled recommendation
methodology (XARSSA). The XARSSA methodology can address the inﬂuence of customer
demographics, extracting customer demands and choices using AR/VR-based shopping
assistant applications. The XARSSA methodology uses a design science approach to attract
a large customer base towards AR/VR-enabled shopping assistant applications and gain
more insights about their needs [120].
Furthermore, combining XAI methodologies with AR/VR techniques will assist in
smooth functioning and interfacing; however, achieving complete transparency and trust
between the human brain and machine interface has remained an open research prob-
lem [ 19]. In addition, XAI-based AR/VR systems have to deal with massive data processing
and high-performance computing challenges.
3.7. XAI for Computer Vision
Computer vision is an application of AI that enables the systems to understand mean-
ingful information from videos, digital images and closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage
and make recommendations based on the information extracted from these sources [121,122] .
Computer vision has many applications in smart cities, such as object detection in au-
tonomous vehicles that can avoid collisions/accidents, reduction in traffic, monitoring
of suspected criminals [ 123] that will, in turn, reduce the crimes, structural monitoring,
combating disasters [ 124,125]. The 5G and computer vision integrated multi-agent systems
use reinforcement learning methodology to analyze traffic congestion situations. Such
systems are integrated with interpretations techniques such as SHAP , LIME and gradient-
weighted class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) for explaining various traffic situations to
a driver and assisting in making driving-related decisions in dense traffic situations [ 126].
The applications mentioned above are very sensitive as the lives of the citizens are at stake
if wrong decisions are taken. Traditional computer vision applications do not explain or
justify the classification of images/videos. Hence, making real-time decisions based on
the classifications given by computer vision-based applications in scenarios in smart cities,
such as collision avoidance, traffic monitoring and crime prevention, may incur severe costs,
such as loss of lives and ethical issues. XAI can solve the issues related to computer vision-
based applications in smart cities through explainability, interpretability, and justification of
classification results.
Combining XAI with computer vision methods also brings a few challenges, such as
data exploration and measuring the complexity of black-box models. XAI with computer
vision can easily work with text, image, and audio data [ 127]. However, it cannot interpret

==== Page 16 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 16 of 40
spatiotemporal quantities, matrices and vectors. Furthermore, the complexity of inter-
pretability highly depends on black-box models, such as the depth of trees, the presence of
non-zero weights in neural network models, etc.
4. XAI for Smart City Applications/Use Cases
Currently, AI is playing the leading role in several domains, such as healthcare, enter-
tainment, and business, regarding progress and innovations. From the current solutions
point of view, the inﬂuence of deep learning (DL) is based on machine learning (ML) and ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) have shown good robustness and excellent performance.
Still, from the decisions and human-understandable perspectives, they lack the abilities.
Therefore, the need for more abilities in the more sensitive domain is crucial. Some of the
applications of smart cities that can beneﬁt from XAI integration are discussed below.
4.1. XAI for Smart Healthcare
Advanced technologies like AI, the IoT and cloud computing refer to smart healthcare
systems in the existing health system. Figure 6 presents smart healthcare systems in smart
cities. The advanced technologies enable the healthcare system to be more personalized,
convenient, and efﬁcient [ 128]. Furthermore, advanced technologies help in health moni-
toring in real-time through available applications of healthcare on wearable or smartphone
devices. Thus, it motivates individuals to take care of and control their health issues.
Furthermore, the collected health data at the individual level may be shared with doctors
and clinicians through cloud computing for other diagnoses [128].
  
Smart Health 
SystemNurse  
Pharmacist
Clinical 
Laboratory  Radiologist  PatientEmer gency
Medical
Services  
Update
the data  Analyze
the data  
Research
Center  
Doctor  
PrescriptionEnter clinical 
test reportPrescription Sensor based 
patients dataSensor based 
patients data
Test from 
decision support system
Enter diagnostic 
test reportDecision
support 
AI 
Test from 
decision support
system
Enter data
to systemPrescription  
Decision
support AI
Update patients 
status  Sensor based 
patients data
Figure 6. Smart Health Care System in Smart Cities.
Moreover, in health screening, AI may be used for the disease’s early diagnosis and the
selection of the treatment plan [ 129]. Ref. [ 130] presented the ethical issues of trust in the
operation of block boxes in AI systems and transparency related to AI frameworks and

==== Page 17 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 17 of 40
applications. The techniques of AI used in explaining the AI framework and the predictions
of AI are known as XAI techniques [ 129]. Ref. [ 129] proposed the XAI techniques in the
existing AI techniques to increase predictions in AI-based models in healthcare. Following
are some of the beneﬁts of the XAI in healthcare:
• Result Tracing: The factors that may affect the AI-based system’s outcome can be
traced with the help of explanations generated by XAI techniques.
• Increased Transparency: XAI can be used to improve trust levels and help in-
crease AI system transparency; it also explains the arrival of the AI system at the
speciﬁc decision.
• Model Improvement: For making an outcome AI framework learned from the pro-
vided dataset. The erroneous predictions may be because of the faulty rules of AI.
To improve the model accuracy and identify the errors in the learning process, expla-
nations generated by XAI are useful.
4.2. XAI for Intrusion Detection Systems
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming popular because of their exact predic-
tions [ 131]. These types of models are hard to interpret but useful. For instance, through
the model of DNN, a self-driving care control requires several thousands of tuning param-
eters [ 132]. From the perspective of IDS, it is tough for a network administrator if such
models of DNN are implemented to comprehend the cognition provided using ML methods.
Therefore, the DNN method is also considered a black box method [ 133]. The black-box
method retains its decision-making process stimulating to construe until ﬁnding the best
solution. DNN mainly modiﬁes several parameters using a trial-and-error method [ 134].
To increase the known attack classiﬁcation accuracy, several studies used ML techniques in
the IDS, automated model construction, and recognized anomalous network packets [ 135].
However, some of these frameworks emphasize output interpretation as an understanding
of predicting attacks and how ML techniques conclude.
Attacks can be interpreted easily if clariﬁed in rule forms, such as simple construed
rules in the if, Then statement. To impose security policies for recognized attacks, some
of the challenges include: linking the IDS with the network, analyzing the network trafﬁc,
explaining network trafﬁc, and deliver explanations to the network administrators. The ex-
planation is required to understand (i) the parts of violated security policies, (ii) the target
parts of the attack, and (iii) the network feature parts. For the logically construed outputs,
crucial pillar models for the processes are required. A decision tree (DT) is the best solution
for such tasks. DTs are the most suitable models where the scenario requires explaining the
output. DTs do not need any assumptions on data distribution like other supervised ML
techniques. In the context of IDS, the interpretative approach is necessary.
4.3. XAI for Transportation
Self-driving cars are expected to reduce deaths and provide greater mobility, but they
also question the explainability of AI decisions. Self-driving cars must make immediate
decisions to categorize objects in real-time. If a car suddenly behaves abnormally due to
misclassiﬁcation issues, it may result in casualties. The signiﬁcance of misclassiﬁcation
may be unsafe. It is not a prospect; it has previously happened. Recently, an Uber killed a
female in Arizona. This is the ﬁrst identiﬁed accident relating to an entirely autonomous
vehicle. Now, the question is, how does this misclassiﬁcation occur? XAI can answer this
question. An XAI-based model can be trained to get an insight into the decision made
by the model. It was reported that the car’s software searched objects in front of the car
but interpreted them as plastic bags or windblown weeds [ 136]. An explainable system
can only simplify the uncertainty of this situation and prevent it from happening. In XAI,
transportation is an important application area. The explanation of car behavior has even
now begun, [137,138], but there is still a long way to go.

==== Page 18 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 18 of 40
4.4. XAI for Aviation Systems
A repair card is used in the aviation maintenance management system to report
anomalies or a failure in aviation maintenance. The incorrect maintenance may result
from an incomplete or incorrect repair card, making the maintenance data hard to analyze.
This incomplete reporting has several different reasons. Firstly, when the crew ﬁlls out
maintenance of the card, some valuable information is frequently unknown. The ﬁndings
mentioned on the card are usually written in the form of free-form text, making it hard
to interpret the card ﬁndings automatically [ 139]. The failure assessed automatically will
describe the repair cards as more consistent and complete. The automatically assessed
failure would increase troubleshooting efﬁciency and add more diagnosis information that
may otherwise be unavailable to the manual maintenance crew. Ref. [ 140] proposed an
automatically diagnosed model for aviation failure. The proposed model combines usage
and maintenance data and utilizes a data-driven approach. XAI plays an essential role in
the aviation industry. The inclusion of XAI will provide interpretability and transparency
of the identiﬁed and assessed diagnosis. With the help of XAI, the diagnosis is explained
by comparing failure with the expected new values of different diagnoses.
4.5. XAI for Legal Issues
In the criminal justice scenario, AI can better evaluate the risk of reoffending and
decrease the expenses related to incarceration and crime. However, to predict the risk
of reoffending using a criminal decision-making framework in court, it must be ensured
that the framework acts reasonably, non-discriminatorily, and honestly. This critical area
requires transparency in decision-making methods, but there needs to be more work
that can explain automatic decision-making in the legal system [ 141–143]. For example,
in [144], the case questioned the use of proprietary risk assessment software in the decision.
The case supposed that the software “created an alternative case to deal with sanctions
for inmates: COMPASS” [ 141] despoiled the right to judge based on race and gender.
However, the Judge is still determining the causal veriﬁcation process and the program
used measured trade secrets.
4.6. XAI for Finance
Using AI tools includes asset management activities, improving customer service,
and obtaining investment advice in ﬁnancial services. However, AI tools also raise ques-
tions about fair lending and data security. The ﬁnancial sector is strictly regulated, and the
law requires credit institutions to make the right decisions. Therefore, when AI systems
are used in rating and loan models, the main challenge is making it more challenging to
provide the valid code lenders need. For instance, an explanation of why the borrower
was denied credit. Especially when the basis of the negation is the result of the opaque
ML algorithm, some credit organizations, such as Experian and Equifax, have carried out
valuable research projects to produce unconscious incentive codes to make it easier for
auditors to interpret and use XAI-based credit rating decisions [ 145]. Figure 7 presents the
role of XAI in ﬁnancial services, including natural language processing (NLP), cognitive
computing (CC), chatbot, anti-money laundering (AML) & Fraud detection, robot, cus-
tomer recommendations, algorithmic trading, robot advice and machine learning [ 146].
XAI is useful in understanding the decisions made by chatbots [ 147] since chatbots are
now being used in every ﬁeld of life to interact with customers, entertain requests and
respond to decisions. Authors in [ 148] used XAI to explain the role of AI in fraud detection.
The authors state that using AI-based systems in ﬁnance is risky due to its nature (Black
box). Therefore, XAI can be used to explain on what grounds did learning model made
this prediction.

==== Page 19 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 19 of 40
Natural Language
Processing 
AML & Fraud
detection
Chatbot
Cognitive  
Computing
Algorithmic  
TradingMachine  
LearningCustomer  
Recommendations  Robot  
Advise
XAI  
- 
Finance Service  
Figure 7. XAI in Financial Service.
Decision made by the AI model is challenging to understand due to the lack of logical
reasoning behind any decision made against a customer recommendation. Authors in [ 149]
used XAI and presented a case study to explain the model decision on customer recommen-
dations using random forest. Furthermore, XAI can be used in cognitive computing and
natural language processing. Authors in [ 150] use AI for cognitive computing for human
behavior analysis. Since AI makes decisions in a black box, explaining how ML predicts
human behavior is necessary. It is critical to understand what decision has been made
and how it was made. Natural language processing uses AI-based models for various
purposes, such as opinion mining, sentiment analysis, etc. XAI is useful here to explain
these analyses.
4.7. XAI for Digital Forensics
Authors in [ 151] emphasized the limitations of IT expertise in AI and automation, data
detection/retrieval, device classiﬁcation, network trafﬁc analysis, forensics, encrypted data
and programming in speciﬁc tools. Describing the applicability of AI in the reconstruction
of forensic and multimedia events for different DF examiners (commercial or personal),
each ﬁeld has different practicalities and applicability. For example, AI/ML can help detect
child pornography and other suspicious images. DF inspectors can use XAI to classify
images, protect their origin and avoid seeing too many objectionable images in these frames.
Alternatively, one can view the image/score similarity without displaying the image or
reading the default image description (generated by the XAI/ML algorithm).

==== Page 20 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 20 of 40
From the perspective of law enforcement, the use of XAI to support preliminary inves-
tigations may be restricted. Traditional ways of criminal forensics are changing dimensions
into more technology-oriented investigations [ 152]. DF police ofﬁcers emphasized that they
were theoretically unjudgmental and did not provide objective reports, but most of DF’s
analysis showed that the suspect had been arrested and executed.Ref. [ 152] proposed the
forensic analysis method to identify the communicating parties for suspecting communica-
tion for later generation and evaluation of the evidence. In this case, the investigator wants
the DF expert to recover the data from the targeted devices and submit it to the court in a
reportable format so that XAI can perform this operation automatically. Integrating XAI
into DF space is a real challenge, but XAI offers the prospect of solving older issues that
are increasingly challenging to solve. The increased amount of data essential for analysis,
the difﬁculty of IT crimes and the diversity of evidence slow the transfer of valuable DF
information, rely on data processing, and consume many resources.
4.8. XAI for Smart Grids
Smart grids combine advanced measurement, control, and communication technolo-
gies to collect large amounts of multidimensional data related to network performance. Due
to the rapid changes in advanced power systems, more scattered smart grid components
such as distributed energy, electric vehicles, telecommunications infrastructure and smart
metering infrastructure are tightly cohesive into advanced power systems [ 153]. These com-
ponents generate a large quantity of data to improve and automate smart grid performance
and support various applications such as network security [ 154], system prediction [ 155],
distributed generation control [ 156] and FD [ 157]. XAI technologies are gaining widespread
attention because traditional computing technologies cannot handle the large amounts of
data ﬂowing into smart grid systems. However, the application of AI technology in smart
grids is becoming more evident due to the many limitations of traditional technologies for
optimization, modeling, and control in data processing [ 158]. As these XAI technologies use
large amounts of data to further improve the performance of smart grids, much research is
being done to study these AI technologies and solve these problems.
4.9. XAI for Smart Governance
The continuous development exacerbates the government’s need to control the scale
and speed of AI and the increasing application of XAI in autonomous, robotics, and deadly
weapons systems. There are many research works on changing aspects of XAI, but the
management of XAI is underdeveloped. While new AI programs offer opportunities to
improve proﬁtability and quality of life, they can also have unintended consequences and
new forms of risk that need to be considered [ 159]. To maximize the beneﬁts of XAI while
mitigating risks, governments worldwide need to understand the depth and extent of
risk, the regulatory and governance processes to address these challenges, and the need
to design the structure. The autonomy of XAI solutions decreases human control over
these solutions, creating new problems for other people and human operators in terms of
liability and legal damages caused by AI. However, XAI depends heavily on ML to adapt
and learn its own rules, leaving humans out of control and only sometimes responsible for
intelligent behavior.
4.10. XAI for Smart Industry
Smart manufacturing and intelligent machines in today’s industry are being developed
with the help of AI, ML and big data exchange technologies [ 160,161]. Figure 8 presents
the role of XAI in Industry 4.0. In the smart Industry, manufacturing comprises data-
driven decision creation to improve current manufacturing processes and the latest robots
are used to solve complex problems increase [ 162–164]. With the IoT and other assistive
technologies, Industry 4.0 and 5.0 have a long way to go to support these latest trends,
but smart factories and smart manufacturing are picking up performance. Following
Industry 4.0 and 5.0, smart enterprises offer smarter solutions for predicting machine

==== Page 21 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 21 of 40
failures, safety, machine, and product failures, and suggestions for saving time and cost
for the smart work machines need to communicate quickly with other machines in the
manufacturing process. By introducing XAI technology into Industry 4.0 and 5.0, our
manufacturing industry can be strengthened and form a modern industrial cluster with a
resilient and dynamic ecosystem [165].
Predictive
Maintenance Predictive Ener gy
Analytics
Predictive Quality
Analytics 
Black Box Model
MES  
DataERP  
DataProcess  
DataIoT 
DataXAI Goals:Explain the reasoning
process of ML System
XAI Goals: Increase the users
confidence to the ML systemExplanation of ML decision with
global and local, model specific &
model agnostic, visual, textual, case-
based, counterfactual explanation
techniques XAI Model & InterfaceML  
Decisions 
Data Engineers &  
Scientist 
End Users
Figure 8. Role of XAI in Industry 4.0.
Table 3 presented the literature review of the XAI applications in smart cities in a
tabular form.
Table 3. XAI Application Summary of related works.
Ref DescriptionApplication Technical AspectSmart Transportation
Smart Industry
Smart Healthcare
Smart Governance
Aviation System
Intrusion Detection
Smart Grids
UA Vs and drones
IoT
Scalability
Dynamacity
Recursion
Adaptivity
Security
Privacy
Communication
Resource Management
[102]Proposed network slices for
identiﬁed V2X use cases:
autonomous driving, teleoperated
driving, vehicle infotainment,
remote diagnostic and management.X X
[128]The author described the status of
the smart healthcare system in
different ﬁelds and identiﬁed the
key technologies that can be
incorporated into smart healthcare.
The author also identiﬁed different
research problems in smart
healthcare and, in the end, proposed
solutions for these problems.X X X X

==== Page 22 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 22 of 40
Table 3. Cont.
Ref DescriptionApplication Technical AspectSmart Transportation
Smart Industry
Smart Healthcare
Smart Governance
Aviation System
Intrusion Detection
Smart Grids
UA Vs and drones
IoT
Scalability
Dynamacity
Recursion
Adaptivity
Security
Privacy
Communication
Resource Management
[130]Using XAI, the author proposed a
novel approach to achieve model
improvement, accountability,
result tracking and transparency in
the healthcare domain.X X X X
[129]The author describes
interpretability and the need for
interpretability in smart
health care.X X X
[137]For controlling self-driving
vehicles, the author proposed an
attention branch network.
The proposed network visually
presented and analyzed
self-driving decision-making
through an attention map.X X X
[138]The author introduced and
deﬁned the importance of timing
and explanations in AVs to
promote trust.X X X
[165]The author provided a detailed
overview of several aspects of Big
Data and AI in Industry 4.0,
particularly focused on speciﬁc
technologies, applications,
concepts, techniques, research
perspectives and challenges in
deploying Industry 5.0.X X X
[159]The author summarizes AI
concepts and presents why AI
Governance is gaining attention to
solve research challenges in
different ﬁelds.X X
[139]The author developed a prototype
tool, Logic and Explained Process
of AI Decisions, to validate and
verify aviation systems based
on AI.X X X X X

==== Page 23 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 23 of 40
Table 3. Cont.
Ref DescriptionApplication Technical AspectSmart Transportation
Smart Industry
Smart Healthcare
Smart Governance
Aviation System
Intrusion Detection
Smart Grids
UA Vs and drones
IoT
Scalability
Dynamacity
Recursion
Adaptivity
Security
Privacy
Communication
Resource Management
[140]The author developed a novel
model to automatically diagnose
an aviation system’s failure.
The developed model used the
data-driven technique with usage
data and maintenance data.X X X X X
[158]The research survey reviewed
common AI approaches used in
security problems, load
forecasting, faults detection,
power grid stability assessment in
the power systems and smart grid.X X X X X
[154]The study aims to design and
develop a scalable IDS for smart
grids. The developed model will
differentiate between a
disturbance and an actual
cyber attack.X X X X X
[1]The study surveys future smart
cities, their requirements,
emerging technologies,
Applications, challenges
and future aspects.X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
[166]The study focused on developing
human-centered smart cities. They
also focused on critical analysis of
smart city security, data
management, and ethical
challenges.X X X X X X X X X X X X
[167]The study focused on AI and
XAI-based methods adopted in
the Industry 4.0 scenarios.X X X X X X X X
5. Open Issues and Research Challenges
Machine learning’s decision explainability has been one of the important research areas
in recent years in smart cities. According to some XAI researchers, the understandability
of models for reliability is essential. Meanwhile, some believe that explainability is not
required in reality for every purpose because human reasoning is considered a black
box [ 168]. For example, in the daily life activities of smart cities, someone would be
more interested in why a loan was approved than a doctor who prefers a speciﬁc medical
treatment. A recent real-life application where explainability is a crucial need is as detection
of COVID patients [ 169]. Either the individual is COVID-positive or negative. Since it is a
crucial decision to be made by the model, an explanation is required on which parameter
this model predicts the patient COVID positive or negative. Despite the disagreement,
both sides of XAI agree that understandable models are critical in regulated areas. It is

==== Page 24 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 24 of 40
possible to achieve global model behavior using Bayesian rule learning (BRL) or a simple
decision tree. There are no variations in approach for the rule or the tree itself. Decision
trees must have a high level of understanding to make lay users understand the reason
for a prediction. Decision trees identify relationships when the model learns only a few
signiﬁcant features. A decision tree maintains a preferred situation requiring little training.
As a result, both rule and decision trees have reproducibility properties and can be referred
to as human-simulatable [170].
A wide selection of training models can allow the users to guess correctly. For “lay
users,” the explanation generation methods such as Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs) do
not possess signiﬁcant importance. Meanwhile, model evaluation based on features can be
roughly approximated when knowledge of relevant techniques is absent among the users.
Therefore, LIME and SHAP were applied regarding local surrogate explanations. Both of
them follow a similar approach to explanation, and there is no real difference among users
except for the actual graphical representation. This results in marginal differences among
the values for single features.
The users likely focus on the most signiﬁcant contributions and general direction, so
the underlying methods are unimportant. The literature mentions feature reduction meth-
ods when explainability comes to light, in particular, [ 171]. However, in explainability, one
needs to be careful with dimension reduction approaches as they can conceal explainability.
The importance of preprocessing data can be accepted due to the more understandable
model that may result. Whether the aim is to achieve accuracy or interpretability for the
model, considering the quality of the input data for the model is always a good practice.
As various explainability approaches are illustrated, it becomes evident that the intrinsic
quality of explanations also tends to experience an inﬂuence from what was done by [ 172].
Numerous explanations consider feature importance, giving statisticians an intuitive sense,
but a “lay user” would unlikely comprehend the process. This is one of many problems.
Many other things need to be done in the future.
5.1. Black-Box versus Interpretable Models—Reconsideration of the Problem from the Beginning
Before training models to address the smart cities problem, one should address what
is being sought and whether there is a real need for a black-box model. According to [ 168],
it is a problem that the ﬁeld of XAI is exploding with research into prediction models for
precise decisions. They argued that the accuracy of black-box models is worth considering
in building interpretable models. Hence, there is a signiﬁcant gap (i.e., lack of under-
standability, comprehensibility, explainability and transparency) in the literature regarding
competing black boxes and an interpretable model. It is worth exploring if there would
still be a need to use interpretable models when proven to be as reliable as a black box.
5.2. Comparison and Measuring of Explainability
This research establishes that standard measurement, quantiﬁcation, and comparison
procedures for enhancing approaches to explainability need to be developed to make
smart cities reliable. Such procedures can then enable researchers to compare different
approaches. However, despite some research work, there remains a massive gap (i.e.,
trustworthiness) in the standardized procedure to be covered in future studies. Evaluation
measures such as accuracy, recall and F1-score are required to evaluate the classiﬁer’s
performance. It is important to emphasize that there is a need for similar metrics to
evaluate explainability. According to authors in [ 173], XAI can be evaluated based on the
four measures. The ﬁrst difference between the explanation’s logic and the agent’s actual
performance is the number of rules resulting from the explanation, the number of features
used to generate that explanation and the stability of the explanation [173].
5.3. Enhancement of Explanations with Ontologies
Combining explanations with ontologies presents another area of exploration for
future research. Enhancement of explanations with ontologies is a challenge for future

==== Page 25 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 25 of 40
studies that can work on practical use cases to expand the current XAI research. Addition-
ally, various case studies can be presented to investigate the advantages (i.e., reasoning)
associated with the combination of ontologies [174].
5.4. Trusting Machine Learning Models
Several issues and questions still need to be addressed despite extensive exploration.
What if trust and explainability are missing while measuring both within a model? Are there
potential smart city scenarios for raising trust in the model? Can more trust be offered just in
time in a real-time smart city environment? There is a signiﬁcant gap in this ﬁeld, especially
in user-centered experiments, that future researchers can ﬁll. A quantitative measure exists
in the literature for measuring trust in ML decisions [ 175]. Two methods were studied in the
experiment of [ 176]. These methods are LIME, a black-box method, and COVAR, a glass-
box method. According to their ﬁndings, COVAR gave more interpretable explanations
than the others. The simple method’s usefulness was highlighted in this regard. As per [ 35],
to pursue meaningful progress in this area, exploring what explainability is, in reality, is
vital for addressing the root of the problem.
5.5. User Training on Explainability Features Explicitly
The literature on algorithmic solving of explainability problems is a challenge for stake-
holders in smart cities. There remains a gap in giving attention to user-based studies due
to their relevance to real-world problems. Though few studies exist on user experiments,
there remains room for more experiments to give the topic holistic coverage addressing all
aspects by determining the differences between the participant’s prediction and prediction
of the model; [ 177] measured trust in this regard. For example, in smart cities, housing
prices can be predicted [ 178]. Similarly, the study was conducted for users trusting the
prediction model in [ 179]. Authors in [ 180] evaluated three types of explanation approaches
based on user trust using a within-subject design. Ref. [ 181] measured the frequency of
revising predictions to match them with the self-reported trust levels and model predic-
tions. Similarly, a user study can be found in [ 182] research where human-interpretable
explanations were studied as properties of explanations were varied systematically.
The impact of these variations was seen in various tasks’ performance. These tasks
include simulation of the response from the system, veriﬁcation of the suggested response
and counterfactual queries showing low accuracy. The difference between persuasive
and descriptive explanation generation tasks was studied by [ 183]. While persuasive
explanations added user preferences, cognitive functions and expertise, the other types
only described explanations within features created by an explainable approach.
5.6. Visualization
After a complete XAI-based system overview, the subsequent issue is how to present
the system’s decision to the end-users and proper explainability, which is still a big chal-
lenge for researchers. Most end-users in smart cities are a layman. They need simple
explanations of all smart city decisions. Therefore, visualization is one more problem for
those considering implementing XAI systems. Research communities must balance the
transparency and secrecy that target user groups need to maintain their users’ trust and
the security of their conﬁdential data by using privacy preservation techniques such as
federated learning.
5.7. Security and Assurance
With the advancement of AI technology, the protection of smart cities-based au-
tonomous systems has become a signiﬁcant challenge since a cyberattack can disrupt them.
An important application of smart cities is the need to drive self-driving cars worldwide,
whether commercial or military, to ensure self-driving. The idea of using XAI to ensure
vehicle operational autonomy while monitoring system security is an important area of
research. An XAI-based system monitoring framework is required to ensure the natural

==== Page 26 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 26 of 40
autonomy of autonomous systems and the security status of computer and sensor data.
Extracting information from the systems used to explain navigation autonomy is also an
important future area for research. The newly developed security monitor should assist
autonomous navigation in decision-making during an attack. The new framework should
enable an XAI-Monitor to explain its capability to ﬁnd unproductive or false decisions
generated by autonomous systems and ﬁnd cybersecurity barriers that lead to unexpected
navigation [184].
5.8. Privacy
Nowadays, privacy is a signiﬁcant concern and a challenge for all stakeholders of
smart cities. The following are some examples of how privacy can be violated. The authors
of [1] show that smart homes in a smart city environment are a growing market that
requires privacy sensors and reliable, interpretable, and explainable control systems. AI’s
recent advancement has been integrated into all aspects of human life, including the home,
and is becoming increasingly resilient. This rise in AI has sparked mutual concern about
the impact of conﬁdentiality and resilience in adopting various sensors, such as home
cameras. AI explainability and transparency are becoming more responsive as a result.
Despite their high accuracy, current black-box AI models could be more trustworthy due
to ambiguous solutions. XAI requires a short-range radar sensor with privacy protection
and an intuitive AI system to solve privacy issues and organize gestures indoors in a
smart home environment. Many traditional encryption concepts and products can be
modiﬁed and reused to ensure the conﬁdentiality and security of scenarios such as smart
homes [ 185]. XAI is needed to ensure that the AI system adheres to privacy policies deﬁned
by organizations such as EU GDPR, etc.
6. Ongoing XAI Projects for Smart Cities
This section presents some of the key research projects in the context of XAI and their
relevance to smart city applications and technologies.
6.1. European Union (EU) Projects
EU has several funding programs and projects in the context of XAI.
SPATIAL
Security and Privacy Accountable Technology Innovations, Algorithms and Machine
Learning (SPATIAL) [ 186] is an EU-funded project under the Horizon 2020 (H2020) funding
framework. The SPATIAL project focuses on developing accountable, resilient, and trust-
worthy AI-based security and privacy-preserving methods for future ICT systems. Thus,
the SPATIAL project focuses on using XAI to ensure the security and privacy of the 5G and
6G networks. Several beyond 5G and 6G use cases are considered in this project.
XAI
The Explanation of AI for decision making (XAI) [ 187] project is an EU-funded project
under the H2020 European Research Council (ERC) funding framework. XAI project
aims to construct useful explanations of opaque AI/ML systems using a local-to-global
framework to offer a black-box explanation. Moreover, the project will focus on developing
an explanation infrastructure that can benchmark AI methods’ explainability. The XAI
project considers use cases such as health and fraud detection to introduce an explanation-
by-design approach.
NL4XAI
Interactive Natural Language Technology for XAI (NL4XAI) [ 188] is an EU-funded
project under the H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie funding European Training Networks
(ETN) framework. NL4XAI makes AI self-explanatory by utilizing natural language
generation and processing, argumentation technology, and interactive technology for XAI

==== Page 27 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 27 of 40
systems. Moreover, the project focuses on training 11 Early-Stage Researchers (ESRs) in the
domain of XAI.
XMANAI
Explainable Manufacturing Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XMANAI) [ 189] is an EU-funded
project under the H2020 funding framework. XMANAI applies XAI for manufacturing by
promoting the concept that “our AI is only as good as we are.” To demonstrate the beneﬁts
of using xAI for manufacturing, XMANAI considers four real-life pilot use cases at CNH
Industrial, Ford, UNIMETRIK, and Whirlpool plants.
DEEPCUBE
XAI Pipelines for Big Copernicus Data (DEEPCUBE) [ 190] is a EU funded project under
the H2020 funding framework. European Union’s Earth observation program manages
Copernicus Space Programme [ 191], which observes the earth and its environment. It
collects a great amount of data and DEEPCUBE aims to analyze the big Copernicus data by
utilizing AI technologies efﬁciently.
AI4EU
In 2019, the AI4EU [ 192] project was started to build the ﬁrst European AI on-demand
platform to share AI resources developed by EU-funded projects. AI4EU is also an EU-
funded project under the H2020 funding framework. AI4EU focuses on ﬁve main intercon-
nected AI domains, i.e., XAI, Collaborative AI, Physical AI, Integrative AI and Veriﬁable AI.
Moreover, AI4EU is developing a comprehensive strategic AI research innovation agenda
for Europe.
Research activities in ﬁve key interconnected AI scientiﬁc areas (XAI, Physical AI,
Veriﬁable AI, Collaborative AI, Integrative AI), which arise from the application of AI in
real-world scenarios;
STAR-AI
Safe and Trusted Human Centric Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Future Manufacturing Lines
(STAR) [ 193] project is an EU-funded project under the H2020 funding framework. It
focuses on implementing secure, safe, reliable, and trusted human-centric AI systems
in manufacturing environments. In the STAR project, XAI boosts the transparency of
manufacturing-related AI systems to improve user trust in AI systems. In this regard,
the STAR-AI project focuses on three main use cases, i.e., human–robot collaboration for
robust quality inspection, human-centered AI for agile manufacturing 4.0 and human
behavior prediction, and safe zone detection for routing.
FeatureCloud
FeatureCloud project [ 194] aims to integrate security-by-design and privacy-by-
architecture concepts on medical health systems to reduce the possibility of cybercrime
and facilitate safe cross-border collaborative data-mining efforts. It is got funded project
under the H2020 funding framework. FeatureCloud integrates blockchain and federated
learning techniques to eliminate sharing sensitive mining data via any communication
channels and centralized data storage. Moreover, the FeatureCloud project incorporates
“supervised machine learning” with XAI to improve compatibility with legal considerations
and international policies.
GECKO
Building Greener and more sustainable societies by ﬁlling the Knowledge gap in
social science and engineering to enable responsible artiﬁcial intelligence co-creation
(GECKO) [ 195] is an EU-funded project under the H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie funding
European Training Networks (ETN) framework. GECKO contributes to developing Ac-
countable, Responsible, and Transparent AI (ART AI) designs considering technological,

==== Page 28 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 28 of 40
ethical, and social science angles to support the European green deal ambition. The GECKO
project focuses on training 15 Early-Stage Researchers (ESRs) who will explore interpretabil-
ity and XAI models to mitigate unintentionally harmful and poorly designed AI models.
6.2. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARP A) Projects
In 2016, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Information Inno-
vation Ofﬁce (I2O) launched the XAI program (Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
https://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artiﬁcial-intelligence). Under this program,
DARPA has funded several projects focusing on different aspects of XAI.
6.2.1. Driving-X
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and the
University of Amsterdam. This project focuses on using XAI for self-driving vehicles to
improve user acceptance.
6.2.2. Retrieval: Saliency Driven Retrieval
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB). This project
focuses on using XAI to improve the accuracy of exemplar-based image retrieval.
6.2.3. RISE: High-Fidelity Salience for Black-Box Networks
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on high-ﬁdelity saliency maps to indicate each pixel level’s
salient for the model’s prediction, mainly for black-box models.
6.2.4. Rollouts: Informative Rollouts and the Critical States
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB). This project
focuses on explaining a robot’s policy and how that robot acts in different scenarios to offer
safe and comfortable human–robot interaction.
6.2.5. SNMN: Transparent Multi-Step Reasoning with Stack Neural Module Networks
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on reasoning procedures in the UCB-developed SNMN
model-generated explanations. It studies how this SNMN model improves users’ satisfac-
tion with the explanation and improves truthful beliefs about the model’s behavior.
6.2.6. StarCraft: Heterogeneous Hierarchical Policies
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on developing an AI model to play the StarCraft II game.
This AI model should be capable of automatically explaining its behavior.
6.2.7. Textual: Textual Justiﬁcation with Grounding
This project is run by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and the University of
Amsterdam. This project combines explanation language generation and natural language
grounding models to provide textual output to explain the image classiﬁcation.
6.2.8. CAMEL: Causal Models to Explain Learning
This project (CAMEL https://cra.com/projects/camel/) is run by Charles River An-
alytics, the University of Massachusetts and Brown University. And develops Causal
Models to Explain Learning (CAMEL) which offer humans understandable and trusted
explanations based on causality to manage machine learning (ML) techniques of AI systems.

==== Page 29 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 29 of 40
6.2.9. Learning and Communicating Explainable Representations for Analytics
and Autonomy
This project is run by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Oregon State
University and Michigan State University and develops an XAI framework for multi-model
analytics and autonomous recognition, reasoning, and planning domains.
6.2.10. xACT: Explanation-Informed Acceptance Testing of Deep Adaptive Programs
This project is run by Oregon State University (OSU). This project develops a new
paradigm of explanation-informed acceptance testing (xACT) tools that can observe and
evaluate machine-learned systems’ behavior and explain the decisions leading to
that behavior.
6.2.11. COmmon Ground Learning and Explanation (COGLE)
This project (COGLE https://www.marksteﬁk.com/?page_id=2262) is run by Palo
Alto Research Center, Inc. (PARC), Carnegie Mellon University, Florida Institute for Human
and Machine Cognition and the United States Military Academy. This project develops
an interactive sense-making system called COGLE (COmmon Ground Learning and Ex-
planation). The COGLE system can explain the learned performance capabilities of an
autonomous system.
6.2.12. XAI for Assisting Data Scientists
This project is run by Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and experimentally analyzes
the effectiveness of the XAI system in debugging standard ML models.
6.2.13. Deep Attentional Representations for Explanations (DARE)
This project is run by SRI International, the University of Toronto and the University
of California, San Diego, and focuses on augmenting several explainable deep learning
models to enable multiple modes of explanation to improve accuracy.
6.2.14. Explainable Question Answering System (EQUAS)
This project (https://www.raytheonintelligenceandspace.com/news/feature/trust-
machine) is run by Raytheon BBN Technologies (Raytheon BBN), Georgia Tech Research
Corporation, the University of Texas Austin and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
This project develops a new Explainable Question Answering System (EQUAS) based
on pedagogical and argumentation theories. It can analyze the important explanation
elements, the behavior of explanation space, and user expectations. The above two theories
help deﬁne the foundation of EQUAS “explanation space,” which provides analytics,
visualization, cases and rejected alternatives.
6.2.15. Tractable Probabilistic Logic Models: A New Deep Explainable Representation
This project (https://www.eng.uﬂ.edu/ai-university/research/tractable-probabilistic-
logic-models-a-new-deep-explainable-representation/) is conducted by The University
of Texas at Dallas (UTD), University of California, Los Angeles, the University of Florida
and Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. It studies new explainable systems for fake news
detection and videos’ automatic action and object detection. These systems can explain the
reasons for produced results.
6.2.16. Transforming Deep Learning to Harness the Interpretability of Shallow Models: An
Interactive End-to-End System
This project is conducted by Texas A&M University (TAMU) and the University of
Florida and develops and analyzes an explainable system named XFake, on fake news
detection. This is an XFake system with three different frameworks, i.e., MIMIC, ATTN,
and PERT, which can analyze the news from different perspectives.

==== Page 30 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 30 of 40
6.2.17. Model Explanation by Optimal Selection of Teaching Examples
This project is conducted by Rutgers University and analyzes the Explanation-by-
Examples system to improve the user understanding of the inference of black-box machine
learning models.
6.3. Other Projects
In South Korea, the XAI Center [ 196] is focusing on developing XAI models by devel-
oping new or modiﬁed ML techniques. This XAI center aims to support research projects
that use XAI to offer sufﬁcient human-understandable explanations about the results and
decision-making ML model. In this regard, the XAI center primarily focuses on to Med-
ical and Financial industry, where adaptation of AI is a high risk without explainability.
Moreover, the Austrian Science Fund has funded a project titled “Reference Model of XAI
for the Medical Domain” (https://www.aholzinger.at/austrian-science-fund-project-on-
explainability-granted/).
The Christ-Era organization had a funding call on Explainable Machine Learning-
based Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) (https://www.chistera.eu/projects-call-2019). It has
funded 12 projects in different domains, including digital medicine, robotics,
and manufacturing.
7. Lessons Learned, Future Development, and Direction of XAI in Smart Cities
This section discusses the lessons learned from surveying the state-of-the-art in XAI
for smart cities. Based on the detailed analysis, it synthesizes future research directions to
enable XAI for smart cities.
7.1. Security Issues of XAI for Smart Cities
From the above discussion, it can be found that XAI has the potential to revolutionize
smart cities by rendering justiﬁcation/explanation to the decision-makers/governments,
through which better decisions can be made. However, due to the sensitive nature of the
data generated from smart cities, the deployment of XAI-integrated smart cities applications
will face critical security issues, such as authentication and authorization, integrity, 24 7
availability, and monitoring and audit of explanatory and interpretable processes [ 197].
The security challenges faced by the applications of XAI-enabled smart cities, along with
the possible solutions, are discussed below:
7.1.1. Authentication and Authorization
Several stakeholders, such as intelligent agents, sensing nodes, IoT sensor nodes,
and machines involved in smart cities, should be authenticated and authorized to ensure
that they do not misuse or expose the AI model to malicious users. If the details of the
training of AI models are exposed, malicious users can tamper with the training data to
change the decision of AI models. To address these issues, blockchain can be used in smart
city applications to ensure that the stakeholders participating in smart city applications are
authentic [198].
7.1.2. Integrity
Integrity is a signiﬁcant concern in XAI-integrated smart city applications due to real-
time data monitoring and decision-making based on the explainability and interpretability
of LIME, SHAP , and Grad-CAM methodologies. Furthermore, emergency notiﬁcations,
such as making decisions about a patient’s health diseases, are sent over third-party
networks that demand a secure and ﬂawless communication channel [ 199]. Blockchain and
federated learning can be used in smart city applications to preserve integrity. Even the
combination of these two techniques can be used to preserve integrity [200].

==== Page 31 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 31 of 40
7.1.3. 24 7 Availability
The availability and access of real-time and near-real-time data and XAI-based decision-
making of smart city applications such as targeted healthcare, connected restaurants, con-
nected cars and smart manufacturing are paramount. Furthermore, performing pervasive
computing and providing robust real-time decisions in smart city applications is chal-
lenging and demands high-performance computing-intensive applications. To provide
247availability, devices with long battery life and a lightweight machine learning model
may be introduced. Furthermore, dead devices or sensor nodes can be identiﬁed by their
readings using machine learning to keep the system up and running [1].
7.1.4. Monitoring and Audit
The XAI integrated smart cities applications demand regular monitoring and main-
tenance of all the smart city stakeholders using audit-log management and preventive
maintenance mechanisms [ 197]. To address this issue, AI-based auditing can be performed
where data is acquired from smart devices. Two types of auditing/forensics can be per-
formed: software-based and hardware-based [ 201]. Data is acquired in two modes in
software-based auditing: root and no root mode. In rooting mode, most of the data can be
acquired. However, in non-rooting mode, data loss can occur due to required permissions.
Various approaches, such as “JTGA” and “chip-off,” can be used in the hardware-based
acquisition. However, it can result in permanent device damage. After data acquisition, AI
is applied to classify or predict any output labels [201].
7.2. Ethical and Privacy Issues of XAI for Smart Cities
All the applications of smart cities depend on various AI algorithms and methodolo-
gies such as reinforcement learning, collaborative and networking nodes, conﬁdential data
and logs [ 202]. So it is essential to maintain the conﬁdentiality of various smart city stake-
holders. Therefore, an XAI-integrated blockchain framework must ensure stakeholders’
data and controlled information exchange over a third-party network. The XAI-integrated
smart cities applications overcome the disadvantages of black-box AI systems, such as
lack of transparency and trust; however, the XAI-integrated smart cities applications need
solutions for issues such as unreasonableness and injustice.
Unreasonableness and Injustice
The XAI-integrated smart city applications can make decisions based on data availabil-
ity. However, as the decisions are based on AI systems, it is challenging to conﬁrm that they
are fair and non-biased [ 203]. As a solution, XAI can ensure that the AI system provides
enough explanation about how a model made a decision and can be evaluated using the
difference between the logic and the models’ actual performance, the number of rules
resulting from the explanation, the number of features used to generate that explanation
and the stability of the explanation. The decisions made using XAI integrated smart cities
applications and systems should be evaluated based on ethical and moral behaviors [68].
7.3. Scalability
Scalability is a cardinal feature in assessing any system’s performance and through-
put [ 202]. The dynamic XAI integrated smart city system functions are based on machines,
various AI algorithms and methodologies, sensing data, and third-party networks. It
is important to ensure ﬂexibility and responsiveness among various collaborative and
networking nodes and AI methodologies. In the future, XAI architecture can be combined
with Responsive AI to achieve scalability in smart city applications and systems [204].
7.4. Regulatory Compliance for Implementing XAI for Smart Cities
Regulatory compliance means formulating guidelines, regulations and laws [ 205].
Formulating appropriate rules and regulations is essential to avoid misuse of the latest
technologies, such as XAI. Furthermore, smart city applications and systems blend the latest

==== Page 32 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 32 of 40
technologies, such as Blockchain, computer vision, IoT, Big data, etc. Such diverse applica-
tions and systems need to formulate legal policies and compliance regulations to protect
smart city applications and systems from fraud, misuse, malfunctioning, and manipulation.
7.5. Standard Speciﬁcations for Implementing XAI for Smart Cities
Standards speciﬁcations are documents that describe a set of rules and conditions.
Therefore, publishing standard speciﬁcations and documents for using technologies such
as XAI is important. Setting high standards for the usage of XAI for smart cities is crucial in
a manner that will lessen vagueness and increase robustness and could assist in enhancing
living/working understanding, advanced transportation [ 206,207], and quicker availability
of enough information for informed decision making [ 208,209]. Furthermore, it is also
essential to make the stakeholders of smart cities aware of various standards and policies
for implementing XAI for smart cities applications and systems.
8. Conclusions
This paper comprehensively surveyed recent and future developments in XAI for
smart cities. This paper envisaged the societal, industrial, and technological trends consid-
ering the 2030 vision. Previous studies have given more focus to XAI applications for smart
cities. This study discussed the concept of XAI for smart cities: various XAI technology
use cases, challenges, applications, and possible alternative solutions. The paper discussed
concise deﬁnitions and key technologies of XAI and its explanation using various smart
city-driven use cases to assist readers. The paper also highlighted ongoing smart city-
driven XAI projects, standardized practices, applications, alternative solutions, and future
developments focusing on developing XAI for smart cities. In the end, the paper discussed
security, privacy, and ethical issues and regular compliance for implementing XAI in smart
cities and provided a roadmap for future research directions. In the future, It is intended to
extend this research to the combination of XAI and recent security frameworks for future
smart cities.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization,A.R.J.; methodology, A.R.J. and W.A.; validation, P .K.R.M.
and S.P .; formal analysis, A.R.J. and T.R.G.; writing—original draft preparation, A.R.J., T.R.G., W.A.;
writing—review and editing, M.A., S.P . and P .K.R.M.; supervision, W.A. and M.A. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: No external funding is required for this study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors share no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Javed, A.R.; Shahzad, F.; ur Rehman, S.; Zikria, Y.B.; Razzak, I.; Jalil, Z.; Xu, G. Future smart cities requirements, emerging
technologies, applications, challenges and future aspects. Cities 2022 ,129, 103794. [CrossRef]
2. Pandya, S.; Srivastava, G.; Jhaveri, R.; Babu, S. P .; Bhattacharya, S.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Mastorakis, S.; Piran, M.J.; Gadekallu, T.R.
Federated learning for smart cities: A comprehensive survey. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 2023 ,55, 102987. [CrossRef]
3. Javed, A.R.; Faheem, R.; Asim, M.; Baker, T.; Beg, M.O. A smartphone sensors-based personalized human activity recognition
system for sustainable smart cities. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021 ,71, 102970. [CrossRef]
4. Javed, A.R.; Fahad, L.G.; Farhan, A.A.; Abbas, S.; Srivastava, G.; Parizi, R.M.; Khan, M.S. Automated cognitive health assessment
in smart homes using machine learning. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021 ,65, 102572. [CrossRef]
5. Sajid, F.; Javed, A.R.; Basharat, A.; Kryvinska, N.; Afzal, A.; Rizwan, M. An Efﬁcient Deep Learning Framework for Distracted
Driver Detection. IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 169270–169280. [CrossRef]
6. Shabbir, A.; Shabir, M.; Javed, A.R.; Chakraborty, C.; Rizwan, M. Suspicious transaction detection in banking cyber–physical
systems. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2022 ,97, 107596. [CrossRef]

==== Page 33 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 33 of 40
7. Fayyaz, M.; Farhan, A.A.; Javed, A.R. Thermal Comfort Model for HVAC Buildings Using Machine Learning. Arab. J. Sci. Eng.
2022 ,47, 2045–2060. [CrossRef]
8. Osheroff, J.A.; Teich, W. A.; Middleton, B.; Steen, E.B.; Wright, A.; Detmer, D.E. A roadmap for national action on clinical decision
support. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2007 ,14, 141–145. [CrossRef]
9. Sutton, R.T.; Pincock, D.; Baumgart, D.C.; Sadowski, D.C.; Fedorak, R.N.; Kroeker, K.I. An overview of clinical decision support
systems: Beneﬁts, risks, and strategies for success. NPJ Digit. Med. 2020 ,3, 1–10. [CrossRef]
10. Obermeyer, Z.; Emanuel, E.J. Predicting the future—Big data, machine learning and clinical medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016 ,
375, 1216. [CrossRef]
11. Vucenovic, A.; Ali-Ozkan, O.; Ekwempe, C.; Eren, O. Explainable AI in Decision Support Systems: A Case Study: Predicting
Hospital Readmission within 30 Days of Discharge. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering (CCECE), London, OT, Canada, 30 August–2 September 2020; pp. 1–4 .
12. Yenduri, G.; Gadekallu, T.R. XAI for Maintainability Prediction of Software-Deﬁned Networks. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking, Kharagpur, India, 4–7 January 2023; pp. 402–406.
13. Thakker, D.; Mishra, B.K.; Abdullatif, A.; Mazumdar, S.; Simpson, S. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Developing Smart
Cities Solutions. Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 1353–1382. [CrossRef]
14. Adadi, A.; Berrada, M. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access 2018 ,
6, 52138–52160. [CrossRef]
15. Tjoa, E.; Guan, C. A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Toward medical xai. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.
2020 ,32, 4793–4813. [CrossRef]
16. Arrieta , A.B.; Díaz-Rodríguez, N.; Del Ser, J.; Bennetot, A.; Tabik, S.; Barbado, A.; García, S.; Gil-López, S.; Molina, D.; Benjamins,
R.; et al. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Inf.
Fusion 2020 ,58, 82–115. [CrossRef]
17. Vassiliades, A.; Bassiliades, N.; Patkos, T. Argumentation and explainable artiﬁcial intelligence: A survey. Knowl. Eng. Rev. 2021 ,
36, e5. [CrossRef]
18. Mohseni, S.; Zarei, N.; Ragan, E.D. A multidisciplinary survey and framework for design and evaluation of explainable AI
systems. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. (TiiS) 2021 ,11, 1–45. [CrossRef]
19. Ferreira, J.J.; Monteiro, M.S. What are people doing about XAI user experience? A survey on AI explainability research and
practice. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Copenhagen, Denmark, 19–24 July
2020; pp. 56–73.
20. ˇCyras, K.; Rago, A.; Albini, E.; Baroni, P .; Toni, F. Argumentative XAI: A Survey. arXiv 2021 , preprint. arXiv:2105.11266.
21. Poceviˇ ci ¯ut˙e, M.; Eilertsen, G.; Lundström, C. Survey of XAI in digital pathology. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning for
Digital Pathology ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020; pp. 56–88.
22. Qian, K.; Danilevsky, M.; Katsis, Y.; Kawas, B.; Oduor, E.; Popa, L.; Li, Y. XNLP: A Living Survey for XAI Research in Natural
Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, College Station, TX,
USA, 14–17 April 2021; pp. 78–80.
23. Ehsan, U.; Wintersberger, P .; Liao, Q.V .; Mara, M.; Streit, M.; Wachter, S.; Riener, A.; Riedl, M.O. Operationalizing Human-Centered
Perspectives in Explainable AI. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Yokohama, Japan, 8–13 May 2021; pp. 1–6.
24. Rai, A. Explainable AI: From black box to glass box. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2020 ,48, 137–141. [CrossRef]
25. Bengio, Y.; Lecun, Y.; Hinton, G. Deep learning for AI. Commun. ACM 2021 ,64, 58–65. [CrossRef]
26. Liaw, A.; Wiener, M. Classiﬁcation and regression by randomForest. R News . 2002. December 2002.
27. Chen, R.C.; Caraka, R.E.; Arnita, N.E.G.; Pomalingo, S.; Rachman, A.; Toharudin, T.; Tai, A.R.J.; Pardamean, B. An end to end of
scalable tree boosting system. Sylwan 2020 ,165, 1–11.
28. Livieris, I.E.; Pintelas, E.; Stavroyiannis, S.; Pintelas, P . Ensemble deep learning models for forecasting cryptocurrency time-series.
Algorithms 2020 ,13, 121. [CrossRef]
29. Linardatos, P .; Papastefanopoulos, V .; Kotsiantis, S. Explainable AI: A review of machine learning interpretability methods.
Entropy 2021 ,23, 18. [CrossRef]
30. Hase, P .; Bansal, M. Evaluating explainable AI: Which algorithmic explanations help users predict model behavior? arXiv 2020 ,
preprint. arXiv:2005.01831.
31. Montavon, G.; Samek, W.; Müller, K.R. Methods for interpreting and understanding deep neural networks. Digital Signal
Processing 2018 ,73, 1–15. [CrossRef]
32. Gleicher, M. A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling. Big Data 2016 ,4, 75–88. [CrossRef]
33. Fernandez, A.; Herrera, F.; Cordon, O.; del Jesus, M.J.; Marcelloni, F. Evolutionary fuzzy systems for explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence: Why, when, what for and where to? IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag. 2019 ,14, 69–81. [CrossRef]
34. Guidotti, R.; Monreale, A.; Ruggieri, S.; Turini, F.; Giannotti, F.; Pedreschi, D. A survey of methods for explaining black box
models. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2018 ,51, 1–42. [CrossRef]
35. Lipton, Z.C. The Mythos of Model Interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and
slippery. Queue 2018 ,16, 31–57. [CrossRef]

==== Page 34 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 34 of 40
36. Islam, S.R.; Eberle, W.; Ghafoor, A.R.J.; Ahmed, M. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approaches: A Survey. arXiv 2021 , preprint.
arXiv:2101.09429.
37. Sokol, K.; Flach, P . Explainability fact sheets: A framework for systematic assessment of explainable approaches. In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, Barcelona, Spain, 27–30 January 2020; pp. 56–67.
38. Schneider, J.; Handali, J. Personalized explanation in machine learning: A conceptualization. arXiv 2019 , preprint.
arXiv:1901.00770.
39. Rudin, C. Please stop explaining black box models for high stakes decisions. STAT 2018 ,1050 , 26.
40. Diez-Olivan, A.; Del Ser, J.; Galar, D.; Sierra, B. Data fusion and machine learning for industrial prognosis: Trends and perspectives
towards Industry 4.0. Inf. Fusion 2019 ,50, 92–111. [CrossRef]
41. Guo, J.; Ding, X.; Wu, W. A blockchain-enabled ecosystem for distributed electricity trading in smart city. IEEE Internet Things J.
2020 ,8, 2040–2050. [CrossRef]
42. Li, M.; Tang, H.; Hussein, A.R.; Wang, X. A sidechain-based decentralized authentication scheme via optimized two-way peg
protocol for smart community. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2020 ,1, 282–292. [CrossRef]
43. Bhattacharya, S.; Somayaji, S.R.K.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Alazab, M.; Maddikunta, P .K.R. A review on deep learning for future smart
cities. Internet Technol. Lett. 2022 ,5, e187. [CrossRef]
44. Alazab, M.; Lakshmanna, K.; Reddy, T.; Pham, Q.V .; Maddikunta, P .K.R. Multi-objective cluster head selection using ﬁtness
averaged rider optimization algorithm for IoT networks in smart cities. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 2021 ,43, 100973.
[CrossRef]
45. Ghayvat, H.; Awais, M.; Gope, P .; Pandya, S.; Majumdar, S. Recognizing suspect and predicting the spread of contagion based
on mobile phone location data (counteract): A system of identifying covid-19 infectious and hazardous sites, detecting disease
outbreaks based on the internet of things, edge computing and artiﬁcial intelligence. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021 ,69, 102798.
46. Pandya, S.; Ghayvat, H. Ambient acoustic event assistive framework for identiﬁcation, detection and recognition of unknown
acoustic events of a residence. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2021 ,47, 101238. [CrossRef]
47. Zhang, S.; Li, X.; Zong, M.; Zhu, X.; Wang, R. Efﬁcient kNN classiﬁcation with different numbers of nearest neighbors. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2017 ,29, 1774–1785. [CrossRef]
48. Garg, D.; Goel, P .; Pandya, S.; Ganatra, A.; Kotecha, K. A deep learning approach for face detection using YOLO. In Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE Punecon, Pune, India, 30 November–2 December 2018; pp. 1–4.
49. Sharma, P .K.; Kumar, N.; Park, J.H. Blockchain-based distributed framework for automotive industry in a smart city. IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform. 2018 ,15, 4197–4205. [CrossRef]
50. Liu, J.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, Q. A Weight Initialization Method Based on Neural Network with Asymmetric Activation Function.
Neurocomputing 2022 ,438, 171–182. [CrossRef]
51. Gai, K.; Guo, J.; Zhu, L.; Yu, S. Blockchain meets cloud computing: A survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 2020 ,22, 2009–2030.
[CrossRef]
52. Rahman, S.A.; Tout, H.; Talhi, C.; Mourad, A. Internet of things intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?
IEEE Netw. 2020 ,34, 310–317. [CrossRef]
53. Khan, R.U.; Zhang, X.; Alazab, M.; Kumar, R. An improved convolutional neural network model for intrusion detection in
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Cybersecurity and cyberforensics conference (CCC), Melbourne, Australia, 8–9 May 2019;
pp. 74–77.
54. Gautam, S.; Henry, A.; Zuhair, M.; Rashid, M.; Javed, A.R.; Maddikunta, P .K.R. A Composite Approach of Intrusion Detection
Systems: Hybrid RNN and Correlation-Based Feature Optimization. Electronics 2022 ,11, 3529. [CrossRef]
55. Huang, C.; Wang, Z.; Chen, H.; Hu, Q.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, W.; Guan, X. RepChain: A Reputation-Based Secure, Fast and High
Incentive Blockchain System via Sharding. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020 ,8, 4291–4304.
56. Mumtaz, S.; Al-Dulaimi, A.; Gaˇ canin, H.; Bo, A. Block Chain and Big Data-Enabled Intelligent Vehicular Communication. IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021 ,22, 3904–3906. [CrossRef]
57. Nassar, M.; Salah, K.; ur Rehman, M.H.; Svetinovic, D. Blockchain for explainable and trustworthy artiﬁcial intelligence. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2020 ,10, e1340.
58. Kotter, E.; Marti-Bonmati, L.; Adrian P ., Brady Nandita M., Desouza, E.S. ESR white paper: Blockchain and medical imaging.
Insights Into Imaging 2021 ,12, 1–7.
59. Calvaresi, D.; Dubovitskaya, A.; Calbimonte, J.P .; Taveter, K.; Schumacher, M. Multi-agent systems and blockchain: Results from
a systematic literature review. In Proceedings of the International conference on practical applications of agents and multi-agent
systems, Toledo, Spain, 20–22 June 2018; pp. 110–126.
60. Singh, A.R.J.; Rathore, S.; Park, J.H. Blockiotintelligence: A blockchain-enabled intelligent IoT architecture with artiﬁcial
intelligence. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2020 ,110, 721–743. [CrossRef]
61. Cirillo, F.; Gómez, D.; Diez, L.; Maestro, I.E.; Gilbert, T.B.J.; Akhavan, R. Smart city IoT services creation through large-scale
collaboration. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020 ,7, 5267–5275. [CrossRef]
62. Kimothi, S.; Thapliyal, A.; Singh, R.; Rashid, M.; Gehlot, A.; Akram, S.V .; Javed, A.R. Comprehensive Database Creation for
Potential Fish Zones Using IoT and ML with Assimilation of Geospatial Techniques. Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1062. [CrossRef]
63. Kirimtat, A.; Krejcar, O.; Kertesz, A.; Tasgetiren, M.F. Future trends and current state of smart city concepts: A survey. IEEE
Access 2020 ,8, 86448–86467. [CrossRef]

==== Page 35 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 35 of 40
64. Kherraf, N.; Alameddine, H.A.; Sharafeddine, S.; Assi, C.M.; Ghrayeb, A. Optimized provisioning of edge computing resources
with heterogeneous workload in IoT networks. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 2019 ,16, 459–474. [CrossRef]
65. Shahzad, F.; Mannan, A.; Javed, A.R.; Almadhor, A.S.; Baker, T.; Al-Jumeily OBE, D. Cloud-based multiclass anomaly detection
and categorization using ensemble learning. J. Cloud Comput. 2022 ,11, 1–12. [CrossRef]
66. Kuppusamy, P .; Kumari, N.M.J.; Alghamdi, W.Y.; Alyami, H.; Ramalingam, R.; Javed, A.R.; Rashid, M. Job scheduling problem in
fog-cloud-based environment using reinforced social spider optimization. J. Cloud Comput. 2022 ,11, 99. [CrossRef]
67. Panarello, A.; Tapas, N.; Merlino, G.; Longo, F.; Puliaﬁto, A. Blockchain and iot integration: A systematic survey. Sensors 2018 ,
18, 2575. [CrossRef]
68. Amann, J.; Blasimme, A.; Vayena, E.; Frey, D.; Madai, V .I. Explainability for artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: A multidisciplinary
perspective. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 2020 ,20, 1–9. [CrossRef]
69. García-Magariño, I.; Muttukrishnan, R.; Lloret, J. Human-centric AI for trustworthy IoT systems with explainable multilayer
perceptrons. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 125562–125574. [CrossRef]
70. Hernandez, L.; Baladron, C.; Aguiar, W. A.; Carro, B.; Sanchez-Esguevillas, A.J.; Lloret, J.; Massana, J. A survey on electric
power demand forecasting: Future trends in smart grids, microgrids and smart buildings. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 2014 ,
16, 1460–1495. [CrossRef]
71. Rehman, S.U.; Javed, A.R.; Khan, M.U.; Nazar Awan, M.; Farukh, A.; Hussien, A. Personalisedcomfort: A personalised thermal
comfort model to predict thermal sensation votes for smart building residents. Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2020 ,16, 1–23. [CrossRef]
72. Soomro, S.; Miraz, M.H.; Prasanth, A.; Abdullah, M. Artiﬁcial intelligence enabled IoT: Trafﬁc congestion reduction in smart
cities. In Proceedings of the Smart Cities Symposium 2018, Bahrain, 22–23 April 2018.
73. Lavrenovs, A.; Graf, R. Explainable AI for Classifying Devices on the Internet. In Proceedings of the 2021 13th International
Conference on Cyber Conﬂict (CyCon), Tallinn, Estonia, 25–28 May 2021; pp. 291–308.
74. Celesti, A.; Galletta, A.; Carnevale, L.; Fazio, M.; ´Lay-Ekuakille, A.; Villari, M. An IoT cloud system for trafﬁc monitoring and
vehicular accidents prevention based on mobile sensor data processing. IEEE Sens. J. 2017 ,18, 4795–4802. [CrossRef]
75. Ahamed, N.N.; Karthikeyan, P . A Reinforcement Learning Integrated in Heuristic search method for self-driving vehicle using
blockchain in supply chain management. Int. J. Intell. Netw. 2020 ,1, 92–101.
76. Lu, R.; Jin, X.; Zhang, S.; Qiu, M.; Wu, X. A study on big knowledge and its engineering issues. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.
2018 ,31, 1630–1644. [CrossRef]
77. Reddy, G.T.; Reddy, M.P .K.; Lakshmanna, K.; Kaluri, R.; Rajput, D.S.; Srivastava, G.; Baker, T. Analysis of dimensionality
reduction techniques on big data. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 54776–54788. [CrossRef]
78. Gadekallu, T.R.; Pham, Q.V .; Huynh-The, T.; Bhattacharya, S.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Liyanage, M. Federated Learning for Big Data:
A Survey on Opportunities, Applications and Future Directions. arXiv 2021 , preprint. arXiv:2110.04160.
79. Sarkar, S.; Agrawal, S.; Baker, T.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Gadekallu, T.R. Catalysis of neural activation functions: Adaptive
feed-forward training for big data applications. Appl. Intell. 2022 ,52, 13364–13383. [CrossRef]
80. Cao, X.; Liu, L.; Cheng, Y.; Shen, X. Towards energy-efﬁcient wireless networking in the big data era: A survey. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutorials 2017 ,20, 303–332. [CrossRef]
81. Li, X.H.; Cao, C.C.; Shi, Y.; Bai, W.; Gao, H.; Qiu, L.; Wang, C.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, S.; Xue, X.; et al. A survey of data-driven and
knowledge-aware explainable AI. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2020 ,34, 29–49. [CrossRef]
82. Yoo, H.; Park, R.C.; Chung, K. IoT-Based Health Big-Data Process Technologies: A Survey. KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst. (TIIS)
2021 ,15, 974–992.
83. Sachan, S.; Yang, J.B.; Xu, D.L.; Benavides, D.E.; Li, Y. An explainable AI decision-support-system to automate loan underwriting.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2020 ,144, 113100.
84. Ohana, J.J.; Ohana, S.; Benhamou, E.; Saltiel, D.; Guez, B. Explainable AI (XAI) Models Applied to the Multi-agent Environment
of Financial Markets. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Explainable, Transparent Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems, Online, 3–7 May 2021; pp. 189–207.
85. Lee, R.S. Chaotic type-2 transient-fuzzy deep neuro-oscillatory network (CT2TFDNN) for worldwide ﬁnancial prediction. IEEE
Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 2019 ,28, 731–745. [CrossRef]
86. Khodabandehloo, E.; Riboni, D.; Alimohammadi, A. HealthXAI: Collaborative and explainable AI for supporting early diagnosis
of cognitive decline. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2021 ,116, 168–189.
87. Brenas, J.H.; Shaban-Nejad, A. Health intervention evaluation using semantic explainability and causal reasoning. IEEE Access
2020 ,8, 9942–9952. [CrossRef]
88. Mugurusi, G.; Oluka, P .N. Towards Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) in Supply Chain Management: A Typology and
Research Agenda. In Proceedings of the IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems,
Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, 25–29 May 2021; pp. 32–38.
89. Reyes, P .M.; Visich, J.K.; Jaska, P . Managing the dynamics of new technologies in the global supply chain. IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev.
2020 ,48, 156–162.
90. H˜uu, P .; Arfaoui, M.A.; Sharafeddine, S.; Assi, C.M.; Ghrayeb, A. A low-complexity framework for joint user pairing and power
control for cooperative NOMA in 5G and beyond cellular networks. IEEE Trans. Commun. 2020 ,68, 6737–6749. [CrossRef]
91. Zhang, C.; Ueng, Y.L.; Studer, C.; Burg, A. Artiﬁcial intelligence for 5G and beyond 5G: Implementations, algorithms and
optimizations. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Circuits Syst. 2020 ,10, 149–163. [CrossRef]

==== Page 36 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 36 of 40
92. Zhao, J.; Hu, T.; Zheng, R.; Ba, P .; Mei, C.; Zhang, Q. Defect recognition in concrete ultrasonic detection based on wavelet packet
transform and stochastic conﬁguration networks. IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 9284–9295. [CrossRef]
93. Wang, S.; Qureshi, M.A.; Miralles-Pechuaán, L.; Huynh-The, T.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Liyanage, M. Explainable AI for B5G/6G:
Technical Aspects, Use Cases and Research Challenges. arXiv 2021 , preprint. arXiv:2112.04698.
94. Li, C.; Guo, W.; Sun, S.C.; Al-Rubaye, S.; Tsourdos, A. Trustworthy deep learning in 6G-enabled mass autonomy: From concept to
quality-of-trust key performance indicators. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 2020 ,15, 112–121. [CrossRef]
95. Guo, W. Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for 6G: Improving trust between human and machine. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2020 ,
58, 39–45. [CrossRef]
96. Nassar, E.; El-Khalil, R. Assessing Agility Implementation in Manufacturing. In Proceedings of the 5th NA International
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, Detroit, MI, USA, 10–14 August 2020; pp. 10–14 .
97. Lee, E.; Barthelmey, A.; Reckelkamm, T.; Kang, H.; Son, J. A Study on Human-Robot Collaboration based Hybrid Assembly
System for Flexible Manufacturing. In Proceedings of the IECON 2019—45th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society, Lisbon, Portugal, 14–17 October 2019; Volume 1, pp. 4197–4202.
98. El-Khalil, R.; Nader, J. Impact of ﬂexibility on operational performance: A case from us automotive manufacturing facilities. In
Proceedings of the 5th NA International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, Detroit, MI, USA,
10–14 August, 2020; pp. 10–14.
99. Hrnjica, B.; Softic, S. Explainable AI in Manufacturing: A Predictive Maintenance Case Study. In Proceedings of the IFIP
International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems, Novi Sad, Serbia, 30 August–3 September 2020;
pp. 66–73.
100. Bailak, G.; Rubinger, B.; Jang, M.; Dawson, F. Advanced Robotics Mechatronics System: Emerging technologies for interplanetary
robotics. In Proceedings of the Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering 2004 (IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37513),
Niagara Falls, ON, Canada, 2–5 May 2004; Volume 4, pp. 2025–2028.
101. Anjomshoae, S.; Najjar, A.; Calvaresi, D.; Främling, K. Explainable agents and robots: Results from a systematic literature review.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2019), Montreal,
QC, Canada, 13–17 May 2019; pp. 1078–1088.
102. De Alwis, C.; Kalla, A.; Pham, Q.V .; Kumar, P .; Dev, K.; Hwang, W.J.; Liyanage, M. Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications,
requirements, technologies and future research. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2021 ,2, 836–886. [CrossRef]
103. Zablocki, É.; Ben-Younes, H.; Pérez, P .; Cord, M. Explainability of vision-based autonomous driving systems: Review and
challenges. arXiv 2021 , preprint. arXiv:2101.05307.
104. Malik, S.; Khan, M.A.; El-Sayed, H. Collaborative Autonomous Driving—A Survey of Solution Approaches and Future Challenges.
Sensors 2021 ,21, 3783. [CrossRef]
105. Dave, D.; Naik, H.; Singhal, S.; Patel, P . Explainable ai meets healthcare: A study on heart disease dataset. arXiv 2020 , preprint.
arXiv:2011.03195.
106. Firouzi, F.; Farahani, B.; Daneshmand, M.; Grise, K.; Song, J.; Saracco, R.; Wang, L.L.; Lo, K.; Angelov, P .; Soares, E.; et al.
Harnessing the Power of Smart and Connected Health to Tackle COVID-19: IoT, AI, Robotics and Blockchain for a Better World.
IEEE Internet Things J. 2021 ,8, 12826–12846. [CrossRef]
107. Rasheed, A.; San, O.; Kvamsdal, T. Digital twin: Values, challenges and enablers from a modeling perspective. IEEE Access 2020 ,
8, 21980–22012. [CrossRef]
108. Alameddine, H.A.; Sharafeddine, S.; Sebbah, S.; Ayoubi, S.; Assi, C. Dynamic task ofﬂoading and scheduling for low-latency IoT
services in multi-access edge computing. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 2019 ,37, 668–682. [CrossRef]
109. Ramu, S.P .; Boopalan, P .; Pham, Q.V .; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; The, T.H.; Alazab, M.; Nguyen, T.T.; Gadekallu, T.R. Federated
Learning enabled Digital Twins for smart cities: Concepts, recent advances and future directions. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2022 ,7,
103663. [CrossRef]
110. Shahat, E.; Hyun, C.T.; Yeom, C. City digital twin potentials: A review and research agenda. Sustainability 2021 ,13, 3386.
[CrossRef]
111. Fuller, A.; Fan, Z.; Day, C.; Barlow, C. Digital twin: Enabling technologies, challenges and open research. IEEE Access 2020 ,
8, 108952–108971. [CrossRef]
112. White, G.; Zink, A.; Codecá, L.; Clarke, S. A digital twin smart city for citizen feedback. Cities 2021 ,110, 103064. [CrossRef]
113. Shirowzhan, S.; Tan, W.; Sepasgozar, S.M. Digital twin and CyberGIS for improving connectivity and measuring the impact of
infrastructure construction planning in smart cities. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2020 ,9, 240. [CrossRef]
114. Ford, D.N.; Wolf, C.M. Smart cities with digital twin systems for disaster management. J. Manag. Eng. 2020 ,36, 04020027.
[CrossRef]
115. Fan, C.; Zhang, C.; Yahja, A.; Mostafavi, A. Disaster City Digital Twin: A vision for integrating artiﬁcial and human intelligence
for disaster management. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2021 ,56, 102049. [CrossRef]
116. Lv, Z.; Xie, S. Artiﬁcial intelligence in the digital twins: State of the art, challenges and future research topics. Digit. Twin 2021 ,
1, 12. [CrossRef]
117. de Souza Cardoso, L.F.; Mariano, F.C.M.Q.; Zorzal, E.R. A survey of industrial augmented reality. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020 ,
139, 106159. [CrossRef]

==== Page 37 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 37 of 40
118. Gadekallu, T.R.; Huynh-The, T.; Wang, W.; Yenduri, G.; Ranaweera, P .; Pham, Q.V .; da Costa, D.B.; Liyanage, M. Blockchain for
the Metaverse: A Review. arXiv 2022 , preprint. arXiv:2203.09738.
119. Zhan, T.; Yin, K.; Xiong, J.; He, Z.; Wu, S.T. Augmented reality and virtual reality displays: Perspectives and challenges. Iscience
2020 ,23, 101397. [CrossRef]
120. Mora, D.; Zimmermann, R.; Cirqueira, D.; Bezbradica, M.; Helfert, M.; Auinger, A.; Werth, D. Who Wants to Use an Augmented
Reality Shopping Assistant Application? In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Computer-Human Interaction
Research and Applications (CHIRA 2020), Budapest, Hungary, 5–6 November 2020.
121. Hassaballah, M.; Awad, A.I. Deep Learning in Computer Vision: Principles and Applications ; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2020.
122. Chowdhary, C.L.; Alazab, M.; Chaudhary, A.; Hakak, S.; Gadekallu, T.R. Computer Vision and Recognition Systems Using Machine
and Deep Learning Approaches: Fundamentals, Technologies and Applications ; Institution of Engineering & Technology: London, UK,
2021.
123. Alazab, M.; Broadhurst, R. Spam and criminal activity. In Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice ; Australian Institute of
Criminology: Canberra, Australia, 2016; pp. 1–20.
124. Shorfuzzaman, M.; Hossain, M.S.; Alhamid, M.F. Towards the sustainable development of smart cities through mass video
surveillance: A response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021 ,64, 102582. [CrossRef]
125. Javed, A.R.; Jalil, Z.; Zehra, W.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Suh, D.Y.; Piran, M.J. A comprehensive survey on digital video forensics:
Taxonomy, challenges and future directions. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2021 ,106, 104456. [CrossRef]
126. Glomsrud, J.A.; Ødegårdstuen, A.; Clair, A.L.S.; Smogeli, Ø. Trustworthy versus explainable AI in autonomous vessels. In
Proceedings of the International Seminar on Safety and Security of Autonomous Vessels (ISSAV) and European STAMP Workshop
and Conference (ESWC), Helsinki, Finland, 17-19 September 2019 ; pp. 37–47.
127. Hamza, A.; Javed, A.R.R.; Iqbal, F.; Kryvinska, N.; Almadhor, A.S.; Jalil, Z.; Borghol, R. Deepfake Audio Detection via MFCC
Features Using Machine Learning. IEEE Access 2022 ,10, 134018–134028. [CrossRef]
128. Tian, S.; Yang, W.; Le Grange, W. A.; Wang, P .; Huang, W.; Ye, Z. Smart healthcare: Making medical care more intelligent. Glob.
Health J. 2019 ,3, 62–65. [CrossRef]
129. Pawar, U.; O’Shea, D.; Rea, S.; O’Reilly, R. Explainable ai in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on
Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA), Dublin, Ireland, 15–19 June 2020; pp. 1–2.
130. Doshi-Velez, F.; Kim, B. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1702.08608.
131. Mourad, A.; Tout, H.; Wahab, O.A.; Otrok, H.; Dbouk, T. Ad hoc vehicular fog enabling cooperative low-latency intrusion
detection. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020 ,8, 829–843. [CrossRef]
132. Bojarski, M.; Del Testa, D.; Dworakowski, D.; Firner, B.; Flepp, B.; Goyal, P .; Jackel, L.D.; Monfort, M.; Muller, U.; Zhang, J.; et al.
End to end learning for self-driving cars. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1604.07316.
133. Zahavy, T.; Ben-Zrihem, N.; Mannor, S. Graying the black box: Understanding dqns. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, New York, NY, USA, 20–22 June 2016; pp. 1899–1908.
134. Bengio, Y. Learning Deep Architectures for AI ; Now Publishers Inc.: Norwell, MA, USA, 2009.
135. Kumar, G.; Kumar, K.; Sachdeva, M. The use of artiﬁcial intelligence based techniques for intrusion detection: A review. Artif.
Intell. Rev. 2010 ,34, 369–387. [CrossRef]
136. McFarland, M. Uber shuts down self-driving operations in Arizona. CNNMoney Version 2018 ,809, 3.
137. Mori, K.; Fukui, H.; Murase, T.; Hirakawa, T.; Yamashita, T.; Fujiyoshi, H. Visual explanation by attention branch network for
end-to-end learning-based self-driving. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Paris, France, 9–12
June 2019; pp. 1577–1582.
138. Haspiel, J.; Du, N.; Meyerson, J.; Robert Jr, L.P .; Tilbury, D.; Yang, X.J.; Pradhan, A.K. Explanations and expectations: Trust building
in automated vehicles. In Proceedings of the Companion of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction, Chicago IL, USA, 5-8 March, 20182018 ; pp. 119–120.
139. Saraf, A.P .; Chan, K.; Popish, M.; Browder, J.; Schade, J. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Aviation Safety Applications. In
Proceedings of the AIAA Aviation 2020 Forum, Online, 15–19 June 2020; p. 2881.
140. Zeldam, S. Automated Failure Diagnosis in Aviation Maintenance Using Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI). Master’s
Thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2018.
141. Tan, S.; Caruana, R.; Hooker, G.; Lou, Y. Detecting bias in black-box models using transparent model distillation. arXiv 2017 ,
preprint. arXiv:1710.06169.
142. Howell, C. A framework for addressing fairness in consequential machine learning. In Proceedings of the FAT Conference Tuts,
New York, NY, USA, 23–24 February 2018; pp. 1–2.
143. Berk, R.A.; Bleich, J. Statistical procedures for forecasting criminal behavior: A comparative assessment. Criminol. Pub. Pol’Y
2013 ,12, 513. [CrossRef]
144. Lightbourne, J. Damned lies & criminal sentencing using evidence-based tools. Duke Tech. Rev. 2017 ,15, 327.
145. Madi, J. FinTech: Law and Regulation ; Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, UK, 2019.
146. Abbasi, A.; Javed, A.R.; Iqbal, F.; Kryvinska, N.; Jalil, Z. Deep learning for religious and continent-based toxic content detection
and classiﬁcation. Sci. Rep. 2022 ,12, 17478. [CrossRef]
147. Gao, M.; Liu, X.; Xu, A.; Akkiraju, R. Chat-XAI: A New Chatbot to Explain Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In Proceedings of the SAI
Intelligent Systems Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2–3 September 2021; pp. 125–134.

==== Page 38 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 38 of 40
148. Cirqueira, D.; Helfert, M.; Bezbradica, M. Towards Design Principles for User-Centric Explainable AI in Fraud Detection. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Bari, Italy, 30 August–3 September 2021; pp. 21–40.
149. Souza, J.; Leung, C.K. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Predictive Analytics on Customer Turnover: A User-Friendly Interface
for Non-expert Users. In Explainable AI Within the Digital Transformation and Cyber Physical Systems ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland,
2021; pp. 47–67.
150. Lv, Z.; Qiao, L.; Singh, A.K. Advanced machine learning on cognitive computing for human behavior analysis. IEEE Trans.
Comput. Soc. Syst. 2020 ,8, 1194–1202. [CrossRef]
151. Du, X.; Hargreaves, C.; Sheppard, J.; Anda, F.; Sayakkara, A.; Le-Khac, N.A.; Scanlon, M. SoK: Exploring the state of the art and
the future potential of artiﬁcial intelligence in digital forensic investigation. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security, Online, 25–28 August 2020; pp. 1–10.
152. Ahmed, W.; Shahzad, F.; Javed, A.R.; Iqbal, F.; Ali, L. WhatsApp Network Forensics: Discovering the IP Addresses of Suspects.
In Proceedings of the 2021 11th IFIP International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), Paris, France,
19–21 April 2021; pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
153. Bhattacharya, S.; Chengoden, R.; Srivastava, G.; Alazab, M.; Javed, A.R.; Victor, N.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Gadekallu, T.R. Incentive
Mechanisms for Smart Grid: State of the Art, Challenges, Open Issues, Future Directions. Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2022 ,6, 47.
[CrossRef]
154. Karimipour, H.; Dehghantanha, A.; Parizi, R.M.; Choo, K.K.R.; Leung, H. A deep and scalable unsupervised machine learning
system for cyber-attack detection in large-scale smart grids. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 80778–80788. [CrossRef]
155. Zhang, L.; Wang, G.; Giannakis, G.B. Real-time power system state estimation and forecasting via deep unrolled neural networks.
IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 2019 ,67, 4069–4077. [CrossRef]
156. Foruzan, E.; Soh, L.K.; Asgarpoor, S. Reinforcement learning approach for optimal distributed energy management in a microgrid.
IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2018 ,33, 5749–5758. [CrossRef]
157. Jiang, H.; Zhang, J.J.; Gao, W.; Wu, Z. Fault detection, identiﬁcation and location in smart grid based on data-driven computational
methods. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2014 ,5, 2947–2956. [CrossRef]
158. Omitaomu, O.A.; Niu, H. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Techniques in Smart Grid: A Survey. Smart Cities 2021 ,4, 548–568. [CrossRef]
159. Taeihagh, A. Governance of artiﬁcial intelligence. Policy Soc. 2021 ,40, 137–157. [CrossRef]
160. El-Khalil, R. Classiﬁcation, purpose, enablers of lean dimensions at automotive manufacturing industry: A case study. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, Paris, France, 26–27 July
2018; pp. 2743–2756.
161. Possik, J.; Zouggar-Amrani, A.; Vallespir, B.; Zacharewicz, G. Lean techniques impact evaluation methodology based on a
co-simulation framework for manufacturing systems. Int. J. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 2022 ,35, 91–111. [CrossRef]
162. Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Pham, Q.V .; Prabadevi, B.; Deepa, N.; Dev, K.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Ruby, R.; Liyanage, M. Industry 5.0: A survey
on enabling technologies and potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 2022 ,26, 100257. [CrossRef]
163. Majid, M.; Habib, S.; Javed, A.R.; Rizwan, M.; Srivastava, G.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Lin, J.C.W. Applications of wireless sensor networks
and internet of things frameworks in the industry revolution 4.0: A systematic literature review. Sensors 2022 ,22, 2087. [CrossRef]
164. Boopalan, P .; Ramu, S.P .; Pham, Q.V .; Dev, K.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Huynh-The, T.; et al. Fusion of Federated
Learning and Industrial Internet of Things: A survey. Comput. Netw. 2022 ,212, 109048. [CrossRef]
165. Jagatheesaperumal, A.R.J.; Rahouti, M.; Ahmad, K.; Al-Fuqaha, A.; Guizani, M. The Duo of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data
for Industry 4.0: Review of Applications, Techniques, Challenges and Future Research Directions. arXiv 2021 , arXiv:2104.02425.
166. Ahmad, K.; Maabreh, M.; Ghaly, M.; Khan, K.; Qadir, J.; Al-Fuqaha, A. Developing future human-centered smart cities: Critical
analysis of smart city security, Data management and Ethical challenges. Comput. Sci. Rev. 2022 ,43, 100452. [CrossRef]
167. Ahmed, I.; Jeon, G.; Piccialli, F. From Artiﬁcial Intelligence to eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Industry 4.0: A survey on
What, How and Where. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2022 ,18, 5031–5042. [CrossRef]
168. Shakur, A.H.; Qian, X.; Wang, Z.; Mortazavi, B.; Huang, S. GPSRL: Learning Semi-Parametric Bayesian Survival Rule Lists from
Heterogeneous Patient Data. In Proceedings of the 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Milan,
Italy, 10–15 January 2021; pp. 10608–10615.
169. Dhasarathan, C.; Hasan, M.K.; Islam, S.; Abdullah, S.; Mokhtar, U.A.; Javed, A.R.; Goundar, S. COVID-19 health data analysis
and personal data preserving: A homomorphic privacy enforcement approach. Comput. Commun. 2023 ,199, 87–97. [CrossRef]
170. Lipton, Z.C.; Kale, D.C.; Wetzel, R.. Modeling missing data in clinical time series with RNNs. Mach. Learn. Healthc. 2016 ,56.
171. Amin, N.; McGrath, A.; Chen, Y.P .P . FexRNA: Exploratory data analysis and feature selection of non-coding RNA. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 2021 ,18, 2795–2801. [CrossRef]
172. Patnaik, S.; Sidhardh, S.; Semperlotti, F. Towards a uniﬁed approach to nonlocal elasticity via fractional-order mechanics. Int. J.
Mech. Sci. 2021 ,189, 105992. [CrossRef]
173. Rosenfeld, A. Better metrics for evaluating explainable artiﬁcial intelligence. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Online, 3–7 May 2021; pp. 45–50.
174. Panigutti, C.; Perotti, A.; Pedreschi, D. Doctor XAI: An ontology-based approach to black-box sequential data classiﬁcation
explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference On Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, Barcelona, Spain, 27–30
January 2020; pp. 629–639.

==== Page 39 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 39 of 40
175. Zhou, J.; Gandomi, A.H.; Chen, F.; Holzinger, A. Evaluating the quality of machine learning explanations: A survey on methods
and metrics. Electronics 2021 ,10, 593. [CrossRef]
176. Burkart, N.; Huber, M.F. A survey on the explainability of supervised machine learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 2021 ,70, 245–317.
[CrossRef]
177. Mencar, C.; Castiello, C.; Cannone, R.; Fanelli, A.M. Interpretability assessment of fuzzy knowledge bases: A cointension based
approach. Int. J. Approx. Reason. 2011 ,52, 501–518. [CrossRef]
178. Poursabzi-Sangdeh, F.; Goldstein, D.G.; Hofman, W. A.; Wortman Vaughan, J.W.; Wallach, H. Manipulating and measuring
model interpretability. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Yokohama, Japan,
8–13 May 2021; pp. 1–52.
179. Tulio Ribeiro, M.; Singh, S.; Guestrin, C. Model-Agnostic Interpretability of Machine Learning. arXiv 2016 , 1606. arXiv:1606.05386.
180. El Bekri, N.; Kling, J.; Huber, M.F. A study on trust in black box models and post-hoc explanations. In Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Soft Computing Models in Industrial and Environmental Applications, Seville, Spain, 13–15 May
2019; pp. 35–46.
181. Yin, M.; Wortman Vaughan, J.; Wallach, H. Understanding the effect of accuracy on trust in machine learning models. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Chi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Glasgow, Scotland, 4–9 May 2019; pp. 1–12.
182. Lage, I.; Chen, E.; He, J.; Narayanan, M.; Kim, B.; Gershman, S.; Doshi-Velez, F. An evaluation of the human-interpretability of
explanation. arXiv 2019 , preprint. arXiv:1902.00006.
183. Herman, B. The promise and peril of human evaluation for model interpretability. arXiv 2017 , 8. preprint. arXiv:1711.07414.
184. Hamilton, D.; Kornegay, K.; Watkins, L. Autonomous Navigation Assurance with Explainable AI and Security Monitoring. In
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop (AIPR), Washington, DC, USA, 13–15 October
2020; pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
185. Shahzad, F.; Iqbal, W.; Bokhari, F.S. On the use of CryptDB for securing Electronic Health data in the cloud: A performance study.
In Proceedings of the 2015 17th International Conference on E-health Networking, Application Services (HealthCom), Boston,
MA, USA, 14–17 October 2015; pp. 120–125. [CrossRef]
186. Security and Privacy Accountable Technology Innovations, Algorithms and machine Learning (SPATIAL). Available online:
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101021808 (accessed on 1 September 2021).
187. Explanation of AI for Decision Making (XAI). Available online: https://www.ibm.com/watson/explainable-ai (accessed on 8
May 2012). (accessed on 1 September 2021).
188. Interactive Natural Language Technology for Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (NL4XAI). Available online: https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/id/860621 (accessed on 1 September 2021).
189. Explainable Manufacturing Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XMANAI). Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/957362
(accessed on 1 September 2021).
190. Explainable AI Pipelines for Big Copernicus Data (DEEPCUBE). Available online: https://ojs.mediageo.it/index.php/
GEOmedia/article/view/1802 (accessed on 1 September 2021).
191. Copernicus:Europe’s eyes on Earth. Available online: https://books.google.co.jp/books/about/Copernicus.html?id=
LCvxjwEACAAJ (accessed on 1 September 2021).
192. AI4EU. Available online: https://www.ai4europe.eu/ (accessed on 1 September 2021).
193. Safe and Trusted Human Centric Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Future Manufacturing Lines (STAR). Available online: https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/id/956573/results (accessed on 1 September 2021).
194. FeatureCloud. Available online: https://featurecloud.eu/ (accessed on 1 September 2021).
195. Building Greener and More Sustainable Societies by Filling the Knowledge Gap in Social Science and Engineering to Enable Re-
sponsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence Co-Creation (GECKO). Available online: https://vbn.aau.dk/en/projects/building-greenerand-
more-sustainable-societies-by-ﬁlling-the-kn (accessed on 1 September 2021).
196. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence(XAI) Center. Available online: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/explainable-artiﬁcial-intelligence/
(accessed on 1 September 2021).
197. Kabir, M.H.; Hasan, K.F.; Hasan, M.K.; Ansari, K. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Smart City Application: A Secure and
Trusted Platform. arXiv 2021 , arXiv:2111.00601.
198. Gadekallu, T.R.; Manoj, M.; Kumar, N.; Hakak, S.; Bhattacharya, S.; et al. Blockchain-Based Attack Detection on Machine Learning
Algorithms for IoT-Based e-Health Applications. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 2021 ,4, 30–33. [CrossRef]
199. Mahbooba, B.; Timilsina, M.; Sahal, R.; Serrano, M. Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai) to enhance trust management in
intrusion detection systems using decision tree model. Complexity 2021 ,2021 , 6634811. [CrossRef]
200. Javed, A.; Muhammad, A.H.; Faisal, S.; Waqas, A.; Saurabh, S.; Thar, B.; Gadekallu, T. Integration of Blockchain Technology and
Federated Learning in Vehicular (IoT) Networks: A Comprehensive Survey. Sensors 2022 ,22, 4394. [CrossRef]
201. Kim, S.; Jo, W.; Lee, J.; Shon, T. AI-enabled device digital forensics for smart cities. J. Supercomput. 2022 ,78, 3029–3044. [CrossRef]
202. Das, A.; Rad, P . Opportunities and challenges in explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): A survey. arXiv 2020 , preprint.
arXiv:2006.11371.
203. Demollin, M.; Budzynska, K.; Sierra, C. Argumentation theoretical frameworks for explainable artiﬁcial intelligence. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Interactive Natural Language Technology for Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Dublin,
Ireland, November 2020 ; pp. 44–49.

==== Page 40 ====
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 40 of 40
204. Khamparia, A.; Gupta, D.; Khanna, A.; Balas, V .E. Biomedical Data Analysis and Processing Using Explainable (XAI) and Responsive
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (RAI) ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022.
205. Gerlings, J.; Shollo, A.; Constantiou, I. Reviewing the Need for Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (xAI). arXiv 2020 ,
arXiv:2012.01007.
206. Al-Hilo, A.; Samir, M.; Assi, C.; Sharafeddine, S.; Ebrahimi, D. UAV-assisted content delivery in intelligent transportation
systems-joint trajectory planning and cache management. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2020 ,22, 5155–5167. [CrossRef]
207. Gupta, B.B.; Gaurav, A.; Marín, E.C.; Alhalabi, W. Novel graph-based machine learning technique to secure smart vehicles in
intelligent transportation systems. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2022 . [CrossRef]
208. Samir, M.; Sharafeddine, S.; Assi, C.M.; Nguyen, T.M.; Ghrayeb, A. UAV trajectory planning for data collection from time-
constrained IoT devices. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2019 ,19, 34–46. [CrossRef]
209. Samir, M.; Assi, C.; Sharafeddine, S.; Ebrahimi, D.; Ghrayeb, A. Age of information aware trajectory planning of UAVs in
intelligent transportation systems: A deep learning approach. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2020 ,69, 12382–12395. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

