==== Page 1 ====
1
A Survey on Data Collection for
Machine Learning
A Big Data - AI Integration Perspective
Yuji Roh, Geon Heo, Steven Euijong Whang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Data collection is a major bottleneck in machine learning and an active research topic in multiple communities. There are
largely two reasons data collection has recently become a critical issue. First, as machine learning is becoming more widely-used, we
are seeing new applications that do not necessarily have enough labeled data. Second, unlike traditional machine learning, deep
learning techniques automatically generate features, which saves feature engineering costs, but in return may require larger amounts
of labeled data. Interestingly, recent research in data collection comes not only from the machine learning, natural language, and
computer vision communities, but also from the data management community due to the importance of handling large amounts of data.
In this survey, we perform a comprehensive study of data collection from a data management point of view. Data collection largely
consists of data acquisition, data labeling, and improvement of existing data or models. We provide a research landscape of these
operations, provide guidelines on which technique to use when, and identify interesting research challenges. The integration of
machine learning and data management for data collection is part of a larger trend of Big data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) integration
and opens many opportunities for new research.
Index Terms —data collection, data acquisition, data labeling, machine learning
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
WEare living in exciting times where machine learning
is having a profound inﬂuence on a wide range of
applications from text understanding, image and speech
recognition, to health care and genomics. As a striking
example, deep learning techniques are known to perform
on par with ophthalmologists on identifying diabetic eye
diseases in images [1]. Much of the recent success is due
to better computation infrastructure and large amounts of
training data.
Among the many challenges in machine learning, data
collection is becoming one of the critical bottlenecks. It
is known that the majority of the time for running ma-
chine learning end-to-end is spent on preparing the data,
which includes collecting, cleaning, analyzing, visualizing,
and feature engineering. While all of these steps are time-
consuming, data collection has recently become a challenge
due to the following reasons.
First, as machine learning is used in new applications,
it is usually the case that there is not enough training
data. Traditional applications like machine translation or
object detection enjoy massive amounts of training data that
have been accumulated for decades. On the other hand,
more recent applications have little or no training data. As
an illustration, smart factories are increasingly becoming
automated where product quality control is performed with
machine learning. Whenever there is a new product or a
new defect to detect, there is little or no training data to
start with. The na ¨ıve approach of manual labeling may not
be feasible because it is expensive and requires domain
Y. Roh, G. Heo, and S. E. Whang are with the School of Electrical
Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
E-mail:fyuji.roh, geon.heo, swhang g@kaist.ac.kr
Corresponding author: S. E. Whangexpertise. This problem applies to any novel application that
beneﬁts from machine learning.
Moreover, as deep learning [2] becomes popular, there
is even more need for training data. In traditional machine
learning, feature engineering is one of the most challenging
steps where the user needs to understand the application
and provide features used for training models. Deep learn-
ing, on the other hand, can automatically generate features,
which saves us of feature engineering, which is a signiﬁcant
part of data preparation. However, in return, deep learning
may require larger amounts of training data to perform
well [3].
As a result, there is a pressing need of accurate and
scalable data collection techniques in the era of Big data,
which motivates us to conduct a comprehensive survey
of the data collection literature from a data management
point of view. There are largely three methods for data
collection. First, if the goal is to share and search new
datasets, then data acquisition techniques can be used to
discover, augment, or generate datasets. Second, once the
datasets are available, various data labeling techniques can
be used to label the individual examples. Finally, instead of
labeling new datasets, it may be better to improve existing
data or train on top of trained models. These three methods
are not necessarily distinct and can be used together. For
example, one could search and label more datasets while
improving existing ones.
An interesting observation is that the data collection
techniques come not only from the machine learning com-
munity (including natural language processing and com-
puter vision, which traditionally use machine learning heav-
ily), but have also been studied for decades by the data
management community, mainly under the names of data
science and data analytics. Figure 1 shows an overview ofarXiv:1811.03402v2  [cs.LG]  12 Aug 2019

==== Page 2 ====
2
Fig. 1: A high level research landscape of data collection for machine learning. The topics that are at least partially
contributed by the data management community are highlighted using blue italic text. Hence, to fully understand the
research landscape, one needs to look at the literature from the viewpoints of both the machine learning and data
management communities.
the research landscape where the topics that have contribu-
tions from the data management community are highlighted
with blue italic text. Traditionally, labeling data has been a
natural focus of research for machine learning tasks. For
example, semi-supervised learning is a classical problem
where model training is done on a small amount of labeled
data and a larger amount of unlabeled data. However, as
machine learning needs to be performed on large amounts
of training data, data management issues including how
to acquire large datasets, how to perform data labeling at
scale, and how to improve the quality of large amounts
of existing data become more relevant. Hence, to fully
understand the research landscape of data collection, one
needs to understand the literature from both the machine
learning and data management communities.
While there are many surveys on data collection that
are either limited to one discipline or a class of techniques,
to our knowledge, this survey is the ﬁrst to bridge the
machine learning (including natural language processing
and computer vision) and data management disciplines.
We contend that a machine learning user needs to know
the techniques on all sides to make informed decisions on
which techniques to use when. In fact, data management
plays a role in almost all aspects of machine learning [4], [5].
We note that many sub-topics including semi-supervised
learning, active learning, and transfer learning are large
enough to have their own surveys. The goal of this sur-
vey is not to go into all the depths of these sub-topics,
but to focus on breadth and identify what data collection
techniques are relevant for machine learning purposes and
what research challenges exist. Hence, we will only cover
the most representative work of the sub-topics, which areeither the best-performing or most recent ones. The key
audience of this survey can be researchers or practitioners
that are starting to use data collection for machine learning
and need an overall landscape introduction. Since the data
collection techniques come from different disciplines, some
may involve relational data while others non-relational data
(e.g., images and text). Sometimes the boundary between
operations (e.g., data acquisition and data labeling) is not
clear cut. In those cases, we will clarify that the techniques
are relevant in multiple operations.
Motivating Example To motivate the need to explore the
techniques in Figure 1, we present a running example on
data collection based on our experience with collaborating
with the industry on a smart factory application. Suppose
that Sally is a data scientist who works on product quality
for a smart factory. The factory may produce manufacturing
components like gears where it is important for them not to
have scratches, dents, or any foreign substance. Sally may
want to train a model on images of the components, which
can be used to automatically classify whether each product
has defects or not. This application scenario is depicted
in Figure 3. A general decision ﬂow chart of the data
collection techniques that Sally can use is shown in Figure 2.
Although the chart may look complicated at ﬁrst glance, we
contend that it is necessary to understand the entire research
landscape to make informed decisions for data collection.
In comparison, recent commercial tools [6]–[8] only cover a
subset of all the possible data collection techniques. When
using the chart, one can quickly narrow down the options
in two steps by deciding whether to perform one of data
acquisition, data labeling, or existing data improvements,

==== Page 3 ====
3
Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Have 
enough 
data? 
No
Are there 
external 
datasets? Discover or 
augment data 
Generate data NoYesYes
Use crowdsourcing Use self learning 
Use weak supervision No 
No YesEnough 
labels for 
self learning? 
Enough 
crowd 
budget? Add labels 
YesImprove 
data/model 
Use weak 
labels? YesYesHave data 
generation 
method? Improve 
data and 
labels 
Improve 
model NoYes
YesExisting data and labels are 
noisy and biased 
Existing 
model is 
inaccurate Star t 
Improve existing data/model 
or add labels? 
Fig. 2: A decision ﬂow chart for data collection. From the top left, Sally can start by asking whether she has enough data.
The following questions lead to speciﬁc techniques that can be used for acquiring data, labeling data, or improving existing
data or models. This ﬂow chart does not cover all the details in this survey. For example, data labeling techniques like self
learning and crowdsourcing can be performed together as described in Section 3.2.1. Also, some questions (e.g., “Enough
labels for self learning?”) are not easy to answer and may require an in-depth understanding of the application and data.
There are also techniques speciﬁc to the data type (images and text), which we detail in the body of the paper.
Data 
Collection 
Model Smart 
Factory 
Defect OK
Fig. 3: A running example for data collection. A smart
factory may produce various images of product compo-
nents, which are classiﬁed as normal or defective by a
convolutional neural network model. Unfortunately, with
an application this speciﬁc, it is often difﬁcult to ﬁnd enough
data for training the model.
and then choosing the speciﬁc technique to use for each
operation. For example, if there is no data, then Sally could
generate a dataset by installing camera equipment. Then if
she has enough budget for human computation, she can use
crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk to
label the product images for defects. We will discuss more
details of the ﬂow chart in the following sections.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
We review the data acquisition literature, which can
be categorized into data discovery, data augmenta-
tion, and data generation. Many of the techniques
require scalable solutions and have thus been studied
by the data management community (Section 2).
We review the data labeling literature and group the
techniques into three approaches: utilizing existing
labels, using crowdsourcing techniques, and usingweak supervision. While data labeling is tradition-
ally a machine learning topic, it is also studied in the
data management community as scalability becomes
an issue (Section 3).
We review techniques for improving existing data
or models when acquiring and labeling new data is
not the best option. Improving data quality through
cleaning is a traditional data management topic
where recent techniques are increasingly focusing on
machine learning applications (Section 4).
We put all the techniques together and provide
guidelines on how to decide which data collection
techniques to use when (Section 5).
Based on the current research landscape, we identify
interesting future research challenges (Section 6).
2 D ATAACQUISITION
The goal of data acquisition is to ﬁnd datasets that can be
used to train machine learning models. There are largely
three approaches in the literature: data discovery, data aug-
mentation, and data generation. Data discovery is necessary
when one wants to share or search for new datasets and
has become important as more datasets are available on the
Web and corporate data lakes [19], [75]. Data augmentation
complements data discovery where existing datasets are
enhanced by adding more external data. Data generation
can be used when there is no available external dataset,
but it is possible to generate crowdsourced or synthetic
datasets instead. The following sections will cover the three
operations in more detail. The individual techniques are
classiﬁed in Table 1.

==== Page 4 ====
4
Task Approach Techniques
Data discoverySharingCollaborative Analysis [9]–[11]
Web [12]–[17]
Collaborative and Web [18]
SearchingData Lake [19]–[23]
Web [24]–[34]
Data augmentationDeriving Latent Semantics [35]–[37]
Entity Augmentation [30], [31]
Data Integration [38]–[44]
Data generationCrowdsourcingGathering [45]–[54]
Processing [49], [50], [55], [56]
Synthetic DataGenerative Adversarial Networks [57]–[62]
Policies [63], [64]
Image [65]–[71]
Text [72]–[74]
TABLE 1: A classiﬁcation of data acquisition techniques. Some of the techniques can be used together. For example, data
can be generated while augmenting existing data.
2.1 Data Discovery
Data discovery can be viewed as two steps. First, the gener-
ated data must be indexed and published for sharing. Many
collaborative systems are designed to make this process
easy. However, other systems are built without the intention
of sharing datasets. For these systems, a post-hoc approach
must be used where metadata is generated after the datasets
are created, without the help of the dataset owners. Next,
someone else can search the datasets for their machine
learning tasks. Here the key challenges include how to
scale the searching and how to tell whether a dataset is
suitable for a given machine learning task. While most of the
data discovery literature came from the data management
community for data science and data analytics, they are also
relevant in a machine learning context. However, another
challenge in machine learning is data labeling, which we
cover in Section 3.
2.1.1 Data Sharing
We study data systems that are designed with dataset
sharing in mind. These systems may focus on collaborative
analysis, publishing on the Web, or both.
Collaborative Analysis In an environment where data sci-
entists are collaboratively analyzing different versions of
datasets, DataHub [9]–[11] can be used to host, share,
combine, and analyze them. There are two components: a
dataset version control system inspired by Git (a version
control system for code) and a hosted platform on top of it,
which provides data search, data cleaning, data integration,
and data visualization. A common use case of DataHub is
where individuals or teams run machine learning tasks on
their own versions of a dataset and later merge with other
versions if necessary.
Web A different approach of sharing datasets is to publish
them on the Web. Google Fusion Tables [12]–[14] is a cloud-
based service for data management and integration. Fusion
Tables enables users to upload structured data (e.g., spread-
sheets) and provides tools for visually analyzing, ﬁltering,
and aggregating the data. The datasets that are publishedthrough Fusion Tables on the Web can be crawled by search
engines and show up in search results. The datasets are
therefore primarily accessible through Web search. Fusion
Tables has been widely used in data journalism for creat-
ing interactive maps of data and adding them in articles.
In addition, there are many data marketplaces including
CKAN [15], Quandl [16], and DataMarket [17] where users
can buy and sell datasets or ﬁnd public datasets.
Collaborative and Web More recently, we are seeing a merg-
ing of collaborative and Web-based systems. For example,
Kaggle [18] makes it easy to share datasets on the Web
and even host data science competitions for models trained
on the datasets. A Kaggle competition host posts a dataset
along with a description of the challenge. Participants can
then experiment with their techniques and compete with
each other. After the deadline passes, a prize is given to the
winner of the competition. Kaggle currently has thousands
of public datasets and code snippets (called kernels) from
competitions. In comparison to DataHub and Fusion Tables,
the Kaggle datasets are coupled with competitions and are
thus more readily usable for machine learning purposes.
2.1.2 Data Searching
While the previous data systems are platforms for sharing
datasets, as a next logical step, we now explore systems that
are mainly designed for searching datasets. This setting is
common within large companies or on the Web.
Data Lake Data searching systems have become more popu-
lar with the advent of data lakes [19], [75] in corporate envi-
ronments where many datasets are generated internally, but
they are not easily discoverable by other teams or individu-
als within the company. Providing a way to search datasets
and analyze them has signiﬁcant business value because the
teams or individuals do not have to make redundant efforts
to re-generate the datasets for their machine learning tasks.
Most of the recent data lake systems have come from the
industry. In many cases, it is not feasible for all the dataset
owners to publish datasets through one system. Instead, a
post-hoc approach becomes necessary where datasets are

==== Page 5 ====
5
processed for searching after they are created, and no effort
is required on the dataset owner’s side.
As an early solution for data lakes, IBM proposed a
system [19] that enables datasets to be curated and then
searched. IBM estimates that 70% of the time spent on an-
alytic projects is concerned with discovering, cleaning, and
integrating datasets that are scattered among many business
applications. Thus, IBM takes the stance of creating, ﬁlling,
maintaining, and governing the data lake where these pro-
cesses are collectively called data wrangling . When analyzing
data, users do not perform the analytics directly on the
data lake, but extract data sets and store them separately.
Before this step, the users can do a preliminary exploration
of datasets, e.g., visualizing them to determine if the dataset
is useful and does not contain anomalies that need further
investigation. While supporting data curation in the data
lake saves users from processing raw data, it does limit the
scalability of how many datasets can be indexed.
More recently, scalability has become a pressing issue
for handling data lakes that consists of most datasets in a
large company. Google Data Search (G OODS ) [20] is a system
that catalogues the metadata of tens of billions of datasets
from various storage systems within Google. G OODS infers
various metadata including owner information and prove-
nance information (by looking up job logs), analyzes the
contents of the datasets, and collects input from users. At
the core is a central catalog, which contains the metadata
and is indexed for data searching. Due to Google’s scale,
there are many technical challenges including scaling to the
number of datasets, supporting a variety of data formats
where the costs for extracting metadata may differ, updating
the catalog entries due to the frequent churn of datasets,
dealing with uncertainty in metadata discovery, comput-
ing dataset importance for search ranking, and recovering
dataset semantics that are missing. To ﬁnd datasets, users
can use keywords queries on the G OODS frontend and view
proﬁle pages of the datasets that appear in the search results.
In addition, users can track the provenance of a dataset to
see which datasets were used to create the given dataset and
those that rely on it.
Finally, expressive queries are also important for search-
ing a data lake. While G OODS scales, one downside is that
it only supports simple keyword queries. This approach is
similar to keyword search in databases [76], [77], but the
purpose is to ﬁnd datasets instead of tuples. The D ATA
CIVILIZER system [21], [22] complements G OODS by focus-
ing more on the discovery aspect of datasets. Speciﬁcally,
DATA CIVILIZER consists of a module for building a linkage
graph of data. Assuming that datasets have schema, the
nodes in the linkage graph are columns of tables while
edges are relationships like primary key-foreign key (PK-
FK) relationships. A data discovery module then supports
a rich set of discovery queries on the linkage graph, which
can help users more easily discover the relevant datasets.
DATARAMAN [23] specializes in extracting structured data
from semi-structured log datasets in data lakes automati-
cally by learning patterns. A URUM [78], [79] supports data
discovery queries on semantically-linked datasets.
Web As the Web contains large numbers of structured
datasets, there have been signiﬁcant efforts to automati-cally extract the useful ones [32]–[34]. One of the most
successful systems is WebTables [24], [25], which automat-
ically extracts structured data that is published online in
the form of HTML tables. For example, WebTables extracts
all Wikipedia infoboxes. Initially, about 14.1 billion HTML
tables are collected from the Google search web crawl. Then
a classiﬁer is applied to determine which tables can be
viewed as relational database tables. Each relational table
consists of a schema that describes the columns and a set
of tuples. In comparison to the above data lake systems,
WebTables collects structured data from the Web.
As Web data tends to be much more diverse than say
those in a corporate environment, the table extraction tech-
niques have been extended in multiple ways as well. One
direction is to extend table extraction beyond identifying
HTML tags by extracting relational data in the form of ver-
tical tables and lists and leveraging knowledge bases [27],
[28]. Table searching also evolved where, in addition to key-
word searching, row-subset queries, entity-attribute queries,
and column search were introduced [29]. Finally, techniques
for enhancing the tables [30], [31] were proposed where
entities or attribute values are added to make the tables
more complete.
Recently, a service called Google Dataset Search [26]
was launched for searching repositories of datasets on the
Web. The motivation is that there are thousands of data
repositories on the Web that contain millions of datasets that
are not easy to search. Dataset Search lets dataset providers
describe their datasets using various metadata (e.g., author,
publication date, how the data was collected, and terms
for using the data) so that they become more searcheable.
In comparison to the fully-automatic WebTables, dataset
providers may need to do some manual work, but have
the opportunity to make their datasets more searcheable.
In comparison to G OODS , Dataset Search targets the Web
instead of a data lake.
2.2 Data Augmentation
Another approach to acquiring data is to augment exist-
ing datasets with external data. In the machine learning
community, adding pre-trained embeddings is a common
way to increase the features to train on. In the data man-
agement community, entity augmentation techniques have
been proposed to further enrich existing entity information.
Data integration is a broad topic and can be considered
as data augmentation if we are extending existing datasets
with newly-acquired ones.
2.2.1 Deriving Latent Semantics
A common data augmentation is to derive latent semantics
from data. A popular technique is to generate and use
embeddings that represent words, entities, or knowledge. In
particular, word embeddings have been successfully used to
solve many problems in natural language processing (NLP).
Word2vec [35] is a seminal work where, given a text corpus,
a word is represented by a vector of real numbers that
captures the linguistic context of the word in the corpus. The
word vectors can be generated by training a shallow two-
layer neural network to reconstruct the surrounding words
in the corpus. There are two possible models for training

==== Page 6 ====
6
word vectors: Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) and Skip-
gram. While CBOW predicts a word based on its surround-
ing words, Skip-gram does the opposite and predicts the
surrounding words based on a given word. As a result, two
words that occur in similar contexts tend to have similar
word vectors. A fascinating application of word vectors is
performing arithmetic operations on the word vectors. For
example, the result of subtracting the word vector of “king”
by that of “queen” is similar to the result of subtracting the
word vector of “man” by that of “woman”. Since word2vec
was proposed, there have been many extensions including
GloVe [36], which improves word vectors by also taking into
account global corpus statistics, and Doc2Vec [80], which
generates representations of documents.
Another technique for deriving latent semantics is la-
tent topic modeling. For example, Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion [37] (LDA) is a generative model that can be used
to explain why certain parts of the data are similar using
unobserved groups.
2.2.2 Entity Augmentation
In many cases, datasets are incomplete and need to be ﬁlled
in by gathering more information. The missing information
can either be values or entire features. An early system
called Octopus [30] composes Web search queries using
keys of the table containing the entities. Then all the Web
tables in the resulting Web pages are clustered by schema,
and the tables in the most relevant cluster are joined with
the entity table. More recently, InfoGather [31] takes a
holistic approach using Web tables on the Web. The entity
augmentation is performed by ﬁlling in missing values of
attributes in some or all of the entities by matching multiple
Web tables using schema matching. To help the user decide
which attributes to ﬁll in, InfoGather identiﬁes synonymous
attributes in the Web tables.
2.2.3 Data Integration
Data integration can also be considered as data augmenta-
tion, especially if we are extending existing data sets with
other acquired ones. Since this discipline is well established,
we point the readers to some excellent surveys [40], [41].
More recently, an interesting line of work relevant to ma-
chine learning [42]–[44] observes that in practice, many
companies use relational databases where the training data
is divided into smaller tables. However, most machine learn-
ing toolkits assume that a training dataset is a single ﬁle
and ignore the fact that there are typically multiple tables
in a database due to normalization. The key question is
whether joining the tables and augmenting the information
is useful for model training. The Hamlet system [38] and
its subsequent Hamlet++ systems [39] address this problem
by determining if key-foreign key (KFK) joins are necessary
for improving the model accuracy for various classiﬁers
(linear, decision trees, non-linear SVMs, and artiﬁcial neural
networks) and propose decision rules to predict when it is
safe to avoid joins and, as a result, signiﬁcantly reduce the
total runtime. A surprising result is that joins can often be
avoided without negatively inﬂuencing the model’s accu-
racy. Intuitively, a foreign key determines the entire record
of the joining table, so the features brought in by a join do
not add a lot more information.2.3 Data Generation
If there are no existing datasets that can be used for training,
then another option is to generate the datasets either manu-
ally or automatically. For manual construction, crowdsourc-
ing is the standard method where human workers are given
tasks to gather the necessary bits of data that collectively
become the generated dataset. Alternatively, automatic tech-
niques can be used to generate synthetic datasets. Note that
data generation can also be viewed as data augmentation if
there is existing data where some missing parts needs to be
ﬁlled in.
2.3.1 Crowdsourcing
Crowdsourcing is used to solve a wide range of problems,
and there are many surveys as well [81]–[84]. One of the
earliest and most popular platforms is Amazon Mechanical
Turk [85] where tasks (called HITs ) are assigned to human
workers, and workers are compensated for ﬁnishing the
tasks. Since then, many other crowdsourcing platforms have
been developed, and research on crowdsourcing has ﬂour-
ished in the areas of data management, machine learning,
and human computer interaction. There is a wide range of
crowdsourcing tasks from simple ones like labeling images
up to complex ones like collaboratively writing that involve
multiple steps [86], [87]. Another important usage of crowd-
sourcing is data labeling (e.g., the ImageNet project), which
we discuss in Section 3.2.
In this section, we narrow the scope and focus on crowd-
sourcing techniques that are speciﬁc to data generation
tasks. A recent survey [88] provides an extensive discus-
sion on the challenges for data crowdsourcing. Another
survey [89] touches on the theoretical foundations of data
crowdsourcing. According to both surveys, data generation
using crowdsourcing can be divided into two steps: gather-
ingdata and preprocessing data.
Gathering data One way to categorize data gathering tech-
niques is whether the tasks are procedural or declarative.
A procedural task is where the task creator deﬁnes explicit
steps and assigns them to workers. For example, one may
write a computer program that issues tasks to workers.
TurKit [45] allows users to write scripts that include HITs us-
ing a crash-and-return programming model where a script
can be re-executed without re-running costly functions with
side effects. A UTO MAN[46] is a domain-speciﬁc language
embedded in Scala where crowdsourcing tasks can be in-
voked like conventional functions. D OG [47] is a high-
level programming language that compiles into MapReduce
tasks that can be performed by humans or machines. A
declarative task is when the task creator speciﬁes high-
level data requirements, and the workers provide the data
that satisfy them. For example, a database users may pose
an SQL query like “SELECT title, director, genre, rating
FROM MOVIES WHERE genre = ’action”’ to gather movie
ratings data for a recommendation system. D ECO [48] uses
a simple extension of SQL and deﬁnes precise semantics for
arbitrary queries on stored data and data collected by the
crowd. CrowdDB [49] focuses on the systems aspect of using
crowdsourcing to answer queries that cannot be answered
automatically.

==== Page 7 ====
7
Another way to categorize data gathering is whether
the data is assumed to be closed-world or open-world.
Under a closed-world assumption, the data is assumed to
be “known” and entirely collectable by asking the right
questions. A SKIT! [51] uses this assumption and focuses
on the problem of determining which questions should be
directed to which users, in order to minimize the uncertainty
of the collected data. In an open-world assumption, there
is no longer a guarantee that all the data can be collected.
Instead, one must estimate if enough data was collected.
Statistical tools [52] have been proposed for scanning a
single table with predicates like “SELECT FLAVORS FROM
ICE CREAM.” Initially, many ﬂavors can be collected, but
the rate of new ﬂavors will inevitably slow down, and
statistical methods are used to estimate the future rate of
new values.
Data gathering is not limited to collecting entire records
of a table. CrowdFill [53] is a system for collecting parts
of structured data from the crowd. Instead of posing spe-
ciﬁc questions to workers, CrowdFill shows a partially-
ﬁlled table. Workers can then ﬁll in the empty cells and
also upvote or downvote data entered by other workers.
CrowdFill provides a collaborative environment and allows
the speciﬁcation of constraints on values and mechanisms
for resolving conﬂicts when workers are ﬁlling in values
of the same record. ALFRED [54] uses the crowd to train
extractors that can then be used to acquire data. ALFRED
asks simple yes/no membership questions on the contents
of Web pages to workers and uses the answers to infer the
extraction rules. The quality of the rules can be improved by
recruiting multiple workers.
Preprocessing data Once the data is gathered, one may want
to preprocess the data to make it suitable for machine
learning purposes. While many possible crowd operations
have been proposed, the ones that are relevant include
data curation, entity resolution, and joining datasets. Data
Tamer [55] is an end-to-end data curation system that
can clean and transform datasets and semantically inte-
grate with other datasets. Data Tamer has a crowdsourcing
component (called Data Tamer Exchange), which assigns
tasks to workers. The supported operations are attribute
identiﬁcation (i.e., determine if two attributes are the same)
and entity resolution (i.e., determine if two entities are the
same). Corleone [56] is a hands-off crowdsourcing system,
which crowdsources the entire workﬂow of entity resolution
to workers. CrowdDB [49] and Qurk [50] are systems for
aggregating, sorting, and joining datasets.
For both gathering and preprocessing data, quality con-
trol is an important challenge as well. The issues include
designing the right interface to maximize worker produc-
tivity, managing workers who may have different levels
of skills (or may even be spammers), and decomposing
problems into smaller tasks and aggregating them. Several
surveys [82]–[84] cover these issues in detail.
2.3.2 Synthetic Data Generation
Generating synthetic data along with labels is increasingly
being used in machine learning due to its low cost and
ﬂexibility [90]. A simple method is to start from a probability
distribution and generate a sample from that distributionusing tools like scikit learn [91]. In addition, there are more
advanced techniques like Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [2], [57], [61], [62] and application-speciﬁc gener-
ation techniques. We ﬁrst provide a brief introduction of
GANs and present synthetic data generation techniques
on relational data. We then introduce recent augmentation
techniques using policies. Finally, we introduce image and
text data generation techniques due to their importance.
GANs The key approach of a GAN is to train two contesting
neural networks: a generative network and a discriminative
network. The generative network learns to map from a
latent space to a data distribution, and the discriminative
network discriminates examples from the true distribution
from the candidates produced by the generative network.
The training of a GAN can be formalized as:
min
Gmax
DV(D; G )
V(D; G ) = E
xpdata (x)[logD(x)] + E
zpz(z)[log(1 D(G(z))]
where pdata(x)is the distribution of the real data, pz(z)
is the distribution of the generator, G(z)is the generative
network, and D(x)is the discriminative network.
The objective of the generative network is to increase
the error rate of the discriminative network. That is, the
generative network attempts to fool the discriminative net-
work into thinking that its candidates are from the true
distribution. GANs have been used to generate synthetic
images and videos that look realistic in many applications.
GANs have recently been used to generate synthetic
relational data. A MED GAN [58] generates synthetic patient
records with high-dimensional discrete variable (binary or
count) features based on real patient records. While GANs
can only learn to approximate discrete patient records, the
novelty is to also use an autoencoder to project these records
into a lower dimensional space and then project them back
to the original space. A TABLE -GAN [59] also synthesizes
tables that are similar to the real ones, but with a focus
on privacy perservation. In particular, a metric for infor-
mation loss is deﬁned, and two parameters are provided to
adjust the information loss. The higher the loss, the more
privacy the synthetic table has. A TGAN [60] focuses on
simultaneously generating values for a mixture of discrete
and continuous features.
Policies Another recent approach is to use human-deﬁned
policies [63], [64] to apply transformations to the images as
long as they remain realistic. This criteria can be enforced
by training a reinforcement learning model on a separate
validation set.
Data-speciﬁc We now introduce data-speciﬁc techniques for
generation. Synthetic image generation is a heavily-studied
topic in the computer vision community. Given the wide
range of vision problems, we are not aware of a comprehen-
sive survey on synthetic data generation and will only focus
on a few representative problems. In object detection, it is
possible to learn 3D models of objects and give variations
(e.g., rotate a car 90 degrees) to generate another realistic
image [65], [66]. If the training data is a rapid sequence of
images frames in time [67] the objects of a frame can be
assumed to move in a linear trajectory between consecutive

==== Page 8 ====
8
frames. Text within images is another application where one
can vary the fonts, sizes, and colors of the text to generate
large amounts of synthetic text images [68], [69].
An alternative approach to generating image datasets
is to start from a large set of noisy images and select the
clean ones. Xia et al. [70] searches the Web for images with
noise and then uses a density-based measure to cluster the
images and remove outliers. Bai et al. [71] exploits large
click-through logs, which contains queries of users and the
images that were clicked by those users. A deep neural
network is used to learn representations of the words and
images and compute word-word and image-word similar-
ities. The noisy images that have low similarities to their
categories are then removed.
Generating synthetic text data has also been studied
in the natural language processing community. Paraphras-
ing [72] is a classical problem of generating alternative
expressions that have the same semantic meaning. For ex-
ample “What does Xdo for a living?” is a paraphrase of
“What is X’s job?”. We brieﬂy cover two recent methods
– one is syntax-based and the other semantics-based – that
uses paraphrasing to generate large amounts of synthetic
text data. Syntactically controlled paraphrase networks [73]
(SCPNs) can be trained to produce paraphrases of a sentence
with different sentence structures. Semantically equivalent
adversarial rules for text [74] (SEARs) have been proposed
for perturbing input text while preserving its semantics.
SEARs can be used to debug a model by applying them
on training data and seeing if the re-trained model changes
its predictions. In addition, there are many paraphrasing
techniques that are not covered in this survey.
3 D ATALABELING
Once enough data has been acquired, the next step is to label
individual examples. For instance, given an image dataset
of industrial components in a smart factory application,
workers can start annotating if there are any defects in
the components. In many cases, data acquisition is done
along with data labeling. When extracting facts from the
Web and constructing a knowledge base, then each fact is
assumed to be correct and thus implicitly labeled as true.
When discussing the data labeling literature, it is easier to
separate it from data acquisition as the techniques can be
quite different.
We believe the following categories provide a reasonable
view of understanding the data labeling landscape:
Use existing labels: An early idea of data labeling
is to exploit any labels that already exist. There is
an extensive literature on semi-supervised learning
where the idea is to learn from the labels to predict
the rest of the labels.
Crowd-based: The next set of techniques are based on
crowdsourcing. A simple approach is to label indi-
vidual examples. A more advanced technique is to
use active learning where questions to ask are more
carefully selected. More recently, many crowdsourc-
ing techniques have been proposed to help workers
become more effective in labeling.
Weak labels: While it is desirable to generate correct
labels all the time, this process may be too expensive.An alternative approach is to newly generate less
than perfect labels (i.e., weak labels), but in large
quantities to compensate for the lower quality. Re-
cently, the latter approach is gaining more popularity
as labeled data is scarce in many new applications.
Table 2 shows where different labeling approaches ﬁt
into the categories. In addition, each labeling approach can
be further categorized as follows:
Machine learning task: In supervised learning, the
two categories are classiﬁcation (e.g., determining
whether a piece of text has a positive sentiment) and
regression (e.g., estimating the salary of a person).
Most of the data labeling research has been focused
on classiﬁcation problems rather than regression
problems, possibly because data labeling is simpler
in a classiﬁcation setting.
Data type: Depending on the data type (e.g., text,
images, and graphs) the data labeling techniques
differ signiﬁcantly. For example, fact extraction from
text is very different from object detection on images.
3.1 Utilizing existing labels
A common setting in machine learning is to have a small
amount of labeled data, which is expensive to produce
with humans, along with a much larger amount of unla-
beled data. Semi-supervised learning techniques [143] ex-
ploit both labeled and unlabeled data to make predictions.
In a transductive learning setting, the entire unlabeled data
is available while in an inductive learning setting, some
unlabeled data is available, but the predictions must be on
unseen data. Semi-supervised learning is a broad topic, and
we focus on a smaller branch of research called self-labeled
techniques [96] where the goal is to generate more labels by
trusting one’s own predictions. Since the details are in the
survey, we only provide a summary here. In addition to the
general techniques, there are graph-based label propagation
techniques that are specialized for graph data.
3.1.1 Classiﬁcation
For semi-supervised learning techniques for classiﬁcation,
the goal is to train a model that returns one of multiple
possible classes for each example using labeled and unla-
beled datasets. We consider the best-performing techniques
in a survey that focuses on labeling data [96], which are
summarized in Figure 4. The performance results are similar
regardless of using transductive or inductive learning.
The simplest class of semi-supervised learning tech-
niques train one model using one learning algorithm on one
set of features. For example, Self-training [92] initially trains
a model on the labeled examples. The model is then applied
to all the unlabeled data where the examples are ranked
by the conﬁdences in their predictions. The most conﬁdent
predictions are then added into the labeled examples. This
process repeats until all the unlabeled examples are labeled.
The next class trains multiple classiﬁers by sampling
the training data several times and training a model for
each sample. For example, Tri-training [93] initially trains
three models on the labeled examples using Bagging for the
ensemble learning algorithm. Then each model is updated

==== Page 9 ====
9
Category Approach Machine learning task Data types Techniques
Use Existing LabelsSelf-labeledclassiﬁcation all [92]–[96]
regression all [97]–[99]
Label propagation classiﬁcation graph [100]–[102]
Crowd-basedActive learningclassiﬁcation all [103]–[109]
regression all [110]
Semi-supervised+Active learning classiﬁcationtext [111], [112]
image [113]
graph [114]
Crowdsourcingclassiﬁcation all [50], [54], [115]–[122]
regression all [123]
Weak supervisionData programming classiﬁcation all [3], [124]–[127], [127]–[130]
Fact extraction classiﬁcation text [131]–[142]
TABLE 2: A classiﬁcation of data labeling techniques. Some of the techniques can be used for the same application. For
example, for classiﬁcation on graph data, both self-labeled techniques and label propagation can be used.
iteratively where the other two models make predictions on
the unlabeled examples, and only the examples with the
same predictions are used in conjunction with the original
labeled examples to re-train the model. The iteration stops
when no model changes. Finally, the unlabeled examples
are labeled using majority voting where at least two models
must agree with each other.
The next class uses multiple learning algorithms. For
example, Democratic Co-learning [94] uses a set of different
learning algorithms (in the experiments, they are Naive
Bayes, C4.5, and 3-nearest neighbor) are used to train a set of
classiﬁers separately on the same training data. Predictions
on new examples are generated by combining the results
of the three classiﬁers using weighted voting. The new
labels are then added to the training set of the classiﬁers
whose predictions are different from the majority results.
This process repeats until no more data is added to the
training data of a classiﬁer.
The ﬁnal class uses multiple views, which are subsets
of features that are conditionally independent given the
class. For example, Co-training [95] splits the feature set
into two sufﬁcient and redundant views, which means that
one set of features is sufﬁcient for learning and independent
of learning with the other set of features given the label.
For each feature set, a model is trained and then used to
teach the model trained on the other feature set. The co-
trained models can minimize errors by maximizing their
agreements over the unlabeled examples.
According to the survey, these algorithms result in sim-
ilar transductive or inductive accuracies when averaged on
55 datasets from the UCI [144] and KEEL dataset [145]
repositories. Here accuracy is deﬁned as the portion of
classiﬁcations by the trained model that are correct. How-
ever, not all of these techniques are generally-applicable
where one can plug in any machine learning algorithm and
use any set of features. First, Co-training assumes that the
feature can be divided into two subsets that are condition-
ally independent given the label (also called sufﬁcient and
redundant views), which is not always possible. Second,
Democratic Co-learning assumes three different machine
learning algorithms, which is not always possible if there
is only one algorithm to use.
Views 
Learning 
Algorithms 
Classifiers Single Multiple 
Single Multiple 
Single Multiple 
Self Training Tri Training Democratic Co-learning Co-training Fig. 4: A simpliﬁed classiﬁcation of semi-supervised learn-
ing techniques for self labeling according to a survey [96]
using the best-performing techniques regardless of induc-
tive or transductive learning.
3.1.2 Regression
Relatively less research has been done for semi-supervised
learning for regression where the goal is to train a
model that predicts a real number given an example. Co-
regularized least squares regression [97] is a least squares
regression algorithm based on the co-learning approach.
Another co-regularized framework [98] utilizes sufﬁcient
and redundant views similar to Co-training. Co-training
regressors [99] uses two k-nearest neighbor regressors with
different distance metrics. In each iteration, a regressor la-
bels the unlabeled data that can be labeled most conﬁdently
by the other regressor. After the iterations, the ﬁnal pre-
diction of an example is made by averaging the regression
estimates by the two regressors. Co-training Regressors can
be extended by using any other base regressor.
3.1.3 Graph-based Label Propagation
Graph-based label propagation techniques also start with
limited sets of labeled examples, but exploit the graph
structure of examples based on their similarities to infer
the labels of the remaining examples. For example, if an

==== Page 10 ====
10
image is labeled as a dog, then similar images down the
graph can also be labeled as dogs with some probability.
The further the distance, the lower the probability of label
propagation. Graph-based label propagation has applica-
tions in computer vision, information retrieval, social net-
works, and natural language processing. Zhu et al. [101]
proposed a semi-supervised learning based on a Gaussian
random ﬁeld model where the unlabeled and labeled ex-
amples form a weighted graph. The mean of the ﬁeld is
characterized in terms of harmonic functions and can be
efﬁciently computed using matrix methods or belief prop-
agation. The MAD-Sketch algorithm [102] was proposed to
further reduce the space and time complexities of graph-
based SSL algorithms using count-min sketching. In partic-
ular, the space complexity per node is reduced from O(m)to
O(logm)under certain conditions where mis the number
of distinct labels, and a similar improvement is achieved for
the time complexity. Recently, a family of algorithms called
EXPANDER [100] were proposed to further reduce the space
complexity per node to O(1)and compute the MAD-Sketch
algorithm in a distributed fashion.
3.2 Crowd-based techniques
The most accurate way to label examples is to do it manu-
ally. A well known use case is the ImageNet image classiﬁ-
cation dataset [146] where tens of millions of images were
organized according to a semantic hierarchy by WordNet
using Amazon Mechanical Turk. However, ImageNet is an
ambitious project that took years to complete, which most
machine learning users cannot afford for their own applica-
tions. Traditionally, active learning has been a key technique
in the machine learning community for carefully choosing
the right examples to label and thus minimize cost. More
recently, crowdsourcing techniques for labeling have been
proposed where there can be many workers who are not
necessarily experts in labeling. Hence, there is more empha-
sis on how to assign tasks to workers, what interfaces to use,
and how to ensure high quality labels. Recent commercial
tools vary in what services they provide for labeling. For
example, Amazon SageMaker [8] supports labeling based
on active learning, Google Cloud AutoML [6] provides a
manual labeling service, and Microsoft Custom Vision [7]
requires labels from the user. While crowdsourcing data
labeling is closely related to crowdsourcing data acquisition,
the individual techniques are different.
3.2.1 Active Learning
Active learning focuses on selecting the most “interesting”
unlabeled examples to give to the crowd for labeling. The
workers are expected to be very accurate, so there is less
emphasis on how to interact with those with less expertise.
While some references view active learning as a special case
of semi-supervised learning, the key difference is that there
is a human-in-the-loop. The key challenge is choosing the
right examples to ask given a limited budget. One downside
of active learning is that the examples are biased to the
training algorithm and cannot be reused. Active learning
is covered extensively in other surveys [105], [147], and we
only cover the most prominent techniques here.Uncertain Examples Uncertainty Sampling [103] is the sim-
plest in active learning and chooses the next unlabeled
example that the model prediction is most uncertain. For
example, if the model is a binary classiﬁer, uncertainty
sampling chooses the example whose probability is nearest
to 0.5. If there are more than three class labels, we could
choose the example whose prediction is the least conﬁdent.
The downside of this approach is that it throws away the
information of all the other possible labels. So an improved
version called margin sampling is to choose the example
whose probability difference between the most and second-
most probable labels is the largest. This method can be fur-
ther generalized using entropy as the uncertainty measure
where entropy is an information-theoretic measure for the
amount of information to encode a distribution.
Query-by-Committee [104] extends uncertainty sam-
pling by training a committee of models on the same labeled
data. Each model can vote when labeling each example,
and the most informative example is considered to be
the one where the most models disagree with each other.
More formally, this approach minimizes the version space ,
which is the space of all possible classiﬁers that give the
same classiﬁcation results as (and are thus consistent with)
the labeled data. The challenge is to train models that
represent different regions of the version space and have
some amount of disagreement. Various methods have been
proposed [105], but there does not seem to be a clear winner.
One general method is called query-by-bagging [106], which
uses bagging as an ensemble learning algorithm and trains
models on bootstrap samples. There is no general agreement
on the best number of models to train, which is application-
speciﬁc.
Both uncertainty sampling and query-by-committee fo-
cus on individual examples instead of the entire set of ex-
amples, they run into the danger of choosing examples that
are outliers according to the example distribution. Density
weighting [107] is a way to improve the above techniques by
choosing instances that are not only uncertain or disagree-
ing, but also representative of the example distribution.
Decision Theoretic Approaches Another line of active learning
performs decision-theoretic approaches. Decision theory is
a framework for making decision under uncertainty using
states and actions to optimize some objective function. In
the context of active learning, the objective could be to
choose an example that maximizes the estimated model
accuracy [108]. Another possible objective is reducing gen-
eralization error [109], which is estimated as follows: if the
measure is log loss, then the entropy of the predicted class
distribution is considered the error rate; if the measure is 0-
1 loss, the maximum probability among all classes is the
error rate. Each example to label is chosen by taking a
sample of the unlabeled data and choosing the example that
minimizes the estimated error rate.
Regression Active learning techniques can also be extended
to regression problems. For uncertainty sampling, instead of
computing the entropy of classes, one can compute the out-
put variance of the predictions and select the examples with
the highest variance. Query-by-committee can also be ex-
tended to regression [110] by training a committee of models
and selecting the examples where the variance among the

==== Page 11 ====
11
committee’s predictions is the largest. This approach is said
to work well when the bias of the models is small. Also, this
approach is said to be robust to overspeciﬁcation, which
reduces the chance of overﬁtting.
Self and Active Learning Combined The data labeling tech-
niques we consider are complementary to each other and
can be used together. In fact, semi-supervised learning and
active learning have a history of being used together [111]–
[114], [148]. A key observation is that the two techniques
solve opposite problems where semi-supervised learning
ﬁnds the predictions with the highest conﬁdence and adds
them to the labeled examples while active learning ﬁnds
the predictions with the lowest conﬁdence (using uncer-
tainty sampling, query-by-committee, or density-weighted
method) and sends them for manual labeling.
There are various ways semi-supervised learning can
be used with active learning. McCallum and Nigam [111]
improves the Query-By-Committee (QBC) technique and
combines it with Expectation-Maximization (EM), which
effectively performs semi-supervised learning. Given a set
of documents for training data, active learning is done
by selecting the documents that are closer to others (and
thus representative), but have committee disagreement, for
labeling. In addition, the EM algorithm is used to further
infer the rest of the labels. The active learning and EM
can either be done separately or interleaved. Tomanek
and Hahn [112] propose semi-supervised active learning
(SeSAL) for sequence labeling tasks, which include POS
tagging, chunking, or named entity recognition (NER). Here
the examples are sequences of text. The idea is to use
active learning for the subsequences that have the highest
training utility within the selected sentences and use semi-
supervised learning to automatically label the rest of the
subsequences. The utility of a subsequence is highest when
the current model is least conﬁdent about the labeling.
Zhou et al. [113] proposes the semi-supervised active
image retrieval (SSAIR) approach where the focus is on
image retrieval. SSAIR is inspired by the co-training method
where initially two classiﬁers are trained from the labeled
data. Then each learner passes the most relevant/irrelevant
images to the other classiﬁer. The classiﬁers are then re-
trained with the additional labels, and their results are
combined. The images that still have low conﬁdence are
selected to be labeled by humans.
Zhu et al. [114] combines semi-supervised and active
learning under a Gaussian random ﬁeld model. The labeled
and unlabeled examples are represented as vertices in a
graph where edges are weighted by similarities between
examples. This framework enables one to compute the next
question that minimizes the expected generalization error
efﬁciently for active learning. Once the new labels are added
to the labeled data, semi-supervised learning is performed
using harmonic functions.
3.2.2 Crowdsourcing
In comparison to active learning, the crowdsourcing tech-
niques here are more focused on running tasks with many
workers who are not necessarily labeling experts. As a
result, workers may make mistakes, and there is a heavy
literature [81]–[84], [115], [149], [150] on improving theinteraction with workers, evaluating workers so they are
reliable, reducing any bias that the workers may have,
and aggregating the labeling results while resolving any
ambiguities among them.
User Interaction A major challenge in user interaction is
to effectively provide instructions to workers on how to
perform the labeling. The traditional approach is to provide
some guidelines for labeling to the workers up front and
then let them make a best effort to follow them. However,
the guidelines are often incomplete and do not cover all
possible scenarios, leaving the workers in the dark. Re-
volt [115] is a system that attempts to ﬁx this problem
through collaborative crowdsourcing. Here workers work in
three steps: Voting where workers vote just like in traditional
labeling, Explaining where workers justify their rational for
labeling, and Categorize where workers review explanations
from other workers and tag any conﬂicting labels. This
information can then be used to make post-hoc judgements
of the label decision boundaries. Another approach is to pro-
vide better tools to assist workers to organize their concepts,
which may evolve as more examples are labeled [117].
In addition, providing the right labeling interface is
critical for workers to perform well. The challenge is that
each application may have a different interface that works
best. We will not cover all the possible applications, but
instead illustrate a line of research for the problem of entity
resolution where the goal is to ﬁnd records in a database
that refer to the same real-world entity. Here the label is
whether two (or more) records are the same or not. Just
for this problem, there is a line of research on providing
the best interface for comparisons. CrowdER [118] provides
two types of interfaces to compare records: pair-based and
cluster-based. Qurk [50] uses a mapping interface where
multiple records on one side are matched with records on
the other side. Qurk uses a combination of comparison or
rating tasks to accelerate labeling.
Quality control Controlling the quality of data labeling by
the crowd is important because the workers may vary sig-
niﬁcantly in their abilities to provide labels. A simple way to
ensure quality is to repeatedly label the same example using
multiple workers and perhaps take a majority voting at the
end. However, there are more sophisticated approaches as
well. Get another label [119] and Crowdscreen [120] actively
solicit labels while Karger et al. [121] passively collects
data and runs the expectation maximization algorithm. Vox
Populi [122] proposes techniques for pruning low-quality
workers that can achieve better labeling quality without
having to repeatedly label examples.
Scalability Scaling up crowdsourced labeling is another
important challenge. While traditional active learning tech-
niques were proposed for this purpose, more recently the
data management community has started to apply sys-
tems techniques for further scaling the algorithms to large
datasets. In particular, Mozafari et al. [116] proposes active
learning algorithms that can run in parallel. One algorithm
(called Uncertainty ) selects examples that the current classi-
ﬁer is most uncertain about. A more sophisticated algorithm
(called MinExpError ) combines the current model’s accuracy
with the uncertainty. A key idea is the use of bootstrap the-

==== Page 12 ====
12
ory, which makes the algorithms applicable to any classiﬁer
and also enables embarassingly-parallel processing.
Regression In comparison to crowdsourcing research for
classiﬁcation tasks, less attention has been given to regres-
sion tasks. Marcus et al. [123] solves the problem of selec-
tivity estimation in a crowdsourced database. The goal is to
estimate the fraction of records that satisfy some property
by asking workers questions.
3.3 Weak supervision
As machine learning is used in a wider range of applica-
tions, it is mostly the case that there is not enough labeled
data. For example, in a smart factory setting, any new
product will have no labels for training a model for quality
control. As a result, weak supervision techniques [151]–
[153] have become increasingly popular where the idea is
to semi-automatically generate large quantities of labels that
are not as accurate as manual labels, but good enough for
the trained model to obtain a reasonably-high accuracy.
This approach is especially useful when there are large
amounts of data, and manual labeling becomes infeasible.
In the next sections, we discuss the recently proposed data
programming paradigm and fact extraction techniques.
3.3.1 Data Programming
As data labeling at scale becomes more important especially
for deep learning applications, data programming [126] has
been proposed as a solution for generating large amounts
of weak labels using multiple labeling functions instead of
individual labeling. Figure 5 illustrates how data program-
ming can be used for Sally’s smart factory application. A
labeling function can be any computer program that either
generates a label for an example or refrains to do so. For
example, a labeling function that checks if a tweet has a
positive sentiment may check if certain positive words ap-
pear in the text. Since a single labeling function by itself may
not be accurate enough or not be able to generate labels for
all examples, multiple labeling functions are implemented
and combined into a generative model, which is then used
to generate large amounts of weak labels with reasonable
quality. Alternatively, voting methods like majority voting
can be used to combine the labeling functions. Finally, a
noise-aware discriminative model is trained on the weak
labels. Data programming has been implemented in the
state-of-the-art Snorkel system [127], which is becoming
increasingly popular in the industry [128], [129].
Data programming has advantages both in terms of
model accuracy and usability. A key observation for gener-
ating weak labels is that training a discriminative model on
large amounts of weak labels may result in higher accuracy
than training with fewer manual labels. In terms of usability,
implementing labeling functions can be an intuitive process
for humans compared to feature engineering in traditional
machine learning [154].
What makes data programming effective is the way it
combines multiple labeling functions into the generative
model by ﬁtting a probabilistic graphical model. A na ¨ıve
approach to combine labeling functions is to take a majority
vote. However, this approach cannot handle pathological
cases where many labeling functions are near identical,
def lf1(x): ... 
def lf2(x): ... 
def lf3(x): ... <Label Function Generation> 
Generative 
Model 
Majority 
Voting Weak 
Labels <Crowd> 
Discriminative 
Model Fig. 5: A workﬂow of using data programming for a smart
factory application. In this scenario, Sally is using crowd-
sourcing to annotate defects on component images. Next,
the annotations can be automatically converted to labeling
functions. Then the labeling functions are combined either
into a generative model or using majority voting. Finally,
the combined model generates weak labels that are used to
train a discriminative model.
which defeats the purpose of majority voting. Instead, la-
beling functions that are more correlated with each other
will have less inﬂuence on the predicted label. In addition,
labeling functions that are outliers are also trained to have
less inﬂuence in order to cancel out the noise. Theoretical
analysis [3] shows that, if the labeling functions are reason-
ably accurate, then the predictions made by the generative
model becomes arbitrarily close to the true labels.
Several systems have been developed for data program-
ming. DeepDive [124] is a precursor of data programming
and supports fast knowledge base construction on dark
data using information extraction. DeepDive effectively uses
humans to extract features, implement supervision rules
using a declarative language (similar to labeling func-
tions), and supports incremental maintenance of inference.
DDLite [125] is the ﬁrst system to use data program-
ming and supports rapid prototyping of labeling functions
through an interactive interface. The primary application
is information extraction, and DDLite has been used to
extract chemicals, diseases, and anatomical named entities.
Compared to DeepDive, it has a simpler Python syntax
and does not require complex setup involving databases.
Snorkel [127], [155] is the most recent system for data pro-
gramming. Compared to DDLite, Snorkel is a full-ﬂedged
product that is widely used in the industry. Snorkel en-
ables users to use weak labels from all available weak
label sources, supports any type of classiﬁer, and provides
rapid results in response to the user’s input. More recently,
Snorkel has been extended to solve massively multi-task
learning [130].
Data programming is designed for classiﬁcation and
does not readily support regression. To make an extension to
regression, the labeling functions must return real numbers
instead of discrete values. In addition, the probabilistic
graphical model used for training generative models must
be able to return a continuous distribution of possible values
for labels.
3.3.2 Fact Extraction
Another way to generate weak labels is use fact extraction.
Knowledge bases contain facts that are extracted from var-
ious sources including the Web. A fact could describe an
attribute of an entity (e.g., hGermany, capital , Berlini). The
facts can be considered positively-labeled examples, which

==== Page 13 ====
13
can be used as seed labels for distant supervision [156]
when generating weak labels. It is worth mentioning that
fact extraction roots from the broader topic of informa-
tion extraction where the goal is to extract structured data
from the Web [157]. Early work include RoadRunner [139],
which compares HTML pages to generates wrappers and
KnowItAll [140], which uses extraction rules and a search
engine to identify and rank facts. Since then, the subsequent
works have become more sophisticated and also attempt to
organize the extract facts into knowledge bases.
We now focus on fact extraction techniques for knowl-
edge bases. If precision is critically important, then manual
curation should be part of the knowledge base construc-
tion as in Freebase [131] and Google Knowledge Graph.
Otherwise, the extraction techniques depend on the data
source. YAGO [132], [133] extracts facts from Wikipedia
using classes in WordNet. Ollie [134], ReVerb [135], and
ReNoun [136] and open information extraction systems
that apply patterns to Web text. Knowledge Vault [137]
also extracts from Web content, but combines facts from
text, tabular data, page structure, and human annotations.
Biperpedia [138] extracts the attributes of entities from a
query stream and Web text.
The Never-Ending Language Learner (NELL) sys-
tem [141], [142] continuously extracts structured in-
formation from the unstructured Web and constructs
a knowledge base that consists of entities and re-
lationships. Initially, NELL starts with a seed on-
tology, which contains entities of classes (e.g., per-
son, fruit, and emotion) and relationships among
the entities (e.g., playsOnTeam (athlete; sportsTeam )
andplaysInstrument (musician; instrument )). NELL an-
alyzes hundreds of millions of Web pages and identiﬁes
new entities in the given classes as well as entity pairs of
the relationships by matching patterns on their surrounding
phrases. The resulting entities and relationships can then be
used as the next training data for constructing even more
patterns. NELL has been collecting facts continuously since
2010. The extraction techniques can be viewed as distant
supervision generating weak labels.
4 U SING EXISTING DATA AND MODELS
An alternative approach to acquiring new data and labeling
it is to improve the labeling of any existing datasets or
improving the model training. This approach makes sense
for a number of scenarios. First, it may be difﬁcult to
ﬁnd new datasets because the application is too novel or
non-trivial for others to have produced datasets. Second,
simply adding more data may not signiﬁcantly improve
the model’s accuracy anymore. In this case, re-labeling or
cleaning the existing data may be the faster way to increase
the accuracy. Alternatively, the model training can be made
more robust to noise and bias, or the model can be trained
from an existing model using transfer learning techniques.
In the following sections, we explore techniques for im-
proving existing labels and improving existing models. The
techniques are summarized in Table 3.Task Techniques
Improve DataData Cleaning [158]–[166]
Re-labeling [119]
Improve ModelRobust Against Noise [167]–[171]
Transfer Learning [172]–[178]
TABLE 3: A classiﬁcation of techniques for improving exist-
ing data and models.
4.1 Improving Existing Data
A major problem in machine learning is that the data
can be noisy and the labels incorrect. This problem occurs
frequently in practice, so production machine learning plat-
forms like TensorFlow Extended (TFX) [179] have separate
components [180] to reduce data errors as much as possible
though analysis and validation. In case the labels are also
noisy, re-labeling the examples becomes necessary as well.
We explore recent advances in data cleaning with a focus on
machine learning and then techniques for re-labeling.
4.1.1 Data Cleaning
It is common for the data itself to be noisy. For example,
some values may be out of range (e.g., a latitude value is
beyond [-90, 90]) or use different units by mistake (e.g., some
intervals are in hours while other are in minutes). There
is a heavy literature on various integrity constraints (e.g.,
domain constraints, referential integrity constraints, and
functional dependencies) that can improve data quality as
well. HoloClean [158] is a state-of-art data cleaning system
that uses quality rules, value correlations, and reference data
to build a probabilistic model that captures how the data
was generated. HoloClean then generates a probabilistic
program for repairing the data. In addition, various inter-
active data cleaning tools [162]–[165] have been proposed to
convert data into a better form for machine learning.
An interesting line of recent work is cleaning techniques
with the explicit intention of improving machine learning
results. ActiveClean [159] is a model training framework
that iteratively suggests samples of data to clean based
on how much the cleaning improves the model accuracy
and the likelihood that the data is dirty. An analyst can
then perform transformations and ﬁltering to clean each
sample. ActiveClean treats the training and cleaning as a
form of stochastic gradiant descent and uses convex-loss
models (SVMs, linear and logistic regression) to guarantee
global solutions for clean models. BoostClean [160] solves an
important class of inconsistencies where an attribute value
is outside an allowed domain. BoostClean takes as input
a dataset and a set of functions that can detect these errors
and repair functions that can ﬁx them. Each pair of detection
and repair functions can produce a new model trained
on the cleaned data. BoostClean uses statistical boosting
to ﬁnd the best ensemble of pairs that maximize the ﬁnal
model’s accuracy. Recently, TARS [161] was proposed to
solve the problem of cleaning crowdsourced labels using
oracles. TARS provides two pieces of advice. First, given
test data with noisy labels, it uses an estimation technique to
predict how well the model may perform on the true labels.
The estimation is shown to be unbiased, and conﬁdence
intervals are computed to bound the error. Second, given

==== Page 14 ====
14
training data with noisy labels, TARS determines which
examples to send to an oracle in order to maximize the
expected model improvement of cleaning each noisy label.
More recently, MLC LEAN [166] has been proposed to inte-
grate three data operations: traditional data cleaning, model
unfairness mitigation where the goal is to remove data bias
that causes model fairness, and data sanitization where the
goal is to remove data poisoning.
4.1.2 Re-labeling
Trained models are only as good as their training data, and
it is important to obtain high quality data labels. Simply
labeling more data may not improve the model accuracy
further. Indeed, Sheng et al. [119] shows that, if the labels
are noisy, then the model accuracy plateaus from some point
and does not increase further, no matter how many more
labeling is done. The solution is to improve the quality of
existing labels. The authors show that repeated labeling us-
ing workers of certain individual qualities can signiﬁcantly
improve model accuracy where a straightforward round
robin approach already give substantial improvements, and
being more selective in labeling gives even better results.
4.2 Improving Models
In addition to improving the data, there are also ways
to improve the model training itself. Making the model
training more robust against noise or bias is an active area
of research. Another popular approach is to use transfer
learning where previously-trained models are used as a
starting point to train the current model.
4.2.1 Robust Against Noise and Bias
A common scenario in machine learning is that there is
a large number of noisy or even adversarial labels and
a relatively smaller number of clean labels. Simply dis-
carding the noisy labels will result in reduced training
data, which is not desirable for complex models. Hence,
there has been extensive research (see the survey [181])
on how to make the model training still use noisy labels
by becoming more robust. For speciﬁc techniques, Xiao et
al. [167] propose a general framework for training convolu-
tional neural networks on images with a small number of
clean labels and many noisy labels. The idea is to model
the relationships between images, class labels, and label
noises with a probabilistic graphical model and integrate
it into the model training. Label noise is categorized into
two types: confusing noise, which is caused by confusing
content in the images, and pure random noise, which is
caused by technical bugs like mismatches between images
and their surrounding text. The true labels and noise types
are treated as latent variables, and an EM algorithm is used
for inference. Webly supervised learning [168] is a technique
for training a convolutional neural network on clean and
noisy images on the Web. First, the model is trained on top-
ranked images from search engines, which tend to be clean
because they are highly-ranked, but also biased in the sense
that objects tends to be centered in the image with a clean
background. Then relationships are discovered among the
clean images, which are then used to adapt the model to
more noisier images that are harder to classify. This methodsuggests that it is worth training on easy and hard data
separately.
Goodfellow et al. [171] take a different approach where
they explain why machine learning models including neu-
ral networks may misclassify adversarial examples. While
previous research attempts to explain this phenomenon by
focusing on nonlinearity and overﬁtting, the authors show
that it is the model’s linear behavior in high-dimensional
spaces that makes it vulnerable. That is, making many small
changes on the features of an example can result in a large
change to the output prediction. As a result, generating
large amounts of adversarial examples becomes easier using
linear perturbation.
Even if the labels themselves are clean, it may be the
case that the labels are imbalanced. SMOTE [170] performs
over-sampling for minority classes that need more exam-
ples. Simply replicating examples may lead to overﬁtting, so
the over-sampling is done by generating synthetic examples
using the minority examples and their nearest neighbors.
He and Garcia [169] provide a comprehensive survey on
learning from imbalanced data.
4.2.2 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a popular approach for training models
when there is not enough training data or time to train from
scratch. A common technique is to start from an existing
model that is well trained (also called a source task ), one
can incrementally train a new model (a target task ) that
already performs well. For example, a convolutional neural
networks like AlexNet [182] and VGGNet [183] can be used
to train a model for a different, but related vision problem.
Recently, Google announced TensorFlow Hub [174], which
enables users to easily re-use an existing model to train an
accurate model, even with a small dataset. Also, Google
Cloud AutoML [6] provides transfer learning as a service.
From a data management perspective, an interesting ques-
tion is how these existing tools can be extended to index the
metadata of models and provide search as a service, just like
for datasets. The metadata for models may be quite different
than metadata for data because one needs to determine if
a model can be used for transfer learning in her own ap-
plication. In addition to using pre-trained models, another
popular technique mainly used in Computer Vision is few-
shot learning [175] where the goal is to extend existing
models to handle new classes using zero or more examples.
Since transfer learning is primarily a machine learning topic
that does not signiﬁcantly involve data management, we
only summarize the high-level ideas based on surveys [172],
[173]. There are studies of transfer learning techniques in
the context of NLP [176], Computer Vision [177], and deep
learning [184] as well.
An early survey of transfer learning [172] identiﬁes three
main research issues in transfer learning: what to transfer,
how to transfer, and when to transfer. That is, we need to
decide what part of knowledge can be transferred, what
methods should be used to transfer the knowledge, and
whether transferring this knowledge is appropriate and
does not have any negative effect. Inductive transfer learning
is used when the source task and target task are different
while the two domains may or may not be the same. Here a
task can be categorizing a document while a domain could

==== Page 15 ====
15
be a set of university webpages to categorize. Transductive
transfer learning is used when the source and target tasks are
the same, but the domains are different. Unsupervised transfer
learning is similar to inductive transfer learning where the
source and target tasks are different, but uses unsupervised
learning tasks like clustering and dimensionality reduction.
The three approaches above can also be divided based
on what to transfer. Instance-based transfer learning assumes
that the examples of the source can be re-used in the target
by re-weighting them. Feature-representation transfer learning
assumes that the features that represent the data of the
source task can be used to represent the data of the target
task. Parameter transfer learning assumes that the source and
target tasks share some parameters or prior distributions
that can be re-used. Relational knowledge transfer learning
assumes that certain relationships within the data of the
source task can be re-used in the target task.
More recent surveys [173], [178] classify most of the tra-
ditional transfer learning techniques as homogeneous transfer
learning where the feature spaces of the source and tar-
get tasks are the same. In addition, the surveys identify
a relatively new class of techniques called heterogeneous
transfer learning where the feature spaces are different, but
the source and target examples are extracted from the same
domain. Heterogeneous transfer learning largely falls into
two categories: asymmetric and symmetric transformation.
In an asymmetric approach, features of the source task
are transformed to the features of the target task. In a
symmetric approach, the assumption is that there is a com-
mon latent feature space that uniﬁes the source and target
features. Transfer learning has been successfully used in
many applications including text sentiment analysis, image
classiﬁcation, human activity classiﬁcation, software defect
detection, and multi-language text classiﬁcation.
5 P UTTING EVERYTHING TOGETHER
We now return to Sally’s scenario and provide an end-
to-end guideline for data collection (summarized as the
workﬂow in Figure 2). If there is no or little data to start with
then Sally would need to acquire datasets. She can either
search for relevant datasets either on the Web or within the
company data lake, or decide to generate a dataset herself
by installing camera equipment for taking photos of the
products within the factory. If the products also had some
metadata, Sally could also augment that data with external
information about the product.
Once the data is available, then Sally can choose among
the labeling techniques using the categories discussed in
Section 3. If there are enough existing labels, then self label-
ing using semi-supervised learning is an attractive option.
There are many variants of self labeling depending on the
assumptions on the model training as we studied. If there
are not enough labels, Sally can decide to generate some us-
ing the crowd-based techniques using a budget. If there are
only a few experts available for labeling, active learning may
be the right choice, assuming that the important examples
that inﬂuence the model can be narrowed down. If there
are many workers who do not necessarily have expertise,
general crowdsourcing methods can be used. If Sally does
not have enough budget for crowd-based methods or if itis simply not worth the cost, and if the model training can
tolerate weak labels, then weak supervision techniques like
data programming and label propagation can be used.
If Sally has existing labels, she may also want to make
sure whether they can be improved in quality. If the data is
noisy or biased, then the various data cleaning techniques
can be used. If there are existing models for product quality
through tools like TensorFlow Hub [174], they can be used
to further improve the model using transfer learning.
Through our experience, we also realize that it is not
always easy to determine if there is enough data and labels.
For example, even if the dataset is small or there are few
labels, as long as the distribution of data is easy to learn,
then automatic approaches like semi-supervised learning
will do the job better than manual approaches like active
learning. Another hard-to-measure factor is the amount
of human effort needed. When comparing active learning
versus data programming, we need to compare the tasks
of labeling examples and implementing labeling functions,
which are quite different. Depending on the application,
implementing a program on examples can range from trivial
(e.g., look for certain keywords) to almost impossible (e.g.,
general object detection). Hence, even if data programming
is an attractive option, one must determine the actual effort
of programming, which cannot be determined with a few
yes or no questions.
Another thing to keep in mind is how the labeling
techniques tradeoff accuracy and scalability. Manual la-
beling is obviously the most accurate, but least scalable.
Active learning scales better than the manual approach,
but is still limited to how fast humans can label. Data
programming produces weak labels, which tend to have
lower accuracy than manual labels. On the other hand, data
programming can scale better than active learning assuming
that the initial cost of implementing labeling functions and
debugging them is reasonable. Semi-supervised learning ob-
viously scales the best with automatic labeling. The labeling
accuracy depends on the accuracy of the model trained on
existing labels. Combining self labeling with active learning
is a good example of taking the best of both worlds.
6 F UTURE RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Although data collection was traditionally a topic in the ma-
chine learning, as the amount of training data is increasing,
data management research is becoming just as relevant, and
we are observing a convergence of the two disciplines. As
such, there needs to be more awareness on how the research
landscape will evolve for both communities and more effort
to better integrate the techniques.
Data Evaluation An open question is how to evaluate
whether the right data was collected with sufﬁcient quantity.
First, it may not be clear if we have found the best datasets
for a machine learning task and whether the amount of
data is enough to train a model with sufﬁcient accuracy.
In some cases, there may be too many datasets, and simply
collecting and integrating all of them may have a negative
affect on model training. As a result, selecting the right
datasets becomes an important problem. Moreover, if the
datasets are dynamic (e.g., they are streams of signals from
sensors) and change in quality, then the choice of datasets

==== Page 16 ====
16
may have to change dynamically as well. Second, many
data discovery tools rely on dataset owners to annotate their
datasets for better discovery, but more automatic techniques
for understanding and extracting metadata from the data
are needed.
While most of the data collection work assumes that the
model training comes after the data collection, another im-
portant avenue is to augment or improve the data based on
how the model performs. While there is a heavy literature
on model interpretation [185], [186], it is not clear how to
address feedback on the data level. In the model fairness
literature [187], one approach to reducing unfairness is to ﬁx
the data. In data cleaning, ActiveClean and BoostClean are
interesting approaches for ﬁxing the data to improve model
accuracy. A key challenge is analyzing the model, which
becomes harder as models become more complicated.
Performance Tradeoff While traditional labeling techniques
focus on accuracy, there is a recent push towards gen-
erating large amounts of weak labels. We need to better
understand the tradeoffs of accuracy versus scalability to
make informed decisions on which approach to use when.
For example, simply having more weak labels does not
necessarily mean the model’s accuracy will eventually reach
a perfect accuracy. At some point, it may be worth investing
in humans or using transfer learning to make additional
improvements. Such decisions can be made through some
trial and error, but an interesting question is whether there
is a more systematic way to do such evaluations.
Crowdsourcing Despite the many efforts in crowdsourcing,
leveraging humans is still a non-trivial task. Dealing with
humans involves designing the right tasks and interfaces,
ensuring that the worker quality is good enough, and setting
the right price for tasks. The recent data programming
paradigm introduces a new set of challenges where work-
ers now have to implement labeling functions instead of
providing labels themselves. One idea is to improve the
quality of such collaborative programming by making the
programming of labeling functions drastically easier, say by
introducing libraries or templates for programming.
Empirical comparison of techniques Although we showed a
ﬂowchart on when to use which techniques, it is far from
complete, as many factors are application-speciﬁc and can
only be determined by looking at the data and application.
For example, if the model training can be done with a small
number of labels, then we may not have to perform data
labeling using crowdsourcing. In addition, the estimated
human efforts in labeling and data programming may not
follow any theoretical model in practice. For example, hu-
mans may ﬁnd programming for certain applications much
more difﬁcult and time-consuming than other applications
depending on their expertise. Hence, there needs to be more
empirical research on the effectiveness of the techniques.
Generalizing and integrating techniques We observed that
many data collection techniques were application or data
type speciﬁc and were often small parts of a larger research.
As machine learning becomes widely used in just about any
application, there needs to be more effort in generalizing
the techniques to other problems. In data labeling, most ofthe research effort has been focused on classiﬁcation tasks
and much less on regression tasks. An interesting question
is which classiﬁcation techniques can also be extended to
regression. It is also worth exploring if application-speciﬁc
techniques can be generalized further. For example, the
NELL system continuously extracts facts from the Web in-
deﬁnitely. This idea can possibly be applied to collecting any
type of data from any source, although the technical details
may differ. Finally, given the variety of techniques for data
collection, there needs to be more research on end-to-end
solutions that combine techniques for data acquisition, data
labeling, and improvements of existing data and models.
7 C ONCLUSION
As machine learning becomes more widely used, it becomes
more important to acquire large amounts of data and label
data, especially for state-of-the-art neural networks. Tradi-
tionally, the machine learning, natural language processing,
and computer vision communities has contributed to this
problem – primarily on data labeling techniques including
semi-supervised learning and active learning. Recently, in
the era of Big data, the data management community is also
contributing to numerous subproblems in data acquisition,
data labeling, and improvement of existing data. In this
survey, we have investigated the research landscape of how
all these technique complement each other and have pro-
vided guidelines on deciding which technique can be used
when. Finally, we have discussed interesting data collection
challenges that remain to be addressed. In the future, we
expect the integration of Big data and AI to happen not only
in data collection, but in all aspects of machine learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Engineering Research
Center Program through the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean Government MSIT
(NRF-2018R1A5A1059921), by SK Telecom, and by a Google
AI Focused Research Award.
REFERENCES
[1] “Deep learning for detection of diabetic eye disease,”
https://research.googleblog.com/2016/11/deep-learning-
for-detection-of-diabetic.html.
[2] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning . The
MIT Press, 2016.
[3] S. H. Bach, B. D. He, A. Ratner, and C. R ´e, “Learning the structure
of generative models without labeled data,” in ICML , 2017, pp.
273–282.
[4] N. Polyzotis, S. Roy, S. E. Whang, and M. Zinkevich, “Data
lifecycle challenges in production machine learning: A survey,”
SIGMOD Rec. , vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 17–28, Jun. 2018.
[5] ——, “Data management challenges in production machine
learning,” in SIGMOD , 2017, pp. 1723–1726.
[6] “Google cloud automl,” https://cloud.google.com/automl/.
[7] “Microsoft custom vision,” https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
services/cognitive-services/custom-vision-service/.
[8] “Amazon sagemaker,” https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/.
[9] A. Bhardwaj, A. Deshpande, A. J. Elmore, D. Karger, S. Madden,
A. Parameswaran, H. Subramanyam, E. Wu, and R. Zhang, “Col-
laborative data analytics with datahub,” PVLDB , vol. 8, no. 12,
pp. 1916–1919, Aug. 2015.

==== Page 17 ====
17
[10] A. P . Bhardwaj, S. Bhattacherjee, A. Chavan, A. Deshpande,
A. J. Elmore, S. Madden, and A. G. Parameswaran, “Datahub:
Collaborative data science & dataset version management at
scale,” in CIDR , 2015.
[11] S. Bhattacherjee, A. Chavan, S. Huang, A. Deshpande, and
A. Parameswaran, “Principles of dataset versioning: Exploring
the recreation/storage tradeoff,” PVLDB , vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1346–
1357, Aug. 2015.
[12] A. Y. Halevy, “Data publishing and sharing using fusion tables,”
inCIDR , 2013.
[13] H. Gonzalez, A. Y. Halevy, C. S. Jensen, A. Langen, J. Madhavan,
R. Shapley, and W. Shen, “Google fusion tables: data manage-
ment, integration and collaboration in the cloud,” in SoCC , 2010,
pp. 175–180.
[14] H. Gonzalez, A. Y. Halevy, C. S. Jensen, A. Langen, J. Madhavan,
R. Shapley, W. Shen, and J. Goldberg-Kidon, “Google fusion
tables: web-centered data management and collaboration,” in
SIGMOD , 2010, pp. 1061–1066.
[15] “Ckan,” http://ckan.org.
[16] “Quandl,” https://www.quandl.com.
[17] “Datamarket,” https://datamarket.com.
[18] “Kaggle,” https://www.kaggle.com/.
[19] I. G. Terrizzano, P . M. Schwarz, M. Roth, and J. E. Colino, “Data
wrangling: The challenging yourney from the wild to the lake,”
inCIDR , 2015.
[20] A. Halevy, F. Korn, N. F. Noy, C. Olston, N. Polyzotis, S. Roy, and
S. E. Whang, “Goods: Organizing google’s datasets,” in SIGMOD ,
2016, pp. 795–806.
[21] R. Castro Fernandez, D. Deng, E. Mansour, A. A. Qahtan, W. Tao,
Z. Abedjan, A. Elmagarmid, I. F. Ilyas, S. Madden, M. Ouzzani,
M. Stonebraker, and N. Tang, “A demo of the data civilizer
system,” in SIGMOD , 2017, pp. 1639–1642.
[22] D. Deng, R. C. Fernandez, Z. Abedjan, S. Wang, M. Stonebraker,
A. K. Elmagarmid, I. F. Ilyas, S. Madden, M. Ouzzani, and
N. Tang, “The data civilizer system,” in CIDR , 2017.
[23] Y. Gao, S. Huang, and A. G. Parameswaran, “Navigating the
data lake with DATAMARAN: automatically extracting structure
from log datasets,” in SIGMOD , 2018, pp. 943–958.
[24] M. J. Cafarella, A. Halevy, D. Z. Wang, E. Wu, and Y. Zhang,
“Webtables: Exploring the power of tables on the web,” PVLDB ,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 538–549, 2008.
[25] M. J. Cafarella, A. Y. Halevy, H. Lee, J. Madhavan, C. Yu, D. Z.
Wang, and E. Wu, “Ten years of webtables,” PVLDB , vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 2140–2149, 2018.
[26] “Google dataset search,” https://www.blog.google/products/
search/making-it-easier-discover-datasets/.
[27] H. Elmeleegy, J. Madhavan, and A. Halevy, “Harvesting rela-
tional tables from lists on the web,” The VLDB Journal , vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 209–226, Apr. 2011.
[28] X. Chu, Y. He, K. Chakrabarti, and K. Ganjam, “Tegra: Table
extraction by global record alignment,” in SIGMOD , 2015, pp.
1713–1728.
[29] K. Chakrabarti, S. Chaudhuri, Z. Chen, K. Ganjam, and Y. He,
“Data services leveraging bing’s data assets,” IEEE Data Eng.
Bull. , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 15–28, 2016.
[30] M. J. Cafarella, A. Halevy, and N. Khoussainova, “Data integra-
tion for the relational web,” PVLDB , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1090–1101,
Aug. 2009.
[31] M. Yakout, K. Ganjam, K. Chakrabarti, and S. Chaudhuri, “Info-
gather: Entity augmentation and attribute discovery by holistic
matching with web tables,” in SIGMOD , 2012, pp. 97–108.
[32] N. N. Dalvi, R. Kumar, and M. A. Soliman, “Automatic wrappers
for large scale web extraction,” PVLDB , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 219–230,
2011.
[33] P . Bohannon, N. N. Dalvi, Y. Filmus, N. Jacoby, S. S. Keerthi,
and A. Kirpal, “Automatic web-scale information extraction,” in
SIGMOD , 2012, pp. 609–612.
[34] R. Baumgartner, W. Gatterbauer, and G. Gottlob, “Web data
extraction system,” in Encyclopedia of Database Systems, Second
Edition , 2018.
[35] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality,” in NIPS , 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[36] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global
vectors for word representation,” in EMNLP , 2014, pp. 1532–1543.[37] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet alloca-
tion,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 3, pp. 993–1022,
2003.
[38] A. Kumar, J. Naughton, J. M. Patel, and X. Zhu, “To join or not
to join?: Thinking twice about joins before feature selection,” in
SIGMOD , 2016, pp. 19–34.
[39] V . Shah, A. Kumar, and X. Zhu, “Are key-foreign key joins safe to
avoid when learning high-capacity classiﬁers?” PVLDB , vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 366–379, Nov. 2017.
[40] M. Stonebraker and I. F. Ilyas, “Data integration: The current
status and the way forward,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , vol. 41, no. 2,
pp. 3–9, 2018.
[41] A. Doan, A. Y. Halevy, and Z. G. Ives, Principles of Data Integration .
Morgan Kaufmann, 2012.
[42] S. Li, L. Chen, and A. Kumar, “Enabling and optimizing non-
linear feature interactions in factorized linear algebra,” in SIG-
MOD , 2019, pp. 1571–1588.
[43] L. Chen, A. Kumar, J. F. Naughton, and J. M. Patel, “Towards
linear algebra over normalized data,” PVLDB , vol. 10, no. 11, pp.
1214–1225, 2017.
[44] A. Kumar, J. F. Naughton, J. M. Patel, and X. Zhu, “To join or not
to join?: Thinking twice about joins before feature selection,” in
SIGMOD , 2016, pp. 19–34.
[45] G. Little, L. B. Chilton, M. Goldman, and R. C. Miller, “Turkit:
Human computation algorithms on mechanical turk,” in UIST ,
2010, pp. 57–66.
[46] D. W. Barowy, C. Curtsinger, E. D. Berger, and A. McGregor,
“Automan: A platform for integrating human-based and digital
computation,” in OOPSLA , 2012, pp. 639–654.
[47] S. Ahmad, A. Battle, Z. Malkani, and S. Kamvar, “The jabber-
wocky programming environment for structured social comput-
ing,” in UIST , 2011, pp. 53–64.
[48] H. Park, R. Pang, A. G. Parameswaran, H. Garcia-Molina,
N. Polyzotis, and J. Widom, “Deco: A system for declarative
crowdsourcing,” PVLDB , vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1990–1993, 2012.
[49] M. J. Franklin, D. Kossmann, T. Kraska, S. Ramesh, and R. Xin,
“Crowddb: Answering queries with crowdsourcing,” in SIG-
MOD , 2011, pp. 61–72.
[50] A. Marcus, E. Wu, S. Madden, and R. C. Miller, “Crowdsourced
databases: Query processing with people,” in CIDR , 2011, pp.
211–214.
[51] R. Boim, O. Greenshpan, T. Milo, S. Novgorodov, N. Polyzotis,
and W. C. Tan, “Asking the right questions in crowd data
sourcing,” in ICDE , 2012, pp. 1261–1264.
[52] M. J. Franklin, B. Trushkowsky, P . Sarkar, and T. Kraska, “Crowd-
sourced enumeration queries,” in ICDE , 2013, pp. 673–684.
[53] H. Park and J. Widom, “Crowdﬁll: collecting structured data
from the crowd,” in SIGMOD , 2014, pp. 577–588.
[54] V . Crescenzi, P . Merialdo, and D. Qiu, “Crowdsourcing large scale
wrapper inference,” vol. 33, pp. 1–28, 2014.
[55] M. Stonebraker, D. Bruckner, I. F. Ilyas, G. Beskales, M. Cherniack,
S. B. Zdonik, A. Pagan, and S. Xu, “Data curation at scale: The
data tamer system,” in CIDR , 2013.
[56] C. Gokhale, S. Das, A. Doan, J. F. Naughton, N. Rampalli,
J. Shavlik, and X. Zhu, “Corleone: Hands-off crowdsourcing for
entity matching,” in SIGMOD , 2014, pp. 601–612.
[57] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-
Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adver-
sarial nets,” in NIPS , 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[58] E. Choi, S. Biswal, B. Malin, J. Duke, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun,
“Generating multi-label discrete patient records using generative
adversarial networks,” in MLHC , 2017, pp. 286–305.
[59] N. Park, M. Mohammadi, K. Gorde, S. Jajodia, H. Park, and
Y. Kim, “Data synthesis based on generative adversarial net-
works,” PVLDB , vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1071–1083, 2018.
[60] L. Xu and K. Veeramachaneni, “Synthesizing tabular data using
generative adversarial networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1811.11264,
2018.
[61] I. J. Goodfellow, “NIPS 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial
networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1701.00160, 2017.
[62] K. Kurach, M. Lucic, X. Zhai, M. Michalski, and S. Gelly, “The
GAN landscape: Losses, architectures, regularization, and nor-
malization,” CoRR , vol. abs/1807.04720, 2018.
[63] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Man ´e, V . Vasudevan, and Q. V . Le, “Au-
toaugment: Learning augmentation policies from data,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/1805.09501, 2018.

==== Page 18 ====
18
[64] A. J. Ratner, H. R. Ehrenberg, Z. Hussain, J. Dunnmon, and C. R ´e,
“Learning to compose domain-speciﬁc transformations for data
augmentation,” in NIPS , 2017, pp. 3239–3249.
[65] X. Peng, B. Sun, K. Ali, and K. Saenko, “Learning deep object
detectors from 3d models,” in ICCV , 2015, pp. 1278–1286.
[66] S. Kim, G. Choe, B. Ahn, and I. Kweon, “Deep representation of
industrial components using simulated images,” in ICRA , 2017,
pp. 2003–2010.
[67] T. Oh, R. Jaroensri, C. Kim, M. A. Elgharib, F. Durand, W. T.
Freeman, and W. Matusik, “Learning-based video motion mag-
niﬁcation,” CoRR , vol. abs/1804.02684, 2018.
[68] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Syn-
thetic data and artiﬁcial neural networks for natural scene text
recognition,” CoRR , vol. abs/1406.2227, 2014.
[69] A. Gupta, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Synthetic data for text
localisation in natural images,” in CVPR , June 2016.
[70] Y. Xia, X. Cao, F. Wen, and J. Sun, “Well begun is half done:
Generating high-quality seeds for automatic image dataset con-
struction from web,” in ECCV , 2014, pp. 387–400.
[71] Y. Bai, K. Yang, W. Yu, C. Xu, W. Ma, and T. Zhao, “Automatic
image dataset construction from click-through logs using deep
neural network,” in MM , 2015, pp. 441–450.
[72] J. Mallinson, R. Sennrich, and M. Lapata, “Paraphrasing revisited
with neural machine translation,” in EACL . Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 881–893.
[73] M. Iyyer, J. Wieting, K. Gimpel, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Adversar-
ial example generation with syntactically controlled paraphrase
networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1804.06059, 2018.
[74] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Semantically equivalent
adversarial rules for debugging nlp models,” in ACL , 2018.
[75] A. Y. Halevy, F. Korn, N. F. Noy, C. Olston, N. Polyzotis, S. Roy,
and S. E. Whang, “Managing google’s data lake: an overview of
the goods system,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 5–14,
2016.
[76] J. X. Yu, L. Qin, and L. Chang, “Keyword search in relational
databases: A survey,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , vol. 33, no. 1, pp.
67–78, 2010.
[77] S. Chaudhuri and G. Das, “Keyword querying and ranking in
databases,” PVLDB , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1658–1659, 2009.
[78] R. C. Fernandez, Z. Abedjan, F. Koko, G. Yuan, S. Madden, and
M. Stonebraker, “Aurum: A data discovery system,” in ICDE ,
2018, pp. 1001–1012.
[79] R. C. Fernandez, E. Mansour, A. A. Qahtan, A. K. Elmagarmid,
I. F. Ilyas, S. Madden, M. Ouzzani, M. Stonebraker, and N. Tang,
“Seeping semantics: Linking datasets using word embeddings for
data discovery,” in ICDE , 2018, pp. 989–1000.
[80] Q. V . Le and T. Mikolov, “Distributed representations of sentences
and documents,” in ICML , 2014, pp. 1188–1196.
[81] “Crowdsourced data management: Industry and academic per-
spectives,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , vol. 6, 2015.
[82] M. Allahbakhsh, B. Benatallah, A. Ignjatovic, H. R. Motahari-
Nezhad, E. Bertino, and S. Dustdar, “Quality control in crowd-
sourcing systems: Issues and directions,” IEEE Internet Comput-
ing, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 76–81, March 2013.
[83] F. Daniel, P . Kucherbaev, C. Cappiello, B. Benatallah, and M. Al-
lahbakhsh, “Quality control in crowdsourcing: A survey of qual-
ity attributes, assessment techniques, and assurance actions,”
ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 7:1–7:40, Jan. 2018.
[84] G. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, and M. J. Franklin, “Crowdsourced data
management: A survey,” IEEE TKDE , vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2296–
2319, Sept 2016.
[85] “Amazon mechanical turk,” https://www.mturk.com.
[86] J. Kim, S. Sterman, A. A. B. Cohen, and M. S. Bernstein, “Me-
chanical novel: Crowdsourcing complex work through reﬂection
and revision,” in CSCW , 2017, pp. 233–245.
[87] N. Salehi, J. Teevan, S. T. Iqbal, and E. Kamar, “Communicating
context to the crowd for complex writing tasks,” in CSCW , 2017,
pp. 1890–1901.
[88] H. Garcia-Molina, M. Joglekar, A. Marcus, A. Parameswaran, and
V . Verroios, “Challenges in data crowdsourcing,” IEEE TKDE ,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 901–911, Apr. 2016.
[89] Y. Amsterdamer and T. Milo, “Foundations of crowd data sourc-
ing,” SIGMOD Rec. , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 5–14, Feb. 2015.
[90] N. Patki, R. Wedge, and K. Veeramachaneni, “The synthetic data
vault,” in DSAA , 2016, pp. 399–410.
[91] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V . Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P . Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V . Dubourg,J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Nov. 2011.
[92] D. Yarowsky, “Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling
supervised methods,” in ACL , 1995, pp. 189–196.
[93] Z.-H. Zhou and M. Li, “Tri-training: Exploiting unlabeled data
using three classiﬁers,” IEEE TKDE , vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1529–
1541, Nov. 2005.
[94] Y. Zhou and S. A. Goldman, “Democratic co-learning,” in IEEE
ICTAI , 2004, pp. 594–602.
[95] A. Blum and T. Mitchell, “Combining labeled and unlabeled data
with co-training,” in COLT , 1998, pp. 92–100.
[96] I. Triguero, S. Garc ´ıa, and F. Herrera, “Self-labeled techniques
for semi-supervised learning: taxonomy, software and empirical
study,” Knowl. Inf. Syst. , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 245–284, 2015.
[97] U. Brefeld, T. G ¨artner, T. Scheffer, and S. Wrobel, “Efﬁcient co-
regularised least squares regression,” in ICML , 2006, pp. 137–144.
[98] V . Sindhwani and P . Niyogi, “A co-regularized approach to semi-
supervised learning with multiple views,” in Proceedings of the
ICML Workshop on Learning with Multiple Views , 2005.
[99] Z.-H. Zhou and M. Li, “Semi-supervised regression with co-
training,” in IJCAI , 2005, pp. 908–913.
[100] S. Ravi and Q. Diao, “Large scale distributed semi-supervised
learning using streaming approximation,” in AISTATS , 2016, pp.
519–528.
[101] X. Zhu, Z. Ghahramani, and J. Lafferty, “Semi-supervised learn-
ing using gaussian ﬁelds and harmonic functions,” in ICML , 2003,
pp. 912–919.
[102] P . P . Talukdar and W. W. Cohen, “Scaling graph-based semi
supervised learning to large number of labels using count-min
sketch,” in AISTATS , 2014, pp. 940–947.
[103] D. D. Lewis and W. A. Gale, “A sequential algorithm for training
text classiﬁers,” in SIGIR , 1994, pp. 3–12.
[104] H. S. Seung, M. Opper, and H. Sompolinsky, “Query by commit-
tee,” in COLT , 1992, pp. 287–294.
[105] B. Settles, Active Learning , ser. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning. Morgan & Claypool Pub-
lishers, 2012.
[106] N. Abe and H. Mamitsuka, “Query learning strategies using
boosting and bagging,” in ICML , 1998, pp. 1–9.
[107] B. Settles and M. Craven, “An analysis of active learning strate-
gies for sequence labeling tasks,” in EMNLP , 2008, pp. 1070–1079.
[108] B. Settles, M. Craven, and S. Ray, “Multiple-instance active learn-
ing,” in NIPS , 2007, pp. 1289–1296.
[109] N. Roy and A. McCallum, “Toward optimal active learning
through sampling estimation of error reduction,” in ICML , 2001,
pp. 441–448.
[110] R. Burbidge, J. J. Rowland, and R. D. King, “Active learning for
regression based on query by committee,” in IDEAL , 2007, pp.
209–218.
[111] A. McCallum and K. Nigam, “Employing em and pool-based
active learning for text classiﬁcation,” in ICML , 1998, pp. 350–
358.
[112] K. Tomanek and U. Hahn, “Semi-supervised active learning for
sequence labeling,” in ACL , 2009, pp. 1039–1047.
[113] Z.-H. Zhou, K.-J. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “Exploiting unlabeled data
in content-based image retrieval,” in ECML , 2004, pp. 525–536.
[114] X. Zhu, J. Lafferty, and Z. Ghahramani, “Combining active
learning and semi-supervised learning using gaussian ﬁelds and
harmonic functions,” in ICML 2003 workshop on The Continuum
from Labeled to Unlabeled Data in Machine Learning and Data Mining ,
2003, pp. 58–65.
[115] J. C. Chang, S. Amershi, and E. Kamar, “Revolt: Collaborative
crowdsourcing for labeling machine learning datasets,” in CHI,
2017, pp. 2334–2346.
[116] B. Mozafari, P . Sarkar, M. Franklin, M. Jordan, and S. Madden,
“Scaling up crowd-sourcing to very large datasets: A case for
active learning,” PVLDB , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 125–136, Oct. 2014.
[117] T. Kulesza, S. Amershi, R. Caruana, D. Fisher, and D. X. Charles,
“Structured labeling for facilitating concept evolution in machine
learning,” in CHI, 2014, pp. 3075–3084.
[118] J. Wang, T. Kraska, M. J. Franklin, and J. Feng, “Crowder: Crowd-
sourcing entity resolution,” PVLDB , vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1483–1494,
2012.
[119] V . S. Sheng, F. Provost, and P . G. Ipeirotis, “Get another label?
improving data quality and data mining using multiple, noisy
labelers,” in KDD , 2008, pp. 614–622.

==== Page 19 ====
19
[120] A. G. Parameswaran, H. Garcia-Molina, H. Park, N. Polyzotis,
A. Ramesh, and J. Widom, “Crowdscreen: algorithms for ﬁltering
data with humans,” in SIGMOD , 2012, pp. 361–372.
[121] D. R. Karger, S. Oh, and D. Shah, “Iterative learning for reliable
crowdsourcing systems,” in NIPS , 2011, pp. 1953–1961.
[122] O. Dekel and O. Shamir, “Vox populi: Collecting high-quality
labels from a crowd,” in COLT , 2009.
[123] A. Marcus, D. R. Karger, S. Madden, R. Miller, and S. Oh,
“Counting with the crowd,” PVLDB , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 109–120,
2012.
[124] C. Zhang, “Deepdive: A data management system for automatic
knowledge base construction,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2015.
[125] H. R. Ehrenberg, J. Shin, A. J. Ratner, J. A. Fries, and C. R ´e, “Data
programming with ddlite: putting humans in a different part of
the loop,” in HILDA@SIGMOD , 2016, p. 13.
[126] A. J. Ratner, C. D. Sa, S. Wu, D. Selsam, and C. R ´e, “Data
programming: Creating large training sets, quickly,” in NIPS ,
2016, pp. 3567–3575.
[127] A. Ratner, S. H. Bach, H. Ehrenberg, J. Fries, S. Wu, and C. R ´e,
“Snorkel: Rapid training data creation with weak supervision,”
PVLDB , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 269–282, Nov. 2017.
[128] S. H. Bach, D. Rodriguez, Y. Liu, C. Luo, H. Shao, C. Xia,
S. Sen, A. Ratner, B. Hancock, H. Alborzi, R. Kuchhal, C. R ´e,
and R. Malkin, “Snorkel drybell: A case study in deploying weak
supervision at industrial scale,” in SIGMOD , 2019, pp. 362–375.
[129] E. Bringer, A. Israeli, Y. Shoham, A. Ratner, and C. R ´e, “Osprey:
Weak supervision of imbalanced extraction problems without
code,” in DEEM@SIGMOD , 2019, pp. 4:1–4:11.
[130] A. Ratner, B. Hancock, J. Dunnmon, R. Goldman, and C. R ´e,
“Snorkel metal: Weak supervision for multi-task learning,” in
DEEM@SIGMOD , 2018, pp. 3:1–3:4.
[131] K. Bollacker, C. Evans, P . Paritosh, T. Sturge, and J. Taylor, “Free-
base: A collaboratively created graph database for structuring
human knowledge,” in SIGMOD , 2008, pp. 1247–1250.
[132] F. M. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G. Weikum, “Yago: A core of
semantic knowledge,” in WWW , 2007, pp. 697–706.
[133] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, and F. M. Suchanek, “YAGO3: A knowl-
edge base from multilingual wikipedias,” in CIDR , 2015.
[134] Mausam, M. Schmitz, R. Bart, S. Soderland, and O. Etzioni,
“Open language learning for information extraction,” in EMNLP-
CoNLL , 2012, pp. 523–534.
[135] N. Sawadsky, G. C. Murphy, and R. Jiresal, “Reverb: Recom-
mending code-related web pages,” in ICSE , 2013, pp. 812–821.
[136] M. Yahya, S. Whang, R. Gupta, and A. Y. Halevy, “Renoun: Fact
extraction for nominal attributes,” in EMNLP , 2014, pp. 325–335.
[137] X. Dong, E. Gabrilovich, G. Heitz, W. Horn, N. Lao, K. Murphy,
T. Strohmann, S. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Knowledge vault: A web-
scale approach to probabilistic knowledge fusion,” in KDD , 2014,
pp. 601–610.
[138] R. Gupta, A. Halevy, X. Wang, S. E. Whang, and F. Wu, “Biperpe-
dia: An ontology for search applications,” PVLDB , vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 505–516, Mar. 2014.
[139] V . Crescenzi, G. Mecca, and P . Merialdo, “Roadrunner: Towards
automatic data extraction from large web sites,” in VLDB , 2001,
pp. 109–118.
[140] O. Etzioni, M. J. Cafarella, D. Downey, S. Kok, A. Popescu,
T. Shaked, S. Soderland, D. S. Weld, and A. Yates, “Web-scale
information extraction in knowitall: (preliminary results),” in
WWW , 2004, pp. 100–110.
[141] T. M. Mitchell, W. W. Cohen, E. R. H. Jr., P . P . Talukdar, J. Bet-
teridge, A. Carlson, B. D. Mishra, M. Gardner, B. Kisiel, J. Krish-
namurthy, N. Lao, K. Mazaitis, T. Mohamed, N. Nakashole, E. A.
Platanios, A. Ritter, M. Samadi, B. Settles, R. C. Wang, D. Wijaya,
A. Gupta, X. Chen, A. Saparov, M. Greaves, and J. Welling,
“Never-ending learning,” in AAAI , 2015, pp. 2302–2310.
[142] A. Carlson, J. Betteridge, B. Kisiel, B. Settles, E. R. H. Jr., and T. M.
Mitchell, “Toward an architecture for never-ending language
learning,” in AAAI , 2010.
[143] X. Zhu, “Semi-Supervised Learning Literature Survey,” Com-
puter Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Tech. Rep.
[144] D. Dheeru and E. Karra Taniskidou, “UCI machine learning
repository,” 2017.
[145] J. Alcal-Fdez, A. Fernndez, J. Luengo, J. Derrac, and S. Garca,
“Keel data-mining software tool: Data set repository, integration
of algorithms and experimental analysis framework.” Multiple-
Valued Logic and Soft Computing , no. 2-3, pp. 255–287.[146] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L. Li, K. Li, and F. Li, “Imagenet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in CVPR , 2009, pp.
248–255.
[147] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Eds., Recommender Systems
Handbook . Springer, 2015.
[148] Y. Gu, Z. Jin, and S. C. Chiu, “Combining active learning and
semi-supervised learning using local and global consistency,” in
Neural Information Processing , C. K. Loo, K. S. Yap, K. W. Wong,
A. Teoh, and K. Huang, Eds. Springer International Publishing,
2014, pp. 215–222.
[149] V . Crescenzi, P . Merialdo, and D. Qiu, “Crowdsourcing large scale
wrapper inference,” Distrib. Parallel Databases , vol. 33, no. 1, pp.
95–122, Mar. 2015.
[150] M. Schaekermann, J. Goh, K. Larson, and E. Law, “Resolvable
vs. irresolvable disagreement: A study on worker deliberation
in crowd work,” P ACMHCI , vol. 2, no. CSCW, pp. 154:1–154:19,
2018.
[151] “Weak supervision: The new programming paradigm for ma-
chine learning,” https://hazyresearch.github.io/snorkel/blog/
wsblog post.html.
[152] A. J. Ratner, B. Hancock, and C. R ´e, “The role of massively multi-
task and weak supervision in software 2.0,” in CIDR , 2019.
[153] Z.-H. Zhou, “A brief introduction to weakly supervised learn-
ing,” National Science Review , vol. 5, 08 2017.
[154] H. R. Ehrenberg, J. Shin, A. J. Ratner, J. A. Fries, and C. R ´e, “Data
programming with ddlite: Putting humans in a different part of
the loop,” in HILDA@SIGMOD , 2016, pp. 13:1–13:6.
[155] A. J. Ratner, S. H. Bach, H. R. Ehrenberg, and C. R ´e, “Snorkel: Fast
training set generation for information extraction,” in SIGMOD ,
2017, pp. 1683–1686.
[156] M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky, “Distant supervision
for relation extraction without labeled data,” in ACL , 2009, pp.
1003–1011.
[157] E. Ferrara, P . D. Meo, G. Fiumara, and R. Baumgartner, “Web data
extraction, applications and techniques: A survey,” Knowl.-Based
Syst. , vol. 70, pp. 301–323, 2014.
[158] T. Rekatsinas, X. Chu, I. F. Ilyas, and C. R ´e, “Holoclean: Holistic
data repairs with probabilistic inference,” PVLDB , vol. 10, no. 11,
pp. 1190–1201, 2017.
[159] S. Krishnan, J. Wang, E. Wu, M. J. Franklin, and K. Goldberg,
“Activeclean: Interactive data cleaning for statistical modeling,”
PVLDB , vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 948–959, 2016.
[160] S. Krishnan, M. J. Franklin, K. Goldberg, and E. Wu, “Boostclean:
Automated error detection and repair for machine learning,”
CoRR , vol. abs/1711.01299, 2017.
[161] M. Dolatshah, M. Teoh, J. Wang, and J. Pei, “Cleaning Crowd-
sourced Labels Using Oracles For Statistical Classiﬁcation,”
School of Computer Science, Simon Fraser University, Tech. Rep.,
2018.
[162] V . Raman and J. M. Hellerstein, “Potter’s wheel: An interactive
data cleaning system,” in VLDB , 2001, pp. 381–390.
[163] S. Kandel, A. Paepcke, J. M. Hellerstein, and J. Heer, “Wrangler:
interactive visual speciﬁcation of data transformation scripts,” in
CHI, 2011, pp. 3363–3372.
[164] S. Kandel, R. Parikh, A. Paepcke, J. M. Hellerstein, and J. Heer,
“Proﬁler: integrated statistical analysis and visualization for data
quality assessment,” in AVI, 2012, pp. 547–554.
[165] W. R. Harris and S. Gulwani, “Spreadsheet table transformations
from examples,” in PLDI , 2011, pp. 317–328.
[166] K. H. Tae, Y. Roh, Y. H. Oh, H. Kim, and S. E. Whang, “Data
cleaning for accurate, fair, and robust models: A big data - AI
integration approach,” in DEEM@SIGMOD , 2019.
[167] T. Xiao, T. Xia, Y. Yang, C. Huang, and X. Wang, “Learning from
massive noisy labeled data for image classiﬁcation.” in CVPR .
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 2691–2699.
[168] X. Chen and A. Gupta, “Webly supervised learning of convolu-
tional networks,” in ICCV , 2015, pp. 1431–1439.
[169] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE
TKDE , vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009.
[170] N. V . Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P . Kegelmeyer,
“Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif.
Int. Res. , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002.
[171] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and har-
nessing adversarial examples,” CoRR , vol. abs/1412.6572, 2014.
[172] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE
TKDE , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2010.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[173] K. R. Weiss, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and D. Wang, “A survey of
transfer learning,” J. Big Data , vol. 3, p. 9, 2016.
[174] “Tensorﬂow hub,” https://www.tensorﬂow.org/hub/.
[175] F. Li, R. Fergus, and P . Perona, “One-shot learning of object
categories,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 594–611, 2006.
[176] S. Ruder, M. E. Peters, S. Swayamdipta, and T. Wolf, “Transfer
learning in natural language processing,” in NAACL-HLT , 2019,
pp. 15–18.
[177] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable
are features in deep neural networks?” in NIPS , 2014, pp. 3320–
3328.
[178] O. Day and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on heterogeneous
transfer learning,” J. Big Data , vol. 4, p. 29, 2017.
[179] D. Baylor, E. Breck, H. Cheng, N. Fiedel, C. Y. Foo, Z. Haque,
S. Haykal, M. Ispir, V . Jain, L. Koc, C. Y. Koo, L. Lew, C. Mewald,
A. N. Modi, N. Polyzotis, S. Ramesh, S. Roy, S. E. Whang,
M. Wicke, J. Wilkiewicz, X. Zhang, and M. Zinkevich, “TFX: A
tensorﬂow-based production-scale machine learning platform,”
inKDD , 2017, pp. 1387–1395.
[180] “Tensorﬂow data validation,” https://www.tensorﬂow.org/tfx/
data validation/.
[181] B. Fr ´enay and M. Verleysen, “Classiﬁcation in the presence of
label noise: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learning Syst. ,
vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 845–869, 2014.
[182] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁ-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in NIPS , 2012,
pp. 1106–1114.
[183] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[184] C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, W. Zhang, C. Yang, and C. Liu, “A survey
on deep transfer learning,” in ICANN , 2018, pp. 270–279.
[185] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “”why should i trust
you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,” in KDD , 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[186] ——, “Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations,” in
AAAI , 2018.
[187] E. Krasanakis, E. Spyromitros-Xiouﬁs, S. Papadopoulos, and
Y. Kompatsiaris, “Adaptive sensitive reweighting to mitigate bias
in fairness-aware classiﬁcation,” in WWW , 2018, pp. 853–862.

