==== Page 1 ====
A survey on Bayesian network structure learning
from data
Mauro Scanagatta, Antonio Salmer ony, Fabio Stellaz
May 14, 2019
Abstract
A necessary step in the development of articial intelligence is to enable
a machine to represent how the world works, building an internal structure
from data. This structure should hold a good trade-o between expressive
power and querying eciency. Bayesian networks have proven to be an
eective and versatile tool for the task at hand. They have been applied
to modeling knowledge in a variety of elds, ranging from bioinformatics
to law, from image processing to economic risk analysis. A crucial aspect
is learning the dependency graph of a Bayesian network from data. This
task, called structure learning , is NP-hard and is the subject of intense,
cutting-edge research. In short, it can be thought of as choosing one graph
over the many candidates, grounding our reasoning over a collection of
samples of the distribution generating the data. The number of possible
graphs increases very quickly at the increase of the number of variables.
Searching in this space, and selecting a graph over the others, becomes
quickly burdensome. In this survey we review the most relevant structure
learning algorithms that have been proposed in the literature. We classify
them according to the approach they follow for solving the problem and we
also show alternatives for handling missing data and continuous variable.
An extensive review of existing software tools is also given.
1 Introduction
A key issue in articial intelligence is the development of models able to provide
a structured representation of the domain knowledge, and taking into account
that most likely those models will be learnt from data. These models should hold
a good trade-o between expressive power and querying eciency. Bayesian
networks (Pearl; 1988) have proven to be an eective and versatile tool for the
task at hand. They have been applied to modeling knowledge in a variety of
elds, ranging from bioinformatics to law, from image processing to economic
risk analysis (Pourret et al.; 2008).
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy - mscanagatta@fbk.eu
yDepartment of Mathematics and Center for the Development and Transfer of Mathemat-
ical Research to Industry (CDTIME), University of Almer a, Spain - antonio.salmeron@ual.es
zDepartment of Informatics, Systems and Communication, University of Milan-Bicocca,
Milano, Italy - stella@disco.unimib.it
1

==== Page 2 ====
Bayesian networks are a structured knowledge representation where domain
variables are regarded as nodes in a graph whose structure encodes the depen-
dencies between them. A crucial aspect is learning the dependency graph of
a Bayesian network from data. This task, which we call structure learning , is
NP-hard (Chickering et al.; 2014), and is the subject of intense, cutting-edge
research.
In short, it can be thought of as choosing one graph over the many candi-
dates, grounding our reasoning over a collection of samples of the distribution
generating the data. The number of possible graphs dramatically increases with
the number of variables. Hence, searching in this space, and selecting a graph
over the others, becomes quickly burdensome. In this survey we present a review
of the many sophisticated algorithms that have been proposed in the literature.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formally intro-
duces Bayesian networks and gives an illustrative example. Section 3 presents a
review of the most relevant literature about structure learning. Section 4 reviews
the main software tools implementing Bayesian networks structure learning and
Section 5 gives some hints about what method to use depending on the target
application. The paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 6.
2 Bayesian networks
We start with the earthquake example given by Pearl (1988). It is a Bayesian
network of 5 variables, modeling the following domain: Mr. K is at work when he
receives a call from a neighbor telling him that his house alarm went o. When
he is about to call the police he remembers reading in the instruction manual
that the alarm is sensitive to earthquakes and can be accidentally triggered
by one. He reckons that if an earthquake occurred, it would be on the news.
So he turns on the radio and nds out that an earthquake has just occurred.
Should Mr. K call the police? A variable is assigned to each event: the alarm
ringing (variable A), a burglar intrusion (variable B), the earthquake occurrence
(variable E), the radio announcement (variable R), and the neighbor's call
(variable C). To each variable is then assigned a conditional probability table
(CPT). These tables encode the distribution of the variable given the values
of its parents. Each variable is binary, with the value tmeaning the event has
happened, and the value fmeaning it has not. The Bayesian network is depicted
in Figure 1.
2.1 Denition
We can now properly dene a Bayesian network as a pair ( G;O) that encodes
a joint probability distribution over a nite set X=fX1;:::;X ngof categorical
variables. It is composed of: (i) a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G=fV;Eg
whose nodesVcorrespond to the variables in Xand arcsErepresent direct de-
pendencies between variables, and (ii) a collection of conditional mass functions
Othat dene the behavior of each variable Xigiven its parents  iin the graph.
In the earthquake example, we have X=fA;B;C;R;Eg;Gis the graph
showed in Figure 1, and Ois the set of conditional probability tables showed in
the same gure.
2

==== Page 3 ====
AB
CRE
P(AjE;B)
E BA=t A =f
t t 0.99 0.01
t f 0.9 0.1
f t 0.97 0.03
f f 0.14 0.86P(B)
B=t B =f
0.2 0.8P(E)
E=t E =f
0.01 0.99
P(R)
ER=t R =f
t 0.6 0.4
f 0.05 0.95P(C)
AC=t C =f
t 0.7 0.3
f 0.01 0.99
Figure 1: A Bayesian network for the earthquake problem. The tables specify
the probability distribution for each variable conditional on its parent values.
All the variables are binary ( true/false values).
The representation of the full joint table P(X) takes exponential space in the
number of variables n. This complexity can be avoided thanks to the so-called
\Markov condition", which states that in a Bayesian network every variable is
conditionally independent of its non-descendant non-parents given its parents.
By using this condition, it is possible to represent the joint table in a compact
form, as a multiplication of local mass functions:
p(x) =p(x1;:::;x n) =Y
ip(xiji);
where xis an instantiation of all the variables in X,xiis the value of variable
Xiinx,iis an instantiation of all the variables in the parent set  icompatible
withx. The representation now takes still exponential space but only in the
size of the largest parent set.
In our example, representing the full joint table would take 25= 32 param-
eters. Applying the previous decomposition:
P(E;B;R;A;C ) =P(E)P(B)P(RjE)P(AjE;B)P(CjA); (1)
we can represent it with only 20 parameters (2 + 2 + 22+ 23+ 22). The benet
becomes more important as the number of variables increases. (Additionaly it
is possible to represent a distribution without the last parameter, as it can be
computed from the others. In this case the full join table takes 31 parameters,
and the decomposition takes 15: 1 + 1 + 3 + 7 + 3).
The most important application of a Bayesian network is probabilistic infer-
ence, that is, estimating the posterior probability P(XjY) on target variables X
given evidence on other variables Y. Our goal could be, for example, to decide
if Mr. K has to rush home. This is based on the probability that there has
indeed been a burglar intrusion, given that his neighbor called and there was a
3

==== Page 4 ====
A B C E R
y n n y y
n n n n y
y y y n n
...
Figure 2: Example data Dsampled from the modeled network.
radio announcement of an earthquake. In a formula:
P(B=tjR=t;C=t) =?: (2)
Several researchers have studied this application, which has been proven to
be NP-Hard (Cooper; 1990). An important result is that this complexity can be
managed by bounding the treewidth, a measure of the tree-likeness of the graph.
The treewidth is dened as the size of the largest clique in a chordal completion of
the graph. Modern exact inference algorithms have worst-case time complexity
exponential in the treewidth of the underlying graph (Kwisthout et al.; 2010).
3 Structure learning
Suppose now that we are unaware of the original structure of the earthquake
model. We can only observe its behavior, sampling data from the distribution
associated to the model as in Figure 2. Grounding our reasoning on these
observations, we can then make an assessment of their originating structure.
This is the fundamental idea of structure learning.
The problem of learning the structure of a Bayesian network from a complete
data set ofddatapointsD=fD1;:::;D dgcorresponds to determining the set of
directed arcsEfor the DAGG= (X;E), using some criterion that species the
quality of a structure. This can also be stated as choosing for each variable Xi
its parent set  i.
The usual assumption is for the data to be complete. The case of missing
data currently represents a bottleneck for structure learning, as few methods
can properly manage it. We discuss them in Section 3.3.
The task is computationally non-trivial due to the enormous size of the
space of possible graphs G, growing super-exponentially in the number of nodes
n(Robinson; 1973). In Figure 3 we show only a few examples. How can we
choose one over the others?
3.1 Score-based structure learning
The most used approach to structure learning is called score-based . Loosely
speaking, the task is to nd the best DAG according to some score function
that measures its tness to the data (Heckerman et al.; 1995). The goal is now
to solve:
argmax
G2Gscore (G;D): (3)
4

==== Page 5 ====
AB
CRE
AB
CRE
AB
CRE
AB
CRE
AB
CRE
AB
CRE
Figure 3: Possible graph reconstruction of the earthquake model. The rst
graph, with the grey nodes, is the original one.
One of the most widely adopted scores is the Bayes Dirichlet equivalent uni-
form (BDeu) (Buntine; 1991; Cooper and Herskovits; 1992; Heckerman et al.;
1995), which measures the posterior probability of a chosen DAG given the
available data, while assuming a uniform prior probability distribution on all
the possible networks. Another important one is the Bayesian Information Cri-
terion (BIC) (Schwarz; 1978), which approximates the BDeu. They share the
important property of decomposability : the score of a DAG is constituted by
the sum of the scores of the subgraphs made by each variable Xiwith its parent
set  i:
score (G;D) =X
Xiscore (Xi;i;D): (4)
The idea is now to separate the learning process in two steps: parent set
identication and structure optimization . Parent set identication produces a
list of suitable candidate parent sets for each variable, in order of decreasing
score. Structure optimization assigns a parent set to each node, maximizing the
score of the resulting structure while avoiding cycles. Most of the approaches
focus on the second phase and assume that the complete list of candidate parent
sets has been pre-computed.
Structure optimization can further be distinguished between general struc-
ture optimization , with no constraints on the resulting graph, and bounded
treewidth structure optimization , with an upper-bound for the treewidth of the
resulting graph.
Parent set identication Most of the existing approaches to score-based
structure learning require a complete exploration of the space of possible parent
sets for every variable, so as to generate a database of pre-computed scores.
The complete exploration of such a space is a burdensome task, as its size
grows asO(nk), wherenis the number of variables and kis the maximum
number of parents allowed for a node, called maximum in-degree . This is a
local property in the graph, usually constrained for managing the exploration
complexity. Cussens et al. (2013) preform structure learning on datasets with
1614 variables, setting k= 2, a very limiting constraint. In the case of k3, the
largest network studied by Cussens (2011) has 60 nodes. These are among the
largest examples of score-based structural learning in the literature. Pruning
5

==== Page 6 ====
rules have been proposed to help with this matter (de Campos and Ji; 2011), but
they do not considerably reduce the dimension of this space. An exception is
the greedy search of the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Herskovits; 1992), which has
however been superseded in terms of accuracy by the more modern approaches
mentioned above.
A high in-degree implies a larger search space and allows achieving a higher
score; however it also requires higher computational time. When choosing the
in-degree the user makes a trade-o between these two objectives. When the
number of variables is large, the in-degree is generally set to a small value,
in order to allow the optimization to be feasible. The problem of parent set
identication is unlikely to admit a polynomial-time algorithm with a quality
guarantee (Koivisto; 2016). This motivates the development of eective search
heuristics.
Scanagatta et al. (2015) devise a novel approach for parent set identication
that eliminates the limitation posed by the structure constraint k. The idea is
to guide the exploration towards the most promising parent sets on the basis of
an approximated score function, denoted as BIC, that is computed in constant
time. The approach is based on the BIC score, and is currently the only score
function supported. The authors report that BICscales up to thousands of
nodes without constraints on the maximum in-degree.
General structure optimization Several exact algorithms for structure op-
timization have been proposed. The rst approaches were based on the obser-
vation that for any xed ordering of the nvariables, the decomposability of the
score enables ecient optimization over all DAGs compatible with the ordering
(Cooper and Herskovits; 1992).
Koivisto and Sood (2004) and Silander and Myllymaki (2006) explored dy-
namic programming approaches. The main idea is to solve small subproblems
rst and use the results to nd solutions to larger problems until the global
learning problem is solved. They spend memory and time proportional to n2n.
Such complexity limits the realistic application of these approaches only to small
domains.
Malone (2012), Yuan and Malone (2012) and Yuan et al. (2011) propose
a new approach that formulates the learning goal as a shortest path problem.
With the guidance of a consistent heuristic, the algorithm is able to focus on
searching for the most promising parts of a solution space. The main benet
consists in pruning part of the graph space. Empirically the approach was shown
to outperform the competitors on data sets with up to 26 variables.
An approach based on branch and bound was proposed by de Campos et al.
(2009) and de Campos and Ji (2011). It rst nds optimal parent sets for the
individual variables by ignoring the acyclicity constraint and then detects and
breaks all the cycles to nd a valid Bayesian network. It continues to improve
on it either by nding a better solution or by reducing the upper bound, until
the optimal solution is found. This anytime behavior is the main appeal of the
approach, as it allows the user to trade-o between the score of the learned
graph and required computational time. It is able to handle datasets with up
to 100 variables.
Yet the current state-of-the-art approach is based on integer linear program-
ming (Cussens; 2011; Jaakkola et al.; 2010). The learning is posed as a relaxed
6

==== Page 7 ====
integer linear problem, where cutting planes are introduced for breaking cycles
until the optimal solution is found. Identifying good cutting planes is the key
to the success of this approach. Experimentally it has been shown to handle
datasets with up to 200 variables.
Malone et al. (2018) propose a supervised solver selection. They evaluate a
collection of features computed on the input data in order to predict the best
state-of-the-art solver for the particular instance. Their work is a promising
initial step also in the understanding of each solver weaknesses and strengths.
An interesting idea was introduced by Teyssier and Koller (2005) (which
we call ordering-based search or OBS ), where a simple yet eective heuristic
approach is proposed. It is based on a Monte Carlo search over the space of
variable orderings, trying to select for each ordering the best network consistent
with it. As an approximate method it is competitive when the problem is too
complex for the exact approaches, potentially scaling to datasets with thousands
of variables.
OBS employs a na ve operator, called swap , for escaping local maxima in the
local greedy search. A more powerful operator, called insertion , was proposed
by Alonso-Barba et al. (2011). With this operator the authors were able to
signicantly increase the score of the learned structures.
Recently, Lee and van Beek (2017) suggest enhancing the performance of the
greedy local search by applying a meta-heuristic. They propose two approaches:
(a) an iterated local search coupled with a perturbation factor, and (b) a genetic
algorithm in which each candidate solution is an individual, subject to a series
of crossover and mutation stages.
Scanagatta et al. (2017) propose a novel operator for improving the score of
the structure by applying local changes to its underlying ordering. They denote
it as the window operator for local search, already known as block insertion
(Ben-Daya and Al-Fawzan; 1998) in the local search literature. They report
that the resulting algorithm consistently yields higher-scoring networks than
state-of-the-art competitors, and is able to learn Bayesian networks from dataset
containing thousands of variables.
The idea to manipulate the underlying ordering was also explored by Scana-
gatta, Corani, de Campos and Zaalon (2018). The authors investigate which
parent sets are especially important for the score of a DAG, with the aim of
improving the sampling strategy and thus to cover better regions of the space
of orders. Their approach is to sample the variables of the ordering in a fashion
that is proportional to their entropy. This leads to an increase of performance,
that can be applied to any algorithm based on local search over the space of
orderings.
Local search has also been carried out over the space of equivalence classes
of network structures (Alonso-Barba et al.; 2013; Chickering; 1995) resulting in
the so-called GES algorithm. It has recently been improved by introducing new
local search heuristics, scaling up to networks of 100 nodes (Alonso et al.; 2018).
Zheng et al. (2018) have recently proposed a novel and interesting approach
to structure learning. They have been able to formulate the learning task as
a continuous optimization problem that can be solved by standard numerical
algorithms.
7

==== Page 8 ====
Bounded treewidth structure optimization Being a global property of
the graph, bounding the treewidth considerably increases the diculty of the
learning process. The treewidth of a DAG is measured as the treewidth of its
moral graph , that is the undirected graph obtained by adding an undirected
edge between all the common parents of a node, and discarding the direction of
all the other arcs.
The rst approaches were based on heuristic edge additions. An approximate
method has been proposed by Elidan and Gould (2008), polynomial in both the
number of variables and the treewidth bound. It is able to provide an upper-
bound on the treewidth of the learned structure, thus able to check at each arc
addition if the bound is violated. The experiments show that their approach
is able to learn better models than competing heuristic methods, on data sets
with up to 200 variables.
An exact method has been proposed by Korhonen and Parviainen (2013).
It is a dynamic programming algorithm able to nd the optimal graph maxi-
mizing a given score function in time O(3nnk+O(1)), wherekis the treewidth
bound. Experiments show its applicability to networks with up to 15 nodes and
treewidth bound of 3. Its complexity growth may render it unfeasible for larger
domains.
Parviainen et al. (2014) adopted an integer programming approach. Cutting
planes are formulated in order to enforce the treewidth bound. Their experi-
ments showed an improvement over the competitors on data sets with up to 60
nodes.
Nie et al. (2014) proposed an approximation technique that consists of sam-
plingk-trees (maximal graphs of treewidth k), and subsequently selecting the
best structure which is a subgraph of that k-tree. Their experiments showed
promising results for data sets with up to 100 variables. Unfortunately the
sampling space for k-trees is huge and can barely be eectively explored by the
sampling technique in a reasonable amount of time. As the number of variables
grows each sampled k-tree has a low probability of providing a good t for the
given domain, and the time required to nd good solution increases.
Nie et al. (2015) improved on the above idea by searching for promising
k-trees using an A* guided exploration. The goodness of the k-tree is ap-
proximated by using a heuristic evaluation, called Informative Score . When a
promisingk-tree has been selected, the algorithm searches for the optimal DAG
that is subgraph of the k-tree. The idea has been shown to improve on competi-
tors, but does not solve completely the issue about the diculties of sampling
in the space of k-trees.
Scanagatta et al. (2016) exploit the fact that any k-tree can be constructed
by an iterative procedure that adds one variable at a time. They then propose
an iterative procedure that, given an order on the variables, builds a DAG G
adding one variable at a time. The moral graph of Gis thus ensured to be
subgraph of a k-tree. The algorithm is designed as to maximize the score of the
resulting DAG, while guaranteeing the bound on the treewidth. They report
that their approach scales eectively with both the number of variables and
the treewidth, outperforming the competitors, and is able to learn bounded
treewidth Bayesian networks from dataset containing thousands of variables.
8

==== Page 9 ====
3.2 Constraint-based structure learning
There are also methods based on statistical tests, called constraint-based struc-
ture learning. These algorithms use a series of conditional hypothesis tests to
learn independences among the variables in the model (Pearl; 2003; Pearl and
Verma; 1995). Following these constraints the DAG is in turn built. Their
performance is critically determined by the adopted hypothesis test.
The state-of-the-art approach is the PC algorithm (named after its authors,
Peter and Clark) introduced by Spirtes et al. (2000). It starts from a complete,
undirected graph and deletes edges recursively based on conditional indepen-
dence decisions. This yields an undirected graph that can then be partially
directed and further extended to represent the underlying DAG. The PC algo-
rithm runs in the worst case in exponential time (as a function of the number
of nodes), but if the true underlying DAG is sparse, which is often a reason-
able assumption, this reduces to a polynomial runtime. Kalisch and B uhlmann
(2007) showed the applicability of the PC algorithm even in high-dimensional
settings, up to 1000 nodes.
The standard PC algorithm relies on an ordering over the variables, and
may thus suer from unstable results. Colombo and Maathuis (2014) proposed
a modication of the algorithm that signicantly increases the robustness of the
method, rendering it order-independent.
The PC algorithm by itself does not require a specic conditional indepen-
dence test. Most applications adopt Chi-square test or mutual information tests.
An interesting approach, based on Bayesian score tests, has been proposed by
Abell an et al. (2006).
Recent innovations introduced parallel computing techniques for local causal
discovery methods in constraint based approaches (Scutari; 2014). Remarkably,
the solution proposed by Madsen et al. (2017), which is based on allocating
the conditional independence tests in the available computing units following
a balanced incomplete block design, has been tested on datasets of over 2000
variables and 500k records.
3.3 Incomplete data
The standard approach to structure learning requires the data to be complete.
At the moment very few methods can handle the case of incomplete data. The
most commonly used is the structural Expectation-Maximization (SEM) (Fried-
man; 1998). This approach performs a two-step iterative procedure: (i) E-step :
complete the data with expected values or modes from the currently induced
Bayesian network (in other word, compute the expected sucient statistics);
(ii)M-step : perform structure learning as if the data were complete. This pro-
cedure continues until convergence. Unfortunately, the complexity cost of this
computation can be very high and restrict its application only to small domains.
A competing approach has been proposed by Adel and de Campos (2017).
Given the task of learning a Bayesian network from missing data, it translates
it into the problem of structure learning from complete data. This is done by
augmenting the network with variables that take into account all the possible
completions of the data. The approach showed convincing potential in datasets
with up to 23 variables, but only on small datasets, since it has an exponential
cost in the size of the missing data.
9

==== Page 10 ====
A dierent approach was proposed by Fern andez et al. (2010). It is de-
signed for learning Bayesian networks representing regression problems, and is
based on using mixtures of truncated exponentials in order to represent the
joint distribution of the induced network (Moral et al.; 2001). It relies on a
data augmentation algorithm that iteratively re-estimates a Bayesian network
model, and imputes the missing values using it. It showed promising results on
datasets with up to 16 variables, with both discrete and continuous values.
Nielsen et al. (2010) proposed an algorithm for learning, in the presence of
missing data, a Probabilistic Decision Graph: this is a representation language
for probability distributions based on binary decision diagrams. It can encode
independence relations that cannot be captured in a Bayesian network struc-
ture, and can sometimes provide computationally more ecient representations
than Bayesian networks (Jaeger; 2004). Their experiments showed a reasonable
performance, but on networks with only up to 40 variables.
Scanagatta, Corani, Zaalon, Yoo and Kang (2018) propose a method for
performing structure learning on incomplete data sets, using structural Expectation-
Maximization (SEM). They tackle the issue of the complexity cost by employing
a bounded treewidth Bayesian network structure learning algorithm. In this way
they obtain a fast implementation of SEM, since the bounded-treewidth struc-
tures learned in the dierent iterations guarantee ecient inferences. They re-
port that it is the rst implementation of SEM that is able to scale to thousands
of variables.
3.4 Handling continuous variables
The methods for structure learning described so far are basically designed for
discrete variables, though in general they can be adapted to handle continuous
variables as well. The most straightforward approach is to discretize the con-
tinuous variables, so that statistical tests of independence can be carried out,
and therefore algorithms like the PC can be applied. This approach has been
explored by Fern andez et al. (2013).
Score-based structure learning can also be used with continuous variables as
long as the score used to guide the search process is compatible with the model
adopted for representing the probability density of the continuous variables.
The method proposed by Romero et al. (2006) represent such densities using
mixtures of truncated exponentials.
However, some statistical models are incompatible with this approach, as
they impose some structure restrictions. This is the case of the conditional
Gaussian (CG) model (Lauritzen and Wermuth; 1989), where discrete variables
are not allowed to have continuous parents. This model corresponds to scenarios
where the marginal over the discrete variables is a Multinomial and the condi-
tional density of the continuous variables for each conguration of the discrete
ones is a multivariate Normal. A solution for learning CG networks following
a score based approach was proposed by Bttcher (2001), later improved by
considering equivalence classes resulting in a more ecient search procedure
(Bttcher and Dethlefsen; 2003).
10

==== Page 11 ====
C
A1 A2 A3 A4
Figure 4: Na ve Bayes. In this gure and the following ones, class variable is
shown in gray.
C
A1A2A3A4
Figure 5: TAN: the tree is A1 A2 A3!A4.
3.5 Statistical classication
Statistical classication is a common problem in machine learning, where it
is required to identify to which category a new observation belongs, based on
previous observations. The category to be predicted is known as the class,
and the explanatory variables on which the choice is made are called features .
An example would be to predict if tomorrow is going to rain ( class ) given
information on today's atmospheric conditions such as pressure, humidity, wind
speed ( features ). This has been a widely used application of Bayesian networks.
Thanks to structural constraints the approaches are usually highly scalable, able
to learn optimal structures even with thousand of variables.
Na ve Bayes (NB) has been one of the rst proposed tools. An example is
shown in Figure 4. It assumes the stochastic independence of the features given
the class. This strong assumption makes the classier highly scalable, with a
complexity of O(n). However, the posterior probabilities are biased and may
lead to incorrect estimation (Hand and Yu; 2001).
The tree-augmented na ve classier (TAN) (Friedman et al.; 1997) relaxes
this assumption, augmenting the NB with a tree which connects the features.
An example is shown in Figure 5. As a result one feature has only the class as
a parent, while the remaining features have two parents: the class and another
feature. This design consistently helps reducing the bias of na ve Bayes, at the
cost of time complexity of only O(n2) for exact learning.
C
A1 A2 A3 A4
Figure 6: FAN: the forest is constituted by the sub-trees A1!A2andA3 A4.
TAN is further improved by the forest-augmented na ve classier (FAN). An
example is shown in Figure 6. A FAN augments the na ve Bayes with a forest.
A forest is a set of disjoint trees; it is more general than a tree, as it includes
11

==== Page 12 ====
the tree as a special case. Thus the BIC score of FAN is higher than or equal
to the BIC score of TAN. The structural learning algorithm of FAN (Koller and
Friedman; 2009) is obtained as a slight modication of the TAN algorithm. It
maintains the same quadratic time complexity.
C
A1A2A3A4
Figure 7: ETAN which recognizes A4as an irrelevant feature. Note also that
A2is not connected to the class.
A limit of both TAN and FAN is that they do not perform feature selection;
each feature is forcedly connected to the class without checking if it is relevant.
The extended tree-augmented naive (ETAN) (de Campos et al.; 2015) overcomes
this problem. ETAN allows each feature to have as parent either (i) the class;
(ii) the class and a feature; (iii) a feature without the class; (iv) no parent,
in which case the feature is recognized as irrelevant. The structural learning
algorithm of ETAN exactly identies the highest-scoring graph that satises
the previous constraints. An example is shown in Figure 7. This algorithm is
more complex than that of TAN and FAN. The ETAN includes naive Bayes,
TAN and FAN as special cases; thus it achieves a higher BIC score (equal score
in the worst case) than all of them.
Bayesian network classiers have also been extended to regression problems,
in which the variable to predict is continuous. Adaptations for learning dif-
ferent structures in regression problems have been proposed by Fern andez and
Salmer on (2008), where feature selection is carried out following a lter ap-
proach.
4 Software Tools
This section provides the current state-of-the-art on software tools for learning
Bayesian networks from data. A summary table, containing main characteristics
of analyzed softwares is made available.
4.1 BANJO
Bayesian network inference with Java objects (BANJO) https://users.cs.
duke.edu/ ~amink/software/banjo/ is a software application and framework
for structure learning of static and dynamic Bayesian networks, developed under
the direction of Alexander J. Hartemink in the Department of Computer Sci-
ence at Duke University. BANJO focuses on score-based structure learning by
making available the following heuristic search strategies: simulated annealing
and greedy hill-climbing. These heuristics are paired with evaluation of a single
random local move or all local moves at each step. BANJO runs on comput-
ers running Macintosh OS X, Microsoft Windows, Linux, and Solaris, and its'
code is modiable within any Java development environment, from simple text
12

==== Page 13 ====
editor to full-featured IDE, while the open source Eclipse IDE has been used to
develop it.
4.2 BayesiaLab
BayesiaLab ( http://www.bayesia.com/ ) is a commercial desktop application
(Windows/Mac/Unix) with a sophisticated graphical user interface, which pro-
vides scientists a comprehensive \laboratory" environment for machine learning,
knowledge modeling, diagnosis, analysis, simulation, and optimization. Accord-
ing to https://library.bayesia.com/display/FAQ/Score-Based+Learning+
Algorithms , BayesiaLab performs structural learning by using a score-based
approach which optimizes the Minimum Description Length score function.
BayesiaLab oers dierent algorithms in order to increase the probability to
nd the optimal solution. They are using dierent search policies (greedy,
taboo) and/or are exploring dierent spaces (Trees, Bayesian networks, Es-
sential Graphs, Order of nodes).
4.3 Bayesian Network Classiers in Weka
Bayesian Network Classiers in Weka ( https://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ ~remco/
weka_bn/ ) is a Java source code available developed by the University of Waikato
and made avalable in 2006 under GPL1 license. Structure learning of Bayesian
networks is achieved by score-based appoach; hill climbing (K2, B, etc) and gen-
eral purpose (simulated annealing, tabu search) algorithms. In particular, the
local score metrics implemented are; Bayes, BDe, MDL, entropy, AIC. Bayesian
Network Classiers in Weka comes with an easy to use graphical user inter-
face. Furthermore, structure learning is made possiblle also accoring to the
constraint-based approach through the ICS, and CI algorithms.
4.4 Bayes Server
Bayes Server ( https://www.bayesserver.com/ ) is a commercial tool for mod-
eling Bayesian networks, Dynamic Bayesian networks and Decision graphs. It
comes wit an eective graphical user interface and a number of advanced APIs,
including all the features of the graphical user interface, are made available.
Structural learning of Bayesian networks can be perfomed according to the
score-based approach, and to the constraint-based approach through the PC
algoritm. Bayes Server API can be used from C#, Java, JavaScript, Python,
R, Matlab, Excel functions and Apache Spark.
4.5 B-Course
B-Course is a web-based data analysis tool for Bayesian modeling which has
been made available from november 2002 by the Complex Systems Computation
Group CoSCo, at Helsinki Institute for Information Technology. According
to the web site http://b-course.hiit.fi/obc/ , B-Course allows the user to
upload his/her dataset to learn the structure of a Bayesian network by using a
score-based approach which exploits proprietary algorithms, as well as simulated
annealing and hill climbing algorithms. In particular, the B-Course's proprietary
algorithm picks models that resemble the current best model. Indeed, the web
13

==== Page 14 ====
site reads \ These models are more likely to be predictively more accurate than
the current best model than if we picked the models randomly ".
4.6 BKD/BD
Bayesware Discoverer ( https://open.bu.edu/handle/2144/1288 ) originates
from Bayesian Knowledge Discoverer (BKD), i.e. a software tool that can learn
Bayesian networks from data by using the \bound and collapse" approach based
on probability intervals. The dataset to learn from may contain missing values.
BKD is free software, but it has been succeeded by a commercial version, the
Bayesware Discoverer, which oers a nice graphical user interface with some
powerful visualization options. However, Bayesware Discoverer is only available
for Windows.
4.7 blip
blip (Bayesian network Learning Improved Project) is an open-source Java pack-
age that oers a wide range of structure learning algorithms ( https://github.
com/mauro-idsia/blip ). It is developed my Mauro Scanagatta and it is dis-
tributed under the LGPL-3 by IDSIA. It focuses on score-based learning, mainly
the BIC and the BDeu score functions, and allows the user to learn BNs from
datasets containing thousands of variables. It provides state-of-the-art algor-
tihms for the following tasks: parent set identication ( BIC), general struc-
ture optimization (WINASOBS-ENT), bounded treewidth structure optimiza-
tion (KMAX) and structure learning on incomplete data sets (SEM-KMAX).
An R binding is also available.
4.8 bnlearn
Bayesian network structure learning, parameter learning and inference is an R
package which oers a rich set of algorithms which was rst released in 2007 by
Marco Scutari. Bnlearn ( http://www.bnlearn.com/ ) allows constraint-based
structural learning via the following algorithms: PC, Grow shrink Markov blan-
ket, incremental association based on Markov blanket, inter incremental associ-
ation based on Markov blanket, fast incremental association based on Markov
blanket, max-min parents and children, Hiton parents and children). Bnlearn
allows score-based structural learning through the following algorithms: hill-
climbing, tabu search, hybrid max-min hill-climbing, Restricted Maximization.
Some of the many available score functions for discrete variables are: log-
likelihood, BDe, BIC, MDL, BDs, K2, while for continuous variable the available
score functions are: loglikelihood, AIC, BIC, for Gaussian networks. Further-
more, bnlearn allows for black and white lists.
4.9 BNJ
Bayesian Network tools in Java (BNJ) is an open-source suite of software tools
for research and development using graphical models. It is implemented in Java
and distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) by the Kansas
State University Laboratory for Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). It
can be dowloaded from http://bnj.sourceforge.net/ , and the latest release
14

==== Page 15 ====
is 2004 July 21st. Structure learning is made available through score-based
approach while search strategy include sparse candidate, Markov chain Monte
Carlo (perturbation-based). BNJ works for both Windows and Linux.
4.10 bnstruct
Bnstruct is an R package which learns Bayesian networks from data with missing
values ( https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/bnstruct/index.html )
implements the Silander-Myllymaki complete search, the max-min parents-and-
children, the hill-climbing, the max-min hill-climbing heuristic searches, and
the structural expectation-maximization algorithm. Structure learning is score-
based on the following scoring functions: BDeu, AIC, BIC. The current release
is bnstruct 1.0.4, which has been released 2018 August the 31st.
4.11 BNT
The Bayes Net Toolbox (BNT) has been developed by Kevin Murphy from
1997 to 2002 using the Matlab programming language. It oers no graphical
user interface, and its' last update dates back to 19 October 2007. Starting from
January 2014, it is maintained on Github at https://github.com/bayesnet/
bnt. BNT supports structure learning of Bayesian networks by making available
the following score-based algorithms: Bayesian learning, using MCMC or local
search, only in the case where nodes are discrete and fully observed, and the
following constraint-based algorithms: Inductive Causation (IC), Fast Causal
Inference (FCI) (Pearl and Verma; 1995), and PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000).
4.12 DEAL
DEAL is a software package for use with R ( https://www.jstatsoft.org/
article/view/v008i20 ) which has been developed by Susanne G. Bttcher
and Claus Dethlefsen. DEAL includes several methods for analysing data using
Bayesian networks with variables of discrete and/or continuous types but re-
stricted to conditionally Gaussian networks. Structure learning is implemented
through a score-based approach which uses the Bayes factor comparing two
dierent DAGs. The seach strategy compares models that dier only by a
single arrow, either added, removed or reversed. Indeed, in these cases, the
Bayes factor is especially simple, because of decomposability of the network
score. DEAL also oers the possibility to combine the search algorithm random
restarts (Heckerman et al.; 1995), and to exploit equivalence relations to speed
up model search. It is worthwhile to mention that DEAL has an interface to
Hugin.
4.13 ELVIRA
The ELVIRA system ( http://leo.ugr.es/elvira/ ) is a tool to construct
model based decision support systems (Elvira Consortium; 2002). It oers an
easy to use Graphic Interface User (GUI) which allows the user to dene models
by clicking his/her mouse. It has been developed using the Java language and
thus it can be used on any operating system. Furthermore, the source code is
made freely available to download. However, its last update dates back to 2001
15

==== Page 16 ====
June 19th, and no informations are provided about the implemented structure
learning approach.
4.14 Free BN
Free BN is a open source, Java written, Bayesian network structure learning
API licensed under the Apache 2.0 license which has been made available by Jee
Vang as a major accomplishement of his PhD dissertation. Structural learning
of Bayesian network is performed according to the score-based approach, using
a search-and-score algorithm which optimizes the K2 metric, and according
to the constraint-based approach mainly through the PC algorithm. The last
interactions on the ocial web site date back to 2010.
4.15 GeNie and Smile
GeNie and Smile are commercial softwares from BayesFusion ( https://www.
bayesfusion.com/ ). GeNie Modeler is a graphical user interface (GUI) to
SMILE Engine and allows for interactive model building and learning. It is
written for the Windows environment but can be also used on macOS and
Linux under Wine. The SMILE Engine, oers easy integration of BayesFusion
in customers' applications, which can be written in a variety of programming lan-
guages (e.g., C++, Python, Java, R, .NET). SMILE.COM allows for easy inte-
gration with MS Excel. Structure learning can be performed by the score-based
approach algorithms as: Bayesian search algorithm (Heckerman et al.; 1995),
Greedy Thick Thinning (Cheng et al.; 1997) and by using the PC constraint-
based algorithm (Spirtes et al.; 2000). Furthermore, GeNie makes available the
Essential Graph Search algorithm, based on a combination of the constraint-
based search (with its prominent representative being the PC algorithm) and
the Bayesian Search approach.
4.16 GOBNILP
Globally Optimal Bayesian Network learning using Integer Linear Program-
ming (GOBNILP) is a C program which learns Bayesian networks from com-
plete discrete data or from local scores. GOBNILP ( https://www.cs.york.
ac.uk/aig/sw/gobnilp/ ) uses the SCIP ( https://scip.zib.de/ ) framework
for constraint integer programming. A development version of GOBNILP is
freely available as well as a Python version. Structural learning in GOBNILP
is score-based (BDeu), while the cutting plane algorithm is used to solve an
integer linear programming problem for score optimization. The latest version,
GOBNILP 1.6.3 has been released 2018 January the 5th, and it is available for
both Windows and Mac.
4.17 Hugin Expert
Hugin Expert ( https://www.hugin.com/ ) is a commercial software based on
Bayesian networks and inuence diagram technology. The following products
are made available: Hugin Explorer, Hugin Developer, Hugin Educational,
which is free but limited in the maximum number of nodes, and Hugin Re-
searcher which makes available API to develop industrial applications. It is
16

==== Page 17 ====
Java based, oers an intuitive ed eective Graphical User Interface and it is
available on Windows, Linux and macOS. Structural learning is performed by
the score-based approach which allows to choose whether to optimize BIC or
AIC, and by the constraint-based approach, where the PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000)
and Necessary Path Condition (Steck and Tresp; 1996) learning algorithms are
made available.
4.18 LibB
LibB ( http://www.cs.huji.ac.il/labs/compbio/LibB/programs.html ) has
been developed by Nir Friedman and Gal Elidan, and it consiists of a set of
executables freely available for academic use only. It made availabel for the
following software platforms: Windows 2000, NT, XP, and Linux. The program
LearnBayes learns the stucture of a Bayesian network by the score-based ap-
proach. In particular, the available scores are the following: BIC, likelihood,
BDe and BDe with equivalent sample size, while the following search options
are available: greedy hill climbing, greedy hill climbing with restarts, Tabu
search, best-rst search, beam search, MCMC search, simulated annealing, and
stochastic rst-ascent search. It is worthwhile to mention that structure learn-
ing is made possible also in the case of missing data, in such a case Structural
Expectation Maximization is used.
4.19 Libpgm
Libpgm ( https://pythonhosted.org/libpgm/ ) is an endeavor to make Bayesian
probability graphs easy to use. It was developed at CyberPoint Labs during the
Summer of 2012 by Charles Cabot working under the direction of James Ulrich
and Mark Raugas. It is provided free of use in accordance with the New BSD
License. Structure learning can be performed according to both the score-based
and the constraint-based approaches.
4.20 OpenMarkov
OpenMarkov ( http://www.openmarkov.org/index.php?lang=en ) has been de-
veloped in Java by the Research Centre for Intelligent Decision-Support Systems
of the UNED in Madrid. The latest stable release is 0.2.0. Structure learning
is performed according to the score-based approach by the hill climbing search
procedure applied to the K2 metric, and according to the constraint-based ap-
proach applying the PC (Spirtes et al.; 2000) algorithm. OpenMarkov makes
available a rudimentary treatment of dataset with missing values, i.e. record
removal of missing replacement with the string missing . Furthermore, Open-
Markov can be used as an API.
4.21 PNL and PyPNL
The Open Source Probabilistic Networks Library (PNL) is a tool, written in
C++, for working with graphical models made available under the Intel Open
Source License. It supports directed and undirected models, discrete and con-
tinuous variables, and various inference and learning algorithms. The last
update of PNL ( https://sourceforge.net/projects/openpnl/ ) dates back
17

==== Page 18 ====
to 2013 April the 16th. However, it is made available in Python ( https:
//github.com/PyOpenPNL ) with the last update dating back to 2017 April 15th.
Structure learning is score-based where BIC and AIC scores can be optimized.
It is worthwhile to mention that a parallel implementation of PNL is made avail-
able from the Information Technologies Laboratory, Faculty of Computational
Mathematics and Cybernetics at Nizhni Novgorod State University.
4.22 Pomegranate
Pomegranate is a Python package that implements fast and exible proba-
bilistic models ranging from individual probability distributions to composi-
tional models such as Bayesian networks and hidden Markov models ( https://
pomegranate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/BayesianNetwork.html ). Structure
learning of Bayesian networks from data is performed according to the score-
based approach. However, the search strategy is such that it currently enumer-
ates all the exponential number of structures and nds the best according to the
score. The score that is optimized is the minimum description length (MDL).
4.23 ProBT
ProBT ( http://www.probayes.com/en/recherche/probt/ ) is commercial C++
library which makes available advanced modeling, inference, and learning capa-
bilities. It extends the Bayesian networks framework by providing a structured
programming language allowing the developers to increase their applications ca-
pabilities and robustness by integrating Bayesian models. Structure learning is
made possible by score-based approach by optimizing MI, BIC, MDL, and AIC
scores.
4.24 Tetrad
The Tetrad codebase ( http://www.phil.cmu.edu/tetrad/ ), developed in JAVA,
and copyrighted by Clark Glymour, Richard Scheines, Peter Spirtes and Joseph
Ramsey, is publically available on GitHub ( https://github.com/cmu-phil/
tetrad ). Tetrad is a unique suite for causal discovery, it provides algorithms
capable to discover causal models when there may be unobserved confounders
of measured variables, to search for models of latent structure, and to search
for linear feedback models. Tetrad V comes with a easy to use graphical user
interface, and it allows to calculate predictions of the eects of interventions
or experiments based on a model. Many algorithms for learning the structure
of Bayesian networks and causal Bayesian networks are made available. Score-
based algorithms include: FGES and and IMaGES, for both continuous and
discrete variables as well as for missing data. Constraint-based algortihms in-
clude: PC, PCStable, CPC, CPCStable, PCmax, FCI, RFCI, GFCI, TsFCI, ...
For additional information the reader is referred to the Tetrad V manual which
is available at http://www.phil.cmu.edu/tetrad/ .
4.25 UnBBayes
UnBBayes ( http://unbbayes.sourceforge.net/index.html ) is an open source
software for modeling, learning and reasoning upon probabilistic networks de-
18

==== Page 19 ====
veloped in Java by researchers from the University of Bras lia and the George
Mason University. The web site mentions that structural learning of Bayesian
networks is implemented trough the score-based approach, i.e. K2 metric. How-
ever, the latest update of UnBBayes dates back to 2010 March 24th.
4.26 WinMine/MSBN
The WinMine/MSBN toolkit is free for non commercial purposes. It has been
developed by Max Chickering at Microsoft Research, and works on Windows
2000/NT/XP and can be downloaded at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
research/project/winmine-toolkit/ . It has been established 2002 October
5th, and consists of a set of executables which allow to build statistical models
from data. Learning the structure of a Bayesian networks can be performed
by running Dnet.exe . In particular, when WinMine/MSBN is used to learn
the strcucture of a discrete Bayesian network, it uses a score-based approach
together with a greedy DAG-based search algorithm. The search for the optimal
structure of the Bayesian networks starts with the model containing no edges;
then edges are greedily added, deleted, and reversed until a local maximum is
reached.
Table 1 summarizes the the analyzed softwares according to the following
characteristics:
Constraint is associated with constraint-based learning algorithms.
Score is associated with score-based learning algorithms, more precisely
with score available for optimization.
Missing is associted with missing treatment with specic reference to struc-
ture learning.
GUI tells about graphical user interface availability.
License is about whether the software is free (F) or commercial (C).
Op. System is about which operating system/s is/are supported.
Language is associated with the programming language used to develop
the software.
API tells about the API availability.
Updated tells the date of the last known update.
5 Guidelines
From a practitioner's point of view, it can be dicult to choose a method to
use in a particular problem given the wide variety of available algorithms for
inducing the structure of a Bayesian network. First of all, the nature of the
problem to solve must be taken into account. If we are facing a classication
19

==== Page 20 ====
Table 1: Summary of softwares to learn the structure of a Bayesian networks from data. XforConstraint andScore means yesbut not
the specic algorithm is unknown, XforMissing ,GUI andAPI means yes, F/C in License stand for Free and Commercial, OSX, W,
L and S in Op. System stand respectively for OSX, Windows, Linux and Solaris, while ? stands for unknown.
Name Constraint Score Missing GUI License Op. System Language API Updated
BANJO BDe F OSX, W, L, S Java ?
BayesiaLab MDL X X C OSX, W, L ? 2019
BNC-Weka ICS, CI AIC, BDe, MDL, K2 X F OSX, W, L Java ?
Bayes Server PC X X C OSX, W, L Java X 2019
B-Course X X F web service ?
BKD/BD X X X F/C W ? ?
blip BDeu, BIC, K2 X F OSX, W, L Java / R 2019
bnlearn PC, GS BDe, BDs, BIC, MDL, K2 X F OSX, W, L R 2018
BNJ X X F W, L Java 2004
bnstruct AIC, BDeu, BIC F OSX, W, L R 2018
BNT IC, FCI, PC BIC F OSX, W, L Matlab 2014
DEAL X Bayes Factor F OSX, W, L R 2018
ELVIRA PC K2 X X F OSX, W, L Java 2010
Free BN PC K2 F W, L Java X 2011
GeNie and Smile PC BS, GTT X F/C OSX, W, S ? X 2019
GOBNILP BDeu F OSX, W C X 2018
Hugin Expert PC, NPC AIC, BIC X X F/C OSX, W, L Java X 2019
LibB BDe, BIC X F W, L ? ?
Libpgm X F OSX, W, L Python 2012
OpenMarkov PC K2 X F W Java X 2012
PNL and PyPNL AIC, BIC F OSX, W, L C++, Python 2017
Pomegranate MDL F OSX, W, L C++, Python X 2017
ProBT AIC, BIC, MDL, MI C OSX, W, L C++ X 2019
Tetrad PC, FCI BIC, BDeu X X F OSX, W, L Java 2017
UnBBayes K2 X F OSX, W, L Java 2010
WinMine/MSBN K2 F W ? 2006
20

==== Page 21 ====
or regression problem, then one should stick to the alternatives described in
Section 3.5, because those structures are specially optimized for the prediction
tasks.
If instead we are interested in knowing the independence relations between
the variables in the model, score-based and constraint-based methods are more
appropriate, since they are more expressive in terms of representing indepen-
dences. It is important to point out that the methods explored in this paper
do not take causality into account. It means that links between the variables in
the learned structures should not be interpreted as causal relationships. Learn-
ing causal models is a research line that is receiving important attention in the
last years. The work by He et al. (2017) constitutes a good review of existing
methods for these scenarios.
From a technical point of view, the features of the available data also deter-
mine the kind of methods that can be used. More precisely, depending on the
existence of missing data or the presence of continuous variables, the procedures
reviewed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4 become relevant, as they are able to handle such
situations directly. Otherwise, a pre-processing step aimed to impute the miss-
ing data or discretize the continuous variables would be necessary.
The size of the dataset is also relevant because it can determine the accuracy
of the constraint-based methods. It is known that the power of the statistical
tests grows with the sample size (i.e. the probability of accepting the null
hypothesis when it is false decreases as the sample size increases). Therefore,
test-based algorithms like the PC have a tendency to include too many false
edges when the sample size is large. A solution to this problem was developed
by Bacciu et al. (2013).
Finally, the software availability issue is crucial when attempting to apply
any of the reviewed methods to practical problems. In that sense, the analysis
of software solutions in Section 4 can be of help.
6 Concluding remarks
In this paper we have presented a review of the most relevant literature on
Bayesian network structure learning. We have classied the analyzed methods
according to the approach they follow for solving the problem and discussed
relevant issues about how they handle missing values or continuous variables.
Methods oriented to specic tasks as classication and regression have also been
accounted for. A thorough revision of available software tools has also been
carried out.
Regarding future lines of research, there is an increasing interest of devel-
oping scalable methods able to handle large volumes of data and to run in
distributed computational environments. Causality is also receiving consider-
able attention. This fact is connected to the need of developing models that are
interpretable by humans.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partly supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Inno-
vation and Universities, grant TIN2016-77902-C3-3-P and by ERDF (FEDER)
21

==== Page 22 ====
funds.
References
Abell an, J., G omez-Olmedo, M. and Moral, S. (2006). Some variations on the
PC algorithm, Third European Workshop on Probabilistic Graphical Models ,
pp. 1{8.
Adel, T. and de Campos, C. P. (2017). Learning Bayesian networks with in-
complete data by augmentation, Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference on
Articial Intelligence , pp. 1684{1690.
Alonso-Barba, J., de la Ossa, L., G amez, J. and Puerta, J. (2013). Scaling up
the greedy equivalence search algorithm by constraining the search space of
equivalence classes, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 54: 429{
451.
Alonso-Barba, J. I., de la Ossa, L. and Puerta, J. M. (2011). Structural learning
of Bayesian networks using local algorithms based on the space of orderings,
Soft Computing 15(10): 1881{1895.
Alonso, J., de la Ossa, L., G amez, J. and Puerta, J. (2018). On the use of local
search heuristics to improve GES-based Bayesian network learning, Applied
Soft Computing 64: 366{376.
Bacciu, D., Etchells, T., Lisboa, P. and Whittaker, J. (2013). Ecient identi-
cation of independence networks using mutual information, Computational
Statistics 28: 621{646.
Ben-Daya, M. and Al-Fawzan, M. (1998). A tabu search approach for the
ow shop scheduling problem, European Journal of Operational Research
109(1): 88{95.
Bttcher, S. (2001). Learning Bayesian networks with mixed variables., Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Workshop in Articial Intelligence and
Statistics .
Bttcher, S. and Dethlefsen, C. (2003). deal: A package for learning bayesian
networks, Journal of Statistical Software 8: 1{40.
Buntine, W. (1991). Theory renement on Bayesian networks, Proceedings of
the 8th Conference on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 52{60.
Cheng, J., Bell, D. A. and Liu, W. (1997). An algorithm for bayesian be-
lief network construction from data, Proceedings of Articial Intelligence and
Statitics , pp. 83{90.
Chickering, D. (1995). A transformational characterization of equivalent
Bayesian network structures, Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference
on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 87{98.
Chickering, D. M., Heckerman, D. and Meek, C. (2014). Large-sample learn-
ing of Bayesian networks is NP-Hard, Journal of Machine Learning Research
5: 1287{1330.
22

==== Page 23 ====
Colombo, D. and Maathuis, M. H. (2014). Order-independent constraint-based
causal structure learning, Journal of Machine Learning Research 15: 3741{
3782.
Cooper, G. F. (1990). The computational complexity of probabilistic inference
using Bayesian belief networks, Articial Intelligence 42: 393{405.
Cooper, G. F. and Herskovits, E. (1992). A Bayesian method for the induction
of probabilistic networks from data, Machine Learning 9: 309{347.
Cussens, J. (2011). Bayesian network learning with cutting planes, Proceedings
of the 27th Conference on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 153{160.
Cussens, J., Malone, B. and Yuan, C. (2013). IJCAI 2013 tu-
torial on optimal algorithms for learning Bayesian networks
(https://sites.google.com/site/ijcai2013bns/slides).
de Campos, C. P., Corani, G., Scanagatta, M., Cuccu, M. and Zaalon, M.
(2015). Learning extended tree augmented naive structures, International
Journal of Approximate Reasoning 68: 153{163.
de Campos, C. P. and Ji, Q. (2011). Ecient structure learning of Bayesian
networks using constraints, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12: 663{
689.
de Campos, C. P., Zeng, Z. and Ji, Q. (2009). Structure learning of Bayesian
networks using constraints, Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on Machine Learning , pp. 113{120.
Elidan, G. and Gould, S. (2008). Learning bounded treewidth Bayesian net-
works, Journal of Machine Learning Research 9: 2699{2731.
Elvira Consortium (2002). Elvira: An environment for creating and using prob-
abilistic graphical models, inJ. G amez and A. Salmer on (eds), Proceedings of
the First European Workshop on Probabilistic Graphical Models , pp. 222{230.
Fern andez, A., Nielsen, J. D. and Salmer on, A. (2010). Learning Bayesian
networks for regression from incomplete databases, International Journal of
Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 18(1): 69{86.
Fern andez, A., P erez-Bernab e, I. and Salmer on, A. (2013). On Using the PC Al-
gorithm for Learning Continuous Bayesian Networks: An Experimental Anal-
ysis, CAEPIA'13. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol. 8109, pp. 342{351.
Fern andez, A. and Salmer on, A. (2008). Extension of Bayesian network clas-
siers to regression problems, inH. Gener, R. Prada, I. M. Alexandre and
N. David (eds), Advances in Articial Intelligence - IBERAMIA 2008 , Vol.
5290 of Lecture Notes in Articial Intelligence , Springer, pp. 83{92.
Friedman, N. (1998). The Bayesian structural EM algorithm, Proceedings of the
14th Conference on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 129{138.
Friedman, N., Geiger, D. and Goldszmidt, M. (1997). Bayesian network classi-
ers, Machine Learning 29: 131{163.
23

==== Page 24 ====
Hand, D. J. and Yu, K. (2001). Idiot's Bayes|not so stupid after all?, Interna-
tional Statistical Review 69(3): 385{398.
He, Y., Jia, J. and Geng, Z. (2017). Structural learning of causal networks,
Behaviormetrika 44: 287{305.
Heckerman, D., Geiger, D. and Chickering, D. (1995). Learning Bayesian net-
works: the combination of knowledge and statistical data, Machine Learning
20: 197{243.
Jaakkola, T., Sontag, D., Globerson, A. and Meila, M. (2010). Learning
Bayesian network structure using LP relaxations, Proceedings of the 13th In-
ternational Conference on Articial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 358{365.
Jaeger, M. (2004). Probabilistic decision graphs - combining verication and ai
techniques for probabilistic inference, International Journal of Uncertainty,
Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 12: 19 { 42.
Kalisch, M. and B uhlmann, P. (2007). Estimating high-dimensional directed
acyclic graphs with the PC-algorithm, Journal of Machine Learning Research
8: 613{636.
Koivisto, M. (2016). Parent assignment is hard for the MDL, AIC, and NML
costs, Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference On Learning Theory , Vol.
4005, year, pp. 289{303.
Koivisto, M. and Sood, K. (2004). Exact Bayesian structure discovery in
Bayesian networks, Journal of Machine Learning Research 5: 549{573.
Koller, D. and Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles
and Techniques .
Korhonen, J. and Parviainen, P. (2013). Exact learning of bounded treewidth
Bayesian networks, Articial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 370{378.
Kwisthout, J. H. P., Bodlaender, H. L. and van der Gaag, L. C. (2010). The ne-
cessity of bounded treewidth for ecient inference in Bayesian networks, Pro-
ceedings of the 19th European Conference on Articial Intelligence , pp. 237{
242.
Lauritzen, S. and Wermuth, N. (1989). Graphical models for associations be-
tween variables, some of which are qualitative and some quantitative, The
Annals of Statistics 17: 31{57.
Lee, C. and van Beek, P. (2017). Metaheuristics for score-and-search Bayesian
network structure learning, Proceedings of the 30th Canadian Conference on
Articial Intelligence , pp. 129{141.
Madsen, A. L., Jensen, F., Salmer on, A., Langseth, H. and Nielsen, T. D. (2017).
A parallel algorithm for Bayesian network structure learning from large data
sets, Knowledge-Based Systems 117: 46{55.
Malone, B., Kangas, K., J arvisalo, M., Koivisto, M. and Myllym aki, P. (2018).
Empirical hardness of nding optimal Bayesian network structures: algorithm
selection and runtime prediction, Machine Learning pp. 1{37.
24

==== Page 25 ====
Malone, B. M. (2012). Learning optimal Bayesian networks with heuristic
search , PhD thesis, Mississippi State University.
Moral, S., Rum , R. and Salmer on, A. (2001). Mixtures of Truncated Expo-
nentials in Hybrid Bayesian Networks, inS. Benferhat and P. Besnard (eds),
Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty , Vol.
2143 of Lecture Notes in Articial Intelligence , Springer, pp. 156{167.
Nie, S., de Campos, C. P. and Ji, Q. (2015). Learning bounded treewidth
Bayesian networks via sampling, Proceedings of the 13th European Confer-
ence on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty ,
pp. 387{396.
Nie, S., Mau a, D. D., de Campos, C. P. and Ji, Q. (2014). Advances in learning
Bayesian networks of bounded treewidth, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 27 , pp. 2285{2293.
Nielsen, J. D., Rum , R. and Salmer on, A. (2010). Structural-EM for learning
PDG models from incomplete data, International Journal of Approximate
Reasoning 51(5): 515{530.
Parviainen, P., Farahani, H. S. and Lagergren, J. (2014). Learning bounded
treewidth Bayesian networks using integer linear programming, Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on Articial Intelligence and Statistics ,
pp. 751{759.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of
Plausible Inference .
Pearl, J. (2003). Causality: models, reasoning and inference, Econometric The-
ory19(46): 675{685.
Pearl, J. and Verma, T. S. (1995). A theory of inferred causation, Studies in
Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 134: 789{811.
Pourret, O., Na m, P. and Marcot B. (2008). Bayesian Networks: A practical
guide to applications . Wiley.
Robinson, R. W. (1973). Counting labeled acyclic digraphs, New Directions in
the Theory of Graphs, Academic Press, New York pp. 28{43.
Romero, V., Rum , R. and Salmer on, A. (2006). Learning hybrid Bayesian
networks using mixtures of truncated exponentials, International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning 42: 54{68.
Scanagatta, M., Corani, G., de Campos, C. P. and Zaalon, M. (2016). Learning
treewidth-bounded Bayesian networks with thousands of variables, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 , pp. 1462{1470.
Scanagatta, M., Corani, G., de Campos, C. P. and Zaalon, M. (2018). Ap-
proximate structure learning for large Bayesian networks, Machine Learning
pp. 1{19.
25

==== Page 26 ====
Scanagatta, M., Corani, G. and Zaalon, M. (2017). Improved local search
in Bayesian networks structure learning, Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on Advanced Methodologies for Bayesian Networks , pp. 45{56.
Scanagatta, M., Corani, G., Zaalon, M., Yoo, J. and Kang, U. (2018). Ecient
learning of bounded-treewidth Bayesian networks from complete and incom-
plete data sets, International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 95: 152{166.
Scanagatta, M., de Campos, C. P., Corani, G. and Zaalon, M. (2015). Learning
Bayesian networks with thousands of variables, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 28 , pp. 1855{1863.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model, The Annals of Statis-
tics6: 461{464.
Scutari, M. (2014). Bayesian network constraint-based structure learning al-
gorithms: Parallel and optimised implementations in the bnlearn R package,
CoRR abs/1406.7648 .
Silander, T. and Myllymaki, P. (2006). A simple approach for nding the glob-
ally optimal Bayesian network structure, Proceedings of the 22nd Conference
on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 445{452.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C. N. and Scheines, R. (2000). Causation, Prediction, and
Search .
Steck, H. and Tresp, V. (1996). Bayesian belief networks for data mining,
University of Magdeburg , pp. 145{154.
Teyssier, M. and Koller, D. (2005). Ordering-based search: A simple and eec-
tive algorithm for learning Bayesian networks, Proceedings of the 21st Con-
ference on Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 584{590.
Yuan, C. and Malone, B. (2012). An improved admissible heuristic for learning
optimal Bayesian networks, Proceedings of the 28th Conference on Uncer-
tainty in Articial Intelligence , pp. 924{933.
Yuan, C., Malone, B. and Wu, X. (2011). Learning optimal Bayesian networks
using A* search, Proceedings of the 22nd International Joint Conference on
Articial Intelligence , pp. 2186{2191.
Zheng, X., Aragam, B., Ravikumar, P. and Xing, E. (2018). DAGs with no
tears: Continuous optimization for structure learning, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pp. 9492{9503.
26

