==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-023-17192-x
1 3
A survey of model compression strategies for object 
detection
Zonglei Lyu1,2  · Tong Yu1,2 · Fuxi Pan1,2 · Yilin Zhang1,2 · Jia Luo1,2 · Dan Zhang1,2 · 
Yiren Chen1,2 · Bo Zhang1,2 · Guangyao Li1,2
Received: 18 July 2022 / Revised: 19 May 2023 / Accepted: 18 September 2023 /  
Published online: 2 November 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in many object detection tasks. 
However, such DNNS-based large object detection models are generally computationally 
expensive and memory intensive. It is difficult to deploy them to devices with low memory 
resources or scenarios with high real-time requirements, which greatly limits their applica-
tion and promotion. In recent years, many researchers have focused on compressing large 
object detection models without significantly degrading their performance, and have made 
great progress. Therefore, this paper presents a survey of object detection model compres-
sion techniques in recent years. Firstly, these compression techniques were divided into six 
categories: network pruning, lightweight network design, neural architecture search (NAS), 
low-rank decomposition, network quantization, and Knowledge distillation (KD) methods. 
For each category, we select some representative state-of-the-art methods and compare and 
analyze their performance on public datasets. After that, we discuss the application sce-
narios and future directions of model compression techniques. Finally, this paper is further 
concluded by analyzing the advantages and disadvantages of six types of model compres-
sion techniques.
Keywords Deep learning · Deep neural networks · Object detection · Model compression
1 Introduction
In recent years, deep learning, as a branch of machine learning, has achieved excellent 
performance in several fields, obviously including the popular computer vision. Object 
detection, the most fundamental and important part of computer vision, has received 
extensive attention for several years. The purpose of object detection is to recognize 
and identify the categories and locations of objects that appear in an image. Due to 
the rapid development of deep learning techniques and GPU computing power, which 
has attracted an increasing interest in object detection, it has brought significant break -
throughs. Currently, most state-of-the-art models exploit deep learning-based networks 
as their backbones to extract features. To obtain better performance, neural networks 
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

==== Page 2 ====
48166 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
are incorporated into larger and more complex structures. As shown in Table  1, the cur -
rent DNNs mainly include AlexNet [274], Visual Geometry Group (VGG) [276], the 
residual network (ResNet) [112], GoogLeNet [4 ], etc. However, these DNN models suf-
fer from massive computing and storage requirements. For example, VGG-16 has up to 
138 million parameters and requires more than 500 MB of storage space. To detect an 
image with a resolution of 224 × 224, the model requires more than 15.5 billion floating 
point operations per second (FLOPs) and 93 MB of additional runtime memory to store 
intermediate outputs.
However, due to the limitation of practical application scenarios, models often need 
to be deployed on embedded development platforms with weak computing power, such 
as autonomous driving and intelligent patrol cars. Although deploying these models in 
the cloud can provide high computing performance and storage availability, the high 
network latency of the cloud will cause certain security risks in practical application 
scenarios. At the same time, with the continuous development of the Internet of things, 
edge computing, and autonomous robots [5 –8], many practical computer vision applica-
tions not only require extremely high detection accuracy, but also put forward higher 
requirements for real-time detection capabilities. In summary, although complex models 
have better performance, they require higher storage space and computing resources, 
which is the reason why DNNS-based object detection models are difficult to be directly 
and effectively deployed on resource-limited hardware platforms. Specifically, in practi-
cal application scenarios, the limitations of current complex object detection models 
mainly come from three aspects:1) model size, 2) memory at runtime, and 3) number of 
computations. Therefore, how to make a DNN model achieve efficient real-time detec-
tion in application scenarios and hardware with limited computing resources is becom-
ing increasingly important. Since 2014, many scholars have conducted a lot of research 
on model compression strategies to break through these limitations.
This survey provides a comprehensive review of deep learning-based object detection 
models and model compression techniques. The Brazilian Laboratory for Theory and 
Applications of Machine Learning provides an important reference on how to choose 
the right model compression method. The standard experimental benchmarks for dif-
ferent model compression methods for object detection tasks was provided, performing 
pruning, KD, and NAS on You Only Look Once (YOLO) v3 and comparing model per -
formance [9 ]. In addition to that, most of the reviews in related fields review the object 
detection model and model compression technology separately, and there is a lack of 
comprehensive reviews for both. For example, Yu Cheng et al. [10] conducted a review Table 1  The current DNNs
Method Parameter Computation
Size (M) Conv (%) Fc (%) FLOPs (G) Conv (%) Fc (%)
AlexNet [274] 61 3.8 96.2 0.72 91.9 8.1
VGG-S [276] 103 6.3 93.7 2.6 96.3 3.7
VGG-16 [276] 138 10.6 89.4 15.5 99.2 0.8
GoogLeNet [4] 6.9 85.1 14.9 1.6 99.9 0.1
ResNet-18 [112] 5.6 100 0 1.8 100 0
ResNet-50 [112] 12.2 100 0 3.8 100 0
Boldface numbers indicate the methods with the highest floating-point operations (FLOPs)

==== Page 3 ====
48167 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
of DNN model compression and acceleration technologies in early 2020, and deeply 
analyzed the performance, related applications, advantages and disadvantages of model 
compression technologies. However, only four types of model compression technologies 
were focused on, and due to the rapid development of model compression field, many 
latest research results were missing. The few surveys that mention both object detection 
and model compression [11] focus on the acceleration of "detection pipeline", "detector 
backbone" and "numerical computation", and only mention network pruning and quanti-
zation, and lightweight network design. Therefore, the papers related to object detection 
and model compression were collected from the top conferences and journals contained 
in class A and part of class B of computer vision recommended by China Computer 
Federation (CCF) and Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and a total of 252 
papers were obtained after removing useless documents.
In this paper, we sort out the research status in this field according to time and tech-
nology type, and provide a comprehensive review of deep learning-based object detection 
models and model compression techniques. In Section  2, six available compression strate-
gies and the research status of related teams and institutions in this field are discussed. Sec-
tion 3 compares and summarizes the compression effects of various compression strategies 
on public datasets, which also contains the performance comparison between the original 
object detection model and the lightweight model. The future research directions and appli-
cable scenarios of various model compression strategies are listed in Section  4. Finally, 
by analyzing the advantages and existing problems of each strategy, the paper is further 
concluded in Section 5.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) This paper systematically reviews six categories of compression techniques, including 
network pruning, lightweight network design, NAS, low-rank decomposition, network 
quantization, and KD methods. A total of 252 papers were collected from 247 top-tier 
conferences and journals, encompassing the latest works that were absent from previ-
ous surveys.
(2) Unlike existing surveys that primarily focus on either object detection models or model 
compression techniques, this paper specifically concentrates on both object detection 
and image classification. This targeted approach provides comprehensive data statistics 
and summaries for all methods on public datasets. For instance, in Fig.  25, we compare 
the performance of original object detection models with lightweight models on the 
VOC 2007 dataset, which has not been covered in other surveys.
(3) In addition to a simple summary based on strategy classification, this paper goes 
beyond and provides an additional analysis of the research landscape of compres-
sion techniques from the perspectives of research institutions, timeline, and publishing 
organizations. Figures  6, 7, 9, among others, present this comprehensive view, assisting 
readers in gaining a more thorough and efficient understanding of the research progress 
in this field.
2  Model compression strategies
Since 2014, methods for compressing and accelerating DNN models have gradually 
emerged. From 2014 to 2021, after eight years of research on DNN model compression 
methods, the field can be divided into the following six research directions: lightweight 

==== Page 4 ====
48168 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
network structure design, NAS, low-rank decomposition, network quantization and KD, 
and some methods that are combinations of each other. In this paper, a total of 252 papers 
are collected from the top conferences and journals contained in class A and part of class 
B of computer vision, as recommended by the CCF and ACM. The proportions of the 
research directions for model compression methods are shown in Fig.  1. It can be seen that 
network pruning and lightweight network structure design methods account for the largest 
proportions among the current model compression methods. In addition, the distribution of 
the top conference and journal papers in model compression research is shown in Fig.  2. 
Among them, 236 conference papers, 5 journal papers and 11 arXiv papers are included. 
Fig. 1  Distribution of the research directions concerning model compression
Fig. 2  The distribution of top conferences and journals papers in model compression research

==== Page 5 ====
48169 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Research on model compression methods in the field of object detection has been a very 
important research hotspot at top conferences in recent years. In contrast, top journals have 
produced less research in this field.
2.1  Network pruning
The network pruning approach is one of the most extensive model compression methods 
in DNNs. Its main idea is to remove redundant parameters by designing different stand-
ards for judging whether parameters are important to make the network sparse and achieve 
compression. In fact, the history of model pruning can be traced back to 1989, and it was 
first proposed in [12]. Since then, many network pruning methods have been developed. 
The collection of the network pruning compression methods provided in top journals and 
conferences in the last 6 years is shown in Fig.  3. This paper counts 90 papers on network 
pruning, and we can find that network pruning-based compression methods have recently 
become increasingly popular.
Fig. 3  Distribution of Network Pruning papers
Fig. 4  Classification of Network 
Pruning approaches
Prunin gUnstructured Pruning
Structured 
Pruning
OthersChannel PruningFilter/Feature map/Kern el 
PruningWeight Pruning
Neuron Pruning
Layer Pruning

==== Page 6 ====
48170 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
According to their different pruning approaches, network pruning methods can be 
divided into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. As shown in Fig.  4, unstructured 
pruning mainly includes unstructured weight pruning. The unstructured weight pruning 
can directly remove unimportant weights from each layer to reduce the number of model 
parameters. Structured pruning is implemented by deleting the unimportant structures con-
tained in the whole DNN, these structures include convolution kernels, channels, filters, 
layers, and so on.
2.1.1  Unstructured pruning
The principle of unstructured weight pruning is shown in Fig.  5. The unimportant weight 
edges of the given network are pruned while minimally affecting the overall structure. As 
shown in Fig.  6, since 2015, various research institutions have achieved some excellent 
research results regarding unstructured pruning methods. Their achievements are intro-
duced in turn below.
The Han Song team of Stanford University has produced many achievements in the 
field of model compression. In 2015, the Han Song team and NVIDIA team [13] jointly 
first proposed a method of pruning weights whose absolute values are less than a given 
threshold, and they then trained a sparse network to learn the remaining connection 
weight. Their model achieved a high sparsity rate at the weight level. Based on this Fig. 5  Weight pruning
Stanford University & NVIDIA :
Learning both weights and connections (NeurIPS)
2015
2016
Stanford &Tsinghua University:
Deep compression
(ICLR)2017
Stanford &Tsinghua University:
Deep gradient compression
(ICLR)Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application:OLMP(IJCAI)
Florida International University & Simon Fraser University:
Constrained optimization(EECV)
Microsoft Research :
Freque ncy-domain dynamic pruning(NeurIPS)ǃPa ckNe t (CVPR)
University of Californiaɿɿ
“Learning-com pression” algorithms(CVPR)
2018
2020
Samsung Rese arch& Harvard University:
Unstructured pruning and quantization
(CVPR)Unstructured 
PruningZhejiang University & Tencent: 
Acce lerate cnns from three dimensions(ICML)
KAIST EE: Layer-adaptive magnitude-based pruning 
(ICLR)
MIT:Pruning neural networks at initialization (ICLR)
2021
Fig. 6  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on regarding Unstructured Pruning

==== Page 7 ====
48171 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
method, the team cooperated with Tsinghua University [14] to propose a three-stage 
pipeline-based deep compression method, which combines pruning, training quantiza-
tion and Huffman coding to reduce the storage requirements of y the examined neural 
network while maintaining the original accuracy. This paper won the best paper award 
at the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2016. To reduce 
the communication overhead, Lin et  al. [15] proposed a deep gradient compression 
(DGC) method, which only selects a part of the most "important" gradient elements in 
each iteration for sending.
The method of pruning weights by providing thresholds for each layer is called layer-
wise magnitude-based pruning (LMP). Many subsequent studies have been conducted 
based on this approach. In the past, the commonly used threshold adjustment method 
was manual operation [14]. Such strategies require much professional and expert knowl-
edge. To facilitate the use of LMP by nonprofessional users, the Anhui Province Key 
Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application [16] proposed an approach called optimiza-
tion based LMP (OLMP) to automatically adjust the pruning threshold of LMP. Con-
sequently, the threshold adjustment problem was transformed into a constrained opti-
mization problem, minimizing the size of the pruned model subject to an accuracy loss 
constraint. Similarly, other scholars have also transformed the compression problem into 
a constrained optimization problem [17– 19]. In 2021, Lee et al. [20] proposed an impor -
tance score for global pruning by studying layered sparsity, namely, the layer-adaptive 
magnitude-based pruning (LAMP) score, and their approach did not require any hyper -
parameter tuning or heavy computation.
Many scholars are still exploring other methods of judging the importance of model 
weights instead of using their magnitude as the importance evaluation metric. The teams at 
Peking University and Microsoft Research [21] proposed a dynamic pruning scheme in the 
frequency domain by using spatial correlation. Carreira-Perpinán et al. of the University of 
California [22] proposed an algorithm called learning compression. They used the quad-
ratic regularization term of a training model to periodically update the weight set and a 
Lagrange multiplier to find the most appropriate weight, not just the largest weight. Mallya 
et  al. of Microsoft Research [23] proposed an algorithm called Packnet. They packaged 
"multiple tasks" into a single network by performing iterative pruning and network retrain-
ing to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem in weight pruning. The Samsung Research 
and Harvard University teams [24] proposed a sparse quantization neural network method 
for weight representation based on fine-grained and unstructured pruning. To speed up the 
training speed and prevent the loss of accuracy caused by the fine-tuning or modification 
of the network architecture during or after training, Frankle’s team [25] at Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) proposed random initialization pruning methods, which 
are different from magnitude-based pruning after training, randomly shuffling the pruned 
weights within each layer or sampling new initial values to preserve or improve accuracy.
Through the above discussion, we know that the research on unstructured pruning 
methods performed by various scholars and research institutions has focused on how to 
choose the weights to be pruned. Threshold pruning methods ranging from LMP [14] to 
dynamic weight selection via spatial correlation [21], and the recent random initialization-
based pruning method [25] (performed to further sparsity the network) have achieved good 
results. On the whole, unstructured pruning, regardless of its structural position, has less 
impact on the overall model accuracy and can achieve a high sparsity rate. However, we 
should also pay attention to the irregular memory access caused by unstructured pruning. 
In addition, for unstructured pruning, the research of MIT Han Song team has provided 
many contributions.

==== Page 8 ====
48172 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
2.1.2  Structured pruning
The concept of structural pruning was proposed based on the limitations of unstructured 
pruning. Structural pruning is realized by deleting the unimportant structures in a whole 
DNN and minimizing the reconstruction error. According to the granularity of structural 
pruning, structural pruning methods can be divided into neuron pruning, filter/feature map/
kernel pruning, channel pruning and layer pruning. As shown in Fig.  7, from 2016 to the 
present, major research institutions and teams have put forward a lot of research results 
each year, among which the filter pruning method accounts for the largest proportion. This 
section introduces various structural pruning methods from the perspective of research 
institutions and teams according to their pruning granularity categories and the overall 
timeline.
(1) Neuron Pruning  After a neural network receives an input, not all neurons in the net-
work are activated, so the output value of those deactivated neurons can be set to zero 
through a certain criterion, which can reduce structural redundancy. Neuron pruning is rel-
evant to weight pruning. Weight pruning focuses on the pruning of weight edges, while 
neuron pruning focuses on the pruning of the neurons pointed out by the weight edges. A 
large number of studies on neuron pruning have appeared since 2016.
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and the SenseTime Technology 
team [26] proposed iterative alternate pruning and training, and the pruning of neurons 
with zero activation values. Guo et al. [27] proposed a dynamic remedy method to improve 
the threshold pruning technique, this approach considers that by dynamically changing 
the importance levels of the connections between neurons: the connections will be deleted 
when they are not important, and they will be remedied back when they are important. 
Improvements of the threshold pruning method are irreversible. The University of Mary -
land, Deepmind, IBM, Jingdong and other teams [28] jointly proposed applying feature 
SenseTime: Synaptic strength for convolutional neural network(NeurIPS)
Southern University of Science and Technology: SFP (IJCAI)
Xiamen  University& Tencent Technology:GDP(IJCAI) 
2018SenseTime&HKUST : 
Network trimming(CVPR)
Guoet al:Dynamic network surgery(NeurIPS)
2016University of Maryland & IBM & Deep Mind:NISP
(CVPR)
TuSimpleɿɿData-driven Sparse Structure Selection 
(ECC V)
2018NVIDIA Research: Taylor (CVPR)
2019
2017
NanjingUnivers ity: ThiNet(ICCV )
Face++˖˖Channel pruning(ICCV)
Tsinghua  University: Runtime neural pruning(NeurIPS)DiDi AI Labs: AutoCompress(AAAI)
Alibaba DAMO Academy: 
DARB( AAAI )
2020
SenseTime: Reborn filters(AAAI)
University of Technology Sydney& Baidu Research : 
Learning filter pruning criteria (CVPR)
NanjingUnivers ity: Residual-Connections and Limited-Data(CVPR)
2020
2019
Tsinghua  University:AFP(AAAI)ɺCe ntripetal sgd(CVPR)ɺAOFP(ICML)ǃGlobal 
sparse momentum sgd(NIPS)ɺFCF (CVPR)
Xiamen  University& Huawei Noahs Ark Lab: KSE (CVPR)ɺGA L(CVPR)
IIT Kanpur:Play and Prun e (IJCAI)ǃHetconv(CVPR)
Tsinghua  University :Network Slimming(ICCV)
2017
2017
Nanyang Technological Univer sity:Layer-WiseOBS (NeurIPS) 
MIT : Energy-Aware Prunin g(CVPR)MIT & Google : NetAdapt(ECC V)
20182020
The University of Sydney& SenseTime:CLFI(AAAI)ɺMD P(CVPR)
Huawei Noahs Ark Lab: Prun ing from scratch(AAAI) ɺDynamic Network Prunin g(AAAI )
Seoul National University: SCP (ICML)2018
South China Univer sity of Technology & Tencent AI Labɿɿ
DCP (NeurIPS)
Huawei Noahs Ark Lab: Variational Prun ing(CVPR) Channel Prunin g
Layer Prunin gFilter/Feature map/
Kernel PruningNeuron PruningTechnical University of Munich: Pathway 
gradient (CVPR )
Northeastern University: 
GReg ( ICLR)
2021
University of Tennessee:SRR-GR (CVPR)
Robert Bosch GmbH: HFP (W ACV)
Chinese Academy of Sciences : 
DPFP(AAAI)
UC Berkeley : Tied Block Convolution(AAAI )
2021
Tsinghua  University:Group fisher(ICML)ǃResRep(ICCV)
Huawei Noah Ark Lab :CC (CVPR)
University of Sydney : Performance Maximization (CVPR)
School of Electrical Engineering : Linearly Replaceable Filter (AAAI)
2021
2021
Sichuan University:One-shot Prun ing-Quantization (AAAI)
University of Oxford : SBP-SR  (ICLR)  
VinAI Research :CLR  (ICLR)
Google Brain &DeepMind: Rigging the lottery (ICML)
Transmute AI Research :ChipNet (ICLR)
University of California : Benefits of Overparameterization (AAAI)
Fig. 7  The research situations of various research institutions and teams regarding Structured Pruning

==== Page 9 ====
48173 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
ranking technology to measure the importance of each neuron in the "final response layer" 
(FRL) and removing the least important neurons. TuSimple Team [29] introduced a new 
parameter-scale factor to scale the output of a specific structure to achieve data-driven and 
end-to-end pruning. The NVIDIA team [30] repeatedly deleted neurons with small scores 
by estimating the contributions of neurons to the final loss. Khakzar [31] of the Technical 
University of Munich proposed a pathway selection method based on neuron contributions, 
and a feature attribution approach, (the “pathway gradient”), that reveals the input features 
associated with features encoded in the critical pathways. Wang [32] of Northeastern Uni-
versity proposed two algorithms that exploit regularization in a new fashion, where the 
penalty factor is uniformly raised to a large level, and they finally solved the two central 
problems regarding the pruning schedule and weight importance criterion of deep neural 
pruning.
Some scholars are also researching structured weight pruning. Last year, the DiDi AI 
research team [33] proposed an automatic structured pruning framework called Auto-
Compress based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM). Similarly, 
Ma et al. [34] also used the ADMM algorithm to obtain a sparse structure called partial 
convolution (PCONV). The Alibaba Dharma Academy team [35] proposed a new prun-
ing method by using block-max weight masking (BMWM) and a density-adaptive regular 
block (DARB) by studying the inherent characteristics of irregular pruning weights.
The research on neuron pruning mainly focuses on the evaluation of neuron contribu-
tion rates and importance levels, and some studies have combined these topics with struc-
tural weight pruning. On the whole, few studies have examined neuron pruning.
(2) Filter/Feature Map/Kernel Pruning  Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) usually 
have significant redundancy between different filters and feature maps. A feature map is 
an output of the network, and a filter is a network parameter. Feature maps and filters have 
corresponding relationships. When a feature map is subtracted, the filter connected to it 
is also removed. Some differences can be found between the filter pruning method and 
the neuron pruning method. The filters pruning method prunes CNN at the filter rather 
level than in terms of a single connection (parameter) or neuron. Filter pruning is the most 
important structured pruning method. The following introduces the research situation of 
this strategy from the perspectives of technology and research purposes.
Methods based on Sparse Constraint Regularization
Filter pruning methods have emerged in large numbers since 2016. To obtain sparse 
structures, many scholars have studied network parameter regularization methods based 
on group sparsity to penalize unimportant parameters. The University of Pittsburgh [36] 
used group least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression for reg-
ularization specification to explore the sparsities of different structure levels, and the 
works in [37, 38] were similar. Yoon and Hwang [39] also studied group sparse regu-
larization, by using the correlations between the features in the examined network for 
pruning. A team at the University of Maryland and NEC Labs America [40] proposed a 
structural sparse CNN regularization and acceleration method, which can greatly reduce 
the cost of computation by removing all the filters and their connected feature maps 
in the network that have little impact on the output accuracy. A team at the Skolkovo 
Institute of Science and Technology [41] used the online balanced descent (OBD) algo-

==== Page 10 ====
48174 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
rithm [12] to regard the convolution operation as a matrix multiplication calculation, 
and used the group sparsity method to achieve sparse matrix multiplication and improve 
the calculation speed of their approach. Megvii Technology and Xi’an Jiaotong Univer -
sity [42] proposed a channel selection strategy based on the LASSO and a least-squares 
reconstruction algorithm to prune filters.
Many methods based on the sparse learning (SL) framework have also been proven to 
be effective [43–47] of Université de Sherbrooke proposed an SL framework, which 
allows learned and selected filters to be pruned in a CNN while considering the neuron 
budget. A University of Amsterdam team [48] used a Bayesian algorithm to construct 
sparse structures for pruning. However, the regularization based on pruning technique 
requires a sensitivity analysis for each layer and additional computations. To solve this 
problem, a team at NVIDIA [49] proposed a global rescaling method that depends on 
the standards of all layers and does not require sensitivity estimation.
Methods based on adaptive and dynamic pruning
Many scholars have proposed some strategies to achieve adaptive and dynamic filter 
pruning. In 2017, Lin et al. of Tsinghua University [50] considered that input sam-
ples should not be treated equally because of the different computational quantities 
required by different tasks. Therefore, they proposed a runtime neural pruning (RNP) 
framework that retains all the capabilities of the original network, and adaptively con-
ducts pruning according to the input image and current feature map. In 2018, the Ding 
team of Tsinghua University proposed an auto-balanced filter pruning (AFP) method 
[51], which prunes some weak filters together with the corresponding feature maps. 
In the second year, they [52] also proposed a new momentum-based stochastic gradi-
ent descent (SGD) optimization method to reduce network complexity via dynamic 
pruning. Ji Rongrong’s team of Xiamen University cooperated with Tencent Technol-
ogy and other institutions [53] to propose a global and dynamic training algorithm to 
prune non-salient filters. A team at the University of Sydney and Baidu [54] proposed 
the learning filter pruning criterion (LFPC) by considering cross-layer filter distribu-
tion diversity, this approach adaptively selects the appropriate pruning criteria for dif-
ferent functional layers.
In 2021, Wang et al. [55] of the University of Tennessee proposed a layer-adaptive 
filter pruning approach based on structural redundancy reduction, which builds a 
graph for each convolutional layer of a CNN to measure the redundancy in each 
layer. This approach prunes unimportant filters in the most redundant layer(s) 
rather than the filters with the least importance across all layers. Peking Univer -
sity and Huawei’s Noah’s Ark Lab used the relationship between different inputs 
to propose a new paradigm that dynamically removes redundant filters by embed-
ding the manifold information of all instances into the space of pruned networks 
(dubbed ManiDP) [56]. To overcome the problem that many extra hyperparameters 
and training epochs are caused by the existing filter pruning methods, Ruan [57] of 
the Chinese Academy of Sciences proposed a novel dynamic and progressive filter 
pruning scheme (DPFPS) that directly learns a structured sparsity network from 
scratch. In particular, the DPFPS specifically imposes a new structured sparsity 
inducing regularization upon the expected pruning parameters in a dynamically 
sparse manner.

==== Page 11 ====
48175 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Methods based on limited data and without retraining or fine-tuning
Considering that the current methods typically need to use the original data for 
retraining after pruning to compensate for the loss of accuracy, due to the data pri-
vacy problem, only a small part of the data may actually be obtained. The Sense-
Time team [58] proposed a data-driven method that uses a parameter class called 
synaptic strength to prune the connection between the input and output feature 
maps, and finally generate a nuclear-level sparse CNN. In 2020, SenseTime and 
Tsinghua University [59] jointly proposed a method for network compression when 
the number of training data is limited. Tang et al. of Nanjing University [60] pro-
posed a network pruning method based on residual blocks and limited data to solve 
the problem of pruning residual connections and small-scale datasets. The Ding 
team of Tsinghua University [61] also proposed a method to safely remove redun-
dant filters, but it is not ideal for large scale datasets because the model needs to be 
trained from scratch [62]. To solve this problem, the team further proposed approxi-
mated oracle filter pruning (AOFP) [63], which continuously searches for the least 
important filters in a binary search manner, performs pruning attempts by randomly 
masking out filters, accumulates the resulting errors, and finetunes the model via a 
multipath framework.
Most of the previous works involved "hard filter pruning", which means deleting the 
pruned filters directly. Therefore, this approach reduces the capacity of the original 
model and leads to performance degradation. In addition, after pruning the filters of the 
pretraining model, fine-tuning is needed. To solve this problem, Southern University of 
Science and Technology [64] proposed a soft filter pruning (SFP) method to acceler -
ate the DNN inference process, so that each pruned filter can be updated during the 
training process of the model with little dependence on the pretraining model. To solve 
dimensional mismatch and retraining problems, the team cooperated with the Huawei 
Noah’s Ark Lab and other institutions [65] to propose an end-to-end pruning method for 
heterogeneous redundant structures, and kernel sparsity and entropy (KSE) indicators to 
guide model compression, without iterative pruning and retraining. Lin et al. [66] also 
introduced a soft mask to learn a sparse soft mask in a label-free and end-to-end man-
ner, and used a fast iterative shrinkage and thresholding algorithm (FISTA) to quickly 
and reliably remove the corresponding structures.
Others
Some scholars have studied pruning methods that can directly specify the accuracy of 
the model after pruning. The Pravendra Singh team at the IIT Kanpur Institute [67] pro-
posed a play and prune (PP) framework consisting of an auto-balanced filter pruning 
(AFP) [51] module and a pruning rate controller (PRC) module. This method allows 
for directly specifying the desired error tolerance instead of conducting this step at the 
pruning level. Enderich [68] of Robert Bosch GmbH proposed the holistic filter pruning 
(HFP) method, which can specify accurate pruning rates for both numbers of param-
eters and multiplications, and they used the channelwise scaling factors of batch-nor -
malization (BN) layers to calculate the model size.
Luo Jianhao’s team at the National Key Software Technology Laboratory of Nanjing 
University [69] proposed a Thinet architecture based on filter pruning by using a greedy 

==== Page 12 ====
48176 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
algorithm. They considered filter pruning to be an optimization question and pointed 
out that whether a filter can be pruned depends on the input of the next layer rather than 
that of the current layer, they finally pruned the filter corresponding to the layer with the 
weakest input channel data in the next layer. This method has also been one of the main 
comparative approaches in follow-up research. Tsinghua University and the Tencent AI 
Lab also used optimization problems for pruning [70], they jointly proposed a factorized 
convolutional filter (FCF) structure, and updated it with an optimization method based 
on the ADMM to obtain a compact CNN model.
To solve the global filter importance ranking (GFIR) problem, Peking University’s 
You et al. [71] proposed a global filter pruning algorithm called GateDecorator. He 
et al. [72] proposed a filter pruning method via the geometric median (FPGM), which 
compresses CNN models by pruning filters with redundancy, rather than those with 
“relatively less” importance. A team at the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Tech-
nology and Microsoft Research proposed Perforatedcnns [73], which uses different 
strategies to mask the activation values and employs adjacent values  to represent the 
masked values to remove redundancy. The Pravendra Singh team at the IIT Kanpur 
Institute [74] proposed a new filter structure called hetconv based on heterogene-
ous kernel to reduce the number of FLOPs without incurring the loss of accuracy. 
In 2021, Wang et al. [75] of UC Berkeley proposed a tied block convolution (TBC), 
which shares the same thinning filter over equal channels blocks and produces multi-
ple responses with a single filter, this approach can also be extended to group convo-
lution and fully connected layers, and can be applied to various backbone networks 
and attention modules.
Through the study of the abovementioned filter, feature map, and kernel pruning 
method, it can be seen that the main techniques used in the research on filter pruning 
methods are the sparse constraint regularization method to penalize unimportant param-
eters, and cross-layer correlation, importance ranking and other mechanisms to evaluate 
importance and remove redundancy, and finally obtaining a sparse structure. In terms of 
research purposes, some studies mainly focus on filter pruning without fine-tuning and 
retraining, and pruning in the case of limited data. Some scholars specialize in adaptive 
and dynamic pruning. Generally, filter pruning methods are relatively excellent, and the 
global dynamic pruning may be the future trend.
(3) Channel Pruning  Both filter pruning and channel pruning approaches are coarse-
grained pruning methods, and their pruning techniques are similar. However, channel prun-
ing can solve the dimensional mismatch problem caused by filter pruning. The main idea 
of channel pruning is to directly delete entire channels from the convolutional layer of a 
network. After pruning, the model can directly be trained to obtain higher compression 
ratio and a shorter computing time.
The team of Tsinghua University [76] proposed applying L1 regularization to channels 
by pushing the value of the BN scaling factor to zero to identify and delete insignificant 
convolution channels. In 2021, the team [77] also proposed a layer grouping algorithm to 
automatically find coupled channels, and derived a unified metric based on Fisher infor -
mation to evaluate the importance of a single channel and coupled channels. Ding’s team 
[78] at Tsinghua University proposed ResRep, a novel method for lossless channel pruning, 
which slims down a CNN by reducing the widths (numbers of output channels) of convo-
lutional layers.

==== Page 13 ====
48177 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Hu et al. [79] proposed a channel pruning method based on genetic algorithm. Accord-
ing to the sensitivity of each channel layer, the network model is pruned layer by layer, 
and then fine-tuned. South China University of Technology [80] introduced an additional 
recognition perception loss to help select the channels that are truly helpful for recognition, 
and jointly optimized the reconstruction error. These methods remove the unimportant 
input feature mappings of the convolution layer and prevent dimensional mismatch. The 
team [81] of the Tencent AI Lab proposed a collaborative channel pruning (CCP) method 
to use the dependency relationship between channels to determine the pruning results to 
reduce the computational overhead with negligible performance degradation.
In recent years, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has conducted excellent research on channel 
pruning methods. Zhao et al. [82] introduced a variational technique to estimate the sali-
ency distribution of the parameter channels, and removed redundant channels from the 
original model. In 2020, they cooperated with Tsinghua University and Ant Financial [83] 
to use a simple binary search strategy to determine the channel number configuration of 
a pruning model, and start training and pruning directly from any initial weight. In the 
same year, the team [84] also proposed a model that explicitly establishes channel selec-
tions with discrete weights to encourage the use of more different weights and improve the 
interpretability of the model with the help of interpretable hierarchical channel selection 
in dynamic networks. In 2021, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab worked with Xiamen University 
[85] to propose a collaborative compression (CC) scheme, which joins channel pruning 
and tensor decomposition to compress CNN models by simultaneously learning the model 
sparsity and low-rank status.
Guo et al. [87] of the University of Sydney proposed a new layer-by-layer channel prun-
ing method called channel pruning guided by classification loss and feature importance 
(CPLI), and a new strategy to suppress the influence of unimportant features, which are 
removed in the pruning stage. The team [88] also proposed multi-dimensional pruning 
(MDP), which considers multiple dimensional factors such as space, time, and channels 
for pruning. In 2021, another team including Gao et al. [89] at the University of Sydney 
considered the loss metric mismatch problem of pruning and proposed a novel channel 
pruning method for CNNs. At the same time, they introduced a corresponding episodic 
memory to update and collect sub-networks during the pruning process to solve the prob-
lem of catastrophic forgetting and the imbalanced distribution of subnetworks.
The Seoul University team [86] proposed that a model may converge to a poor local 
minimum after pruning, and channel pruning depends excessively on the absolute activa-
tion value in the corresponding channel. Therefore, they proposed a data-driven channel 
pruning algorithm using the random gradient descent method, which combines BN and a 
rectified linear unit (ReLU) for channel pruning without an additional fine-tuning process. 
Gao et al. [14] of the University of Pittsburgh proposed a discrete optimal structural prun-
ing method to obtain compact CNN with strong resolution. Joo et al. [90] of the School of 
Electrical Engineering proposed a novel channel pruning method, a linearly replaceable 
filter (LRF), suggesting that a filter that can be approximated by the linear combination of 
other filters is replaceable. Moreover, weights compensation was proposed to support the 
LRF method by effectively reducing the output difference caused by removing filters via 
direct weight modification.
To reduces the risk of pruning important channels prematurely, another team including 
Hou et al. [91] propose a novel Channel Exploration methodology (CHEX) in 2022, which 
repeatedly prune and regrow the channels throughout the training process. They tackle the 
channel pruning problem via a well known column subset selection (CSS) formulation. 
The results show that compressed ResNet-50 model on ImageNet dataset achieves 76% 

==== Page 14 ====
48178 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
top1 accuracy with only 25% FLOPs of the original ResNet-50 model, outperforming pre-
vious state-of-the-art channel pruning methods.
Through the research on channel pruning methods, it can be seen that among these 
approaches, L1 regularization using the scaling factor of the BN layer, sensitivity and cou-
pling the correlations of the channels in each layer to remove redundancy are most popular. 
In addition, the Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has performed more research on channel prun-
ing methods in recent years, and they have focused on combining other methods such as 
search algorithms and tensor decomposition methods, with channel pruning methods to 
achieve further pruning effects. The proposed linear combination of other filters to achieve 
compression is a relatively novel filter pruning method in 2021. Most recently, a team 
of National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University proposes an accurate and efficient object 
detector capable of performing real-time inference under the hardware constraints of an 
edge device by leveraging structural pruning, feature distillation, and NAS [92]. Generally, 
the channel pruning methods have good compression effect and do not produce a sparse 
matrix, so special software is not required.
(4) Layer Pruning  Layer pruning method is one of the deepest pruning methods, which 
directly prunes a layer in the network. The degree of compression of layer pruning is great, 
but the accuracy is relatively lower.
In recent years, some studies have focused on layer pruning methods. Dong et al. [93] 
of Nanyang Technology University proposed a new layer-wise pruning method for DNNs. 
The parameters of each individual layer are pruned independently based on the second 
order derivatives of a layer-wise error function with respect to the corresponding param-
eters, and the original prediction performance is restored through the reconstruction error 
and a retraining process. Yang et al. [94] in MIT used the method of energy perception to 
calculate the energy consumption of each layer, preferentially pruning the layers with high 
energy consumption. In addition, to prevent incorrect pruning, the weight that resulted in 
the greatest decrease in accuracy after pruning was retained. Subsequently, the team coop-
erated with Google [95] to propose Netadapt, which also takes hardware metrics (delay, 
energy consumption, etc.) as pruning evaluation criteria, uses empirical metrics for evalu-
ation, and automatically iteratively prunes the pretraining network on a mobile platform 
until the imposed resource budget is met.
In the application of object detection, the Guangdong Key Laboratory of Modern Con-
trol Technology uses channel pruning and layer pruning to compress the YOLOv3-SPP 
garbage detection model, and the compressed model is directly deployed on the low-com-
puting edge computing device carried by the robot to automatically classify and recycle 
garbage[279].
2.1.3  Other types of approaches
In 2021, some scholars conducted research on training perspectives, Google Brain and 
DeepMind [96] proposed a method to train sparse neural networks with a fixed param-
eter count and a fixed computational cost throughout training. This approach updates the 
topology of a sparse network during training by using parameter magnitudes and infre-
quent gradient calculations, this approach requires fewer FLOPs to achieve a given level 
of accuracy. Hayou et al. [97] of University of Oxford provided a comprehensive theoreti-
cal analysis of magnitude and gradient-based pruning for the initialization and training of 

==== Page 15 ====
48179 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
sparse architectures. Then, they introduced a simple rescaling trick to bring the pruned 
model back into the edge of chaos (EOC) regime, making the pruned neural network easily 
trainable.
Through a large number of experiments, Le et al. [98] of VinAI Research studied ran-
dom pruning and learning rate restarting, and proposed that compared to traditional fine-
tuning, in general, learning rate restarting is an efficient way to retrain pruned networks to 
recover performance drops caused by pruning. Liu et al. [99] investigates the effectiveness 
of random pruning for sparse training. Specifically, the paper adopted several random prun-
ing methods(ERK, Uniform, Uniform +) and compare the results with non-random Prun-
ing methods(SNIP,GraSP). They are conducted on different ResNet scaling models, with 
CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet dataset under different sparsity ratios. Results show that ran-
dom pruning can be quite effective for sparse training especially on larger or wider models. 
Hu [100] of Sichuan University proposed a novel one-shot pruning quantization (OPQ) 
approach, which analytically solves the compression allocation problem with only pre-
trained weight parameters. During fine-tuning, the compression module is fixed and only 
the weight parameters are updated, without any complex iterative/manual optimization.
Tiwari et al. [101] presented ChipNet, a deterministic pruning strategy that employs a 
continuous Heaviside function and a novel crispness loss to identify a highly sparse net-
work based on an existing dense network. For problems that involve training a small model 
from the beginning or training a large model first and then pruning, Chang et al. [102] of 
the University of California conducted systematic research and analysis, and finally comes 
to the conclusion that the effect of pruning using over-parameterized model is better.
Discussion  According to whether the network structure is changed after pruning, network 
pruning can be divided into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. Unstructured 
pruning (weight pruning) does not change the original structure of the network, but the 
resulting sparse network needs to be supported by special hardware libraries or computing 
libraries. In contrast, structured pruning directly removes part of the network structure and 
is more suitable for general hardware acceleration. According to the granularity of prun-
ing, structure pruning can be further divided into neuron pruning, kernel pruning, channel 
pruning and layer pruning. Neuron pruning is based on a single neuron, which is suitable 
for any type of layer, but the pruning effect is poor. Kernel pruning is based on convolution 
kernels and is usually applied to convolutional layers; Channel pruning is an extension of 
kernel pruning, which prunes multiple channels in a convolution kernel. Layer pruning is 
one of the most extreme structured pruning techniques applicable to some deeper neural 
networks where some layers can be considered useless or redundant.
2.2  Lightweight network design
Methods that directly compress existing network models can effectively construct light-
weight network models (such approaches include network pruning, network quantization, 
low-rank decomposition and KD methods), but their performance largely depends on the 
utilized pretrained model. Without improving the network architecture, the accuracy can-
not be further improved, so lightweight network design methods have emerged. The main 
idea of lightweight network design is to reduce the number of network structure parameters 
by directly designing a more compact convolution kernel or convolution method. As illus-
trated in Fig.  8, research on lightweight network structure design methods has been boom-
ing since 2015. The number of lightweight network design papers reached its peak starting 

==== Page 16 ====
48180 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
in 2017. As illustrated in Fig.  9, Google, Facebook, Microsoft Research, Megvii and Hua-
wei have proposed many lightweight structure models with strong performance in the area 
of lightweight network design. These lightweight structure models are often proposed and 
improved in the form of series. In this paper, a total of 49 outstanding lightweight network 
designs are counted, and all of them have been published in top conferences and journals. 
The available lightweight network design methods are divided into model design method 
based on convolution structure and convolution operation. In addition, due to the excellent 
performance of the YOLO models in the field of object detection, many researchers have 
designed lightweight YOLO structures according to its unique structure, which are specifi-
cally introduced in 2.2.3.
2.2.1  Lightweight model design based on convolution structure
A common method is to construct a lightweight network to transform a convolution struc-
ture to reduce the number of network computations. In recent years, lightweight model 
design methods based on convolution structures have mainly converted traditional convolu-
tion operations, such as standard convolution, group convolution, pointwise convolution, 
dilated convolution and depth-wise separable convolution. These convolution structures are 
shown in Fig.  10. This section introduces the research status of lightweight models from 
the perspective of some different convolution structures and other methods.Fig. 8  Distribution of Light-
weight Network Design papers
Fig. 9  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on Lightweight Network Design

==== Page 17 ====
48181 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
(1) Depth‑wise Separable Convolution  To reduce the number of model parameters, 
Google has made some excellent achievements in recent years by using the depth-wise sep-
arable convolution structure. Google first proposed the InceptionV1-V2 [103, 104] models 
in 2015. In the second year, InceptionV3 [105] used asymmetric convolution in a deeper 
position of the network, and the model parameters were reduced without affecting effi-
ciency. To obtain a more lightweight network, Google improved InceptionV3 and proposed 
Xception [106] in 2017, which uses depth-wise separable convolution to replace the mul-
tidimensional convolution kernel feature response operation in the original InceptionV3, 
achieving better results.
From 2017 to 2018, Google’s team successively proposed MobileNetV1-V2 [107, 
108] lightweight network models. They proposed a lightweight network architecture 
MobileNetV1 by using depth-wise separable convolution instead of standard convolution. 
To improve the performance of MobileNetV1 so that it could perform better on mobile 
devices, MobileNetV2 was proposed by adding residual structure and a linear bottleneck 
structure on the basis of MobileNetV1. MobileNetV2 amplifies the given input from a low-
dimensional feature map to a high-dimensional feature map, then uses the depth-wise con-
volution method to perform convolution operations, and finally uses a linear convolution 
to map the input to the low-dimensional space, which greatly reduces the number of con-
volution operation. In 2019, Google’s team proposed a new mixed depth-wise convolution 
(MDconv), which mixes different kernel sizes in a convolution operation, and proposed a 
series of networks called MixNets [110] based on the search space of AutoML.
The team of Allen Institute for AI proposed ESPNetV2 [111] by adding depth-wise 
dilated separable convolutions to modify the ESPNetV1 model structure. ESPNetV2 
achieved better accuracy and lower parameter quantity in image classification, semantic 
segmentation and object detection.
(2) Group Convolution  Facebook AI Research combined ResNet [112] and Incep-
tion to propose ResNeXt [113] by using group convolution. Later, they cooperated with 
Cornell University and Tsinghua University to propose DenseNet [114], which achieved Fig. 10  Convolution operations0
'N
1
0'N
0
1'N'N


Standard convolu/g415on
Depth-wise convolu/g415on
Pointwise convolu/g415on

==== Page 18 ====
48182 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
better results and required fewer parameters due to the extreme use of feature maps. Since 
DenseNet’s internal connections still exhibit considerable redundancy, the team and Tsin-
ghua University research scholars cooperated to improve DenseNet and propose Con-
denseNet [115], which can reduce the video memory consumption and improve the speed 
of the model through using a learnable grouped convolution operation during training and 
pruning.
The Microsoft Research Institute proposed the interleaved group convolution network 
(IGCNets) [116] which was implemented by interleaved group convolutions in 2017. Inter -
leaved group convolutions make the network wider, while the network parameters and com-
putational complexity remain unchanged. In the second year, the team proposed IGCV2 
[117] on the basis of IGCV1, and performed another interleaved group convolution for the 
second group convolution in the block. In the same year, the Microsoft Research team pro-
posed IGCV3 based on the ideas of IGCV2 and a bottleneck [118] by combining low-rank 
convolution kernels and sparse convolution kernels to form dense convolution kernels, 
expanded the dimensionality of the input grouping features, reduced the dimensionality 
of output, and finally achieved compression. The core of the IGC series of networks is the 
ultimate application of grouped convolution, which decomposes conventional convolutions 
into multiple grouped convolutions and reduces the number of required parameters.
(3) Pointwise Convolution  In the past, lightweight models based on discrete or group con-
volutions structures often did not make full use of 1 × 1 convolution, examples include the 
Xception and ResNeXt models. This kind of convolution is also called pointwise convolu-
tion, and it usually brings a large number of computations. To solve this problem, Megvii 
and Tsinghua University cooperated to use the group pointwise convolution calculation 
method to propose ShuffleNetV1 [119] in 2018. They used the pointwise convolution in 
place of the group convolution operation to reduce the calculation consumption, and used 
the channel shuffling method to solve the problem that the output channel can only be con-
nected with some of the input channels. Subsequently, they proposed four guidelines for 
designing lightweight neural networks based on ShuffleNetV1. After carrying out a large 
number of experiments, they proposed ShuffleNetV2 [120] based on these four guidelines 
and improved the defects of ShuffleNetV1 by introducing channel splitting. In 2019, the 
Megvii team proposed ThunderNet [121] based on ShuffleNetV2 and Lighthead region-
based CNN (RCNN), designed context enhancement module and spatial attention module 
to integrate local and global features and enhance network feature expression ability.
The University of Washington and Allen Institute for AI proposed a lightweight network 
called the efficient spatial pyramid network (ESPNet) [122] for semantic segmentation, 
which decomposes the standard convolution into 1 × 1 pointwise convolutions and a spa-
tial pyramid of dilated convolutions. Both of themes are used to reduce the computational 
complexity of the network and resample the features of each effective receptive domain.
(4) Plug‑and‑Play  Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab has been keen to research plug-and-play light-
weight network models in recent years. They proposed plug-and-play versatile filters with 
multiple channels or spatial versatile filters [123]. In 2020, the team proposed a new end-
to-side neural network architecture called GhostNet [124], which uses a plug-and-play 
Ghost module to divide the original convolutional layer into two parts. The module first 
uses fewer convolution kernels to generate a small amount intrinsic feature map, and then 
uses simple linear change operation to further efficiently generate ghost feature map.

==== Page 19 ====
48183 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
(5) Others  Some lightweight networks use multiple convolutional structures for compres-
sion. Stanford University, DeepScale and UC Berkeley jointly proposed SqueezeNet [125], 
which was a relatively early and classic lightweight network that used the 1 × 1 convolu-
tion and grouped convolution methods, and then used the Fire module for parameter com-
pression. Many subsequent works produced by of the team were conducted to optimize 
and improve this model. On the basis of SqueezeNet, they proposed SqueezeNext [126] by 
directly incorporating separation convolution to achieve improved parameter compression. 
By removing global average pooling and using the design idea of YOLO as reference, they 
added ConvDet structure to predict the characteristics extracted from the backbone net-
work bounding box, and finally constructed SqueezeDet [127].
Many other scholars have also constructed lightweight structures by using channel fea-
tures. In 2018, Gao et al. [128] proposed ChannelNet with three instances of channel-wise 
convolutions: group channel-wise convolutions, depth-wise separable channel-wise con-
volutions, and the convolutional classification layer, which reduce the number of model 
parameters. Momenta and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences jointly proposed 
the squeeze-and-excitation network (SENet) [129] to obtain more channel features through 
modeling and introduced an attention mechanism between channels. The model was the 
champion of image classification task during the last ImageNet competition in 2017. In 
2021, Yu et  al. of Huazhong University of Science cooperated with Microsoft to apply 
efficient shuffle blocks to the high-resolution network HRNet [131], leading a lightweight 
network called Lite-HRNet [130]. They also introduced an efficient conditional channel 
weighting unit to replace the costly 1 × 1 convolution in shuffle blocks, and the weights 
were computed across channels and resolutions.
In recent years, a large number of models have been proposed, such as MobileNet, Shuf-
fleNet and MobileNetV2. However, these models are heavily dependent on depth-wise 
separable convolution, which lacks effective implementation in most deep learning frame-
works. Therefore, Weston University proposed an effective architecture called PeleeNet 
[132], which was constructed by conventional convolution. In 2020, Yitu and the National 
University of Singapore proposed a MobileNeXt [133] network architecture by using a 
novel SandGlass module group, which can be easily embedded into an existing network 
architecture to improve model performance.
In 2021, Zhou et al. [134] of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications intro-
duced a lightweight CNN, called residual semantic-guided attention network (RSANet). 
First, the lightweight convolutional network (LCNet) is used as backbone, and the Residual 
Semantic-guided attention feature pyramid network (RSAFPN) is used as detection head. 
In the LCNet, a constant channel module (CCM) was designed to save the memory access 
cost (MAC) and down sampling module (DSM) was designed to save the computational 
cost. In the RSAFPN, meanwhile, residual semantic-guided attention mechanism (RSAM) 
was employed to fuse the multi-scale features from LCNet to efficiently improve its detec-
tion performance. Han et al. [135] of the Chinese Academy of Sciences introduced versa-
tile filters to construct efficient CNNs, which are widely used in various visual recognition 
tasks. By studying the applicability of the anchor-free strategy on lightweight object detec-
tion models, Yu et al. [109] of Baidu proposed a new family of real-time object detectors 
named PP-PicoDet, they enhanced the backbone structure and designed the lightweight 
structure of the neck, which improved the feature extraction ability of the network, and 
then improved label assignment strategy and loss function to make training more stable and 
efficient.
Lightweight structure design based on convolutional structure is a hot research topic 
for major companies and institutions. Lightweight structures designed by using traditional 

==== Page 20 ====
48184 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
grouped convolutions and deep separable convolutions are currently relatively mature and 
high-performing. In addition, the combination of hardware plug-and-play proposed by 
the Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab is an attempt to combine lightweight model with hardware 
equipment. Some studies have also used combinations of channel features to design net-
work structures, and we think this method may be extended to filters, feature maps and 
other structural features. The lightweight structure method designed by Yitu that can be 
embedded into an existing network framework is once and for all, and is the focus of 
future research. In general, lightweight structural design still has development prospects, 
as it saves additional compression steps and is more efficient and faster than traditional 
approaches.
2.2.2  Lightweight model design based on convolution operation method
To reduce the number of network operations, many researchers have optimized the con-
volution operation from the perspective of the convolution operation method, which can 
mainly be divided into two types: shift convolution operations and multiplication opera-
tions. shift convolution operations include standard shift, grouped shift, active shift and 
sparse shift operations. This section introduces the current research situation regarding 
lightweight model design based on convolution operation method in turn.
In order to solve the limitation of memory movement in shift operations, the UC 
Berkeley team first proposed an end-to-end training module which combines shift 
and pointwise convolutions [138]. In the same year, another team at the school used 
this principle to build a more compact and powerful network model called ShiftNet 
[139]. In 2019, Hangzhou Hikvision Research Institute proposed fully-exploited net-
work (FE-Net) [140] based on ShiftNet, which improves the active shift layer by using 
sparse shift layer (SSL), eliminates meaningless shift operations and speeds up the 
running speed of models.
Aiming at the problems of high computational complexity and high energy consump-
tion caused by a large number of intensive multiplication operations in traditional CNNs, 
some researchers have used other operations instead of multiplication operations. The 
Pengcheng Laboratory, Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab and the School of EECS of Peking 
University proposed AdderNet [141], which uses addition instead of multiplication to 
greatly reduce the computational power consumption without reducing the accuracy of 
the model. Huawei Technologies put forward Deepshift [142], which utilizes bitwise 
shifts and sign flipping to replace multiplication operations, bitwise shift operations to 
replace absolute value multiplication operations, and sign flipping to replace positive and 
negative sign operations. Alibaba Damo Academy and other institutions jointly proposed 
ShiftAddNet [143], which uses the combination of addition operation and shift operation 
instead of multiplication.
2.2.3  Lightweight model based on YOLO model structure
In actual object detection projects, the trade-off between real-time and accuracy is very 
important, and the YOLO series models v2-v5 [144–147] are some of the most advanced 
object detection methods based on DNN, which have good performance in terms of speed 
and precision. The YOLO series models often include tiny versions when they are pro-
posed. The lightweight idea of the tiny version is to greatly compress the parameters of the 

==== Page 21 ====
48185 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
network, reduce the convolutional layer, and make the network shallow and thin. In addi-
tion to these tiny versions of the YOLO series models, many researchers have constructed 
lighter weights based on the YOLO series models. The following introduces some excel-
lent and typical lightweight models based on the YOLO model structure.
To achieve real-time object detection on laptops or mobile phones without GPUs, 
Huang et al. [148] proposed YOLO-LITE based on tiny-YOLOv2, which proved the shal-
low network has great potential in fast object detection without GPUs, and also proved 
that BN is unnecessary for shallow networks. Based on the single-stage object detection 
network architecture of the YOLO network series, researchers from the Waterloo Artifi-
cial Intelligence Institute AI Institute of the University of Waterloo and Darwin AI cre-
ated YOLO Nano [149] by using a human–machine collaborative design strategy. HIT Lab 
NZ scholars at the University of Canterbury proposed xYOLO [150] based on YOLOv3-
tiny. By using the normal convolutional layer and XNOR layer for training and recall, it 
achieved greater inference speed on desktop CPU and GPU. Researchers from CVTE put 
forward the YOLO-Fastest algorithm [151] by combining it with EfficientNet-lite, which 
is known as the strongest mobile lightweight neural network. It can be easily deployed 
on mobile devices, and its image classification effect is good and meets the requirements 
of all platforms. In addition, the original team that developed YOLOv4 proposed Scaled-
YOLOv4 to scale of YOLOv4 [147]. In 2021, Cai et al. [153] of Northeastern University 
proposed YOLObile framework, a real-time object detection on mobile devices via com-
pression-compilation co-design, and proposed a novel block-punched pruning scheme and 
GPU-CPU collaborative scheme to achieve improved computational efficiency on mobile 
devices. To deploy real-time object detection algorithms on UAV-friendly devices, Debojy -
oti B. Et al. used compressed convolutional techniques, transfer learning, backbone shrink -
age, and scale prediction to reduce the number of learnable parameters in YOLOv5model. 
It is worth noting that in addition to reducing GPU memory consumption by 34%, this 
study also reduced energy consumption by 10 watts [154].
2.2.4  Other types of approaches
Many scholars study lightweight models. The University of California, Berkeley and Nan-
jing University jointly proposed SkipNet [155], which uses a gate module to determine 
whether to perform a certain layer of calculation to reduce the model size. Google Research 
used a set of fixed scaling factors to evenly scale each dimension of the network and built a 
high-precision lightweight image classification model called EfficientNet [156]. The team 
proposed EfficientDet [157] by using a bidirectional feature pyramid network (BiFPN) and 
Box prediction net to predict the features extracted from the backbone network.
In real-world environments, it’s much common to use training data to fine-tune quan-
tized networks for dealing with the performance drop induced by quantization errors. How -
ever, when training data is unavailable due to security, privacy, or confidentiality concerns, 
a popular method is to use zero-shot quantization to addresses such problems which repre-
sents neural networks by low-bit integer without accessing any of the real data. Choi et al. 
[158] propose AIT, a simple yet powerful technique for zero-shot quantization, which uses 
a KL distance loss only without a cross-entropy loss, and manipulates gradients to guar -
antee that a certain portion of weights are properly updated after crossing the rounding 
thresholds. Moreover, learning to synthesize data has emerged as a promising direction in 
zero-shot quantization. Zhong et al. [159] propose a novel zero-shot quantization method 

==== Page 22 ====
48186 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
(IntraQ) which well retain the intra-class heterogeneity in the synthetic images and also 
was observed to perform state-of-the-art.
Discussion: lightweight network design methods are mainly divided into "lightweight 
model design based on convolution structure" and "lightweight model design based on con-
volution operation method" and "lightweight model design based on YOLO model struc-
ture". The design of lightweight models based on convolutional structures is relatively sim-
ple and easy to implement and deploy. By choosing a simplified convolutional structure, 
the model can be greatly compressed, but the feature representation ability of the model 
will be sacrificed. Although the design of lightweight model based on convolution opera-
tion method is relatively complex and the convolution operation needs to be improved, it is 
easier to balance the expression ability and compression degree of the model. However, if 
the improved convolution operation is more complex, it will affect the training efficiency of 
the model. Lightweight model design based on YOLO model structure is mainly for object 
detection tasks. This improvement is based on the most popular object detection algorithm, 
mainly to take advantage of the real-time detection ability of the YOLO model itself.
2.3  NAS
As network structures becomes increasingly complex, the artificial model compression 
technology of neural network relies on heuristic and rule-based strategy, and its trial-and-
error and time costs will be unbearable. Algorithm designers need to explore larger design 
spaces, and trade-off between model size, speed and accuracy, which is usually subopti-
mal and time-consuming. Therefore, the NAS method has been introduced in model com-
pression to reduce the time and cost of model construction. NAS is an automatic design 
method of neural network, which consists of three parts: search space, evaluation method 
and search method. As shown in Fig.  11, the principle of NAS is to first give a set of can-
didate neural network structures called search space, then use the learned search strategy 
to build the optimal neural network architecture from the search space, and then use the 
performance evaluation strategy to measure the performance, and finally obtain the optimal 
neural network architecture through feedback-based iterative learning. In the field of light-
weight model design, NAS has gradually become one of the most important research direc-
tions. As shown in Fig.  12, this paper lists the classic NAS compression methods published 
by major research institutions at the top conferences and journals in recent years. It illus-
trates be seen that the research on this method began to increase significantly since 2018. 
In this paper, a total of 34 papers on NAS for model compression are counted. At present, 
the mainstream NAS algorithm can be divided into the following aspects: reinforcement 
Fig. 11  The principle of NAS 66HHDDUUFFKKRRXXWWWWKKHHQQHHWWZZRRUUNN
VVWWUUXXFFWWXXUUHH
((YYDDOOXXDDWWHHWWKKHHQQHHWWZZRRUUNN
VVWWUUXXFFWWXXUUHH66HHDDUUFFKK
VVWWUUDDWWHHJJ\\33HHUUIIRRUUPPDDQQFFHH
HHYYDDOOXXDDWWLLRRQQVVWWUUDDWWHHJJ\\66HHDDUUFFKK
VVSSDDFFHH

==== Page 23 ====
48187 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
learning methods (RL), neuro evolutionary methods, gradient based methods. This sec-
tion is introduced according to these categories. The research situations of various research 
institutions and teams with respect to each aspect are shown in Fig. 13.
2.3.1  NAS methods based on reinforcement learning
With the rapid development of RL, it has begun to be applied in NAS. MIT and the Uni-
versity of Cambridge [160] proposed a NAS strategy based on reinforcement learning for 
the first time. This strategy models NAS as a Markov decision process, combines it with 
Q-learning optimization and experience playback method, and finally finds the optimal net-
work architecture. Based on RL and block search space, Google team proposed NASNet 
[161], designed blocks with different architectures by using prior knowledge about char -
acteristic problems, and constructed local search space of neural network architecture. The 
Chinese Academy of Sciences team and SenseTime [162] proposed a NAS method based 
on Q-learning algorithm in block-based search space. Shanghai Jiaotong University [163] 
used RL and path-level conversion operations to design an effective structure with complex 
path topologies. The team also considered RL agent as the meta-controller, and proposed 
an efficient architecture search (EAS) [164] framework based on the current network and 
reused its weights, saving considerable computational costs.Fig. 12  Distribution of Light-
weight NAS papers
Fig. 13  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on NAS

==== Page 24 ====
48188 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
To solve the limitations of manual heuristic methods and rule-based strategies, the MIT 
Han Song team and the Google team jointly proposed the AutoML model compression 
method (AMC) [165], which uses RL to automatically learn model compression strategies 
to search the design space, achieves a higher compression ratio than other approaches and 
maintains the performance of neural network. Many other scholars have followed up on this 
AutoML research. For example, Google and the Stanford University team [158] proposed a 
method to speed up networks by using knowledge transfer with AutoML in existing tasks. In 
2019, they proposed an automatic NAS method MnasNet [137] for mobile neural network 
model design, which is takes the diversity of layers into account. Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Megvii Technology and other teams [167] 
proposed a meta-pruning network for channel pruning, which uses the idea of AutoML to 
automatically prune and adjust the appropriate network structure under different constraints.
2.3.2  NAS methods based on evolutionary algorithm
With the development of evolutionary algorithms, many scholars have applied them to the 
NAS method. Google’s team [168] used evolutionary algorithm to search neural network 
architecture automatically, and finally obtained the optimal image classification network 
architecture. In 2019, the team also used evolutionary algorithm to propose an image clas-
sifier called AmoebaNet [169], which surpassed the manual classifier for the first time. 
Carnegie Mellon University and DeepMind [170] proposed a search strategy based on evo-
lutionary algorithm by designing a hierarchical search space. To reduce the weight cou-
pling of the super network, the Megvii Research Institute used an evolutionary algorithm to 
propose a single path super network [171], which does not require fine-tuning.
2.3.3  NAS methods based on gradient
The gradient optimization algorithm is a method to obtain the optimal strategy by con-
tinuously approaching the optimal value. By using gradient descent technology, Sorbonne 
University and Crito Research Institute [172] proposed budget super networks (BSNs) to 
solve the computational cost, memory consumption and distributed computing cost prob-
lems. From 2019 to 2020, the feature balance network (FBNet) series of models [173–175] 
were proposed by UC Berkeley and Facebook, these are a series of lightweight networks 
that are completely based on NAS method. FBNet combines differentiable neural network 
search (DNAS) [176] and resource constraints, FBNetV2 adds channel and input resolution 
searches, and FBNetV3 uses accuracy prediction to perform fast NAS.
2.3.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the methods mentioned above, the Google artificial intelligence team has 
conducted many research on other methods of NAS. They used the sequential model-based 
optimization (SMBO) strategy to propose PNASNET [177]. In the same year, they and the 
MIT team used a sparsifying regularizer to calculate the costs of neurons relative to target 
resources, and proposed an automated NAS method called MorphNet [178] that iteratively 
scales neural networks. Another team at Google proposed an efficient neural architecture 
search (ENAS) [179] method by searching the optimal subgraph in large computational 
graph to learn and discover NAS.

==== Page 25 ====
48189 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
The team at Google combined the depth-wise separable convolution structure and the 
inverted residual with linear bottleneck structure, using the MnasNet [137] model based on 
the SE structure to propose MobileNetV3 [136], and using complementary search technol-
ogy and NetAdapt algorithm to achieve computer vision tasks carried on the mobile phone. 
In 2021, Google cooperated with the University of Wisconsin-Madison [180] to propose an 
augmented search space family with building blocks based on regular convolutions, they 
called it Mobiledets, that NAS methods can substantially benefit from this enlarged search 
space to achieve better latency-accuracy trade-off on a variety of mobile devices.
To solve the DNAS problem of high memory consumption in a large candidate set, 
Han Song’s team at MIT proposed proxylessNAS [181], which can directly learn the 
architecture for large-scale target tasks and target hardware platforms. The University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ByteDance, and the Snap team collaborated to pro-
pose the Slimmable Neural Network [182], which dynamically adjusts the network 
width according to the device benchmark and resource constraints at runtime, and has 
good performance in object detection, instance segmentation, human key point detec-
tion and other tasks. Elsken et al. [183] team at the Center for Artificial Intelligence of 
Bosch proposed a new method based on a simple Hill-climbing process to automatically 
search for a CNN architecture with good performance. In 2021, Chen et al. [184] of the 
University of Sydney and Baidu proposed NAS with batch normalization (BN-NAS) 
to accelerate NAS, which can significantly reduce the time required by model training 
and evaluation by only training the BN parameters during the supernet training, thereby 
accelerating network convergence for NAS. Chen et al. [185] of Stony Brook University 
and Microsoft Research proposed a simple yet effective framework for efficient train-
ing of transformer supernets. Without extra fine-tuning or retraining steps, the trained 
supernet is able to produce thousands of high-quality transformers by inheriting weights 
from it directly.
Many researchers still combine NAS methods with other compression methods. In 
order to overcome the structural limitations of pruning networks, University of Tech-
nology Sydney and Baidu Research [186] proposed using NAS to directly search for 
networks with flexible channels and layer sizes. The National University of Singapore 
and UISEE Technology [187] used the search space of the partial-order hypothesis 
pruning architecture to automatically search for the structure with the best speed and 
accuracy performance. MIT’s [188] team proposed once for all (OFA), which can train 
subnetworks under different hyperparameters by combining KD, network pruning, 
and NAS algorithms to search for suitable subnetworks according to different accu-
racy requirements and resource constraints. The team of MIT and Shanghai Jiaotong 
University [189] proposed an APQ algorithm that combines NAS, pruning strategy, 
and quantization strategy for efficient deep learning-based inference on resource-con-
strained hardware. The National University of Taiwan and MIT IBM Watson Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory jointly proposed microcontroller units Net (MCUNet) [190], 
a framework that jointly designs the efficient neural architecture (TinyNAS) and the 
lightweight inference engine (TinyEngine), enabling ImageNet-scale inference on 
microcontrollers. Combining binary quantization can also achieve compression. In 
2021, Beihang University and Baidu Research [191] introduced the partial channel 
connections for memory-efficient differentiable architecture search (PC-DARTS) strat-
egy into the search of the binary network, and gradually deleted operations with lower 
probability during the search process to narrow the search space. Beihang University 
proposed a child parent search strategy, called CP-NAS [192], which uses a full-pre-
cision model (parent) to guide the search of binary model (child). Another team Yan 

==== Page 26 ====
48190 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
et  al. [193] of Microsoft Research used NAS to design a lightweight object tracker, 
called LightTrack, which reformulates one-shot NAS specialized for object tracking, 
and introduces an effective search space. In addition, it can run in real-time on diverse 
resource-restricted platforms.
Discussion  Many studies use NAS for model compression and acceleration. According 
to the method of solving the search problem, NAS methods are divided into reinforce-
ment learning based, evolutionary algorithms and gradient based. NAS method based 
on reinforcement learning is very common, it can find a good neural network struc-
ture, but the training time is long. Although the NAS method based on evolutionary 
algorithm is easy to fall into local optimal solution, its search time is relatively short. 
At present, some scholars have used evolutionary algorithm to search and accelerate 
the network structure, and have achieved some excellent research results in image clas-
sification. The gradient-based NAS method to find the optimal value is more novel. It 
does not need to maintain the whole population like evolutionary algorithms, which can 
effectively reduce the computational cost of search, but it is still in the development 
stage. In addition, NAS methods are often used in combination with other model com-
pression methods, which also illustrates their compatibility. The NAS method proposed 
by MIT in recent years, which can search for a special network structure by combining 
hardware performance with different precision levels and resource constraints, may be a 
hot spot for future development.
2.4  Network quantization
The main idea of network quantization is to convert floating-point operations into inte-
ger fixed-point operations, so as to compress the model size and accelerate network train-
ing. As shown in Fig.  14, Quantization model is a method that uses low-precision weights 
to approximate conventional precision (generally 32-bit floating-point) to store model 
weights. At present, INT8 quantization is mostly used in the industry. TensorRT, Tensor -
Flow, PyTorch and many other deep learning frameworks have already enabled (or are 
enabling) quantization. Academic research on quantization pays more attention to how to 
reduce the accuracy loss caused by model quantization, which can be roughly divided into 
binary quantization, ternary quantization, cluster quantization, and quantization combined 
with other compression methods. As shown in Fig.  15, this paper lists the classic network 
quantization methods published by major research institutions at the top meeting in recent 
years. In this paper, a total of 33 papers about network quantization compression model 
methods are counted. The research situation of various research institutions and teams 
regarding each aspect are shown in Fig. 16.
Fig. 14  Network Quantization
Inde xI n bits value
1 01 00.40.3
1.2 33 2
2
2 10 0.4
31 1 1.1-0.2 1
01
1 0.1
-0.6 -0.7 0 010 00 -0.6

==== Page 27 ====
48191 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
2.4.1  Binary quantization
Binarization means that the network parameters are limited to 1 or—1, which greatly 
reduces the storage space and memory space requirements of the given model, and con-
verts the original multiplication operation into an addition or shift operation. Since 2015, 
quantization methods have been applied in compression. Courbariaux et al. [194] first pro-
posed binary connection, a weight binarization scheme, and provided a training method 
for binarization parameters in forward and backward propagation processes. Subsequently, 
the team proposed a method for training binarized neural networks (BNN) [195], which 
uses binary weights and activation values to calculate parameter gradient in the training 
phase, quantifies weights and activation functions for the first-time during inference and 
the whole training period, and replaces most arithmetic operations with bit operations. The 
Allen Institute of Artificial Intelligence team proposed binary-weight-networks (BWN) and 
XNOR-Net [196]. They greatly improved the computational efficiency of floating-point 
numbers used in traditional convolutions by utilizing approximate convolutions of binary 
operations.
Shenzhen DJ-Innovations (DJI) [197] proposed a high-precision BNN called the accu-
rate binary CNN (ABC-Net), which uses a linear combination of multiple binary weight 
bases to approximate full-precision weights, this was the first time that the accuracy of 
BNN can matching with the full-precision model on ImageNet. Hong Kong University of Fig. 15  Distribution of Network 
Quantization papers
Fig. 16  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on Network Quantization

==== Page 28 ====
48192 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Science and Technology [198] proposed a binarization algorithm called LAB that directly 
considers the influence of binarization weights on loss, and uses the approximate New -
ton algorithm for the diagonal Heisen approximation to obtain the appropriate binariza-
tion weights. Another team at the school and the Tencent Artificial Intelligence Labora-
tory jointly proposed Bi-Real Net [199] to compensate for the defects of XNOR-Net. They 
introduced shortcut connection and adopted second-order function to fit activation function 
sign, achieving binarization of network weight and activation output, while maintaining 
high inference accuracy. Hu et al. [200] team at the Institute of Automation of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences proposed the BWNH method, which trains a binary weight network 
by hashing, and converts the problem of learning binary parameters into a hashing prob-
lem under inner product similarity. Diffenderfer et al. [201] proposed a method that simply 
prunes and quantizes randomly weighted full-precision neural networks to obtain a highly 
accurate BNN, and then proposed and verified the multi-prize lottery ticket hypothesis, 
that is, a sufficiently overparametrized randomly weighted network contains binary subnet-
works, which can achieve high accuracy without any training.
Many scholars are still making improvements to binary networks. Xilinx Research 
Labs [202] proposed FINN, a framework for building fast and flexible field-programmable 
gate array (FPGA) accelerators by using a flexible heterogeneous streaming architecture, 
which enables efficient mapping of BNNs to hardware. The University of California San 
Diego and Harvard University [203] proposed binary ensemble neural network (BENN) 
to improve the performance of BNN at the cost of limited efficiency. Wang et  al. [204] 
proposed a channel-wise interaction based binary convolutional neural network learning 
(CI-BCNN) method for efficient inference. Liu et al. [205] of Peking University of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics and Huawei Noah’s Ark Laboratory designed the circulant binary 
convolutional network (CBCN) based on the redesign of binary filter, and enhanced the 
expression ability of binary convolution features by rotating the binary filter from multiple 
angles. Ding et al. [206] proposed a method of using distribution loss to explicitly regular -
ize the activation flow, and developed a BNN distribution loss (BNN-DL) framework to 
systematically formulate the loss, so as to minimize the adverse effects caused by forward 
binarization and back propagation.
2.4.2  Ternary quantization
Ternary Quantization is to introduce 0 as the third threshold on the basis of binarization to 
reduce quantization error. The Han Song team of Stanford University and Tsinghua Uni-
versity proposed trained ternary quantization (TTQ) [207], a method that can reduce the 
precision of weights in neural networks to ternary values. This method improves the accu-
racy of some models on ImageNet but brings very little accuracy degradation. The Acad-
emy of Mathematics and Systems Science in Chinese Academy of Sciences [208] proposed 
a ternary weight network (TWN), which uses a weight that is different from the traditional 
1 or weight average, they convert the weight into {w, 0, + w}.
To solve the problem of significant accuracy loss caused by the existing ternary neural 
network methods based on rule-of-thumb quantization methods with simple thresholding 
operations, Li et al. [209] of Beihang University and Baidu Research proposed an order 
residual framework called ternary residual quantization (TRQ), which recursively performs 
quantization on full-precision weights for a refined reconstruction by combining the bina-
rized stem and residual parts, this method endows the quantizer with high flexibility and 
precision.

==== Page 29 ====
48193 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
2.4.3  Cluster quantization
Some scholars have combined clustering and quantization methods to achieve compres-
sion. The National Laboratory of Patter Recognition Institute of Automation at the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences [210] proposed a quantitative CNN method, which extends 
the K-means clustering method to the volume layer, divides the weight matrix into many 
blocks, then obtains the codebook by clustering, and proposes an effective training scheme 
to suppress the multi-layer cumulative error after quantization. Subsequently, the team pro-
posed a convolution compression method called deep K-means [211], which clusters the 
weights by K-means, records K clustering centers and weight allocation indicators, and 
finally realizes shared weight compression. Shanghai Jiao Tong University [212] proposed 
level quantization, which considers two quantization methods: single-level quantization 
(SLQ) and multi-level quantization (MLQ).
2.4.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the previously described quantitative methods, many scholars have con-
ducted other research and improvement on quantization. Megvii Technology [213] pro-
posed DoReFa-Net, which quantifies the weight and activation value to 1-bit and 2-bit. 
Google Technologies has proposed a method integer-arithmetic-only (IAO) [214], which 
allows the associated network to use only integer calculations when inferring, and quanti-
fies it on already compressed networks such as MobileNet. Microsoft Research [215] pro-
posed learned quantization (LQ-nets), so that the quantizer could be jointly trained with the 
network to adaptively learn the optimal quantization bit width. The University of Sydney 
proposed a gradient-based symmetric quantization method (SYQ) [216], which designs 
binary or ternary weights and defines scaling factors with different granularities at mul-
tiple levels to estimate network weights. Wang et al. [217] proposed a two-step quantiza-
tion (TSQ), which first uses a sparse quantization method to quantify the activation value, 
and then regards the quantization weight as a nonlinear least square regression problem. 
Qin et al. [218] proposed an information retention network (IR-Net) to retain the informa-
tion of forward activation and backward gradient. Due to the discontinuity of the quan-
tization function, it is difficult to calculate the gradient. Alibaba [219] converted low-bit 
quantization into an ADMM-based optimizable objective function to solve this problem. 
Hubara et al. [220] proposed a method to train quantized neural networks (QNNs) — neu-
ral networks with extremely low precision (e.g., 1-bit) weights and activations at runtime. 
In 2021, Liu et al. [221] of the University of Texas at Austin and Google Brain considered 
the post-training quantization problem, then proposed multipoint quantization, a quantiza-
tion method that approximates a full-precision weight vector by using a linear combina-
tion of multiple low-bit numbers vectors. Kim et al. [222] of the School of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering proposed a novel quantizer, called distance aware quantizer (DAQ), 
which is mainly consists of a distance aware soft rounding (DASR) and a temperature con-
troller. The DASR approximates discrete rounding with the kernel soft argmax, allowing 
the training of quantization networks in an end-to-end manner to alleviate the gradient 
mismatch problem. The controller adaptively adjusts the temperature parameter in DASR 
according to the input, addressing the quantizer gap problem.
In the past two years, many achievements have been made in research combining quan-
tization with other compression methods. In 2019, Wang et al. [223] at MIT proposed an 
automated hardware-aware automated quantization framework (HAQ), which uses RL to 

==== Page 30 ====
48194 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
specify specific quantization strategies according to the utilized hardware structures. In 
2020, Y-Tech and Seattle AI Lab [224] jointly proposed automatic compression, which 
automatically combines pruning and quantization according to the size of the target model. 
Quantization can also be combined with NAS methods. The Samsung Artificial Intelli-
gence Center [225] proposed a binary architecture search (BATS), which greatly reduces 
the accuracy gap between BNNs and their actual values through NAS. South Korea’s 
Gwangju Institute of Science (GIST) proposed a binary network learning architecture 
called BNAS [226], which specifically designs a search space for binary networks. Boo 
et al. [227] of Seoul National University and Hanyang University studied the use of KD 
methods to improve the performance of quantization networks, and then proposed stochas-
tic precision ensemble training for quantum DNNs (QDNNs) [228], which is a KD training 
scheme. Moreover, they also proposed cosine similarity as an essential loss function to 
effectively distill the knowledge of activation quantization in training.
Discussion  Network quantization is a technique to quantize the parameters of neural 
networks into a low-bit representation, which mainly includes binary quantization, ter -
nary quantization and cluster quantization. Binary quantization and ternary quantization 
are research hotspots in the field of quantization. In addition, some scholars have stud-
ied the combination of multiple quantizations approaches to achieve very obvious com-
pression effects, but these methods also result in serious losses of precision. Therefore, 
many researchers have studied the problems of precision recovery and gradient mismatch, 
and have also achieved good results. In general, quantization can speed up the calculation 
speed and greatly reduce the size of the examined model. The combination of it with hard-
ware equipment is also being studied by many research institutions. Quantization is a very 
important model compression method.
As shown in the table, a direct comparison of the three sub methods is shown. Binary 
quantization is suitable for scenarios that require very high computing and storage 
resources. It has low accuracy but very small computing speed and storage space. Ternary 
quantization is more accurate than binary quantization, but it requires more storage space 
and computation time. Cluster quantization is suitable for scenarios with relatively low 
computational and storage resource requirements, but requires some knowledge of cluster -
ing algorithms.
2.5  KD
KD was first proposed in 2006, who used a shallow network to simulate the output struc-
ture of a large network. The main idea of KD is to transfer the knowledge learned from 
a teacher network with a complex structure and huge parameters to a small student net-
work with a relatively simple structure. The student network can achieve similar expres-
sion ability while saving time and space costs. According to the types of knowledge to be 
transferred, KD can be divided into three categories: output transfer, feature transfer and 
relation transfer. A total of 26 papers on KD are counted in this paper. As shown in Fig.  17, 
many studies have been conducted on KD by major research institutions in recent years. In 
terms of various available strategies, the research results of major institutions are shown in 
Fig.  18. Many studies have applied KD method to compress the tasks of object detection 
and semantic segmentation. The following focuses on object detection.

==== Page 31 ====
48195 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
2.5.1  Output transfer
Output transfer uses network outputs as knowledge for student’ network learning. In fact, 
it was not until 2014 that the relatively mature idea of KD was proposed. Instead of using 
hard targets, they used the final output of the teacher network to directly guide the learning 
process of the student’ network, and proved that the knowledge capacity of shallow net-
work is not smaller than that of deep network. In the same year, Google team first named 
this technology KD [229]. As shown in Fig.  19, such approaches first use hard targets to 
train the teacher model, and then use hard targets and soft targets of softmax layer output 
of teacher network for training. Finally, they send the softmax layer outputs of the two 
networks into total loss calculation to guide student’ model training, so that the student’ 
networks can achieve similar expression abilities and achieve compression.
In the traditional KD method, there is only a one-way transfer between teachers and 
students. Zhang et al. [230] proposed deep mutual learning method, which allows a group 
Fig. 17  Distribution of KD papers
Fig. 18  The research situations of various research institutions and teams on KD

==== Page 32 ====
48196 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
of students to learn and teach each other according to the outputs of multiple networks. To 
enable students to better understand the teacher model, Kim et al. [231] of Seoul National 
University proposed utilizing convolution operation to encode the output of the teacher 
model and decode (translate) it to students, so as to achieve better learning effect.
Borui et al. [232] of Megvii Technology Limited provide a novel viewpoint that the potential 
of output KD has actually not been fully exploited, so they reformulate the classical KD loss 
into two parts, i.e., target class knowledge distillation (TCKD) and non-target class knowledge 
distillation (NCKD). Traditional KD method naturally suppresses the effectiveness of NCKD 
and limits the flexibility to balance these two parts. Thus, they present Decoupled Knowledge 
Distillation (DKD), further decouples TCKD and NCKD enabling TCKD and NCKD to play 
their roles more efficiently and flexibly, and controls the action of both by independent hyperpa-
rameters, resulting in a significant performance gains on a range of visual tasks.
2.5.2  Feature transfer
Feature transfer uses the hidden layer features of network learning as knowledge for stu-
dents to learn. In 2015, Romero et al. [233] proposed Fitnet on the basis of Hinton, which 
trains the student network by using the hidden features obtained from the middle layer of 
the teacher network. Komodakis and Zagoruyko [234] proposed attention transfer (AT), 
which encourages student’ networks to imitate the attention and sensitivity distributions 
(gradient) of teacher’ networks for feature extraction. TuSimple [235] regards knowledge 
transfer as a domain adaptation problem, and implement knowledge transfer by matching 
the activation distribution of the feature maps of the teacher model and student model.
The Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Amazon and other institu-
tions [2] proposed an information-theoretic framework for knowledge transfer that formu-
lates knowledge transfer as maximizing the mutual information between the teacher and 
student networks. Tung et al. [236] proposed a method of maintaining similarity KD, so 
that the input sample pairs of similar (different) activations in the teacher network can pro-
duce the same (different) activations in the student network, thereby guiding the learning 
of the student network. Heo et al. [1] of Seoul National University proposed a new feature 
distillation method by designing the distillation loss as a synergy between teacher trans-
formation, student transformation, distillation feature location and distance function. The 
Computer Vision Lab of the University of Nottingham and the Samsung Artificial Intel-
ligence Center [237] proposed a new KD method based on feature statistics, which feed the 
learned statistical information back to the teacher through adaptive instance normalization 
Fig. 19  The process of KD

==== Page 33 ====
48197 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
(on the condition of students), and allow the teacher network to reliably transmit the statis-
tical information of student’ learning through loss.
2.5.3  Relation Transfer
Relation transfer uses the relationships between the layers of network characteristics or the 
relationships of samples as knowledge for students to learn. Yim et al. [238] distilled by fit-
ting the relationships between layers of teachers and students to let students learn the pro-
cess of feature extraction from teachers. You et al. [239] integrated the knowledge of mul-
tiple teacher networks, used the information of the middle and output layers in the teacher 
network to standardize some layers in the student network, and finally trained a thin and 
deep student network. Similarly, the Google team [240] proposed the codistillation method 
to improve accuracy and speed up training.
Instance relationships can also be learned as a kind of knowledge. The National Univer -
sity of Defense Technology and Shangtang Technology [241] proposed a new distillation 
framework named correlation congruence KD (CCKD), which considers not only instance 
information but also correlation information between instances when transferring knowl-
edge. Park et al. [242] introduced a novel approach called dubbed relational KD (RKD), 
which transfers mutual relations of data examples instead. Liu et al. [243] used the trans-
formation of the distance between two samples in different layers for distillation. MIT and 
Google [244] proposed that more information can be obtained by training students to learn 
the teacher’s description of data. It is critical for ufficeent student network learning to inte-
grate both individual knowledge and relational knowledge while reserving their inherent 
correlation. Zhou et al. [245] of Zhejiang University proposed distilling the novel holistic 
knowledge based on an attributed graph constructed among instances.
2.5.4  Other types of approaches
In addition to the abovementioned conventional KD methods, some special KD methods 
have been researched. Some scholars have specially studied the KD method for object 
detection task. Gupta et  al. [246] proposed a cross modal distillation method for super -
vision transfer, which transfers the knowledge learned from the RGB data set to a deep 
learning scenario. Li et al. [247] proposed using the feature map sampled by the region 
candidate frame to perform distillation, and L2 loss to reduce the differences between the 
local feature sampling results of large and small networks, to achieve certain results on 
detection tasks. The Communications & Media Research Laboratory of Korea Eletronics 
Telecommunications Research Instutue [248] also used KD method to improve the perfor -
mance of lightweight mobile network single shot multibox detector(SSD) [273] model in 
object detection. Chen et al. [249] introduced the method of combining hint learning, soft 
targets and hard targets into object detection distillation simultaneously. By giving differ -
ent weights to different loss functions, the whole network is trained, and the performance 
of multi-classification object detection network is improved. Wang et al. [250] introduced 
anchor points around the area as supervisory information to avoid the background noise 
problem during simulation. Chen et  al. [251] of Peking University and Noah’s Ark Lab 
proposed utilizing a large amount of unlabeled data in the wild to address the data-free 
KD problem, then in order to improve the performance of the student network, a data-free 
noise distillation algorithm was also proposed, which uses the student network to learn an 

==== Page 34 ====
48198 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
adaptation matrix to correct the label noise produced by the teacher network on the col-
lected unlabeled images.
Some scholars put forward "assistant" to help learning. Mirzadeh et al. [252] introduced 
multi-step distillation method, using a medium-sized network as a teacher assistant to 
improve knowledge extraction ability and reduce the gap between primary school student’ 
networks and teacher network. Tianjin University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong 
and SenseTime [253] proposed residual KD method. They used assistant to help students 
acquire more knowledge by learning the residual between teachers and students.
Discussion:The research on KD mainly includes relationship transfer and feature trans-
fer. Output Transfer constrains the output of the student model to be similar to the teacher 
model. Feature Transfer constrains the intermediate features of the student model to be 
similar to those of the teacher model. And relation Transfer constraints the category rela-
tion of the student model is similar to that of the teacher model, and this relation can be 
obtained by computing the correlation matrix. Compared with Output Transfer and Feature 
Transfer, Relation Transfer can control the similarity between the student model and the 
teacher model more fine-grained. In addition, these three distillation methods can also be 
combined, such as the combination of Output Transfer and Feature Transfer, which can bet-
ter preserve the details and features of the model. It should be noted that KD also has some 
limitations. When there is a large gap between the performance of the teacher model and 
the student model, the effect of KD will be limited. In addition, for some complex tasks, 
KD may need to be performed in multiple stages to achieve the best results. In addition, the 
combination of knowledge and relationships proposed by scholars at Zhejiang University 
is a new attempt. Some researchers used semi supervised learning mode to reduce the gap 
between students and teachers. We think that more research can be conducted in this area, 
The problem of KD without data and the wider application of KD the field of target detec-
tion instead of image classification may be future research focuses.
2.6  Low‑rank decomposition
Since most of the calculations in a CNN are convolution computations, in essence, we 
can consider convolution computations to be matrix analysis. Therefore, the compres-
sion method of low-rank decomposition was introduced. The main idea is to decompose 
the convolution kernel through matrix analysis methods such as low-rank decomposition. 
Therefore, a large convolution kernel tensor is decomposed into a small convolution ker -
nel to approximate the original weight matrix, reducing the computations and parameters 
required by the model to a certain extent. The compression method of low-rank decompo-
sition has been rising in popularity since 2013. This paper collects a total of 17 papers on 
DNN model compression via low-rank decomposition. Figure  20 shows the popularity of 
low-rank decomposition research over the past 8 years. More studies on this method were 
conducted in 2018, while fewer studies have been conducted in recent years. The process 
of low-rank decomposition for the convolution kernel is shown in Fig.  21. The research 
situations of various research institutions and teams are shown in Fig. 22.
In 2013, the University of Oxford and Facebook [254] first theoretically explained 
the feasibility of applying matrix factorization to convolution kernels, and proposed that 
the remaining values could be accurately predicted by given part of the weight value of 
each feature. In the second year, the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology [255] 
proposed the CP decomposition method to compress the convolution kernel in the con-
volutional network. With the development of low-rank decomposition methods, Facebook 

==== Page 35 ====
48199 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
AI research [256] has proposed a variety of low-rank decomposition strategies, such as 
CP decomposition and cluster-based decomposition. Jaderberg et al. [257] used low-rank 
decomposition techniques to take advantage of the redundancy between different channels 
and filters to accelerate the trained network.
In addition to CP decomposition, Samsung Electronics [258] proposed a convolu-
tion kernel decomposition method based on Tucker decomposition. First, the rank was 
selected by using variational Bayesian matrix decomposition, then kernel tensor Tucker 
Fig. 20  Distribution of Low-rank Decomposition papers
Fig. 21  The process of low-rank decomposition for the convolution kernel
Fig. 22  The research situations of various research institutions and teams regarding low-rank decomposition

==== Page 36 ====
48200 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
decomposition was performed, and finally the model was adjusted. Microsoft Research 
[259] adopted the generalized singular value decomposition (GSVD) strategy, which 
achieved acceleration while the precision decreased slightly. The Skolkovo Institute of sci-
ence and technology [260] used Tensor-train Decomposition algorithm to decompose the 
full connection layer to achieve network parameter compression. A team of the Univer -
sity of Central Florida [261] introduced LASSO sparsity constraint on the basis of tensor 
decomposition to further sparsify the convolution kernel after preliminary decomposition.
Princeton University and the Chinese University of Hong Kong team [262] found that a 
specific form of low-rank decomposition has a closed global optimal solution. They used 
the BN method to train a deep low-rank neural network, and tensor decomposition tech-
nology to remove convolution kernel redundancy. The University of Sydney team [263] 
proposed a unified framework for feature reconstruction by combining low-rank decom-
position and sparsity. The Hikvision Research Institute [264] proposed a new low-rank 
decomposition method based on filter bank structure, which can significantly reduce redun-
dancy while maintaining most of the feature representation. The University of Electronic 
Science and Technology team [265] proposed to decompose tensor by combining CP 
decomposition and Tucker decomposition. The Purdue University team [266] used Ten-
sor-ring decomposition to decompose the weight tensor. SAIC-Cambridge added various 
low-rank constraints to the weight tensor to construct a fully parameterized CNN called 
T-Net, which has a single high-order and low-rank tensor [267]. The University of Califor -
nia [268] rebuilt the loss function by adding constraints to the tensor rank, and converted it 
into an optimization problem to achieve compression. Google Artificial Intelligence [269] 
proposed a new algorithm to convert non-circulant tensors into circulant tensors, making 
it possible for a new algorithm to implement circulant convolution on the pretrained non-
circulant model. ETH Zurich [270] combined filter pruning and tensor decomposition for 
compression.
Recent research on low-rank decomposition methods has focused on breaking through 
the limitations of traditional low-rank decomposition methods in the past. The popular 
low-rank decomposition method singular value decomposition (SVD) ignores that the rela-
tive importance or contribution of each neuron in each layer is different. When it is used 
for model compression, it is mainly applied to the fully connected layer and only retains 
the most prominent components of the decomposition matrix. Sridhar Swaminathan et al. 
[271]at Bennett University reconsidered the importance of the input–output neurons of the 
layer, sparsified the SVD matrix to keep the unimportant neurons low-rank, and verified 
the effectiveness of this compression method for image recognition models. More signifi-
cantly, existing tensor compression methods enforce a low-rank factorization structure on 
neural network weights, and have been effectively applied to the compression of some large 
neural networks, including VGG. But advanced backbone networks often used in object 
detection tasks, such as MobileNet, have taken advantage of this decomposition structure 
through depthwise separable convolutions. Pure tensor factorization becomes trivial at this 
point. A team from the University of California and Meta [272] combined low-rank ten-
sor factorization with sparse pruning to capture complementary coarse and fine structure, 
respectively, and outperform sparse pruning or low-rank tensor factorization alone. This 
study is the first to consider the combination of low-rank tensor compression with sparse 
pruning. Alternatively, this is the first study to investigate low-rank + sparse weight com-
pression for SOTA architectures that rely on efficient depthwise separable convolutions.
Low-rank decomposition is very suitable for model compression and acceleration, 
but the implementation of low-rank decomposition method is not easy and involves high 

==== Page 37 ====
48201 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
computational costs. The current method mainly involves layer by layer address approxi-
mation. The compression of global parameters and the retraining process after decomposi-
tion may be the focuses of future research.
3  Datasets and evaluation metrics
This section presents an overview of the Common Objects in Context (COCO) test-
dev2015, the Pascal Visual Object Classes(VOC)2007, ImageNet Large Scale Visual Rec-
ognition Challenge (ILSVRC)2012, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 public datasets.
3.1  Datasets
3.1.1  COCO test‑dev2015
The COCO dataset is a large-scale object detection, keypoint detection, and caption-
ing dataset published by Microsoft. It is one of the most challenging datasets available 
and a very general standard. It contains 91 classes of objects taken from complex every -
day scenes, 328,000 images and 2,500,000 labels, with an average of 3.5 classes and 7.7 
instances per image. Among them, 80 object categories and the corresponding instance 
labeling information are selected for the object detection task. Test-dev2015 is a subset of 
the test set published in 2015 in the COCO dataset, which has about 20 k images in total. 
The differences between the test-dev and validation sets are threefold: guaranteed consist-
ent evaluation of test-dev using the evaluation server, test-dev cannot be used for training 
(annotations are private), and a leaderboard is provided for test-dev, allowing for compari-
son with the state-of-the-art. So the COCO test-dev2015 is the default test data for general 
testing, and latest publications often report their performance results in the Test-dev2015 
dataset for fair and open comparison.
3.1.2  VOC 2007
The VOC dataset is a dataset of competitions that took place between 2005 and 2012 with 
the goal of object recognition in images. The labeled objects in this dataset include 20 
categories including people, animals (such as cats, dogs, islands, etc.), transportation vehi-
cles (such as cars, boats, airplanes, etc.), and furniture (such as chairs, tables, sofas, etc.). 
This dataset is also a commonly used dataset for object detection tasks and contains 11,530 
images for training and validation, 27,450 calibrated objects of interest, and an average of 
2.4 objects per image. The VOC 2007 dataset contains 9,963 labeled images with a total of 
24,640 labeled objects Table 2.
3.1.3  ImageNet ILSVRC 2012
The ImageNet is a well-known dataset in computer vision. The dataset used in the Ima-
geNet ILSVRC is a lightweight version of the ImageNet dataset. Many papers at the fore-
front of computer vision use the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset to test their models. Ima-
geNet ILSVRC 2012 has a total of 1000 classes. There are 1,281,167 images in the training 
set with 732 to 1,300 images of each type, 50,000 images in the validation set with 50 

==== Page 38 ====
48202 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
images of each type, and 100,000 images in the test set with 100 images of each type. It is 
worth mentioning that the evaluation metrics of ImageNet are generally fixed, namely top1, 
top5.
3.1.4  CIFAR10 and 100
The CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets are subsets of the Visual Dictionary(Teaching 
computers to recognize objects), Collected from google and various search engines by 
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton.
The CIFAR-10 dataset contains 60,000 color images with 32 × 32 resolution, in total 
10 categories with 6000 images per class. There are 50,000 images in the training set and 
10,000 in the test set. It’s worth noting that these classes are completely mutually exclu-
sive, with no overlap between "cars" and "trucks": "cars" includes cars, SUVs, etc., and 
"trucks" includes only big trucks, and neither includes pickup trucks.
The CIFAR-100 dataset is very similar to CIFAR-10 except that it has 100 classes, each 
class contains 600 images, and each class has 500 training images and 100 test images. The 
100 classes in CIFAR-100 are divided into 20 superclasses. Each image is accompanied 
by a "fine" label (the class it belongs to) and a "coarse" label (the superclass it belongs to). 
The categories in CIFAR-100 are shown in Tables 3.
3.2  Metrics
3.2.1  FLOPs
FLOPs is the number of floating-point operations that can be performed per second. It 
reflects the demand of the model for hardware computing units, and is usually used to eval-
uate the computational complexity of a deep learning model or the demand for computing 
resources. Many studies choose FLOPs as a reference for the speed of the model. A higher 
value of FLOPs means that the model is more computationally demanding and requires 
more computing resources. The overall computational cost of the model is equal to the 
sum of the computational cost of each operator in the model. The computation amount of 
each operator is calculated in different ways. For convolution, FLOPs can be approximated 
as Eqs. (1), Where OC is the number of output channels, OH and OW are the height and 
width of the output feature map, KH and KW are the height and width of the convolution 
kernel, and IC is the number of input channels.
(1) FLOPsConv=2×OC×OH×OW×KH×KW×ICTable 2  A Comparison of Sub Methods for Network Quantization
Binary Quantization Ternary Quantization Cluster Quantization
Accuracy minimum better than the former rely on clustering algorithms
Calculation speed fastest slower than the former slowest
Storage space least Less than the former most
Training effect good good rely on clustering algorithms
Application mobile terminal, 
embedded devicemobile terminal, embedded device Server

==== Page 39 ====
48203 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
3.2.2  Param
The number of parameters is the sum of the parameters in the model and is directly related 
to the amount of disk space required by the model. For embedded devices, limited Flash 
cannot deploy models that require large disk space. Therefore, the number of parameters 
is also a valuable comparison for model compression techniques, although the number of 
parameters does not directly affect the inference performance of the model.
3.2.3  AccTop‑1
AccTop-1% represents the proportion of the class corresponding to the highest prob-
ability of the model prediction results that agrees with the true label. It is a commonly 
used evaluation metric for classification models, and it is also an indicator to measure the 
feature extraction ability of the backbone network of object detection models. It is calcu-
lated as Eqs. (2), the value of AccTop-1% ranges from 0 to 1, with higher values indicat-
ing better model performance. To some extent, is equivalent to accuracy, but AccTop-1% 
and AccTop-5% appear together to distinguish the performance of the model on different 
classes when there is a severe imbalance between the classes. AccTop-5% is the ratio of the 
top 5 classes that contain the true class in the final output probability vector.
(2) AccTop −1%= (TP+TN)∕(P+N)Table 3  The Categories of CIFAR-100
Superclass Classes
aquatic mammals beaver, dolphin, otter, seal, whale
fish aquarium fish, flatfish, ray, shark, trout
flowers orchids, poppies, roses, sunflowers, tulips
food containers bottles, bowls, cans, cups, plates
fruit and vegetables apples, mushrooms, oranges, pears, sweet peppers
household electrical devices clock, computer keyboard, lamp, telephone, television
household furniture bed, chair, couch, table, wardrobe
insects bee, beetle, butterfly, caterpillar, cockroach
large carnivores bear, leopard, lion, tiger, wolf
large man-made outdoor things bridge, castle, house, road, skyscraper
large natural outdoor scenes cloud, forest, mountain, plain, sea
large omnivores and herbivores large omnivores and herbivores
medium-sized mammals fox, porcupine, possum, raccoon, skunk
non-insect invertebrates crab, lobster, snail, spider, worm
people baby, boy, girl, man, woman
reptiles crocodile, dinosaur, lizard, snake, turtle
small mammals hamster, mouse, rabbit, shrew, squirrel
trees maple, oak, palm, pine, willow
vehicles 1 bicycle, bus, motorcycle, pickup truck, train
vehicles 2 lawn-mower, rocket, streetcar, tank, tractor

==== Page 40 ====
48204 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
3.2.4  AP
Average Precision (AP) is one of the commonly used metrics to evaluate the performance 
of object detection and image classification tasks. AP is used to measure the balance 
between precision and recall of the model on different categories. The value of AP ranges 
from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating better performance of the model. When calculat-
ing AP, it is also necessary to balance the categories according to the least categories in the 
dataset to avoid that some categories dominate the dataset and affect the overall evaluation 
results. The value of AP is equal to the area under the Precision-Recall (P-R) curve, which 
is calculated using the Eqs. (3):
4  Performance comparison
In this section, we comprehensively summarize and compare the actual compression 
effects of various typical DNN compression methods on the COCO test-dev2015, VOC 
2007, ImageNet ILSVRC 2012, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 public datasets. The perfor -
mance of a model is affected by many factors such as the size and scale of the input image, 
the feature extractor, the GPU architecture and performance, the number of proposals, the 
training method, the loss function, etc. Moreover, to reproduce the inevitable errors that 
may arise from experiments, we assume that the results published in the original paper 
represent the best experimental results obtained by the original authors, so as to make a fair 
performance comparison.
4.1  Performance comparison among lightweight structure design methods
In this section, we summarize the performance of some classic lightweight structure design 
models and original object detection model methods on ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset, 
COCO test-dev2015 dataset, VOC 2007 dataset, and CIFAR-10 dataset. The evaluation 
indices include: model parameter size: Param; the accuracy of the first category consistent 
with the actual result: AccTop-1; the mean average precision: mAP; the average precision: 
AP; and the operation speed of the model: FLOPs.
The comparison methods include: VGG-16 [276], SSD [273], YOLOv2 [145], 
YOLOv3 [146], YOLOv4 [147], PeleeNet [132], ThunderNet [121], EfficientDet [157], 
GhostNet [124], MobileNetV1 [107], MobileNetV2 [108], MobileNetV3 [136], ESPNetV2 
[111], ShuffleNetV1 [119], ShuffleNetV2 [120], Xception [106], AlexNet [274], Goog-
leNet [4], ResNet-153 [112], ResNeXt-101 [113], DenseNet [114], InceptionV1 [103], 
InceptionV2 [104], InceptionV3 [105], Inception-v4 [275], SqueezeNet [125], Squeezen-
ext [126], SqueezeDet [127], CondenseNet [115], ChannelNets [128], NASNet-A [161], 
IGCV1 [116], IGCV2 [117], IGCV3 [118], EfficientNet [156], MixNets [110], ShiftNet 
[139], MobileNeXt [133], YOLO Nano [149], YOLO-LITE [148], VarGNetV1 [278], 
HRNetV1 [131], Lite-HRNet [130], MobileDets + MobileNetV2 SSDLite [180], YOLO-
bile [153], RSANet [134], BN-NAS [184], and PP-PicoDet [109].Some method names are (3) AP=/uni222B.dsp1
0p(r)dr

==== Page 41 ====
48205 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
abbreviations adapted from the original author’s title, specifically in the references. The 
results are presented in Table 4 and Figs. 23, 24 and 25.
On the COCO test-dev 2015 dataset, it is clear that as a lightweight object detection 
model, YOLO-LITE has a very small param and FLOPs, but at the same time its AP drop 
is also very obvious. The key role of YOLO-LITE is to bring light model design impli-
cations, namely the ability of shallow networks for non-GPU real-time object detection 
applications, and batch normalization is not necessary for shallow networks. However, in 
general, the experimental effect of PP-PicoDet model is higher than that of all other meth-
ods. The model size is only 0.99 M, and the AP can reach 27.1%. The proposed method 
is more stable than other lightweight structures by enhancing the backbone structure and 
combining the label assignment strategy. On ImageNet ILSVRC 2012, most of the light-
weight models since MobileNetV1-V3 have achieved amazing performance with a good 
balance between parameters and accuracy. On the CIFAR-10 dataset, Ghost-ResNet-56 can 
reduce the parameter size to 0.43 m while maintaining 92.7% accuracy. It can be seen that 
the combination of GhostNet [124] and ResNet can achieve excellent model compression 
Table 4  Compression 
performance comparison among 
the lightweight model design 
methods on COCO test-dev 2015 
datasetModels Param(M) AP FLOPs(B)
SSD 34.3 25.1 99.5
YOLOv2 50.7 21.6 17.5
YOLOv3 62.3 33 71
YOLOv4 64.36 38.2 35.5
YOLOv2-Tiny - 23.7 5.41
YOLOv3-Tiny 8.86 16.6 5.62
YOLOv4-Tiny 6.06 21.7 6.96
YOLO-LITE 0.6 12.26 1
PeleeNet 5.98 22.4 1.39
ThunderNet - 23.7 0.47
EfficientDet 3.9 33.8 2.5
IGCV3 4 22.2 0.21
GhostNet - 26.6 0.164
MobileNetV1 SSDLite 5.1 22.2 1.3
MobileNetV2 SSDLite 4.3 22.1 0.8
MobileNetV2 - 26.7 0.3
MobileNetV3 - 26.4 0.22
ESPNetv2 - 21.9 0.7
ShuffleNetV1 - 20.8 0.14
ShuffleNetV2 - 22.7 0.15
Xception - 23 0.15
HRNetV1 28.5 25.4 1.6
Lite-HRNet 1.1 33.1 0.45
MobileDets + MobileNetV2 
SSDLite3.17 21.8 -
YOLObile 4.59 31.6 3.95
RSANet 4.348 23.7 2.34
BN-NAS - 33.32 2.7
PP-PicoDet 0.99 27.1 0.73

==== Page 42 ====
48206 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
effects and build a multi-channel plug-and-play lightweight network structure. The per -
formance comparison on VOC 2007 dataset is mainly for the lightweight object detection 
model and the original object detection model. It is surprising that most of the lightweight 
object detection models have reached the same level of accuracy as the original model. 
This is the goal that the cutting-edge research on compressed object detection models is 
still pursuing.
4.2  Performance comparison among NAS methods
In this section, we summarize the performance of some classic NAS methods on Ima-
geNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset and CIFAR-10 dataset. The evaluation indices include: model 
parameter size: Param/M; the accuracy of the first category consistent with the actual 
Fig. 23  Compression performance comparison among the lightweight model design methods on ImageNet 
ILSVRC 2012
Fig. 24  Compression performance comparison among the lightweight model design methods on CIFAR-10 
dataset

==== Page 43 ====
48207 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
result:  AccTop-1%; the operation speed of the model: FLOPs; and search time: GPU days 
(the type of GPU is NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti). The results are shown in Tables 5 and 6.
The comparison methods include: ResNet152 [112], EfficientNetB0 [156], 
ResNeXt-101 [113], MnasNet [137], ProxylessNAS [181], DF [187], FBNetV1 [173], 
FBNetV2-L2 [174], FBNetV3-A [175], BNAS [226], SinglePathNAS [171], OFA [188], 
APQ [189], CP-NAS [192], PNASNET [177], NASNet [161], AmoebaNet [169], Baker 
[160], Zoph [161], EAS [164], Real [169], Zhong [162], Path-level NAS [163], Liu [170], 
DARTS [176], ENAS [179], Elsken [183], AutoFormer [185], BN-NAS [184], and Light-
Track [193]. Some method names are abbreviations adapted from the original author’s title, 
specifically in the references.
As shown in Tables  5 and  6, the best size of the NAS method can be compressed to 
2.5 M, but the accuracy of this model is only 69.8%. Regarding the overall effect, the CP-
NAS method has the best effect on CIFAR10 dataset, which has a size of 2.9 M and an 
accuracy of 96.35%. And its search time is relatively short. It can be seen that the CP-NAS 
method achieves high compression ratio and accuracy by using the full precision model 
(parent model) to guide the search of the binary model (child model). In addition, the accu-
racy of AutoFormer method is 99.1%. It can be seen that CPNAS approach achieves high 
compression and accuracy by using full precision model (parent model) to guide the search 
of the binary model (child model). AutoFormer methods of obtaining high-quality trans-
formers from trained supernetworks are superior in accuracy.
4.3  Performance comparison among network quantization methods
In this section, we summarize some of the classic network quantization methods. We quan-
tify ResNet-18 and ResNet34 on the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset and quantify VGG-
Small and ResNet20 on the CIFAR10 dataset. The evaluation indices include: the number 
Fig. 25  Compression performance comparison among the lightweight model design methods on VOC 2007 
dataset

==== Page 44 ====
48208 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Table 5  Comparison of 
compression performance among 
NAS methods on ImageNet 
ILSVRC 2012 datasetMothods Param(M) AccTop-1 (%) FLOPs(M)
ResNet152 - 78.3 11,000
EfficientNetB0 5.3 77.3 390
ResNeXt-101 - 79.3 7800
ResNet-18 11.17 69.3 -
MnasNet 5.2 76.7 403
ProxylessNAS 4.1 74.6 320
DF 2.5 69.8 746
FBNetV1 4.5 74.9 375
FBNetV2 4.3 78.1 423
FBNetV3 3.7 78 343
DARTS 4.9 74.1 595
BNAS 6.2 71.3 -
SinglePathNAS 4.4 74.7 328
OFA - 80 595
APQ - 75.1 -
CP-NAS 12.5 64.3 -
PNASNET 5.1 74.2 588
NASNet 5.3 74 564
AmoebaNet 5.1 74.5 555
BN-NAS 5.4 75.67 470
LightTrack - 77.6 -
AutoFormer 5.7 74.7 1300
Table 6  Comparison of 
compression performance among 
NAS methods on CIFAR10 
datasetMethods Param(M) AccTop-1(%) GPU(Days)
Baker 11.18 93.08 100
Zoph 37.4 96.35 1800
EAS 23.4 95.77 10
NASNet 3.3 96.59 2000
Real 5.4 94.6 2600
Zhong 39.8 96.46 96
Path-level NAS 5.7 97.01 200
Liu 15.7 96.25 300
DARTS 3.1 97.06 1.5
BNAS 3.3 97.16 0.08
CP-NAS 2.9 96.35 0.1
NASNet-A 3.3 93.5 -
ENAS 4.6 97.35 0.5
PNASNET 3.2 96.46 225
AmoebaNet 3.2 96.59 3150
Elsken 19.7 96.66 1
AutoFormer 23 99.1 -

==== Page 45 ====
48209 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
of model weight quantization bits: W-bit; the number of activation quantization bits: A-bit; 
model parameter size: Param; the accuracy of the first category consistent with the actual 
results:  AccTop-1%. The results are shown in Tables 7 and 8.
The methods of comparison include: BinaryConnect [194], BNN [195], XNOR-Net 
[196], BWN [196], LAB [198], CI-BCNN [204], BNN-DL [206], TWN [208], LQ-Nets 
[215], TSQ [217], IR-Net [218], TTQ [207], Bi-Real [199], BWNH [200], BENN [203], 
CBCN [205], DoReFa-Net [213], IAO [214], SYQ [216], BATS [225], DAQ [222], PQMP 
Table 7  Compression performance of various network quantization methods for ResNet-18 and ResNet34 
on the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset
ResNet-18 ResNet34
Methods W/A AccTop-1(%) Param(M) AccTop-1(%) Param(M)
Fullprecision 32/32 69.6 374 73.3 697 M
BNN 1/1 42.2 - - -
XNOR-Net 1/1 51.2 33.7 - 43.9
BWN 1/32 60.8 11.2 60.8 -
ABC-Net 1/32 62.8 11.2 - -
2/32 63.7 - - -
1/1 42.7 11.2 52.4 21.8
Bi-Real 1/1 56.4 33.6 62.2 43.7
BWNH 1/32 64.3 11.2 - -
BENN 1/1 61 - - -
CI-BCNN 1/1 59.9 33.5 64.93 43.5
CBCN 1/1 61.4 - - -
TWN 2/32 61.8 - - -
DoReFa-Net 1/4 69.9 - - -
1/2 53.4 - - -
2/2 62.6 - - -
IAO 8/8 74.9 - - -
LQ-Nets 1/2 62.6 - 66.6 -
2/2 64.9 - 69.8 -
3/3 68.2 - 71.9 -
SYQ 1/2 55.4 - - -
1/8 62.9 - - -
IR-Net 1/32 66.5 - 70.4 21.8
1/1 58.1 4.21 62.9 21.8
BATS 1/1 60.4 - - -
TTQ 2/32 66.6 - - -
DAQ 1/1 56.2 - 62.1 -
1/2 64.6 - 69.4 -
1/32 67.2 - 71.9 -
2/32 69.8 - - -
PQMP 4/8 61.68 5.37 - -
4/4 65.89 5.41 - -

==== Page 46 ====
48210 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
[221], and MPT [201]. Some method names are abbreviations adapted from the original 
author’s title, specifically in the references.
The "W/A" in the Table  7 and  8 refers to the ratio of the total amount of parameter weights 
to the total amount of activation values in the model. A low "W/A" value means that the com-
putational cost of the model is relatively low, that is, the model pays more attention to the cal-
culation of activation values rather than the calculation of parameter weights in the calculation 
process. This is exactly what is pursued in network quantization. Based on this, we analyze 
various models obtained by compressing ResNet-18 and ResNet34 using network quantization 
methods on the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset. Compared with ResNet-18 "Fullprecision", 
the DoReFa-Net method has no loss of accuracy and provides an improvement after weight-
ing, and the accuracies of IAO and DAQ are higher than before. The DoReFa-Net method uses 
low-bit wide gradients to train low-bit wide CNNs, and its accuracy is significantly higher than 
the BWN and TWN methods. For the quantization of ResNet34, there are few studies, but 
most of AccTop-1 also reach the level with "Fullprecision".
4.4  Performance comparison among KD methods
In this section, we summarize the performance of some classic KD methods on ImageNet 
ILSVRC 2012 dataset, CIFAR-10 dataset and CIFAR-100 dataset, using WideResNet 
(WRN), ResNet (RN) and other models as teacher and student models. The evalua-
tion indices include: the accuracy of the first category consistent with the actual results: Table 8  Compression 
performance of various network 
quantization methods for 
VGG-Small and ResNet20 on 
CIFAR10 datesetMethods W/A VGG-SmalL ResNet20
AccTop-1(%)
Fullprecision 32/32 93.8 92.1
BinaryConnect 1/32 91.73 -
BNN 1/1 89.9 -
XNOR-Net 1/1 89.8 -
BWN 1/32 90.1 -
LAB 1/32 89.5 -
1/1 87.7 -
CI-BCNN 1/1 92.5 91.1
BNN-DL 1/1 90.0 -
TWN - 92.56 -
LQ-Nets 1/2 93.4 88.4
TSQ 3/2 93.5 -
IR-Net 1/1 90.4 85.4
TTQ [207] 2/32 - 91.13
DoReFa-Net 1/1 - 79.3
1/32 - 90
DAQ 1/1 - 85.8
1/32 - 91.2
MPT 1/1 91.9 -
1/32 91.48 94.8

==== Page 47 ====
48211 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
AccTop-1%. (The size of the method model after KD is consistent with the student net-
work). The results are shown in Tables 9, 10 and 11.
The methods of comparison include: KD [229], AT [234], OFD [1], RKD [242], CRD 
[244], AIN [237], FSP [238], FT [231], and SP [236]. Some method names are abbrevia-
tions adapted from the original author’s title, specifically in the references.
As shown in Tables  9, 10 and 11, We summarize the student networks and teacher net-
works obtained with different architectures and the same architecture. In general, the gen-
eral accuracy of the small student model obtained by the KD method is not much lower 
than that of the teacher network, and the accuracy of the AIN method only drops by 0.15%, 
which method is based on feature statistics can better transfer statistical information from 
teachers to students with less loss of accuracy.
4.5  Performance comparison among low‑rank decomposition methods
In this section, we summarize some of the current classic low-rank decomposition methods. 
On the ImageNet, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 datasets, we use AlexNet, VGG-16, ResNet-32, 
and GoogLeNet as the original models to perform low-rank decomposition, and compare 
them with some pruning algorithms. The evaluation indices include: model parameter size: 
Param/M; the accuracy of the first category consistent with the actual result:  AccTop-1%; the 
accuracy of the fifth category consistent with the actual result:  AccTop-5%; and the opera-
tion speed of the model: FLOPS (×  109). The results are shown in Tables  12, 13, 14 and 15.
The comparison methods include: Tai [262], Tucker [258], GreBdec [263], SVD [256], 
Guo [27], Han [14], neuron importance score propagation (NISP) [28], AFP [51], TT 
[260], and TRN [266]. Some method names are abbreviations adapted from the original 
author’s title, specifically in the references.
Among the low-rank decomposition methods for VGG-16 and AlexNet [274] in 
Tables  12 and 13, the GreBdec method performs very well, compressing the size to 7.0% 
and 9.8% of the original size respectively, while the accuracy is slightly improved. The 
GreBdec method uses feature reconstruction and combines low-rank decomposition and 
sparsity to achieve better results than the traditional Tucker and Tai methods. Table  14 com-
pares the compression effects of some low-rank decomposition methods of GoogLeNet. 
Table 9  Compression 
performance among various KD 
methods on ImageNet datasetStudent (Param(M)) RN18 (11.69) MobileNet (4.23) RN18
(13.95)
Teacher (Param(M)) RN34 (21.80) RN50 (25.56) RN101
Student 70.04 70.13 70.83
Teacher 73.31 76.16 78.05
KD 70.68 70.68 71.43
AT 70.59 70.72 71.58
OFD 71.08 71.25 -
RKD 71.34 71.32 -
CRD 71.17 71.4 -
AIN 71.82 72.49 -
FSP - - 71.28
HKD + KD - 69.45 -
DFND 61.75 - -

==== Page 48 ====
48212 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3Table 10  Compression performance among various KD methods on CIFAR-10 dataset
Student 
(Param(M))VGG-13 
(9.4)RN-20 
(0.27)RN-20 
(0.27)NIN-thin 
(0.2)WRN-16–1 
(0.2)WRN-16–1 
(0.2)WRN-16–2 
(0.7)WRN-16–2 
(0.7)WRN-40–2 
(2.2)RN-20
(0.27)RN18 (11.69)
Teacher 
(Param(M))WRN-46–4 
(10)WRN-40–1 
(0.56)RN-56 
(0.85)NIN-wide 
(1)WRN-40–1 
(0.6)WRN-16–2 
(0.7)WRN-40–2 
(2.2)WRN-16–8 
(11.0)WRN-16–8 
(11.0)RN-164
(2.6)RN34 (21.80)
Student 94.01 92.22 92.22 90.62 91.26 91.25 93.93 93.93 94.82 91.42 93.92
Teacher 95.56 93.16 93.61 92.72 93.49 93.79 94.82 95.76 95.76 93.43 94.85
AT 94.46 92.66 92.87 91.07 91.7 91.89 94.11 94.53 95.53 - -
KD 94.29 92.91 92.81 91.45 91.52 92.32 94 94.38 95.14 91.12 94.34
FT 95.16 93.15 93.15 - - - - - - - -
AT + KD 94.7 93 93.11 91.67 91.99 92.48 94.29 - - - -
FT + KD 95.35 93.05 92.96 - - 92.41 - - - - -
SP - - - - 91.87 92.48 94.48 94.66 95.45 - -
OFD - - - - - 92.28 94.3 - - - -
RKD - - - - - 92.51 94.41 - - - -
AIN - - - - - 92.9 94.67 - - - -
DFND - - - - - - - - - - 94.02

==== Page 49 ====
48213 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Table 11  Compression performance among various KD methods on CIFAR-10 dataset
Student WRN-16–2 
(0.70 M)WRN-16–4 
(2.77 M)WRN-10–10 
(7.49 M)RN-10 (0.34 M) RN-18 (0.75 M) RN-10 (4.95 M) WRN-16–2 
(0.70 M)MobileNetV2 
(2.37 M)MobileNetV2 
(2.37 M)
Teacher WRN-40–4 
(8.97 M)WRN-40–4 
(8.97 M)WRN-16–10 
(17.2 M)RN-34 (1.39 M) RN-50 (1.99 M) RN-34 
(21.33 M)RN-34 
(21.33 M)RN-34 
(21.33 M)WRN-40–4 
(8.97 M)
Student 72.22 75.68 73.75 67.6 70.21 74.2 72.22 68.36 68.36
Teacher 78.31 78.31 78.75 72.05 72.83 77.26 77.26 77.26 78.31
KD 73.32 77.17 76.63 68.05 72.4 75.79 73.32 68.65 68.4
AT 72.56 76.48 74.63 68.39 70.78 75.03 71.46 66.68 66.46
OFD 74.12 77.79 76.97 67.94 71.54 75.6 73.78 70.18 70.1
RKD 73.08 77.48 76.28 68.43 72.1 75.04 72.95 69.52 68.64
CRD 73.75 77.49 76.28 69.17 72.31 76.63 73.39 70.98 70.45
AIN 74.58 78.25 77.12 69.49 72.59 76.11 74.38 70.66 71.15

==== Page 50 ====
48214 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Although the accuracy can reach the same level as that of GoogLeNet, the compression 
ratio is also very limited due to the small size of GoogLeNet. Table  15 compares the com-
pression effects of some low-rank decomposition methods of ResNet-32 on CIFAR10 and 
CIFAR100 datasets, and it can be seen that the TT method has the best comprehensive 
performance on the two datasets.Table 12  Compressing VGG-16 
by using low-rank decomposition 
methods on ImageNet datasetMethods Param AccTop-1/% AccTop-5/% FLOPs
VGG-16 138 68.5 88.68 15.5
Tai 50.18 - 90.31 7.56
Tucker 126.6 - 89.4 3.14
Han 10.3 68.66 89.12 -
GreBdec 9.7 68.75 89.06 -
Han 15 68.15 - -
Table 13  Compression 
effects among some low-rank 
decomposition methods for 
AlexNet on ImageNet datasetMethods Param AccTop-1/% AccTop-5/% FLOPs
AlexNet [274] 61 57.22 80.27 0.72
Tai 12.2 - 79.66 0.39
Tucker 10.9 56.6 78.33 0.27
GreBdec 6 57.26 80.31 -
Denton 12.2 55.98 - -
Guo 3.47 56.91 - -
Han 6.8 57.23 80.33 -
NISP - 55.87 79.86 0.31
AFP - 56.17 79.53 0.15
Table 14  Compressing 
GoogLeNet by using low-rank 
decomposition methods on 
ImageNet datasetMethods Param AccTop-1/% AccTop-5/% FLOPs
GoogLeNet 6.9 68.7 88.9 -
Tai 2.4 - 91.79 0.39
Tucker 4.7 - 88.66 0.27
GreBdec 1.5 67.3 88.11 -
Table 15  Compressing 
ResNet-32 by using low-rank 
decomposition methods on 
CIFAR10, CIFAR100 datasetMethod Params CIFAR10 CIFAR100
AccTop-1/%
ResNet-32 0.46 92.5 68.1
Tucker 0.09 87.7 57.8
TT 0.096 88.3 62.9
TRN 0.09 90.6 48.7

==== Page 51 ====
48215 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
4.6  Performance comparison among network pruning methods
In this section, we summarize some of the current network pruning methods. On the Ima-
geNet, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 datasets, we use AlexNet [274], VGG-16 [276], ResNet-50, 
ResNet-56, and GoogLeNet as the original models to perform network pruning. The evalu-
ation indices include: model parameter size: Param/M; the accuracy of the first category 
consistent with the actual result:  AccTop-1%; and the operation speed of the model: FLOPs 
(×  109). The results are shown in Tables 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 and Figs. 26, 27 and 28.
The comparison methods include: Han(2015b) [14], Han(2015a) [13], Zhang [17], Liu 
[21], Guo [27], PerforatedCNNs [73], AOFP [63], Dong [93], PFEC [40], ThiNet [69], CP 
[42], RNP [50], GDP [53], Slimming [76], DCP [80], AMC [165], Lin [58], NISP [28], 
SSS [29], Taylor [30], SFP [64], KSE [65], GAL [66], C-SGD [52], GBN [71], CURL 
[59], Hu [79], MDP [88], DMC [3], MobileNet [107], Slimmable NN [182], TAS [186], 
Hinge [270], MetaPruning [167], Ghost-ResNet-50 [124], Versatile [123], AFP [51], PP Table 16  Pruning AlexNet by 
using various pruning methods 
on ImageNet datasetMethods Param(M) AccTop-1(%) FLOPs(G)
AlexNet [274] 61 57.22 0.72
Han(2015b) 6.9 57.22 -
Han(2015a) 27 57.23 -
Zhang 2.9 - -
Liu 0.3 57.48 -
Guo 3.4 56.91 -
PerforatedCNNs 30.5 57.22 0.28
GDP 61 55.44 0.26
AOFP - 56.17 0.49
Dong 6.8 57.23 -
Table 17  Pruning VGG-16 by 
using various pruning methods 
on ImageNet datasetMethods Param(M) AccTop-1(%) FLOPSs(B)
VGG-16 138 68.5 15.5
Han(2015b) 10.6 68.66 -
Han(2015a) 11.3 68.83 -
Hu 9.2 64.78 4.4
PerforatedCNNs 57.5 - 5.54
PFEC - 53.9 12.4
ThiNet 8.32 67.34 9.34
CP - 66.8 12.4
RNP - 64.92 12.4
GDP 138 65.69 3.79
AOFP 2.04 53.7 -
Slimming - 42.6 7.75
DCP - 65.27 7.75
AMC - 67.1 12.4
CC 8.35 68.81 7.37
OPQ 7.7 71.39 -

==== Page 52 ====
48216 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
[67], Wang [84], CCP [241], CLFI [87], CC [85], OPQ [100], NPPM [89], SRR-GR [55], 
HFP [68], ACTD [19], Greg [32], CLR [98], ResRep [78], LRF [90], DPFPS [57], Group 
fisher [77], GSM [51], RigL [96], TBC [75], SBP-SR-0.8 [97], LAMP [20], and L-Versa-
tile [135]. Some method names are abbreviations adapted from the original author’s title, 
specifically in the references.
At present, the pruning effects of the network pruning methods are relatively bet-
ter. Many methods exhibit precision losses of less than 0.5% and the model sizes can be Table 18  Pruning ResNet-50 by 
using various pruning methods 
on CIFAR10 datasetMethods Param(M) AccTop-1(%) FLOPs(G)
ResNet-50 25.56 72.88 7.72
Han(2015a) 22.26 72.87 -
ThiNet 8.66 68.42 2.2
CP - 73.3 2.0
Lin 5.89 72.26
SFP - 75.1 2.9
GDP - 68.67 1.35
DCP 12.38 71.82 3.41
MetaPruning - 76.2 3.0
Table 19  Pruning ResNet-50 by 
using various pruning methods 
on ImageNet datasetMethods Param(M)AccTop-1( %) FLOPs(B)
ResNet-50 25.5 76.15 4.09
SFP - 74.61 2.38
GDP - 71.19 1.88
C-SGD - 75.54 1.81
AOFP - 75.63 2.58
He et al - 72.3 2.73
DMC - 75.35 1.84
TAS - 76.2 2.31
Hinge - 74.7 1.9
CCP - 75.21 1.88
FPGM - 74.83 1.94
MetaPruning - 69.92 1.03
SRR-GR - 75.76 2.29
Group fisher - 76.42 2.04
Greg 3.26 76.27 -
GSM 2.1 74.3 -
RigL - 74.6 -
ResRep - 76.15 1.86
DPFPS - 75.55 2.2
OPQ 6.59 76.41 -
Han et al - 76.15 -
SBP-SR-0.8 - 69.75 -

==== Page 53 ====
48217 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
reduced by more than 90%, such as the AOFP, SCP, and Lin methods. The model size of 
OPQ method is 7.7 M, and the accuracy reaches 71.39%, which is 2.89% higher than the 
original model. In addition, CC method also performs very well, the model size of CC 
method is 8.35 M, and the accuracy reaches 68.81%, and its FLOPs are reduced by more 
than 50%. It can be seen that the overall effect of combining multiple compression methods 
is better, such as CC method, which combines channel pruning and tensor decomposition, 
and OPQ method, which combines pruning and quantization.Table 20  Pruning ResNet-56 by 
using various pruning methods 
on CIFAR10 datasetMethods Param(M) AccTop-1(%) FLOPs(G)
ResNet-56 0.85 93.57 0.13
NISP-56 0.49 93.01 0.17
PFEC 0.73 93.06 0.094
ThiNet 0.43 92.98 0.065
CP 0.425 91.8 0.065
SFP - 93.35 0.062
AFP-G - 92.94 0.051
KSE 0.38 93.23 0.0624
GAL 0.75 90.36 0.049
PP - 93.09 0.041
C-SGD - 93.44 0.06085
GBN 0.39 93.34 0.052
Slimming 0.425 78.74 0.065
He et al - 90.8 0.062
DCP 0.43 93.59 0.065
Zhao 0.58 92.26 0.1
SCP - 93.23 0.0515
DMC - 93.69 0.065
WM MobileNet 0.43 93.24 0.065
AMC 0.425 91.9 0.065
TAS - 93.69 0.059
Hinge 0.41 93.69 0.065
CCP - 93.42 0.062
FPGM - 93.49 0.062
CLFI - 94.7 0.045
NPPM - 93.4 0.065
SRR-GR - 93.75 0.06
CC 0.44 93.64 0.062
HFP 0.425 93.57 0.057
ACTD - 93.76 0.062
Greg - 93.18 -
CLR - 92.41 -
ResRep - 93.57 0.061
LRF 0.31 93.73 0.049
DPFPS 0.452 93.2 0.61

==== Page 54 ====
48218 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Fig. 26  Pruning ResNet-50 by using various pruning methods on ImageNet dataset
Fig. 27  Pruning VGG-16 by using various pruning methods on CIFAR10 dataset
Fig. 28  Pruning VGG-16 by using various pruning methods on CIFAR100 dataset

==== Page 55 ====
48219 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
5  Discussion and future directions
In this section, the impact of different model compression strategies on the model is ana-
lyzed, and the application scenarios and future development directions of different strategy 
adaptations are discussed.
Despite the advantages and limitations of different model compression techniques, they 
share a common objective of reducing model parameters or computational complexity to 
accelerate inference speed. However, most model compression techniques lead to a decline 
in model accuracy, highlighting the crucial balance between compression and accuracy. 
The effect of network pruning on accuracy depends on pruning strategies and levels, as 
excessive pruning inevitably results in a significant drop in accuracy. The accuracy of light-
weight architecture design relies on specific design choices and requires extensive expert 
experience. Network quantization has made notable progress, such as post-training quanti-
zation and quantization-aware training, which mitigate the impact on accuracy and enable 
compressed models to approach the accuracy level of the original models. NAS falls within 
the domain of automated machine learning and can yield models that achieve a balance 
between accuracy and compression ratio in certain cases, although the search process is 
often time-consuming. KD generally achieves comparable accuracy to that of the teacher 
model, necessitating the selection of an appropriate teacher model along with proper data 
augmentation and model complexity control. Low-rank decomposition requires careful 
selection of decomposition strategies to mitigate the impact and maintain a reasonable 
level of accuracy in the model.
It is worth noting that the exact impact of these techniques may vary depending on spe-
cific implementations, datasets, and application scenarios. Based on the characteristics of 
models compressed by each technique, we discuss the future development directions and 
application scenarios of the six compression methods in Table  21. Models pruned through 
network pruning exhibit fewer parameters, making them suitable for devices with low com-
putational memory and storage capacity. Lightweight architecture design is applicable to 
real-time end-to-end embedded platforms with high time constraints. Network quantiza-
tion is more suitable for devices with high inference speed and low computational mem-
ory requirements. NAS is suitable for mobile devices with specific storage and accuracy 
requirements. KD performs well in scenarios with small or no datasets. Low-rank decom-
position, due to its computationally expensive decomposition operations and the need for 
extensive model training to achieve convergence, is primarily used for compressing fully 
connected layers.
6  Conclusion
The development of lightweight models makes neural networks smaller and more efficient, 
and makes it possible to apply them in a wider range of fields. On the one hand, lightweight 
neural networks help with the application of deep learning systems in virtual reality, aug-
mented reality, smart security and smart wearable devices; on the other hand, the real-time 
performance of lightweight neural networks is of great significance for online learning and 
automatic driving technology.
In this paper, we first introduced the research background of neural network compres-
sion technology. Second, we introduced the current compression strategies and the cor -
responding research work in detail, and then compared their compression effects. Finally, 

==== Page 56 ====
48220 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3Table 21  Discussion and future directions
Methods Future directions Application scenarios
Network Pruning Combine network pruning with other compression methods to 
achieve further compressionDevices with low computing memory sizes and storage capacities
Lightweight Structure Design 1. Consider the combination of lightweight structure design and 
network architecture search
2. Explore more application tasks and scenariosEnd-to-end embedded platforms with high real-time requirements
Network Quantization 1. Improve the expression ability of the network and tap the training 
potential of the network
2. Increase the acceleration research on actual hardware devicesDevices with high inference speeds and low computational memory 
sizes
NAS 1. Apply neural network search methods to semantic segmentation 
and other tasks
2. Increase the research on search spacesMobile devices with specific storage and accuracy requirements
KD 1. Expand to other fields such as object detection
2. Combine the intermediate feature layer and use different forms of 
knowledgeSmall or no datasets
Low-Rank Decomposition Study how to simplify the calculation operations required for decom-
positionFully connected layer compression

==== Page 57 ====
48221 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
Table 22  The advantages and existing problems of six strategies
Methods Advantages Existing problems
Network Pruning Small number of parameters and small loss of precision Needs to retrain and fine-tune the recovery accuracy after pruning sometimes; 
may lead to non-uniform sparsity patterns that can impact hardware accelera-
tion
Lightweight Structure Design Simple to train the network; small network parameters Designing high-performance models requires strong design skills; weak gener -
alization ability
Network Quantization Significantly speeds up bit operations;
small network parametersHigh implementation difficulty and unstable accuracy; needs special compiler 
and hardware support
NAS Excellent performance in device adaptation problems; 
structural hyperparameter tuning instead of manual 
designDifficult to design the search space; Computationally expensive and time-con-
suming; Lack of interpretability
KD Better training effects on small-scale networks High requirements for dataset scale and training time without a pretrained 
teacher model
Low-Rank Decomposition Applied during and after training; reduction in training time Requires many calculations and a larger number of retraining steps (because each 
layer must be readjusted after decomposition)

==== Page 58 ====
48222 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
we summarized the current problems and future research directions of various compression 
strategies.
As shown in Table  22, we have summarized the highlights and existing problems of the 
six strategies. It can be seen that, in general, each method has its own unique advantages. 
If we can combine various methods to develop strengths and avoid weaknesses, we should 
be able to achieve better results. For example, it can be seen that pruning and lightweight 
structure design methods are widely used in the field of object detection. NAS method can 
be used to search for a better lightweight network structure; According to the structural 
characteristics, combining pruning with KD technology and using the original model to 
guide the learning of pruning model can further improve the performance. In addition, the 
use of quantization to complete real-time object detection tasks on hardware devices has 
reached a relatively mature stage. Supporting model transformation tools and platforms are 
the research hotspots of major internet companies for intelligent front-end object detec-
tion devices. Model training acceleration has been given attention. How to incorporate 
hardware performance, and co design with hardware for compression is the trend of model 
compression in object detection.
Through reading this article, readers can attain a more comprehensive and thorough 
understanding of neural network compression technology. We believe that in the future, 
lightweight neural network technology will continue to develop and play an important role 
in the intelligence of our lives.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities 
of the Civil Aviation University of China (Grant No. 3122021088).
Data availability All data analyzed during this study are available in, COCO test-dev2015, VOC 2007, Ima-
geNet ILSVRC 2012, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100, the public datasets. These datasets were derived from the 
following public domain resources:
http:// cocod ataset. org;
https:// pjred die. com/ proje cts/ pascal- voc- datas et- mirror/;
https:// www. image- net. org;
http:// www. cs. toron to. edu/ ~kriz/ cifar. html
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Heo B, Kim J, Yun S, Park H, Kwak N, Choi JY (2019) A comprehensive overhaul of feature distil-
lation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision 2019:1921–
1930. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV. 2019. 00201
 2. Ahn S, Hu SX, Damianou A, Lawrence ND, Dai Z (2019) Variational information distillation for 
knowledge transfer. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 2019:9163–9171. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00938
 3. Gao S, Huang F, Pei J, Huang H (2020) Discrete model compression with resource constraint for deep 
neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Rec-
ognition 2020:1899–1908. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00197

==== Page 59 ====
48223 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 4. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D et al (2015) Going deeper with convolu-
tions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2015:1–
9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2015. 72985 94
 5. Feroz MdA, Sultana M, Hasan MdR, Sarker A, Chakraborty P, Choudhury T (2022) Object detection 
and classification from a real-time video using SSD and YOLO models. In Computational Intelli-
gence in Pattern Recognition, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 1349:37–47. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 981- 16- 2543-5_4
 6. Vulli A, Srinivasu PN, Sashank MSK, Shafi J, Choi J, Ijaz MF (2022) Fine-tuned DenseNet-169 for 
breast cancer metastasis prediction using FastAI and 1-cycle policy. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 
22(8):2988. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ s2208 2988
 7. Basha SM, Ahmed ST, Al-Shammari NK (2022) A study on evaluating the performance of robot 
motion using gradient generalized artificial potential fields with obstacles. In Computational 
Intelligence in Data Mining, Systems and Technologies 281:113–125. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
978- 981- 16- 9447-9_9
 8. Ahmed S, Guptha N, Fathima A, Ashwini S (2021) Multi-view feature clustering technique for detec-
tion and classification of human actions. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on 
Advanced Scientific Innovation in Science, Engineering and Technology, ICASISET. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 4108/ eai. 16-5- 2020. 23040 34
 9. de Aguiar SA, Barros RC (2021) Model compression in object detection. In: Int Joint Conf Neural 
Netw (IJCNN) 2021:1–8.10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ IJCNN 52387. 2021. 95337 92
 10. Cheng Y, Wang D, Zhou P, Tao Z (2017) A survey of model compression and acceleration for deep 
neural networks.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09282. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1710. 09282
 11. Zou Z, Shi Z, Guo Y, Ye J (2019) Object detection in 20 years: a survey. Proceedings of the IEEE 
111:257–276. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ JPROC. 2023. 32385 24
 12. LeCun Y, Denker JS, Solla SA (1990) Optimal brain damage. In: advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems 2:598–605
 13. Han S, Pool J, Tran J, Dally W (2015a) Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural 
network. Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst 1:1135–1143
 14. Han S, Mao H, Dally WJ (2015b). Deep compression: compressing deep neural networks with prun-
ing, trained quantization and huffman coding. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2016. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1510. 00149
 15. Lin Y, Han S, Mao H, Wang Y, Dally WJ (2017) Deep gradient compression: reducing the commu-
nication bandwidth for distributed training. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning 
Representations, 2018. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1712. 01887
 16. Li G, Qian C, Jiang C, Lu X, Tang K (2018) Optimization based layer-wise magnitude-based pruning 
for DNN compression. IJCAI 330:2383–2389
 17. Zhang T, Ye S, Zhang K, Tang J, Wen W, Fardad M, Wang Y (2018) A systematic dnn weight prun-
ing framework using alternating direction method of multipliers. Proceedings of the European Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 11212:191–207. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01237-3_ 12
 18. Chen C, Tung F, Vedula N, Mori G (2018) Constraint-aware deep neural network compression. Pro-
ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 11212:400–415. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01237-3_ 25
 19. Wang W, Chen M, Zhao S, Chen L, Hu J, Liu H, Liu W (2021) ACTD Accelerate cnns from three 
dimensions: a comprehensive pruning framework. International Conference on Machine Learning, 
vol 2021. PMLR, pp 10717–10726
 20. Lee J, Park S, Mo S, Ahn S, Shin J (2020) Layer-adaptive sparsity for the magnitude-based pruning. 
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2010. 
07611
 21. Liu Z, Xu J, Peng X, Xiong R (2018) Frequency-domain dynamic pruning for convolutional neural 
networks. Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems. pp 1051–1061
 22. Carreira-Perpinán MA, Idelbayev Y (2018) “Learning-compression” algorithms for neural net prun-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2018:8532–
8541. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00890
 23. Mallya A, Lazebnik S (2018) Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2018:7765–
7773. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00810
 24. Kwon SJ, Lee D, Kim B, Kapoor P, Park B, Wei GY (2020) Structured compression by weight 
encryption for unstructured pruning and quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference 

==== Page 60 ====
48224 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:1906–1915. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 
2020. 00198
 25. Frankle J, Dziugaite GK, Roy DM, Carbin M (2020) Pruning neural networks at initialization: why 
are we missing the mark? In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 
535:6377–6389. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5555/ 34957 24. 34962 59
 26. Hu H, Peng R, Tai YW, Tang CK (2016). Network trimming: a data-driven neuron pruning approach 
towards efficient deep architectures. arXiv:1607.03250. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 1607. 03250
 27. Guo Y, Yao A, Chen Y (2016) Dynamic network surgery for efficient dnns. Advances in Neural Infor -
mation Processing Systems 29:1387–1395. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1608. 04493
 28. Yu R, Li A, Chen CF, Lai JH, Morariu VI, Han X, Davis LS (2018) Nisp: pruning networks using 
neuron importance score propagation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition. pp 9194–9203. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00958
 29. Huang Z, Wang N (2018) Data-driven sparse structure selection for deep neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) 11220:317–334. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ 978-3- 030- 01270-0_ 19
 30. Molchanov P, Mallya A, Tyree S, Frosio I, Kautz J (2019) Importance estimation for neural net-
work pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition,pp  11264–11272. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 01152
 31. Khakzar A, Baselizadeh S, Khanduja S, Rupprecht C, Kim ST, Navab N (2021) Neural response 
interpretation through the lens of critical pathways. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp 13523-13533. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 
2021. 01332
 32. Wang H, Qin C, Zhang Y, Fu Y (2020) Neural pruning via growing regularization. In International 
Conference on Learning Representations 2021. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2012. 09243
 33. Liu N, Ma X, Xu Z, Wang Y, Tang J, Ye J (2020) AutoCompress An automatic DNN structured prun-
ing framework for ultra-high compression rates. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence 34(04):4876–4883
 34. Ma X, Guo FM, Niu W, Lin X, Tang J, Ma K, Wang Y (2020) Pconv: the missing but desirable spar -
sity in dnn weight pruning for real-time execution on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34(04):5117–5124
 35. Ao R, Tao Z, Yuhao W, Sheng L, Peiyan D, Yen-kuang C,.et al (2020). DARB: a density-adaptive 
regular-block pruning for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence 34(04):5495–5502. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1609/ aaai. v34i04. 6000
 36. Wen W, Wu C, Wang Y, Chen Y, Li H (2016) Learning structured sparsity in deep neural networks. 
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 2082–2090
 37. Zhou H, Alvarez JM, Porikli F (2016) Less is more: Towards compact cnns. European Conference on 
Computer Vision, vol 9908. Springer, Cham, pp 662–677. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 46493-
0_ 40
 38. Alvarez JM, Salzmann M (2016) Learning the number of neurons in deep networks. In Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 2270–2278
 39. Yoon J, Hwang SJ (2017) Combined group and exclusive sparsity for deep neural networks. In Inter -
national Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR) 70:3958–3966
 40. Li H, Kadav A, Durdanovic I, Samet H, Graf HP (2017) Pruning filters for efficient convnets. In: 
ICLR 2017: International conference on learning representations 2017. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ 
arXiv. 1608. 08710
 41. Lebedev V, Lempitsky V (2016) Fast convnets using group-wise brain damage. Proc IEEE Conf 
Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2016:2554–2564. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2016. 280
 42. He Y, Zhang X, Sun J (2017) Channel pruning for accelerating very deep neural networks. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 2017:1398–1406. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1109/ ICCV. 2017. 155
 43. Kingma DP, Salimans T, Welling M (2015) Variational dropout and the local reparameterization 
trick. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) 28:2575–2583
 44. Louizos C, Welling M, Kingma DP (2017) Learning sparse neural networks through L0 regulariza-
tion. arXiv:1712.01312.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1712. 01312
 45. Molchanov D, Ashukha A, Vetrov D (2017) Variational dropout sparsifies deep neural networks. In 
International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR) 70:2498–2507
 46. Neklyudov K, Molchanov D, Ashukha A, Vetrov D (2017) Structured bayesian pruning via log-nor -
mal multiplicative noise. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp 6778–6787

==== Page 61 ====
48225 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 47. Lemaire C, Achkar A, Jodoin PM (2019) Structured pruning of neural networks with budget-aware 
regularization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition 2019:9108–9116. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00932
 48. Louizos C, Ullrich K, Welling M (2017) Bayesian compression for deep learning. In: Proceedings of 
the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 30:3290-3300. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1705. 08665
 49. Molchanov P, Tyree S, Karras T, Aila T, Kautz J (2016) Pruning convolutional neural networks for 
resource efficient inference. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 
2017. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1611. 06440
 50. Lin J, Rao Y, Lu J, Zhou J (2017) Runtime neural pruning. In: Proceedings of the 31st International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 30:2178–2188
 51. Ding X, Ding G, Han J, Tang S (2018) Auto-balanced filter pruning for efficient convolutional neu-
ral networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 32(1):6797–6804. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1609/ aaai. v32i1. 12262
 52. Ding X, Ding G, Zhou X, Guo Y, Han J, Liu J (2019) Global sparse momentum sgd for pruning very 
deep neural networks. Adv Neural Inf Processing Syst 32:8867
 53. Lin S, Ji R, Li Y, Wu Y, Huang F, Zhang B (2018) Accelerating convolutional networks via global & 
dynamic filter pruning. In IJCAI, pp 2425–2432
 54. He Y, Ding Y, Liu P, Zhu L, Zhang H, Yang Y (2020) Learning filter pruning criteria for deep con-
volutional neural networks acceleration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:2009–2018. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00208
 55. Wang Z, Li C, Wang X (2021) Convolutional neural network pruning with structural redundancy 
reduction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion 2021:14913–14922. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 2021. 01467
 56. Tang Y, Wang Y, Xu Y, Deng Y, Xu C, Tao D, Xu C (2021) Manifold regularized dynamic net-
work pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Rec-
ognition 1:5018–5028
 57. Ruan X, Liu Y, Li B, Yuan C, Hu W (2021) DPFPS: dynamic and progressive filter prun-
ing for compressing convolutional neural networks from scratch. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 
35(3):2495–2503
 58. Lin C, Zhong Z, Wu W, Yan J (2018) Synaptic strength for convolutional neural network. Adv 
Neural Inf Processing Syst 2018:10149–10158
 59. Luo JH, Wu J (2020) Neural network pruning with residual-connections and limited-data. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:1458–
1467. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1911. 08114
 60. Tang Y, You S, Xu C, Han J, Qian C, Shi B, Zhang C (2020) Reborn filters: pruning convolutional 
neural networks with limited data. In Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 34(04):5972–5980. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1609/ aaai. v34i04. 6058
 61. Ding X, Ding G, Guo Y, Han J (2019) Centripetal sgd for pruning very deep convolutional net-
works with complicated structure. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:4943–4953. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00508
 62. Liu Z, Sun M, Zhou T, Huang G, Darrell T (2018) Rethinking the value of network pruning. In 
Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2019
 63. Ding X, Ding G, Guo Y, Han J, Yan C (2019) Approximated oracle filter pruning for destructive 
cnn width optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning 1:1607–1616 (PMLR)
 64. He Y, Kang G, Dong X, Fu Y, Yang Y (2018) Soft filter pruning for accelerating deep convo-
lutional neural networks. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2234–
2240. https:// doi. org/ 10. 24963/ ijcai. 2018/ 309
 65. Li Y, Lin S, Zhang B, Liu J, Doermann D, Wu Y, ... Ji R (2019) Exploiting kernel sparsity and 
entropy for interpretable CNN compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:2800–2809. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019.  
00291
 66. Lin S, Ji R, Yan C, Zhang B, Cao L, Ye Q, Doermann D (2019) Towards optimal structured cnn 
pruning via generative adversarial learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:2790–2799. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00290
 67. Singh P, Verma VK, Rai P, Namboodiri VP (2019a) Play and prune: adaptive filter pruning for 
deep model compression. In IJCAI, pp 3460–3466. https:// doi. org/ 10. 24963/ ijcai. 2019/ 480

==== Page 62 ====
48226 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
 68. Enderich L, Timm F, Burgard W (2021) Holistic filter pruning for efficient deep neural networks. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp 
2596–2605. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ WACV4 8630. 2021. 00264
 69. Luo JH, Wu J, Lin W (2017) Thinet: A filter level pruning method for deep neural network com-
pression. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision 2017:5058. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV. 2017. 541
 70. Li T, Wu B, Yang Y, Fan Y, Zhang Y, Liu W (2019) Compressing convolutional neural networks 
via factorized convolutional filters. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:3977–3986. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00410
 71. You Z, Yan K, Ye J, Ma M, Wang P (2019) Gate decorator: global filter pruning method for accel-
erating deep convolutional neural networks. Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst 32(191):2133–2144
 72. He Y, Liu P, Wang Z, Hu Z, Yang Y (2019) Filter pruning via geometric median for deep convo-
lutional neural networks acceleration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:4340–4349. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00447
 73. Figurnov M, Ibraimova A, Vetrov DP, Kohli P (2016) Perforatedcnns: acceleration through elimi-
nation of redundant convolutions. In Adv Neural Inf Processing Syst 29:947–955
 74. Singh P, Verma VK, Rai P, Namboodiri VP (2019b) Hetconv: heterogeneous kernel-based convo-
lutions for deep cnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition 2019:4835–4844. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00497
 75. Wang X, Stella XY (2021) Tied Block Convolution: Leaner and Better CNNs with Shared Thinner 
Filters. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35(11):10227–10235
 76. Liu Z, Li J, Shen Z, Huang G, Yan S, Zhang C (2017) Learning efficient convolutional networks 
through network slimming. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer 
Vision 2017:2736–2744. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV. 2017. 298
 77. Liu L, Zhang S, Kuang Z, Zhou A, Xue JH, Wang X,... Zhang W, (2021) Group fisher pruning for 
practical network compression. In International Conference on Machine Learning 139:7021–7032
 78. Ding X, Hao T, Tan J, Liu J, Han J, Guo Y, Ding G (2021) ResRep: lossless cnn pruning via decou-
pling remembering and forgetting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on 
Computer Vision 2021:4490–4500. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV4 8922. 2021. 00447
 79. Hu Y, Sun S, Li J, Wang X, Gu Q (2018) A novel channel pruning method for deep neural network 
compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11394. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1805. 11394
 80. Zhuang Z, Tan M, Zhuang B, Liu J, Guo Y, Wu Q, Zhu J (2018) Discrimination-aware channel prun-
ing for deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31:883–894.
 81. Peng H, Wu J, Chen S, Huang J (2019) Collaborative channel pruning for deep networks. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning 1:5113–5122 (PMLR)
 82. Zhao C, Ni B, Zhang J, Zhao Q, Zhang W, Tian Q (2019) Variational convolutional neural network 
pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
2019:2775-2784. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00289
 83. Wang Y, Zhang X, Xie L, Zhou J, Su H, Zhang B, Hu X (2020a) Pruning from scratch. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34(07):12273–12280
 84. Wang Y, Zhang X, Hu X, Zhang B, Su H (2020b) Dynamic Network Pruning with Interpretable Lay -
erwise Channel Selection. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 34(04):6299–6306
 85. Li Y, Lin S, Liu J, Ye Q, Wang M, Chao F,... Ji R (2021) Towards compact cnns via collaborative 
compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion 2021:6434–6443. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 2021. 00637
 86. Kang M, Han B (2020) Operation-aware soft channel pruning using differentiable masks. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning 119:5122–5131
 87. Guo J, Ouyang W, Xu D (2020) Channel pruning guided by classification loss and feature impor -
tance. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 34(07):10885–10892
 88. Guo J, Ouyang W, Xu D (2020b) Multi-dimensional pruning: a unified framework for model com-
pression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
2020:1505–1514. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00158
 89. Gao S, Huang F, Cai W, Huang H (2021) Network pruning via performance maximization. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2021:9266–
9276. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 2021. 00915
 90. Joo D, Yi E, Baek S, Kim J (2021) Linearly Replaceable Filters for Deep Network Channel Pruning. 
Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35(9):8021–8029

==== Page 63 ====
48227 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 91. Hou Z, Qin M, Sun F, Ma X, Yuan K, Xu Y, Chen Y-K, Jin R, Xie Y, Kung S-Y, (2022) CHEX: chan-
nel exploration for cnn model compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2022:12277–12288. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR5 2688. 2022. 01197
 92. Poliakov E et al (2022) Model compression via structural pruning and feature distillation for accurate 
multi-spectral object detection on edge-devices. 2022 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia 
and Expo (ICME). pp 1–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICME5 2920. 2022. 98599 94
 93. Dong X, Chen S, Pan SJ (2017) Learning to prune deep neural networks via layer-wise optimal brain 
surgeon. Adv Neural Inf Processing Syst 30:4857–4867.
 94. Yang TJ, Chen YH, Sze V (2017) Designing energy-efficient convolutional neural networks using 
energy-aware pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Rec-
ognition 2017:6071–6079. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2017. 643
 95. Yang TJ, Howard A, Chen B, Zhang X, Go A, Sandler M, Adam H (2018) Netadapt: platform-aware 
neural network adaptation for mobile applications. In Proceedings of the European Conference on 
Computer Vision (ECCV) 11214:289–304. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01249-6_ 18
 96. Evci U, Gale T, Menick J, Castro PS, Elsen E (2020) Rigging the lottery: making all tickets winners. 
In International Conference on Machine Learning 119(276):2943–2952
 97. Hayou S, Ton JF, Doucet A, Teh YW (2020) Robust pruning at initialization. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2002.08797. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2002. 08797
 98. Le DH, Hua BS (2020) Network pruning that matters: a case study on retraining variants. arXiv pre-
print arXiv:2105.03193. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2105. 03193
 99. Liu S, Chen T, Chen X, Shen Li, Mocanu D, Wang Z, Pechenizkiy M (2022) The unreasonable 
effectiveness of random pruning: return of the most naive baseline for sparse training. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2202.02643.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2202. 02643
 100. Hu P, Peng X, Zhu H, Aly MMS, Lin J (2021) OPQ: compressing deep neural networks with one-shot 
pruning-quantization. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI-21), Vancouver, VN, Canada 35(9):7780–7788
 101. Tiwari R, Bamba U, Chavan A, Gupta D (2020) ChipNet: Budget-aware pruning with heaviside con-
tinuous approximations. In International Conference on Learning Representations 2021. arXiv pre-
print  arXiv:2102.07156. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2102. 07156
 102. Chang X, Li Y, Oymak S, Thrampoulidis C (2021) Provable Benefits of Overparameterization in 
Model Compression: From Double Descent to Pruning Neural Networks. Proc AAAI Conf Artif 
Intell 35(8):6974–6983
 103. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D,... Rabinovich A, (2015) Going deeper 
with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion 2015:1–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2015. 72985 94
 104. Ioffe S, Szegedy C (2015) Batch normalization: accelerating deep network training by reducing 
internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning 37:448–456
 105. Szegedy C, Vanhoucke V, Ioffe S, Shlens J, Wojna Z (2016) Rethinking the inception architecture 
for computer vision. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2016:2818–2826. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2016. 308
 106. Chollet F (2017) Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In Proc IEEE 
Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2017:1800–1807. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2017. 195
 107. Howard AG, Zhu M, Chen B, Kalenichenko D, Wang W, Weyand T,... Adam H (2017) Mobilen-
ets: efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1704.04861. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1704. 04861
 108. Sandler M, Howard A, Zhu M, Zhmoginov A, Chen LC (2018) Mobilenetv 2: inverted residuals 
and linear bottlenecks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:4510–4520. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00474
 109. Yu G, Chang Q, Lv W, Xu C, Cui C, Ji W,... Ma Y (2021) PP-PicoDet: a better real-time object 
detector on mobile devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00902. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv.  
2111. 00902
 110. Tan M, Le QV (2019b) Mixconv: mixed depthwise convolutional kernels. In British Machine 
Vision Conference (BMVC), 33(116):1–13. https:// dx. doi. org/ 10. 5244/C. 33. 116
 111. Mehta S, Rastegari M, Shapiro L, Hajishirzi H (2019) Espnetv2: a light-weight, power efficient, 
and general purpose convolutional neural network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:9182–9192. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR.  
2019. 00941

==== Page 64 ====
48228 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
 112. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proc IEEE 
Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2016:770–778. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2016. 90
 113. Xie S, Girshick R, Dollár P, Tu Z, He K (2017) Aggregated residual transformations for deep neu-
ral networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2017:5987–5995. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1109/ CVPR. 2017. 634
 114. Huang G, Liu Z, Van Der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ (2017) Densely connected convolutional net-
works. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2017:2261–2269. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/  
CVPR. 2017. 243
 115. Huang G, Liu S, Van der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ (2018) Condensenet: An efficient densenet 
using learned group convolutions. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:2752–
2761. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00291
 116. Zhang T, Qi GJ, Xiao B, Wang J (2017) Interleaved group convolutions. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE international conference on computer vision 2017:4383–4392. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/  
ICCV. 2017. 469
 117. Xie G, Wang J, Zhang T, Lai J, Hong R, Qi GJ (2018) Interleaved structured sparse convolutional 
neural networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:8847–8856. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00922
 118. Sun K, Li M, Liu D, Wang J (2018) Igcv3: interleaved low-rank group convolutions for efficient 
deep neural networks. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC). https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/  
arXiv. 1806. 00178
 119. Zhang X, Zhou X, Lin M, Sun J (2018) Shufflenet: an extremely efficient convolutional neural 
network for mobile devices. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:6848–6856. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00922
 120. Ma N, Zhang X, Zheng HT, Sun J (2018) Shufflenet v2: practical guidelines for efficient cnn archi-
tecture design. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) 11218: 
122–138. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01264-9_8
 121. Qin Z, Li Z, Zhang Z, Bao Y, Yu G, Peng Y, Sun J (2019) Thundernet: towards real-time generic 
object detection on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on 
Computer Vision 2019:6717–6726. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV. 2019. 00682
 122. Mehta S, Rastegari M, Caspi A, Shapiro L, Hajishirzi H (2018) Espnet: efficient spatial pyramid 
of dilated convolutions for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the european conference on 
computer vision (ECCV) 11214:561–580. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01249-6_ 34
 123. Wang Y, Xu C, Xu C, Xu C, Tao D (2018) Learning versatile filters for efficient convolutional 
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31:1608–1618
 124. Han K, Wang Y, Tian Q, Guo J, Xu C, Xu C (2020) Ghostnet: More features from cheap opera-
tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
1580–1589
 125. Iandola FN, Han S, Moskewicz MW, Ashraf K, Dally WJ, Keutzer K (2016). SqueezeNet: 
AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and< 0.5 MB model size.  arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1602.07360.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1602. 07360
 126. Gholami A, Kwon K, Wu B, Tai Z, Yue X, Jin P, Keutzer K (2018). Squeezenext: hardware-aware 
neural network design. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Rec-
ognition Workshops, pp 1638–1647. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPRW. 2018. 00215
 127. Wu B, Iandola F, Jin PH, Keutzer K (2017) Squeezedet: unified, small, low power fully convolutional 
neural networks for real-time object detection for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,  pp 446–454. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1109/ CVPRW. 2017. 60
 128. Gao H, Wang Z, Ji S (2018) Channelnets: compact and efficient convolutional neural networks via 
channel-wise convolutions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 43(8):2570–2581. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TPAMI. 2020. 29757 96
 129. Hu J, Shen L, Sun G (2018) Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pat-
tern Recognit 42(8):2011–2023. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TPAMI. 2019. 29133 72
 130. Yu C, Xiao B, Gao C, Yuan L, Zhang L, Sang N, Wang J (2021) Lite-hrnet: a lightweight high-
resolution network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 2021:10435–10445. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 2021. 01030
 131. Wang J, Sun K, Cheng T, Jiang B, Deng C, Zhao Y,... Xiao B, (2020) Deep high-resolution repre-
sentation learning for visual recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 43(10):3349–3364. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TPAMI. 2020. 29836 86

==== Page 65 ====
48229 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 132. Wang RJ, Li X, Ling CX (2018) Pelee: a real-time object detection system on mobile devices. In Adv 
Neural Inf Proces Syst 43(10):3349–3364. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TPAMI. 2020. 29836 86
 133. Zhou D, Hou Q, Chen Y, Feng J, Yan S (2020) Rethinking bottleneck structure for efficient mobile 
network design. European Conference on Computer Vision 12348:680–697. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
978-3- 030- 58580-8_ 40
 134. Zhou Q, Wang J, Liu J, Li S, Ou W, Jin X (2021) RSANet: towards real-time object detection with 
residual semantic-guided attention feature pyramid network. Mobile Networks and Applications 
26(1):77–87
 135. Han K, Wang Y, Xu C, Xu C, Wu E, Tao D (2021) Learning versatile convolution filters for efficient 
visual recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
 136. Howard A, Sandler M, Chu G, Chen LC, Chen B, Tan M,... Adam H (2019). Searching for mobile-
netv3. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision 2019:1314–
1324. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV. 2019. 00140
 137. Tan M, Chen B, Pang R, Vasudevan V, Sandler M, Howard A, Le QV (2019) Mnasnet: platform-
aware neural architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition  2018:2815–2823. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00293
 138. Wu B, Wan A, Yue X, Jin P, Zhao S, Golmant N,... Keutzer K, (2018) Shift: A zero flop, zero param-
eter alternative to spatial convolutions. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2017:9127–
9135. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00951
 139. Yan Z, Li X, Li M, Zuo W, Shan S (2018) Shift-net: image inpainting via deep feature rearrangement. 
In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) 11218:3–19. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01264-9_1
 140. Chen W, Xie D, Zhang Y, Pu S (2019) All you need is a few shifts: designing efficient convolutional 
neural networks for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:7234–7243. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00741
 141. Chen H, Wang Y, Xu C, Shi B, Xu C, Tian Q, Xu C (2020) AdderNet: do we really need multiplica-
tions in deep learning? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 2019:1465–1474. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00154
 142. Elhoushi M, Chen Z, Shafiq F, Tian YH, Li JY (2019) Deepshift: towards multiplication-less neural 
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,  
pp 2359–2368. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPRW 53098. 2021. 00268
 143. You H, Chen X, Zhang Y, Li C, Li S, Liu Z,... Lin Y (2020) Shiftaddnet: a hardware-inspired deep 
network. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS’20) 233:2771–2783.
 144. Redmon J, Divvala S, Girshick R, Farhadi A (2016) You only look once: unified, real-time object 
detection. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2015:779–788. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ 
CVPR. 2016. 91
 145. Redmon J, Farhadi A (2017) YOLO9000: better, faster, stronger. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pat-
tern Recognit 2016:6517–6525. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2017. 690
 146. Redmon J, Farhadi A (2018) Yolov3: an incremental improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1804. 02767
 147. Bochkovskiy A, Wang CY, Liao HYM (2020) Yolov4: optimal speed and accuracy of object detec-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10934. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2004. 10934
 148. Huang R, Pedoeem J, Chen C (2018) YOLO-LITE: a real-time object detection algorithm optimized 
for non-GPU computers. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp 2503–
2510. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ BigDa ta. 2018. 86218 65
 149. Wong A, Famuori M, Shafiee MJ, Li F, Chwyl B, Chung J (2019) Yolo nano: a highly compact you 
only look once convolutional neural network for object detection.  2019 Fifth Workshop on Energy 
Efficient Machine Learning and Cognitive Computing - NeurIPS Edition (EMC2-NIPS), pp 22–25. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ EMC2- NIPS5 3020. 2019. 00013
 150. Barry D, Shah M, Keijsers M, Khan H, Hopman B (2019). XYOLO: a model for real-time object 
detection in humanoid soccer on low-end hardware. In 2019 International Conference on Image and 
Vision Computing New Zealand (IVCNZ), pp 1–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ IVCNZ 48456. 2019. 89609 
63
 151. Qiuqiu D (2020) Yolo-fastest: yolo universal object detection model combined with efficientnet-lite. 
https:// github. com/ dog- qiuqiu/ Yolo- Faste st
 152. Wang CY, Bochkovskiy A, Liao HYM (2020) Scaled-YOLOv4: Scaling cross stage partial network. 
In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2021:13024–
13033. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 6437. 2021. 01283

==== Page 66 ====
48230 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
 153. Cai Y, Li H, Yuan G, Niu W, Li Y, Tang X et al (2021) YOLObile: real-time object detection on 
mobile devices via compression-compilation co-design. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence 35(2):955–963. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1609/ aaai. v35i2. 16179
 154. Biswas, Debojyoti et al. (2022) Improving the energy efficiency of real-time DNN object detection 
via compression, transfer learning, and scale prediction. 2022 IEEE International Conference on Net-
working, Architecture and Storage (NAS), pp. 1–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ NAS55 553. 2022. 99255 28
 155. Wang X, Yu F, Dou ZY, Darrell T, Gonzalez JE (2018) Skipnet: learning dynamic routing in con-
volutional networks. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 
11217:420–436. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01261-8_ 25
 156. Tan M, Le Q (2019) Efficientnet: rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. In 
International Conference on Machine Learning 97:6105–6114
 157. Tan M, Pang R, Le QV (2020) Efficientdet: scalable and efficient object detection. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition 2020:10781–10790. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 01079
 158. Choi K, Lee H, Hong D, Yu J, Park N, Kim Y, Lee J (2022) It’s all in the teacher: zero-shot quantiza-
tion brought closer to the teacher. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition 2022:8301–8311. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR5 2688. 2022. 00813
 159. Zhong Y, Lin M, Nan G, Liu J, Zhang B, Tian Y, Ji R (2021) IntraQ: learning synthetic images with 
intra-class heterogeneity for zero-shot network quantization. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2022:12329–12338
 160. Baker B, Gupta O, Naik N, Raskar R (2016) Designing neural network architectures using reinforce-
ment learning. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2017. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1611. 02167
 161. Zoph B, Vasudevan V, Shlens J, Le Q (2017) Learning transferable architectures for scalable image 
recognition. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2018:8697–8710
 162. Zhong Z, Yan J, Wu W, Shao J, Liu CL (2018) Practical block-wise neural network architecture gen-
eration. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:2423–2432
 163. Cai H, Yang J, Zhang W, Han S, Yu Y (2018) Path-level network transformation for efficient architec-
ture search. In International Conference on Machine Learning 80:678–687
 164. Cai H, Chen T, Zhang W, Yu Y, Wang J (2018) Efficient architecture search by network transforma-
tion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 32(1):2787–794
 165. He Y, Lin J, Liu Z, Wang H, Li LJ, Han S (2018) Amc: automl for model compression and accel-
eration on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 
11211:815–832. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01234-2_ 48
 166. Wong C, Houlsby N, Lu Y, Gesmundo A (2018) Transfer learning with neural automl. In Adv Neural 
Inf Proces Syst 31:8366–8375
 167. Liu Z, Mu H, Zhang X, Guo Z, Yang X, Cheng KT, Sun J (2019) Metapruning: meta learning for 
automatic neural network channel pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference 
on Computer Vision 2019:3296–3305
 168. Real E, Moore S, Selle A, Saxena S, Suematsu YL, Tan J et al (2017) Large-scale evolution of image 
classifiers. In International Conference on Machine Learning 70:2902–2911
 169. Real E, Aggarwal A, Huang Y, Le QV (2019) Regularized evolution for image classifier architecture 
search. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence 33(01):4780–4789
 170. Liu H, Simonyan K, Vinyals O, Fernando C, Kavukcuoglu K (2017) Hierarchical representations for 
efficient architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00436, 2017.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 
1711. 00436
 171. Guo Z, Zhang X, Mu H, Heng W, Liu Z, Wei Y, Sun J (2020) Single path one-shot neural architecture 
search with uniform sampling. In European Conference on Computer Vision 12361:544–560. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 58517-4_ 32
 172. Veniat T, Denoyer L (2018) Learning time/memory-efficient deep architectures with budgeted super 
networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2019:3492–3500
 173. Wu B, Dai X, Zhang P, Wang Y, Sun F, Wu Y, Keutzer K (2019) Fbnet: hardware-aware efficient con-
vnet design via differentiable neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:10734–10742
 174. Wan A, Dai X, Zhang P, He Z, Tian Y, Xie S, Gonzalez JE (2020) Fbnetv2: differentiable neural 
architecture search for spatial and channel dimensions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer -
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:12965–12974

==== Page 67 ====
48231 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 175. Dai X, Wan A, Zhang P, Wu B, He Z, Wei Z, Gonzalez JE (2020) FBNetV3: joint architecture-
recipe search using neural acquisition function. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2021:16271–16280
 176. Liu H, Simonyan K, Yang Y (2018) Darts: differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1806.09055. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1806. 09055
 177. Liu C, Zoph B, Neumann M, Shlens J, Hua W, Li LJ, et al (2018) Progressive neural architecture 
search. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV)  11205:19–35.  
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01246-5_2
 178. Gordon A, Eban E, Nachum O, Chen B, Wu H, Yang TJ, Choi E (2018) Morphnet: fast & simple 
resource-constrained structure learning of deep networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern 
Recognit 2018:1586–1595. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00171
 179. Pham H, Guan M, Zoph B, Le Q, Dean J (2018) Efficient neural architecture search via parameters 
sharing. In International Conference on Machine Learning 80:4095–4104
 180. Xiong Y, Liu H, Gupta S, Akin B, Bender G, Wang Y, et al (2021). Mobiledets: searching for 
object detection architectures for mobile accelerators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer -
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2021:3825–3834.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/  
CVPR4 6437. 2021. 00382
 181. Cai H, Zhu L, Han S (2018) Proxylessnas: direct neural architecture search on target task and 
hardware. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2019. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1812. 00332
 182. Yu J, Yang L, Xu N, Yang J, Huang T (2018) Slimmable neural networks. In Proceedings of Inter -
national Conference on Learning Representations 2019. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1812.  
08928
 183. Elsken T, Metzen JH, Hutter F (2017) Simple and efficient architecture search for convolutional 
neural networks. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2018.  
https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1711. 04528
 184. Chen B, Li P, Li B, Lin C, Li C, Sun M, et al (2021). Bn-nas: neural architecture search with batch 
normalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision 
2021:307–316. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV4 8922. 2021. 00037
 185. Chen M, Peng H, Fu J, Ling H (2021). Autoformer: searching transformers for visual recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision 2021:12270–
12280. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICCV4 8922. 2021. 01205
 186. Dong X, Yang Y (2019) Network pruning via transformable architecture search. In Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems
 187. Li X, Zhou Y, Pan Z, Feng J (2019) Partial order pruning: for best speed/accuracy trade-off in 
neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition 2019:9145–9153. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00936
 188. Cai H, Gan C, Wang T, Zhang Z, Han S (2019) Once-for-all: train one network and specialize it 
for efficient deployment. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 
2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1908. 09791
 189. Wang T, Wang K, Cai H, Lin J, Liu Z, Wang H, ... Han S (2020). Apq: joint search for network 
architecture, pruning and quantization policy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:2075–2084. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600.  
2020. 00215
 190. Lin J, Chen WM, Lin Y, Cohn J, Gan C, Han S (2020) Mcunet: tiny deep learning on iot devices. 
In Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst 33:11711–11722
 191. Chen H, Zhang B, Zheng X, Liu J, Ji R, Doermann D, Guo G (2021) Binarized neural architecture 
search for efficient object recognition. Int J Comput Vision 129(2):501–516
 192. Zhuo LA, Zhang B, Chen H, Yang L, Chen C, Zhu Y, Doermann D (2020) CP-NAS: child-parent 
neural architecture search for binary neural networks. In IJCAI 144:1033–1039. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
24963/ ijcai. 2020/ 144
 193. Yan B, Peng H, Wu K, Wang D, Fu J, Lu H (2021) LightTrack: finding lightweight neural net-
works for object tracking via one-shot architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2021:15175–15184. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/  
CVPR4 6437. 2021. 01493
 194. Courbariaux M, Bengio Y, David JP (2015) Binaryconnect: training deep neural networks with 
binary weights during propagations. In Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst 28:3123–3131

==== Page 68 ====
48232 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
 195. Hubara I, Courbariaux M, Soudry D, El-Yaniv R, Bengio Y (2016) Binarized neural networks. 
In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 
29:4114–4122
 196. Rastegari M, Ordonez V, Redmon J, Farhadi A (2016) Xnor-net: imagenet classification using binary 
convolutional neural networks. In European conference on computer vision  9908:525–542. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 46493-0_ 32
 197. Lin X, Zhao C, Pan W (2017). Towards accurate binary convolutional neural network. In Proceed-
ings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 30:344–352
 198. Hou L, Yao Q, Kwok JT (2016) Loss-aware binarization of deep networks. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Learning Representations 2017. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1611.  
01600
 199. Liu Z, Wu B, Luo W, Yang X, Liu W, Cheng KT (2018) Bi-real net: enhancing the performance of 
1-bit cnns with improved representational capability and advanced training algorithm. In Proceedings 
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 11219:722–737. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
978-3- 030- 01267-0_ 44
 200. Hu Q, Wang P, Cheng J (2018) From hashing to cnns: training binary weight networks via hashing. In 
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 32(1):3247–3254
 201. Diffenderfer J, Kailkhura B (2020) Multi-prize lottery ticket hypothesis: finding accurate binary neu-
ral networks by pruning a randomly weighted network. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations 2021.arXiv preprint arXiv: 2103.09377. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2103. 09377
 202. Umuroglu Y, Fraser NJ, Gambardella G, Blott M, Leong P, Jahre M, Vissers K (2017) Finn: a framework 
for fast, scalable binarized neural network inference. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA International 
Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, pp 65-74. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 30200 78. 30217 44
 203. Zhu S, Dong X, Su H (2019) Binary ensemble neural network: more bits per network or more net-
works per bit? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition 2019:4918-4927. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00506
 204. Wang Z, Lu J, Tao C, Zhou J, Tian Q (2019) Learning channel-wise interactions for binary convolu-
tional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 43(10):3432-3445. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TPAMI. 2020. 29882 62
 205. Liu C, Ding W, Xia X, Zhang B, Gu J, Liu J,... Doermann D (2019). Circulant binary convolutional 
networks: enhancing the performance of 1-bit dcnns with circulant back propagation. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019:2691–2699. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00280
 206. Ding R, Chin TW, Liu Z, Marculescu D (2019) Regularizing activation distribution for training bina-
rized deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 2019:11408–11417. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 01167
 207. Zhu C, Han S, Mao H, Dally WJ (2016) Trained ternary quantization.  arXiv preprint  
arXiv:1612.01064. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1612. 01064
 208. Li F, Zhang B, Liu B (2016) Ternary weight networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04711. https:// 
arxiv. org/ abs/ 1605. 04711
 209. Li Y, Ding W, Liu C, Zhang B, Guo G (2021) TRQ: ternary neural networks with residual quantiza-
tion. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35(10):8538–8546
 210. Wu J, Leng C, Wang Y, Hu Q, Cheng J (2016) Quantized convolutional neural networks for mobile 
devices. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2016:4820–4828
 211. Wu J, Wang Y, Wu Z, Wang Z, Veeraraghavan A, Lin Y (2018) Deep k-means: re-training and param-
eter sharing with harder cluster assignments for compressing deep convolutions. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning 80:5363–5372
 212. Xu Y, Wang Y, Zhou A, Lin W, Xiong H (2018) Deep neural network compression with single 
and multiple level quantization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
32(1):335–442
 213. Zhou S, Wu Y, Ni Z, Zhou X, Wen H, Zou Y (2016) Dorefa-net: training low bitwidth convolutional 
neural networks with low bitwidth gradients. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06160. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 
1606. 06160
 214. Jacob B, Kligys S, Chen B, Zhu M, Tang M, Howard A,... Kalenichenko D, (2018) Quantization and 
training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput 
Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:2704–2713
 215. Zhan D, Yang J, Ye D, Hua G (2018) Lq-nets: Learned quantization for highly accurate and com-
pact deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 
2018:365–382

==== Page 69 ====
48233 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 216. Faraone J, Fraser N, Blott M, Leong PH (2018) Syq: Learning symmetric quantization for efficient 
deep neural networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:4300–4309
 217. Wang P, Hu Q, Zhang Y, Zhang C, Liu Y, Cheng J (2018) Two-step quantization for low-bit neural 
networks. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2018:4376–4384
 218. Qin H, Gong R, Liu X, Shen M, Wei Z, Yu F, Song J (2020) Forward and backward information 
retention for accurate binary neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020:2250–2259
 219. Leng C, Dou Z, Li H, Zhu S, Jin R (2018) Extremely low bit neural network: Squeeze the last bit out 
with admm.  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 32(1):466–3473
 220. Hubara I, Courbariaux M, Soudry D, El-Yaniv R, Bengio Y (2017) Quantized neural networks: 
training neural networks with low precision weights and activations. J Machine Learning Res 
18(1):6869–6898
 221. Liu X, Ye M, Zhou D, Liu Q (2021) Post-training quantization with multiple points: mixed precision 
without mixed precision. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35(10):8697–8705
 222. Kim D, Lee J, Ham B (2021) Distance-aware quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter -
national Conference on Computer Vision. 2021:5271–5280
 223. Wang K, Liu Z, Lin Y, Lin J, Han S (2019) Haq: Hardware-aware automated quantization with 
mixed precision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition 2019:8612–8620
 224. Yang H, Gui S, Zhu Y, Liu J (2020) Automatic neural network compression by sparsity-quantiza-
tion joint learning: A constrained optimization-based approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:2178–2188
 225. Bulat A, Martinez B, Tzimiropoulos G (2020) Bats: binary architecture search. In European Con-
ference on Computer Vision 12368:309–325
 226. Kim D, Singh KP, Choi J (2020) Learning architectures for binary networks. In European confer -
ence on computer vision. 12357:575–591
 227. Boo Y, Shin S, Choi J, Sung W (2021) Stochastic precision ensemble: self-knowledge distillation 
for quantized deep neural networks. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35(8):6794–6802
 228. Zhao C, Gao X (2021) QDNN: deep neural networks with quantum layers. Quantum Machine 
Intell 3:1–9
 229. Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J (2015) Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In: Proc Adv 
Neural Inf Processing Syst Workshop 27:2014
 230. Zhang Y, Xiang T, Hospedales TM, Lu H (2018) Deep mutual learning. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018:4320–4328
 231. Kim J, Park S, Kwak N (2018) Paraphrasing complex network: network compression via factor 
transfer. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2018:2765–2774
 232. Zhao B, Cui Q, Song R, Qiu Y, Liang J (2022) Decoupled knowledge distillation. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2022:11953–11962
 233. Romero A, Ballas N, Kahou SE, Chassang A, Gatta C, Bengio Y (2014) Fitnets: hints for thin 
deep nets. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2015. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1412. 6550
 234. Komodakis N, Zagoruyko S (2017) Paying more attention to attention: improving the performance 
of convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. In ICLR
 235. Huang Z, Wang N (2018) Like what you like: knowledge distill via neuron selectivity transfer. In 
Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations 2019.  https:// doi. org/ 10.  
48550/ arXiv. 1707. 01219
 236. Tung F, Mori G (2019) Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/
CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2019:1365–1374
 237. Yang J, Martinez B, Bulat A, Tzimiropoulos G (2020) Knowledge distillation via adaptive instance 
normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04289. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2003. 04289
 238. Yim J, Joo D, Bae J, Kim J (2017) A gift from knowledge distillation: fast optimization, network 
minimization and transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision 
and Pattern Recognition. 2017:4133–4141.
 239. You S, Xu C, Xu C, Tao D (2017) Learning from multiple teacher networks. In Proceedings of 
the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 
2017:1285–1294
 240. Anil R, Pereyra G, Passos A, Ormandi R, Dahl GE, Hinton GE (2018). Large scale distributed 
neural network training through online distillation. In Proceedings of International Conference on 
Learning Representations 2018. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1804. 03235

==== Page 70 ====
48234 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
 241. Peng B, Jin X, Liu J, Li D, Wu Y, Liu Y, ... Zhang Z (2019) Correlation congruence for knowl-
edge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 
2019:5007–5016
 242. Park W, Kim D, Lu Y, Cho M (2019) Relational knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2019:3967–3976
 243. Liu Y, Cao J, Li B, Yuan C, Hu W, Li Y, Duan Y (2019) Knowledge distillation via instance 
relationship graph. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. 2019:7096–7104
 244. Tian Y, Krishnan D, Isola P (2019) Contrastive representation distillation. In Proceedings of Inter -
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 1910. 10699
 245. Zhou S, Wang Y, Chen D, Chen J, Wang X, Wang C, Bu J (2021) Distilling holistic knowledge 
with graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision. 2021:10387–10396
 246. Gupta S, Hoffman J, Malik J (2016) Cross modal distillation for supervision transfer. In Proc IEEE 
Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2016:2827–2836. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2016. 309
 247. Li Q, Jin S, Yan J (2017) Mimicking very efficient network for object detection. In Proceedings of 
the ieee conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017:6356–6364
 248. Ko Jong-gook, Yoo Wonyoung (2020) Knowledge distillation based compact model learning method 
for object detection. International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Con-
vergence (ICTC) 2020:1276–1278
 249. Chen G, Choi W, Yu X, Han T, Chandraker M (2017) Learning efficient object detection models with 
knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information 
Processing Systems 2020(30):742–51
 250. Wang T, Yuan L, Zhang X, Feng J (2019) Distilling object detectors with fine-grained feature imi-
tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
2019:4933–4942
 251. Chen H, Guo T, Xu C, Li W, Xu C, Xu C, Wang Y (2021) Learning student networks in the wild. 
2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2021:6424–6433
 252. Mirzadeh SI, Farajtabar M, Li A, Levine N, Matsukawa A, Ghasemzadeh H (2020) Improved knowl-
edge distillation via teacher assistant. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 34(04):5191–5198
 253. Gao M, Shen Y, Li Q, Loy CC (2020) Residual Knowledge Distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2002.09168. 
https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2002. 09168
 254. Denil M, Shakibi B, Dinh L, Ranzato M, de Freitas N (2013) Predicting parameters in deep learning. 
Adv Neural Inf Processing Syst. Lake Tahoe 26:2148–2156
 255. Lebedev V, Ganin Y, Rakhuba M, Oseledets I, Lempitsky V (2015). Speeding-up convolutional neu-
ral networks using fine-tuned cp-decomposition. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1412. 6553
 256. Denton EL, Zaremba W, Bruna J, LeCun Y, Fergus R (2014) Exploiting linear structure within convo-
lutional networks for efficient evaluation. Neural information processing systems foundation (NIPS). 
2014: 1269–1277
 257. Jaderberg M, Vedaldi A, Zisserman (2014) Speeding up Convolutional Neural Networks with Low 
Rank Expansions. In British Machine Vision Conference. 2014: 1–13
 258. Kim Y, Park E, Yoo S, Choi T, Yang L, Shin D (2015) Compression of deep convolutional neural 
networks for fast and low power mobile applications. CoRR. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 1511. 06530
 259. Zhang X, Zou J, He K, Sun J (2015) Accelerating very deep convolutional networks for classification 
and detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 38(10):1943–1955
 260. Novikov A, Podoprikhin D, Osokin A, Vetrov D (2015) Tensorizing neural networks. In Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems. 28:442–450
 261. Liu B, Wang M, Foroosh H, Tappen MF, Pensky M (2015) Sparse convolutional neural networks. 
2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2015:806–814
 262. Tai C, Xiao T, Zhang Y, Wang X (2015) Convolutional neural networks with low-rank regularization. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06067. https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 1511. 06067
 263. Yu X, Liu T, Wang X, Tao D (2017) On compressing deep models by low rank and sparse decomposition. 
Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 2017:7370–7379. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2017. 15
 264. Peng B, Tan W, Li Z, Zhang S, Xie D, Pu S (2018) Extreme network compression via filter group 
approximation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 11212:300–
316. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 01237-3_ 19
 265. Ye J, Wang L, Li G, Chen D, Zhe S, Chu X, Xu Z (2018) Learning compact recurrent neural networks 
with block-term tensor decomposition. In Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 9378–9387. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00977

==== Page 71 ====
48235 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236 
1 3
 266. Wang W, Sun Y, Eriksson B, Wang W, Aggarwal V (2018) Wide compression: tensor ring nets. In 
Proc IEEE Conf Comput Vis Pattern Recognit 9329–9338. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2018. 00972
 267. Kossaifi J, Bulat A, Tzimiropoulos G, Pantic M (2019) T-net: parametrizing fully convolutional nets 
with a single high-order tensor. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition 2019:7822–7831. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR. 2019. 00801
 268. Idelbayev Y, Carreira-Perpinán MA (2020) Low-rank compression of neural nets: learning the rank of 
each layer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
2020:8046–8056. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00807
 269. Liao S, Yuan B (2019) CircConv: a structured Convolution with low complexity. In Proc AAAI Conf 
Artif Intell 33(01):4287–4294
 270. Li Y, Gu S, Mayer C, Gool LV, Timofte R (2020) Group sparsity: the hinge between filter pruning and 
decomposition for network compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2020:8015–8024. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CVPR4 2600. 2020. 00804
 271. Swaminathan S, Garg D, Kannan R, Andres F (2020) Sparse low rank factorization for deep neural 
network compression. Neurocomputing 398:185–196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neucom. 2020. 02. 035
 272. Hawkins C, Yang H, Li M, Lai L, Chandra V (2021) Low-rank+sparse tensor compression for neural 
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01697.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2111. 01697
 273. Liu W, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Szegedy C, Reed S, Fu CY, Berg AC (2016). Ssd: single shot multibox 
detector. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2016 9905:21–37.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 46448-0_2
 274. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural 
networks. In Adv Neural Inf Proces Syst 60(6):84–90
 275. Szegedy C, Ioffe S, Vanhoucke V, Alemi A (2017) Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of 
residual connections on learning. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 31(1):4278–4284
 276. Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recogni-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1409. 1556
 277. Zhang T, Qi G, Xiao B, Wang J (2017) Interleaved Group Convolutions for Deep Neural Networks.
arXiv preprint  arXiv:1707.02725. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1707. 02725
 278. Zhang Q, Li J, Yao M, Song L, Zhou H, Li Z, Meng W, Zhang X, Wang G (2019) VarGNet: vari-
able group convolutional neural network for efficient embedded computing. arXiv preprint  
arXiv:1907.05653. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 1907. 05653
 279. Yang K, Jiao Z, Liang J, Lei H, Li C, Zhong Z (2022) An application case of object detection model 
based on Yolov3-SPP model pruning. IEEE Int Conf Artif Intell Comput App (ICAICA) 2022:578–582
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

==== Page 72 ====
48236 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:48165–48236
1 3
Authors and Affiliations
Zonglei Lyu1,2  · Tong Yu1,2 · Fuxi Pan1,2 · Yilin Zhang1,2 · Jia Luo1,2 · Dan Zhang1,2 · 
Yiren Chen1,2 · Bo Zhang1,2 · Guangyao Li1,2
 * Zonglei Lyu 
 zllv@cauc.edu.cn
 Tong Yu 
 2021051030@cauc.edu.cn
 Fuxi Pan 
 2019051023@cauc.edu.cn
 Yilin Zhang 
 2020051019@cauc.edu.cn
 Jia Luo 
 2020051011@cauc.edu.cn
 Dan Zhang 
 2019052031@cauc.edu.cn
 Yiren Chen 
 2020052039@cauc.edu.cn
 Bo Zhang 
 2020051029@cauc.edu.cn
 Guangyao Li 
 2019053075@cauc.edu.cn
1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin 300300, China
2 Key Laboratory of Smart Airport Theory and System, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin, 
China

