==== Page 1 ====
1
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation
Accepted to ACM Computing Survey (CUSR) WENHAO YU, University of Notre Dame, USA
CHENGUANG ZHU, Microsoft Research, USA
ZAITANG LI, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
ZHITING HU, University of California at San Diego, USA
QINGYUN WANG, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
HENG JI, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
MENG JIANG, University of Notre Dame, USA
The goal of text-to-text generation is to make machines express like a human in many applications such as
conversation, summarization, and translation. It is one of the most important yet challenging tasks in natural
language processing (NLP). Various neural encoder-decoder models have been proposed to achieve the goal
by learning to map input text to output text. However, the input text alone often provides limited knowledge
to generate the desired output, so the performance of text generation is still far from satisfaction in many
real-world scenarios. To address this issue, researchers have considered incorporating (i) internal knowledge
embedded in the input text and (ii) external knowledge from outside sources such as knowledge base and
knowledge graph into the text generation system. This research topic is known as knowledge-enhanced text
generation . In this survey, we present a comprehensive review of the research on this topic over the past five
years. The main content includes two parts: (i) general methods and architectures for integrating knowledge
into text generation; (ii) specific techniques and applications according to different forms of knowledge data.
This survey can have broad audiences, researchers and practitioners, in academia and industry.
CCS Concepts: •General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →
Natural language processing ;Neural networks .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Natural language generation, Knowledge-enhanced Methods
§§Some useful materials related to this survey:
•A tutorial entitled “Knowledge-enriched Natural Language Generation”, at EMNLP 2021.
Tutorial abstract, slides, videos can be found at https://kenlg-tutorial.github.io.
•A tutorial entitled “Knowledge-augmented Methods for NLP”, to appear at ACL 2022.
•A Github repository with a more complete collection of papers and codes can be found at
https://github.com/wyu97/KENLG-Reading. It will be frequently updated with new papers.
Authors’ addresses: Wenhao Yu, wyu1@nd.edu, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, 46556; Chenguang Zhu,
chezhu@microsoft.com, Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA, 98052; Zaitang Li, 1155107739@link.cuhk.edu.hk,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 999077; Zhiting Hu, zhitinghu@gmail.com, University of
California at San Diego, San Diego, California, USA, 92092; Qingyun Wang, qingyun4@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA, 61801; Heng Ji, hengji@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA, 61801; Meng Jiang, mjiang2@nd.edu, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, 46556.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2022/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3512467
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.arXiv:2010.04389v4  [cs.CL]  22 Jan 2022

==== Page 2 ====
1:2 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
1 INTRODUCTION
Text generation, which is often formally referred as natural language generation (NLG), is one of
the most important yet challenging tasks in natural language processing (NLP) [ 37]. NLG aims at
producing understandable text in human language from linguistic or non-linguistic data in a variety
of forms such as textual data, numerical data, image data, structured knowledge bases, and knowl-
edge graphs. Among these, text-to-text generation is one of the most important applications and
thus often shortly referred as “text generation”. Researchers have developed numerous technologies
for this task in a wide range of applications [ 38,55,125]. Text generation takes text (e.g., a sequence,
keywords) as input, processes the input text into semantic representations, and generates desired
output text. For example, machine translation generates text in a different language based on the
source text; summarization generates an abridged version of the source text to include salient
information; question answering (QA) generates textual answers to given questions; dialogue
system supports chatbots to communicate with humans with generated responses.
With the recent resurgence of deep learning technologies [ 66], deep neural NLG models have
achieved remarkable performance in enabling machines to understand and generate natural lan-
guage. A basic definition of the text generation task is to generate an expected output sequence from
a given input sequence , called sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq). The Seq2Seq task and model were
first introduced in 2014 [ 117]. It maps an input text to an output text under encoder-decoder schemes.
The encoder maps the input sequence to a fixed-sized vector, and the decoder maps the vector to the
target sequence. Since then, developing NLG systems has rapidly become a hot topic. Various text
generation models have been proposed under deep neural encoder-decoder architectures. Popular
architectures include recurrent neural network (RNN) encoder-decoder [ 117], convolutional neural
network (CNN) encoder-decoder [39], and Transformer encoder-decoder [122].
Nevertheless, the input text alone contains limited knowledge to support neural generation
models to produce the desired output. Meanwhile, the aforementioned methods generally suffer
from an inability to well comprehend language, employ memory to retain and recall knowledge,
and reason over complex concepts and relational paths; as indicated by their name, they involve
encoding an input sequence, providing limited reasoning by transforming their hidden state given
the input, and then decoding to an output. Therefore, the performance of generation is still far
from satisfaction in many real-world scenarios. For example, in dialogue systems, conditioning on
only the input text, a text generation system often produces trivial or non-committal responses of
frequent words or phrases in the corpus [ 139,159], such as “Me too. ” or“Oh my god!” given the input
text “My skin is so dry. ” These mundane responses lack meaningful content, in contrast to human
responses rich in knowledge. In comparison, humans are constantly acquiring, understanding, and
storing knowledge from broader sources so that they can be employed to understand the current
situation in communicating, reading, and writing. For example, in conversations, people often first
select concepts from related topics (e.g., sports, food), then organize those topics into understandable
content to respond; for summarization, people tend to write summaries containing keywords used
in the input document and perform necessary modifications to ensure grammatical correctness and
fluency; in question answering (QA), people use commonsense orprofessional knowledge pertained
to the question to infer the answer. Therefore, it is often the case that knowledge beyond the input
sequence is required to produce informative output text.
1.1 What is Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation?
In general, knowledge is the familiarity, awareness, or understanding that coalesces around a
particular subject. In NLG systems, knowledge is an awareness and understanding of the input text
and its surrounding context. These knowledge sources can be categorized into internal knowledge
and external knowledge (see Figure 1). Internal knowledge creation takes place within the input
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 3 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:3
ConceptNetInputKeyword… …TopicGeneration modelOutputInternal knowledgeKnowledge extractionKnowledge sourceInputGeneration modelOutput… …Path on KG……Relevantdoc.External knowledgeKnowledge acquisition
Fig. 1. We divide different knowledge sources into internal knowledge and external knowledge. Internal
knowledge creation takes place within the input text(s), while external knowledge acquisition occurs when
knowledge is provided from outside sources (e.g., Wikipedia, ConceptNet [115]).
text(s), including but not limited to keyword, topic, linguistic features, and internal graph structure.
External knowledge acquisition occurs when knowledge is provided from outside sources, including
but not limited to knowledge base, external knowledge graph, and grounded text. These sources
provide information (e.g., commonsense triples, topic words, reviews, background documents)
that can be used as knowledge through various neural representation learning methods, and then
applied to enhance the process of text generation. In addition, knowledge introduces interpretability
for models with explicit semantics. This research direction of incorporating knowledge into text
generation is named as knowledge-enhanced text generation .
Problem 1 (Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation). Given a text generation problem where
the system is given an input sequence 𝑋, and aims to generate an output sequence 𝑌. Assume we
also have access to additional knowledge denoted as 𝐾. Knowledge-enhanced text generation aims
to incorporate the knowledge 𝐾to enhance the generation of 𝑌given𝑋, through leveraging the
dependencies among the input text, knowledge, and output text.
Many existing knowledge-enhanced text generation systems have demonstrated promising
performance on generating informative, logical, and coherent texts. In dialogue systems, a topic-
aware Seq2Seq model helped understand the semantic meaning of an input sequence and generate
a more informative response such as “Then hydrate and moisturize your skin. ” to the aforementioned
example input “My skin is so dry. ” In summarization, knowledge graph produced a structured
summary and highlight the proximity of relevant concepts, when complex events related with the
same entity may span multiple sentences. A knowledge graph enhanced Seq2Seq model generated
summaries that were able to correctly answer 10% more topically related questions [ 54]. In question
answering (QA) systems, facts stored in knowledge bases completed missing information in the
question and elaborate details to facilitate answer generation [ 30,48]. In story generation, using
commonsense knowledge acquired from knowledge graph facilitated understanding of the storyline
and better narrate following plots step by step, so each step could be reflected as a link on the
knowledge graph and the whole story would be a path [46].
1.2 Why a Survey of Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation?
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interests in developing methods for incorporating knowledge
in NLG beyond input text. However, there is a lack of comprehensive survey of this research topic.
Related surveys have laid the foundation of discussing this topic. For example, Garbacea et al. [ 37]
and Gatt et al. [ 38] reviewed model architectures for core NLG tasks but did not discuss knowledge-
enhanced methods. Ji et al. [ 58] presented a review on knowledge graph techniques which could
be used for enhancing NLG. Wang et al. [ 125] summarized how to represent structural knowledge
such as knowledge base and knowledge graph for reading comprehension and retrieval.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 4 ====
1:4 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Section 2General methodsSection 3-4Knowledge sourcesSection 6Future directionsSection 2.1-2.2Knowledge-enhanced model architecturesSection 2.3Knowledge-enhanced learning and inferenceSection 3Internal knowledgeSection 4External knowledgeAttention mechanismGraph neural networkPointer networkMemory networkKnowledge-enhanced Text Generation 
TopicKeywordLinguistic featuresInternal graph structureConstraint-driven learningPosterior regularizationMulti-task learningPlug and play methodsKnowledge baseKnowledge graphUnstructured textUse knowledge for VL tasksLearn with broader sourcesLearn with limited resourcesLearn in a continuous waySection 5Benchmark and toolkit
Fig. 2. Categorization of information sources and methods for knowledge-enhanced text generation. Knowl-
edge can be learnt from various information sources, and then integrated into the generation process.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first survey that presents a comprehensive review of
knowledge-enhanced text generation. It aims to provide NLG researchers a synthesis and pointer
to related research. Our survey includes a detailed discussion about how NLG can benefit from
recent progress in deep learning and artificial intelligence, including technologies such as graph
neural network, reinforcement learning, and neural topic modeling.
1.3 What are the Challenges in Knowledge-enhanced Text Generation?
To start with, we note that the first challenge in knowledge-enhanced NLG is to obtain useful related
knowledge from diverse sources. There has been a rising line of work that discovers knowledge
from topic, keyword, knowledge base, knowledge graph and knowledge grounded text. The second
challenge is how to effectively understand andleverage the acquired knowledge to facilitate text
generation. Multiple methods have been explored to improve the encoder-decoder architecture
(e.g., attention mechanism, copy and pointing mechanism).
Based on the first challenge, the main content of our survey is divided into two parts: (1) gen-
eral methods of integrating knowledge into text generation (Section 2); (2) specific methods and
applications according to different sources of knowledge enhancement (Sections 3–4). More con-
cretely, since knowledge can be obtained from different sources, we first divide existing knowledge
enhanced text generation work into two categories: internal knowledge enhanced and external
knowledge enhanced text generation. The division of internal and external knowledge is widely
adopted by management science [ 88], which can be analogous with knowledge enhanced text
generation. Based on the second challenge, we categorize recent knowledge-enhanced text gen-
eration methods evolved from how knowledge is extracted and incorporated into the process of
text generation in each section (named as M1, M2, and etc). Furthermore, we review methods for a
variety of natural language generation applications in each section to help practitioners choose,
learn, and use the methods. In total, we discuss seven mainstream applications presented in more
than 80 papers that were published or released in or after the year of 2016.
As shown in Figure 2, the remainder of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 presents basic
NLG models and general methods of integrating knowledge into text generation. Sections 3 reviews
internal knowledge-enhanced NLG methods and applications. The internal knowledge is obtained
from topic, keyword, linguistic features and internal graph structures. Sections 4 reviews external
knowledge-enhanced NLG methods and applications. The external knowledge sources include
knowledge bases, knowledge graphs, and grounded text. Section 5 presents knowledge-enhanced
NLG benchmarks. Section 6 discusses future work and concludes the survey.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 5 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:5
2 GENERAL METHODS OF INTEGRATING KNOWLEDGE INTO NLG
2.1 The Basic Text Generation Models
Early encoder-decoder frameworks are often based on recurrent neural network (RNN) such as RNN-
Seq2Seq [ 117]. Convolutional neural network (CNN) based encoder-decoder [ 39] and Transformer
encoder-decoder [ 122] have been increasingly widely used. From a probabilistic perspective, the
encoder-decoder frameworks learn the conditional distribution over a variable length sequence
conditioned on yet another variable length sequence:
𝑃(𝑌|𝑋)=𝑃(𝑦1,···,𝑦𝑚|𝑥1,···,𝑥𝑛)=𝑚Ö
𝑡=1𝑝(𝑦𝑡|𝑋,𝑦 1,···,𝑦𝑡−1). (1)
Encoder. The encoder learns to encode a variable length sequence into a fixed length vector
representation. RNN encoder reads the input sentence 𝑋sequentially . CNN encoder performs con-
volutional operations on a word and its surrounding word(s) in a sequential window. Transformer
encoder eschews recurrence and instead relying entirely on the self-attention mechanism to draw
global dependencies between different tokens in the input 𝑋. We denote them uniformly as:
(h1,h2,···,h𝑛)=Encoder(e(𝑥1),e(𝑥2),···,e(𝑥𝑛)), (2)
where e(𝑥𝑖)is the word embedding of word 𝑥𝑖,h𝑖is the contextualized hidden representation of 𝑥𝑖.
Decoder. The decoder is to decode a given fixed length vector representation into a variable
length sequence [ 117]. Specially, the decoder generates an output sequence one token at each time
step. At each step the model is auto-regressive, consuming the previously generated tokens as
additional input when generating the next token. Formally, the decoding function is represented as:
s𝑡=Decoder(s𝑡−1,e(𝑦𝑡−1)), (3)
𝑝(𝑦𝑡|𝑦𝑡−1,𝑦𝑡−2,···,𝑦1)=Readout(s𝑡), (4)
where Readout(·)is a nonlinear multi-layered function that outputs the probability of 𝑦𝑡.
Optimization. A generation process is regarded as a sequential multi-label classification problem.
It can be directly optimized by the negative log likelihood (NLL) loss. Therefore, the objective of a
text generation model via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is formulated as:
L𝑁𝐿𝐿(𝜃)=−log𝑝𝜃(𝑌|𝑋)=−𝑚∑︁
𝑡=1log(𝑝𝜃(𝑦𝑡|𝑦<𝑡,𝑋)). (5)
2.2 Knowledge-enhanced Model Architectures
The most popular idea of incorporating knowledge is designing specialized architectures of text
generation models that can reflect the particular type of knowledge. In the context of neural net-
works, several general neural architectures are widely used and customized to bake the knowledge
about the problems being tackled into the models.
2.2.1 Attention Mechanism .It is useful to capture the weight of each time step in both encoder
and decoder [ 3]. During the decoding phase, the context vector c𝑡is added, so the hidden state s𝑡is:
s𝑡=Decoder(s𝑡−1,e(𝑦𝑡−1),c𝑡). (6)
Unlike Eq.(3), here the probability is conditioned on the distinct context vector c𝑡for target word 𝑦𝑡,
andc𝑡depends on a sequence of hidden states H={h𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1that were mapped from input sequence.
In RNN-Seq2Seq decoder, the c𝑡is computed as a weighted sum of {h𝑖}𝑛
𝑖=1:
c𝑡=𝑛∑︁
𝑖=1𝛼𝑡𝑖h𝑖,where𝛼𝑡𝑖=exp(𝜂(s𝑡−1,h𝑖))Í𝑛
𝑘=1exp(𝜂(s𝑡−1,h𝑘)), (7)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 6 ====
1:6 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Table 1. NLG methods that incorporates knowledge attention ( §2.2.1) and knowledge mode ( §2.2.2).
Topic Keyword Knowledge base Knowledge graph Grounded text
Knowledge-related attention [134, 139, 152] [69, 70, 73] [34, 48] [46, 54, 151, 159] [9, 87]
Knowledge-related mode [139] [70] [48] [57, 151, 159] [87, 107]
Knowledge-related memory [34, 158] - [82, 135] [144] [61]
where𝜂(·)is parametrized as a multi-layer perception to compute a soft alignment. 𝜂(·)enables the
gradient of loss function to be backpropagated. There are six alternatives for the 𝜂(·)function (see
Table 2 in [ 37]). The probability 𝛼𝑡𝑖reflects the importance of the hidden state of input sequence in
presence of the previous hidden state s𝑡−1for deciding the next hidden state.
In Transformer decoder, on top of the two sub-layers in the encoder, the decoder inserts a third
sub-layer, which performs multi-head attention over the output of the encoder stack H. Efficient
implementations of the transformer use the cached history matrix S𝑡to generate next token. To
compare with RNN-Seq2Seq, we summarize the Transformer decoder using recurrent notation:
S𝑡=Transformer-Decoder (S𝑡−1,e(𝑦𝑡−1),H), (8)
where S𝑡=[(K(1)
𝑡,V(1)
𝑡),···,(K(𝑙)
𝑡,V(𝑙)
𝑡)], where(K(𝑖)
𝑡,V(𝑖)
𝑡)corresponds to the key-value pairs
from the𝑖-th layer generated at all time-steps from 0to𝑡. Instead of noting a specific name, we
will use Encoder (·) and Decoder (·) to represent encoder and decoder in the following sections.
Knowledge-related attention. Attention mechanism has been widely used to incorporate knowl-
edge representation in recent knowledge-enhanced NLG work. The general idea is to learn a
knowledge-aware context vector (denoted as ec𝑡) by combining both hidden context vector ( c𝑡)
and knowledge context vector (denoted as c𝐾
𝑡) into decoder update, such as ec𝑡=𝑓𝑚𝑙𝑝(c𝑡⊕c𝐾
𝑡).
The knowledge context vector ( c𝐾
𝑡) calculates attentions over knowledge representations (e.g.,
topic vectors, node vectors in knowledge graph). Table 1 summarizes a variety of knowledge
attentions, including keyword attention [ 69,70,73], topic attention [ 79,134,139,152], knowledge
base attention [ 34,48], knowledge graph attention [ 54,63,151], and grounded text attention [ 9,87].
2.2.2 Copy and Pointing Mechanisms .CopyNet and Pointer-generator (PG) are used to choose
subsequences in the input sequence and put them at proper places in the output sequence.
CopyNet and PG have a differentiable network architecture [ 43]. They can be easily trained
in an end-to-end manner. In CopyNet and PG, the probability of generating a target token is a
combination of the probabilities of two modes, generate-mode and copy-mode. First, they represent
unique tokens in the global vocabulary Vand the vocabulary of source sequence V𝑋. They build
an extended vocabulary Vext=V∪V𝑋∪{unk}. The difference between CopyNet and PG is the
way to calculate distribution over the extended vocabulary. CopyNet calculates the distribution by
𝑝(𝑦𝑡)=𝑝𝑔(𝑦𝑡)+𝑝𝑐(𝑦𝑡), (9)
where𝑝𝑔(·|·)and𝑝𝑐(·|·)stand for the probability of generate-mode and copy-mode. Differently, PG
explicitly calculates a switch probability 𝑝𝑚between generate-mode and copy-mode. It recycles the
attention distribution to serve as the copy distribution. The distribution over Vextis calculated by
𝑝(𝑦𝑡)=𝑝𝑚(g)·𝑝𝑔(𝑦𝑡)+(1−𝑝𝑚(g))·𝑝𝑐(𝑦𝑡), (10)
where𝑝𝑚(g)indicates the probability of choosing generate-mode, which is obtained by a nonlinear
multi-layered (MLP) function. Importantly, CopyNet and pointer-generator network have been
used as the base module for a lot of knowledge-enhanced NLG work.
Knowledge-related mode. A knowledge-related mode chooses subsequences in the obtained
knowledge and puts them at proper places in the output sequence. It helps NLG models to generate
words that are not included in the global vocabulary ( V) and input sequence ( V𝑋). For example,
by adding the model of knowledge base, the extended vocabulary ( V𝑒𝑥𝑡) adds entities and relations
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 7 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:7
from the knowledge base, i.e., V𝑒𝑥𝑡=V+V𝑋+V𝐾𝐵. The probability of generating a target token
is a combination of the probabilities of three modes: generate-mode, copy-mode and knowledge
base-mode. Therefore, knowledge-related mode is not only capable of regular generation of words
but also operation of producing appropriate subsequences in knowledge sources. Table 1 summa-
rizes different kinds of knowledge-related modes such as topic mode [ 139], keyword mode [ 70],
knowledge base mode [48], knowledge graph mode [151, 159], and background mode [87, 107].
2.2.3 Memory Network .Memory networks (MemNNs) are recurrent attention models over
a possibly large external memory [ 116]. They write external memories into several embedding
matrices, and use query (generally speaking, the input sequence 𝑋) vectors to read memories
repeatedly. This approach encodes long dialog history and memorize external information.
Given an input set {𝑚1,···,𝑚𝑖}to be stored in memory. The memories of MemNN are repre-
sented by a set of trainable embedding matrices C={C1,···,C𝐾+1}, where each C𝑘maps tokens
to vectors, and a query (i.e., input sequence) vector h𝑘
𝑋is used as a reading head. The model loops
over𝐾hops and it computes the attention weights at hop 𝑘for each memory 𝑚𝑖using:
p𝑘
𝑖=softmax((h𝑘
𝑋)⊤C𝑘
𝑖), (11)
where C𝑘
𝑖=C𝑘(𝑚𝑖)is the memory content in 𝑖-th position, i.e., mapping 𝑚𝑖into a memory vector.
Here, p𝑘is a soft memory selector that decides the memory relevance with respect to the query
vector h𝑘
𝑋. Then, the model reads out the memory o𝑘by the weighted sum over C𝑘+1,
o𝑘=∑︁
𝑖p𝑘
𝑖C𝑘+1
𝑖. (12)
Then, the query vector is updated for the next hop by using h𝑘+1
𝑋=h𝑘
𝑋+o𝑘. The result from the
encoding step is the memory vector o𝐾and becomes the input for the decoding step.
Knowledge-related memory. Memory augmented encoder-decoder framework has achieved
promising progress for many NLG tasks. For example, MemNNs are widely used for encoding
dialogue history in task-oriented dialogue systems [ 106,135]. Such frameworks enable a decoder
to retrieve information from a memory during generation. Recent work explored to model external
knowledge with memory network such as knowledge base [82, 144] and topic [34, 158].
2.2.4 Graph Network .Graph network captures the dependence of graphs via message pass-
ing between the nodes of graphs. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [ 138] and graph-to-sequence
(Graph2Seq) [ 6] potentiate to bridge up the gap between graph representation learning and text
generation. Knowledge graph, dependency graph, and other graph structures can be integrated
into text generation through various GNN algorithms. Here we denote a graph as G=(U,E),
whereUis the set of entity nodes and Eis the set of (typed) edges. Modern GNNs typically follow
a neighborhood aggregation approach, which iteratively updates the representation of a node by
aggregating information from its neighboring nodes and edges. After 𝑘iterations of aggregation, a
node representation captures the structural information within its 𝑘-hop neighborhood. Formally,
the𝑘-th layer of a node 𝑢∈U is:
u(𝑘)=Combine 𝑘(u(𝑘−1),Aggregate 𝑘(
(u(𝑘−1)
𝑖,e(𝑘−1)
𝑖𝑗,u(𝑘−1)
𝑗):∀(𝑢𝑖,𝑒𝑖𝑗,𝑢𝑗)∈N(𝑢)	
)),(13)
whereN(𝑢)={(𝑢𝑖,𝑒𝑖𝑗,𝑢𝑗)∈E|𝑢𝑖=𝑢or𝑢𝑗=𝑢}denotes the set of edges containing node 𝑢,u(𝑘)
ande(𝑘)
𝑖𝑗are feature vectors of a node 𝑢and the edge between 𝑢𝑖and𝑢𝑗at the𝑘-th iteration/layer.
The choice of Aggregate(·)andCombine(·)in GNNs is crucial. A number of architectures for
Aggregate(·)have been proposed in different GNN works such as GAT [ 123]. Meanwhile, the
Aggregate(·)function used in labeled graphs (e.g., a knowledge graph) is often taken as those
GNNs for modeling relational graphs [ 108]. To obtain the representation of graph G(denoted as
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 8 ====
1:8 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
h𝐺), the Readout(·)function (either a simple permutation invariant function or sophisticated
graph-level pooling function) pools node features from the final iteration 𝐾,
h𝐺=Readout(
u(𝐾):𝑢∈U	
). (14)
Applications. Graph network has been commonly used in integrating knowledge in graph struc-
ture such as knowledge graph and dependency graph. Graph attention network [ 123] can be
combined with sequence attention and jointly optimized [ 151,159]. We will introduce different
graph structure knowledge in subsequent sections such as knowledge graph (Section 4.2), depen-
dency graph (Section 3.3.2-3.3.3), and open knowledge graph (OpenKG) (Section 3.4).
2.2.5 Pre-trained Language Models .Pre-trained language models (PLMs) aims to learn uni-
versal language representation by conducting self-supervised training on large-scale unlabeled
corpora. Recently, substantial PLMs such as BERT [ 25] and T5 [ 104] have achieved remarkable
performance in various NLP downstream tasks. However, these PLMs suffer from two issues when
performing on knowledge-intensive tasks. First, these models struggle to grasp structured world
knowledge, such as concepts and relations, which are very important in language understanding.
For example, BERT cannot deliver great performance on many commonsense reasoning and QA
tasks, in which many of the concepts are directly linked on commonsense knowledge graphs [ 146].
Second, due to the domain discrepancy between pre-training and fine-tuning, these models do not
perform well on domain-specific tasks. For example, BERT can not give full play to its value when
dealing with electronic medical record analysis task in the medical field [78].
Recently, a lot of efforts have been made on investigating how to integrate knowledge into
PLMs [ 45,78,80,140,146,161]. Specifically, we will introduce some PLMs designed for NLG
tasks. Overall, these approaches can be grouped into two categories: The first one is to explicitly
inject entity representation into PLMs, where the representations is pre-computed from external
sources [ 80,155]. For example, KG-BART encoded the graph structure of KGs with knowledge
embedding algorithms like TransE [ 11], and then took the informative entity embeddings as
auxiliary input [ 80]. However, the method of explicitly injecting entity representation into PLMs
has been argued that the embedding vectors of words in text and entities in KG are obtained in
separate ways, making their vector-space inconsistent [ 78]. The second one is to implicitly modeling
knowledge information into PLMs by performing knowledge-related tasks, such as concept order
recovering [ 161], entity category prediction [ 146]. For example, CALM proposed a novel contrastive
objective for packing more commonsense knowledge into the parameters, and jointly pre-trained
both generative and contrastive objectives for enhancing commonsense NLG tasks [161].
2.3 Knowledge-enhanced Learning and Inference
Besides specialized model architectures, one common way of injecting knowledge to generation
models is through the supervised knowledge learning. For example, one can encode knowledge into
the objective function that guides the model training to acquire desired model behaviors [ 27,61].
Such approaches enjoy the flexibility of integrating diverse types of knowledge by expressing them
as certain forms of objectives. In general, knowledge-enhanced learning is agnostic to the model
architecture, and can be combined with the aforementioned architectures.
2.3.1 Learning with knowledge-related tasks .One could devise learning tasks informed by
the knowledge so that the model is trained to acquire the knowledge information.
Knowledge as target .The methods can be mainly divided into two categories as shown in Figure
3. The first category of knowledge-related tasks creates learning targets based on the knowledge,
and the model is trained to recover the targets. These tasks can be combined as auxiliary tasks with
the text generation task, resulting in a multi-task learning setting. For example, knowledge loss is
defined as the cross entropy between the predicted and true knowledge sentences, and it is combined
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 9 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:9
ConceptNetInputGeneration modelOutputGeneration loss
Knowledge lossLabelsLabelsInputGeneration modelOutputGeneration lossLabelscreate
keyword… …
ConceptNet
keyword… …
Fig. 3. Incorporating knowledge into text generation by treating knowledge as the target. The first category
of methods (left) combine knowledge-related tasks as auxiliary into the text generation task, resulting in
amulti-task learning setting. The second category of methods (right) create weakly-supervised labels from
knowledge, enforcing the relevancy between the knowledge and the target sequence.
with the standard conversation generation loss to enhance grounded conversation [ 27,61]. Similar
tasks include keyword extraction loss [ 70], template re-ranking loss [ 13,129], link prediction loss
on knowledge graph [ 57], path reasoning loss [ 81], mode loss [ 137,159], bag-of-word (BOW)
loss [ 74,143], etc. The second category of methods directly derive the text generation targets
from the knowledge, and use those (typically noisy) targets as supervisions in the standard text
generation task. The approach is called weakly-supervised learning. Weakly-supervised learning
enforces the relevancy between the knowledge and the target sequence. For example, in the problem
of aspect based summarization, the work [ 118] automatically creates target summaries based on
external knowledge bases, which are used to train the summarization model in a supervised manner.
Knowledge as condition .The second way of devising knowledge-related tasks is to augment
the text generation task by conditioning the generation on the knowledge. That is, the goal is
to learn a function 𝑝𝜃(𝑌|𝑋,𝐾), where𝑋is the input sequence, 𝑌is the target text and 𝐾is the
knowledge. Generally, the knowledge 𝐾is first given externally (e.g., style, emotion) or retrieved
from external resources (e.g., facts from knowledge base, a document from Wikipedia) or extracted
from the given input text (e.g., keywords, topic words). Second, a conditional text generation model
is used to incorporate knowledge and generate target output sequence. In practice, knowledge is
often remedied by soft enforcing algorithms such as attention mechanism [ 3] and copy/pointing
mechanism [ 43,109]. Regarding knowledge as condition is widely used in knowledge-enhanced
text generation. For examples, work has been done in making personalized dialogue response by
taking account of persona [ 154] and emotion [ 158], controlling various aspects of the response
such as politeness [ 96], grounding the responses in external source of knowledge [ 27,42,159] and
generating topic-coherent sequence [ 119,143]. Besides, using variational autoencoder (VAE) to
enforce the generation process conditioned on knowledge is one popular approach to unsupervised
NLG. By manipulating latent space for certain attributes, such as topic [ 132] and style [ 50], the
output sequence can be generated with desired attributes without supervising with parallel data.
2.3.2 Learning with knowledge constraints .Instead of creating training objectives in stan-
dalone tasks that encapsulate knowledge, another paradigm of knowledge-enhanced learning is to
treat the knowledge as the constraints to regularize the text generation training objective.
The posterior regularization (PR) framework was proposed to restrict the space of the model
posterior on unlabeled data as a way to guide the model towards desired behavior [ 35,164]. PR
has been used as a principled framework to impose knowledge constraints on probabilistic models
(including deep networks) in general [ 51,153]. PR augments any regular training objective L(𝜃)
(e.g., negative log-likelihood, as in Eq. (5)) with a constraint term to encode relevant knowledge.
Formally, denote the constraint function as 𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)∈Rsuch that a higher 𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)value indicates
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 10 ====
1:10 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
a better generated sequence 𝑌that incorporates the knowledge. PR introduces an auxiliary distri-
bution𝑞(𝑌|𝑋), and imposes the constraint on 𝑞by encouraging a large expected 𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)value:
E𝑞[𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)]. Meanwhile, the model 𝑝𝜃is encouraged to stay close to 𝑞through a KL divergence
term. The learning problem is thus a constrained optimization:
max
𝜃,𝑞L(𝜃)−KL(𝑞(𝑌|𝑋)||𝑝𝜃(𝑌|𝑋))+𝜉 (15)
𝑠.𝑡.E𝑞[𝑓(𝑋,𝑌)]>𝜉, (16)
where𝜉is the slack variable. The PR framework is also related to other constraint-driven learning
methods [14, 83]. We refer readers to [35] for more discussions.
2.3.3 Inference with knowledge constraints .Pre-trained language models leverage large
amounts of unannotated data with a simple log-likelihood training objective. Controlling lan-
guage generation by particular knowledge in a pre-trained model is difficult if we do not modify
the model architecture to allow for external input knowledge or fine-tuning with specific data [ 24].
Plug and play language model (PPLM) opened up a new way to control language generation with
particular knowledge during inference. At every generation step during inference, the PPLM shifts
the history matrix in the direction of the sum of two gradients: one toward higher log-likelihood
of the attribute 𝑎under the conditional attribute model 𝑝(𝑎|𝑌)and the other toward higher log-
likelihood of the unmodified pre-trained generation model 𝑝(𝑌|𝑋)(e.g., GPT). Specifically, the
attribute model 𝑝(𝑎|𝑌)makes gradient based updates to ΔS𝑡as follows:
ΔS𝑡←ΔS𝑡+∇ΔS𝑡log𝑝(𝑎|S𝑡+ΔS𝑡)
||∇ΔS𝑡log𝑝(𝑎|S𝑡+ΔS𝑡)||𝛾, (17)
where𝛾is the scaling coefficient for the normalization term; ΔS𝑡is update of history matrix
S𝑡(see Eq.(8)) and initialized as zero. The update step is repeated multiple times. Subsequently,
a forward pass through the generation model is performed to obtain the updated eS𝑡+1aseS𝑡+1=
Decoder((S𝑡+ΔS𝑡),e(𝑦𝑡),H). The perturbed eS𝑡+1is then used to generate a new logit vector. PPLMs
is efficient and flexible to combine differentiable attribute models to steer text generation [102].
3 NLG ENHANCED BY INTERNAL KNOWLEDGE
3.1 NLG Enhanced by Topic
Topic, which can be considered as a representative or compressed form of text, has been often
used to maintain the semantic coherence and guide the NLG process. Topic modeling is a powerful
tool for finding the high-level content of a document collection in the form of latent topics [ 10]. A
classical topic model, Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), has been widely used for inferring a low
dimensional representation that captures latent semantics of words and documents [ 10]. In LDA,
each topic is defined as a distribution over words and each document as a mixture distribution
over topics. LDA generates words in the documents from topic distribution of document and
word distribution of topic. Recent advances of neural techniques open a new way of learning low
dimensional representations of words from the tasks of word prediction and context prediction,
making neural topic models become a popular choice of finding latent topics from text [12, 47].
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by topics:
•Dialogue system. A vanilla Seq2Seq often generates trivial or non-committal sentences of
frequent words or phrases in the corpus [ 139]. For example, a chatbot may say “I do not know” ,
“I see” too often. Though these off-topic responses are safe to reply to many queries, they are
boring with very little information. Such responses may quickly lead the conversation to an
end, severely hurting user experience. Thus, on-topic response generation is highly needed.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 11 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:11
Sequence decoderOutput textMixture distributionLDAInput textSequence encoderCNN topic encoderLatent topicLatent textSequence decoderOutput textInput textSequence encoderTopic words encoderLatent topicLatent textTopic words
Sequence decoderOutput textInput textSequence encoderNeural topic encoderLatent topicLatent text(M1) Leverage topic words from generative topic models(M2) Jointly optimize generation model and CNN topic model(M3) Enhance NLG by neural topic models with variational inference
Fig. 4. Three typical methodologies for incorporating topics into NLG. Detailed designs are not included.
•Machine translation. Though the input and output languages are different (e.g., translating
English to Chinese), the contents are the same, and globally, under the same topic. Therefore,
topic can serve as an auxiliary guidance to preserve the semantics information of input text
in one language into the output text in the other language.
•Paraphrase. Topic information helps understand the potential meaning and determine the
semantic range to a certain extent. Naturally, paraphrases concern the same topic, which can
serve as an auxiliary guidance to promote the preservation of source semantic.
As shown in Figure 4, we summarize topic-enhanced NLG methods into three methodologies:
(M1) leverage topic words from generative topic models; (M2) jointly optimize generation model
and CNN topic model; (M3) enhance NLG by neural topic models with variational inference.
3.1.1 M1: Leverage Topic Words from Generative Topic Models .Topics help understand
the semantic meaning of sentences and determine the semantic spectrum to a certain extent. To
enhanced text generation, an effective solution is to first discover topics using generative topic
models (e.g., LDA), and then incorporate the topics representations into neural generation models,
as illustrated in Figure 4(a). In existing work, there are two mainstream methods to represent topics
obtained from generative topic models. The first way is to use the generated topic distributions for
each word (i.e., word distributions over topics) in the input sequence [ 94,152]. The second way is to
assign a specific topic to the input sequence, then picks the top- 𝑘words with the highest probabilities
under the topic, and use word embeddings (e.g., GloVe) to represent topic words [ 79,139]. Explicitly
making use of topic words can bring stronger guidance than topic distributions, but the guidance
may deviate from the target output sequence when some generated topic words are irrelevant.
Zhang et al. proposed the first work of using a topic-informed Seq2Seq model by concatenating the
topic distributions with encoder and decoder hidden states [ 152]. Xing et al. designed a topic-aware
Seq2Seq model in order to use topic words as prior knowledge to help dialogue generation [139].
3.1.2 M2: Jointly Optimize Generation Model and CNN Topic Model .The LDA models
were separated from the training process of neural generation model and were not able to adapt
to the diversity of dependencies between input and output sequences. Therefore, the idea of
addressing this issue is to use neural topic models. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) were used
to learn latent topic representations through iterative convolution and pooling operations. There
are growing interests of using the CNNs to map latent topics implicitly into topic vectors that can be
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 12 ====
1:12 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Table 2. Natural language generation methods that incorporate topic knowledge in text generation. Since
most of the methods are tested on different tasks and datasets, we only compare the performance between
“w/o topic” setting and “with topic” setting. For evaluation metrics, PPL is short for perplexity (lower is better);
B-4 is short for BLEU-4 (higher is better); R-L is short for ROUGE-L (higher is better).
Task Method Ref. Cat.Framework components Effect of topic modeling
Seq. Enc/Dec Topic model Dataset w/o topic with topic
Dialogue
systemTp-S2S [139] M1 RNN Seq2Seq LDA topics Baidu Tieba (PPL) 147.0 (PPL) 134.6
PEE [143] M3 RNN Seq2Seq Neural topics PersonaChat (B-4) 2.98 (B-4) 3.56
Machine
translationTp-NMT [152] M1 RNN Seq2Seq LDA topics NIST (B-4) 34.76 (B-4) 35.91
BLT-NMT [134] M2 RNN Seq2Seq CNN topics NIST (B-4) 38.97 (B-4) 40.10
Summari
-zationTp-CS2S [94] M1 CNN Seq2Seq LDA topics XSum (R-L) 25.23 (R-L) 25.75
TGVAE [132] M3 RNN with VAE Neural topics Gigawords (R-L) 32.13 (R-L) 33.02
VHTM [33] M3 RNN with VAE Neural topics CNN/DM (R-L) 36.73 (R-L) 37.18
ParaphraseTGLM [36] M2 RNN Seq2Seq CNNs topics Yahoo! Ans (PPL) 99.13 (PPL) 88.69
PTA [79] M1 RNN Seq2Seq LDA topics Quora (B-4) 28.76 (B-4) 31.75
used to enhance text generation tasks [ 36,134]. Empirical analyses showed that convolution-based
topic extractors could outperform LDA-based topic models for multiple applications (e.g., dialogue
system, text summarization, machine translation). However, theoretical analysis was missing to
ensure the quality of the topics captured by the convolutions. And their interpretability is not as
satisfactory as the LDA-based topic models.
3.1.3 M3: Enhance NLG by Neural Topic Models with Variational Inference .Neural topic
models can be trained efficiently by backpropagation [ 12]. In neural topic models, Dirichlet distri-
butions can be employed as the prior to generate the parameters of the multinomial distribution 𝜃𝑑
for each document [ 89]. The generative process of LDA is represented as: (1) 𝜃𝑑∼Dirichlet(𝛼);
(2)𝑡𝑖∼Multinomial(𝜃𝑑); (3)𝑤𝑖∼Multinomial(𝛽𝑡𝑖), where𝑑denotes the bag-of-words representa-
tion of a document, 𝑡𝑖represents the topic assignment for word 𝑤𝑖, and𝛽𝑡𝑖represents the topic
distribution over words given topic assignment 𝑡𝑖. However, a directed generative model comes up
against the problem of establishing low variance gradient estimators. Miao et al. parameterized
the multinomial distributions with neural networks and jointly learned the model parameters
via variational inference [ 89]. They created neural structures for constructing topic distributions
conditioned on a draw from a multivariate Gaussian distribution, represented as 𝜃𝑑∼G(𝜇0,𝜎2
0),
where G(𝜇0,𝜎2
0)is composed of a neural network conditioned on an isotropic Gaussian N(𝜇0,𝜎2
0).
Taking a Gaussian prior distribution makes re-parameterization feasible to build an unbiased and
low-variance gradient estimator for the variational distribution [ 26]. Without conjugacy prior,
the updates of the parameters are derived directly and easily from the variational lower bound.
Formally, a variational lower bound for the document log-likelihood is:
J𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑐=E𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)[log𝑝(𝑑|𝛽,𝜃)]−KL(𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)||𝑝(𝜃|𝜇0,𝜎2
0)), (18)
where𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)is the variational distribution approximating the true posterior 𝑝(𝜃|𝑑). Its lower
bound is estimate by sampling 𝜃from𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)=G(𝜃|𝜇(𝑑),𝜎2(𝑑)).
In order to combine neural topic model and neural generation model, the idea is to use the
Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [ 26]. It adopts autoregressive networks (e.g., LSTM) both as the
encoder and decoder. VAE can learn latent codes 𝑧of texts by reconstructing texts with its decoder.
It assumes that the generation process is controlled by codes in a continuous latent space. This
kind of VAE implementation considers sequential information of texts that can model the linguistic
structure of texts. Wang et al. proposed topic guided variational autoencoder (TGVAE), to draw
latent code𝑧from a topic-dependent Gaussian Mixture Prior in order to incorporate the topical
knowledge into latent variables [ 132]. The topic-dependent Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) is
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 13 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:13
defined as:𝑝(𝑧|𝛽,𝑡)=Í𝑇
𝑖=1𝑡𝑖N(𝜇(𝛽𝑖),𝜎2(𝛽𝑖)), where𝑇is the number of topics, 𝜇(𝑑)and𝜎2(𝑑)are
functions implemented by MLP. TGVAE uses bag-of-words as input and embeds an input document
into a topic vector. The topic vector is then used to reconstruct the bag-of-words input, and the
learned topic distribution over words is used to model a topic-dependent prior to generate an output
sequence𝑌from conditioned on an input sequence 𝑋. Therefore, to maximize the log-likelihood
log𝑝(𝑌,𝑑|𝑋), a variational objective function is constructed as:
J𝑠𝑒𝑞2𝑠𝑒𝑞=E𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)[log𝑝(𝑌|𝑋,𝑧)]−E𝑞(𝜃|𝑑)[KL(𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)||𝑝(𝑧|𝛽,𝜃))], (19)
where𝑞(𝑧|𝑋)is variational distributions for 𝑧. The combined object function is given by:
J=J𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑐+J𝑠𝑒𝑞2𝑠𝑒𝑞. (20)
3.1.4 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .ForM1, topic models (e.g., LDA) has a
strict probabilistic explanation since the semantic representations of both words and documents
are combined into a unified framework. Besides, topic models can be easily used and integrated
into generation frameworks. For example, topic words can be represented as word embeddings;
topic embeddings can be integrated into the decoding phase through topic attention. However,
LDA models are separated from the training process of generation, so they cannot adapt to the
diversity of dependencies between input and output sequences.
ForM2, it is an end-to-end neural framework that simultaneously learns latent topic represen-
tations and generates output sequences. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are often used to
generate the latent topics through iterative convolution and pooling operations. However, theoreti-
cal analysis is missing to ensure the quality of the topics captured by the convolutions. And their
interpretability is not as good as the LDA-based topic models.
ForM3, neural topic models combine the advantages of neural networks and probabilistic
topic models. They enable back propagation for joint optimization, contributing to more coherent
topics, and can be scaled to large data sets. Generally, neural topic models can provide better topic
coherence than LDAs [ 12,132,143]. However, neural variational approaches share a same drawback
that topic distribution is assumed to be an isotropic Gaussian, which makes them incapable of
modeling topic correlations. Existing neural topic models assume that the documents should be i.i.d.
to adopt VAE, while they are commonly correlated. The correlations are critical for topic modeling.
3.2 NLG Enhanced by Keywords
Keyword (aka., key phrase, key term) is often referred as a sequence of one or more words, providing
a compact representation of the content of a document. The mainstream methods of keyword
acquisition for documents can be divided into two categories [ 112]: keyword assignment and
keyword extraction. Keyword assignment means that keywords are chosen from a controlled
vocabulary of terms or predefined taxonomy. Keyword extraction selects the most representative
words explicitly presented in the document, which is independent from any vocabulary. Keyword
extraction techniques (e.g., TF-IDF, TextRank, PMI) have been widely used over decades. Many NLG
tasks can benefit from incorporating such a condensed form of essential content in a document to
maintain the semantic coherence and guide the generation process.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by keywords:
•Dialogue system. Keywords help enlighten and drive the generated responses to be infor-
mative and avoid generating universally relevant replies which carry little semantics. Besides,
recent work introduced personalized information into the generation of dialogue to help
deliver better dialogue response such as emotion [71, 114, 158], and persona [154, 157].
•Summarization. Vanilla Seq2Seq models often suffer when the generation process is hard
to control and often misses salient information [ 69]. Making use of keywords as explicit
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 14 ====
1:14 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Table 3. Natural language generation methods that incorporate keyword in text generation.
(a) (M1) Descriptions and quantitative comparisons between three methods for emotional dialogue systems.
Task Method Ref. Assignment methodExperiments on NLPCC dataset
BLEU D-1/D-2 Emotion w/s
Dialogue
systemSeq2Seq [3] Seq2Seq attention without using keywords 1.50 0.38/1.20 33.5/37.1
E-SCBA [71] MLP classifier to 7 emotions (categories) 1.69 0.54/4.84 72.0/51.2
EmoChat [158] E-SCBA + two memory modules for decoding 1.68 0.90/7.35 76.5/58.0
EmoDS [114] MLP classifier after decoding (discriminator) 1.73 1.13/8.67 81.0/68.7
(b) (M2) As most methods are tested on different tasks and datasets, we only compare the performance
between “w/o keyword” setting and “with keyword” setting. Besides, HM is short for human evaluation.
Task Method Ref.Extraction Keyword Effect of keyword
method labels Dataset w/o keyword with keyword
Summari-
zationKIGN [69] TextRank UnsupervisedCNN/DM (R-2) 15.66 (R-2) 17.12
Gigaword (R-2) 23.61 (R-2) 23.93
ComGen [73] PMI and TFIDF Unsupervised Tencent (HM) 5.77 (HM) 7.19
KGAS [70] BiLSTM-Softmax w(𝑋)∩w(𝑌)Gigaword (R-2) 23.61 (R-2) 25.06
Question
generationSelector [22] BiLSTM-Softmax w(𝑋)∩w(𝑌)SQuAD (B-4) 14.72 (B-4) 15.87
Prior [133] BiLSTM-Softmax w(𝑋)∩w(𝑌)SQuAD (B-4) 14.72 (B-4) 15.34
guidance can provide significant clues of the main points about the document [ 69,70]. It is
closer to the way that humans write summaries: make sentences to contain the keywords, and
then perform necessary modifications to ensure the fluency and grammatically correctness.
•Question generation. It aims to generate questions from a given answer and its relevant
context. Given an answer and its associated context, it is possible to raise multiple questions
with different focuses on the context and various means of expression.
Researchers have developed a great line of keyword-enhanced NLG methods. These methods can
be categorized into two methodologies: (M1) Incorporate keyword assignment into text generation;
(M2) Incorporate keyword extraction into text generation.
3.2.1 M1: Incorporate Keyword Assignment into Text Generation .When assigning a key-
word to an input document, the set of possible keywords is bounded by a pre-defined vocabu-
lary [ 112]. The keyword assignment is typically implemented by a classifier that maps the input
document to a word in the pre-defined vocabulary [ 23,71,114,158]. Unfortunately, some NLG sce-
narios do not hold an appropriate pre-defined vocabulary, so keyword assignment cannot be widely
used to enhance NLG tasks. One applicable scenario is to use a pre-determined domain specific
vocabulary to maintain relevance between the input and the output sequence [ 23]. Another scenario
is to generate dialogue with specific attributes such as persona [113, 143], emotion [71, 114, 158].
M1.1: Adding assigned keyword into the decoder .A straightforward method of keyword
assignment is to assign the words from pre-defined vocabulary and use them as the keywords [ 113,
143]. Sometimes, the input sequence does not have an explicit keyword, but we can find one from
the pre-defined vocabulary. For example, a dialogue utterance “If you had stopped him that day,
things would have been different. ” expresses sadness but it does not have the word “sad.” To address
this issue, Li et al. propose a method to predict an emotion category by fitting the sum of hidden
states from encoder into a classifier [ 71]. Then, the response will be generated with the guidance
of the emotion category. In order to dynamically track how much the emotion is expressed in the
generated sequence, Zhou et al. propose a memory module to capture the emotion dynamics during
decoding [ 158]. Each category is initialized with an emotion state vector before the decoding phase
starts. At each step, the emotion state decays by a certain amount. Once the decoding process is
completed, the emotion state decays to zero, indicating that the emotion is completely expressed.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 15 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:15
M1.2: Assigning keyword for generated sequence .As mentioned in [ 114], explicitly incorpo-
rating emotional keywords suffers from expressing a certain emotion overwhelmingly. Instead,
Song et al. propose to increase the intensity of the emotional experiences not by using emotional
words explicitly, but by implicitly combining neutral words in distinct ways on emotion [ 114].
Specifically, they use an emotion classifier to build a sentence-level emotion discriminator, which
helps to recognize the responses that express a certain emotion but not explicitly contain too many
literal emotional words. The discriminator is connected to the end of the decoder.
3.2.2 M2: Incorporate Keyword Extraction into Text Generation .Keyword extraction se-
lects salient words from input documents [ 112]. Recent work has used statistical keyword extraction
techniques (e.g., PMI [ 73], TextRank [ 69]), and neural-based keyword extraction techniques (e.g.,
BiLSTM [ 70]). The process of incorporating extracted keywords into generation is much like the
process discussed in Section 3.2.1. It takes keywords as an additional input into decoder. Recent
work improves encoding phase by adding another sequence encoder to represent keywords [ 69,70].
Then, the contextualized keywords representation is fed into the decoder together with input
sequence representation. To advance the keyword extraction, Li et al. propose to use multi-task
learning for training a keyword extractor network and generating summaries [ 22,70]. Because both
summarization and keyword extraction aim to select important information from input document,
these two tasks can benefit from sharing parameters to improve the capacity of capturing the gist
of the input text. In practice, they take overlapping words between the input document and the
ground-truth summary as keywords, and adopt a BiLSTM-Softmax as keyword extractor. Similar
idea has also been used in question generation tasks [ 22,133]. They use overlapping words between
the input answer context and the ground-truth question as keywords.
3.2.3 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .
Pros and cons. ForM1, the primary advantage of keyword assignment is that the quality of
keywords is guaranteed, because irrelevant keywords are not included in the pre-defined vocabulary.
Another advantage is that even if two semantically similar documents do not have common words,
they can still be assigned with the same keyword. However, there are mainly two drawbacks. On
one hand, it is expensive to create and maintain dictionaries in new domains. So, the dictionaries
might not be available. On the other hand, potential keywords occurring in the document would be
unfortunately ignored if they were not in the vocabulary. Therefore, keyword assignment is suitable
for the task that requires specific categories of keywords to guide the generated sentences with
these key information. For example, dialogue systems generate responses with specific attitudes.
ForM2, keyword extraction selects the most representative words explicitly presented in the
document, which is independent from any vocabulary. It is easy to use but has two drawbacks. First,
it cannot guarantee consistency because similar documents may still be represented by different
keywords if they do not share the same set of words. Second, when an input document does not
have a proper representative word, and unfortunately, the keyword extractor selects an irrelevant
word from the document as a keyword, this wrong guidance will mislead the generation. Therefore,
keyword extraction is suitable for the task that the output sequence needs to keep important
information in the input sequence such as document summarization and paraphrase.
Quantitative analysis. Table 3 summarizes tasks and datasets used in keyword-enhanced NLG
work. Comparing with keyword-enhanced methods (E-SCBA [ 71]) and the basic Seq2Seq attention
model, keyword-enhanced methods can greatly improve both generation quality (evaluated by
BLEU) and emotional expression (evaluated by emotion-w and emotion-s) on the NLPCC dataset.
Besides, as shown in Table 3(a), EmoDS [ 114] achieved the best performance among three M1
methods, which indicates taking keyword assignment as a discriminant task can make better
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 16 ====
1:16 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
improvement than assigning keyword before the sentence decoding. For M2 methods, since most
methods were evaluated on different tasks, we can only compare the performance between “without
using keyword” and “using keyword”. As shown in Table 3(b), leveraging extracted keywords from
input sequence into Seq2Seq model can improve the generation quality on summarization and
question generation tasks. Comparing with KGAS [ 70] and KIGN [ 69], we can observe using
BiLSTM-Softmax to extract keyword (a supervised manner by using overlapping words between 𝑋
and𝑌as labels) can make better performance than using TextRank (an unsupervised manner).
3.3 NLG Enhanced by Linguistic Features
Feature enriched encoder means that the encoder not only reads the input sequence, but also
incorporates auxiliary hand-crafted features [ 110,149,160]. Linguistic features are the most common
hand-crafted features, such as part-of-speech (POS) tags, dependency parsing, and semantic parsing.
3.3.1 POS tags and NER tags .Part-of-speech tagging (POS) assigns token tags to indicate the
token’s grammatical categories and part of speech such as noun (N) ,verb (V) ,adjective (A) . Named-
entity recognition (NER) classifies named entities mentioned in unstructured text into pre-defined
categories such as person (P) ,location (L) ,organization (O) . CoreNLP is the most common used
tool [ 84]. In spite of homonymy and word formation processes, the same surface word form may
be shared between several word types. Incorporating NER tags and POS tags can detect named
entities and understand input sequence better, hence, further improve NLG [28, 93, 160].
3.3.2 Syntactic dependency graph .Syntactic dependency graph is a directed acyclic graph
representing syntactic relations between words [ 4]. For example, in the sentence “The monkey eats
a banana”, “monkey” is the subject of the predicate “eats”, and “banana” is the object. Enhancing
sequence representations by utilizing dependency information captures source long-distance depen-
dency constraints and parent-child relation for different words [ 1,4,15]. In NLG tasks, dependency
information is often modeled in three different ways as follows: (i) linearized representation: lin-
earize dependency graph and then use sequence model to obtain syntax-aware representation [ 1];
(ii) path-based representation: calculate attention weights based on the linear distance between a
word and the aligned center position, i.e., the greater distance a word to the center position on the
dependency graph is, the smaller contribution of the word to the context vector is [ 15]; and (iii)
graph-based representation: use GNNs to aggregate information from dependency relations [4].
3.3.3 Semantic dependency graph .Semantic dependency graph represents predicate-argument
relations between content words in a sentence and have various semantic representation schemes
(e.g., DM) based on different annotation systems. Nodes in a semantic dependency graph are
extracted by semantic role labeling (SRL) or dependency parsing, and connected by different
intra-semantic and inter-semantic relations [ 98]. Since semantic dependency graph introduces a
higher level of information abstraction that captures commonalities between different realizations
of the same underlying predicate-argument structures, it has been widely used to improve text
generation [ 59,75,98]. Jin et al. propose a semantic dependency guided summarization model [ 59].
They incorporate the semantic dependency graph and the input text by stacking encoders to guide
summary generation process. The stacked encoders consist of a sequence encoder and a graph
encoder, in which the sentence encoder first reads the input text through stacked multi-head
self-attention, and then the graph encoder captures semantic relationships and incorporates the
semantic graph structure into the contextual-level representation.
3.4 NLG Enhanced by Open Knowledge Graphs
For those KGs (e.g., ConceptNet) constructed based on data beyond the input text, we refer them as
external KGs . On the contrary, an internal KG is defined as a KG constructed solely based on the
input text. In this section, we will discuss incorporating internal KG to help NLG [30, 54].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 17 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:17
Internal KG plays an important role in understanding the input sequence especially when it is of
great length. By constructing an internal KG intermediary, redundant information can be merged or
discarded, producing a substantially compressed form to represent the input document [ 30]. Besides,
representations on KGs can produce a structured summary and highlight the proximity of relevant
concepts, when complex events related with the same entity may span multiple sentences [ 54]. One
of the mainstream methods of constructing an internal KG is using open information extraction
(OpenIE). Unlike traditional information extraction (IE) methods, OpenIE is not limited to a small
set of target entities and relations known in advance, but rather extracts all types of entities and
relations found in input text [ 95]. In this way, OpenIE facilitates the domain independent discovery
of relations extracted from text and scales to large heterogeneous corpora.
After obtaining an internal KG, the next step is to learn the representation of the internal KG and
integrate it into the generation model. For example, Zhu et al. use a graph attention network (GAT)
to obtain the representation of each node, and fuse that into a transformer-based encoder-decoder
architecture via attention [ 163]. Their method generates abstractive summaries with higher factual
correctness. Huang et al. extend by first encoding each paragraph as a sub-KG using GAT, and then
connecting all sub-KGs with a Bi-LSTM [ 54]. This process models topic transitions and recurrences,
which enables the identification of notable content, thus benefiting summarization.
4 NLG ENHANCED BY EXTERNAL KNOWLEDGE
4.1 NLG Enhanced by Knowledge Base
One of the biggest challenges in NLG is to discover the dependencies of elements within a sequence
and/or across input and output sequences. The dependencies are actually various types of knowledge
such as commonsense, factual events, and semantic relationship. Knowledge base (KB) is a popular
technology that collects, stores, and manages large-scale information for knowledge-based systems
like search engines. It has a great number of triples composed of subjects, predicates, and objects.
People also call them “facts” or “factual triplets”. Recently, researchers have been designing methods
to use KB as external knowledge for learning the dependencies easier, faster, and better.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by knowledge base:
•Question answering. It is often difficult to generate proper answers only based on a given
question. This is because, depending on what the question is looking for, a good answer may
have different forms. It may completes the question precisely with the missing information.
It may elaborate details of some part of the question. It may need reasoning and inference
based on some facts and/or commonsense. So, only incorporating input question into neural
generation models often fails the task due to the lack of commonsense/factual knowledge [ 8].
Related structured information of commonsense and facts can be retrieved from KBs.
•Dialogue system. The needs of KB in generating conversations or dialogues are relevant with
QA but differ from two aspects. First, a conversation or dialogue could be open discussions
when started by an open topic like “ Do you have any recommendations? ” Second, responding
an utterance in a certain step needs to recall previous contexts to determine involved entities.
KB will play an important role to recognize dependencies in the long-range contexts.
To handle different kinds of relationships between KB and input/output sequences, these methods
can be categorized into two methodologies which is shown in Figure 5: (M1) design supervised
tasks around KB for joint optimization; (M2) enhance incorporation by selecting KB or facts.
4.1.1 M1: Design Supervised Tasks around KB for Joint Optimization .Knowledge bases
(KBs) that acquire, store, and represent factual knowledge can be used to enhance text generation.
However, designing effective incorporation to achieve a desired enhancement is challenging because
a vanilla Seq2Seq often fails to represent discrete isolated concepts though they perform well to
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 18 ====
1:18 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Jet Li was born in Singapore. Heis now a Singaporeancitizen.Top-3triplesSequence encoderTriple encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
(a) M1: Retrieve relevant triples, use them for generation Input textDo    you   know where  was  Jet_Li fromsubjectpredicateobject 1Jet_LigenderMale2Jet_Liprofessionactor3Jet_LinationalitySingapore4Jet_LibirthplaceBeijing5………Jet Li was born in Beijing. Heis now a Singaporeancitizen.Top-3triplesSequence encoderTriple encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
source conceptsKBlocate triples(b) M2: Use KL tomeasure the proximity between prior and posteriorInput textDo    you   know where  was  Jet_Li fromsubjectpredicateobject 1Jet_LigenderMale2Jet_LinationalitySingapore3Jet_LibirthplaceBeijing4Jet_Liprofessionactor5………
𝑝(𝑘|𝑌)123124
𝑝(𝑘|𝑋)KL div losslocate triplesKB
source conceptsKBlocate triples
Fig. 5. The left figure demonstrates retrieving relevant triples, then using them for generation; the right figure
demonstrate using KL to measure the proximity between prior and posterior distribution.
learn smooth shared patterns (e.g., language diversity). To fully utilize the knowledge bases, the
idea is to jointly train neural models on multiple tasks. For example, the target task is answer
sequence generation, and additional tasks include question understanding and fact retrieval in
the KB. Knowledge can be shared across a unified encoder-decoder framework design. Typically,
question understanding and fact retrieval are relevant and useful tasks, because a question could
be parsed to match (e.g., string matching, entity linking, named entity recognition) its subject and
predicate with the components of a fact triple in KB, and the answer is the object of the triple.
KBCopy was the first work to generate responses using factual knowledge bases [ 29]. During the
generation, KBCopy is able to copy words from the KBs. However, the directly copying relevant
words from KBs is extremely challenging. CoreQA used both copying and retrieving mechanisms to
generate answer sequences with an end-to-end fashion [ 48]. Specifically, it had a retrieval module to
understand the question and find related facts from the KB. Then, the question and all retrieved facts
are transformed into latent representations by two separate encoders. During the decoding phase,
the integrated representations are fed into the decoder by performing a joint attention on both
input sequence and retrieved facts. Figure 5(a) demonstrates a general pipeline that first retrieves
relevant triples from KBs, then leverages the top-ranked triples into the generation process.
4.1.2 M2: Enhance Incorporation by Selecting KB or Facts in KB .Ideally, the relevance of
the facts is satisfactory with the input and output sequence dependencies, however, it is not always
true in real cases. Lian et al. addressed the issue of selecting relevant facts from KBs based on
retrieval models (e.g. semantic similarity) might not effectively achieve appropriate knowledge
selection [ 74]. The reason is that different kinds of selected knowledge facts can be used to generate
diverse responses for the same input utterance. Given a specific utterance and response pair, the
posterior distribution over knowledge base from both the utterance and the response may provide
extra guidance on knowledge selection. The challenge lies in the discrepancy between the prior
and posterior distributions. Specifically, the model learns to select effective knowledge only based
on the prior distribution, so it is hard to obtain the correct posterior distribution during inference.
To tackle this issue, the work of Lian et al. [ 74] and Wu et al. [ 137] (shown in Figure 5(b))
approximated the posterior distribution using the prior distribution in order to select appropriate
knowledge even without posterior information. They introduced an auxiliary loss, called Kullback-
Leibler divergence loss (KLDivLoss), to measure the proximity between the prior distribution and
the posterior distribution. The KLDivLoss is defined as follows:
LKLDiv(𝜃)=𝑁∑︁
𝑖=1𝑝(𝑘=𝑘𝑖|𝑋,𝑌)log𝑝(𝑘=𝑘𝑖|𝑋,𝑌)
𝑝(𝑘=𝑘𝑖|𝑋), (21)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 19 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:19
Table 4. M2-based methods can retrieve more precise triples, and further improve the generation performance.
Method Cat. Ref.Chinese Weibo (large) [137] Chinese Weibo (small) [136]
Entity score Generation score Entity score Generation score
Match Recall BLEU-2 Dist-2 Match Recall BLEU-2 Dist-2
GenDS M1 [165] 0.97 0.37 3.42 4.27 0.75 0.26 2.09 1.66
CCM M1 [159] 1.09 0.37 4.75 4.87 0.99 0.28 3.26 2.59
ConKADI M2 [136] - - - - 1.48 0.38 5.06 23.93
TaFact M2 [137] 1.81 0.47 5.07 23.56 - - - -
where𝑁is the number of retrieved facts. When minimizing KLDivLoss, the posterior distribution
𝑝(𝑘|𝑋,𝑌)can be regarded as labels to apply the prior distribution 𝑝(𝑘|𝑋)for approximating
𝑝(𝑘|𝑋,𝑌). Finally, the total loss is written as the sum of the KLDivLoss and NLL (generation) loss.
4.1.3 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .The relevance between triples in KBs
and input sequences plays a central role in discovering knowledge for sequence generation. Meth-
ods in M1typically follows the process that parses input sequence, retrieves relevant facts, and
subsequently, a knowledge-aware output can be generated based on the input sequence and previ-
ously retrieved facts. Even though the improvement by modeling KB with memory network [ 82],
existing KG-enhanced methods still suffer from effectively selecting precise triples.
Methods of M2improve the selection of facts, in which the ground-truth responses used as the
posterior context knowledge to supervise the training of the prior fact probability distribution. Wu
et al. used exact match and recall to measure whether the retrieved triples is used to generate the
target outputs [ 136]. Table 4 shows the entity recall scores of M1-based methods and M2-based
methods reported in [ 136,137]. We observe that compared to M1-based methods, M2-based methods
can greatly improve the accuracy of triple retrieval, as well as the generation quality.
There are still remaining challenges in KB-enhanced methods. One is that retrieved facts may
contain noisy information, making the generation unstable [ 61]. This problem is extremely harmful
in NLG tasks, e.g., KB-based question answering and task-oriented dialogue system, since the
information in KB is usually the expected entities in the response.
4.2 NLG Enhanced by Knowledge Graph
Knowledge graph (KG), as a type of structured human knowledge, has attracted great attention
from both academia and industry. A KG is a structured representation of facts (a.k.a. knowledge
triplets) consisting of entities∗, relations, and semantic descriptions [ 58]. The terms of “knowledge
base” and “knowledge graph” can be interchangeably used, but they do not have to be synonymous.
The knowledge graph is organized as a graph, so the connections between entities are first-class
citizens in it. In the KG, people can easily traverse links to discover how entities are interconnected
to express certain knowledge. Recent advances in artificial intelligence research have demonstrated
the effectiveness of using KGs in various applications like recommendation systems [127].
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications that have been enhanced by knowledge graph:
•Commonsense reasoning. It aims to empower machines to capture the human common-
sense from KG during generation. The methods exploit both structural and semantic informa-
tion of the commonsense KG and perform reasoning over multi-hop relational paths, in order
to augment the limited information with chains of evidence for commonsense reasoning.
Popular tasks in commonsense reasoning generation include abductive reasoning (e.g., the
𝛼NLG task) [ 7,57], counterfactual reasoning [ 56,57], and entity description generation [ 21].
•Dialogue system. It frequently makes use of KG for the semantics in linked entities and
relations [ 97,121,151,159]. A dialogue may shift focus from one entity to another, breaking
∗For brevity, we use “entities” to denote both entities (e.g., prince) and concepts (e.g., musician) throughout the paper.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 20 ====
1:20 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
one discourse into several segments, which can be represented as a linked path connecting
the entities and their relations.
•Creative writing. This task can be found in both scientific and story-telling domains. Scien-
tific writing aims to explain natural processes and phenomena step by step, so each step can
be reflected as a link on KG and the whole explanation is a path [ 63,130]. In story generation,
the implicit knowledge in KG can facilitate the understanding of storyline and better predict
what will happen in the next plot [45, 46, 80].
Compared with separate, independent knowledge triplets, knowledge graph provides compre-
hensive and rich entity features and relations for models to overcome the influence of the data
distribution and enhance its robustness. Therefore, node embedding and relational path have played
important roles in various text generation tasks. The corresponding techniques are knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) [ 131] and path-based knowledge graph reasoning [ 17]. Furthermore, it
has been possible to encode multi-hop and high-order relations in KGs using the emerging graph
neural network (GNN) [138] and graph-to-sequence (Graph2Seq) frameworks [6].
Definition 4.1 (Knowledge graph (KG)). A knowledge graph (KG) is a directed and multi-relational
graph composed of entities and relations which are regarded as nodes and different types of edges.
Formally, a KG is defined as G=(U,E,R), whereUis the set of entity nodes and E⊆U×R×U
is the set of typed edges between nodes in Uwith a certain relation in the relation schema R.
Then given the input/output sequences in the text generation task, a subgraph of the KG which
is associated with the sequences can be defined as below.
Definition 4.2 (Sequence-associated K-hop subgraph). A sequence-associated K-hop subgraph
is defined asG𝑠𝑢𝑏=(U𝑠𝑢𝑏,E𝑠𝑢𝑏,R), whereU𝑠𝑢𝑏is the union of the set of entity nodes mapped
through an entity linking function𝜓:U×X→U 𝑠𝑢𝑏andtheir neighbors within K-hops. Similarly,
E𝑠𝑢𝑏⊆U𝑠𝑢𝑏×R×U𝑠𝑢𝑏is the set of typed edges between nodes in U𝑠𝑢𝑏.
Sequence-associated subgraph provides a graphical form of the task data (i.e., sequences) and
thus enables the integration of KGs and the sequences into graph algorithms.
Many methods have been proposed to learn the relationship between KG semantics and in-
put/output sequences. They can be categorized into four methodologies as shown in Figure 6: (M1)
incorporate knowledge graph embeddings into language generation; (M2) transfer knowledge into
language model with triplet information; (M3) perform reasoning over knowledge graph via path
finding strategies; and (M4) improve the graph embeddings with graph neural networks.
4.2.1 M1: Incorporate Knowledge Graph Embeddings into Language Generation .Knowl-
edge graph embedding (KGE) techniques learn node embedding from a KG [ 131]. KGE aims to
capture the semantic relatedness between entity nodes from their connectivity information (i.e.,
different types of relations) in the KG. The primary idea is to represent entities and relations in a
low-dimensional vector space R𝑑, where𝑑≪|U∪R| , to reduce data dimensionality while preserv-
ing the inherent structure of the KG. TransE [ 11] is the most widely used KGE technique. In TransE,
given a KG edge(𝑢𝑖,𝑟,𝑢𝑗), the relation is seen as a translation vector rso that the embedded entities
u𝑖and u𝑗can be connected with low translation error, namely u𝑖+r≈u𝑗. For example, we have
−−−−−→𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑦𝑜+−−−−−−−−−−−−→𝐼𝑠𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑂𝑓≈−−−−→𝐽𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑛 for the knowledge edge (Tokyo,IsCapticalOf ,Japan). As shown
in Figure 6(a), a common strategy of incorporating KGE into NLG is to concatenate the original
word representations ( x) with the corresponding entity representations ( u) from KGE [151, 159].
4.2.2 M2: Transfer Knowledge into Language Model with Knowledge Triplet Informa-
tion .The vector spaces of entity embeddings (from KGE) and word embeddings (from pre-trained
language models) are usually inconsistent [ 80]. Beyond a simple concatenation, recent methods
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 21 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:21
futurechattalkdreamPath 1Path 2futurechattalkdream
: GNN aggregationYeah, it ’s not a dreamto have a talkwith robot!Input textInput subgraphSequence encoderGNN encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
Chatbasedon knowledge  is    the   futuresource conceptsKGlocate subgraphYeah, it ’s not a dreamto have a talkwith robot!Input textInput pathsSequence encoderPath encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
Chatbasedon knowledge  is    the   futuresource conceptsKGlocate subgraph(M3) Performing path reasoning on KG(M4) Aggregating sub-KG via GNNChatbasedon knowledge  is    the   futureInput text+++++++KG embeddingLanguage generation modelPretrained through TransEidentityvector1chat[-0.1, 0.2, 0.5]2talk[0.3, 0.4, -0.2]3future[0.6, 0.1, 0.1]4based[-0.4, 0.4, 0.2]entity emb.word emb.KG-enhanced language modelParisAtLocationEiffel tower<s>   Eiffel   tower   is      at    Paris Eiffel  tower     is      at   Paris   </s>Pretrained language modeltraining with all KG triples(M1) Incorporate KGE into language generation(M2) Transfer knowledge into pretrained LM
Fig. 6. Four typical methodologies for incorporating KG semantics into text generation.
have explored to fine-tune the language models directly on knowledge graph triplets. Guan et al.
transformed the commonsense triplets (in ConceptNet and ATOMIC) into readable sentences using
templates, as illustrated in Figure 6(b). And then the language model (e.g., GPT-2) is fine-tuned on
the transformed sentences to learn the commonsense knowledge to improve text generation.
4.2.3 M3: Perform Reasoning over Knowledge Graph via Path Finding Strategies .KGE
learns node representations from one-hop relations through a certain semantic relatedness (e.g.
TransE). However, Xiong et al. argued that an intelligent machine is supposed to be able to conduct
explicit reasoning over relational paths to make multiple inter-related decisions rather than merely
embedding entities in the KGs [ 141]. Take the QA task an example. The machine performs reasoning
over KGs to handle complex queries that do not have an obvious answer, infer potential answer-
related entities, and generate the corresponding answer. So, the challenge lies in identifying a subset
of desired entities and mentioning them properly in a response [ 91]. Because the connected entities
usually follow natural conceptual threads, they help generate reasonable and logical answers to
keep conversations engaging and meaningful. As shown in Figure 6(c), path-based methods explore
various patterns of connections among entity nodes such as meta-paths and meta-graphs. Then
they learn from walkable paths on KGs to provide auxiliary guidance for the generation process.
The path finding based methods can be mainly divided into two categories: (1) path ranking based
methods and (2) reinforcement learning (RL) based path finding methods.
M3.1: Path routing and ranking .Path ranking algorithm (PRA) emerges as a promising
method for learning and inferring paths on large KGs [ 65]. PRA uses random walks to perform
multiple bounded depth-first search processes to find relational paths. Coupled with elastic-net
based learning [ 166], PRA picks plausible paths and prunes non-ideal, albeit factually correct
KG paths. For example, Tuan et al. proposed a neural conversation model with PRA on dynamic
knowledge graphs [ 121]. In the decoding phase, it selected an output from two networks, a general
GRU decoder network and a PRA based multi-hop reasoning network, at each time step. Bauer et
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 22 ====
1:22 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
al. ranked and filtered paths to ensure both the information quality and variety via a 3-step scoring
strategy: initial node scoring, cumulative node scoring, and path selection [ 5]. Ji et al. heuristically
pruned the noisy edges between entity nodes and proposed a path routing algorithm to propagate
the edge probability along multi-hop paths to the entity nodes [56].
M3.2: Reinforcement learning based path finding .Reinforcement learning (RL) based meth-
ods make an agent to perform reasoning to find a path in a continuous space. These methods
incorporate various criteria in their reward functions of path finding, making the path finding
process flexible. Xiong et al. proposed DeepPath, the first work that employed Markov decision
process (MDP) and used RL based approaches to find paths in KGs [ 141]. Leveraging RL based
path finding for NLG tasks typically consists of two stages [ 81,97]. First, they take a sequence
as input, retrieve a starting node 𝑢0onG, then perform multi-hop graph reasoning, and finally
arrive at a target node 𝑢𝑘that incorporates the knowledge for output sequence generation. Second,
they represent the sequence 𝑋and selected path Φ𝑘(𝑢0,𝑢𝑘)through two separate encoders. They
decode a sequence with multi-source attentions on the input sequence and selected path. Path-based
knowledge graph reasoning converts the graph structure of a KG into a linear path structure that
can be easily represented by sequence encoders (e.g, RNN) [ 30,97,121]. For example, Niu et al.
encoded selected path and input sequence with two separate RNNs and generated sequence with
a general attention-based RNN decoder [ 97]. To enhance the RL process, Xu et al. proposed six
reward functions for training an agent in the reinforcement learning process. For example, the
functions looked for accurate arrival at the target node as well as the shortest path between the
start and target node, i.e., minimize the length of the selected path Φ𝑘(𝑢0,𝑢𝑘)[142].
4.2.4 M4: Improve the Graph Embeddings with Graph Neural Networks .The contexts
surrounding relevant entities on KGs play an important role in understanding the entities and
generating proper text about their interactions [ 46,63]. For example, in scientific writing, it is
important to consider the neighboring nodes of relevant concepts on a taxonomy and/or the
global context of a scientific knowledge graph [ 63]. However, neither KGE nor relational path
could fully represent such information. Graph-based representations aim at aggregating the con-
text/neighboring information on graph data; and recent advances of GNN models demonstrate a
promising advancement in graph-based representation learning [ 138]. In order to improve text
generation, graph-to-sequence (Graph2Seq) models encode the structural information of the KG in
a neural encoder-decoder architecture [ 6]. Since then, GNNs have been playing an important role
in improving the NLG models. They have been applied to both encoding anddecoding phases.
Learning KG-aware input text representation with GNNs (Encoding). For encoding phase,
a general process of leveraging GNNs for incorporating KG is to augment semantics of a word
in the input text by combining with the vector of the corresponding entity node vector to the
word on the KG [ 46,54,150,151,159]. A pre-defined entity linking function 𝜓:U×X→U 𝑠𝑢𝑏
maps words in the input sequence to entity nodes on the KG. Given an input sequence, all the
linked entities and their neighbors within 𝐾-hops compose a sequence-associated K-hop subgraph
G𝑠𝑢𝑏(formally defined in Definition 4.2). For each entity node in G𝑠𝑢𝑏, it uses the KG structure as
well as entity and edge features (e.g., semantic description if available) to learn a representation
vector u. Specifically, a GNN model follows a neighborhood aggregation approach that iteratively
updates the representation of a node by aggregating information from its neighboring nodes and
edges. After 𝑘iterations of aggregation, the node representation captures the structural information
within its𝑘-hop neighborhood. Formally, the 𝑘-th layer of a node 𝑢∈U𝑠𝑢𝑏is:
u(𝑘)=Combine 𝑘(u(𝑘−1),Aggregate 𝑘(
(u(𝑘−1)
𝑖,e(𝑘−1)
𝑖𝑗,u(𝑘−1)
𝑗):∀(𝑢𝑖,𝑒𝑖𝑗,𝑢𝑗)∈N(𝑢)	
)).(22)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 23 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:23
Table 5. Tasks, datasets and KG sources used in different KG-enhanced papers. We also compared the
performance of different models before and after incorporating KG into the generation process, in which “w/o
KG” performance comes from the best baseline method; “with KG” comes from the KG-enhanced method.
Tasks Methods Ref. Cat.Dataset Information Effect of KG KG
Name #Instance w/o KG with KG ΔBLEU source
Common-
sense
reasoningKG-BART [80] M4 CommonGen 77,449 28.60 30.90 +2.30 ConceptNet
CE-PR [56] M3 ComVE 30,000 15.70 17.10 +1.60 ConceptNet
GRF [57] M4𝛼NLG-ART 60,709 9.62 11.62 +2.00 ConceptNet
MGCN [21] M3 EntDesc 110,814 24.90 30.00 +4.30 Self-built KG
Story
generationIE+MSA [46] M4 ROCStories98,1628.25 9.36 +1.11 ConceptNet
GRF [57] M4 (split-1) 10.40 11.00 +0.60 ConceptNet
KEPM [45] M2ROCStories98,162 14.10 14.30 +0.20ConceptNet
(split-2) & ATOMIC
MRG [156] M3 VisualStory 50,000 3.18 3.23 +0.05 ConceptNet
Scientific
writingGraphWriter [63] M4 AGENDA 40,000 12.20 14.30 +1.90 Self-built KG
PaperRobot [130] M4 PaperWriting 27,001 9.20 13.00 +3.80 Self-built KG
Dialogue
systemConceptFlow [151] M4 Reddit-10M 3,384K 1.62 2.46 +0.84 ConceptNet
AKGCM [81] M3 EMNLP dialog 43,192 32.45 30.84 -1.61 Self-built KG
AKGCM [81] M3 ICLR dialog 21,569 6.74 6.94 +0.20 Self-built KG
Question
answeringMHPGM [5] M3 NarrativeQA 46,765 19.79 21.07 +1.28 Self-built KG
Table 6. Qualitative comparison between different KG-enhanced methods.
Methods Ref.Method category Multi-hop info. Multi-hop path Auxiliary (knowledge
M1 M2 M3 M4 aggregation reasoning related) task(s)
THOTH [92] ✓ ×× ×
CCM [159] ✓×, one-hop× ×
KEPM [45] ✓×× ×
AKGCM [81] ✓× ✓, Markov decision ✓, Path selection
IE+MSA [46] ✓✓, by GNN× ×
ConceptFlow [151] ✓✓, by GNN× ×
CE-PR [56] ✓× ✓, Path routing ✓, Concept selection
GRF [57] ✓✓, by GNN ✓, Path scoring ✓, Link prediction
The sub-graph representation h𝑠𝑢𝑏𝐺 is learned thorough a Readout(·)function from all entity node
representations (i.e., h𝑠𝑢𝑏𝐺=Readout(
u(𝑘),𝑢∈U𝑠𝑢𝑏	
). Zhou et al. was the first to design such
a knowledge graph interpreter to enrich the context representations with neighbouring concepts
on ConceptNet using graph attention network (GAT) [159].
Dynamically attending KG representation (Decoding). The sequence decoder uses attention
mechanism to find useful semantics from the representation of KG as well as the hidden state of
the input text, where the KG’s representation is usually generated by GNNs. Specially, the hidden
state is augmented by subgraph representation h𝑠𝑢𝑏𝐺, i.e., s0=h𝑛⊕h𝑠𝑢𝑏𝐺 [6]. Then, the decoder
attentively reads the retrieved subgraph to obtain a graph-aware context vector. Then it uses the
vector to update the decoding state [ 46,57,80,151,159]. It adaptively chooses a generic word or
an entity from the retrieved subgraph to generate output words. Because graph-level attention
alone might overlook fine-grained knowledge edge information, some recent methods adopted the
hierarchical graph attention mechanism [ 46,80,159]. It attentively read the retrieved subgraph
G𝑠𝑢𝑏and then attentively read all knowledge edges E𝑠𝑢𝑏involved inG𝑠𝑢𝑏. Ji et al. added a relevance
score that reflected the relevancy of the knowledge edge according to the decoding state [57].
4.2.5 Discussion and Analysis of the Methodologies and Methods .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 24 ====
1:24 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Pros and cons. Knowledge graph embedding ( M1) was the earliest attempt to embed com-
ponents of a KG including entities and relations into continuous vector spaces and use them to
improve text generation. Those entity and relation embeddings can simply be used to enrich
input text representations (e.g., concatenating embeddings), bridging connections between entity
words linked from input text in latent space. Because the graph projection and text generation are
performed as two separate steps, the embedding vectors from knowledge graph and the hidden
states from input text were in two different vector spaces. The model would have to learn to bridge
the gap, which might make a negative impact on the performance of text generation.
Fine tuning pre-trained language models on the KG triplets ( M2) can eliminate the gap between
the two vector spaces. Nevertheless, M1 and M2 share two drawbacks. First, they only preserve
information of direct (one-hop) relations in a KG, such as pair-wise proximity in M1 and KG triplet
in M2, but ignore the indirect (multi-hop) relations of concepts. The indirect relations may provide
plausible evidence of complex reasoning for some text generation tasks. Second, from the time
KGs were encoded in M1 or M2 methods, the generation models would no longer be able to access
the KGs but their continuous representations. Then the models could not support reasoning like
commonsense KG reasoning for downstream tasks. Due to these two reasons, M1 and M2 were
often used to create basic KG representations upon which the KG path reasoning (M3) and GNNs
(M4) could further enrich the hidden states [151, 159].
The path finding methods of KG reasoning ( M3) perform multi-hop walks on the KGs beyond
one-hop relations. It enables reasoning that is needed in many text generation scenarios such as
commonsense reasoning and conversational question answering. At the same time, it provides
better interpretability for the entire generation process, because the path selected by the KG
reasoning algorithm will be explicitly used for generation. However, the selected paths might not
be able to capture the full contexts of the reasoning process due to the limit of number. Besides,
reinforcement-learning based path finding uses heuristic rewards to drive the policy search, making
the model sensitive to noises and adversarial examples.
The algorithms of GNN and Graph2Seq ( M4) can effectively aggregate semantic and structural
information from multi-hop neighborhoods on KGs, compared to M3 that considers multi-hop
paths. Therefore, the wide range of relevant information can be directly embedded into the en-
coder/decoder hidden states. Meanwhile, M4 enables back propagation for jointly optimizing text
encoder and graph encoder. Furthermore, the attention mechanism that has been applied in GNN
and Graph2Seq (e.g., graph attention) can explain the model’s output at some extent, though the
multi-hop paths from M3 has better interpretability.
M3 and M4 are able to use multi-hop relational information, compared to M1 and M2. However,
they have two weak points. First, they have higher complexity than M1 and M2. In M3, the action
space of path finding algorithms can be very large due to the large size and sparsity of the knowledge
graph. In M4, the decoder has to attentively read both input sequence and knowledge graph. Second,
the subgraphs retrieved by M3 and M4 might provide low coverage of useful concepts for generating
the output. For example, people use ConceptNet, a widely used commonsense KG, to retrieve the
subgraph on three generative commonsense reasoning tasks. The task datasets are ComVE [ 57],
𝛼-NLG [ 7], and ROCSories [ 46]. We found 25.1% / 24.2% / 21.1% of concepts in the output could
be found on ConceptNet, but only 11.4% / 8.1% / 5.7% of concepts in the output can be found on
the retrieved 2-hop sequence-associated subgraph, respectively. It means that a large portion of
relevant concepts on the KG are not utilized in the generation process.
Quantitative analysis. Table 5 summarizes tasks, datasets, and KG sources used in existing
KG-enhanced works. Three important things should be mentioned. First, all the datasets in the table
are public, and we include their links in Table 11. CommonGen [ 76], ComVE [ 124] and𝛼-NLG [ 7]
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 25 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:25
B: I like country music. It is the most listened to rush hour radio genre.3 relevant docsSequence encoderDocument encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
(a) M1: Retrieve relevant documents, use them for generation Input textB: It made $279,167,575 at the box office.Background docSequence encoderDocument encoderSequence DecoderOutput text
(b) M2: Read background document and generate outputInput text
(1) In 2009, country music was the most lis-tenedto rush hourradio genrein the US.(2) Country is a musical genre that origin-atedin the southern US in the early 1920s.(3) George Glenn Jones was an American musician, singer and songwriter.A dialogue between A and BA: Do you know George Glenn Jones?B: Yes, he was a famous American        singer and songwriter.A: Cool! You sure know some stuff about country music!Retrieve from WikipediaBackground: ... but if you like ben stiller, go see“meet the fockers”. Dustin’s antics will favorite character was jack (the older one), because he was so serious but always plotting and putting up a front. I think it was $279,167,575 awards ASCAP film and television music awards 2005 top box office films MTV… (~250 words)A dialogue between A and BA: That name is so ridiculous but funny. B: First off, the writers did not miss a single opportunity to play off ofthe name “focker”. A: Yeah, I heard it was a pretty successfulmovie overall.A background-based conversion (BBC)
Fig. 7. The left figure demonstrates retrieving relevant documents, then using them for generation; the right
figure demonstrate reading background document to conduct conversions.
have a public leaderboard for competition. Second, for KG sources, we observe that eight (57.1%)
papers use ConceptNet as external resource, while six (42.9%) papers constructed their own KGs
from domain-specific corpus. For example, Koncel et al. created a scientific knowledge graph by
applying the SciIE tool (science domain information extraction) [ 63]. Besides, Zhao et al. compared
the performance of models between using ConceptNet and using a self-built KG, and found the
model with self-built KG could work better on story generation and review generation tasks [ 156].
Third, we observed that KG-enhanced NLG methods made the largest improvement on generative
commonsense reasoning tasks, in which the average improvement is +2.55% in terms of ΔBLEU,
while the average improvement on all different tasks is +1.32%.
Qualitative analysis. Table 6 compares different KG-enhanced methods from three dimensions:
multi-hop information aggregation, multi-hop path reasoning, and auxiliary knowledge graph
related tasks. M3 is commonly used for multi-hop path reasoning and M4 is used for multi-hop
information aggregation, except that CCM [ 159] only aggregates one-hop neighbors. Besides, the
auxiliary KG-related tasks are often used to further help the model learn knowledge from the KG.
For example, ablation studies in [ 56,57,81] show that the tasks of path selection, concept selection
and link prediction can further boost the generation performance. GRF [ 57] learns these three
abilities at the same time. It achieves the state-of-art performance on three generation tasks.
4.3 NLG enhanced by Grounded Text
Knowledge grounded text refers to textual information that can provide additional knowledge
relevant to the input sequence. The textual information may not be found in training corpora
or structured databases, but can be obtained from massive textual data from online resources.
These online resources include encyclopedia (e.g., Wikipedia), social media (e.g., Twitter), shopping
websites (e.g., Amazon reviews). Knowledge grounded text plays an important role in understanding
the input sequence and its surrounding contexts. For example, Wikipedia articles may offer textual
explanations or background information for the input text. Amazon reviews may contain necessary
descriptions and reviews needed to answer a product-related question. Tweets may contain people’s
comments and summaries towards an event. Therefore, knowledge grounded text is often taken as
an important external knowledge source to help with a variety of NLG applications.
Next, we introduce popular NLG applications enhanced by knowledge grounded text:
•Dialogue system. Building a fully data-driven dialogue system is difficult since most of
the universal knowledge is not presented in the training corpora [ 42]. The lack of universal
knowledge considerably limits the appeal of fully data-driven generation methods, as they
are bounded to respond evasively or defectively and seldom include meaningfully factual
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 26 ====
1:26 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
contents. To infuse the response with factual information, an intelligent machine is expected
to obtain necessary background information to produce appropriate response.
•Summarization. Seq2Seq models that purely depend on the input text tend to “lose control”
sometimes. For example, 3% of summaries contain less than three words, and 4% of summaries
repeat a word for more than 99 times as mentioned in [ 13]. Furthermore, Seq2Seq models
usually focus on copying source words in their exact order, which is often sub-optimal in
abstractive summarization. Therefore, leveraging summaries of documents similar as the
input document as templates can provide reference for the summarization process [ 13,129].
•Question answering (QA). It is often difficult to generate proper answers only based on
the given question. For example, without knowing any information of an Amazon product, it
is hard to deliver satisfactory answer to the user questions such as “Does the laptop have a
long battery life?” or“Is this refrigerator frost-free?” So, the product description and customer
reviews can be used as a reference for answering product-related questions [9, 16].
To handle different kinds of relationships between grounded text and input/output sequences,
these methods can be categorized into two methodologies as shown in Figure 7: (M1) guiding gener-
ation with retrieved information; (M2) modeling background knowledge into response generation.
4.3.1 M1: Guiding Generation with Retrieved Information .Because knowledge grounded
text is not presented in the training corpora, an idea is to retrieve relevant textual information (e.g.,
a review, a relevant document, a summary template) from external sources based on the input text
and to incorporate the retrieved grounded text into the generation process. This process is similar
to designing knowledge acquisition and incorporation of KBs and KGs in text generation tasks.
The difference is that ground text is unstructured and noisy. So, researchers design knowledge
selection and incorporation methods to address the challenges. Based on the number of stages,
we further divide related methods into two categories: retrieve-then-generate (also known as
retrieval-augmented generation, short as RAG, in many existing papers [ 64,68,99]) methods
(2-stage methods) and retrieve, rerank and rewrite methods (3-stage methods).
M1.1: Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) .RAG follows a two-stage process: retrieval
and generation. Specially, as shown in Figure 7(a), a retriever 𝑝(𝑍|𝑋)first returns (usually top-K
truncated) distributions over text passages given a query 𝑋, and then a generator 𝑝(𝑦𝑖|𝑋,𝑍,𝑦 1:𝑖−1)
generates a current token based on a context of the previous tokens 𝑦1:𝑖−1, the original input 𝑋
and a retrieved passage 𝑍. Methods for retrieving fact or review snippets are various, including
matching from a collection of raw text entries indexed by named entities [ 42]; scoring relevant
documents within a large collection by statistical approaches such as BM25 [ 27], or neural-based
retrieval approaches such as dense paragraph retrieval (DPR) [ 68]. For training the retriever and
generator, most of existing work has jointly optimized these two components, without any direct
supervision on what document should be retrieve [ 64,68]. However, by asking human experts to
label what document should be retrieved and adding the retrieval loss (resulting in a multi-task
learning setting), the generation performance can be greatly improved [ 27,61], though the labelling
process is an extremely time-consuming and labor-intensive task.
Ghazvininejad et al. proposed a knowledge grounded neural conversation model (KGNCM),
which is the first work to retrieve review snippets from Foursquare and Twitter. Then it incorporates
the snippets into dialogue response generation [ 42]. It uses an end-to-end memory network [ 116]
to generate responses based on the selected review snippets. Lewis et al. introduced a general
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework by leveraging a pre-trained neural retriever and
generator. It can be easily fine-tuned on downstream tasks, and it has demonstrated state-of-the-
art performance on various knowledge intensive NLG tasks [ 68]. Recently, the fusion-in-decoder
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 27 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:27
Table 7. Tasks, datasets and evidence sources used in retrieve-then-generate (M1) papers. We also include
their document(d)/sentence(s) retrieval space and the number of retrieved document(d)/sentence(s).
EvidenceTasks Methods Ref.Dataset Information Retrieval # Retri-
sources Name #Instance space (d/s) eved d/s
WikipediaDialogue
systemMemNet [27] Wizard of
Wikipedia (WoW)22,311 5.4M/93M7
SKT [61] 7
Question
answeringRAG [68] MS-MARCO 267,287 21M/- 10
BART+DPR [99]ELI5 274,7413.2M/- -
RT+C-REALM [64] 3.2M/- 7
Argument
generationH&W [53]ChangeMyView 287,1525M/- 10
CANDELA [52] 5M/- 10
Online platform
(e.g., Amazon)Dialogue (for
business)AT2T [62] Amazon books 937,032 -/131K 10
KGNCM [42] Foursquare 1M -/1.1M 10
GigawordsSummari-
zationR3Sum [13]Gigawords 3.8M-/3.8M 30
BiSET [129] -/3.8M 30
Table 8. Qualitative comparison between different grounded text enhanced methods.
Methods Ref.Method categoryRetrieval supervisionRetriever Number
M1.1 M1.2 M2 pre-training of stages
MemNet [27] ✓ ✓, Human annotated labels × 2
SKT [61] ✓ ✓, Human annotated labels × 2
R3Sum [13] ✓ ✓, Pseudo labels × 3, with rerank
BiSET [129] ✓ ✓, Pseudo labels × 3, with rerank
RefNet [87] ✓× × 1, no retrieval
GLKS [107] ✓× × 1, no retrieval
RAG [68] ✓ × ✓, DPR 2
Kilt [99] ✓ × ✓, DPR 2
RT+C-REALM [64] ✓ × ✓, REALM 2
methods (i.e., the decoder performs attention over the concatenation of the resulting representations
of all retrieved passages [ 72,145]) could even outperform RAG as reported in KILT benchmark [ 99].
M1.2: Retrieve, rerank and rewrite ( 𝑅3).Different from RAG, a 𝑅3-based method is expected
to retrieve a most precise reference document that can be directly used for rewriting/editing. 𝑅3-
based method has proved successful in a number of NLG tasks such as machine translation [ 44],
and summarization [ 13,129]. In summarization, Seq2Seq models that purely depend on the input
document to generate summaries tend to deteriorate with the accumulation of word generation, e.g.,
they generate irrelevant and repeated words frequently [13, 129]. Template-based summarization
assume the golden summaries of the similar sentences (i.e., templates) can provide a reference point
to guide the input sentence summarization process [ 13,129]. These templates are often called soft
templates in order to distinguish from the traditional rule-based templates. Soft template-based
summarization typically follows a three-step design: retrieve, rerank, and rewrite. The step of
retrieval aims to return a few candidate templates from a summary collection. The reranking
identifies the best template from the retrieved candidates. And the rewriting leverages both the
source document and template to generate more faithful and informative summaries.
Difference between RAG and 𝑅3.Compared with 𝑅3-based methods, RAG-based have several
differences, including less of emphasis on lightly editing a retrieved item, but on aggregating
content from several pieces of retrieved content, as well as learning latent retrieval, and retrieving
evidence documents rather than related training pairs.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 28 ====
1:28 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
4.4 M2: Modeling Background Knowledge into Response Generation
Background document, with more global and comprehensive knowledge, has been often used for
generating informative responses and ensuring a conversation to not deviate from its topic. Keeping
a conversation grounded on a background document is referred as background based conversation
(BBC) [ 9,90]. Background knowledge plays an important role in human-human conversations.
For example, when talking about a movie, people often recall important points (e.g., a scene or
review about the movie) and appropriately mention them in the conversation context. Therefore, an
intelligent NLG model is expected to find an appropriate background snippet and generate response
based on the snippet. As shown in Figure 7(b), the task of BBC is often compared with machine
reading comprehension (MRC), in which a span is extracted from the background document as a
response to a question [ 105]. However, since BBC needs to generate natural and fluent responses,
the challenge lies in not only locating the right semantic units in the background, but also referring
to the right background information at the right time in the right place during the decoding phase.
As MRC models tie together multiple text segments to provide a unified and factual answer,
many BBC models use the same idea to connect different pieces of information and find the
appropriate background knowledge based on which the next response is to be generated [ 87,101].
For instance, Qin et al. proposed an end-to-end conversation model that jointly learned response
generation together with on-demand machine reading [ 101]. The MRC models can effectively
encode the input utterance by treating it as a question in a typical QA task (e.g., SQuAD [ 105]) and
encode the background document as the context. Then, they took the utterance-aware background
representation as input into decoding phase.
4.4.1 Discussion and Analysis of Different Methods .
Pros and cons. For M1, guiding generation with retrieved information explicitly exposes the
role of world knowledge by asking the model to decide what knowledge to retrieve and use
during language generation. Since retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) captures knowledge in a
interpretable and modular way, it is often used for knowledge-intensive tasks such as long-form QA
and argument generation. However, a knowledge retriever is expected to retrieve documents from
a large-scale corpus, e.g., the entire Wikipedia, which causes significant computational challenge.
Besides, one input often requires retrieved text whose amount is much larger than the input itself
(as indicated in Table 7), leading to serious information overwhelming for the generation model.
For M2, background based conversations (BBCs) avoid generating generic responses in a dialogue
system and are able to generate more informative responses by exploring related background
information. However, existing methods still cannot solve inherent problems effectively, such as
tending to break a complete semantic unit and generate shorter responses [87].
Qualitative analysis. Table 7 summarizes tasks, datasets and evidence sources used in existing
grounded text enhanced work. Three important things should be mentioned. First, all the datasets in
the table are public, and we include their links in Table 11. Second, Wikipedia is the most commonly
used evidence source since it is the largest free online encyclopedia. Besides, some online platforms
contain plenty of product-related textural information, e.g., product reviews on Amazon, which
are often used to build up task/goal oriented dialogue systems for business purpose. Third, the
retrieval space of candidate documents are usually larger than 1 million and only 7-10 documents
are selected. So, the process of retrieving relevant documents is challenging.
Table 8 compares different grounded text enhanced methods from three dimensions: retrieval
supervision, pre-training of the retriever, and number of stages. First, as mentioned above, retrieving
relevant documents from a large candidate set is a challenging task. To improve the retrieval
accuracy, four (57.1%) papers added the retrieval supervision either by human annotated labels
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 29 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:29
or pseudo labels, resulting in a multi-task learning setting. Besides, three (42.9%) papers used pre-
trained language models to produce document representation for better retrieval. Though existing
work has greatly improved the retrieval accuracy, the performance is still far from satisfactory in
many text generation tasks [ 64,68]. How to learn mutually enhancement between retrieval and
generation is still a promising direction in the grounded text enhanced text generation systems.
5 BENCHMARK, TOOLKIT AND LEADERBOARD PERFORMANCE
The development of general evaluation benchmarks for text generation helps to promote the
development of research in related fields. Existing text generation benchmarks did not specially
focus on choosing the tasks and datasets that have been widely used for knowledge-enhanced
text generation. Therefore, we re-screened from the existing four text generation benchmarks, i.e.,
GLGE [ 77], GEM [ 40], KilT [ 99], GENIE [ 60], and determined 9 benchmark datasets for evaluating
knowledge-enhanced NLG methods. Here is our criteria for selection:
•We only consider benchmark datasets that have open-access downloading link.
•We focus on diverse text generation tasks, involving various applications.
•We select at most three benchmark datasets for each text generation task.
•We include a mix of internal and external knowledge focused datasets.
•We prefer multi-reference datasets for robust automatic evaluation.
Based on the benchmark selection criteria, we finalize 9 knowledge-centric tasks that covers
various NLG tasks, including commonsense reasoning, text summarization, question generation,
generative question answering, and dialogue. The data statistics is shown in Table 9. Descriptions
and dataset links are listed as follows:
•Wizard of Wikipedia (WOW): It is an open-domain dialogue dataset, where two speakers
conduct an open-ended conversion that is directly grounded with knowledge retrieved from
Wikipedia. (Data link: https://parl.ai/projects/wizard_of_wikipedia/)
•CommonGen: It is a generative commonsense reasoning dataset. Given a set of common
concepts, the task is to generate a coherent sentence describing an everyday scenario using
these concepts. (Data link: https://inklab.usc.edu/CommonGen/)
•𝛼NLG-ART: It is a generative commonsense reasoning dataset. Given the incomplete obser-
vations about the world, the task it to generate a valid hypothesis about the likely explanations
to partially observable past and future. (Data link: http://abductivecommonsense.xyz/)
•ComVE: It is a generative commonsense reasoning dataset. The task is to generate an
explanation given a counterfactual statement for sense-making. (Data link: https://github.
com/wangcunxiang/SemEval2020-Task4-Commonsense-Validation-and-Explanation
•ELI5: It is a dataset for long-form question answering. The task is to produce explana-
tory multi-sentence answers for diverse questions. Web search results are used as evidence
documents to answer questions. (Data link: https://facebookresearch.github.io/ELI5/)
•SQuAD: It is a dataset for answer-aware question generation. The task is to generate a
question asks towards the given answer span based on a given text passage or document.
(Data link: https://github.com/magic282/NQG)
•CNN/DailyMail (CNN/DM): It is a dataset for summarization. Given a news aticles, the goal
is to produce a summary that represents the most important or relevant information within
the original content. (Data link: https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/cnn_dailymail)
•Gigaword: It is a dataset for summarization. Similar with CNN/DM, the goal is to generate a
headline for a news article. (Data link: https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/gigaword)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 30 ====
1:30 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Table 9. We choose 9 knowledge-enhanced NLG benchmark datasets. These datasets have been included in
four existing general NLG benchmarks (i.e., GLGE [ 77], GEM [ 40], Kilt [ 99], GENIE [ 60]) or in SemEval tasks.
Tasks Ref.Dataset Information Leader In which NLG Papers including
Name #Train #Dev. #Test board benchmark this dataset
Dialogue
system[27]Wizard of
Wikipedia18,430 1,948 1,933 ✓∗Kilt [27, 61, 74]
[154] PersonaChat 122,499 14,602 14,056× GLGE [27, 74]
Question
answering[31] ELI5 272,634 1,507 600 ✓‡Kilt [64, 99]
Question
generation[105] SQuAD 75,722 10,570 11,877× GLGE [19, 22, 133]
Commonsense
reasoning[76] CommonGen 67,389 4,018 6,042 ✓§GEM [32, 80, 126]
[7]𝛼NLG-ART 50,481 7,252 2,976 ✓⁄pilcrowGENIE [7, 57]
[124] ComVE 25,596 1,428 2,976 ✓∥SemEval [56, 57]
Summarization[109] CNN/DM 287,226 13,368 11,490 ✓∗∗GLGE [33, 41, 163]
[109] Gigaword 3.8M 189K 1,951 ✓††GLGE [13, 59, 69]
•PersonaChat: It is an open-domain dialogue dataset. It presents the task of making chit-
chat more engaging by conditioning on profile information. (Data link: https://github.com/
facebookresearch/ParlAI/tree/master/projects/personachat)
6 DISCUSSION ON FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Many efforts have been conducted to tackle the problem of knowledge-enhanced text generation
and its related applications. To advance the field, there remains several open problems and future
directions. Designing more effective ways to represent knowledge and integrate them into the
generation process is still the most important trend in knowledge-enhanced NLG systems. From a
broader perspective, we provide three directions that make focusing such efforts worthwhile now:
(i) incorporating knowledge into visual-language generation tasks, (ii) learning knowledge from
broader sources, especially pre-trained language models, (iii) learning knowledge from limited
resources, (iv) learning knowledge in a continuous way.
6.1 Incorporate Knowledge into Visual-Language Generation Tasks
Beyond text-to-text generation tasks, recent years have witnessed a growing interest in visual-
language (VL) generation tasks, such as describing visual scenes [ 49], and answering visual-related
questions [ 85]. Although success has been achieved in recent years on VL generation tasks, there
is still room for improvement due to the fact that image-based factual descriptions are often not
enough to generate high-quality captions or answers [ 162]. External knowledge can be added in
order to generate attractive image/video captions. We observed some pioneer work has attempted
to utilize external knowledge to enhance the image/video captioning tasks. For example, Tran et
al. proposed to detect a diverse set of visual concepts and generate captions by using an external
knowledge base (i.e., Freebase), in recognizing a broad range of entities such as celebrities and
landmarks [ 120]. Zhou et al. used a commonsense knowledge graph (i.e., ConceptNet), to infer a
∗https://parl.ai/projects/wizard_of_wikipedia
†https://nikitacs16.github.io/holl-e-website/
‡https://facebookresearch.github.io/ELI5/
§https://inklab.usc.edu/CommonGen/leaderboard.html
⁄pilcrowhttps://leaderboard.allenai.org/genie-anlg/submissions/public
∥https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/21080#results
∗∗https://paperswithcode.com/sota/document-summarization-on-cnn-daily-mail
††https://paperswithcode.com/sota/text-summarization-on-gigaword
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 31 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:31
set of terms directly or indirectly related to the words that describe the objects found in the scene
by the object recognition module [ 162]. In addition, Mao et al . [85] proposed a neuro-symbolic
learner for improving visual-language generation tasks (e.g., visual question answering).
However, existing approaches for knowledge-enhanced visual-language generation tasks still
have a lot of space for exploration. Some promising directions for future work include using other
knowledge sources, such as retrieving image/text to help solve open-domain visual question answer-
ing and image/video captioning tasks; bringing structured knowledge for providing justifications
for the captions that they produce, tailoring captions to different audiences and contexts, etc.
6.2 Learning Knowledge from Broader Sources
More research efforts should be spent on learning to discover knowledge more broadly and combine
multiple forms of knowledge from different sources to improve the generation process. More
knowledge sources can be but not limited to network structure, dictionary and table. For examples,
Yu et al. [ 147] and An et al. [ 2] augmented the task of scientific papers intention detection and
summarization by introducing the citation graph; Yu et al. augmented the rare word representations
by retrieving their descriptions from Wiktionary and feed them as additional input to a pre-
trained language model [ 148]. Besides, structured knowledge and unstructured knowledge can
play a complementary role in enhancing text generation. To improve knowledge richness, Fu et al.
combined both structured (knowledge base) and unstructured knowledge (grounded text) [34].
Leveraging Knowledge from Pre-trained Language Models. Pre-trained language models can learn a
substantial amount of in-depth knowledge from data without any access to an external memory, as a
parameterized implicit knowledge base [ 68,104]. However, as mentioned in [ 45], directly fine-tuning
pre-trained language generation models on the story generation task still suffers from insufficient
knowledge by representing the input text thorough a pre-trained encoder, leading to repetition,
logic conflicts, and lack of long-range coherence in the generated output sequence. Therefore,
discovering knowledge from pre-trained language models can be more flexible, such as knowledge
distillation, data augmentation, and using pre-trained models as external knowledge [ 100]. More
efficient methods of obtaining knowledge from pre-trained language models are expected.
6.3 Learning Knowledge from Limited Resources
Most of current NLG research conduct on extensively labelled data to favor model training. However,
this is in contrast to many real-world application scenarios, where only a few shots of examples are
available for new domains. Limited data resources lead to limited knowledge that can be learnt in new
domains. For examples, learning topical information of a dialogue occurring under a new domain
is difficult since the topic may be rarely discussed before; constructing a syntactic dependency
graph of a sequence in a low-resource language is hard since many linguistic features are of great
uniqueness. Besides, external knowledge bases are often incomplete and insufficient to cover full
entities and relationships due to the human costs of collecting domain-specific knowledge triples.
Therefore, quick domain adaptation is an essential task in text generation tasks. One potential route
towards addressing these issues is meta-learning, which in the context of NLG means a generation
model develops a broad set of skills and pattern recognition abilities at training time, and quickly
adapt to a new task given very few examples without retraining the model from scratch. Recently,
there has been raising interests in both academia and industry to investigate meta-learning in
different NLG tasks. Thus, it is a promising research direction to build efficient meta-learning
algorithms that only need a few task-specific fine-tuning to learn the new task quickly. And for
knowledge-enhanced text generation, it is of crucial importance to adapt the model quickly on new
domains with limited new knowledge (e.g., only a few knowledge triples).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 32 ====
1:32 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
6.4 Learning Knowledge in a Continuous Way
A machine learning is expected to learn continuously, accumulate the knowledge learned in
previous tasks, and use it to assist future learning. This research direction is referred as lifelong
learning [ 20]. In the process, the intelligent machine becomes more and more knowledgeable
and effective at learning new knowledge. To make an analogy, humans continuously acquire
new knowledge and constantly update the knowledge system in the brain. However, existing
knowledge-enhanced text generation systems usually do not keep updating knowledge in real time
(e.g., knowledge graph expansion). A meaningful exploration of was discussed in [ 86]. They built a
general knowledge learning engine for chatbots to enable them to continuously and interactively
learn new knowledge during conversations. Therefore, it is a promising research direction to
continuously update knowledge obtained from various information sources, empowering intelligent
machines with incoming knowledge and improving the performance on new text generation tasks.
7 CONCLUSIONS
In this survey, we present a comprehensive review of current representative research efforts and
trends on knowledge-enhanced text generation, and expect it can facilitate future research. To
summarize, this survey aims to answer two questions that commonly appears in knowledge-
enhanced text generation: how to acquire knowledge andhow to incorporate knowledge to facilitate
text generation . Base on knowledge acquisition, the main content of our survey is divided into
three sections according to different sources of knowledge enhancement. Based on knowledge
incorporation, we first present general methods of incorporating knowledge into text generation and
further discuss a number of specific ideas and technical solutions that incorporate the knowledge to
enhance the text generation systems in each section. Besides, we review a variety of text generation
applications in each section to help practitioners learn to choose and employ the methods.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all anonymous reviewers for valuable comments. We also appreciate the suggestions from
readers of the pre-print version. We thank Dr. Michael Zeng (Microsoft) and Dr. Nazneen Rajani
(Saleforce) for their constructive comments and suggestions. Wenhao Yu and Dr. Meng Jiang’s
research is supported by National Science Foundation grants IIS-1849816, CCF-1901059, and IIS-
2119531. Qingyun Wang and Dr. Heng Ji’s research is based upon work supported by Agriculture
and Food Research Initiative (AFRI) grant no. 2020-67021-32799/project accession no.1024178
from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. DARPA SemaFor Program No.
HR001120C0123, DARPA AIDA Program No. FA8750-18-2-0014, and DARPA KAIROS Program No.
FA8750-19-2-1004. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of
DARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-right annotation therein.
REFERENCES
[1] Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Towards String-To-Tree Neural Machine Translation. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[2]Chenxin An, Ming Zhong, Yiran Chen, Danqing Wang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2021. Enhancing scientific
papers summarization with citation graph. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[3]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[4]Joost Bastings, Ivan Titov, Wilker Aziz, Diego Marcheggiani, and Khalil Sima’an. 2017. Graph Convolutional Encoders
for Syntax-aware Neural Machine Translation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[5]Lisa Bauer, Yicheng Wang, and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Commonsense for Generative Multi-Hop Question Answering
Tasks. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 33 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:33
[6]Daniel Beck, Gholamreza Haffari, and Trevor Cohn. 2018. Graph-to-Sequence Learning using Gated Graph Neural
Networks. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[7]Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Hannah Rashkin, Doug
Downey, Scott Wen-tau Yih, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Abductive commonsense reasoning. In International Conference for
Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[8]Bin Bi, Chen Wu, Ming Yan, Wei Wang, Jiangnan Xia, and Chenliang Li. 2019. Incorporating External Knowledge
into Machine Reading for Generative Question Answering. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[9]Bin Bi, Chen Wu, Ming Yan, Wei Wang, Jiangnan Xia, and Chenliang Li. 2020. Generating Well-Formed Answers by
Machine Reading with Stochastic Selector Networks. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[10] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. In Journal of Machine Learning
Research (JMLR) .
[11] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto Garcia-Duran, Jason Weston, and Oksana Yakhnenko. 2013. Translating
embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[12] Ziqiang Cao, Sujian Li, Yang Liu, Wenjie Li, and Heng Ji. 2015. A novel neural topic model and its supervised extension.
InAAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[13] Ziqiang Cao, Wenjie Li, Sujian Li, and Furu Wei. 2018. Retrieve, rerank and rewrite: Soft template based neural
summarization. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[14] Ming-Wei Chang, Lev Ratinov, and Dan Roth. 2007. Guiding semi-supervision with constraint-driven learning. In
annual meeting of the association of computational linguistics (ACL) .
[15] Kehai Chen, Rui Wang, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, and Tiejun Zhao. 2018. Syntax-directed attention for neural
machine translation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[16] Shiqian Chen, Chenliang Li, Feng Ji, Wei Zhou, and Haiqing Chen. 2019. Driven answer generation for product-related
questions in e-commerce. In International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM) .
[17] Xiaojun Chen, Shengbin Jia, and Yang Xiang. 2020. A review: Knowledge reasoning over knowledge graph. In Expert
Systems with Applications .
[18] Xiuyi Chen, Fandong Meng, Peng Li, Feilong Chen, Shuang Xu, Bo Xu, and Jie Zhou. 2020. Bridging the Gap between
Prior and Posterior Knowledge Selection for Knowledge-Grounded Dialogue Generation. In Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[19] Yu Chen, Lingfei Wu, and Mohammed J Zaki. 2020. Reinforcement learning based graph-to-sequence model for
natural question generation. In International Conference of Learning Representation (ICLR).
[20] Zhiyuan Chen and Bing Liu. 2018. Lifelong machine learning. In Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning . Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
[21] Liying Cheng, Dekun Wu, Lidong Bing, Yan Zhang, Zhanming Jie, Wei Lu, and Luo Si. 2020. Entdesc: Entity
description generation by exploringknowledge graph. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) .
[22] Jaemin Cho, Minjoon Seo, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Mixture Content Selection for Diverse Sequence Generation.
InConference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[23] Sajal Choudhary, Prerna Srivastava, Lyle Ungar, and Joao Sedoc. 2017. Domain aware neural dialog system. In arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.00897 .
[24] Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and Rosanne
Liu. 2020. Plug and play language models: a simple approach to controlled text generation. In International Conference
for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[25] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[26] P Kingma Diederik, Max Welling, et al .2014. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[27] Emily Dinan, Stephen Roller, Kurt Shuster, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and Jason Weston. 2019. Wizard of wikipedia:
Knowledge-powered conversational agents. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[28] Xiangyu Dong, Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, and Meng Jiang. 2021. Injecting Entity Types into Entity-Guided Text
Generation. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[29] Mihail Eric and Christopher D Manning. 2017. A Copy-Augmented Sequence-to-Sequence Architecture Gives Good
Performance on Task-Oriented Dialogue. In Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL) .
[30] Angela Fan, Claire Gardent, Chloé Braud, and Antoine Bordes. 2019. Using Local Knowledge Graph Construction to
Scale Seq2Seq Models to Multi-Document Inputs. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 34 ====
1:34 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[31] Angela Fan, Yacine Jernite, Ethan Perez, David Grangier, Jason Weston, and Michael Auli. 2019. ELI5: Long Form
Question Answering. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[32] Zhihao Fan, Yeyun Gong, Zhongyu Wei, Siyuan Wang, Yameng Huang, Jian Jiao, Xuan-Jing Huang, Nan Duan,
and Ruofei Zhang. 2020. An Enhanced Knowledge Injection Model for Commonsense Generation. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .
[33] Xiyan Fu, Jun Wang, Jinghan Zhang, Jinmao Wei, and Zhenglu Yang. 2020. Document Summarization with VHTM:
Variational Hierarchical Topic-Aware Mechanism. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[34] Yao Fu and Yansong Feng. 2018. Natural answer generation with heterogeneous memory. In Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[35] Kuzman Ganchev, Jennifer Gillenwater, Ben Taskar, et al .2010. Posterior regularization for structured latent variable
models. In Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) .
[36] Ce Gao and Jiangtao Ren. 2019. A topic-driven model for learning to generate diverse sentences. In Neurocomputing .
[37] Cristina Garbacea and Qiaozhu Mei. 2020. Neural Language Generation: Formulation, Methods, and Evaluation. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15780 .
[38] Albert Gatt and Emiel Krahmer. 2018. Survey of the state of the art in natural language generation: Core tasks,
applications and evaluation. In Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) .
[39] Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional sequence to
sequence learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[40] Sebastian Gehrmann, Tosin Adewumi, Karmanya Aggarwal, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Aremu Anuoluwapo,
Antoine Bosselut, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Miruna Clinciu, Dipanjan Das, Kaustubh D Dhole, et al .2021. The
gem benchmark: Natural language generation, its evaluation and metrics. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[41] Sebastian Gehrmann, Yuntian Deng, and Alexander M Rush. 2018. Bottom-Up Abstractive Summarization. In
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[42] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and Michel Galley.
2018. A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[43] Jiatao Gu, Zhengdong Lu, Hang Li, and Victor OK Li. 2016. Incorporating Copying Mechanism in Sequence-to-
Sequence Learning. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[44] Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor OK Li. 2018. Search engine guided neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[45] Jian Guan, Fei Huang, Zhihao Zhao, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. 2020. A knowledge-enhanced pretraining
model for commonsense story generation. In Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL) .
[46] Jian Guan, Yansen Wang, and Minlie Huang. 2019. Story ending generation with incremental encoding and common-
sense knowledge. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[47] Dandan Guo, Bo Chen, Ruiying Lu, and Mingyuan Zhou. 2020. Recurrent Hierarchical Topic-Guided RNN for
Language Generation. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[48] Shizhu He, Cao Liu, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2017. Generating natural answers by incorporating copying and
retrieving mechanisms in sequence-to-sequence learning. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[49] MD Zakir Hossain, Ferdous Sohel, Mohd Fairuz Shiratuddin, and Hamid Laga. 2019. A comprehensive survey of deep
learning for image captioning. In ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) .
[50] Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P Xing. 2017. Toward controlled generation
of text. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[51] Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Xiaodan Liang, Lianhui Qin, Haoye Dong, and Eric Xing. 2018. Deep
Generative Models with Learnable Knowledge Constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
[52] Xinyu Hua, Zhe Hu, and Lu Wang. 2019. Argument Generation with Retrieval, Planning, and Realization. In Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[53] Xinyu Hua and Lu Wang. 2018. Neural Argument Generation Augmented with Externally Retrieved Evidence. In
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[54] Luyang Huang, Lingfei Wu, and Lu Wang. 2020. Knowledge Graph-Augmented Abstractive Summarization with
Semantic-Driven Cloze Reward. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[55] Touseef Iqbal and Shaima Qureshi. 2020. The Survey: Text Generation Models in Deep Learning.. In Journal of King
Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences . Elsevier.
[56] Haozhe Ji, Pei Ke, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. 2020. Generating Commonsense Explanation by
Extracting Bridge Concepts from Reasoning Paths. In Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on Natural Language (AACL-IJCNLP) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 35 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:35
[57] Haozhe Ji, Pei Ke, Shaohan Huang, Furu Wei, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. 2020. Language Generation with
Multi-Hop Reasoning on Commonsense Knowledge Graph. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) .
[58] Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and Philip S Yu. 2020. A survey on knowledge graphs:
Representation, acquisition and applications. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00388 .
[59] Hanqi Jin, Tianming Wang, and Xiaojun Wan. 2020. SemSUM: Semantic Dependency Guided Neural Abstractive
Summarization. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[60] Daniel Khashabi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Jonathan Bragg, Nicholas Lourie, Jungo Kasai, Yejin Choi, Noah A Smith, and
Daniel S Weld. 2021. Genie: A leaderboard for human-in-the-loop evaluation of text generation. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.06561 .
[61] Byeongchang Kim, Jaewoo Ahn, and Gunhee Kim. 2020. Sequential Latent Knowledge Selection for Knowledge-
Grounded Dialogue. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[62] Jihyeok Kim, Seungtaek Choi, Reinald Kim Amplayo, and Seung-won Hwang. 2020. Retrieval-Augmented Controllable
Review Generation. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .
[63] Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Dhanush Bekal, Yi Luan, Mirella Lapata, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019. Text Generation
from Knowledge Graphs with Graph Transformers. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[64] Kalpesh Krishna, Aurko Roy, and Mohit Iyyer. 2021. Hurdles to Progress in Long-form Question Answering. In
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[65] Ni Lao, Tom Mitchell, and William W Cohen. 2011. Random walk inference and learning in a large scale knowledge
base. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[66] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. In Nature . Nature Publishing Group.
[67] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov,
and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation,
Translation, and Comprehension. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[68] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandara Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler,
Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al .2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[69] Chenliang Li, Weiran Xu, Si Li, and Sheng Gao. 2018. Guiding generation for abstractive text summarization based
on key information guide network. In Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (NAACL) .
[70] Haoran Li, Junnan Zhu, Jiajun Zhang, Chengqing Zong, and Xiaodong He. 2020. Keywords-guided abstractive
sentence summarization. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[71] Jingyuan Li and Xiao Sun. 2018. A Syntactically Constrained Bidirectional-Asynchronous Approach for Emotional
Conversation Generation. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[72] Wei Li, Xinyan Xiao, Jiachen Liu, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Junping Du. 2021. Leveraging Graph to Improve
Abstractive Multi-Document Summarization. In Annual Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[73] Wei Li, Jingjing Xu, Yancheng He, ShengLi Yan, Yunfang Wu, and Xu Sun. 2019. Coherent Comments Generation for
Chinese articles with a Graph-to-Sequence Model. In Annual Meeting of Association Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[74] Rongzhong Lian, Min Xie, Fan Wang, Jinhua Peng, and Hua Wu. 2019. Learning to select knowledge for response
generation in dialog systems. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) .
[75] Kexin Liao, Logan Lebanoff, and Fei Liu. 2018. Abstract Meaning Representation for Multi-Document Summarization.
InInternational Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .
[76] Bill Yuchen Lin, Wangchunshu Zhou, Ming Shen, Pei Zhou, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. 2020.
CommonGen: A Constrained Text Generation Challenge for Generative Commonsense Reasoning. In Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-Findings) .
[77] Dayiheng Liu, Yu Yan, Yeyun Gong, Weizhen Qi, Hang Zhang, Jian Jiao, Weizhu Chen, Jie Fu, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong,
et al.2021. Glge: A new general language generation evaluation benchmark. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[78] Weijie Liu, Peng Zhou, Zhe Zhao, Zhiruo Wang, Qi Ju, Haotang Deng, and Ping Wang. 2020. K-BERT: Enabling
Language Representation with Knowledge Graph.. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[79] Yuanxin Liu, Zheng Lin, Fenglin Liu, Qinyun Dai, and Weiping Wang. 2019. Generating Paraphrase with Topic as
Prior Knowledge. In International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM) .
[80] Ye Liu, Yao Wan, Lifang He, Hao Peng, and Philip S Yu. 2021. KG-BART: Knowledge Graph-Augmented BART for
Generative Commonsense Reasoning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[81] Zhibin Liu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. 2019. Knowledge aware conversation generation with
reasoning on augmented graph. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 36 ====
1:36 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[82] Andrea Madotto, Chien-Sheng Wu, and Pascale Fung. 2018. Mem2Seq: Effectively Incorporating Knowledge Bases
into End-to-End Task-Oriented Dialog Systems. In Annual Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[83] Gideon S Mann and Andrew McCallum. 2007. Simple, robust, scalable semi-supervised learning via expectation
regularization. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[84] Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky. 2014.
The Stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: System Demonstration (ACL) .
[85] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. 2019. The neuro-symbolic concept
learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. International Conference for Learning
Representation (ICLR) .
[86] Sahisnu Mazumder, Nianzu Ma, and Bing Liu. 2018. Towards a continuous knowledge learning engine for chatbots.
InarXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06024 .
[87] Chuan Meng, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Christof Monz, Jun Ma, and Maarten de Rijke. 2020. RefNet: A reference-
aware network for background based conversation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[88] Tanya Menon and Jeffrey Pfeffer. 2003. Valuing internal vs. external knowledge: Explaining the preference for
outsiders. In Management science .
[89] Yishu Miao, Edward Grefenstette, and Phil Blunsom. 2017. Discovering discrete latent topics with neural variational
inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
[90] Nikita Moghe, Siddhartha Arora, Suman Banerjee, and Mitesh M Khapra. 2018. Towards Exploiting Background
Knowledge for Building Conversation Systems. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[91] Seungwhan Moon, Pararth Shah, Anuj Kumar, and Rajen Subba. 2019. Opendialkg: Explainable conversational
reasoning with attention-based walks over knowledge graphs. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[92] Diego Moussallem, Tommaso Soru, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. 2019. THOTH: Neural Translation and
Enrichment of Knowledge Graphs. In International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) .
[93] Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Caglar Gulcehre, and Bing Xiang. 2016. Abstractive Text Summarization using
Sequence-to-sequence RNNs and Beyond. In Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (SIGNLL) .
[94] Shashi Narayan, Shay B Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. 2018. Don’t Give Me the Details, Just the Summary! Topic-Aware
Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme Summarization. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) .
[95] Christina Niklaus, Matthias Cetto, André Freitas, and Siegfried Handschuh. 2018. A Survey on Open Information
Extraction. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .
[96] Tong Niu and Mohit Bansal. 2018. Polite dialogue generation without parallel data. In Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (TACL) .
[97] Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, et al .2019. Knowledge Aware Conversation Generation with Explainable Rea-
soning over Augmented Graphs. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[98] Liangming Pan, Yuxi Xie, Yansong Feng, Tat-Seng Chua, and Min-Yen Kan. 2020. Semantic Graphs for Generating
Deep Questions. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[99] Fabio Petroni, Aleksandra Piktus, Angela Fan, Patrick Lewis, Majid Yazdani, Nicola De Cao, James Thorne, Yacine
Jernite, Vassilis Plachouras, Tim Rocktäschel, et al .2021. KILT: a benchmark for knowledge intensive language tasks.
InConference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[100] Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and Alexander Miller.
2019. Language Models as Knowledge Bases?. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[101] Lianhui Qin, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Xiaodong Liu, Xiang Gao, Bill Dolan, Yejin Choi, and Jianfeng Gao. 2019.
Conversing by Reading: Contentful Neural Conversation with On-demand Machine Reading. In Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[102] Lianhui Qin, Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jena Hwang, Ronan Le Bras, Antoine Bosselut, and
Yejin Choi. 2020. Backpropagation-based Decoding for Unsupervised Counterfactual and Abductive Reasoning. In
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[103] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners. In OpenAI Blog .
[104] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J Liu. 2020. Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. In Journal of
Machine Learning Research (JMLR) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 37 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:37
[105] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine
Comprehension of Text. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[106] Revanth Gangi Reddy, Danish Contractor, Dinesh Raghu, and Sachindra Joshi. 2019. Multi-Level Memory for Task
Oriented Dialogs. In the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[107] Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Christof Monz, Jun Ma, and Maarten de Rijke. 2020. Thinking Globally, Acting Locally:
Distantly Supervised Global-to-Local Knowledge Selection for Background Based Conversation. In AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[108] Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling. 2018.
Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC) .
[109] Abigail See, Peter J Liu, and Christopher D Manning. 2017. Get To The Point: Summarization with Pointer-Generator
Networks. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[110] Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow. 2016. Linguistic Input Features Improve Neural Machine Translation. In Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT) .
[111] Minjoon Seo, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2017. Bidirectional attention flow for
machine comprehension. In International Conference for Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[112] Sifatullah Siddiqi and Aditi Sharan. 2015. Keyword and keyphrase extraction techniques: a literature review. In
International Journal of Computer Applications (IJCA) . Foundation of Computer Science.
[113] Haoyu Song, Wei-Nan Zhang, Yiming Cui, Dong Wang, and Ting Liu. 2019. Exploiting persona information for
diverse generation of conversational responses. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) .
[114] Zhenqiao Song, Xiaoqing Zheng, Lu Liu, Mu Xu, and Xuan-Jing Huang. 2019. Generating responses with a specific
emotion in dialog. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[115] Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. 2017. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of general
knowledge. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[116] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jason Weston, Rob Fergus, et al .2015. End-to-end memory networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[117] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. 2014. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[118] Bowen Tan, Lianhui Qin, Eric Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2020. Summarizing Text on Any Aspects: A Knowledge-Informed
Weakly-Supervised Approach. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[119] Jianheng Tang, Tiancheng Zhao, Chenyan Xiong, Xiaodan Liang, Eric Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2019. Target-Guided
Open-Domain Conversation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[120] Kenneth Tran, Xiaodong He, Lei Zhang, Jian Sun, Cornelia Carapcea, Chris Thrasher, and Chris Buehler. 2016. Rich
image captioning in the wild. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
[121] Yi-Lin Tuan, Yun-Nung Chen, and Hung-yi Lee. 2019. DyKgChat: Benchmarking Dialogue Generation Grounding on
Dynamic Knowledge Graphs. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
[122] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .
[123] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Graph
attention networks. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[124] Cunxiang Wang, Shuailong Liang, Yili Jin, Yilong Wang, Xiaodan Zhu, and Yue Zhang. 2020. SemEval-2020 Task 4:
Commonsense Validation and Explanation. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on Semantic Evaluation .
[125] Hao Wang, Bin Guo, Wei Wu, and Zhiwen Yu. 2020. Towards information-rich, logical text generation with knowledge-
enhanced neural models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00814 .
[126] Han Wang, Yang Liu, Chenguang Zhu, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong Gong, Yichong Xu, and Michael Zeng. 2021. Retrieval
Enhanced Model for Commonsense Generation. In Annual Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[127] Hongwei Wang, Fuzheng Zhang, Mengdi Zhang, Jure Leskovec, Miao Zhao, Wenjie Li, and Zhongyuan Wang. 2019.
Knowledge-aware graph neural networks with label smoothness regularization for recommender systems. In ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD) .
[128] Jian Wang, Junhao Liu, Wei Bi, Xiaojiang Liu, Kejing He, Ruifeng Xu, and Min Yang. 2020. Improving Knowledge-aware
Dialogue Generation via Knowledge Base Question Answering. In Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[129] Kai Wang, Xiaojun Quan, and Rui Wang. 2019. BiSET: Bi-directional Selective Encoding with Template for Abstractive
Summarization. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[130] Qingyun Wang, Lifu Huang, Zhiying Jiang, Kevin Knight, Heng Ji, Mohit Bansal, and Yi Luan. 2019. PaperRobot:
Incremental Draft Generation of Scientific Ideas. In Annual Meeting of Association Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[131] Quan Wang, Zhendong Mao, Bin Wang, and Li Guo. 2017. Knowledge graph embedding: A survey of approaches and
applications. In IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 38 ====
1:38 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
[132] Wenlin Wang, Zhe Gan, Hongteng Xu, Ruiyi Zhang, Guoyin Wang, Dinghan Shen, Changyou Chen, and Lawrence
Carin. 2019. Topic-Guided Variational Auto-Encoder for Text Generation. In Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[133] Zhen Wang, Siwei Rao, Jie Zhang, Zhen Qin, Guangjian Tian, and Jun Wang. 2020. Diversify Question Generation
with Continuous Content Selectors and Question Type Modeling. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-Findings) .
[134] Xiangpeng Wei, Yue Hu, Luxi Xing, Yipeng Wang, and Li Gao. 2019. Translating with Bilingual Topic Knowledge for
Neural Machine Translation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[135] Chien-Sheng Wu, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. 2019. Global-to-local memory pointer networks for task-
oriented dialogue. In International Conference for Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[136] Sixing Wu, Ying Li, Dawei Zhang, Yang Zhou, and Zhonghai Wu. 2020. Diverse and Informative Dialogue Generation
with Context-Specific Commonsense Knowledge Awareness. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[137] Sixing Wu, Ying Li, Dawei Zhang, Yang Zhou, and Zhonghai Wu. 2020. TopicKA: Generating Commonsense
Knowledge-Aware Dialogue Responses Towards the Recommended Topic Fact. In International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) .
[138] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. 2020. A comprehensive
survey on graph neural networks. In IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (TNNLS) .
[139] Chen Xing, Wei Wu, Yu Wu, Jie Liu, Yalou Huang, Ming Zhou, and Wei-Ying Ma. 2017. Topic aware neural response
generation. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[140] Wenhan Xiong, Jingfei Du, William Yang Wang, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Pretrained Encyclopedia: Weakly
Supervised Knowledge-Pretrained Language Model. In International Conference of Learning Representation (ICLR) .
[141] Wenhan Xiong, Thien Hoang, and William Yang Wang. 2017. DeepPath: A Reinforcement Learning Method for
Knowledge Graph Reasoning. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[142] Jun Xu, Haifeng Wang, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, Wanxiang Che, and Ting Liu. 2020. Conversational graph grounded
policy learning for open-domain conversation generation. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[143] Minghong Xu, Piji Li, Haoran Yang, Pengjie Ren, Zhaochun Ren, Zhumin Chen, and Jun Ma. 2020. A Neural Topical
Expansion Framework for Unstructured Persona-oriented Dialogue Generation. In European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (ECAI) .
[144] Pengcheng Yang, Lei Li, Fuli Luo, Tianyu Liu, and Xu Sun. 2019. Enhancing Topic-to-Essay Generation with External
Commonsense Knowledge. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[145] Donghan Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Yuwei Fang, Wenhao Yu, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Xiang Ren, Yiming Yang, and
Michael Zeng. 2022. Kg-fid: Infusing knowledge graph in fusion-in-decoder for open-domain question answering.
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[146] Donghan Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Yiming Yang, and Michael Zeng. 2022. Jaket: Joint pre-training of knowledge graph
and language understanding. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[147] Wenhao Yu, Mengxia Yu, Tong Zhao, and Meng Jiang. 2020. Identifying referential intention with heterogeneous
contexts. In Proceedings of The Web Conference (WebConf) .
[148] Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Yuwei Fang, Donghan Yu, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang.
2021. Dict-BERT: Enhancing Language Model Pre-training with Dictionary. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06490 .
[149] Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Tong Zhao, Zhichun Guo, and Meng Jiang. 2021. Sentence-Permuted Paragraph
Generation. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
[150] Qingkai Zeng, Jinfeng Lin, Wenhao Yu, Jane Cleland-Huang, and Meng Jiang. 2021. Enhancing Taxonomy Completion
with Concept Generation via Fusing Relational Representations. ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining (KDD) .
[151] Houyu Zhang, Zhenghao Liu, Chenyan Xiong, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2020. Grounded conversation generation as guided
traverses in commonsense knowledge graphs. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .
[152] Jian Zhang, Liangyou Li, Andy Way, and Qun Liu. 2016. Topic-Informed Neural Machine Translation. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers (COLING) .
[153] Jiacheng Zhang, Yang Liu, Huanbo Luan, Jingfang Xu, and Maosong Sun. 2017. Prior Knowledge Integration for
Neural Machine Translation using Posterior Regularization. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
[154] Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018. Personalizing
Dialogue Agents: I have a dog, do you have pets?. In Annual Meeting of Association Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
[155] Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, Xin Jiang, Maosong Sun, and Qun Liu. 2019. ERNIE: Enhanced Language
Representation with Informative Entities. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 39 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:39
[156] Liang Zhao, Jingjing Xu, Junyang Lin, Yichang Zhang, Hongxia Yang, and Xu Sun. 2020. Graph-based multi-hop
reasoning for long text generation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13282 .
[157] Yinhe Zheng, Rongsheng Zhang, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoxi Mao. 2020. A Pre-Training Based Personalized Dialogue
Generation Model with Persona-Sparse Data.. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[158] Hao Zhou, Minlie Huang, Tianyang Zhang, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Bing Liu. 2018. Emotional chatting machine: Emotional
conversation generation with internal and external memory. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .
[159] Hao Zhou, Tom Young, Minlie Huang, Haizhou Zhao, Jingfang Xu, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2018. Commonsense knowledge
aware conversation generation with graph attention. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) .
[160] Qingyu Zhou, Nan Yang, Furu Wei, Chuanqi Tan, Hangbo Bao, and Ming Zhou. 2017. Neural question generation
from text: A preliminary study. In Conference on Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing (NLPCC) .
[161] Wangchunshu Zhou, Dong-Ho Lee, Ravi Kiran Selvam, Seyeon Lee, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Xiang Ren. 2021. Pre-training
text-to-text transformers for concept-centric common sense. International Conference for Learning Representation .
[162] Yimin Zhou, Yiwei Sun, and Vasant Honavar. 2019. Improving image captioning by leveraging knowledge graphs. In
IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) .
[163] Chenguang Zhu, William Hinthorn, Ruochen Xu, Qingkai Zeng, Michael Zeng, Xuedong Huang, and Meng Jiang.
2021. Boosting Factual Correctness of Abstractive Summarization with Knowledge Graph. In Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) .
[164] Jun Zhu, Ning Chen, and Eric P Xing. 2014. Bayesian inference with posterior regularization and applications to
infinite latent SVMs. In The Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) .
[165] Wenya Zhu, Kaixiang Mo, Yu Zhang, Zhangbin Zhu, Xuezheng Peng, and Qiang Yang. 2017. Flexible end-to-end
dialogue system for knowledge grounded conversation. In CoRR, abs/1709.04264 .
[166] Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. 2005. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. In Journal of the royal
statistical society . Wiley Online Library.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 40 ====
1:40 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
A APPENDIX
Figure 8 demonstrates the statistics of selected publications in this survey. The left figure shows the
paper publishing venues. Most papers were published in top machine learning, artificial intelligence,
and natural language processing conferences, such as ACL, EMNLP, AAAI, ICLR, NeurIPS. Besides,
many selected papers were published in high-impact journals, such as TNNLS, JMLR, TACL. The
right figure shows the paper categories. Among 160 selected papers, 87 papers (“general methods
(General)”, “topic”, “keyword”, “knowledge base (KG)”, “knowledge graph (KG)”, “grounded text
(Text)”) are directly relevant to the different kinds of knowledge-enhanced text generation methods;
10 papers are relevant to benchmark datasets; 10 papers are related survey papers. Besides, other
43 papers are about basic (pre-trained) generation methods (e.g., Seq2Seq, CopyNet, BART, T5), or
necessary background (e.g., TransE, OpenIE, GNN, LDA), or future direction.
Figure 9 summarized different papers according to years, knowledge sources, and methods.
Table 10 lists the leaderboard performance on ten knowledge-enhanced generation benchmarks.
Table 11 lists code links and programming language of representative open-source knowledge-
enhanced text generation systems that have been introduced in this survey.
312685204106644
01020304050
ACLEMNLPNAACLCOLINGAAAIIJCAIICLRNeruIPSICMLOthers# PapersPublishing venus
13111314102016101043
01020304050
GeneralTopicKeywordLinguisticKBKGTextDatasetSurveyOthers# PapersPaper categories
Fig. 8. Paper statistics of selected publications in this survey.
251035911
3591010
2246731015
224714
0102030405060708020162017201820192020
# Publications (including arXiv)YearTopicKeywordLinguistic featuresKnowledge baseKnowledge graphGrounded text
Fig. 9. Knowledge-enhanced text generation has been gaining emerging interests in the recent five years.
A.1 Evaluation Metrics
BLEU-𝑚(short as B- 𝑚):BLEU is a weighted geometric mean of 𝑛-gram precision scores.
ROUGE-𝑚(short as R- 𝑚):ROUGE measures the overlap of n-grams between the reference and
hypothesis; ROUGE-L measures the longest matched words using longest common sub-sequence.
Distinct-𝑘(short as D-k): Distinct measures the total number of unique 𝑘-grams normalized by
the total number of generated 𝑘-gram tokens to avoid favoring long sentences.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 41 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:41
Table 10. Leaderboard performance on ten knowledge-enhanced generation benchmarks.
(a) Leaderboard performance on two summarization benchmark datasets with different knowledge-enhanced
NLG methods. Evaluation metrics are standard n-gram based metrics: ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L.
Methods Ref.Knowledge Method CNN/DM Gigaword
source category R-2 R-L R-2 R-L
Baseline methods (w/o KG)
Seq2Seq [117] 11.81 28.83 11.32 26.42 with attention mechanism
PG [109] 15.66 33.42 17.63 33.66 w/o coverage mechanism
Knowledge enhanced methods
VHTM [33] Topic M3 18.05 37.18 - - -
SELECTOR [22] Keyword M2 18.31 - - - * Improve generation diversity
FASUM [163] OpenKG - 17.84 37.40 - - * Improve factual correctness
KIGN [69] Keyword M1 17.12 35.68 17.93 34.44 -
BottomUp [41] Keyword M2 18.68 38.34 17.61 33.54 -
TGVAE [132] Topic M3 - - 17.27 33.02 -
HierDualPG [70] Keyword M2 - - 18.06 34.39 -
R3Sum [13] Text M1 - - 19.03 34.46 -
BiSET [129] Text M1 - - 19.78 36.87 -
SemSUM [59] DepGraph - - - 19.75 36.09 -
ASGARD [54] OpenKG - 20.37 40.48 - - -
(b) Leaderboard performance on 𝛼NLG-ART dataset.
Both B-4 and R-L are commonly used.
Method Ref. Source B-4 R-L
Baseline methods
Seq2Seq [117] - 2.37 22.30
GPT-2 [103] - 9.80 32.90
Knowledge-enhanced methods
GPT-COMeT [7] KG 9.62 32.88
GRF [80] KG 11.62 34.62(c) Leaderboard performance on ComVE dataset.
Both B-4 and R-L are commonly used.
Method Ref. Source B-4 R-L
Baseline methods
Seq2Seq [117] - 6.10 25.80
GPT-2 [103] - 15.70 36.50
Knowledge-enhanced methods
CE-PR [56] KG 17.10 37.90
GRF [57] KG 17.19 38.10
(d) Leaderboard performance on CommonGen
dataset. SPICE is the primary evaluation metric.
Method Ref. Source B-4 SPICE
Baseline methods
BART [67] - 31.83 27.99
T5 [104] - 31.96 28.86
Knowledge-enhanced methods
EKI-BART [32] Text 35.95 29.59
KG-BART [80] KG 33.87 29.63
RE-T5 [126] Text 40.87 31.08(e) Leaderboard performance on Holl-E (mix-short
setting) dataset. R-L are the primary metric.
Method Ref. Source R-L B-4
Baseline methods
Seq2Seq [117] - 21.48 5.26
BiDAF [111] - 35.09 27.44
Knowledge-enhanced methods
AKGCM [81] KG 34.72 30.84
RefNet [87] Text 36.17 29.38
GLKS [107] Text 39.63 -
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 42 ====
1:42 Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu, Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang
(f) Leaderboard performance on Wizard of Wikipedia
with seen (S) and unseen (UnS) test set.
Method Ref. R-1/R-2 (S) R-1/R-2 (UnS)
Baseline methods
Transformer [122] 17.8/ — 14.0/ —
Knowledge-enhanced methods
MemNet [27] 16.9/ — 14.4/ —
PostKS [74] 18.1/5.3 13.5/2.0
SKT [61] 19.3/6.8 16.1/4.2
PIPM+KDBTS [18] 19.9/7.3 17.6/5.4(g) State-of-the-art performance on SQuAD.
Method Ref. Source B-4
Baseline methods
Seq2Seq [117] - 3.01
Transformer [122] - 3.09
Knowledge-enhanced methods
NQG++ [160] LF 13.27
SELECTOR [22] LF+Keyword 15.87
G2S+BERT [19] LF+DepGraph 17.49
G2S+BERT+RL [19] LF+DepGraph 18.30
(h) Leaderboard performance on ELI5 dataset. The
Kilt R-L (KRL) is the primary evaluation metric.
Method Ref. Source KRL R-L
Baseline methods
T5 [104] - 0.0 19.1
BART [67] - 0.0 20.1
Knowledge-enhanced methods
RAG [68] Text 1.7 17.4
BART+DPR [99] Text 1.9 17.4
RT+c-REALM [61] Text 2.4 23.2(i) Some state-of-the-art performance on Per-
sonaChat dataset (no leaderboard on this dataset).
Method Ref. B-1/B-2 D-1/D-2
Baseline methods
Seq2Seq [117] 18.2/9.3 2.6/7.4
Knowledge-enhanced methods
MemNet(soft) [27] 17.7/9.1 3.5/9.6
MemNet(hard) [27] 18.6/9.7 3.7/9.9
PostKS [74] 19.0/9.8 4.6/13.4
PEE [143] 23.2/11.5 - / -
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

==== Page 43 ====
A Survey of Knowledge-Enhanced Text Generation 1:43
Table 11. A list of representative open-source knowledge-enhanced text generation systems.
Task Ref. Paper title and open source code/toolkitProgramming Venue
language & Year
Topic-enhanced methods
Summarization[94]Topic-Aware Convolutional Neural Networks for Extreme SummarizationPyTorchEMNLP
—— Code: https://github.com/EdinburghNLP/XSum 2018
[135]Friendly Topic Assistant for Transformer Based Abstractive Summarization-EMNLP
—— Code: https://github.com/BoChenGroup/TA 2020
Keyword-enhanced methods
Dialogue
system[94]A Content-Introducing Approach to Generative Short-Text ConversationTensorflowCOLING
—— Code: https://github.com/MaZhiyuanBUAA/Seq2BFforDialogueGeneration 2016
[135]Emotional Chatting Machine: Emotional Conversation Generation withPyTorchAAAI
Internal and External Memory —— Code: https://github.com/loadder/ECM-tf 2018
Summarization [94]Coherent Comment Generation with a Graph-to-Sequence ModelPyTorchACL
—— Code: https://github.com/lancopku/Graph-to-seq-comment-generation 2018
KB-enhanced methods
Dialogue
system[82]Mem2Seq: Effectively Incorporating Knowledge Bases into End-to-EndPyTorchACL
Dialog Systems —— Code: https://github.com/HLTCHKUST/Mem2Seq 2019
[135]Global-to-local Memory Pointer Networks for Task-Oriented DialoguePyTorchICLR
—— Code: https://github.com/jasonwu0731/GLMP 2019
[128]Improving Knowledge-aware Dialogue Generation via Knowledge BasePyTorchAAAI
Question Answering —— Code: https://github.com/siat-nlp/TransDG 2020
[136]Diverse and Informative Dialogue Generation with Context-Specific KnowledgeTensorflowACL
Awareness —— Code: https://github.com/pku-sixing/ACL2020-ConKADI 2020
[137]TopicKA: Generating Commonsense Knowledge-Aware Dialogue ResponsesTensorflowIJCAI
—— Code: https://github.com/pku-sixing/IJCAI2020-TopicKA 2020
KG-enhanced methods
Dialogue
system[159]Commonsense Knowledge Aware Conversation Generation with GraphTensorflowIJCAI
Attention —— Code: https://github.com/thu-coai/ccm 2018
[121]DyKgChat: Benchmarking Dialogue Generation Grounding on DynamicTensorflowEMNLP
Knowledge Graphs —— Code: https://github.com/Pascalson/DyKGChat 2019
[151]Grounded Conversation Generation as Guided Traverses in CommonsensePyTorchACL
Knowledge Graphs —— Code: https://github.com/thunlp/ConceptFlow 2020
Scientific
writing[63]Text Generation from Knowledge Graphs with Graph TransformersPyTorchNAACL
—— Code: https://github.com/rikdz/GraphWriter 2019
[130]PaperRobot: Incremental Draft Generation of Scientific IdeasPyTorchACL
—— Code: https://github.com/EagleW/PaperRobot 2019
Commonsense
reasoning
&
Story
generation[46]Story Ending Generation with Incremental Encoding and CommonsenseTensorflowAAAI
Knowledge —— Code: https://github.com/JianGuanTHU/StoryEndGen 2019
[57]Language Generation with Multi-Hop Reasoning on CommonsensePyTorchEMNLP
Knowledge Graph —— Code: https://github.com/cdjhz/multigen 2020
[80]KG-BART: Knowledge Graph-Augmented BART for GenerativePyTorchAAAI
Commonsense Reasoning —— Code: https://github.com/yeliu918/KG-BART 2021
[21]ENT-DESC: Entity Description Generation by Exploring Knowledge GraphMXNetEMNLP
—— Code: https://github.com/LiyingCheng95/EntityDescriptionGeneration 2020
Question
answering[5]Commonsense for Generative Multi-Hop Question Answering TasksTensorflowEMNLP
—— Code: https://github.com/yicheng-w/CommonSenseMultiHopQA 2018
Ground text-enhanced methods
Dialogue
system[27]Wizard of Wikipedia: Knowledge-Powered Conversational agentsPyTorchICLR
—— Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/ParlAI 2019
[101]Conversing by Reading: Contentful Neural Conversation with On-demandPyTorchACL
Machine Reading —— Code: https://github.com/qkaren/converse_reading_cmr 2019
[61]Sequential Latent Knowledge Selection for Knowledge-Grounded DialogueTensorflowICLR
—— Code: https://github.com/bckim92/sequential-knowledge-transformer 2020
[87]RefNet: A Reference-aware Network for Background BasedTensorflowAAAI
Conversation —— Code: https://github.com/ChuanMeng/RefNet 2020
Summarization [129]BiSET: Bi-directional Selective Encoding with Template forPyTorchACL
Abstractive Summarization —— Code: https://github.com/InitialBug/BiSET 2019
Question
answering[68]Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP TasksPyTorchNeurips
—— Code in https://github.com/huggingface/transformers 2020
[99]KILT: a Benchmark for Knowledge Intensive Language TasksPyTorchNAACL
—— Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/KILT 2021
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

