==== Page 1 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Martin Wistuba martin.wistuba@ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM Technology Campus, Damastown Ind. Park
Dublin, D15HN66, Ireland
Ambrish Rawat ambrish.rawat@ie.ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM Technology Campus, Damastown Ind. Park
Dublin, D15HN66, Ireland
Tejaswini Pedapati tejaswinip@us.ibm.com
IBM Research AI
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
Abstract
The growing interest in both the automation of machine learning and deep learning has
inevitably led to the development of a wide variety of automated methods for neural ar-
chitecture search. The choice of the network architecture has proven to be critical, and
many advances in deep learning spring from its immediate improvements. However, deep
learning techniques are computationally intensive and their application requires a high level
of domain knowledge. Therefore, even partial automation of this process helps to make
deep learning more accessible to both researchers and practitioners. With this survey, we
provide a formalism which unies and categorizes the landscape of existing methods along
with a detailed analysis that compares and contrasts the dierent approaches. We achieve
this via a comprehensive discussion of the commonly adopted architecture search spaces
and architecture optimization algorithms based on principles of reinforcement learning and
evolutionary algorithms along with approaches that incorporate surrogate and one-shot
models. Additionally, we address the new research directions which include constrained
and multi-objective architecture search as well as automated data augmentation, optimizer
and activation function search.
Keywords: Neural Architecture Search, Automation of Machine Learning, Deep Learn-
ing, Reinforcement Learning, Evolutionary Algorithms, Constrained Optimization, Multi-
Objective Optimization
1. Introduction
Deep learning methods are very successful in solving tasks in machine translation, image
and speech recognition. This success is often attributed to their ability to automatically
extract features from unstructured data such as audio, image and text. We are currently
witnessing this paradigm shift from the laborious job of manual feature engineering for
unstructured data to engineering network components and architectures for deep learning
methods. While architecture modications do result in signicant gains in the performance
of deep learning methods, the search for suitable architectures is in itself a time-consuming,
arduous and error-prone task. Within the last two years there has been an insurgence
c2019 Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati.arXiv:1905.01392v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jun 2019

==== Page 2 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
in research eorts by the machine learning community that seeks to automate this search
process. On a high level, this automation is cast as a search problem over a set of decisions
that dene the dierent components of a neural network. The set of feasible solutions to
these decisions implicitly denes the search space and the search algorithm is dened by
the optimizer. Arguably, the works by Zoph and Le (2017) and Baker et al. (2017) mark
the beginning of these eorts where their works demonstrated that good architectures can
be discovered with the use of reinforcement learning algorithms. Shortly thereafter, Real
et al. (2017) showed that similar results could also be achieved by the hitherto well studied
approaches in neuroevolution (Floreano et al., 2008). However, both these search approaches
consumed hundreds of GPU hours in their respective computations. Consequently, many
of the subsequent works focused on methods that reduce this computational burden. The
successful algorithms along this line of research leverage from the principle of reusing the
learned model parameters, with the works of Cai et al. (2018a) and Pham et al. (2018)
being the notable mentions.
The design of the search space forms a key component of neural architecture search. In
addition to speeding up the search process, this inuences the duration of the search and the
quality of the solution. In the earlier works on neural architecture search, the spaces were
designed to primarily search for chain-structured architectures. However, with branched
handcrafted architectures surpassing the classical networks in terms of performance, appro-
priate search spaces were proposed shortly after the initial publications (Zoph et al., 2018)
and these have since become a norm in this eld.
In parallel to these developments, researchers have broadened the horizons of neural
architecture search to incorporate objectives that go beyond reducing the search time and
generalization error of the found architectures. Methods that simultaneously handle multi-
ple objective functions have become relevant. Notable works include methods that attempt
to limit the number of model parameters or the like, for ecient deployment on mobile
devices (Tan et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2017). Furthermore, the developed techniques for ar-
chitecture search have been extended for advanced automation of other related components
of deep learning. For instance, the search for activation functions (Ramachandran et al.,
2018) or suitable data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2018a).
Currently, the automation of deep learning in the form of neural architecture search
is one of the fastest developing areas of machine learning. With new papers emerging on
arXiv.org each week and major conferences publishing a handful of interesting work, it is
easy to lose track. With this survey, we provide a formalism which unies the landscape of
existing methods. This formalism allows us to critically examine the dierent approaches
and understand the benets of dierent components that contribute to the design and suc-
cess of neural architecture search. Along the way, we also highlight some popular miscon-
ceptions pitfalls in the current trends of architecture search. We supplement our criticism
with suitable experiments.
Our review is divided into several sections. In Section 2, we discuss various architecture
search spaces that have been proposed over time. We use Section 3 to formally dene the
problem of architecture search. Then we identify four typical types of optimization meth-
ods: reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, surrogate model-based optimization,
and one-shot architecture search. We dene these optimization procedures and associate
them to existing work and discuss it. Section 6 highlights the architecture search, consider-
2

==== Page 3 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
ing constraints, multiple objective functions and model compression techniques. Alternate
approaches that are motivated from the use of transfer learning are discussed in Section
5. Similarly, the class of methods that use early termination to fasten the search process
are detailed in Section 4. Finally, the inuence of search procedures on related areas is dis-
cussed in Section 7. The discussion is supported with extensive illustrations to elucidate the
dierent methods under a common formalism and relevant experimentation that examines
the dierent aspects of neural architecture search methods.
2. Neural Architecture Search Space
From a computational standpoint, neural networks represent a function that transforms in-
put variables xto output variables ^ythrough a series of operations. This can be formalized
in the language of computational graphs (Bauer, 1974) where neural networks are repre-
sented as directed acyclic graphs with a set of nodes Z. Each nodez(k)represents a tensor
and is associated with an operation o(k)2Oon its set of parent nodes I(k)(Goodfellow
et al., 2016). The only exception is the input node xwhich has neither a set of parent
nodes nor an operation associated to it and is only considered as an input to other nodes.
The computation at a node kamounts to
z(k)=o(k)(I(k)): (1)
The set of operations includes unary operations such as convolutions, pooling, activation
functions or multivariate operations such as concatenation or addition. For notational
convenience, we adopt a convention wherein we x the unary operations to use concatenation
as an implicit merge operation when acting on a set of multiple inputs and often omit it
in the representation. Note that for a neural network, any representation that species
the set of parents and the operation for each node completely denes the architecture of
the network. We refer to such a representation as and use this to unify and outline the
dierent neural architecture search methods under the same framework.
Aneural architecture search space is a subspace of this general denition of neural ar-
chitectures. Its space of operations can be limited and certain constraints may be imposed
on the architectures. In the rest of this survey, we use search space to refer to the set of
feasible solutions of a neural architecture search method. Most works on neural architec-
ture search address the automated search of architectures for the task of image recognition
and are consequently concerned with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al.,
1998). The corresponding search spaces in these works can be broadly classied into two
categories. The rst category of search spaces is dened for the graphs that represent an
entire neural architecture which we refer to as the global search space and discuss in Sec-
tion 2.1. We discuss the second category in Section 2.2 which assumes that an architecture
is a combination of few cells which are repeated to build the complete network. Although
in principle the global search space encompasses the cell-based search space, we make this
distinction to highlight some of the nuanced aspects of both these spaces. An objective
comparison of these search spaces is provided in Section 2.3. Another common task tackled
with neural architecture search is language modeling where search methods seek to nd the
architecture for recurrent neural networks (RNNs). We discuss the commonly used search
space in this context in Section 2.4.
3

==== Page 4 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
o1o2onsoftmax
xz(1)z(n)^y
(a) Baker et al. (2017)o1o2onsoftmax
xz(1)z(n)^y
z(1)
(b) Zoph and Le (2017)Segment 1
xSegment 2
z(1)Segment ndense
z(n)softmax^y
+ conv conv
conv
convconvconvmax pool
xz(1)
(c) Xie and Yuille (2017)
Figure 1: Global search spaces: (a) chain-structured, (b) with skips, (c) architecture tem-
plate, only the connections between the dark blue (dashed) operations are not xed.
2.1 Global Search Space
Instances belonging to the global search space admit large degrees of freedom regarding
the arrangement of operations. An architecture template may be assumed which limits the
freedom of admissible structural choices within an architecture denition. This template
often xes certain aspects of the network graph. For instance, it may divide the architecture
graph into several segments or enforce specic constraints on operations and connections
both within and across these segments, thereby limiting the type of architectures that
belong to a search space. Figure 1 illustrates examples of architectures from such template-
constrained search spaces. Here, we exclude constraints which enforce a predetermined
repeating pattern of subgraphs and dedicate a separate section for the discussion of such
search spaces in Section 2.2.
The simplest example of a global search space is the chain-structured search space as
shown in Figure 1a. In its most primitive form, this search space consists of architectures
that can be represented by an arbitrary sequence of ordered nodes such that for any node
z(k),z(k 1)is its only parent. The data ow for neural networks with such architectures
simplies to
z(k)=o(k)n
z(k 1)o
: (2)
Baker et al. (2017) explore this search space. They consider a set of operations that includes
convolutions, pooling, linear transformations (dense layers) with activation, and global av-
erage pooling with dierent hyperparameter settings such as number of lters, kernel size,
stride and pooling size. Furthermore, they consider additional constraints so as to ex-
4

==== Page 5 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Segment 1 Segment 2 Segment 3 Segment 7
Repeat:n2, Filters:f2
conv
1x1conv
3x3+
Figure 2: Tan et al. (2018) propose to decompose the architecture into dierent segments.
Each segment ihas its own pattern (blue operations) which is repeated nitimes and has fi
lters.
clude certain architectures that correspond to patently poor or computationally expensive
neural network models. For instance, architectures with pooling as the rst operation do
not belong to their search space. Furthermore, architectures with dense (fully connected)
layers applied as high-resolution feature maps, or as feature transformations before other
operations like convolutions are excluded from their search space.
In a parallel work around the same time, Zoph and Le (2017) dene a relaxed version
of the chain-structured search space. By permitting arbitrary skip connections to exist
between the ordered nodes of a chain-structured architecture, members belonging to this
search space exhibit a wider variety of designs. However, in their denition the operation
set is restricted to use only convolutions with dierent hyperparameter settings. While they
adhere to the basic recursive formulation of the chain-structured search space, they extend
it with the inclusion of skip connections. For an architecture in this search space, the set of
parents of a node z(k)necessarily contains z(k 1)with possible inclusion of other ancestor
nodes,
z(k)=o(k)n
z(k 1)o
[n
z(i)ji;k= 1; i<k 1o
: (3)
For such nodes, the merge operation is xed as concatenation. Figure 1b provides an
example of such a skip connection. As mentioned earlier, we omit the explicit representation
of the concatenation.
Xie and Yuille (2017) consider a similar search space which uses summation instead
of concatenation as the merging operation. Furthermore, the architectures in this search
space are no longer sequential in the sense that the set of parents for a node z(k)does not
necessarily contain the node z(k 1). Moreover, this search space incorporates a template
which separates architectures into sequentially connected segments (e.g. three segments are
used for image recognition on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009)). Each segment
is parameterized by a set of nodes with convolutions as their operation. As part of the
template, the segments begin with a convolution and conclude with a max pooling operation
with a stride of two to reduce feature dimensions (see Figure 1c).
Additionally, the maximum number of convolution operations along with their number
of lters for each segment is also xed as part of the template (for the case of CIFAR-10
this is xed to three convolutions of lter size 64 for the rst, four convolutions of lter size
128 for the second, and ve convolutions of lter size 256 for the last segment). With the
5

==== Page 6 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
normal cellnreduction cellnormal cellnreduction cellnormal cellnsoftmax
xnormal cellnormal cellnormal cellnormal cellreduction cellnormal cellconv
1x1*
xz(1)z(n 1)z(n)z(n+1)x
xz(n 2)
z(n 1)z(n)z(n0)
Figure 3: Structure of the NASNet search space instances. nnormal cells followed by a
reduction cell. This sequence is repeated several times, the reduction cell might be re-
peated. This decision is a hyperparameter and depends on the image resolution. The 1x1*
convolution is a special operation which converts z(n)to match the shape of z(n+1).
operations xed, an adjacency matrix denes the connections in the directed acyclic graphs
corresponding to each segment.
An alternative work by Tan et al. (2018) is motivated to look for neural network models
for mobile devices that perform eciently on multiple fronts which include accuracy, infer-
ence time and number of parameters. They design a suitable search space for this purpose
that consists of architectures with a hierarchical representation (Figure 2). Architectures in
this search space are also formed by sequentially connecting segments. Segments are further
structured to have repeating patterns of operations and each segment is parameterized by
the choice of operations and the number of repetitions of the patterns. The structure of
the patterns itself is simplied to be sequentially connected operations with an optional
skip connection and an optional choice of stride. Although they simplify the per-segment
search space, they allow segments to be dierent which dierentiates this from the cell-based
search space discussed in the following section (Section 2.2). They argue that this exibility
provides them the necessary apparatus to tackle multi-objective designs.
2.2 Cell-Based Search Space
A cell-based search space builds upon the observation that many eective handcrafted
architectures are designed with repetitions of xed structures. Such architectures often
consist of smaller-sized graphs that are stacked to form a larger architecture. Across the
literature, these repeating structures have been interchangeably referred to as cells, blocks
or units. In the context of this survey, we refer to them as cells. Not only is this design
known to yield high performing models, it also enables easy generalization across datasets
and tasks as these units can be exibly stacked to build larger or smaller networks. Zoph
et al. (2018) were one of the rst to explore such a search space leading to the popular
6

==== Page 7 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Celli
Block 1 Block 2 Block 3 Block 4 Block 5
max
3x3sep
7x7+
max
3x3sep
3x3+
sep
5x5sep
7x7+
idavg
3x3+
avg
3x3sep
5x5+
Cell
i 1
Cell
i 2
Figure 4: Reduction cell of the NASNet-A architecture (Zoph et al., 2018) as one example
how a cell in the NASNet search space can look like. Blocks can be used as input for other
blocks (e.g. block 1 and 3), unused blocks are concatenated and are the output of the cell.
architecture called NASNet. Post the development of this work, other cell-based search
spaces have been proposed. Most of these broadly stick to the structure proposed by Zoph
et al. (2018) with small modications to the choice of operations and cell-combination
strategies. In the remaining section we dene and discuss these dierent approaches to
cell-based search spaces.
In the cell-based search space a network is constructed by repeating a structure called a
cell in a prespecied arrangement as determined by a template (see Figure 3). A cell is often
a small directed acyclic graph representing a feature transformation. While the topology of
the cell is maintained across the network, its hyperparameters are often varied. For instance
the number of lters for the convolution operations can dier across dierent cells and a
template usually species the xed policy for varying these across the network structures.
One aspect of cell-based search spaces that demands attention is their handling of tensor
dimensions when building the entire network. While some approaches have dedicated cells
to take care of dimension reduction like the reduction cells in the work by Zoph et al. (2018),
others achieve this by introducing pooling operations between dierent units in the network
(Zhong et al., 2018). The prespecied template for connecting the various cells localizes the
search to structures within a cell. Often the template also includes a set of initial convolution
layers which capture low-level features for the given dataset. It is also worth remarking that
most approaches that seek to learn a topology limit the hyperparameter choice to smaller
values during the search process thereby making the search process ecient. The nal
proposed network is trained with a larger number of lters ( f) and more repetitions of the
cells (n) with an aim to achieve better performance (Zoph et al., 2018).
7

==== Page 8 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
convCellnmax poolCellnmax poolCellnsoftmax
xCelli
Cell
i 1conv
3x3conv
5x5+conv
3x3
conv
1x1conv
5x5avg
3x3
conv
3x3Cell
i+ 1
Figure 5: Architecture template (left) and the Block-QNN-B cell discovered by Zhong et al.
(2018) (right).
Zoph et al. (2018) are one of the rst to propose a cell-based approach, popularly
referred to as the NASNet search space . The architectures in this search space consider a
template of cells as visualized in Figure 3. This search space distinguishes between two cell
types, namely normal cells and reduction cells, which handle the feature dimensions across
the architecture. Operations in a normal cell have a stride of one and do not change the
dimensions of the feature maps, whereas the rst set of operations in a reduction cell have a
stride of two and it consequently halve the spatial dimensions of the feature maps. Each cell
consists ofbblocks, where bis a search space hyperparameter (with b= 5 being the most
popular choice). Each block is completely dened by its two inputs and the corresponding
operations. The computation ow for a block is dened by
z(block i)=o(i1)n
z(i1)o
+o(i2)n
z(i2)o
: (4)
An example for the cell structure is visualized in Figure 4. In their original formulation,
Zoph et al. (2018) also consider concatenation as a possible merge operation of o(i1)and
o(i2). However in their experiments they note that architectures with summation operation
dominate those with concatenation in terms of accuracy. Therefore, later works such as Liu
et al. (2018a) x this decision to summation. For a block, the set of possible inputs include
the output of one of the previous two cells and the output of a previously dened block
within a cell. By including the output from previous two cells as candidates for the input
to the block, this search space includes instances with skip connections across cells. The
output of a cell is determined as concatenation of the outputs of all blocks within the cell
which do not serve as inputs to any other block. Cells from this search space dier in their
choice of the inputs and the operations for the dierent blocks.
Concurrently with Zoph et al. (2018), Zhong et al. (2018) propose a similar cell-based
search space as shown in Figure 5. The key dierences lie in their denition of cells and the
8

==== Page 9 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
conv 3x3cellsep 3x3
stride=2cellsep 3x3
stride=2cellsep 3x3
stride=2global poolsoftmaxTemplate
xMeta-
Op 3Meta-
Op 5Meta-
Op 3Meta-
Op 3Meta-
Op 5
Meta-
Op 1 Meta-
Op 5Meta-
Op 5
Meta-
Op 3Meta-
Op 4Cell
sep
3x3sep
3x3avg
3x3dep
3x3
sep
3x3Meta-Operation 3
idsep
3x3sep
3x3
sep
3x3idMeta-Operation 5
Figure 6: The search space proposed by Liu et al. (2018b) is based on an architecture
template (left) which denes the sequence of cells and reduction operations. The choices
made about an architecture is the set of meta-operations and their arrangement within the
cell (right).
use of xed max-pooling layers as opposed to reduction cells for handling feature dimensions
in the architecture template. Since they do not decompose the cell structure any further,
graphs comprising of arbitrary connections between dierent nodes are admissible as cells in
this search space. This alternate denition of cell admits higher degrees of freedom than the
normal cell of the NASNet search space, for instance the number of operations within each
cell is not xed. In addition to the number of operations, the instances of cells also dier
in the type of operations and their input. This search space formulation does not allow
skip connections across dierent cells. An example architecture discovered is presented in
Figure 5.
Liu et al. (2018b) propose a search space similar to the one proposed by Zhong et al.
(2018). An architecture template that describes their high-level denition of an architecture
as shown in Figure 6. The main dierence is that the search space is decomposed into a
hierarchical search space. The rst level of hierarchy denes a xed numbers of meta-
9

==== Page 10 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
convcell
(n1)avg pool
(stride=2)cell
(n2)avg pool
(stride=2)cell
(n3)global
pool x ^y
Figure 7: Mobile search spaces as used by Dong et al. (2018). The entire network including
the cells are densely connected.
operations. A meta-operation is the connection of few operations to a larger segment
(Figure 6). The second level represents the cell by connections between the meta-operations.
The cell-based design paradigm has also been used for dening search spaces that are
suitable for mobile devices. Dong et al. (2018) propose a search space specically aimed at
meeting such requirements which include objectives like fewer parameters and fast inference
time. Architectures in this search space comprise of cells without branches and a xed inter-
nal structure that alternates two normalization (e.g. batch normalization) and convolution
layers. All operations are densely connected (Huang et al., 2017) as shown in Figure 7 which
also applies for those in the cell. The number of choices is signicantly smaller than the
previously discussed cell-based search spaces, making this a less challenging optimization
task.
2.3 Global vs. Cell-Based Search Space
So far, there has been no detailed comparative study of the dierent search spaces proposed
in the vast literature of neural architecture search. However, cell-based search spaces,
in particular the NASNet search space, are the most popular choices for developing new
methods. Most works that examine both search spaces, the global and the cell-based space,
support this choice by providing empirical evidence that well-performing can be obtained
in the cell-based search space (Pham et al., 2018). Regardless, cell-based search spaces
benet from the advantage that discovered architectures can be easily transferred across
datasets. Moreover, the complexity of the architectures can be varied almost arbitrarily
by changing the number of lters and cells. In general, the architectures belonging to
the global search space do not exhibit all these properties, but specic cases may benet
from some of them. For instance, architectures can be naturally modied by varying the
number of lters, but transferring a discovered architecture to a new datasets with dierent
input shapes or deepening the architecture is not trivial. Interestingly, Tan et al. (2018)
endorse the use of the global search space when searching for mobile architectures. They
base this argument on a hypothesis that diversity of layers is critical for achieving both
high accuracy and low latency for deployment in mobile devices and that these cannot be
provided by conventional cell-based search spaces. Interestingly, Hu et al. (2018) remark
10

==== Page 11 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Node 1
Node 2 Node 3Cell
State
Node 3
add
tanhNode 2
elem mult
ReLUNode 1
add
ReLU
Cell State
Input 2
Output 3
elem mult
tanhaddtanh
elem
multReLUelem
multtanh add ReLU
ct 1ctht
ht 1xt
ht 1xt
Figure 8: On the left is an example for a full binary tree describing a recurrent cell. Each
node has a merging and an activation function associated. The cell state information is
stored independently. It points to two nodes from the binary tree which are associated to
the input and output as well as a merging and activation function. The right shows how
this representation is translated to a computational graph.
on the importance of selecting initial architectures for searching in the global search space
and show that architectures with comparable performance to the ones discovered in cell-
based search spaces can be easily arrived at with appropriate initial conditions. This is an
interesting insight which might revive the use of global search space in the development of
new methods. However, the choice of useful initial architecture might be task-dependent
and the guidelines for this selection remain unclear.
2.4 Search Space for Recurrent Cells
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are the popular class of deep learning models used for
sequence-to-sequence modelling tasks in natural language processing and other domains.
Zoph and Le (2017) were the rst and only to dene a search space for recurrent cells. A
recurrent cell ( g) can be described by
ht=g;(xt;ht 1;ct 1); (5)
whereis the vector of trainable parameters, the structure of g,htthe hidden state, ct
the cell state, and xtthe input at step t. The architecture is dened by a full binary tree
where every node is associated with a binary merge operation (e.g. addition, element-wise
multiplication) and an activation function (e.g. tanh, sigmoid) as shown in Figure 8. Every
nodeirepresents a parameterized function
g(i)

z(i1);z(i2)
=o(act)
o(merge)
z(i1);z(i2)
; (6)
11

==== Page 12 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
wherez(i1)andz(i2)are the outputs computed by the child nodes of node i. Each leaf node
takes as input xtandht 1, the cell state is considered independently. A node within the
tree has to be selected to provide ct.ct 1is used in combination with an arbitrary node
using the selected merge operation and activation function.
3. Optimization Methods
With a comprehensive coverage of the search spaces, we are now in a position to formally
dene the problem of neural architecture search. We denote the space of all datasets as D,
the space of all deep learning models as M, and the architecture search space as A. Given
this setup, a general deep learning algorithm  is dened as the mapping
 :DA!M : (7)
In the context of this denition, an architecture of the search space 2Adenes more
than just the topology. It further encodes all properties required to train a network on a
dataset which includes the choice of model parameter optimization algorithm, regularization
strategies and all other hyperparameters.
Given a dataset d, which is split into a training partition dtrainand a validation partition
dvalid, the general deep learning algorithm  estimates the model m;2M. This model
is estimated by minimizing a loss function Lwhich is penalized with a regularization term
Rwith respect to the training data. That is,
 (;d) = arg min
m;2ML(m;;dtrain) +R(): (8)
Neural architecture search is the task of nding the architecture which maximizes an
objective function Oon the validation partition dvalid. Formally,
= arg max
2AO( (;dtrain);dvalid) = arg max
2Af(): (9)
The objective function Ocan be the same as the negative loss function L. For the classica-
tion problem it is often the case that the loss is the negative cross-entropy and the objective
function the classication accuracy. This problem denition falls under the broader scope
of hyperparameter optimization (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012).
Optimizing the response function fis a global black-box optimization problem. In
the following, we discuss several optimization strategies based on reinforcement learning,
evolutionary algorithms and others.
3.1 Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) approaches are useful for modeling a process of sequential
decision making where an agent interacts with an environment with the sole objective of
maximizing its future return. The agents learns to improve its behavior through multiple
episodes of interaction with the environment. At every step t, the agent executes an action
a(t)and receives an observation of the state s(t)along with a reward r(t). The environment
on the other hand receives the agent's action, accordingly transits to a new state, and emits
12

==== Page 13 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
AgentEnvironment
Actions Observation Rewards
Figure 9: A general framework for reinforcement learning algorithms.
the corresponding observation and scalar reward (Figure 9). The objective of the agent lies
in maximizing its return which is expressed as a discounted sum of rewards over Tdecision
steps as dened byPT
t=0r(t), whereis the discounting factor. Naturally, such approaches
are well suited for neural architecture search where the agent, namely the search algorithm,
takes decisions to modify the system's state, i.e. the architecture, so as to maximize the
long term objective of high performance which is often measured in terms of accuracy.
Reinforcement learning systems are often modeled as a Markov decision process en-
compassing cases where the environment is fully observable. Most approaches consider
simplied scenarios where the set of actions and states is nite and the setup consists in
a nite horizon problem where episodes terminate after a nite number of steps. Even in
this setting the number of possible options is combinatorially high. An RL agent seeks to
learn a policy which serves as the mapping from a state to a probability distribution over
the set of actions. While one class of RL methods indirectly learns this policy with the
use of value functions and state-action value functions, other approaches directly learn a
parameterized policy. The state-value function v(s) denes the expected return for the
agent given that the starting state is sand the policy is followed thereafter. The value
of taking an action ain statesunder a policy is similarly dened by q. Both value
functions satisfy the consistency equation dened by the Bellman equation (Sutton and
Barto, 1998). Furthermore, the value function induces a partial order over policies and the
optimal policy is the one that ascribes largest values to all states. The goal of an agent is
to nd this optimal policy.
Temporal Dierence Learning Approaches like SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan,
1994), TD- (Sutton and Barto, 1998), and Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) attempt to nd
this policy implicitly via approximating the optimal value functions. The optimal policy is
subsequently determined as the greedy-policy with respect to the optimal value function.
The optimal value functions v(s) andq(a;s) satisfy the Bellman optimal criterion. Q-
learning (Watkins, 1989) learns an action-value function Q(s;a) that directly approximates
q. The agent learns Qindependently from the policy it follows. The Q-learning algorithm
uses the following update rule for the action-value function Q,
Q(s(t);a(t)) (1 )Q(s(t);a(t)) +
r(t)+max
a0Q
s(t+1);a0
: (10)
Here,is the Q-learning rate. The learned policy and correspondingly the proposed ar-
chitecture is subsequently derived by greedily selecting the actions for every state which
maximizeQ(s;a).
13

==== Page 14 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Policy Gradient Methods An alternative approach in RL consists in policy gradient
methods which do not appeal to value functions and instead directly learn policies as de-
ned by a collection of parameters, (ajs). These methods select actions without explicitly
consulting a value function. The parameters of the policy are adjusted so as to move in
the direction of the agent's performance measure via classical gradient ascent updates. The
required gradient is often not directly available as the performance depends both on the
actions selected and the distribution of states under which the actions is taken. Hence
an empirical estimate of the gradient is used to perform the necessary update. REIN-
FORCE (Williams, 1992) is a classical algorithm that estimates this gradient as,
E"TX
t=0rln(a(t)js(t))G(t)#
: (11)
whereG(t)is the return from step t,PT
tr(t)
. However these empirical gradient estimates
are often noisy and additional tricks like inclusion of a baseline are incorporated for useful
learning. Moreover, alternative formulations of this gradient as derived through objective
functions of importance sampling have led to other approximations. These approaches
include Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015) and Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). It is worth noting that these methods
are on-policy methods as the agents follow the policy they seek to learn.
Optimization with Q-Learning Baker et al. (2017) were one of the rst to propose
the use of RL-based algorithms for neural architecture search. They use a combination of
Q-learning, -greedy, and experience replay in the design of their algorithm. The actions
in their approach are the choice of dierent layers to add to an architecture as well as the
option to terminate building the architecture and declare it as nished (we discussed this
search space in Section 2.1). Subsequently, the states are the premature architectures. The
trajectories sampled from this state space correspond to models which are subsequently
trained to compute the validation accuracy. The Qfunction is appropriately updated with
experience replay. In order to trade o between exploration and exploitation, they incor-
porate an-greedy strategy where random trajectories are sampled with a probability of .
This is an o-policy method where the agent does not use the optimal policy during the
episodes. Additionally, the action-value function utilized in this case is deterministic. The
algorithm works as follows: after initializing the action-value function, the agent samples
a trajectory which comprises of multiple decision steps, eventually leading to a terminal
state. The algorithm then trains the model corresponding to the trajectory and updates
the action-value function as dened in the Q-learning algorithm. Zhong et al. (2018) also use
a Q-learning-based algorithm to search for network architectures. However, they perform
the search in a cell-based search space which we discussed in Section 2.2.
Optimization with Policy Gradient Methods Alternate approaches based on policy
gradient method have also been used for neural architecture search. The work by Zoph
and Le (2017) was the rst to consider this modeling approach. In their approach they
directly model a controller whose predictions can be considered as actions that are used
to construct a neural architecture. The controller parameterized by denes the stochas-
tic policy(ajs). They incorporate an autoregressive controller which predicts the action
14

==== Page 15 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Hidden
State
EmbeddingSoftmaxFilter
HeightFilter
WidthStride
HeightStride
WidthNumber of
Filters
Figure 10: The controller used by Zoph and Le (2017) (predictions for skip connections are
not shown) to predict conguration of one layer.
based on previous actions, and model it with a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). During
an episode, every action is sampled from the probability distribution implied by a softmax
operation and then fed into the next time step as input (Figure 10). The RNN-controller
in their approach samples layers which are sequentially appended to construct the nal
network. The nal network is trained to obtain the validation accuracy and the param-
eters of the controller are updated as per the REINFORCE update rule (Equation (11))
which involves scaling the gradient with the obtained validation accuracy. As discussed
in Section 2.1, they consider a space of chain-structured networks parameterized by only
convolutional layers with dierent lter width, lter height, stride parameters, and num-
ber of lters. Additionally, they include anchor points in their encoding to allow for skip
connections.
Policy gradient approaches have also been explored to learn controllers for cell-based
search spaces. Zoph et al. (2018) dene an RNN-controller that outputs actions which
sequentially determines the inputs and operations for a prespecied number of blocks within
a NASNet search space cell as dened in Section 2.2. The sampled architectures are trained
and the parameters of the controller are updated according to the PPO update rule.
Cai et al. (2018a) also model a controller to parameterized the policy and train it with
REINFORCE. However the action space of the controller diers and it requires an initial
architecture to start with. There are two types of actions, widening a layer or inserting
a new layer to deepen the network. Both actions are performed by means of function-
preserving transformations (Chen et al., 2016). This means that although the structure of
the architecture changes, the function that it models remains unchanged. Thus, the accu-
racy of this network does not change at rst. This is ensured by initializing the additionally
added parameters in a special way. In the example of adding a layer, it is initialized to
correspond to the identity function. At every step and every layer, the controller predicts
whether it wants to change it by means of widening or deepening it. As this involves
predicting transformation decisions for a variable length sequence, they incorporate a bidi-
rectional recurrent network (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997) with an embedding layer to learn
a low-dimensional representation of the network which is subsequently fed into actors that
compute the transformation decisions. For the predicted actions the function-preserving
transformations are computed which enable ecient reuse of weights for training the newly
sampled architecture which reduces the overall search duration.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
The work by Cai et al. (2018b) builds upon these transformations and proposes new
transformations to include branches in the network architectures. A convolutional layer
or an identity map is rst converted to its equivalent multi-branch motif such that the
functionality is preserved. This is achieved by splitting or replicating the input to a convo-
lutional or identity map into multiple branches, applying the corresponding transformation
(convolutional or identity) to each branch, and respectively concatenating or adding the
outputs of each branch. The function-preserving transformations are subsequently applied
on branches to explore more complex architectures. Similar to the work by Cai et al.
(2018a), the meta-controller in their approach also uses an encoder network to learn a
low-dimensional representation of the architecture and provide a distribution over transfor-
mation actions. They propose to learn the meta-controller with REINFORCE.
Monte Carlo Tree Search An alternative way of solving the reinforcement learning
problem lies in the use of Monte Carlo methods which are based on averaging sample
returns (Sutton and Barto, 1998). A popular algorithm in this domain is the UCT algo-
rithm (Kocsis and Szepesv ari, 2006) which has been adopted in dierent ways for neural
architecture search. This algorithm is designed for a tree-structured state-action space which
is incrementally explored and expanded. A policy based on upper condence bound (Auer,
2002) is utilized to explore this tree. The work of Negrinho and Gordon (2017) adopts
the vanilla UCT algorithm with bisection for neural architecture search. Wistuba (2018b)
builds on this work and employs function-preserving operations to speed up the training
process and uses surrogate models to predict the reward for unexplored states. Similarly,
Wang et al. (2019) make use of a surrogate model to predict the state reward and search
on the NASNet search space and use the weight sharing paradigm (Section 3.4).
3.2 Evolutionary Algorithms
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) are population-based global optimizer for black-box functions
which consist of following essential components: initialization, parent selection, recombina-
tion and mutation, survivor selection (Jong, 2006). The initialization denes how the rst
generation of the population is generated. After the initialization the optimizer repeats the
following steps until termination (see Figure 11):
1. Select parents from the population for reproduction.
2. Apply recombination and mutation operations to create new individuals.
3. Evaluate the tness of the new individuals.
4. Select the survivors of the population.
In this broad class of algorithms, the choices for mutation and recombination operators
along with the choice of tness and parent selection functions guide the overall search
process. The choice of operators used for recombination and mutation is motivated to
trade o diversity and similarity in the population, akin to the exploration and exploitation
trade-o in reinforcement learning-based search algorithms. Similarly, the choice of tness
functions reects the optimization objective and the choice of survivor selection enables
competition between the individuals of the population.
16

==== Page 17 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Parents
OspringPopulationParent Selection
Fitness EvaluationRecombination & MutationInitializationSurvivor
Selection
Figure 11: A general framework for evolutionary algorithms.
In the context of neural architecture search, the population consists of a pool of network
architectures. A parent architecture or a pair of architectures is selected in step 1 for
mutation or recombination, respectively. The steps of mutation and recombination refer to
operations that lead to novel architectures in the search space which are evaluated for tness
in step 3 and the process is repeated till termination. Often only mutation operators are used
in the domain of neural architecture search. There is no indication that a recombination
operation applied to two individuals with high tness would result into an ospring with
similar or better tness. On the contrary, oftentimes the tness of the resultant ospring
is much lower. For this reason and other reasons of simplicity, this part is often omitted.
The most common parent selection method in neural architecture search is tournament
selection (Goldberg and Deb, 1990). This method selects the individuals for further evo-
lution in two steps. First, it selects kindividuals from the population at random. Then
it iterates over them in the descending order of their tness while selecting individuals for
further steps with some (prespecied) high probability p. An alternative to tournament
selection is tness proportionate selection . In this approach an individual is selected pro-
portional to its tness. Thus, in a population f1;:::;Ng, thei-th individual is selected
with probabilityf(i)PN
j=1f(j), wheref(i) is the tness of the individual i.
After the recombination and mutation step, the population has grown. The intent of the
survivor selection component is to reduce the population size and enable competition within
the individuals. Several dierent policies are used to achieve this, ranging from selecting only
the best ( elitist selection ) to selecting all individuals. One class of evolutionary algorithm
that has been widely adopted for neural architecture search is genetic algorithms. These
approaches bear their name from the representation of individuals in their methodology
which is done by means of a xed-length encoding, called the genotype . Mutation and
recombination operations are performed directly on this representation. Further, a genotype
is used to create the physical appearance of the individual, which in the case of neural
architecture search is the architecture. This materialization is called the phenotype . It is
important to note that parts of the genotype can be conditionally active or inactive. The
information of the genotype is referred to as active if its modication results in a change in
the phenotype (given all other information remains the same). For an example see Figure
13.
In the remaining section we discuss the popular choices for search space, mutation
operators and selection functions that have been utilized for neural architecture search.
We note that EA-based neural architecture search methods include a set of highly diverse
approaches which have beneted from the varied choices of encoding the search space along
17

==== Page 18 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Table 1: High-level details of various evolutionary algorithms for neural architecture search.
Method Search Space Init Parent Sel. Survivor Sel.
Real et al. (2017) global simple tournament tournament
Xie and Yuille (2017) global random all tness prop.
Suganuma et al. (2017) global random n/a elitist
Liu et al. (2018b) cell-based random tournament all
Real et al. (2019) cell-based random tournament youngest
Elsken et al. (2018) global simple n/a elitist
Wistuba (2018a) cell-based simple tournament all
conv convbatch
normReLUbatch
normReLUglobal
poolsoftmaxx ^y(x)
Figure 12: A possible architecture discovered by the algorithm described by Real et al.
(2017). Noticeable are the redundant operations such as two convolutions in a row without
an activation.
with the choices of mutation operators and selection functions. In the context of this work
we describe six notable works in EA-based neural architecture search. A broad overview of
these approaches is provided in Table 1.
Real et al. (2017) Real et al. (2017) were one of the rst to propose an evolutionary algo-
rithm to nd competitive convolutional neural network architectures for image classication.
Their approach begins with one thousand copies of the simplest possible architecture, i.e.
a global pooling layer followed by the output layer. In the parent selection step of their
approach they propose to sample a pair of architectures for further processing. While the
better of the two architectures is copied (along with the weights), mutated, trained for
25,600 steps with a batch size 50, and added to the population, the other one is removed
from the population. This is equivalent to using tournament selection with k= 2 and
p= 1. The set of mutations consists of simple operations such as adding convolutions (pos-
sibly with batch normalization or ReLU activation) at arbitrary locations before the global
pooling layer, along with mutations that alter kernel size, number of channels, stride and
learning rate, add or remove skip connections, remove convolutions, reset weights, and a
mutation that corresponds to no change. Since no further domain constraints are enforced,
architectures with redundant components can be potentially sampled in this approach (see
Figure 12).
Xie and Yuille (2017) Xie and Yuille (2017) made their work available only one day
later. In contrast to Real et al. (2017), their work develops a genetic algorithm over a more
structured search space which comprises of a sequence of segments with possibly parallel
convolution operations. In their approach they consider networks to be composed of three
18

==== Page 19 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
max 00Node 1
conv 01Node 2
conv 12Node 3
sum 21Node 4
output 43Node 5
Genotype
softmax
+
max
pool
convmax
poolNode 4Phenotype
Figure 13: The genetic encoding used by Suganuma et al. (2017). Gray shaded parts of
the genotype are inactive. Inactive parts such as Node 3 are not present in the phenotype.
The additional max pooling layer introduced by Node 4 is an example how not explicitly
encoded operations in the genotype can appear in the phenotype.
segments, each consisting of multiple convolution layers (see Section 2.1 for more details).
Each segment is described by an adjacency matrix which denes a directed acyclic graph
over the layers within the segment. The genotype of the entire network is obtained as a xed
length binary string of the adjacency matrices of the three segments. The algorithm begins
with a population of 20 random samples from the search space. In the parent selection
step, all pairs ( i;i+1); imod 2 = 1 are considered for a cross-over operation. With a
probability p, the cross-over operation swaps segments between the two selected networks.
As the next step, all individuals which have undergone no modications in the previous
step are considered for mutation. In their algorithm, mutations are dened as random
ip operations on the adjacency matrices that dene the segments. Finally, the obtained
ospring is trained from scratch and its tness is evaluated. The tness of an individual is
dened as the dierence between its validation accuracy and the minimum accuracy among
all individuals of the population. As tness proportionate selection is used in their approach,
this modication ensures that the weakest individual survives with a probability of zero. It
is worth remarking that this is one of the rst works to demonstrate a successful transfer of
an architecture automatically discovered on a smaller dataset to a larger one, namely from
CIFAR-10 to ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015).
Suganuma et al. (2017) Suganuma et al. (2017) present another optimizer based on
genetic algorithms but consider a wider set of operations in their search space, which includes
convolutions and pooling along with concatenation and summation of vectors. In their
approach, they encode the entire network as a sequence of blocks represented by a triple
that denes the operation and inputs of the block. The string obtained by concatenating the
block encoding constitutes the genotype. Inactive parts are admissible in such a denition
19

==== Page 20 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
of a genotype, for instance unused inputs for certain operations or disconnected blocks. The
inactive parts do not materialize in the phenotype (for an example see Figure 13). They
propose to use the (1+ )-evolutionary strategy ( = 2) (Beyer and Schwefel, 2002) approach
to guide the evolution where mutation and selection operators are applied in a loop until
termination. Beginning with a genotype that corresponds to the parent individual (random
for the rst iteration), ospring are generated by forcefully modifying the active parts of
the genotype. A mutation is also applied to the parent on one of the inactive parts of its
genotype. However this does not result in any change of the phenotype and hence does not
add to the overall training cost. This action ensures progress of the search even in cases
where the parent of this generation will become the parent of the next generations again.
The ospring networks are trained to obtain validation accuracies and the parent for the
next iteration is selected using elitist selection strategy.
Liu et al. (2018b) Liu et al. (2018b) propose another evolutionary algorithm which uses
the hierarchically organized search space as described in Section 2.2. At every step a muta-
tion selects the hierarchy level to modify along with the modication to the representations
at that level. The population is initialized with 200 trivial genotypes which are diversied
by applying 1000 random mutations. Furthermore, parents are selected using tournament
selection (5% of the population) and no individuals are removed during the evolutionary
process. In their setting, mutations can add, alter and remove operations from the genotype.
Real et al. (2019) The follow-up work by Real et al. (2019) is one of the most signicant
works in the direction of using evolutionary algorithms for architecture search. It is pri-
marily known for nding the architectures AmoebaNet-B and AmoebaNet-C which set new
records for the task of image classication on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet dataset. However,
their search process used a total of 3,150 GPU hours. Their evolutionary search algorithm
operates on the NASNet search space (details in Section 2.2) with tournament selection
used to select parents at each iteration. The selected individuals are mutated with a ran-
dom change in an operation or a connection in either a normal or a reduction cell and are
trained for 25 epochs. As opposed to previous works, their algorithm does not solely rely on
validation accuracy and incorporates age in the selection of survivors. This is motivated to
restrain repeated selection of well-performing models for mutation and introduce diversity
to the population. This basically adds a regularization term to the objective function which
makes sure that we are searching for architectures which are not only capable of reaching
high validation accuracy once but every time.
The previously discussed evolutionary algorithms are mostly concerned about nding a
good performing architecture ignoring GPU budget limitations. The shortest search time
used among those methods is still seventeen GPU days. The two works discussed in the
following are more concerned about eciency and report comparable results within a day.
The method to accomplish this is a combination of mutations which are function-preserving
transformations (see Section 3.1) and a more aggressive, greedy evolution.
Elsken et al. (2018) Elsken et al. (2018) propose a simple yet ecient evolutionary
algorithm inspired by the function-preserving transformations. Similar to Suganuma et al.
(2017) they follow the (1+ ) evolutionary strategy. A parent is selected with elitist selection
20

==== Page 21 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture SearchCelli
Cell
i 1conv
3x3conv
3x3conv
7x7
sep
5x5sep
3x3+conv
3x3
sep
3x3+conv
7x7conv
5x5max
3x3Cell
i+ 1
Figure 14: Exemplary outcome of the evolutionary algorithm proposed by Wistuba (2018a).
strategy, eight dierent ospring are generated with function-preserving mutations, and each
is trained for a total of 17 epochs. The initial architecture comprises of three convolution and
two max pooling layers. As discussed earlier, the function-preserving operations signicantly
reduce the training time per architecture and therefore the entire search duration.
Wistuba (2018a) In a similar line of work, Wistuba (2018a) also utilizes function-
preserving mutations but uses a cell-based search space. The proposed search method
begins with a simple network and performs function-preserving mutations to grow the pop-
ulation. The initial population is diversied by generating fteen additional children from
the base network. During the evolutionary algorithm, parents are selected using tourna-
ment selection and the ospring is trained for fteen epochs prior to their tness evaluation.
Similar to Liu et al. (2018b), all individuals survive the evolution process to ensure diversity.
Discovered cells have arbitrary structures, an example is provided in Figure 14.
3.3 Surrogate Model-Based Optimization
As the name implies, surrogate model-based optimizers use a surrogate model ^fto ap-
proximate the response function f(Equation (8)) (Jones, 2001). For the case of neural
architecture search this is motivated to get an approximate response for an architecture by
circumventing the time-consuming training step and thereby improve the overall eciency
of the search process. The surrogate itself is modeled as a machine learning model and is
trained on a meta-dataset which contains architecture descriptions along with their response
values, which are gathered during the architecture search:
H=f(1;f(1));(2;f(2));:::g (12)
Surrogate models are generally trained to minimize the squared error:
X
(;f())2H
^f() f()2
: (13)
However, often in practice only a ranking for the architectures is desired and in such cases
a low loss value is not necessitated as long as the surrogates provide a useful ranking.
The predictions from surrogate model are often used to identify promising candidate
architectures. These candidates are evaluated, their corresponding new meta-instances are
added toHand the surrogate model is accordingly updated (Figure 15). These steps are
executed until a convergence criterion is reached. We describe three dierent approaches
21

==== Page 22 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Surrogate
ModelResponse
FunctionCandidates
HistorySelect Candidates Evaluate Candidates
Update History Update SurrogateApproximates
Figure 15: A general framework for surrogate model-based optimization.
to surrogate model-based optimization that have been used with an intent to improve the
eciency of neural architecture search.
Kandasamy et al. (2018) Kandasamy et al. (2018) cast this as a black-box optimiza-
tion problem and tackle it with Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012). Bayesian opti-
mization methods use a combination of a probabilistic surrogate model and an acquisition
function to obtain suitable candidates. The acquisition function measures the utility by
accounting for both, the predicted response and the uncertainty in the prediction. In their
approach they model the surrogate with a Gaussian process (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006)
and use expected improvement as the acquisition function (Mockus et al., 1978) for the op-
timization. The architecture with the highest expected utility is selected for evaluation
and the consequent meta-instances are added to H. The surrogate model is updated and
the previous steps are repeated. The authors render two changes to the standard Bayesian
optimization algorithm. First, a novel kernel function to compute similarity between two
network architectures is proposed and second, an evolutionary algorithm is used to max-
imize the acquisition function. The kernel value computation in this work is modeled as
an optimal transport program (Villani, 2008). In essence, the graph topology, the location
and frequency of operations as well as the number of feature maps are used to compute the
similarity between two architectures.
Liu et al. (2018a) Liu et al. (2018a) also incorporate a surrogate model and search for
architectures in the NASNet search space (Section 2.2). They explore this search space by
progressively increasing the number of blocks in a cell, which, as previously discussed, is a
hyperparameter and xed in the template. While searching for models with an additional
block, they simultaneously train a surrogate model which can predict the validation accuracy
of the architecture given the encoding of the cell. The overall search process is designed as
a beam search where at every step, a new set of candidates is generated by expanding the
current pool of cells with an additional block and the top kof those are trained as per the
predictions of the surrogate model. Further, in each step the surrogate model is updated
by considering the newly obtained karchitectures in the meta-dataset. Given the design of
their setup, the surrogate model is required to handle variable sized inputs. In addition to
an RNN and an Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)
which are natural choices for this modeling, they also investigate a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) for this model.
22

==== Page 23 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
 ^ Encoder Architecture CodeAccuracy Predictor^f()
Decoder
Figure 16: Luo et al. (2018) propose to combine an autoencoder with the surrogate model.
This model is jointly learned to achieve ^andf()^f().
Luo et al. (2018) In an interesting approach, Luo et al. (2018) jointly learn an autoen-
coder for the architecture representation with the surrogate model which uses the continuous
encoding provided by the autoencoder, the architecture code, as its input (Figure 16). A
key dierence lies in their search algorithm which uses the surrogate model to sample new
architectures by taking gradient steps with respect to the architecture code. The architec-
ture code is changed by moving in the direction which yields better accuracy according to
the surrogate model. The new architecture is obtained by mapping the potentially better
architecture code back using the decoder learned as part of the autoencoder. At every
step, these samples are trained, the meta-dataset is expanded, and the surrogate model and
autoencoder are updated accordingly. The encoder, decoder and the surrogate model are
jointly trained to minimize a weighted sum of the reconstruction loss and the performance
prediction loss.
3.4 One-Shot Architecture Search
We dene an architecture search method as one-shot if it trains a single neural network dur-
ing the search process.1This neural network is then used to derive architectures throughout
the search space as candidate solutions to the optimization problem. Most of these one-shot
architectures are based on an over-parameterized network (Saxena and Verbeek, 2016; Pham
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Xie et al., 2019b; Casale et al., 2019). The advantage of this
family of methods is the relatively low search eort which is only slightly greater than the
training costs of one architecture in the search space. As we describe later, this method-
ology can be conveniently combined with many of the previously discussed optimization
methods.
Weight Sharing Pham et al. (2018) search in a subspace of the NASNet search space
(see Section 2.2) and operate on an over-parameterized network that covers the entire search
space. They use reinforcement learning to learn a controller to sample architectures (which
are only subgraphs of the complete architecture) from the search space (see Figure 17).
The weights of the controller and a part of the over-parameterized network are alternately
updated by gradient descent. During the network parameter update step, a batch is se-
lected and an architecture is sampled from the search space. Only the parameters of this
1. Not to be confused with the one-shot learning paradigm which refers to algorithms that seek to learn
from one instance.
23

==== Page 24 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
o1
o2o1
o2o1
o2
o1
o2o1
o2
o1
o2o1
o2
Figure 17: Example for weight sharing with only two operations in the chain-structured
search space. Every box has its own weights, every path (e.g. the red one: o1!o1!
o2!o2) is one architecture in the search space. Thus, weights are shared across dierent
architectures.
architecture are updated, the remaining parameters and the parameters of the controller
remain unchanged. During the update of the controller, architectures are sampled and eval-
uated on a validation batch. The obtained reward is used to update the controller similar
to Zoph and Le (2017) (details provided in Section 3.1). This idea is referred to as weight
sharing, as it corresponds to training multiple networks with shared weights. Bender et al.
(2018) suggest to replace the controller with uniform sampling. Casale et al. (2019) learn
the parameters of an independent categorical distribution to sample architectures. In all
these variations, after the training step, the nal architecture is selected according to the
one-shot model's validation performance and trained from scratch.
Dierentiable Architecture Search By introducing a set of binary variables fi;j;kg,
an equivalent formulation of Equation (1) can be obtained as
z(k)=X
j2jOjo(j)n
z(i)ji;j;k= 1; i<ko
: (14)
For notational convenience, we will assume that each operation which determines z(k)can
only use a single input from I(k). Then, this denition simplies to
z(k)=X
i2I(k)X
j2jOji;j;ko(j)n
z(i)o
; (15)
withi;j;k2f0;1g. In the works discussed thus far, the assumption has been that every
operation is either part of the network or not. Liu et al. (2019b) relax this assumption and
instead assumes a linearly weighted combination where the i;j;kcan assume any real value
in the range of 0 to 1, which allows for softer decisions on paths. They parameterize by
structural parameters ,
i;j;k=exp (i;j;k)P
i2I(k)P
j2jOjexp 
i0;j0;k: (16)
This softmax operation ensures that for every k
X
i2I(k)X
j2jOji;j;k= 1: (17)
24

==== Page 25 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
From Equation (9) a new, dierentiable loss function for both structural parameters and
model parameters can be derived:
min
()2AL 
arg min
m();2M()L 
m();;dtrain
+R();dvalid!
: (18)
Liu et al. (2019b) propose an alternating optimization method which learns the model
parameters by minimizing the loss on the training set and the structural parameters by
minimizing the loss on the validation set using gradient-based optimization methods. After
training this network, the nal architecture is chosen based on the values of i;j;k, the larger
the better. This method is a very elegant solution that makes all parameters dierentiable.
However, it has a signicant drawback: all parameters must be kept in memory all the
time. Since the network covers the entire search space, this is a signicant disadvantage.
The following two works overcome this by introducing update rules which require to keep
only a part of the network in memory at any one time.
The work by Xie et al. (2019b) builds upon the work of Liu et al. (2019b), but has
three major dierences. First, they represent the architecture by p(), wherep() is fully
factorizable and is modeled with a concrete distribution (Maddison et al., 2017). Choosing
this distribution results in only one path of the over-parameterized network being selected
for training. This path corresponds to a feasible solution in the search space and accordingly
requires less memory and can be easily kept in memory. Second, they minimize the loss of
dtrainwith respect to the two types of parameters and. The validation partition dvalidis
used only to select the nal architecture. And nally, gradients are estimated from Monte
Carlo samples rather than analytic expectation. Cai et al. (2019) achieve the same eect
with the use of binary gates (Courbariaux et al., 2015). Each binary gate chooses a part of
the path based on a learned probability and in this sense is very similar to the idea of Xie
et al. (2019b). Both these works signicantly reduce the memory overload by not loading
the entire over-parameterized model in the memory. Discrete architectures are derived by
selecting the most likely operation and the top two predecessors in the over-parameterized
network. This architecture is then trained again from scratch.
Hypernetworks Brock et al. (2018) propose the use of dynamic hypernetworks (Ha et al.,
2017), a neural network which generates the weights for another network conditioned on
a variable, i.e. in this case the architecture description. The hypernetwork is trained
to generate network weights for a variety of architectures. It can be used to rank dierent
architectures and derive a nal architecture which is then trained from scratch. This method
also shares weights, but most of them are shared in the hypernetwork. Hypernetworks save
training time of candidate architectures during the search as the weights are obtained as
predictions from these hypernetworks.
Zhang et al. (2019) extend this idea by combining it with a graph neural network (Scarselli
et al., 2009) which directly operates on a graph dened by nodes and edges. Every node is
a recurrent neural network, and messages between these networks can be propagated using
the edges. Each node stores its own state, which is updated by means of message propa-
gation. For each architecture, a graph neural network is generated which is homomorphic.
This means we have one node for each operation in the architecture, and for each connec-
tion between operations we have an edge in the graph neural network. The hypernetwork
25

==== Page 26 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
is then conditioned on the states of the graph neural network to infer the weights of the
architecture.
Discussion All of the one-shot approaches share the weights across dierent sampled ar-
chitectures, and rely on the hypothesis that the trained over-parameterized network can
be used to rank architectures for quality. This belief is supported by Bender et al. (2018)
who show a correlation between the validation error obtained for a sample of the over-
parameterized network and the one obtained after training the corresponding architecture
from scratch. However, they acknowledge that training the over-parameterized network
is not trivial and that the practical approaches of batch normalization, dropout rate and
regularization play an important role. Zhang et al. (2019) conduct a similar experiment
using a separate implementation and conrm the correlation between the two variables.
The correlation for the hypernetwork-based optimizers has been independently conrmed
by Brock et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2019). Thus, we have sucient empirical evidence
that weight sharing is indeed a useful tool for the search of CNN architectures. As a result,
the search only takes up insignicantly additional time than training a single candidate
in the search space and is consequently incredibly ecient compared to other optimiza-
tion methods. Sciuto et al. (2019) challenge this widespread belief for its applicability for
searching recurrent cells. They show that the ranking of architectures implied by the vari-
ous methods (Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Luo et al., 2018) does not correlate with
the true ranking. The reason that the search methods still deliver good results is solely due
to the very limited search space. They provide empirical evidence that a random search
outperforms many of the previously described methods in the search for an RNN cell.
3.5 Conclusions
In this section, we reviewed various optimization algorithms based on methods such as
reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, surrogate model-based optimization, and
one-shot models. Naturally, the imminent question is - which method should be prescribed?
In order to answer that we need to inspect if the results can be fairly compared. In our
opinion, this is not the case. The dierent experiments dier drastically in terms of search
space, search duration and data augmentation. However, we can safely conclude that the
NASNet search space is the most commonly used search space, presumably because the
imposed restrictions in its denition favor the discovery of well-performing architectures.
Similarly, strategies that reuse parameters (through function-preserving transformations or
weight sharing) are eective in reducing the search duration. However, we would like to
re-emphasize the questionable benets of weight sharing for RNNs as noted in our previous
discussion.
At this point we need to criticize the lack of fair baselines. Although architecture search
can be considered as a special way of optimizing hyperparameters, most of the related work
is disregarded. In particular, random search which has proven to be an extremely strong
baseline. In fact, Sciuto et al. (2019) show that random search nds better RNN cells than
any other optimizer. Li and Talwalkar (2019) also conrm this result and additionally show
that random search nds architectures that perform at least as well as the ones obtained
from established optimizers for CNNs. It is worth noting that these random optimizers work
on a search space that is known to sample well-performing architectures. Xie et al. (2019a)
26

==== Page 27 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Table 2: We give an overview of the results obtained and the search time required on
CIFAR-10 by the various search algorithms discussed. In addition, we list the results of
various random searches and human-designed architectures.
Reference Error (%) Params
(Millions)GPU
DaysRLBaker et al. (2017) 6.92 11.18 100
Zoph and Le (2017) 3.65 37.4 22,400
Cai et al. (2018a) 4.23 23.4 10
Zoph et al. (2018) 3.41 3.3 2,000
Zoph et al. (2018) + Cutout 2.65 3.3 2,000
Zhong et al. (2018) 3.54 39.8 96
Cai et al. (2018b) 2.99 5.7 200
Cai et al. (2018b) + Cutout 2.49 5.7 200EAReal et al. (2017) 5.40 5.4 2,600
Xie and Yuille (2017) 5.39 N/A 17
Suganuma et al. (2017) 5.98 1.7 14.9
Liu et al. (2018b) 3.75 15.7 300
Real et al. (2019) 3.34 3.2 3,150
Elsken et al. (2018) 5.2 19.7 1
Wistuba (2018a) + Cutout 3.57 5.8 0.5SMBOKandasamy et al. (2018) 8.69 N/A 1.7
Liu et al. (2018a) 3.41 3.2 225
Luo et al. (2018) 3.18 10.6 200One-ShotPham et al. (2018) 3.54 4.6 0.5
Pham et al. (2018) + Cutout 2.89 4.6 0.5
Bender et al. (2018) 4.00 5.0 N/A
Casale et al. (2019) + Cutout 2.81 3.7 1
Liu et al. (2019b) + Cutout 2.76 3.3 4
Xie et al. (2019b) + Cutout 2.85 2.8 1.5
Cai et al. (2019) + Cutout 2.08 5.7 8.33
Brock et al. (2018) 4.03 16.0 3
Zhang et al. (2019) 2.84 5.7 0.84RandomLiu et al. (2018b) 3.91 N/A 300
Luo et al. (2018) 3.92 3.9 0.3
Liu et al. (2019b) + Cutout 3.29 3.2 4
Li and Talwalkar (2019) + Cutout 2.85 4.3 2.7HumanZagoruyko and Komodakis (2016) 3.87 36.2 -
Gastaldi (2017) (26 2x32d) 3.55 2.9 -
Gastaldi (2017) (26 2x96d) 2.86 26.2 -
Gastaldi (2017) (26 2x112d) 2.82 35.6 -
Yamada et al. (2016) + ShakeDrop 2.67 26.2 -
27

==== Page 28 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Table 3: Results obtained on ImageNet by architectures discovered by neural architecture
search methods as well as human-designed architectures.
Reference Top 1/Top 5
Accuracy (%)Params
(Millions)Image Size
(squared)GPU
DaysRLZoph et al. (2018) 82.7/96.2 88.9 331 2,000
Zhong et al. (2018) 77.4/93.5 N/A 224 96
Cai et al. (2018b) 74.6/91.9 594 224 200EAXie and Yuille (2017) 72.1/90.4 156 224 17
Liu et al. (2018b) 79.7/94.8 64.0 N/A 300
Real et al. (2019) 82.8/96.1 86.7 331 3,150
Real et al. (2019) 83.9/96.6 469 331 3,150SMBOLiu et al. (2018a) 74.2/91.9 5.1 224 225
Liu et al. (2018a) 82.9/96.2 86.1 331 225One-ShotBender et al. (2018) 75.2/N/A 11.9 224 N/A
Casale et al. (2019) 74.0/91.6 5.6 N/A 1
Liu et al. (2019b) 73.3/91.3 4.7 224 4
Xie et al. (2019b) 72.7/90.8 4.3 224 1.5
Cai et al. (2019) 75.1/92.5 N/A 224 8.33
Brock et al. (2018) 61.4/83.7 16.2 32 3
Zhang et al. (2019) 73.0/91.3 6.1 224 0.84HumanHoward et al. (2017) 70.6/89.5 4.2 224 -
Zhang et al. (2018b) 70.9/89.8 5.0 224 -
Xie et al. (2017) 80.9/95.6 83.6 320 -
Zhang et al. (2017) 81.3/95.8 92.0 331 -
Chen et al. (2017) 81.5 95.8 79.5 320 -
28

==== Page 29 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
IterationsValidation Accuracy
Final Performance

Premature Performance
Figure 18: Learning curve prediction tries to predict from the premature learning curve
(solid line) the nal performance. This can signicantly reduce the number of required
training iterations.
go one step further and use a graph generator to generate random graph structures that no
longer adhere to the rules of established search spaces. Although these graph generators do
not have any deep learning specic prior, the generated architectures perform better than
those found by complex architecture optimizers. Architectures designed by humans often
serve as a motivation to justify the search for neural architectures. However, state-of-the-art
architectures are often not considered for comparison or not trained under equivalent exper-
imental conditions. Thus, the eect of learning rate decay strategies, augmenting techniques
(cutout (DeVries and Taylor, 2017)), regularization tricks (ScheduledDropPath (Zoph et al.,
2018)), and other nuanced strategies that eect training dynamics gets overshadowed. We
include the results for the state-of-the-art architectures for CIFAR-10 in Table 2 and re-
port additional results for models trained with the popular data-augmentation technique of
cutout in Table 4. Results for ImageNet are reported in Table 3. We note that the perfor-
mance gap between human-designed and discovered architectures is smaller than what is
often claimed or reported, in particular for CIFAR-10.
We recognize that in recent years many interesting and creative architecture search
methods have been developed, but we argue that the source of performance gains still
remains unclear. This remains a highly relevant and unanswered question for this research
area.
4. Early Termination of Training Processes
Although expensive, training is an inevitable step to obtain the validation accuracy on a
dataset. For neural architecture search, however, it is not necessary to know the validation
accuracy, it is sucient to know whether an architecture candidate is better or worse than
the current best solution. Human experts estimate the likelihood if the current candidate
can surpass the current best solution by analyzing the behavior of its learning curve. We
refer to the function that maps the number of iterations used for training a model to
its validation accuracy at that time as its learning curve (Figure 18). If there is a high
probability that a current training process does not lead to an improved solution, the process
is terminated. The time thus saved can now be used for other training processes. Learning
29

==== Page 30 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
curve prediction methods are automated methods that try to estimate this probability.
The previously discussed surrogate models (Section 3.3) are related to these methods. The
main dierence is that learning curve prediction methods require additional training of a
candidate and take the learning curve into account.
Many approaches in neural architecture search do not train models to completion. In-
stead, the validation accuracy of this premature model is used as an approximation for the
nal performance. One popular hyperparameter optimization which relies on this prema-
ture performance is Hyperband (Li et al., 2017). In this work, a random set of candidate
models is trained in parallel and after every few iterations (the considered number of iter-
ations is increased exponentially), training of a large fraction of candidates is terminated
based on the premature performance. In this way the number of candidates reduces expo-
nentially, while at the same time the training time per candidate is also increased at an
exponential rate. Eventually only one candidate remains which serves as the output of the
search algorithm.
In the following we discuss more sophisticated approaches which try to predict the nal
performance based on architecture and data information as well as the premature learning
curve. All these methods use a model to predict the nal performance of a training job.
This model provides the probability that a premature learning curve will exceed a particular
accuracy. This is used to determine the likelihood that the current training job will provide
a network with higher accuracy than the current best one. If this likelihood does not exceed
a predetermined threshold, training is terminated.
Domhan et al. (2015) Typically learning curves are increasing and saturating functions.
Domhan et al. (2015) build on this observation and select a set of eleven dierent increasing
and saturating function families and combine them by a weighted sum to probabilistically
model a learning curve. However, since it does not learn across learning curves, it requires
a relatively long premature learning curve in order to yield accurate predictions.
Klein et al. (2017) Klein et al. (2017) extend the work by Domhan et al. (2015) to learn
the learning curve prediction model across dierent learning curves. For this purpose, the
function families are combined with a Bayesian neural network which infers the parameters
of the functions and their weights conditioned on the premature learning curve. Parameters
of the Bayesian neural network are learned on a set of mature learning curves.
Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) The two previously discussed works make strong
assumptions regarding the learning curves by using a set of function families which might
not apply generally. Moreover, noisy optimization or learning rate schedules may violate the
assumption made about the learning curve behavior. For instance, a step-wise decay of the
learning rate violates the assumption that the learning curve is a quickly saturating function
and a cyclic learning rate schedule violates the assumption that the learning curve is an
increasing function. Chandrashekaran and Lane (2017) overcome this problem by using
mature learning curves observed during training rather than a predened set of functions.
An ane transformation is used to reduce the squared error between all mature learning
curves and a premature learning curve. The prediction model is formed as an average of
the best ts of mature learning curves.
30

==== Page 31 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Baker et al. (2018) All previously discussed learning curve predictors are based only on
the premature learning curve as well as machine learning models specically designed for
learning curve prediction. Baker et al. (2018) approach this problem dierently. First, they
enrich the representation and include additional features like the rst and second derivative
of the premature learning curve, properties of the architecture (number of parameters and
layers) and chosen hyperparameters (e.g. initial learning rate and weight decay). Second,
they study a set of traditional regression models to solve the prediction task. Empirically,
they nd that the -Support Vector Regression (Sch olkopf et al., 2000) performs best among
other alternatives such as random forest or Bayesian linear regression. Furthermore, they
report that the premature performance can be a strong competitor method which in most
cases outperforms the work by Domhan et al. (2015) and Klein et al. (2017). While Domhan
et al. (2015) did not compare against the premature performance, Klein et al. (2017) only
report results with respect to the mean squared error. However, the squared error is no
relevant measure for this task and it is by no means surprising that the premature perfor-
mance has a high squared error. Instead, the ranking of learning curves is more important
and thus a measure like R2(as used by Baker et al. (2018)) is more appropriate. Finally,
Baker et al. (2018) are also the rst and only to use a more sophisticated learning curve
prediction method in combination with a neural architecture search method. They build
upon their previous work (Baker et al., 2017), report a speed up by a factor of 3.8, and nd
equally good neural architectures.
5. Transfer Learning
Transfer learning refers to the idea of reusing knowledge gained when solving one task in
order to solve a dierent but related task more eciently.
In the context of neural architechtures search, many simple techniques have proven to
be eective. Some works (Baker et al., 2017) demonstrate that an architecture discovered
for one dataset can be easily applied (without introducing signicant changes) to a dataset
with the same image dimensions. Zoph et al. (2018) demonstrate easy transferability of ar-
chitectures discovered on datasets with few data points and a small resolution (CIFAR-10)
to datasets with signicantly more data and a higher resolution (ImageNet). Furthermore,
architectures which perform well across a diverse set of tasks provide a competitive solu-
tion (Wistuba and Pedapati, 2019). Other similar paradigms include searching on a subset
of the data (Sabharwal et al., 2016) and searching on a down-scaled version of the data (Hinz
et al., 2018). It is also a common practice to search for networks with few cell repetitions
and for cells that use only few lters. Then, the nal model is obtained by increasing the
number of lters and number of cell repetitions signicantly to build larger models with
better performance.
Transferring knowledge across tasks provides another alternative avenue that can be
leveraged to improve the performance of neural architecture search methods. Most search
algorithms train multiple sample architectures during the search process. In the same spirit
as the use of surrogate models, training of these sampled architectures can be made more
ecient with the use of additional information gained from training architectures on other
datasets of tasks. In order to learn dataset-specic properties, features which describe
31

==== Page 32 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
properties of the dataset, also called meta-features (Reif et al., 2014), are considered. We
discuss some of these approches in this section.
Wong et al. (2018) Wong et al. (2018) use transfer learing to automate the ne-tuning
of architectures across tasks. They extend the controller of Zoph and Le (2017) to include
task-specic embeddings as input to the controller to account for the dierent tasks in the
policy. The controller generates a sequence of discrete actions that specify design choices for
ne-tuning a network architecture. This includes choosing the embeddings, the structure of
the classier and various hyperparameters. The parameters of the controller are updated
with REINFORCE. In their work they explore transfer learning for both image classication
and natural language processing tasks.
Istrate et al. (2019) The approach by Istrate et al. (2019) is based on a surrogate
model which predicts the performance of neural architectures for a new dataset based on
performance observations of neural architectures on other datasets. They use as land-
marker (Pfahringer et al., 2000), the accuracy of one computationally inexpensive a CNN
model on new dataset, which is their only meta-feature. This meta-feature is used to deter-
mine the most similar datasets. It is also used together with the architecture encoding as
input for the surrogate model. The observations on datasets with similar validation accu-
racy are used to train the surrogate model. An evolutionary algorithm with a setup similar
to Real et al. (2017) is used to obtain the the architecture that maximizes the surrogate
model's prediction. This architecture is the outcome of the search process and is trained
from scratch.
Kokiopoulou et al. (2019) Kokiopoulou et al. (2019) propose to automate ne-tuning
for transferring models across dierent text classication tasks by using a surrogate model.
This model is trained to predict the validation accuracy for a given set of meta-features and
architecture design choice. Contrary to other works, they propose to learn the meta-features
from the raw data rather than relying on manually engineered meta-features or embeddings.
The surrogate model consists of two components. While the rst component learns to
compute predictive meta-features given a small amount of data, the second component
predicts the validation accuracy for an architecture based on the architecture description
and the meta-features. These components are trained across multiple datasets and then
used for a new dataset. Instead of just predicting the accuracy of several architectures,
the authors propose to search it by means of gradient ascent. For this purpose they use a
continuous parametrization for the neural architectures.
Xue et al. (2019) Xue et al. (2019) assume a lifelong neural architecture search setting
with an incoming stream of datasets. For each new dataset, a set of landmarkers is trained
to establish a dataset representation. Based on this representation, it is decided whether
the dataset resembles a previously handled one, or whether it is a fundamentally dierent
one. For the former case, they avoid a search and reuse the solution for the previously
handled dataset. Otherwise, a new search with any arbitrary optimizer is initiated for the
dataset.
32

==== Page 33 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
6. Constraints and Multiple Objectives
While it is important to nd networks that yield high accuracy, sometimes for a practitioner
it is also imperative to consider other objectives, such as the number of model parameters,
the number of oating point operations, and device-specic statistics like the latency of the
model. There exist two dierent approaches which account for these additional objectives.
In the rst approach, the conditions are added as constraints to the optimization problem
so as to enforce requirements like fewer parameters or faster inference time. The exact form
of the constraints and the trade-o between dierent constraints can be adjusted as per
practical requirements. In the second approach, the problem is tackled as a multi-objective
function optimization problem which yields a set of proposals as a solution (Deb, 2014).
This separates the decision making into two steps. In the rst step, a set of candidates is
obtained without considering any trade-os between the dierent objectives and then the
decision for a solution is made in the second step. This separation allows for reusing the
set of candidate solution for dierent specications.
6.1 Constrained Optimization
For some tasks modeled with deep learning, specic constraints gi, such as, thresholds on in-
ference time or memory requirement are explicitly stated. For such cases the single-objective
optimization problem dened in Equation (9) then turns into a constrained optimization
problem as dened by
max
2Af() (19a)
subject to gi()ci8i2I: (19b)
The optimization methods discussed in Section 3 cannot be directly adopted for this sce-
nario as they were designed to solve an unconstrained optimization problem. However, the
classical technique of penalty methods (Fiacco and McCormick, 1990) can be used to form
the unconstrained optimization given by
max
2Af()Y
i2I(gi();ci): (20)
The function is a penalty function, that punishes any violations of constraints. Once a
penalty function has been selected, most optimization method discussed in Section 3 can
be directly applied to solve the problem. In the following, we discuss the various penalty
functions considered in the literature along with the specic optimizer used by dierent
approaches.
Tan et al. (2018) use
(gi();ci) =gi()
ciwi
; (21)
as a penalty function, where wis treated as a hyperparameter and is set to suit the desired
trade-o. They use the reinforcement learning optimizer proposed by Zoph and Le (2017)
in the factorized hierarchical search space as discussed in Section 2.2. Zhou et al. (2018)
propose to use
(gi();ci) =maxf0;(gi() ci)=cig; (22)
33

==== Page 34 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
whereis a penalization constant in the range of 0 to 1 and use a similar approach to Cai
et al. (2018a) to nd the nal architecture. Specically, a policy is learned that decides
whether to add, remove or keep a layer as well as whether to alter its number of lters. Hsu
et al. (2018) use a harder penalty function which returns 0 when the constraint is violated
and 1 otherwise. They use a reinforcement learning optimizer similar to the one proposed by
Zoph and Le (2017) which predicts the hyperparameters of dierent layers. Thus, the reward
received by the controller is the accuracy for cases which do not violate any constraint and is
0 otherwise. The authors evaluate their optimizer to select the layer-wise hyperparameters
(number of lters, kernel size) of an AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and the cell-wise
hyperparameters (stage, growth rate) of a CondenseNet (Huang et al., 2018a). We refer to
Section 3.1 for more details on the optimization methods.
6.2 Multi-Objective Optimization
Another approach to handle multiple fronts lies in the formalism of multi-objective opti-
mization problem (Hwang and Masud, 2012) dened as
max
2Af1();f2();:::;fn(): (23)
However, often there is no single optimal solution that simultaneously minimizes all these
functions. As some of the objectives can be conicting, an optimal solution with respect
to one objective may not be optimal with respect to another. Therefore, in such scenarios,
the task boils down to nding a set of solutions which are Pareto optimal . A solution is
Pareto optimal if none of the objectives can be improved without worsening at least one
other objective. This means that for a Pareto optimal solution , no other solution 02A
exists such that fi()fi(0) withfj()> fj(0) for some j. Otherwise, we say 0
dominates,0. Finally, it is up to the user to select a model from the set of Pareto
optimal solutions, the Pareto front, maybe depending on dierent deployment scenarios.
Decomposition Methods One way to solve this problem is the decomposition approach.
A parameterized aggregation function his used to transform the multi-objective optimiza-
tion problem into a single-objective optimization problem
max
2Ah((f1();f2();:::;fn());w): (24)
Examples for hare the weighted sum, weighted exponential sum, weighted min-max or
weighted product (Santiago Pineda et al., 2014). However, solving this problem for a xed
setting of the weights wwill in most cases not nd all Pareto optimal solutions. Therefore,
the problem is solved for dierent w. In neural architecture search this requires multiple
optimization runs for several dierent weight vectors which is prohibitive. Therefore, a
common approach is to select an aggregation function and x the weight vector according to
domain knowledge and the desired trade-o between objectives. Consequently, the multi-
objective becomes a single-objective optimization problem which can be solved by any
method discussed in Section 3. Hsu et al. (2018) propose to use the weighted sum as the
aggregation function and use a reinforcement learning approach (Zoph and Le, 2017) to
solve this problem. Unfortunately, not every objective function is dierentiable which is a
requirement for some of the optimization methods discussed in Section 3.4. Cai et al. (2019)
34

==== Page 35 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
demonstrate one way to overcome this obstacle. They propose to replace non-dierentiable
objective functions with dierentiable surrogate models. Specically, they use a surrogate
model to predict the latency of an operation.
NSGA-II An alternative approach is to estimate architectures which are not dominated
by the current solution set and evaluate their performance. NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002) is
an elitist evolutionary algorithm that is utilized predominantly. The initial population is
selected at random. Candidate solutions are sorted into dierent lists, called fronts. All the
non-dominated solutions belong to the rst front. The solutions in the ithfront are only
dominated by all the solutions in the 1 ;:::;i 1 fronts. Solutions within a front are sorted
according to their crowding distance which is a measure for the density of solutions within
this solution's region. It is computed by the sum of all the neighborhood distances across
all the objectives and ensures that the algorithm explores diverse solutions in the search
space. This yields a ranking of all solutions where the solution in front 1 with lowest density
is the best one. Now, the top ksolutions are selected as parents, mutated, recombined and
evaluated.
Kim et al. (2017) and Lu et al. (2018) both employ NSGA-II in order to tackle the
problem. The early work of Kim et al. (2017) encodes the genotype by means of layer type
and number of outputs leading to only chain-structured networks. In their experiments Lu
et al. (2018) report results on both NASNet search space and the genotype representation
by Xie and Yuille (2017) (see Section 2 for details) and therefore are not limited to chain-
structured networks. They use the vanilla NSGA-II for modeling the evolutionary process.
However the sampling step in their approach comprises of two phases - exploration and
exploitation. For the exploration phase, the ospring is generated by applying mutations
and cross-over. In the exploitation phase new samples are obtained from a Bayesian network
that models the distribution of previously trained architectures.
Elsken et al. (2019) Elsken et al. (2019) propose another evolutionary algorithm which
shares many common aspects with their earlier work (Elsken et al., 2018) (see Section 3.2).
No cross-over operations are used and mutations are function-preserving. They extend
the pool of mutations and include new ones that shrink an architecture by means of layer
removal or lter reduction. Similar to NSGA-II, their algorithm tries to achieve diverse
solutions. They take advantage of the fact that the objective functions can be divided
into cheap-to-evaluate objective functions (e.g. number of parameters, inference time etc.)
and expensive-to-evaluate objective functions (e.g. validation accuracy). A kernel density
estimator is used to model the density of candidates with respect to the cheap-to-evaluate
objectives in order to select candidates from low-density regions. Finally, the expensive-to-
evaluate objectives for the candidates are evaluated and the Pareto front is updated.
Smithson et al. (2016) Smithson et al. (2016) propose a surrogate model-based ap-
proach to search for a chain-structured architecture. The search algorithm starts with
a random parameter setting. New candidates are sampled from a Gaussian distribution
around previously evaluated architectures. A surrogate model (articial neural network)
is used to predict the values for the expensive-to-evaluate objective functions, cheap-to-
evaluate objectives are evaluated exactly. Based on both the predictions and evaluations,
it is determined whether this solution is dominated by an existing solution which will in
35

==== Page 36 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
turn determine the probability the candidate is accepted. Every accepted candidate will be
evaluated and thereafter the surrogate model is updated.
Dong et al. (2018) Dong et al. (2018) is another surrogate model-based approach which
extends the work by Liu et al. (2018a) (see Section 3.3) to solve multi-objective optimization
problems. The only dierence of the optimization method is how models are selected.
Instead of only considering model accuracy, they also consider all other objectives. Feasible
candidates are those which do not violate any constraints and are not dominated (according
to the prediction of the surrogate model) by any known solution.
6.3 Model Compression
Motivated by the eciency of network deployment on mobile devices, model compression
has surfaced as a relevant goal for architecture design. Neural architecture search methods
in this context seek to nd policies to prune a model so as to satisfy budget constraints in
terms of number of parameters, without sacricing a great deal in accuracy. To this end,
we discuss three important works that propose methods to automate model compression.
He et al. (2018) In their work, He et al. (2018) use a reinforcement controller to prune
a trained network in a layer-wise fashion. The controller takes as input a representation for
each layer and is trained to output the desired sparsity ratio of this layer after compression.
They use deep deterministic policy gradient (Lillicrap et al., 2016) to update the parameters
of the controller. During the exploration phase, they evaluate the reward accuracy of the
pruned model without ne-tuning and argue that it serves as a good proxy for the ne-tuned
accuracy.
Ashok et al. (2018) Ashok et al. (2018) use reinforcement learning to learn two policies
which sequentially remove and shrink layers for any given initial architecture with the
aim of compressing it. The architecture altered by the policies is trained from scratch
with knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), where the initial architecture serves as the
teacher. REINFORCE is used to train the reinforcement learning controllers using following
reward function with resembles the penalty function introduced in Equation (20),
f()
f(init)g() (2 g()); (25)
whereg() is the compression ratio, i.e. the number of parameters of divided by number
of parameters of the initial architecture init.
Cao et al. (2019) Cao et al. (2019) maximize Equation (25) by using Bayesian opti-
mization (Section 3.3) with a Gaussian process built using a deep kernel (Wilson et al.,
2016). The acquisition function is maximized by random exploration of the search space.
Candidates are derived from the initial architecture by randomly removing and shrinking
layers as well as adding skip connections. The authors highlight that the consideration of
adding skip connection is crucial for the discovery of compressed architectures which are
comparable to the initial architecture with respect to classication accuracy.
36

==== Page 37 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Hidden
State
EmbeddingSoftmax Operand 1 Operand 2Unary
Operation 1Unary
Operation 2Binary
Operation
g ^vid log=
Figure 19: Controller output for one group. Each group consists of two operands and the
unary operations applied to it as well as the binary operation which combines the outcome
of the unary operations.
7. Other Related Methods
Methodologies originally developed for architecture search have been extended to automate
other aspects of deep learning. For instance, Bello et al. (2017) encode a parameter opti-
mization method used in training of a deep learning model by means of a graph structure
that denes the update rules akin to classical gradient-based optimization. An update is
dened by several blocks as shown in Figure 19. A block consists of two operands, one
unary function for each of the operands and a binary function. The unary functions are
applied on the operands and the binary function is applied to combine the respective out-
comes. The output of this block becomes a possible operand itself and can be used by
other blocks. This structure is stacked up to a depth of three. Possible operands include
dierent orders of the gradient ( g;g2;g3), its bias-corrected running estimates, dierently
scaled versions of the parameter, random noise, constants, and the sign of the gradient.
Additionally the classical updates of Adam and RMSProp optimizer are also encapsulated
as operands. Examples for unary functions are the identity function, clipping functions, the
sign function, functions that modify the gradient to zero with a certain probability, as well
as logarithmic and exponential function. Binary functions include addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. A reinforcement controller, similar to the one proposed by
Zoph and Le (2017) (see Section 3.1), is applied to search for an optimal structure. The
main dierence in the work of Bello et al. (2017) is that they use Trust Region Policy
Optimization (Schulman et al., 2015) instead of REINFORCE for updating the controller
parameters. A deep-learning optimizer sampled from the controller is used to train a simple
two-layer convolutional neural network for only ve epochs and the validation accuracy is
used as the reward.
Ramachandran et al. (2018) uses the aforementioned setup and search space structure
to search for activation functions. They learn the controller with Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (Schulman et al., 2017). As they seek to search for activation functions, there setup
comprises of only one operand which is the input of the activation function and a dierent
set of unary and binary operations. Examples for unary operations are powers of dierent
degree, various sigmoid functions and the sine function. The set of possible binary functions
on the input ( x1;x2) is extended with additional functions like x1(x2), maximum and
minimum, and a weighted average. The reward is estimated by training a ResNet-20 with
37

==== Page 38 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Table 4: Classication error of various architectures with dierent augmentation strategies.
Whenever two numbers are reported, the left one are the results obtained by us then the
right one the results reported by Cubuk et al. (2018a). Cubuk et al. (2018a) do not report
results for mixup.
Model Baseline Cutout Mixup Cutout
+MixupAuto-
AugmentAuto-
Augment
+Mixup
Wide-ResNet
(28-10)3.93/3.87 2.89/3.08 3.24 2.95 2.71/2.68 2.60
Shake-Shake
(26 2x32d)3.73/3.55 3.03/3.02 3.13 3.10 2.59/2.47 2.85
Shake-Shake
(26 2x96d)3.15/2.86 2.50/2.56 2.37 2.15 2.16/1.99 1.84
Shake-Shake
(26 2x112d)3.13/2.82 2.55/2.57 2.37 2.12 2.09/1.89 1.83
PyramidNet
+ShakeDrop2.77/2.67 2.09/2.31 1.90 1.51 1.62/1.48 1.33
the sampled activation function on CIFAR-10 for 10,000 steps. The authors report the
discovery of the following activation function
swish (x) =x(x); (26)
whereis the logistic function. In their experiments, this particular activation function
turned out to be more eective than other commonly used activation functions and has been
used by many other authors since. However, it is interesting to note that the discovered
function closely resembles the previously proposed swish activation in an earlier work by
the authors.
Cubuk et al. (2018a) dene a similar controller and train it with Proximal Policy Op-
timization to optimize data augmentation policies for image classication. The controller
predicts ve sub-policies, each consists of two augmentation operations and always uses
horizontal ipping, random crops and a cutout operation. Examples for augmentation op-
erations are rotation, sheering, control the brightness, contrast and sharpness of the image.
For every image, a random sub-policy is selected and applied. The validation accuracy is
used as the reward signal. Finally, the best sub-policies of ve policies are concatenated to
the nal augmentation policy which consists of 25 sub-policies.
Experiment We conduct an experiment to better understand the impact of established
augmentation schemes and contrast it with the found policies. As part of this we recon-
ducted the experiments by Cubuk et al. (2018a) using their publicly available code. A
Wide-ResNet (Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2016), three versions of Shake-Shake (Gastaldi,
2017) and a PyramidNet (Yamada et al., 2016) with ShakeDrop (Yamada et al., 2018)
are trained with dierent augmentation strategies as detailed in the following. Baseline
is horizontal ipping and random crops and cutout additionally uses cutout (DeVries and
38

==== Page 39 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Taylor, 2017). AutoAugment extends the cutout policy by augmentation sub-policies found
during the search. We extend this setup further by considering mixup (Zhang et al., 2018a)
as another augmentation technique in order to see whether the AutoAugment policy can
improve over standard state-of-the-art augmentation techniques. As we see in Table 4, the
combination of cutout with mixup in many cases is better than using just one of them.
Since AutoAugment is cutout plus other augmentation techniques, perhaps it is not sur-
prising to notice a signicant lift over cutout. We consider the combination of cutout and
mixup as a useful baseline which it is not able to outperform. However, adding mixup to
AutoAugment does not hurt the performance in most cases as expected. In cases where
the combination of cutout and mixup performed better than AutoAugment, this addition
provides a signicant improvement resulting in the best scores. We are able to achieve an
error of 1.33% on the CIFAR-10 object recognition task. To the best of our knowledge,
the only work claiming a lower error on this task is the work by Huang et al. (2018b)
which claims 1% error. However, they use a pretrained model on ImageNet which has 557
million parameters, while the PyramidNet used in our experiments has \only" 26.2 million
parameters and can be trained on a single GPU. More importantly, we do not use any
pretrained weights and train the model from scratch. Finally, we select eight augmentation
policies at random and compare them to the discovered AutoAugment policies. The results
on Wide-ResNet yield a mean error of 2.81 and ranges from 2.67 to 2.97. Thus, the mean
error across eight random policies is worse than AutoAugment, however, some of them are
better. We observe a similar behavior for Shake-Shake (26 2x32d) and (26 2x96d) where
we obtain a mean error of 2.70 and 2.24, respectively. The errors range from 2.46 to 2.85
and 2.02 to 2.40. Two of the eight policies sampled at random yield better results than
AutoAugment for every architecture, yet again, shows the importance to consider random
as a baseline. The search space for augmentation policies seems to be dened in such a way
that any augmentation policy will perform better than cutout. Only for Wide-ResNet the
worst random policy considered by us is marginally worse.
8. Outlook and Future Applications of Neural Architecture Search
Methods
In the broader context of automated deep learning, neural architecture search only tackles
one component of the pipeline. Moreover, most of the current approaches in neural ar-
chitecture search only focus on CNNs for solving the task of object recognition and RNN
cells for language modeling. However, other interesting areas have already surfaced some
of which have been discussed in sections 5 to 7. For example, many recent works address
the idea of using knowledge across dierent datasets to speed up the optimization processes
(Section 5). Similarly, the search for architectures under constraints, with multiple objec-
tives, and the automation of model compression has garnered signicant attention in the
past year (Section 6). The alignment of architecture search algorithms with other graph
structures such as parameter optimization algorithms and activation functions or the search
for data augmentation are exciting developments (Section 7). Recently there have also been
promising developments along other dimensions that address more complex tasks with im-
age data such as object detection and segmentation (Zoph et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019a; Weng et al., 2019), as well as works that address safety-critical issues
39

==== Page 40 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
such as the discovery of architectures that are robust against adversarial attacks (Cubuk
et al., 2018b; Sinn et al., 2019). Furthermore, the existing techniques are extended to apply
the architecture search for other types of networks. For instance, there are rst attempts
to automatically optimize the architecture of autoencoders (Suganuma et al., 2018), trans-
formers (So et al., 2019) and graph CNNs (Gao et al., 2019). In general, these techniques
are increasingly being used to automate all components of the data science workow. The
big remaining challenge is the joint optimization of all conguration parameters of the deep
learning workow. So far, the individual components have been treated independently with
some components still relying on manual conguration. However, for true automation, it
is inevitable that all sensitive parameters must be learned or searched for. This includes
data augmentation, the various search space hyperparameters, the choice of optimizer, the
actual architecture choice and possibly even the nal model compression. Moreover, further
development of any of these search methods needs to incorporate sample eciency in its
design, an aspect that is currently not handled by neural architecture search.
Given the large amounts of resources dedicated to the research in neural architecture
search, it is imperative to question its meaningfulness and usefulness to research. Although,
one might hope to get insights into the understanding of the space of deep learning models
or perhaps even the interpretability of deep learning in general, so far there have not been
any dedicated eorts channelled into this direction. Another important question, which
we believe is often overlooked, pertains to the credibility of neural architecture search as
a practically useful eld of research. It is crucial to emphasize the role of search space
designs in the performance of obtained architectures, some of which are heavily inspired by
the design of existing architectures. Many architectures originate from the NASNet search
space, which were found by various search algorithms. Therefore, a legitimate question is to
ask whether the search algorithms have really discovered new or innovative architectures,
or whether they owe their success to the design and properties of the NASNet search space.
Li and Talwalkar (2019) as well as the inventors of the NASNet search space, partially
answer this question by showing that even a random search yields good, if not better,
results. Furthermore, these architectures ultimately do not seem to be signicantly better
than those developed by humans. The human innovations that contribute to the invention
of new architectures are dicult to discover given the restrictions of search spaces. This
brings us to the question of what to expect from the future developments of architecture
search algorithms. If we really seek to nd new architectures with innovative elements that
advance research in general, then perhaps we have to let go of the restrictive search spaces.
While a general automation of deep learning might answer most of these concerns, perhaps
for now we need to ask ourselves why an architecture discovered by a search algorithm
is better than the choice of an existing architecture in combination with hyperparameter
optimization. In terms of usefulness, the answer can not be that each dataset needs its own
architecture. Many architecture search papers show that found architectures can be easily
transferred to other datasets, even other tasks, which is a well known property of deep
learning architectures. So why then should a practitioner commit to the use of a search
algorithm for nding a new architecture, in particular since it does not free her from the
optimization of the search space hyperparameters?
40

==== Page 41 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
The general automation of deep learning is still in its infancy, and many of the aforemen-
tioned concerns remain unanswered for the time being. However, this remains an exciting
domain and the future works will certainly highlight its practical relevance and usefulness.
References
Anubhav Ashok, Nicholas Rhinehart, Fares Beainy, and Kris M. Kitani. N2N learn-
ing: Network to network compression via policy gradient reinforcement learning. In
6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings , 2018. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=B1hcZZ-AW .
Peter Auer. Using condence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-os. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research , 3:397{422, 2002. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v3/auer02a.
html .
Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network
architectures using reinforcement learning. In 5th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track
Proceedings , 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1c2cvqee .
Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Ramesh Raskar, and Nikhil Naik. Accelerating neural archi-
tecture search using performance prediction. In 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Workshop
Track Proceedings , 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJqk3N1vG .
Friedrich L Bauer. Computational graphs and rounding error. SIAM Journal on Numerical
Analysis , 11(1):87{96, 1974.
Irwan Bello, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le. Neural optimizer search with
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017 , pages 459{468, 2017.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/bello17a.html .
Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc Le. Un-
derstanding and simplifying one-shot architecture search. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas
Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 550{559, Stock-
holmsmssan, Stockholm Sweden, 10{15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v80/bender18a.html .
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13:281{305, 2012. URL http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=2188395 .
Hans-Georg Beyer and Hans-Paul Schwefel. Evolution strategies - A comprehensive in-
troduction. Natural Computing , 1(1):3{52, 2002. doi: 10.1023/A:1015059928466. URL
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015059928466 .
41

==== Page 42 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Andrew Brock, Theodore Lim, James M. Ritchie, and Nick Weston. SMASH: one-shot
model architecture search through hypernetworks. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3,
2018, Conference Track Proceedings , 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
rydeCEhs- .
Han Cai, Tianyao Chen, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Jun Wang. Ecient architecture
search by network transformation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Confer-
ence on Articial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Articial
Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Arti-
cial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018 , pages
2787{2794, 2018a. URL https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI18/paper/
view/16755 .
Han Cai, Jiacheng Yang, Weinan Zhang, Song Han, and Yong Yu. Path-level network
transformation for ecient architecture search. In Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsm assan, Stockholm, Sweden,
July 10-15, 2018 , pages 677{686, 2018b. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/
cai18a.html .
Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. ProxylessNAS: Direct neural architecture search
on target task and hardware. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=HylVB3AqYm .
Shengcao Cao, Xiaofang Wang, and Kris M. Kitani. Learnable embedding space for ef-
cient neural architecture compression. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1xLN3C9YX .
Francesco Paolo Casale, Jonathan Gordon, and Nicolo Fusi. Probabilistic neural architec-
ture search. CoRR , abs/1902.05116, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05116 .
Akshay Chandrashekaran and Ian R. Lane. Speeding up hyper-parameter optimization by
extrapolation of learning curves using previous builds. In Machine Learning and Knowl-
edge Discovery in Databases - European Conference, ECML PKDD 2017, Skopje, Macedo-
nia, September 18-22, 2017, Proceedings, Part I , pages 477{492, 2017. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-71249-9n29. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71249-9_29 .
Tianqi Chen, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. Net2net: Accelerating learning
via knowledge transfer. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 4th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4,
2016, Conference Track Proceedings , 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05641 .
Yunpeng Chen, Jianan Li, Huaxin Xiao, Xiaojie Jin, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng.
Dual path networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long
Beach, CA, USA , pages 4470{4478, 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7033-
dual-path-networks .
42

==== Page 43 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre David. Binaryconnect: Training
deep neural networks with binary weights during propagations. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2015, December 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada , pages 3123{3131, 2015.
URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5647-binaryconnect-training-deep-neural-
networks-with-binary-weights-during-propagations .
Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Man e, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le.
Autoaugment: Learning augmentation policies from data. CoRR , abs/1805.09501, 2018a.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09501 .
Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Samuel S. Schoenholz, and Quoc V. Le. Intriguing prop-
erties of adversarial examples. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Workshop Track
Proceedings , 2018b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skz1zaRLz .
Kalyanmoy Deb. Multi-objective optimization. In Search methodologies , pages 403{449.
Springer, 2014.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Samir Agrawal, Amrit Pratap, and T. Meyarivan. A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computation , 6
(2):182{197, 2002. doi: 10.1109/4235.996017. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.
996017 .
Terrance DeVries and Graham W. Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural
networks with cutout. CoRR , abs/1708.04552, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1708.04552 .
Tobias Domhan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Speeding up automatic hy-
perparameter optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves.
InProceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Articial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25-31, 2015 , pages 3460{3468, 2015.
URL http://ijcai.org/Abstract/15/487 .
Jin-Dong Dong, An-Chieh Cheng, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Min Sun. Dpp-
net: Device-aware progressive search for pareto-optimal neural architectures. In Vit-
torio Ferrari, Martial Hebert, Cristian Sminchisescu, and Yair Weiss, editors, Com-
puter Vision - ECCV 2018 - 15th European Conference, Munich, Germany, Septem-
ber 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part XI , volume 11215 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science , pages 540{555. Springer, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01252-6 n32. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01252-6_32 .
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Simple and ecient architecture
search for convolutional neural networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Workshop
Track Proceedings , 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1hymrkDf .
43

==== Page 44 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Ecient multi-objective neural
architecture search via lamarckian evolution. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ByME42AqK7 .
Anthony V Fiacco and Garth P McCormick. Nonlinear programming: sequential uncon-
strained minimization techniques , volume 4. Siam, 1990.
Dario Floreano, Peter D urr, and Claudio Mattiussi. Neuroevolution: from architectures to
learning. Evolutionary Intelligence , 1(1):47{62, 2008. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12065-007-0002-4 .
Yang Gao, Hong Yang, Peng Zhang, Chuan Zhou, and Yue Hu. Graphnas: Graph neural
architecture search with reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/1904.09981, 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09981 .
Xavier Gastaldi. Shake-shake regularization. CoRR , abs/1705.07485, 2017. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1705.07485 .
David E. Goldberg and Kalyanmoy Deb. A comparative analysis of selection schemes used
in genetic algorithms. In Gregory J. E. Rawlins, editor, Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Foundations of Genetic Algorithms. Bloomington Campus, Indiana, USA, July 15-18
1990. , pages 69{93. Morgan Kaufmann, 1990.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning . MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org .
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In 5th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference
Track Proceedings , 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkpACe1lx .
Yihui He, Ji Lin, Zhijian Liu, Hanrui Wang, Li-Jia Li, and Song Han. AMC: automl for
model compression and acceleration on mobile devices. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2018
- 15th European Conference, Munich, Germany, September 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part
VII, pages 815{832, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01234-2 n48. URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-01234-2_48 .
Georey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jerey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network. CoRR , abs/1503.02531, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531 .
Tobias Hinz, Nicol as Navarro-Guerrero, Sven Magg, and Stefan Wermter. Speeding up
the hyperparameter optimization of deep convolutional neural networks. International
Journal of Computational Intelligence and Applications , 17(2):1850008, 2018. doi: 10.
1142/S1469026818500086. URL https://doi.org/10.1142/S1469026818500086 .
Sepp Hochreiter and J urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9
(8):1735{1780, 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/
neco.1997.9.8.1735 .
44

==== Page 45 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, To-
bias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Ecient convolutional
neural networks for mobile vision applications. CoRR , abs/1704.04861, 2017. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04861 .
Chi-Hung Hsu, Shu-Huan Chang, Da-Cheng Juan, Jia-Yu Pan, Yu-Ting Chen, Wei Wei,
and Shih-Chieh Chang. MONAS: multi-objective neural architecture search using rein-
forcement learning. CoRR , abs/1806.10332, 2018.
Hanzhang Hu, John Langford, Rich Caruana, Eric Horvitz, and Debadeepta Dey. Macro
neural architecture search revisited. In Workshop on Meta-Learning at NeurIPS
2018, MetaLearn 2018, 3-8 December 2018, Montr eal, Canada. , 2018. URL http:
//metalearning.ml/2018/papers/metalearn2018_paper16.pdf .
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens van der Maaten, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Densely
connected convolutional networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017 , pages 2261{
2269. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.243. URL https://doi.
org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.243 .
Gao Huang, Shichen Liu, Laurens van der Maaten, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Condensenet:
An ecient densenet using learned group convolutions. In 2018 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June
18-22, 2018 , pages 2752{2761. IEEE Computer Society, 2018a. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
2018.00291. URL http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2018/html/Huang_
CondenseNet_An_Efficient_CVPR_2018_paper.html .
Yanping Huang, Yonglong Cheng, Dehao Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V.
Le, and Zhifeng Chen. Gpipe: Ecient training of giant neural networks using pipeline
parallelism. CoRR , abs/1811.06965, 2018b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06965 .
C-L Hwang and Abu Syed Md Masud. Multiple objective decision makingmethods and
applications: a state-of-the-art survey , volume 164. Springer Science & Business Media,
2012.
Roxana Istrate, Florian Scheidegger, Giovanni Mariani, Dimitrios S. Nikolopoulos, Costas
Bekas, and A. Cristiano I. Malossi. TAPAS: train-less accuracy predictor for architecture
search. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence,
(AAAI-19), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA , 2019.
Donald R. Jones. A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response surfaces. J.
Global Optimization , 21(4):345{383, 2001. doi: 10.1023/A:1012771025575. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1023/A:1012771025575 .
Kenneth A. De Jong. Evolutionary computation - a unied approach . MIT Press, 2006.
ISBN 978-0-262-04194-2.
Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Je Schneider, Barnab as P oczos, and Eric P.
Xing. Neural architecture search with bayesian optimisation and optimal transport. In
45

==== Page 46 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, 3-8 December 2018, Montr eal,
Canada. , pages 2020{2029, 2018. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7472-neural-
architecture-search-with-bayesian-optimisation-and-optimal-transport .
Ye-Hoon Kim, Bhargava Reddy, Sojung Yun, and Chanwon Seo. Nemo : Neuro-evolution
with multiobjective optimization of deep neural network for speed and accuracy. In
AutoML Workshop at ICML 2017 , 2017.
Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Learning curve
prediction with bayesian neural networks. In 5th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track
Proceedings , 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S11KBYclx .
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesv ari. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In Johannes
F urnkranz, Tobias Scheer, and Myra Spiliopoulou, editors, Machine Learning: ECML
2006, 17th European Conference on Machine Learning, Berlin, Germany, September 18-
22, 2006, Proceedings , volume 4212 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 282{293.
Springer, 2006. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/11871842_29 .
E Kokiopoulou, Anja Hauth, Luciano Sbaiz, Andrea Gesmundo, Gabor Bartok, and Jesse
Berent. Fast task-aware architecture inference. CoRR , abs/1902.05781, 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05781 .
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report,
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Georey E. Hinton. Imagenet classication with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Peter L. Bartlett, Fernando C. N. Pereira, Christopher
J. C. Burges, L eon Bottou, and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 25: 26th Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2012. Proceedings of a meeting held December 3-6, 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada,
United States. , pages 1106{1114, 2012. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-
imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks .
Yann LeCun, L eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haner. Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278{2324, 1998. ISSN
0018-9219. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture
search. CoRR , abs/1902.07638, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.07638 .
Lisha Li, Kevin G. Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar.
Hyperband: A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 18:185:1{185:52, 2017. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/
v18/16-558.html .
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval
Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement
46

==== Page 47 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
learning. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 4th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Confer-
ence Track Proceedings , 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971 .
Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-
Fei, Alan L. Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural architecture
search. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2018 - 15th European Conference, Munich, Ger-
many, September 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part I , pages 19{35, 2018a. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-030-01246-5n2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_2 .
Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schro, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan L. Yuille,
and Li Fei-Fei. Auto-deeplab: Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic im-
age segmentation. CoRR , abs/1901.02985, 2019a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.
02985 .
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. Hierarchical representations for ecient architecture search. In 6th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings , 2018b. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=BJQRKzbA- .
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: dierentiable architecture
search. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019b. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=S1eYHoC5FX .
Zhichao Lu, Ian Whalen, Vishnu Boddeti, Yashesh D. Dhebar, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik D.
Goodman, and Wolfgang Banzhaf. NSGA-NET: A multi-objective genetic algorithm for
neural architecture search. CoRR , abs/1810.03522, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.03522 .
Renqian Luo, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Enhong Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Neural architecture op-
timization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, 3-8 December 2018,
Montr eal, Canada. , pages 7827{7838, 2018. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8007-
neural-architecture-optimization .
Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continu-
ous relaxation of discrete random variables. In 5th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Pro-
ceedings , 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1jE5L5gl .
Jonas Mockus, Vytautas Tie sis, and Antanas Zilinskas. The application of bayesian methods
for seeking the extremum. Towards Global Optimization , 2:117{129, 1978.
Renato Negrinho and Georey J. Gordon. Deeparchitect: Automatically designing and
training deep architectures. CoRR , abs/1704.08792, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1704.08792 .
47

==== Page 48 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Bernhard Pfahringer, Hilan Bensusan, and Christophe G. Giraud-Carrier. Meta-learning by
landmarking various learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA,
June 29 - July 2, 2000 , pages 743{750, 2000.
Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Je Dean. Ecient neural architec-
ture search via parameters sharing. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 4095{4104, Stockholmsmssan, Stockholm Sweden,
10{15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/pham18a.html .
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching for activation functions.
In6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Workshop Track Proceedings , 2018. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=Hkuq2EkPf .
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian processes for ma-
chine learning . Adaptive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 2006. ISBN
026218253X. URL http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/61285753 .
Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxena, Yutaka Leon Suematsu, Jie
Tan, Quoc V. Le, and Alexey Kurakin. Large-scale evolution of image classiers. In Doina
Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2902{
2911, International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, 06{11 Aug 2017. PMLR. URL
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/real17a.html .
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Aging evolution for image
classier architecture search. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on
Articial Intelligence, (AAAI-19), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA , 2019.
Matthias Reif, Faisal Shafait, Markus Goldstein, Thomas M. Breuel, and Andreas Dengel.
Automatic classier selection for non-experts. Pattern Anal. Appl. , 17(1):83{96, 2014.
doi: 10.1007/s10044-012-0280-z. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10044-012-0280-z .
G. A. Rummery and M. Niranjan. On-line q-learning using connectionist systems. Technical
report, 1994.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhi-
heng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael S. Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg,
and Fei-Fei Li. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International Jour-
nal of Computer Vision , 115(3):211{252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y .
Ashish Sabharwal, Horst Samulowitz, and Gerald Tesauro. Selecting near-optimal learners
via incremental data allocation. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Articial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA. , pages 2007{2015,
2016. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI16/paper/view/12524 .
48

==== Page 49 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
Alejandro Santiago Pineda, Hctor Joaqun Fraire Huacuja, Bernab e Dorronsoro, Johnatan E.
Pecero, Claudia G omez Santill an, Juan Javier Gonz alez Barbosa, and Jos'e Carlos Soto
Monterrubio. A survey of decomposition methods for multi-objective optimization. In
Recent Advances on Hybrid Approaches for Designing Intelligent Systems , pages 453{465.
Springer, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-05170-3 n31. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-05170-3_31 .
Shreyas Saxena and Jakob Verbeek. Convolutional neural fabrics. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain , pages 4053{4061, 2016. URL
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6304-convolutional-neural-fabrics .
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfar-
dini. The graph neural network model. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks , 20(1):61{80, 2009.
doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605 .
Bernhard Sch olkopf, Alexander J. Smola, Robert C. Williamson, and Peter L. Bartlett.
New support vector algorithms. Neural Computation , 12(5):1207{1245, 2000. doi: 10.
1162/089976600300015565. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/089976600300015565 .
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I. Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust
region policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015 , pages 1889{1897, 2015. URL
http://jmlr.org/proceedings/papers/v37/schulman15.html .
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms. CoRR , abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1707.06347 .
Mike Schuster and Kuldip K. Paliwal. Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE
Trans. Signal Processing , 45(11):2673{2681, 1997. doi: 10.1109/78.650093. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1109/78.650093 .
Christian Sciuto, Kaicheng Yu, Martin Jaggi, Claudiu Musat, and Mathieu Salzmann. Eval-
uating the search phase of neural architecture search. CoRR , abs/1902.08142, 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.08142 .
Mathieu Sinn, Martin Wistuba, Beat Buesser, Maria-Irina Nicolae, and Minh Tran. Evolu-
tionary search for adversarially robust neural networks. Safe Machine Learning Workshop
at ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019.
Sean C. Smithson, Guang Yang, Warren J. Gross, and Brett H. Meyer. Neural networks
designing neural networks: multi-objective hyper-parameter optimization. In ICCAD ,
page 104. ACM, 2016.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of
machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
25: 26th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2012. Proceed-
ings of a meeting held December 3-6, 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States. , pages
49

==== Page 50 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
2960{2968, 2012. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4522-practical-bayesian-
optimization-of-machine-learning-algorithms .
David So, Quoc Le, and Chen Liang. The evolved transformer. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long
Beach, California, USA , pages 5877{5886, 2019. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v97/so19a.html .
Masanori Suganuma, Shinichi Shirakawa, and Tomoharu Nagao. A genetic programming
approach to designing convolutional neural network architectures. In Proceedings of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO 2017, Berlin, Germany,
July 15-19, 2017 , pages 497{504, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3071178.3071229. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3071178.3071229 .
Masanori Suganuma, Mete Ozay, and Takayuki Okatani. Exploiting the potential of
standard convolutional autoencoders for image restoration by evolutionary search. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018,
Stockholmsm assan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 , pages 4778{4787, 2018. URL
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/suganuma18a.html .
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning - an introduction . Adap-
tive computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 1998. ISBN 0262193981. URL
http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/37293240 .
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le. Mnasnet:
Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. CoRR , abs/1807.11626, 2018. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.11626 .
C edric Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New . Grundlehren der mathematischen Wis-
senschaften. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. ISBN 9783540710509.
Linnan Wang, Yiyang Zhao, Yuu Jinnai, Yuandong Tian, and Rodrigo Fonseca. Alphax:
exploring neural architectures with deep neural networks and monte carlo tree search.
CoRR , abs/1903.11059, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.11059 .
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards . PhD thesis,
King's College, Cambridge, UK, May 1989. URL http://www.cs.rhul.ac.uk/ ~chrisw/
new_thesis.pdf .
Yu Weng, Tianbao Zhou, Yujie Li, and Xiaoyu Qiu. Nas-unet: Neural architecture search for
medical image segmentation. IEEE Access , 7:44247{44257, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2019.2908991. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2908991 .
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist rein-
forcement learning. Machine Learning , 8:229{256, 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992696 .
Andrew Gordon Wilson, Zhiting Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P. Xing. Deep kernel
learning. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Articial Intelligence
50

==== Page 51 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
and Statistics, AISTATS 2016, Cadiz, Spain, May 9-11, 2016 , pages 370{378, 2016. URL
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v51/wilson16.html .
Martin Wistuba. Deep learning architecture search by neuro-cell-based evolution with
function-preserving mutations. In ECML/PKDD (2) , volume 11052 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 243{258. Springer, 2018a. URL http://www.ecmlpkdd2018.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/108.pdf .
Martin Wistuba. Practical deep learning architecture optimization. In 5th IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, DSAA 2018, Turin,
Italy, October 1-3, 2018 , pages 263{272, 2018b. doi: 10.1109/DSAA.2018.00037. URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA.2018.00037 .
Martin Wistuba and Tejaswini Pedapati. Inductive transfer for neural architecture opti-
mization. CoRR , abs/1903.03536, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03536 .
Catherine Wong, Neil Houlsby, Yifeng Lu, and Andrea Gesmundo. Transfer learning with
neural automl. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, 3-8 December
2018, Montr eal, Canada. , pages 8366{8375, 2018. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
8056-transfer-learning-with-neural-automl .
Lingxi Xie and Alan L. Yuille. Genetic CNN. In IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice, Italy, October 22-29, 2017 , pages 1388{1397. IEEE
Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.154. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICCV.2017.154 .
Saining Xie, Ross B. Girshick, Piotr Doll ar, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. Aggregated
residual transformations for deep neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017 ,
pages 5987{5995, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.634. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
CVPR.2017.634 .
Saining Xie, Alexander Kirillov, Ross B. Girshick, and Kaiming He. Exploring randomly
wired neural networks for image recognition. CoRR , abs/1904.01569, 2019a. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1904.01569 .
Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. SNAS: stochastic neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019b. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=rylqooRqK7 .
Chao Xue, Junchi Yan, Rong Yan, Stephen M. Chu, Yonggang Hu, and Yonghua Lin.
Transferable automl by model sharing over grouped datasets. In The IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2019.
Yoshihiro Yamada, Masakazu Iwamura, and Koichi Kise. Deep pyramidal residual networks
with separated stochastic depth. CoRR , abs/1612.01230, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1612.01230 .
51

==== Page 52 ====
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, Tejaswini Pedapati
Yoshihiro Yamada, Masakazu Iwamura, and Koichi Kise. Shakedrop regularization. CoRR ,
abs/1802.02375, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.02375 .
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Proceedings of the
British Machine Vision Conference 2016, BMVC 2016, York, UK, September 19-22,
2016, 2016. URL http://www.bmva.org/bmvc/2016/papers/paper087/index.html .
Chris Zhang, Mengye Ren, and Raquel Urtasun. Graph hypernetworks for neural archi-
tecture search. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA , 2019. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=rkgW0oA9FX .
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Ciss e, Yann N. Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track
Proceedings , 2018a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ddp1-Rb .
Xiangyu Zhang, Xinyu Zhou, Mengxiao Lin, and Jian Sun. Shuenet: An extremely
ecient convolutional neural network for mobile devices. In 2018 IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, June 18-22, 2018 , pages 6848{6856, 2018b. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00716.
URL http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2018/html/Zhang_ShuffleNet_
An_Extremely_CVPR_2018_paper.html .
Xingcheng Zhang, Zhizhong Li, Chen Change Loy, and Dahua Lin. Polynet: A pursuit of
structural diversity in very deep networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2017, Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017 , pages 3900{
3908, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.415. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.
415.
Zhao Zhong, Junjie Yan, Wei Wu, Jing Shao, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Practi-
cal block-wise neural network architecture generation. In 2018 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, June 18-22, 2018 , pages 2423{2432, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00257.
URL http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2018/html/Zhong_Practical_
Block-Wise_Neural_CVPR_2018_paper.html .
Yanqi Zhou, Siavash Ebrahimi, Sercan Omer Arik, Haonan Yu, Hairong Liu, and Greg
Diamos. Resource-ecient neural architect. CoRR , abs/1806.07912, 2018. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1806.07912 .
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In
5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France,
April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings , 2017. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=r1Ue8Hcxg .
Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. Learning
transferable architectures for scalable image recognition. In 2018 IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2018, Salt Lake City,
52

==== Page 53 ====
A Survey on Neural Architecture Search
UT, USA, June 18-22, 2018 , pages 8697{8710, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
2018.00907. URL http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2018/html/Zoph_
Learning_Transferable_Architectures_CVPR_2018_paper.html .
53

