==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)Artificial Intelligence Review (2022) 55:5731–5780
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10144-1
1 3
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, 
and challenges
Mayur Wankhade1,2 · Annavarapu Chandra Sekhara Rao1,2  · Chaitanya Kulkarni1,2
Published online: 7 February 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022
Abstract
The rapid growth of Internet-based applications, such as social media platforms and blogs, 
has resulted in comments and reviews concerning day-to-day activities. Sentiment analy -
sis is the process of gathering and analyzing people’s opinions, thoughts, and impressions 
regarding various topics, products, subjects, and services. People’s opinions can be benefi-
cial to corporations, governments, and individuals for collecting information and making 
decisions based on opinion. However, the sentiment analysis and evaluation procedure face 
numerous challenges. These challenges create impediments to accurately interpreting sen-
timents and determining the appropriate sentiment polarity. Sentiment analysis identifies 
and extracts subjective information from the text using natural language processing and 
text mining. This article discusses a complete overview of the method for completing this 
task as well as the applications of sentiment analysis. Then, it evaluates, compares, and 
investigates the approaches used to gain a comprehensive understanding of their advan-
tages and disadvantages. Finally, the challenges of sentiment analysis are examined in 
order to define future directions.
Keywords Sentiment analysis · Text analysis · Word embedding · Machine learning · 
Social media
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis has gained widespread acceptance in recent years, not just among 
researchers but also among businesses, governments, and organizations (Sánchez-Rada 
and Iglesias 2019). The growing popularity of the Internet has lifted the web to the 
rank of the principal source of universal information. Lots of users use various online 
resources to express their views and opinions. To constantly monitor public opinion and 
 * Annavarapu Chandra Sekhara Rao 
 acsrao@iitism.ac.in
 Mayur Wankhade 
 mayur.18dr0078@cse.iitism.ac.in
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), 
Dhanbad 826004, India
2 Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bangalore 560078, India

==== Page 2 ====
5732 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
aid decision-making, we must employ user-generated data to analyze it automatically. 
As a result, sentiment analysis has increased its popularity across research communities 
in recent years. Sentiment analysis is also called as Opinion analysis or Opinion mining. 
We have seen a recent growth in the sentiment analysis task. The variuos research works 
in sentiment analysis (Ligthart et al. 2021) published an overview on Opinion mining 
in the earlier stage. In (Piryani et al. 2017) discusses the study topic from 2000 to 2015 
and provides a framework for computationally processing unstructured data with the 
primary goal of extracting views and identifying their moods. Several recent surveys 
(Yousif et al. 2019; Birjali et al. 2021) authors has described the problem of sentiment 
analysis and suggested potential directions. Soleymani et  al. (2017) and Yadav and 
Vishwakarma (2020) on sentiment classification have been published. Also the topic 
of detecting opinion spam and fraudulent reviews was investigated. Additionally, In the 
work of Yue et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2012) conducted research on the effectiveness 
of internet reviews. The Authors (Jain et al. 2021b) discuss machine learning applica-
tions that incorporate online reviews in sentiment categorization, predictive decision-
making, and the detection of false reviews. In the work of Balaji et al. (2021) conducted 
a thorough examination of the several applications of social media analysis utilizing 
sophisticated machine learning algorithms. Authors present a brief overview of machine 
learning algorithms used in social media analysis (Hangya and Farkas 2017).
The growth of social network sites has generated a slew of fields devoted to analyz-
ing these networks and their contents in order to extract necessary information. Sen-
timent analysis is concerned with deriving the sentiments communicated by a piece 
of text from its content. Sentiment analysis is a subfield of NLP and that, given long 
and illustrious public opinion for decision making, there must be multiple early works 
addressing it. However, it still works going on sentiment analysis develop till the new 
millennium.
Several real-world applications require sentiment analysis for detailed investigation. 
for example, product analysis, discover which components or qualities of a product 
appeal to customers in terms of product quality. In work of Subhashini et  al. (2021) 
presents the results of a comprehensive review of contemporary opinion mining litera-
ture. It also covers how to extract text features from opinions with noise or uncertainty, 
represent knowledge in opinions, and categorize them. Mowlaei et al. (2020) suggest a 
technique for adaptive aspect-based lexicons for sentiment classification. The authors 
described two strategies for constructing two dynamic lexicons to aid in the classifica-
tion of sentiments depending on their aspects: a strategy based on statistics and genetic 
algorithms. A dynamic lexicon can be automatically updated and provides more precise 
grading for context-related concepts (Kumar and Uma 2021). To organize all the aspects 
of the reviews they selected a number of lexicons from several dictionaries. Sentiment 
analysis is previously being applied in various domains ranging from hotels to airlines 
and healthcare to the stock market (Zvarevashe and Olugbara 2018). Sentiment analy -
sis has applied to hotel reviews to get a better understanding of customer’s likes and 
dislikes. In comparison (Valencia et al. 2019), it is used to determine the trends of the 
stock market and cryptocurrencies based on the market sentiment. The Authors (Ahmad 
et al. 2019a) analyze tweets relating to various domains and analyze the sentiments of 
the tweets. The health care domain is seeing a surge in sentiment analysis applications 
in recent times, customer opinion analyses (Ruffer et al. 2020; Park et al. 2020; Cor -
tis and Davis 2021; Arora et al. 2021), customer satisfaction analyses are few applica-
tions in the healthcare sector (Baashar et  al. 2020; Miotto et  al. 2018). The business 
sector has always utilized sentiment analysis for its improvement. Sentiment analysis 

==== Page 3 ====
5733
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
for various applications like reputation management, market research, and competitor 
analysis, product analysis, customer voice, etc.
Various issues are associated with sentiment analysis and natural language processing, 
such as individuals informal writing style, sarcasm, irony, and language-specific challenges. 
There are many words in different languages whose meaning and orientation change depend-
ing on the context and domain in which they are employed. Therefore, there are not many 
tools and resources available for all the languages. Sarcasm and irony are two of the most criti-
cal challenges that have recently attracted the attention of researchers. There has been much 
development in detecting sarcasm and irony in text. There are many challenges in sentiment 
analysis. In this work  we will analyze the variuos challenges, methodologies, applications, 
and algorithms that are employed in sentiment analysis. We present the task with comparative 
data analysis shown in tables, flow charts, and graphs that are simple to comprehend. Various 
description of abbreviation which use in our work shown in Table 1 .
To our understanding, existing surveys frequently skip some of the sentiment analysis 
techniques in favor of machine learning, transformer learning, and lexicon-based approaches. 
Although this paper covered all the task as well, it varies from earlier research in that it cov -
ers the most frequently used techniques. Additionally, other surveys study sentiment analysis 
from a particular task, various challenges, or concentrate on a specific issue, such as product 
reviews. This study provides a comprehensive investigation of sentiment analysis by discuss-
ing this area from various perspectives since it encompasses numerous research components 
connected to sentiment analysis, such as problems, applications, tools, and approaches. This 
work is highly beneficial to scholars and beginners, as it allows them to access a wealth of 
knowledge about this area in a single paper. The survey important contributions can be sum-
marized as follows
• Several literature have been analyzed in order to thoroughly define the sentiment analysis 
process and to identify well-known technologies for performing this work.
• Analyses of available methodologies in order to determine which one is most appropriate 
for a certain application.
• We classify and summarize frequently used sentiment analysis approaches to understand 
better accessible techniques such as machine learning, lexicon-based analysis, and hybrid 
analysis.
• Summarizing the benefits and challenges of sentiment analysis in order to keep up of cur -
rent trending research.
• Each method comparison with their advantage and disadvantage, suggesting selecting the 
proper method sentiment analysis task.
  The literature survey paper is organized as Sect.  2, Level of Sentiment Analysis, Sect.  3, 
contain the Data Collection, Feature Extraction, and Feature Selection Method, explaining 
all the steps from data extraction to various task of Sentiment Analysis, Sect.  4 contain 
General Methodology for Sentiment Analysis and its Summary, Sect. 5 , Contain the Senti-
ment Analysis Application in Various Domain, Sect.  6, Contain the Challenges in Senti-
ment Analysis, In the final Sect. 7 , We Conclude our research work.

==== Page 4 ====
5734 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
2  Sentiment analysis levels
Sentiment analysis has been investigated on several levels: Document Level, Sentence 
Level, Phrase Level, and Aspect Level. Sentiment analysis in each level such as document, 
sentence and phrase, aspect level shown in Fig. 1.
2.1  Document level sentiment analysis
Document-level: Document level sentiment analysis is performed on a whole document, 
and single polarity is given to the whole document. This type of sentiment analysis is not 
used a lot. It can be used to classify chapters or pages of a book as positive, negative, or 
neutral. At this level, both supervised and unsupervised learning approaches can be utilized 
to classify the document (Bhatia et al. 2015). Cross-domain and cross-language sentiment 
analysis are the two most significant issues in document-level sentiment analysis. (Saun-
ders 2021) Domain-specific sentiment analysis has been shown to achieve remarkable 
accuracy while staying highly domain-sensitive. In these tasks, the feature vector is a set of 
words that must be domain-specific and limited.
2.2  Sentence level sentiment analysis
Sentence level: In this level of analysis, each sentence is analyzed and finding with a corre-
sponding polarity. This is highly useful when a document has a wide range and mix of senti-
ments associated with it (Yang and Cardie 2014). This classification level is associated with 
subjective classification (Rao et  al. 2018). Each sentence polarity will be determined inde-
pendently using the same methodologies as the document level but with greater training data 
and processing resources. The polarity of each sentence may be aggregated to find the senti-
ment of the document or used individually. Occasionally, document-level sentiment analysis 
is insufficient for specific uses (Behdenna et  al. 2018). In previous work  on sentence-level 
analysis has been devoted to finding subjective sentences. However, more difficult tasks, such Fig. 1  Level of sentiment 
analysis


==== Page 5 ====
5735
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
as working with conditional sentences or ambiguous statements (Ferrari and Esuli 2019). In 
these circumstances, sentence-level sentiment analysis is critical.
2.3  Phrase level sentiment analysis
Phrase level: Sentiment analysis also be performed where opinion words are mined at phrase 
level, and classification will be done. Each phrase may contain multiple aspects or single 
aspects. This may be useful product reviews of multiple lines; here, it is observed that a sin-
gle aspect is expressed in a phrase (Thet et al. 2010). It has been a hot topic of researchers 
in recent times. While document-level analysis concentrated on categorizing the entire docu-
ment as subjective, either positively or negatively, sentence-level analysis is more beneficial, 
as a document contains both positive and negative statements. Word is the most basic unit of 
language; its polarity is intimately related to the subjectivity of the sentence or document in 
which it appears. A sentence containing an adjective has a high probability of being a subjec-
tive sentence. (Fredriksen-Goldsen and Kim 2017) Additionally, the term chosen for expres-
sion represents the demographic characteristics of individuals, such as gender and age, and its 
desire, social standing, and personality, other psychological and social characteristics (Flek 
2020). As a result, term serves as the foundation for text sentiment analysis.
2.4  Aspect level sentiment analysis
Aspect level:  sentiment analysis is performed at the aspect level. Each sentence may con-
tain multiple aspects; therefore, Aspect level sentiment analysis. Primary attention to all the 
aspects used in the sentence and assigns polarity to all the aspects after which an aggregate 
sentiment has calculated for the whole sentence (Schouten and Frasincar 2015; Lu et al. 2011).Hotel Reviews
Restaurant
Reviews
Airline
Reviews
Stock News
Product
Reviewswww. amazon.co m
twitter API
www .tripadvisor .com
www. yelp.com
www .facebook.co m
Kaggle
Online Survey
www .airlinequalit y.com
Data Selection Data ScrapingData Pre-
Processing
Data
Visualization
Data AnalysisCorpus Based
Approaches
Machine
Learning Based
ApproachesDictionary Based
Approaches
ApproachSentiment Analysis
Subjectivity Classification
Opinion Spam Detectio n
Aspect Detectio n
Polarity Classification
Task
Fig. 2  General procedure of sentiment analysis

==== Page 6 ====
5736 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
3  Data collection and feature selection
3.1  Data collections
Data can be collected from the internet via web scraping, social media, news channels, 
E-commerce websites, Forums, Weblog, some other websites shown in Fig.  2. Data Col-
lection is the first stage in the Sentiment Analysis. Depending on task sentiment analysis Table 1  Various description of abbreviation
Abbreviation Description of abbreviation
NLP Natural Language Processing
NB Naïve Bayes
SVM Support Vector Machine
RF Random Forest
LR Logistic Regression
DT Decision Tree
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
Bi-LSTM Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
RNTN Recursive Neural Tensor Network
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
ANN Artificial Neural Network
RNTN Recursive Neural Tensor Network
AI Artificial Intelligence
KNN K nearest Neighbours
LDA Latent Dirichlet allocation
ME Maximum Entropy
LSA Latent Semantic Analysis
CBOW Continuous Bag of words
SG Skip Gram
TF-IDF Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency
DNN Deep Neural Network
BoW Bag of Words
ABSA Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis
PoS Parts-of-Speech
NLTK Natural Language tool kit
DCNN Dynamic Convolutional Neural Network
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
MSA Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
GPT Generative Pre-trained Transformer
SLC Sentence Level Classification
AR-NN Auto-regressive Neural Network
DMN Dynamic Memory Networks
ELMo Embedding Language Models

==== Page 7 ====
5737
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
of findings, text data can be combined with other types of data like video, audio, loca-
tion, etc. A few essential sources of data collection are:
Social media: Social data refers to information gathered via social media networks. It 
demonstrates how consumers interact with the product by accessing, posting, and exchang-
ing over. Academic study on individual, group and behavior uses social media as a dynamic 
data source. It refers to Internet apps that are web or mobile-based that enable users to cre-
ate, access, and trade user-generated content.
Forums: Users can use message boards to discuss various topics, exchange opinions 
and ideas, and solicit assistance via text messages. Forums are an intriguing source for 
sentiment analysis due to the dynamic nature of user-generated information. Additionally, 
researchers can undertake sentiment analysis on a specific domain by leveraging forums as 
a source (Korkontzelos et al. 2016).
Weblog: A short weblog consists of paragraphs conveying a viewpoint, facts, personal 
diary entries, or links. Together referred to as posts, that are chronologically sorted with 
the most recent entry appearing first, in the style of a research article (Kumar and Teeja 
2012). Blogs an valuable resource for performing sentiment analysis on a variety of entities 
(Annett and Kondrak 2008).
Electronic Commerce website: Electronic Commerce websites where users can give 
evaluations and express their opinions about a particular business or organization. In this 
instance, websites that do not specifically review sites have millions of reviews, such as 
e-commerce sites that feature product reviews1 or professional review sites such as.2 In 
the work of Jain et al. (2019) conducted a descriptive study of the various airline service 
classifications. 
3.2  Feature selection
It is important to remember that developing a classification model requires first identifying 
relevant features in dataset (Ritter et al. 2012). Thus, a review can be decoded into words 
during model training and appended to the feature vector. For single word is considered, 
the technique is called a “Uni-gram”; when two words are considered, the technique is 
called a “Bi-gram”; and if three words are considered, the technique is referred to as a 
“Tri-gram.” combination of unigram and bigram helpful for analysis (Razon and Barnden 
2015); the context feature which helpful for getting results most accurate.
Pragmatic features are those that emphasize the application of words rather than a 
methodological foundation. Pragmatics is the study of how context relates to perception in 
linguistics and related sciences. Pragmatics is the study of phenomena such as implicature, 
speech acts, relevance, and conversations.
Emoji are facial expressions used in sentiment analysis to convey emotions. Various 
emoticons are used to depict a wide variety of human emotions (Tian et al. 2017). Emoti-
cons aid in conveying a person’s tone when composing a sentence and so aid in sentiment 
analysis. Substitute their meaning for the emoticons: Review contain a range of emotions, 
including happiness, sadness, and rage. Emoticons are classified into two categories: posi-
tive and negative sentiment emotions. Positive emotions are formed of positive emotions 
1 www. amazon. com.
2 www. yello  wpages. com.

==== Page 8 ====
5738 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
such as love, happiness, and joy, while negative emoticons are composed of negative emo-
tions such as sadness, depression, and wrath.
Punctuation marks, or exclamation marks, serve to highlight the force of a positive or 
negative remark. Similarly, the apostrophe and the question mark are other punctuation 
marks.
Words in slang, such as lol and rofl. These are frequently used to introduce a sense of 
humor into a remark. Given the nature of opinion tweets, it is plausible to assume that a 
slang expression in the text suggests sentiment analysis. Substitute their meaning for the 
slang term.
Punctuation marks, like exclamation marks, serve to highlight the force of a positive 
or negative remark. Similarly, the apostrophe and the question mark are other punctuation 
marks.
3.3  Feature extraction
Feature extraction is a key task in sentiment classification as it involves the extraction of 
valuable information from the text data, and it will directly impact the performance of the 
model. The approach tries to extract valuable information that encapsulates the text’s most 
essential features. In the work of Venugopalan and Gupta (2015) incorporated other fea-
tures as it is challenging to extract features from the text. In most cases, punctuations are 
removed from the text after lowering it in the pre-processing stage, but they used them to 
extract features and hashtags and emoticons commonly used techniques for feature extrac-
tions listed below.
Terms frequency It is one of the simplest ways to express features that are more fre-
quently used in various NLP applications, including Sentiment Analysis, for information 
retrieval. It considers a single word, i.e., uni-gram or group of two-three words, which can 
be in bi-gram and tri-gram, with their terms count representing features (Sharma et  al. 
2013). Term’s presence gives the word a value of either 0 or 1. Term frequency is the 
integer value, which is its count in the given document. TF-IDF can be used as a weighted 
scheme for better results that will measure the importance of any token in the given 
document.
Parts of Speech tagging The process of tagging a word in a text (corpus) based on its 
definition and context is also known as grammatical tagging. Tokens are categorized as 
nouns, verbs, pronouns, adverbs, adjectives, and prepositions. For instance, “This mobile 
is amazing” may be tagged as follows: (Straka et al. 2016) This :determiner, mobile:noun, 
is:verb, amazing:adjective. For sentiment mining, an adjective is used more often as it rep-
resents the sentiment of the opinion. PoS taggers may be used for this task which is availa-
ble in NLTK or Spacy. Researches most commonly use Stanford PoS-tagger (Weerasooriya 
et al. 2016).
Negations These are the words that can change or reverse the polarity of the opinion and 
shift the meaning of a sentence. Commonly used negation words include not, cannot, nei-
ther, never, nowhere, none, etc. Every word appearing in the sentence will not reverse the 
polarity; therefore, removing all negation words from stop-words may increase the compu-
tational cost and decrease the model’s accuracy. Negation words must be handled with at 
most care (George et al. 2013). Negation words such as not, neither, nor, and so on are crit-
ical for sentiment analysis since they can revert the polarity of a given phrase. For instance, 
the line “This movie is good.” is a positive sentence, but “The movie is not good.” is a 
negative sentence. Regrettably, some systems eliminate negation words because they are 

==== Page 9 ====
5739
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
included in stop word lists or are implicitly omitted since they have a neutral sentiment 
value in a lexicon and do not affect the absolute polarity. However, reversing the polarity 
is not straight forward because negation words might occur in a sentence without affecting 
the text’s emotion.
In some cases, neutral sentiment is also included, and neutral evaluations are frequently 
ignored in many sentiment analysis tasks due to their vagueness and lack of information, In 
the work of Valdivia et al. (2018) considered to empower neutrality by defining the bound-
ary between positive and negative evaluations to improve the model performance. They use 
several sentiment analysis approaches to various corpora, extracting their sentiment and fil-
tering out neutral evaluations by consensus, i.e., taking various models based on weighted 
aggregation. Finally, then they compared the performance of single and aggregated models 
in categorization. Other contribution introduced in the work of Wang et al. (2020) opinion 
analysis, namely multi-level fine-scaled sentiment detection with ambivalence handling. 
The ambivalence handler is detailed, as are the strength-level tuning settings for analyz-
ing the strength and fine-scale of both positive and negative attitudes (Buder et al. 2021). 
It is capable of delving deeper into the text to uncover multi-level fine-scaled sentiments 
and distinct emotional types. In the work of Valdivia et  al. (2017) suggest the usage of 
induced ordered weighted averaging operators based on the fuzzy majority for the aggre-
gating polarity from many sentiment analysis methods. Their contribution is to establish 
neutrality for opinions guided by a fuzzy majority.
Bag of Words (BoW) BoW is one of the simplest approach for extracting text features. 
BoW will describe the occurrence of words in a document. Bag represents the vocabulary 
of words using which a vector is formed for each sentence. The main problem with this 
model is that it does not consider the syntactic meaning of the text. For instance, consider 
two sentences s1= “the food was good”, s2= “the service was bad”. The vocabulary is 
created for two sentences where v= {’the’, ‘food’, ‘was’, ‘service’, ‘bad’, ‘good’} and the 
length of the vector is 6 and is represented as v1= [ 1 1 1 0 0 1] and v2= [1 0 1 1 1 0]. BoW 
approach performance evaluated using (TF-IDF) which performs better in most cases.
3.3.1  Word embedding
Word embeddings represent words in a vector space by clustering words with similar 
meanings together. Each word is assigned to a vector, which is then learned in a manner 
similar to neural networks. It learns and chooses a vector from a predetermined vocabulary. 
The dimension of the words may be chosen by passing it as a hyperparameter. SG model 
and the continuous CBOW model are two of the most well-known algorithms for word 
embeddings. Both of these are shallow window approaches methods in which a short win-
dow of some size, such as four or six, is specified, and the current word is anticipated using 
context words in CBOW, while context words are forecasted using the current word in the 
SG model. Word embeddings are concerned with learning about words in the context of 
their local usage, which is specified by a window of nearby terms.
Word2vec word2vec is a 2-layer neural network that is used for vectorizing the tokens. 
It is one of the famous and widely used vectorizing techniques developed by Mikolov et al. 
(2013). Word2vec mainly has two models CBOW and SG. The CBOW model predicts the 
target word using context words, whereas the SG model predicts the target word using con-
text words. With a larger dataset, the SG model performs better.
Global Vectors (GloVe) Global Vectors for word representation have developed (Pen-
nington et al. 2014) by an unsupervised learning approach to generate word embeddings 

==== Page 10 ====
5740 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
from a corpus word-to-word co-occurrence matrix. GloVe is a popularly used method as 
it is straightforward and quick to train GloVe model because of its parallel implementation 
capacity (Al Amrani et al. 2018).
Fast Text It is an open-source and free library developed by FAIR (Facebook AI 
Research) mainly used for word classifications, vectorization, and creation of word embed-
dings. It uses a linear classifier to train the model, which is very fast in training the model 
(Bojanowski et al. 2017). It supports a CBOW and SG model. Semantic similarities may be 
found using this model.
ELMo ELMo is a deep contextualized text representation. ELMo contributes to over -
coming the limitations of conventional word embedding approaches such as LSA, TF-IDF 
and n-grams models (Peng et al. 2019). ELMo generates embeddings to words based on 
the contexts in which they are used to record the word meaning and retrieve additional 
contextual information. Through pretraining, ELMo can more accurately represent polyse-
mous words in a variety of contexts and is more informative about the text’s higher-level 
semantics (Ling et al. 2020).
3.4  Feature selection approach
Feature Selection Approach is evaluated to identify a data characteristic. A characteris-
tic can be insignificant, significant, or redundant. Various feature selection approaches are 
used to eliminate irrelevant and superfluous characteristics (Ahmad et al. 2019b; Lata et al. 
2020). Feature Selection is a procedure that identifies and eliminates superfluous and irrel-
evant characteristics from the feature list and thus increases sentiment classification accu-
racy. In  the work of  (Hailong et  al. 2014; Duric and Song 2012) sentiment analysis  for 
feature selection include lexicon-based and statistical methods. Humans produce features 
in lexicon-based techniques. Typically, the procedure begins with the collection of phrases 
with a strong feeling to develop a limited feature set (Kolchyna et  al. 2015). The set is 
augmented with additional terms via synonym detection or web resources (Ghazi et  al. 
2015; Rizos et al. 2019). The benefit of these approaches is their efficacy, as they carefully 
address aspects. Choosing handcrafted features is a lengthy and complicated process.
SentiWordNet is a sentiment lexicon built from the WordNet database, with each term 
accompanied by numerical values indicating positive and negative sentiment. A well-
known example is a SentiWordNet lexicon. contrarily, statistical processes are entirely 
automated and are widely used for feature selection, although they typically fail to distin-
guish between sentimental and non-sentimental features (Poria et al. 2014; Varelas et al. 
2005). The authors (Cambria et al. 2020) proposed SenticNet as a way to include logical 
reasoning into deep learning models for sentiment analysis.
Statistical techniques for feature selection are typically categorized into four categories: 
filter, embedding, wrapper, and hybrid.
Filter approach This is the most often used technique of selecting features. It selects 
features without utilizing any machine learning technique based on the general properties 
of the training data. The feature is ranked using several statistical metrics, and then the 
features with the highest rankings are chosen (Adomavicius and Kwon 2011).  They are 
computationally inexpensive and well-suited for datasets with a high number of attributes. 
The words “Information Gain”, “Chi-square”, “Document Frequency”, and “Mutual infor -
mation” are all used to refer to fundamental filter algorithms.
Wrapper approach This approach is based on machine learning algorithms since it 
relies on the output of the machine learning algorithm. Approaches are often iterative and 

==== Page 11 ====
5741
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
computationally demanding due to this dependency, but they can determine the optimal 
feature set for that particular modeling algorithm. Wrapper techniques include creating fea-
ture subsets (forward or backward selection) plus various learning algorithms(such as NB 
or SVM).
Embedded approach This method combines the feature selection procedure into the exe-
cution of the modeling algorithm. It employs classification methods that have a built-in fea-
ture selection capability (Imani et al. 2013). As a result, it is more computationally efficient 
than the wrapper approach. However, this technique is algorithm-specific (Das et al. 2020). 
Embedded techniques are frequently based on a variety of decision tree algorithms, includ-
ing CART (Kosamkar and Chaudhari 2013), C4.5, and ID3 (Quinlan 2014; Mezquita et al. 
2020), and additional algorithms like LASSO (Hssina et al. 2014).
Hybrid approach This strategy combines filter and wrapper approaches; hybrid meth-
ods generally utilize multiple approaches to produce the optimum feature subset. Hybrid 
techniques typically achieve excellent performance and accuracy through the use of many 
approaches. Numerous hybrid feature selection algorithms for sentiment analysis have been 
developed (Chiew et al. 2019).
3.5  Task of sentiment analysis
Overview of the various task of sentiment analysis as shown in Fig.  3 and explain as 
follows.
Subjectivity classification This is frequently assumed to be the first stage in senti-
ment analysis. Subjectivity classification recognizes subjective hints, emotional phrases, 
and subjective ideas. Tokens like ’hard’, ’amazing’ and ’cheap’ are identified (Kasmuri 
and Basiron 2017). These indications are used to distinguish objective or subjective text 
objects. In work of Kasmuri and Basiron (2017) involves determining whether or not there 
is a particular subject in the given text. Subjectivity classification aims to keep undesirable 
objective data items out of subsequent processing (Kamal 2013).
Sentiment classification Sentiment categorization is a well-known researched task in 
sentiment analysis. Polarity determination is one of the subtasks of sentiment classification, 
Fig. 3  Task of sentiment analysis

==== Page 12 ====
5742 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
and the term “Opinion analysis” is frequently used while referring to Sentiment Analysis. 
It is a little duty aimed on determining the sentiment of each piece of text. Polarity is tra-
ditionally either positive or negative (Wang et al. 2014). In the work of Xia et al. (2015), 
the opinion-level context is investigated, with intra-opinion and inter-opinion aspects being 
finely characterized. Neutral is also included in some cases. With a trained classifier, the 
cross-domain analysis predicts the sentiment of a target domain. Extracting the domain 
invariant features and where they are distributed is a commonly used approach (Peng et al. 
2018). The cross-language analysis is done similarly by training the model on a dataset 
from a source language and then evaluating it on a dataset from a different language with 
limited data. The ambiguity of word polarity is one of the obstacles that sentiment analysis 
must overcome. In the work of Vechtomova (2017) and Singh et al. (2021b) demonstrated 
that retrieval-based models provide an alternative to Machine Learning based strategies for 
word polarity detection. Affective computing and sentiment analysis also have tremendous 
potential as a subsystem technology for other systems (Cambria et al. 2017). They can aug-
ment the capabilities of customer relationship management and recommendation systems 
by enabling the discovery of which features customers particularly enjoy or the omission of 
items that have received highly unfavourable feedback from the suggestions.
Opinion Spam Detection Spam Detection has become a significant challenge in senti-
ment analysis because of the rising interest in e-commerce and review platforms. Opinion 
spams, often known as fraudulent or phone reviews, are well-written comments supporting 
or criticizing a product for their benefit. Opinion spam detection seeks to identify three 
distinct characteristics of a phone review: the review’s content, the review’s metadata, and 
real-world product expertise (Crawford et al. 2015). Machine learning algorithms are fre-
quently used to assess review material in order to detect dishonesty. The star or point rat-
ings, IP address of the user, geolocation of user, and other information are few Metadata 
used in detecting spam opinions. In many circumstances, though, it is inaccessible for anal-
ysis. Real-world experience and knowledge are included in a third way. For example, if a 
product with bad ratings and reviews is being rated high for a period, that can be put under 
suspect and analyzed for opinion spam detection.
Implicit Language Detection Sarcasm, irony, and humor are generally referred to as 
Implicit Languages. These equivocal and ambiguous form is speech is an arduous task 
to detect, even by humans sometimes. However, this implicit language is an essential 
aspect of a sentence and can completely flip the meaning and polarity of the sentence. For 
instance, consider the phrase ’Brilliant, I am fired’. The word Brilliant is very positive, but 
it describes irony or sarcasm when combined with later parts, i.e., "I am fired" it makes the 
phrase "I am fired" more negative. Investigating signs such as emoticons, laughter emo-
tions, and extensive punctuation mark utilization are more classic approaches for detecting 
implicit language (Fang et al. 2020; Filatova 2012).
Aspect Extraction Aspect level sentiment analysis is mainly composed of three steps 
aspect extraction, polarity classification, and aggregation. The process of aspect-based 
sentiment analysis starts with the extraction of aspect, one of the key processes as this 
differentiates usual sentiment analysis. Aspects can be extracted using a predefined set of 
aspects which should be carefully predefined based on the domain on which it is used. 
Other approaches are more sophisticated approaches like Frequency-based methods, syn-
tax-based methods, supervised and unsupervised machine learning approaches. It has been 
seen that in reviews (Kanapala et al. 2019), few words are used more frequently than oth-
ers, and these most frequent terms are more likely to turn out as aspects; this straightfor -
ward method can turn out into quite a powerful approach by fact that a significant num-
ber of approaches. This approach has few shortcomings because all frequent nouns do 

==== Page 13 ====
5743
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
not refer to aspects, terms like ’bucks,’ ’dollars,’ ’rupees,’ etc. Also, aspects that are not 
mentioned frequently can be missed by this method. A set of rules can be supplemented 
with a frequency-based approach to overcome these problems, but these manually crafted 
rules tend to come from parameters that need to be tuned manually, which is a hectic and 
time-consuming task. Instead of focusing on the Frequency-based approach. Syntax-based 
approach can be used as this approach covers the flaws of the frequency-based approach of 
not detecting less frequent aspects (Bai et al. 2020). In this approach, For example, here, 
’ Awesome’ refers to an adjective referring to the aspect “food” in ’ Awesome food.’ For this 
approach, many annotated data covering all syntactical relations should be collected for 
training the algorithm.
3.5.1  Need of sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is incredibly significant since it helps businesses understand their con-
sumers sentiment towards their brand. By automatically classifying the emotions behind 
social media interactions, reviews, and more, organizations can make informed decisions. 
Sentiment Analysis refers to the methods and strategies that enable firms to examine data 
about how their customer base feels about a given service or product. To identify the Polar -
ity:? Indicates whether an emotion is good or negative.? Subject: What is the subject of dis-
cussion? Who is the holder of the opinion:? A thing or person that conveys the sentiment.
Sentiment Analysis is a process that analyzes natural language utterances automatically, 
discovers essential claims or opinions, and classifies them according to their emotional 
attitude.
• In the business needs with sentiment analysis has increased consumer happiness 
through enhanced products, real-time problem detection, and market distinctiveness.
• Customer satisfaction analysis through sentiment analysis: The customer shares his 
experience with a product and communicates his opinion and attitude about it using 
natural language comments. This provides us with crucial insight into whether the con-
sumer is satisfied and, if necessary, how we can improve the product.
Fig. 4  Approach of sentiment analysis

==== Page 14 ====
5744 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
• Identify and act in real-time problems: Through social media, a customer can immedi-
ately voice his discontent to the entire world.
4  Methodology
Three mainly used approaches for Sentiment Analysis include Lexicon Based Approach, 
Machine Learning Approach, and Hybrid Approach. In addition, researchers are continu-
ously trying to figure out better ways to accomplish the task with better accuracy and lower 
computational cost. Overview various methods used in Sentiment Analysis as shown in 
Fig. 4. General Method about the Data collection, Feature selection and Sentiment analysis 
task are shown in Fig.  2 which understand the overall scenario of sentiment analysis task 
and overall method workflow.
4.1  Lexicon based approach
Lexicons are the collection of tokens where each token is assigned with a predefined score 
which indicates the neutral, positive and negative nature of the text (Kiritchenko et  al. 
2014). A score is assigned to tokens based on polarity such as + 1, 0, − 1  for positive, 
neutral, negative or the score may be assigned based on the intensity of polarity and its val-
ues range from [+ 1, − 1] where + 1 represents highly positive, and − 1 represents highly 
negative. In Lexicon Based Approach, for a given review or text, the aggregation of scores 
of each token is performed, i.e., positive, negative, neutral scores are summed separately. 
In the final stage, overall polarity is assigned to the text based on the highest value of indi-
vidual scores. Thus, the document is first divided into tokens of single words, where-after 
the polarity of each token is calculated and aggregated in the end.
The lexicon-based technique is extremely feasible for sentiment analysis at the sentence 
and feature level. Because no training data is required, it might be termed an unsupervised 
technique. On the other side, the primary disadvantage of this technique is domain depend-
ence, as words can have several meanings and senses, and therefore a positive word in one 
domain may be negative in another. For instance, given the word “small” and the sentences 
“The TV screen is too small” and “This camera is extremely small”, the word “small” in 
the first sentence is negative, as people generally prefer large screens, whereas in the sec-
ond sentence it is positive, as if the camera is small, it will be easy to carry. This issue can 
be overcome by developing a domain-specific sentiment lexicon or by adapting an existing 
vocabulary.
The advantage of the lexicon-based approach is that not require any training data and 
is considered an unsupervised approach by some experts (Yan-Yan et al. 2010). The main 
disadvantage with lexicon-based approach is that it is highly domain orientated and words 
pertaining to one domain cannot be used in another domain (Moreo et  al. 2012). For 
instance, consider the word huge it may be positive or negative based on the domain in 
which it is being used. In “the queue for the movie was huge” the word may be considered 
positive whereas, in “there was a huge lag in network” the word can be considered nega-
tive. Therefore, the polarity should be assigned to words carefully, considering the domain. 
There are mainly two approaches used in Lexicon Based Approaches: Corpus Based and 
Statistical Approach explain below, Comparative Analysis of Lexicon Based Classification 
Method and its individual Advantage and Disadvantage are shown in Table 3.

==== Page 15 ====
5745
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
4.1.1  Corpus based approach
The approach employs semantic and syntactic patterns to ascertain the sentence’s emo-
tion. This approach begins with a predefined set of sentiment terms and their orientation 
and then investigates syntactic or similar patterns to discover sentiment tokens and their 
orientation in a huge corpus. This is a situation-specific method that requires a signifi-
cant amount of labeled data to train. However, it aids in resolving the issue of opinion 
words with context-dependent orientations.
In the work of Park and Kim (2016) used a corpus based method for sentiment anal-
ysis. They used linguistic constraints and connectives to find the sentiment of a new 
token. For instance, tokens on either side of correlative conjunctions like "AND" tend 
to have the same orientation while words like "OR", but point out opinion change or the 
tokens on opposite orientations. Although this idea is popularly known as Sentiment 
Consistency, in practice, this is not that consistent. So, they constructed a graph that 
contained tokens in vertices and their corresponding word in edges, after which a linear 
log model was used to identify if two conjoined adjectives were or same or opposite ori-
entation and later clustered into a set of positive or negative words.
The corpus-based approach has the following types of approaches: Statistical 
Approach and Semantic Approach as explained below.
Statistical Approach The seed opinion words or co-occurrence patterns can be found 
using statistical approach. The rough idea behind this approach is that if it appears 
in positive texts more than negative texts, then it is more likely to be positive or vice 
versa. The key premise of this approach is that if comparable sentiment tokens are fre-
quently observed in the same environment, they will likely have the same orientation. 
As a result, the orientation of the new token is determined by the frequency with which 
it appears alongside other tokens detected in a similar context. In Turney and Littman 
(2003) approach for calculating mutual information can be used to calculate the fre-
quency of co-occurrences of tokens.
A statistical approach is mostly used in several sentiment analysis applications. One 
such application is detecting manipulated reviews by running a statistical test of ran-
domness popularly known as training test. In work of Hu et  al. (2012) expected that 
reviews written by customers would have random writing styles due to the random back -
grounds of customers. They used a book review dataset from amazon.com to confirm 
their results but, it was found that close to 10.3 percent of products were subjected to 
online review manipulations.
LSA is another statistical technique for analyzing links between papers and tokens 
referenced in the documents in order to generate essential patterns connecting to the 
documents and phrases. In work of Cao et al. (2011) in used LSA to find semantic quali-
ties from reviews to investigate the effect of various features. They engaged program 
user feedback dataset from the CNETdownload.com website. Their main objective was 
to find out why few reviews received helpful votes while few reviews helpful votes. 
They determined various factors which may affect the helpful voting pattern for reviews.
Semantic Approach In this approach, the similarity score is calculated between 
tokens that are used for Sentiment Analysis. Wordnet is commonly used for this task. 
Antonyms and synonyms can be easily found using this approach as similar words have 
a positive score or higher value. In Maks and Vossen (2012) proposed that semantic 
approach can be used in various applications to build a lexicon model that can be used 
to describe adjectives, verbs, and nouns to use in Sentiment Analysis. They described, 

==== Page 16 ====
5746 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
the in-depth description of subjectivity relations among the characters in a statement 
conveying distinct attitudes for each character. subjectivity tagged with the knowledge 
relating to both identity and orientation of attitude holder. In work of Bordes et  al. 
(2014), Bhaskar et al. (2015), Rao and Ravichandran (2009) worked on the WordNet 
dataset in their work. They determined that the viewer’s subjectivity and the actor’s sub-
jectivity might be distinguished in some instances (Hershcovich and Donatelli 2021).
4.1.2  Dictionary based method
Dictionary based approach consists of a list of predefined set opinion words collected 
manually (Chetviorkin and Loukachevitch 2012; Kaity and Balakrishnan 2020). The pri-
mary assumption behind this approach is that synonyms have the same polarity as the base 
word, while antonyms have opposite polarity. Large corpora like thesaurus or wordnet are 
looked upon for antonyms and synonyms, after which it is appended to a group or seed 
list prepared earlier. In the first stage, initial set of words are collected manually with their 
orientation. Later the list is expanded by looking at the antonyms and synonyms in the 
available lexical resources (Singh et al. 2017; Ho et al. 2014). Then the words are itera-
tively added to the list, and list is expanded. Manual evaluation or correction may be done 
in the last stage to ensure the quality of it. Stefano and Andrea created SentiWordNet three-
way in Baccianella et  al. (2010) with the help of automatic annotations of WordNet 3/uni2032.vars 
synsets. Another famous resource thesaurus was created based on online dictionaries. In 
the work of Park and Kim (2016) suggested a rule-based strategy for labelling sentiment 
sentences and words in contextual advertising using a dictionary-based approach. This 
approach is feasible only for small dictionary size. Another disadvantage of all lexicon-
based approaches (Hajek et al. 2020), including the dictionary-based approach, is finding 
opinion words specific for each domain as the polarity may vary. General Procedure step 
in Lexicon Unsupervised learning category shown in Fig.  6. Summary Analysis of Lexicon 
Based Classification Method and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in Table  3 and 
Summary Analysis of Clustering Method and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in 
Table 2.
• Lexicon Method Based tools Summary Analysis of Lexicon Based method tools and 
available Dictionary as explain below
• Pre-define Dictionary Utilize a pre-defined list of positive and negative words to deter -
mine the polarity of texts based on the frequency with which each category is repre-
sented.3.
• SentiWordNet SentiWordNet assigns numerical sentiment scores to WordNet synsets 
that are either positive or negative.4
• Bing Liu’s Sentiment Lexicon A dictionary has 4783 helpful positive and negative 
words.5
• SentiStrength Unless modified by any additional classification rules, texts are catego-
rized according to the highest positive or negative score for any constituent word.6
3 http:// www. wjh. harva rd. edu/ ~inqui rer/
4 http:// senti wordn et. isti. cnr. it.
5 https:// www. cs. uic. edu/ ~liub/ FBS/ senti ment- analy  sis. html.
6 http:// senti stren gth. wlv. ac. uk .

==== Page 17 ====
5747
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3Table 2  Advantages and disadvantages of sentiment analysis clustering approaches
Technique Advantage Disadvantage
K-means Due to the fact that these algorithms accomplish complexity in linear 
time, they are well-suited for massive datasetsIf there are any ambiguities, it is not accurate enough
The algorithm is not required to know the class of a document in 
advance. Does not require training
The algorithm is not required to know the class of a document in 
advance
Does not require training
This means that it is devoid of human intervention
Memory requirements are minimalThe issue with these techniques is that
they are sensitive to the starting center locations and make the assump-
tion that the number of clusters is known
These methods struggle with anomalies and noise, as well as a non-
convex cluster
A low cost, efficient, and extremely convenient approach for sentiment 
analysis
Fuzzy c-means It always converges It is susceptible to initial assumptions and may terminate at local mini-
mum
Computation time is high
Agglomerative algorithm Do not depend on the number of clusters or the center gravity Hierarchical algorithms have a high degree of time complexity. Although 
it has superior clustering properties, its high cost limits its use in large-
scale data applications
Divisive algorithm Do not rely on the number of clusters or the center
Simple to implement and, in some situations, produces the best resultsAlgorithms can never erase prior actions
No target reduction is achieved directly. At sometimes, it can be challeng-
ing to
Determine the correct number of clusters using the dendogram

==== Page 18 ====
5748 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
• Opinion Identification Opinion Finder recognizes subjective statements automatically 
and highlights several characteristics of their subjectivity, such as the source (holder) of 
the subjectivity and terms included in phrases indicating positive or negative views.7
• National Taiwan University Sentiment Dictionary contain 2812 Positive and 8276 neg-
atives words.8
• WordNet-Affect WordNet-Affect is a WordNet Domains extension that includes a subset 
of synsets that are appropriate for representing affective notions associated with emo-
tional words.9
• Affective Norms for English Words Affective Norms for English Words is a collection 
of normative emotional ratings for a large number of English words. This collection of 
linguistic materials has been graded for enjoyment, arousal, and dominance in order to 
establish a baseline for future research on sentiment and attentiveness.10Table 3  Summary analysis of Lexicon based classification method and its advantage and disadvantage
Technique Advantage Disadvantage
Dictionary based Trained data are not required
Give good outcomes for domains with fewer bands
Quick access to the vocabulary of word meaningsOpinion terms with a specific 
content orientation
Incapable of finding opinion terms 
with a specified content oriented 
domain that are not included in 
the lexicon
Corpus based The capacity to identify expressions of opinion 
with a particular content orientation. When 
domains are distinct, provides superior resultsDue to the lexicon’s broad scope, 
performance varies
The difficulties of providing 
substantial texts while also being 
able to cover all of the text terms 
means that they cannot be used 
individually
Raw
DataTraining
Algorith m
ModelManual
Review
Manual
ReviewManual
Review
Production Trained
Algorithm
Fig. 5  General procedure for sentiment analysis in supervised machine learning category
9 http:// csea. phhp. ufl. edu/ media/ anewm essage. html.
10 http:// csea. phhp. ufl. edu/ media/ anewm essage. html.7 http:// mpqa. cs. pitt. edu/ opini onfin der .
8 http:// acade miasi nican lplab. github. io.

==== Page 19 ====
5749
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
• LingPipe can work on a wide range of activities, such as identifying topics, identifying 
named entities, parsing and indexing documents, database text mining, word segmenta-
tion, sentiment analysis, and language identification.11
• Apache OpenNLP provides support for parsing sentence, tokenization, part-of-speech 
tagging, segmentation, chunking, named entity extraction, language recognition, and 
coreference resolution.12
• Lexicon Sentiment Dictionary A language used in politics.13
4.2  Machine learning approach
Machine Learning Algorithms can be used to categorize sentiments. Sentiment analysis is 
the process of identifying and quantifying the sentiment of text or audio using natural lan-
guage processing, text analysis, computational linguistics, and other techniques. Data Col-
lection from Social Media and processing step for sentiment analysis in Supervised Learn-
ing category shown in Fig.  5 and Unsupervised learning category shown in Fig.  6. There 
are two primary in Machine Learning approaches to sentiment analysis:
• Supervised machine learning
• Lexicon-based unsupervised learning
This task can be accomplished using both supervised and unsupervised learning methodol-
ogies. Unsupervised strategies for sentiment analysis by utilizing knowledge bases, ontolo-
gies, databases, and lexicons that include detailed knowledge that has been selected and Clustering
Algorith mClusters
Manual
Review
Manual
ReviewManual
ReviewProduction
Raw
Data
Fig. 6  General procedure for sentiment analysis in unsupervised machine learning category
13 http:// www. lexic oder. com.11 http:// alias-i. com/ lingp ipe.
12 http:// incub ator. apache. org/ openn lp.

==== Page 20 ====
5750 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
prepared specifically for sentiment analysis. Supervised learning methods are more com-
monly used due to their accurate results. These algorithms need to be trained on a training 
set before it is applied to the actual data. Features may be extracted from text data.
The machine learning technique utilizes syntactic and/or linguistic factors to address 
sentiment classification as a standard text classification issue utilizing syntactic and/or lin-
guistic factors. The categorization model associates the underlying record’s features with 
one of the class labels. The model is then used to predict a class label for a given instance 
of an unknown class. When an instance is assigned only one label, we have a difficult cat-
egorization challenge. When a probabilistic value of labels assigned to an instance, this is 
referred to as the soft classification issue. Machine learning enables systems to acquire new 
abilities without being explicitly programmed to do so. Sentiment analysis algorithms can 
be trained to read beyond simple definitions to comprehend contextual information, sar -
casm, and misapplied words. Commonly used algorithms include:
4.2.1  Naive Bayes (NB)
NB technique is utilized for both categorization and training. NB is a Bayesian classifi-
cation approach based on the theorem of bayes. NB is a probabilistic classifier that uses 
Bayes theorem to predict the probability of a given set of features as part of any particular 
label. The conditional probability that event A occurs given the individual probabilities of 
A and B and conditional probability of occurrence of event B. Here it is assumed that fea-
tures are not dependent. BoW model may be used for feature extraction. Generally, NB is 
applied when the training data size is small. NB classified as positive 10% more accurately 
than negative classification. This led to a decrease in average accuracy when it was taken. 
In the work of Kang et al. (2012) solved this problem using an improved version of the NB 
classifier. They tested this model on to restaurant review dataset. In work of Tripathy et al. 
(2015) used machine learning for the classification of reviews. They proposed a NB model 
along with a SVM model (Hajek et al. 2020; Bordes et al. 2014). They used a movie review 
dataset for training and testing the models. Two thousand reviews were trained after pre-
processing and vectorization of the training dataset. Count Vectorizer and TF-IDF were 
used before training the machine learning model. NB model proposed in Tripathy et al. 
(2015) gave an accuracy of 89.05 percent in a K-fold Cross-validation. The performance 
was better when compared to other models using the probabilistic NB algorithm (Calders 
and Verwer 2010).
4.2.2  Support vector machine (SVM)
SVM approach, which uses hyper-planes, is used to analyze data and define decision lim-
its in this technique. SVM are a type of non-probabilistic supervised learning technique 
that is frequently used for classification tasks. SVM primary objective is to determine the 
hyperplane that best separates the data into distinct classes. As a result, SVM seeks out 
the hyperplane with the highest feasible margin. In work of Li and Li (2013) used Sup-
port Vector Machines for sentiment polarity Classifier. Classifying reviews based on their 
quality is one of the many purposes for which SVM are utilized. Chen and Tseng (2011) 
used two multiple class SVM based approaches. First being One-vs- all SVM and Multi-
class SVM to classify reviews. Second, a method was proposed to evaluate the quality of 
the product review dataset quality by considering it as a classification problem. In work 
of Dave et al. (2003) worked on MP3 reviews and digital camera reviews. Borg and Boldt 

==== Page 21 ====
5751
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
(2020) used Linear SVM and VADER to predict customer reviews sentiment. The review 
belonged to Huge Swedish Telecom Corporation. The dataset was huge and consisted of 
168,  010 emails for training. They used Swedish sentiment Lexicon and VADER senti-
ment for initial labeling. Their (Li et al. 2019a) linear SVM model performed marvelously 
with an F1 score of 83.4 percent and a mean AUC of 0.896. Furthermore, their model 
highlighted a pattern that was predicted in Email conversations, using which sentiment of 
unseen Email was being predicted. In work of Xia et al. (2020) urged that subjectivity of 
opinion and credibility of expresser should be considered, unlike regular Binary Classifi-
cation Problem. A framework (Wu et al. 2020) was proposed to summarize opinions on 
microblogs. They found and retrieved the topics mentioned in the opinions related to users 
inquiries and then categorized the opinions using SVM. Ali et al. (2020) also worked on 
Twitter tweet data for the experiment. They found it to be beneficial to aggregate the opin-
ions for microblogs.
4.2.3  Logistic regression (LR)
A machine learning technique known as logistic regression works by multiplying an input 
value by a weight value. It is a classifier that learns which input properties are most helpful 
in identifying positive and negative classes. Logistic regression is a probabilistic regression 
analysis used for classification tasks. For binary classification applications, logistic regres-
sion is commonly deployed. When there are multiple explanatory variables, logistic regres-
sion calculates the ratio of odds. Logistic regression uses Maximum-likelihood to calculate 
best parameters. The independent variables may belong to any category i.e., Continuous, 
Discrete (ordinal and nominal). LR model (Hamdan et al. 2015) that the dependent vari-
able is binary, and there is little or no multicollinearity between the predicting variables.
4.2.4  Decision tree (DT)
DT Classifier is a supervised learning technique where a tree is built using the training 
example to classify the polarity of the text. DT uses a condition to divide data into parts 
recursively. RF are used frequently than DT which combines multiple DT to avoid over -
fitting and improve accuracy. DT may be built using several algorithms like CART, ID3, 
C5.0, C4.5 (Revathy and Lawrance 2017; Hssina et al. 2014; Singh and Gupta 2014; Patel 
and Prajapati 2018). These are used the identify the best fitting attribute which needs to 
be placed in the root (Gower 1966; Revathy and Lawrance 2017; Patil et al. 2012). Yan-
Yan et al. (2010)using a graph-based strategy, They proposed a propagation strategy for 
integrating sentence-level and sentence-level features. These two phrase characteristics are 
referred to as inter and intra document verification. They tried to argue that determining 
the sentiment classification of a review sentence entails more than simply examining the 
statement’s components. They investigated the camera domain and compared their results 
to those obtained using SVM and NB Classifiers. In the work of Jain et al. (2021a) tagged 
data that can be used to distinguish between genuine and fraudulent reviews. Additionally, 
we used two distinct datasets to test various machine learning techniques for categorization 
(Yelp hotel review dataset, Yelp restaurant review dataset).

==== Page 22 ====
5752 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
4.2.5  Maximum entropy (ME)
Conditional Exponential Classifiers: Conditional exponential classifiers encode labelled 
feature sets as vectors or arrays of integers. This vector is then used to compute feature 
weights, which can be used to select the most likely label for the feature set. Entropy is a 
measure of unpredictability. The Entropy is maximum for uniformly distributed data. The 
input data consists of texts and ratings from 1-5 polarity assigned to it. Most popularly 
used algorithms include SVM, NB, ME (Khairnar and Kinikar 2013; Kaufmann 2012) 
used ME Classifier to detect parallel sentences in any two-language pair, which have less 
training data. The other models used either required a massive amount of training data-
set or used a language-specific technique (Bergsma et al. 2012), but their model showed 
improved results could be produced using any pair of languages. This will enable the estab-
lishment of parallel corpora for various languages.
4.2.6  K‑nearest neighbours (KNN)
KNN algorithm is not extensively used in sentiment analysis but has shown to produce 
good results when trained carefully. It operates on the fact that the classification of a test 
sample will be similar to nearby neighbours. The K value may be selected on any hyper-
parameter tuning algorithms like Grid search or Randomized search cross validation. The 
polarity may be hard voted based on K nearest neighbors values, or soft addition may be 
done to find overall polarity.
4.2.7  Semi‑supervised learning
In this case, where the training dataset contains both labelled and unlabelled data, semi-
supervised learning appears to be a viable option (Zhu and Goldberg 2009). It is motivated 
that while gathering unlabelled data is relatively easy in many real-world applications, 
such as collecting articles from various blogs, labelling is expensive or labour-consuming 
because labelling the training dataset is typically performed by humans. Ortigosa-Hernán-
dez et al. (2012) introduced in the work of a real-world situation in which the user attitude 
is defined by three distinct (but related) target variables: subjectivity, sentiment solarity, 
and will to influence. In the work of Janjua et al. (2021) framework for semi-supervised 
machine learning that combines pre-processing and classification algorithms for unlabelled 
datasets.
Summary of different Sentiment Analysis Techniques its Advantage and Disadvantage 
shown in Table 5.
4.3  Hybrid approach
Hybrid approach combines machine learning and lexicon-based approaches. Hybrid is a 
term that refers to the combination of machine learning and lexicon-based techniques to 
sentiment analysis. The hybrid technique combines the two and is extremely popular, with 
sentiment lexicons playing a significant role in the majority of systems. Sentiment analysis 
is a hybrid approach, including both statistical and knowledge-based methods for polarity 
recognition. In the work of Hassonah et al. (2020a) proposed a hybrid machine learning 
approach using SVM and two feature selection techniques using the multi-verse optimizer 

==== Page 23 ====
5753
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3Table 4  Summary analysis of machine learning classification algorithm and its advantage and disadvantage
Technique Advantage Disadvantage
NB Easy to Implement
Less training data required
Requires less training time and data than other approachesAssumes that attributes are mutually independent
Model can face Zero Frequency Problem
Limited by class imbalance, as a probability value must be estimated for 
each conceivable value
SVM Most popular algorithm for SA
Gives good accuracy for large datasetFine tuning of model is very difficult and tedious
Long training time for large datasets
DT Easy to construct
Less time for training
Extensive dataset is not required for trainingModel is more prone to overfit
Highly Domain oriented model will be constructed
KNN Non-linear decision boundaries can built
Data can be added constantly with time without explicit trainingHigher prediction complexity for large dataset and dimensions
Equal importance is given to all features
RF The model is robust and very stable
Model is significantly less likely to overfitThe model is very complex
Longer time for training the data
ME Works on a probabilistic model. Therefore, lots of training data is not required Model is domain-oriented and will not perform well for different dataset
LR Simplest models to implement and training
No assumptions made about distributions of classes in feature spaceLinear boundaries are constructed
Accuracy is low for complex dataset
DNN In comparison to other DL models, this one is rather simple to implement Over-fitting problem
RNN Capture of sequential data, which is critical for sentiment text categorization Train more slowly than other models
Complicated and computationally costly
LSTM More efficient than RNN
Can map out long term dependenciesVery complex model
Training time is high
Bi-LSTM Can find out dependencies in both the directions
Better results can be obtained as compare to other methodComputationally very costly
Training is very slow
CNN High Accuracy, Fast Training Design and maintenance are time-consuming
Transformer Uses self-attention models for finding dependencies
Focuses only on important part of the sentenceLess popular and less used
Require huge data

==== Page 24 ====
5754 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3Table 5  Summary of different machine learning sentiment analysis techniques its advantage and disadvantage
Technique Advantage Disadvantage
Supervised learning Method With the ability to assess a wide range of topics, Effective-
ness in identifying the issue of subjectivityDesignated training documents capability of revealing subjective 
it demands human work and linguistic knowledge
Labeled data required
Unsupervised learning Method It do not need much human effort
Labeled data not requiredIts capacity to do so is not yet fully established
Semi-supervised learning Method Productive results in the presence of ambiguity If the unlabelled samples are noisy, the classifier suffers difficulty
Domain-oriented Sentiment Analysis Lexicon-
based Dictionary-basedInclude a two-tiered classification system that includes 
both positive and negative opinions
Classify sentiment on a certain scale
Eliminating objective sentences from a document can help 
improve sentiment analysis effectivenessNeglect the variety and depth of human feelings, as well as more 
emotional categories, aspects, and granularities
Depends on Techniques

==== Page 25 ====
5755
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
and Relief algorithms (Chang et al. 2020). Sentiment analysis task (Al Amrani et al. 2018) 
proposed using machine learning-based hybrid approach including RF and SVM. They 
have shown that the individual models of SVM and RF had an accuracy of 81.01 and 
82.03 percent, respectively, whereas the hybrid model combining both the algorithms had 
an accuracy of close to 84% in the product review dataset provided by amazon.com. Few 
researchers have proposed a hybrid architecture involving both lexicon-based and auto-
mated learning techniques to enhance the results. This is still a hot topic for researchers, 
and lots of research needs to be done.
In work of Hassonah et  al. (2020b) used Twitter data for training. As many as 6900 
tweets were extracted for training using the Twitter API. The results showed that their 
model outperforms most of the models while reducing the total number of features up to 
96%. They also pointed out the capacities of Hybrid models and concluded that Hybrid 
models could outperform all the models with proper architecture and precise selection of 
hyperparameters (Chang et al. 2020). The Hybrid model outperformed both the model in 
all other metrics and comparisons. They concluded that although their Hybrid model per -
forms better than individual models, there are still many research opportunities available to 
improve the performance of the hybrid model by tweaking and training the model. There 
are various Method Summary Analysis of Supervised Machine learning Classification 
Algorithm and its Advantage and Disadvantage shown in Table 4.
4.4  Neural network
Neural Network- In work of Van de Camp and Van den Bosch (2012) presented the use 
of Neural networks and SVM in supportive relationships. They used biographical texts to 
confirm their results. They were successful in marking relations between two individuals 
as neutral, positive, or negative. They concluded that a SVM and a single layer Neural 
Network had shown improved results. In work of Moraes et al. (2013a) presented a com-
parative empirical analysis between SVM and ANN in document-level sentiment analysis. 
The motive of this comparison is that SVM was widely being used as an algorithm for 
opinion mining as it had shown its capacity of getting accuracy. ANN, even though with 
good potential, did not have much attention. In Moraes et al. (2013b) they discussed all 
the aspects related to both ANN and SVM, including their requirements, their accuracies, 
and other contexts in which each model can perform the best. They have also implemented 
a consistent evaluation framework using well-known participants in supervised methods 
for selecting features and weights in orthodox BoW models. According to Medhat et al. 
(2014), Ravi and Ravi (2015) ANN had the edge over SVM in most of the cases, except 
very few cases where there was a data imbalance. They used product reviews of Books, 
GPS, and camera from amazon.com and Movie reviews to come to this conclusion. They 
also pointed out potential problems and drawbacks of each model. An important disadvan-
tage of each model is the computational cost taken in training by ANN and the computa-
tional cost of SVM model in run time.
The traditional RNN (Liu et al. 2016) were used for various NLP tasks as they used 
the previous time step information to predict the current time step, which ensures the 
usage of previous information and acts as memory as it remembers some information 
about a sequence. The most significant achievement or advantage of RNN was that it 
used previous information, thus remembering the previous information, which acted 
as memory. The main disadvantage of a traditional RNN is that it suffers from van-
ishing and exploding gradient descent, which means it cannot remember long-term 

==== Page 26 ====
5756 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
relationships in the sequence. In the case of Bi-LSTM (Plank et  al. 2016) uses the 
previous time step information along with next time step information to predict the 
current time step, as pass the sequence in both the ways forward as well as backward. 
Deep learning has identified new avenues for emulating the peculiarly human poten-
tial, for example-based learning. While this method of bottom-up learning is success-
ful for picture classification and object recognition, it is ineffective for NLP (Cambria 
et al. 2020). They blend top-down and bottom-up learning in their work using an array 
of symbolic and subsymbolic AI tools and apply them to the intriguing challenge of 
text polarity detection.
RNN (Donkers et al. 2017) have proven to improve results when trained on suffi-
cient data and computations. Variants of RNN (Pham and Le-Hong 2017) like LSTM 
(Bandara et  al. 2020), GRU (Cheng et  al. 2020), Bi-LSTM (Abid et  al. 2019; Cho 
and Lee 2019) have been used extensively in Sentiment analysis and related NLP task 
(Abid et al. 2019; Khan et al. 2016). Attention models are being introduced recently, 
which gives models an edge over another model. Recent transfer learning techniques 
using BERT (Devlin et  al. 2018) and GPT (Ethayarajh 2019) are gaining the atten-
tion of researchers as the model is already trained on a massive corpus for days on 
high-end GPU and Super computers. Weights can be fine-tuned using the training 
dataset to get accurate results. Deep learning-based techniques are becoming highly 
popular due to their outstanding performance in recent times. In the work of Yadav and 
Vishwakarma (2020) and Wadawadagi and Pagi (2020) gives a detailed assessment of 
common deep learning techniques that are widely employed in sentiment analysis. To 
detect the intensity of sentiments and emotions, a stacked-ensemble model based on 
deep learning was developed (Akhtar et  al. 2020). To better capture both long-term 
dependencies and local features, they employ GloVe word embedding, bidirectional 
GRU, bidirectional LSTM, attention mechanism, and CNN. The authors (Basiri et al. 
2021) suggested a model for sentiment analysis based on attention (CNN-RNN). In the 
work of Alhumoud and Al Wazrah (2021) conduct a systematic review of the literature 
to identify, categorize, and evaluate state-of-the-art works utilizing RNNs for Arabic 
sentiment analysis.
In 2017, researchers at the Google Brain team, Google Research and University of 
Toronto came up with the concept of Transformers in their paper (Vaswani et al. 2017) 
“Attention is all you need,” which revolutionized the NLP applications. This model is 
a stack of encoder-decoder models consisting of self-attention, multi-headed attention 
layers, and normalizing and feed-forward layers. The input is word embeddings along 
with the position vector, which specifies the position of the vector and the inputs can 
be given parallelly, unlike other models which take serial or sequential inputs. In the 
encoder part, Self attention is calculated for each token with the help of key-value and 
query vector. This is done multiple times and stacked over each other, forming a multi-
headed attention layer passed to the feed-forward layer (Kitaev and Klein 2018). There 
are six encoder and six decoder layers present in the model. The input to the decoder 
from an encoder is the two vectors K  and V . The decoder layer has three layers: the self 
attention layer, then a normalization layer which is the same as the encoder layer sec-
ond one is the encoder-decoder attention. The output self-attention and the input from 
encoder are used to produce an output vector followed a feed forward network along 
with a linear and a SoftMax layer (Juraska and Walker 2021). There are few skip con-
nections or residuals present in both encoders and decoders for better results.
There are various methods for sentiment analysis using machine learning and deep 
learning used by the author are shown in Table  6. we are using several terms in Table  6 

==== Page 27 ====
5757
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3Table 6  Sentiment analysis by using deep learning and machine learning method
References Method Lang. Dataset Task Result
Qiu et al. (2010) Rule Based English automotvieforums.com SA Recall = 0.375
Bai (2011) Markov Model, SVM, NB English IMDb SC SVM = 76.68, NB = 75.05
Fan and Chang (2011) Chi-square, SVM English ebay.com, wikipedia.com, 
epinions.comSA Chi (matching) Pos = 74.8 Neg 
= 57.6 Uni-gram Pos = 59.1 
Neg = 67.4
Rui et al. (2013) NB, SVM, rule-based English convinceme.net SC
Moraes et al. (2013b) NB, ANN, SVM English amazon.com SC Precision:Recall NB = 
0.98:0.65 ANN = 0.86:0.85 
SVM = 0.83:0.85
Socher et al. (2013) RNTN and RNN English Sentiment treebank SC
Lakkaraju et al. (2014) Joint Multi aspect sentiment 
model + RNTNEnglish Beer Review and camera 
reviewSC Beer = 77.04, Camera = 81.02
Vateekul and Koomsubha 
(2016)LSTM and Dynamic CNN English twitter SLC LSTM-75.30, DCNN-75.35
Poria et al. (2016) Temporal CNN,RNN English Spanish MOUD Youtube dataset Multi-modal SC AND EC CNN,RNN = 96.55
Zhao et al. (2017) CNN LSTM English amazon reviews on digital 
camera, phone and laptopSLC CNN-87.7, LSTM-87.9
Dragoni and Petrucci (2017) RNN English Dranziera dataset SC Dranziera dataset = 0.81
Chen et al. (2017) Deep fusion CNN English VSO : Flickr Images MVSO-
EN: the dataset includes 
concepts related to emo-
tions expressedMulti-modal SC VSO = 84.7, MVSO-EN = 
73.7
Wu and Chi (2017) Quadratic LSTM-RNN English Stanford sentiment 
treebank(SST) and SICK 
datasetSLC SST-86.6(binary) SICK-87.28
Uysal and Murphey (2017) CNN,LSTM, CNN+LSTM English IMDb, Sentiment 140, 
Nine public sentiment 
reviews,amazon multi 
domain datsetDocument level SC S140-71.5 Nine-77.1 IMDB-
89.1 Amazon-85.4

==== Page 28 ====
5758 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3Table 6  (continued)
References Method Lang. Dataset Task Result
Yuan et al. (2018) Bi-LSTM with attention 
mechanismEnglish amazon multi-domain and 
sanders twitter sentiment 
datasetMulti-domain SC amazon = 87.69, sanders = 
86.32
Zhang et al. (2018) Dynamic Memory Networks English semeval2014, semeval 2016 SC DMN = 0.84
Rao et al. (2018) LSTM English Yelp 2014, 2015, IMDb Document level SC Yelp2014-63.9 Yelp2015-63.8, 
IMDb-44.3
Naseem et al. (2020) Deep Intelligent Contextual 
EmbeddingEnglish Airline Dataset SA airline dataset = 0.95
Basiri et al. (2021) Attention based Bidirectional 
CNN-RNN Deep Model 
(ABCDM)Sentiment140, Airline, Kindle 
dataset, movie reviewSA (ABCDM) Kindle dataset = 
0.93, Airline = 0.92, movie 
review = 0.90, Sentiment140 
= 0.81

==== Page 29 ====
5759
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
as SA indicates Sentiment Analysis, SC indicates Sentiment Classification. Categori-
zation of an individual method as Supervised Learning Method, Unsupervised Learn-
ing Method, Semi-supervised Learning Method, Domain-oriented Sentiment Analysis 
Lexicon-based and Dictionary-based with its advantage and disadvantage are shown in 
Table 5 .
4.5  Other approaches
4.5.1  Aspect based sentiment analysis (ABSA)
ASBA is valuable and rapidly growing part of sentiment analysis that has gained promi-
nence in recent years. Three critical phases compose aspect-level sentiment analysis: 
aspect detection, polarity or sentiment categorization, and aggregation. Aspect detection 
is a critical stage in Aspect-based Sentiment analysis, as it is followed by sentiment cal-
culation. Aspects are mined either by using pre-defined implicit aspects or can be mined 
explicitly (Rana and Cheah 2016). Machine learning techniques, along with NLP tech-
niques, are used to mine aspects out of a sentence. Aspect level sentiment analysis is most 
popular among product reviews or hotel reviews, as this approach will help them identify 
various aspects focused by the review writers and help them rectify aspects that have a 
negative sentiment (Tran et al. 2019). This is useful to both consumers as well as produc-
ers. For instance, for a hotel review dataset, implicit aspects may be defined as A= taste, 
service, value, miscellaneous. For instance, consider a review R= “the food was awesome, 
but service was slow”, this review consists of two aspects which are food and service, i.e., 
A = taste, service and the corresponding sentiment words are awesome and slow i.e. S = 
awesome, slow which be classified as P = positive, negative which when aggregated is 
neutral. If we consider the sentiment scores based on their positiveness or negativeness, the 
aggregated polarity may vary.
Aspect level sentiment analysis has many challenges as it to identify the individ-
ual aspect(implicit or explicit) and classify as per sense is challenging to mine aspects 
(Tubishat et al. 2018), Therefore, complex algorithms like LSTM, Bi-LSTM or pre-trained 
models like BERT, GPT-2 may be used to accomplish the task. The researchers avoid 
vanilla RNN as it faces many problems like vanishing and exploding gradient descent. It 
is seen that recently attention-based models are being used in aspect detection. The next 
step after aspect detection is polarity assignment to those mined aspects. There are multiple 
approaches to perform the task, Machine learning algorithms may be used to complete the 
task, or a dictionary-based approach may be used. Assigning the polarity to the aspect an 
aggregation score may be calculated to find the overall polarity of the sentence. Hard or 
soft voting is used to determine the sentence’s overall sentiment. Consumer sentiment is 
assessed concerning qualitative content, quantitative ratings, and cultural factors in order to 
forecast consumer recommendation decisions (Jain et al. 2021c, d).
4.5.2  Transfer learning
Transfer learning is one of the advances techniques in AI, where a pre-trained model can 
use its acquired knowledge to transfer to a new model. Transfer learning uses the simi-
larity of data, distribution, and task. The new model directly uses the previously learned 
features without needing any explicit training data. Training data may be used to fine-tune 

==== Page 30 ====
5760 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
the model to a new task. This technique can be used to transfer knowledge of one domain 
to another domain. This methodology has grown as a transfer learning technique because it 
can produce great accuracy and results while requiring significantly less training time than 
training a new model from scratch (Celik et al. 2020). Transfer learning is frequently used 
in sentiment analysis to classify sentiments from one field to another field. In Meng et al. 
(2019) developed a multiple-layer CNN based transfer learning approach. They used the 
weights and biases of a convolutional and pooling layer from a pre-trained model to model. 
They used the features from pre-trained model and fine-tuned weights of Fully connected 
layers. This approach can produce good results when large labeled data sets are absent and 
similarities in the tasks accomplished by the models. In the work of Bartusiak et al. (2015), 
applied Transfer Learning to propose the sentiment analysis challenge. They used this tech-
nique to evaluate the sentiment at the document level in the polish language. They used 
N-gram and Bi-gram to encode complex words and phrases. They used two different data-
sets from two different domains to provide evidence that knowledge gained from the train-
ing model suing dataset of one domain can be used for a dataset of another domain. Senti-
ment Analysis by using Deep learning and Machine Learning Method as shown in Table 6.
In 2018, Google AI Language Researchers open-sourced a new model for NLP called 
BERT. It has a breakthrough and has taken the industry of deep learning by storm due 
to its performance. In the work of Han et al. (2021) Transformer network revolutionized 
the area of NLP and replaced the usage of LSTM and Bi-LSTM. The main advantage is 
that Transformers do not suffer from vanishing or exploding gradient problems as they do 
not use recurrence at all, and also, they are faster and less expensive to train. BERT is 
an extension of the Transformers model proposed (Vaswani et al. 2017) in the “Attention 
is all you need” paper. BERT uses transformers, an attention mechanism that learns con-
textual relationships between words or sub-words in a given text. The input in this model 
contains the word embeddings and position embeddings, unlike transformers, but also has 
an extra vector representing the sentence it belongs to handle two or more sentences at 
a time. BERT consists of encoders based transformers; the encoder part is similar to the 
transformer encoder. BERT has two models BERT base with 12 encoders stacked with 
110 million parameters and BERT large model with 24 encoders stacked with 330 mil-
lion parameters. BERT model trained in two stages pre-training and fine-tuning. This is the 
model main advantage as the fine-tuning with the dataset can be done as per the task. Such 
as sentiment analysis (Singh et al. 2021a), aspect detection (Li et al. 2019b), spam detec-
tion (Yaseen et al. 2021), Transformer models for text-based emotion detection (Acheam-
pong et al. 2021), impact of coronavirus(singh2021sentiment). A single sentence or a pair 
of sentences can be represented as a successive array of tokens using the task-specific 
BERT architecture (Gao et al. 2019). In the work of Sun et al. (2019) transform ABSA to 
a sentence-pair classification problem, such as question answering and natural language 
inference, by constructing an auxiliary sentence from the aspect. BERT pre-trained model 
has been fine-tuned.
4.6  Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA)
MSA adds a new level to standard text-based sentiment analysis by incorporating addi-
tional modalities such as audio and visual data. Several studies have attempted to discern 
sentiment analysis in social multimedia using a variety of multimodal inputs, including vis-
ual, audio, and textual data (Soleymani et al. 2017). Social multimedia sites such as You-
Tube, video blogs (vlogs), or spoken evaluations contain expressions of sentiment, such as 

==== Page 31 ====
5761
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
a video portraying a person discussing a product or a movie. Typically, spoken transcripts 
are examined separately from face and voice expressions, and the results of unimodal, 
text-based sentiment analysis are combined in post to create a “MSA” system. It may be 
bimodal, consisting of various combinations of two modalities, or trimodal, consisting of 
three modalities (Stappen et al. 2020). The majority of MSA techniques focus on develop-
ing complex fusion processes, ranging from attention-based models to tensor-based fusion.
MSA is a rapidly expanding area of study. A key area of opportunity in this subject is 
to enhance the mechanism of multimodal fusion. In the work of Majumder et al. (2018) 
and Poria et al. (2018b) feature fusion technique that is hierarchical in nature, merging the 
two modalities first and subsequently all three modalities. MSA of human spoken language 
has developed into a significant subject of research (Liu 2012; Poria et al. 2017). Unlike 
traditional emotional learning tasks that require the use of single modalities (text, speech), 
multimodal learning makes use of many sources of information, including language (text/
transcripts/ASR), audio/acoustic, and visual modalities.
5  Performance evaluation parameter
The majority of state-of-the-art sentiment analysis makes use of accuracy, F1 score, and 
precision. Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: a review utilizes recall and 
accuracy as performance metrics. These metrics are as follows:
True Positive(TP): The number of positive reviews that have been correctly classified.
True Negative(TN):The number of negative reviews correctly classified as negative.
False Positive(FP): Number of incorrectly classified positive review.
False Negative(FN): Number of incorrectly classified negative review.
Precision Precision is defined as the ratio of correctly classified positive samples to 
the total number of samples predicted as positive. This metric can be used to indicate the 
strength of the prediction. i.e., if a model has 100 percent precision, all the samples evalu-
ated as positive are confidently positive.
Recall Recall is also known as sensitivity. It is defined as the ratio of actual posi-
tive instances out of a total number of positive instances present in the classification. It 
measures the misclassifications done by the model. Precision and recall are inversely (1) Precision =TP
TP+FPFig. 7  Confusion matrix
True Positive False Negative
False Postive True NegativeACTUA L
Negative Positive
PREDICTEDPositive Negative

==== Page 32 ====
5762 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
proportional to each other. Therefore it is impossible to increase both Precision and Recall 
at the same time. A recall is used in cases where the capture of a class is dominant.
F1 score F1 score is the harmonic mean of Recall and Precision. It is the most used met-
ric after Accuracy. It is used when we are unable to choose between Precision or Recall. F1 
score manages the trade-off between recall and precision.
Accuracy This is the most commonly used metric in all the classification tasks. Accu-
racy defines how accurate the model is. It is the ratio of correct classification to total pre-
dictions done by the model. Accuracy is a good metric to use for sentiment classification 
for a balanced dataset.
Specificity Specificity Is the opposite of sensitivity. It is not popularly used by research-
ers but is helpful in few domains. It Is the ratio of the total number of correctly classified 
negative samples to negative classes actually present in the confusion matrix as shown in 
Fig. 7.
Confusion matrix A confusion matrix is a table that is frequently used to evaluate a cat-
egorization model’s (or “classifier’s”) effectiveness on a set of training test data values are 
known. While the confusion matrix Fig.  7. itself is rather straightforward to comprehend, 
the associated language might be perplexing.
TF-IDF Term Frequency refer to as number of times term present in a document. TF 
which counts the number of times a term word appears in the document Because each doc-
ument is varied in length, it is likely that a term will appear far more frequently in longer 
documents than in shorter ones. As a result, the phrase frequency is frequently divided by 
the document length.(2) Recall =TP
TP+FN
(3) Term Frequency =(Number of times term t present in a document )
(Total number of terms in the document )
SA APPLICA TIONS Review Analysis
Stock MarketSentiments of
Customer Review s
Aspect Analysis
Trend PredictionStock Price
PredictionHealth Care
Experince AnalysisReputation
ManagmentBusiness
IntelligenceProduct AnalysisMarket Research an d
Competitor Analysis
Fig. 8  Applications of sentiment analysis

==== Page 33 ====
5763
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
6  Applications of sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis has many applications, ranging from analyzing customer opinion, ana-
lyzing patient mental health status based on posts done on social media. Furthermore, 
technological advances such as Blockchain, IoT, Cloud Computing, and Big Data have 
broadened the range of applications for Sentiment Analysis, allowing it to be used in prac-
tically any discipline. Few most frequently used application in sentiment analysis shown in 
Fig.  8. A few significant domains and industries where Sentiment Analysis is applied are 
described below:
6.1  Business analysis
Sentiment analysis in the field of business intelligence offers several benefits. Additionally, 
firms can utilize sentiment analysis data to improve products, investigate client feedback 
and develop an innovative marketing strategy. The most typical use of sentiment analy -
sis in the field of business intelligence is analyzing customers impressions of services or 
products. These studies, however, are not limited to product producers; consumers may 
use them to review items and make more informed decisions. Sentiment analysis in busi-
ness intelligence has various benefits. For example, Businesses can use the results of Senti-
ment Analysis to make product enhancements, examine consumer feedback, or develop a 
new marketing plan (Han et al. 2019). Sentiment analysis is most frequently used in busi-
ness intelligence to examine customers perceptions of products or services. However, these 
analyses are not limited to product producers; consumers may also use them to compare 
items and make a more informed choice. For eight years, (Bose et al. 2020) service food 
reviews on amazon.com. Emotion lexicon, which classifies them into eight different emo-
tions and two moods (positive and negative). They found that sentiment analysis may be 
used to identify customer behaviours and hazards and increase customer satisfaction.
6.1.1  Product reviews
As the e-commerce business is burgeoning, so is the number of products sold and reviews 
given from the customers. Sentiment analysis one them will help customers choose better 
products (Paré 2003). Phrase level or aspect level (Schouten and Frasincar 2015) sentiment 
analysis performed on product reviews. Sentiment analysis can determine what the cus-
tomer thinks about its latest product after launching or examining comments and reviews. 
Keywords for a specific product feature (food, service, cleanliness) can be chosen, and a 
sentiment analysis framework (Mackey et al. 2015) can be trained to identify and analyze 
only the necessary information.(4) Inverse Document Frequency (IDF )=(Total Number of document )
(number of terms t in the document )
(5) TF−IDF =(TF )∗(IDF)

==== Page 34 ====
5764 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
6.1.2  Market research and competitor analysis
Market research is perhaps the most common sentiment analysis application, besides brand 
image monitoring and consumer opinion investigation. The purpose of sentiment analysis 
is to determine who is emerging among competitors and how marketing campaigns com-
pare. It can be utilized to acquire a complete picture of a brand’s and its competitors con-
sumer base from the ground up. Sentiment analysis may collect data from several platforms 
Twitter, Facebook, blogs, deliver tangible results, and overcome difficulties in business 
intelligence.
6.2  Healthcare and medical domain
This is one of the industries where sentiment analysis is being utilized in recent times. 
Data can be collected from various sources like surveys, Twitter (Carvalho and Plastino 
2021), blogs, news articles, reviews, etc. This data can then be analyzed for various 
use cases, one of them being an evaluation of standards and analysis of new updates in 
the medical field. Domain experts are researching actively to find more uses of senti-
ment analysis and other NLP applications (Ebadi et  al. 2021). This application helps 
healthcare service providers collect and evaluate patient moods, epidemics, adverse 
drug reactions, and diseases to improve healthcare services. In work of Jiménez-Zafra 
et  al. (2019) pointed out the difficulties in applying sentiment analysis in health care 
because of the specific and unique terminologies used in the domain. In work of Clark 
et al. (2018) used Twitter tweets concerning patient’s experiences as an add-on to ana-
lyze public health. Over a year, they generated roughly five million breast cancer-related 
tweets using Twitter’s Streaming API. After pre-processing, the tweets were classified 
with a standard LR classifier and a CNN model. Positive treatment experiences, rally -
ing support, and expanding public awareness were all linked. In conclusion, applying 
sentiment analysis to analyze patient-generated data on social media can help determine 
patients’ needs and views.
6.2.1  Reputation management
The application of sentiment analysis in diverse markets is brand monitoring and repu-
tation management. Evaluating how customers view their brand, product, or service is 
beneficial to fashion companies, marketing agencies, IT companies, hotel chains, media 
channels, and other businesses. Sentiment analysis tool adds more variety and intelli-
gence to the brand’s and their products portrayal. It enables businesses to track how 
their customers perceive their brands and highlight the precise data about their attitudes. 
Look for trends and changes, and pay attention to influencers presentations. Altogether, 
sentiment analysis can be utilized in automating the media surveillance system as well 
as the alarm system that goes with it. Keep track of the brand’s discussions and ratings 
on various social media platforms.

==== Page 35 ====
5765
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
6.3  Review analysis
Sentiment analysis is extensively used in the domain of Entertainment. Reviews of 
movie, shows, and short films may be analyzed to determine the viewer’s response 
(Kumar et al. 2019). This not only helps viewers make a better choice but also helps 
good contents gain popularity. Sentence level (Lin and He 2009) Sentiment Analysis 
has commonly used in this domain to determine the overall sentiment of the reviews 
given accurately. The travel industry has sought to improve client experiences by devel-
oping machine learning and online consumer recommendation systems based on intel-
ligent, data-driven decision-making techniques (Jain et al. 2021f) also discussed catego-
rizing consumer decisions as positive or negative based on online reviews provided by 
the valuable consumer(Jain et al. 2021e).
6.3.1  Customer reviews
Sentimental analysis on reviews on hotels and restaurants can help customers choose 
better and also help the owners improve. Aspect-based sentiment analysis done on 
hotels and restaurants will help identify the aspect with the most positive reviews and 
negative reviews, on which Hotels can work and make it better. (Sann and Lai 2020; 
Al-Smadi et al. 2018) According to sentiment analysis, this is one of the most attractive 
industries. Sentimental analysis on reviews on hotels and restaurants can help customers 
choose better and also help the owners improve (Zhao et al. 2019). ABSA (Akhtar et al. 
2017) done on hotels and restaurants will help identify the aspect with the most positive 
reviews and negative reviews, on which hotels can work and make it better. The service 
providers profit the most since they may extract the aspect that receives the most nega-
tive feedback and improve on it.
6.3.2  Aspect analysis
Aspect-based sentiment analysis can help businesses make the most use of the massive 
amounts of data they create. The aspect-based method will enable companies to extract 
the most important aspects of client feedback and service.
6.4  Stock market
One of the applications of sentiment analysis is stock price prediction. It can be done 
by analyzing all the news about the stock market and predicting the stock price trends. 
Data can be collected from various sources like Twitter, news articles, blogs, etc. Sen-
tence level sentiment analysis can be done on these texts, after which the overall polar -
ity of texts will be decided of news of a particular company. In work of Xing et  al. 
(2018) used to determine whether the trend will be rising or decreasing. Positive news 
tended to lead to an upward trend, whereas negative news tended to lead to a downward 
trend. Bitcoin and other digital cryptocurrencies relate to a novel technology known as 
Blockchain. Participants inside the blockchain network verify the digital transactions 
using peer to peer consensus methods. However, investigations which apply Sentiment 
Analysis towards the area of blockchain technology are still infrequent, and those that 
do exist, such as work in Kraaijeveld and De Smedt (2020), have employed sentiment 

==== Page 36 ====
5766 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
analysis to anticipate the value of digital cryptocurrencies. In the work of Rognone et al. 
(2020) investigated the influence of news sentiment on cryptocurrencies like bitcoin and 
other standard currencies volatility, volume, and returns.
6.5  Voice of customers
Take all user feedback from the call centres, emails, surveys, chats, and web and com-
bine and assess it. Sentiment analysis will allow categorizing and organizing data in 
order to detect trends and reoccurring issues and worries. Sentiment analysis may aid 
in identifying an appropriate customer group and subsequent value proposition develop-
ment, both of which are essential components of a successful business operation. On the 
other hand, to stay updated and maintain the product in demand, it must have the finger 
on the pulse of its customers.
6.6  Social media monitoring
Sentiment analysis of social data will monitor client sentiment 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week, in real-time when anything unpleasant starts to circulate, which can rap-
idly reply and bolster image when getting favourable mentions. That also obtains con-
sistent, reliable information on clients, which can track progress from season to season 
for the decision-making process. Because individuals provide their comments without Table 7  Study of various challenges in sentiment analysis as per structure of data
References Challenge Structure of review
Heerschop et al. (2011) Negation Semi structure data(adjective)
Lapponi et al. (2012) Negation + huge lexicon Semi Structured data
Remus (2013) Negation + bi polar words Semi structured data , sentences or 
topic documents
Chunping et al. (2014) Domain decencies Unstructured data, Emotion reviews
Hu et al. (2014) Short abbreviations Unstructured data
Kiritchenko et al. (2014) Emotions unstructured data
Cao et al. (2015) Ambiguity Semi-structured data
Flekova et al. (2015) Bi-polar words Unstructured data
Kasmuri and Basiron (2017) Opinion Spam Detections Structured data
Shayaa et al. (2018) Incomplete information and Sparsity Unstructured data and Structured data
Salah et al. (2019) and Mite-
Baidal et al. (2018)Domain dependency Unstructured data
Oueslati et al. (2020) Language dependency Unstructured data
Zuo et al. (2020) Implicit language Unstructured data
Acheampong et al. (2020) Emotion detection unstructured data
Kumar and Garg (2020) Multi-source data fusion Unstructured data, Structured data
Parvin et al. (2021) Informal speech, and slangs Unstructured data
Mendon et al. (2021) Multiple class classifications Unstructured data, Structured data

==== Page 37 ====
5767
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
being asked, social media posts frequently present some of the most honest points of 
view regarding products, services, and enterprises. They are obliged to express their 
feelings to the rest of the world.
7  Challenges in sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis comes with various challenges ranging from computational cost to 
informal writing and the presence of variations in languages. We look at the sentiment 
analysis challenges that occur more frequently with certain types of sentiment structure, 
as shown in Table 7 . Few significant challenges faced in sentiment analysis are:
7.1  Structured sentiments
Structured sentiments are found in formal sentiment reviews, they are more focused 
on formal problems such as books or research. Because the authors are professionals, 
they are capable of writing thoughts or observations concerning scientific or factual 
concerns.
7.2  Semi‑structured sentiments
Semi-Structured Sentiments fall between structured and unstructured sentiments. These 
require an awareness of numerous review-related concerns. This style, which is depend-
ent on benefits and drawbacks, is listed separately by the authors, and the pros and cons 
sections are typically comprised of brief sentences (Birjali et al. 2021; Hussein 2018; 
Ebrahimi et al. 2017; Mohammad 2017).
7.3  Unstructured sentiment
Unstructured Sentiment is an informal and free-flowing writing type in which the writer 
is not constrained by any rules (Mukherjee et al. 2013). The text may comprise multi-
ple sentences, each of which could potentially include both pros and cons. For exam-
ple, unstructured reviews offer more opinion information than their formal counterparts 
(Levashina et al. 2014). A feature explicitly stated: If a feature occurs in a review sen-
tence’s segment/chunk, the feature is referred to as an explicit feature of the product. 
For instance, in the segment, the image is marvelous. The image is an explicit feature. If 
a feature f is not explicitly mentioned in the review section but is implied, it is referred 
to as an implicit feature of the product (Liu et al. 2010; Elith et al. 2011). For instance, 
in the section, it is extremely pricey, and expensive is a feature sign. In light of the criti-
cal nature of sentiment analysis, this study examines the relationship between respond-
ents perspective structures and sentiment analysis issues.

==== Page 38 ====
5768 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
7.4  Methodological challenges
The majority of sentiment analysis in the modern day is data-driven machine learning 
models adapting a sentiment analysis algorithm developed for product evaluations to 
evaluate microblog postings is an unanswered question. Additionally, how to deal with 
ambiguous situations and irony are key difficulties in sentiment analysis. For instance, 
a sarcastic remark about an object is intended to communicate a negative sentiment; 
yet, conventional sentiment analysis algorithms frequently miss this meaning. Numer -
ous methods have been proposed (Castro et  al. 2019; Medhat et  al. 2014) for detect-
ing sarcasm in language. However, the problem is far from resolved, as comedy is very 
culturally particular, and it is challenging for a machine to understand unique(and fre-
quently fairly detailed) cultural allusions. In the work of Poria et al. (2018a) suggest by 
incorporating vocal and facial expressions into multimodal sentiment analysis; This can 
improve its success rate in identifying sarcastic comments. Furthermore, individuals 
express sentiment for social reasons unrelated to their fundamental dispositions. For 
instance, a person may transmit positive or negative thoughts to adhere to a specific 
topic A norm or express and define one’s identity. Finally, machine-based sentiment 
analysis is confined to outward expressions of sentiment, and conclusive information 
about an individual expressed ideas is lacking.
Sentiment analysis is applicable to different types of data, each of which presents par -
ticular challenges. Sentiment analysis of human to machine and human to human interac-
tions requires very similar datasets to those used for emotion recognition. As a result, it has 
the same limitations in terms of size and unreliable ground truth. In the work of McDuff  
et al. (2014) have illustrated how webcams may be used to collect a large number of emo-
tional reactions, including sentiment. While this degrades the audiovisual capture qual-
ity, it achieves a scale that is not conceivable in the laboratory. Additionally, there is the 
issue of labeling confidential laboratory data, which prohibits those permitted to examine 
the data from performing the time-consuming operation of labeling. As a result, they are 
restricted in terms of the amount of data they can collect in the laboratory and our ability 
to label huge volumes of data. There are several methods for assessing feelings, but word 
embedding algorithms such as word2vec and GloVe turn words into meaningful vectors. 
These methods, on the other hand, ignore the word’s sentiment information (Wankhade 
et al. 2021).
Multimedia information on websites is the second source of multi-modal sentiment 
data. Social media provides us with a wealth of data that helps us to scale. The issue is that 
the data acquired vary in terms of quality and context, and the data is limited to specific 
populations that are more prevalent on the internet. However, because the data is publicly 
available, crowd sourcing may be utilized to categorize it easily. According to the available 
data on MSA, people are more prone to communicate positive or negative ideas online, 
resulting in a scarcity of neutral opinions represented in all MSA studies evaluated.
Sarcasm People tend to use sarcasm when they do not meet their expectations. It is very 
tough for machines to pick up sarcasm as many factors affect sarcasm, such as tone, situ-
ation, background information, etc. Sarcasm is a satirical remark that may look like prais-
ing but in reality. Sarcasm is used by people to criticize. Sarcasm is a type of sentiment in 
which people express implicit information, usually the polar opposite of the message con-
tent, in order to emotionally hurt someone or mock something. Sarcasm detection in text 
mining is one of the most challenging tasks in NLP, but it has lately become an interesting 

==== Page 39 ====
5769
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
research subject due to its usefulness in enhancing social media sentiment analysis (Eke 
et al. 2020).
Informal style of writing Informal style of writing is the biggest challenge to all NLP 
tasks, including sentiment analysis. People are very casual about writing reviews or texts; 
they tend to use acronyms, emojis, shortcuts in their text which is very hard to pick up. 
Acronyms can be handled if they are universal. There are a lot of regional acronyms14 
which change and grow day by day.
Grammatical errors Grammatical errors are very common in informal texts and can be 
handled, but only to some extent; spelling errors can also be corrected limited. It is very 
difficult to burgeoning the spelling mistake of users uniquely every time. The accuracy of 
sentiment analysis and NLP tasks may be improved if these errors can be handled and 
corrected.
Computational cost To get better accuracy, we need to increase the training data size 
and complicate the model, which will exponentially increase the computational cost of the 
model for training; high-end GPU may be required to train a model with a huge corpus. 
Models like SVM, NB are not computationally costly, but neural networks and attention 
models have shown that they are computationally costly.
Availability of data As NLP and sentiment analysis is a recently boomed technology, 
the Availability of data may also be a challenge in some cases. Although data is available 
in Twitter for sentiment analysis, high-quality training data is challenging for supervised 
learning algorithms. Training data for ABSA is challenging to find online therefore needs 
to be prepared manually. The training data of one domain may not be applicable and valu-
able to other domains. For instance, a model trained on a hotel review dataset is not helpful 
in predicting sentiments of a stock or mutual fund dataset and vice versa.
Adaptations of language Languages change as they move to different regions and 
places; although the base language remains the same, many factors influence language, 
such as language prominence, pronunciation, literacy rate, etc. For instance, consider Eng-
lish language, which is widely spoken worldwide, but it is seen that many English varieties 
are spoken worldwide based on the regions like Indian, American, British, etc. Lots of 
words are used differently depending upon the region there are used. For instance, consider 
the word “thong” which means flip-flops or slippers in Australia but means undergarments 
in the UK. Similarly, different spellings for the same word, such as “color” and “colour,” 
mean the same but are spelled differently in different regions. This will create duplicates 
and may affect the accuracy and computational cost of the model. Language barrier is the 
hardest of the challenges to NLP. There are thousands of languages spoken worldwide, 
although NLP techniques are hardly available to 5-10 languages, and resources are widely 
available for English.
Phrases containing degree adverbs and intensifiers Adverbs such as slightly, barely, and 
moderately are used to quantify the sentiments. For instance, consider review r1= “The 
food is barely good” and r2= “the food is really good”. r1 is considered neutral or slightly 
positive, whereas r2 is considered to be highly positive. The adverbs ’barely’ and ’really’ 
decide the extent of positiveness and the word ’good’. Similarly, intensifiers also quantify 
the sentiment of the sentences. Intensifiers like very, too are used to increase the positive-
ness or negativeness of the token. For instance, “too good” is considered to be more posi-
tive than “good.” Intensifiers and degree adverbs impose a challenge on aggregating the 
14 https:// www. dicti onary. com/e/ acron  yms.

==== Page 40 ====
5770 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
sentiment values and comparing two sentences of the same sentiment rather than differenti-
ating between two sentences of opposite polarity.
The theoretical challenges employ a variety of approaches to enhance performance 
when answering the particular sentiment challenges (Hunter et al. 2012). The theoretical 
kind makes extensive PoS tagging and lexicon-based approaches (Taboada et  al. 2011). 
The second approach is the BoW technique (El-Din 2016). Finally, there is the ME 
approach. However, the most frequently used technique is the N-gram technique, which is 
based on phrases and expressions when it comes to technical sentiment challenges (Wilson 
et al. 2009). As well as the method that is used the least is the lexicon-based approach.
Mixed Code Data Code-mixing is the employment of vocabulary and grammar from 
different languages in same sentence (Pravalika et al. 2017; Poria et al. 2020). Code Mix-
ing is a linguistic phenomenon that can occur in a multilingual situation where speakers 
speak multiple languages. This phenomenon is becoming increasingly common as com-
munication between groups of people who speak different languages grows. Code-Mixing: 
A review of Facebook posts created by Hindi-English users revealed a high code-mixing 
level in the posts. The problems in the Hindi-English code-mixed text were reported using 
a PoS tag annotated corpus. (Vijay et al. 2018) a system that can detect the language of 
the words, normalize them to their standard forms, assign their PoS tag, and split them 
into chunks to handle the problem of shallow parsing of Hindi-English code-mixed social 
media content. It’s frequent in multilingual societies and presents considerable difficulty to 
NLP tasks like sentiment analysis. The lack of a formal grammar for code-mixed phrases 
makes it challenging to identify compositional semantics, which is critical for conducting 
sentiment analysis using rule-based and machine learning-based techniques. Furthermore, 
because mixing is up to the individual, there are no predetermined mixing guidelines, 
which is one of the significant drawbacks (Chatterjere et al. 2020). As a result, in order to 
conduct sentiment analysis on code-mixed data, new language models must be developed. 
In work of Chatterjere et al. (2020) and Singh et al. (2018) language modeling challenge 
for code-mixed Hinglish text was investigated. However, despite the fact that Code Mix-
ing is a significant concern, few research has addressed it as thoroughly as the study of Lal 
et al. (2019) (English-Hindi) code-mixed data for sentiment analysis, the authors presented 
a hybrid architecture.
8  Conclusion
This article discussed sentiment analysis and associated techniques. The primary objective 
of this work is to investigate and complete classification methods with their advantage and 
disadvantages in sentiment analysis. To begin, several levels of sentiment analysis were 
discussed, followed by a quick overview of necessary procedures such as data collection 
and feature selection. Next, methods of sentiment categorization systems were classified 
and compared in terms of their advantages and disadvantages. Due to their simplicity and 
excellent accuracy, supervised machine learning methods are often the widely utilized 
technique in this discipline. Classification using NB and SVM algorithms are commonly 
used as benchmarks against which newly proposed approaches can be compared. Several of 
the most common application areas are discussed then the survey examines the significance 
and consequences of sentiment analysis challenges in sentiment evaluation. The compari-
son investigates the relationship between the structure of sentiment reviews and the dif-
ficulties associated with sentiment analysis. This comparison reveals domain dependence, 

==== Page 41 ====
5771
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
which is essential for identifying sentiment issues. The future work will consist of continu-
ously expanding the comparison area with additional findings. The subsequent challenges 
illustrate that sentiment analysis is still a relatively unexplored subject of study.
References
Abid F, Alam M, Yasir M, Li C (2019) Sentiment analysis through recurrent variants latterly on convolu-
tional neural network of twitter. Futur Gener Comput Syst 95:292–308
Acheampong FA, Wenyu C, Nunoo-Mensah H (2020) Text-based emotion detection: advances, challenges, 
and opportunities. Eng Rep 2(7):e12189
Acheampong FA, Nunoo-Mensah H, Chen W (2021) Transformer models for text-based emotion detection: 
a review of BERT-based approaches. Artif Intell Rev 54:5789–5829
Adomavicius G, Kwon Y (2011) Improving aggregate recommendation diversity using ranking-based tech-
niques. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 24(5):896–911
Ahmad S, Asghar MZ, Alotaibi FM, Awan I (2019) Detection and classification of social media-based 
extremist affiliations using sentiment analysis techniques. Hum Centric Comput Inf Sci 9(1):1–23
Ahmad SR, Bakar AA, Yaakub MR (2019) A review of feature selection techniques in sentiment analysis. 
Intell Data Anal 23(1):159–189
Akhtar MS, Ekbal A, Cambria E (2020) How intense are you? predicting intensities of emotions and senti-
ments using stacked ensemble [application notes]. IEEE Comput Intell Mag 15(1):64–75
Akhtar N, Zubair N, Kumar A, Ahmad T (2017) Aspect based sentiment oriented summarization of hotel 
reviews. Procedia Comput Sci 115:563–571
Al Amrani Y, Lazaar M, El Kadiri KE (2018) Random forest and support vector machine based hybrid 
approach to sentiment analysis. Procedia Comput Sci 127:511–520
Al-Smadi M, Qawasmeh O, Al-Ayyoub M, Jararweh Y, Gupta B (2018) Deep recurrent neural network vs. 
support vector machine for aspect-based sentiment analysis of Arabic hotels’ reviews. J Comput Sci 
27:386–393
Alhumoud SO, Al Wazrah AA (2021) Arabic sentiment analysis using recurrent neural networks: a review. 
Artif Intell Rev 55:707–748
Ali SM, Noorian Z, Bagheri E, Ding C, Al-Obeidat F (2020) Topic and sentiment aware microblog summa-
rization for twitter. J Intell Inf Syst 54(1):129–156
Annett M, Kondrak G (2008) A comparison of sentiment analysis techniques: Polarizing movie blogs. In: 
Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence. Springer, pp 25–35
Arora A, Chakraborty P, Bhatia M, Mittal P (2021) Role of emotion in excessive use of twitter during 
COVID-19 imposed lockdown in India. J Technol Behav Sci 6(2):370–377
Baashar Y, Alhussian H, Patel A, Alkawsi G, Alzahrani AI, Alfarraj O, Hayder G (2020) Customer rela-
tionship management systems (CRMS) in the healthcare environment: a systematic literature review. 
Comput Stand Interfaces 71:103442
Baccianella S, Esuli A, Sebastiani F (2010) Sentiwordnet 3.0: an enhanced lexical resource for sentiment 
analysis and opinion mining. Lrec 2010:2200–2204
Bai X (2011) Predicting consumer sentiments from online text. Decis Support Syst 50(4):732–742
Bai X, Liu P, Zhang Y (2020) Investigating typed syntactic dependencies for targeted sentiment classifica-
tion using graph attention neural network. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process 29:503–514
Balaji T, Annavarapu CSR, Bablani A (2021) Machine learning algorithms for social media analysis: a sur -
vey. Comput Sci Rev 40:100395
Bandara K, Bergmeir C, Smyl S (2020) Forecasting across time series databases using recurrent neural net-
works on groups of similar series: a clustering approach. Expert Syst Appl 140:112896
Bartusiak R, Augustyniak L, Kajdanowicz T, Kazienko P (2015) Sentiment analysis for polish using transfer 
learning approach. In: 2015 second european network intelligence conference. IEEE, pp 53–59
Basiri ME, Nemati S, Abdar M, Cambria E, Acharya UR (2021) ABCDM: an attention-based bidirectional 
CNN-RNN deep model for sentiment analysis. Futur Gener Comput Syst 115:279–294
Behdenna S, Barigou F, Belalem G (2018) Document level sentiment analysis: a survey. EAI Endorsed 
Trans Context-aware Syst Appl 4(13):e2
Bergsma S, McNamee P, Bagdouri M, Fink C, Wilson T (2012) Language identification for creating lan-
guage-specific twitter collections. In: Proceedings of the second workshop on language in social 
media, pp 65–74

==== Page 42 ====
5772 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
Bhaskar J, Sruthi K, Nedungadi P (2015) Hybrid approach for emotion classification of audio conversation 
based on text and speech mining. Procedia Comput Sci 46:635–643
Bhatia P, Ji Y, Eisenstein J (2015) Better document-level sentiment analysis from rst discourse parsing. 
arXiv preprint arXiv: 15090 1599
Birjali M, Kasri M, Beni-Hssane A (2021) A comprehensive survey on sentiment analysis: approaches, 
challenges and trends. Knowl-Based Syst 226:107134
Bojanowski P, Grave E, Joulin A, Mikolov T (2017) Enriching word vectors with subword information. 
Trans Assoc Comput Linguist 5:135–146
Bordes A, Glorot X, Weston J, Bengio Y (2014) A semantic matching energy function for learning with 
multi-relational data. Mach Learn 94(2):233–259
Borg A, Boldt M (2020) Using VADER sentiment and SVM for predicting customer response sentiment. 
Expert Syst Appl 162:113746
Bose R, Dey RK, Roy S, Sarddar D (2020) Sentiment analysis on online product reviews. In: Information 
and communication technology for sustainable development. Springer, pp 559–569
Buder J, Rabl L, Feiks M, Badermann M, Zurstiege G (2021) Does negatively toned language use on social 
media lead to attitude polarization? Comput Hum Behav 116:106663
Calders T, Verwer S (2010) Three naive bayes approaches for discrimination-free classification. Data Min 
Knowl Disc 21(2):277–292
Cambria E, Das D, Bandyopadhyay S, Feraco A (2017) Affective computing and sentiment analysis. In: A 
practical guide to sentiment analysis. Springer, pp 1–10
Cambria E, Li Y, Xing FZ, Poria S, Kwok K (2020) Senticnet 6: ensemble application of symbolic and 
subsymbolic ai for sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on 
information & knowledge management, pp 105–114
Cao Q, Duan W, Gan Q (2011) Exploring determinants of voting for the “helpfulness’’ of online user 
reviews: a text mining approach. Decis Support Syst 50(2):511–521
Cao Y, Zhang P, Xiong A (2015) Sentiment analysis based on expanded aspect and polarity-ambiguous 
word lexicon. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 6(2):97–103
Carvalho J, Plastino A (2021) On the evaluation and combination of state-of-the-art features in twitter 
sentiment analysis. Artif Intell Rev 54(3):1887–1936
Castro S, Hazarika D, Pérez-Rosas V, Zimmermann R, Mihalcea R, Poria S (2019) Towards multimodal 
sarcasm detection (an _obviously_ perfect paper). arXiv preprint arXiv: 19060 1815
Celik Y, Talo M, Yildirim O, Karabatak M, Acharya UR (2020) Automated invasive ductal carci-
noma detection based using deep transfer learning with whole-slide images. Pattern Recogn Lett 
133:232–239
Chang JR, Liang HY, Chen LS, Chang CW (2020) Novel feature selection approaches for improving the 
performance of sentiment classification. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput pp 1–14
Chatterjere A, Guptha V, Chopra P, Das A (2020) Minority positive sampling for switching points-an 
anecdote for the code-mixing language modeling. In: Proceedings of the 12th language resources 
and evaluation conference, pp 6228–6236
Chen CC, Tseng YD (2011) Quality evaluation of product reviews using an information quality frame-
work. Decis Support Syst 50(4):755–768
Chen X, Wang Y, Liu Q (2017) Visual and textual sentiment analysis using deep fusion convolutional neural 
networks. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE, pp 1557–1561
Cheng Y, Yao L, Xiang G, Zhang G, Tang T, Zhong L (2020) Text sentiment orientation analysis 
based on multi-channel CNN and bidirectional GRU with attention mechanism. IEEE Access 
8:134964–134975
Chetviorkin I, Loukachevitch N (2012) Extraction of Russian sentiment lexicon for product meta-
domain. In: Proceedings of COLING 2012, pp 593–610
Chiew KL, Tan CL, Wong K, Yong KS, Tiong WK (2019) A new hybrid ensemble feature selection 
framework for machine learning-based phishing detection system. Inf Sci 484:153–166
Cho H, Lee H (2019) Biomedical named entity recognition using deep neural networks with contextual 
information. BMC Bioinform 20(1):1–11
Chunping O, Wen Z, Ying Y, Zhiming L, Xiaohua Y (2014) Topic sentiment analysis in Chinese news. 
Int J Multimed Ubiquitous Eng 9(11):385–396
Clark EM, James T, Jones CA, Alapati A, Ukandu P, Danforth CM, Dodds PS (2018) A sentiment analy -
sis of breast cancer treatment experiences and healthcare perceptions across twitter. arXiv preprint 
arXiv: 18050 9959
Cortis K, Davis B (2021) Over a decade of social opinion mining: a systematic review. Artif Intell Rev 
54:4873–4965

==== Page 43 ====
5773
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
Crawford M, Khoshgoftaar TM, Prusa JD, Richter AN, Al Najada H (2015) Survey of review spam 
detection using machine learning techniques. J Big Data 2(1):1–24
Das H, Naik B, Behera H (2020) A jaya algorithm based wrapper method for optimal feature selection in 
supervised classification. J King Saud Univ Comput Inf Sci
Dave K, Lawrence S, Pennock DM (2003) Mining the peanut gallery: opinion extraction and semantic 
classification of product reviews. In: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on World 
Wide Web, pp 519–528
Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K (2018) Bert: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers 
for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv: 18100 4805
Donkers T, Loepp B, Ziegler J (2017) Sequential user-based recurrent neural network recommendations. 
In: Proceedings of the eleventh ACM conference on recommender systems, pp 152–160
Dragoni M, Petrucci G (2017) A neural word embeddings approach for multi-domain sentiment analysis. 
IEEE Trans Affect Comput 8(4):457–470
Duric A, Song F (2012) Feature selection for sentiment analysis based on content and syntax models. 
Decis Support Syst 53(4):704–711
Ebadi A, Xi P, Tremblay S, Spencer B, Pall R, Wong A (2021) Understanding the temporal evolution 
of covid-19 research through machine learning and natural language processing. Scientometrics 
126(1):725–739
Ebrahimi M, Yazdavar AH, Sheth A (2017) Challenges of sentiment analysis for dynamic events. IEEE 
Intell Syst 32(5):70–75
Eke CI, Norman AA, Shuib L, Nweke HF (2020) Sarcasm identification in textual data: systematic 
review, research challenges and open directions. Artif Intell Rev 53(6):4215–4258
El-Din DM (2016) Enhancement bag-of-words model for solving the challenges of sentiment analysis. 
Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 7(1):244–252
Elith J, Phillips SJ, Hastie T, Dudík M, Chee YE, Yates CJ (2011) A statistical explanation of maxent for 
ecologists. Divers Distrib 17(1):43–57
Ethayarajh K (2019) How contextual are contextualized word representations? Comparing the geometry of 
BERT, ELMO, and GPT-2 embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv: 19090 0512
Fan TK, Chang CH (2011) Blogger-centric contextual advertising. Expert Syst Appl 38(3):1777–1788
Fang Z, Zhang Q, Tang X, Wang A, Baron C (2020) An implicit opinion analysis model based on feature-
based implicit opinion patterns. Artif Intell Rev 53(6):4547–4574
Ferrari A, Esuli A (2019) An NLP approach for cross-domain ambiguity detection in requirements engi-
neering. Autom Softw Eng 26(3):559–598
Filatova E (2012) Irony and sarcasm: corpus generation and analysis using crowdsourcing. In: Lrec, Cit-
eseer, pp 392–398
Flek L (2020) Returning the N to NLP: towards contextually personalized classification models. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pp 7828–7838
Flekova L, Preoţiuc-Pietro D, Ruppert E (2015) Analysing domain suitability of a sentiment lexicon by 
identifying distributionally bipolar words. In: Proceedings of the 6th workshop on computational 
approaches to subjectivity, sentiment and social media analysis, pp 77–84
Fredriksen-Goldsen KI, Kim HJ (2017) The science of conducting research with LGBT older adults-an 
introduction to aging with pride: National health, aging, and sexuality/gender study (NHAS)
Gao Z, Feng A, Song X, Wu X (2019) Target-dependent sentiment classification with BERT. IEEE Access 
7:154290–154299
George DR, Rovniak LS, Kraschnewski JL (2013) Dangers and opportunities for social media in medicine. 
Clin Obstet Gynecol 56(3)
Ghazi D, Inkpen D, Szpakowicz S (2015) Detecting emotion stimuli in emotion-bearing sentences. In: Inter -
national conference on intelligent text processing and computational linguistics. Springer, pp 152–165
Gower JC (1966) Some distance properties of latent root and vector methods used in multivariate analysis. 
Biometrika 53(3–4):325–338
Hailong Z, Wenyan G, Bo J (2014) Machine learning and lexicon based methods for sentiment classifica-
tion: a survey. In: 2014 11th web information system and application conference. IEEE, pp 262–265
Hajek P, Barushka A, Munk M (2020) Fake consumer review detection using deep neural networks integrat-
ing word embeddings and emotion mining. Neural Comput Appl 32(23):17259–17274
Hamdan H, Bellot P, Bechet F (2015) Lsislif: Crf and logistic regression for opinion target extraction and 
sentiment polarity analysis. In: Proceedings of the 9th international workshop on semantic evaluation 
(SemEval 2015), pp 753–758
Han K, Xiao A, Wu E, Guo J, Xu C, Wang Y (2021) Transformer in transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv: 
21030 0112

==== Page 44 ====
5774 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
Han T, Liu C, Yang W, Jiang D (2019) A novel adversarial learning framework in deep convolutional neural 
network for intelligent diagnosis of mechanical faults. Knowl-Based Syst 165:474–487
Hangya V, Farkas R (2017) A comparative empirical study on social media sentiment analysis over various 
genres and languages. Artif Intell Rev 47(4):485–505
Hassonah MA, Al-Sayyed R, Rodan A, Ala’M AZ, Aljarah I, Faris H (2020) An efficient hybrid filter and 
evolutionary wrapper approach for sentiment analysis of various topics on twitter. Knowl-Based Syst 
192:105353
Hassonah MA, Al-Sayyed R, Rodan A, Ala’M AZ, Aljarah I, Faris H (2020) An efficient hybrid filter and 
evolutionary wrapper approach for sentiment analysis of various topics on twitter. Knowl-Based Syst 
192:105353
Heerschop B, van Iterson P, Hogenboom A, Frasincar F, Kaymak U (2011) Accounting for negation in 
sentiment analysis. In: 11th Dutch-Belgian information retrieval workshop (DIR 2011), Citeseer, pp 
38–39
Hershcovich D, Donatelli L (2021) It’s the meaning that counts: the state of the art in NLP and semantics. 
KI-Künstliche Intelligenz pp 1–16
Ho C, Murad MAA, Doraisamy S, Kadir RA (2014) Extracting lexical and phrasal paraphrases: a review of 
the literature. Artif Intell Rev 42(4):851–894
Hssina B, Merbouha A, Ezzikouri H, Erritali M (2014) A comparative study of decision tree id3 and c4. 5. 
Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 4(2):13–19
Hu N, Bose I, Koh NS, Liu L (2012) Manipulation of online reviews: an analysis of ratings, readability, and 
sentiments. Decis Support Syst 52(3):674–684
Hu X, Tang J, Gao H, Liu H (2014) Social spammer detection with sentiment information. In: 2014 IEEE 
international conference on data mining. IEEE, pp 180–189
Hunter ST, Cushenbery L, Friedrich T (2012) Hiring an innovative workforce: a necessary yet uniquely 
challenging endeavor. Hum Resour Manag Rev 22(4):303–322
Hussein DMEDM (2018) A survey on sentiment analysis challenges. J King Saud Univ Eng Sci 
30(4):330–338
Imani MB, Keyvanpour MR, Azmi R (2013) A novel embedded feature selection method: a comparative 
study in the application of text categorization. Appl Artif Intell 27(5):408–427
Jain PK, Pamula R, Ansari S, Sharma D, Maddala L (2019) Airline recommendation prediction using cus-
tomer generated feedback data. In: 2019 4th international conference on information systems and 
computer networks (ISCON). IEEE, pp 376–379
Jain PK, Pamula R, Ansari S (2021) A supervised machine learning approach for the credibility assessment 
of user-generated content. Wirel Pers Commun 118(4):2469–2485
Jain PK, Pamula R, Srivastava G (2021) A systematic literature review on machine learning applications for 
consumer sentiment analysis using online reviews. Comput Sci Rev 41:100413
Jain PK, Pamula R, Yekun EA (2021c) A multi-label ensemble predicting model to service recommendation 
from social media contents. J Supercomput 1–18
Jain PK, Quamer W, Pamula R, Saravanan V (2021d) Spsan: sparse self-attentive network-based aspect-
aware model for sentiment analysis. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput 1–18
Jain PK, Saravanan V, Pamula R (2021) A hybrid CNN-LSTM: a deep learning approach for consumer sen-
timent analysis using qualitative user-generated contents. Trans Asian Low-Resour Lang Inf Process 
20(5):1–15
Jain PK, Yekun EA, Pamula R, Srivastava G (2021) Consumer recommendation prediction in online reviews 
using cuckoo optimized machine learning models. Comput Electr Eng 95:107397
Janjua F, Masood A, Abbas H, Rashid I, Khan MMZM (2021) Textual analysis of traitor-based dataset 
through semi supervised machine learning. Futur Gener Comput Syst 125:652–660
Jiménez-Zafra SM, Martín-Valdivia MT, Molina-González MD, Ureña-López LA (2019) How do we talk 
about doctors and drugs? sentiment analysis in forums expressing opinions for medical domain. Artif 
Intell Med 93:50–57
Juraska J, Walker M (2021) Attention is indeed all you need: semantically attention-guided decoding for 
data-to-text nlg. arXiv preprint arXiv: 21090 7043
Kaity M, Balakrishnan V (2020) Sentiment lexicons and non-english languages: a survey. Knowl Inf Syst 
1–36
Kamal A (2013) Subjectivity classification using machine learning techniques for mining feature-opinion 
pairs from web opinion sources. arXiv preprint arXiv: 13126 962
Kanapala A, Pal S, Pamula R (2019) Text summarization from legal documents: a survey. Artif Intell Rev 
51(3):371–402
Kang H, Yoo SJ, Han D (2012) Senti-lexicon and improved Naïve Bayes algorithms for sentiment analysis 
of restaurant reviews. Expert Syst Appl 39(5):6000–6010

==== Page 45 ====
5775
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
Kasmuri E, Basiron H (2017) Subjectivity analysis in opinion mining—a systematic literature review. Int J 
Adv Soft Comput Appl 9(3):133–159
Kaufmann M (2012) Jmaxalign: a maximum entropy parallel sentence alignment tool. In: Proceedings of 
COLING 2012: demonstration papers, pp 277–288
Khairnar J, Kinikar M (2013) Machine learning algorithms for opinion mining and sentiment classification. 
Int J Sci Res Publ 3(6):1–6
Khan MT, Durrani M, Ali A, Inayat I, Khalid S, Khan KH (2016) Sentiment analysis and the complex natu-
ral language. Complex Adapt Syst Model 4(1):1–19
Kiritchenko S, Zhu X, Mohammad SM (2014) Sentiment analysis of short informal texts. J Artif Intell Res 
50:723–762
Kitaev N, Klein D (2018) Constituency parsing with a self-attentive encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv: 18050 
1052
Kolchyna O, Souza TT, Treleaven P, Aste T (2015) Twitter sentiment analysis: Lexicon method, machine 
learning method and their combination. arXiv preprint arXiv: 15070 0955
Korkontzelos I, Nikfarjam A, Shardlow M, Sarker A, Ananiadou S, Gonzalez GH (2016) Analysis of the 
effect of sentiment analysis on extracting adverse drug reactions from tweets and forum posts. J 
Biomed Inform 62:148–158
Kosamkar V, Chaudhari SS (2013) Improved intrusion detection system using c4. 5 decision tree and sup-
port vector machine. PhD diss, Doctoral dissertation, Mumbai University
Kraaijeveld O, De Smedt J (2020) The predictive power of public twitter sentiment for forecasting crypto-
currency prices. J Int Finan Markets Inst Money 65:101188
Kumar A, Garg G (2020) Systematic literature review on context-based sentiment analysis in social multi-
media. Multimed Tools Appl 79(21):15349–15380
Kumar A, Teeja MS (2012) Sentiment analysis: a perspective on its past, present and future. Int J Intell Syst 
Appl 4(10):1
Kumar KN, Uma V (2021) Intelligent sentinet-based lexicon for context-aware sentiment analysis: opti-
mized neural network for sentiment classification on social media. J Supercomput 77:12801–12825
Kumar S, Yadava M, Roy PP (2019) Fusion of EEG response and sentiment analysis of products review to 
predict customer satisfaction. Inf Fusion 52:41–52
Lakkaraju H, Socher R, Manning C (2014) Aspect specific sentiment analysis using hierarchical deep learn-
ing. In: NIPS Workshop on deep learning and representation learning, pp 1–9
Lal YK, Kumar V, Dhar M, Shrivastava M, Koehn P (2019) De-mixing sentiment from code-mixed text. 
In: Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics: student 
research workshop, pp 371–377
Lapponi E, Read J, Øvrelid L (2012) Representing and resolving negation for sentiment analysis. In: 2012 
IEEE 12th international conference on data mining workshops. IEEE, pp 687–692
Lata K, Singh P, Dutta K (2020) A comprehensive review on feature set used for anaphora resolution. Artif 
Intell Rev 54:2917–3006
Levashina J, Hartwell CJ, Morgeson FP, Campion MA (2014) The structured employment interview: narra-
tive and quantitative review of the research literature. Pers Psychol 67(1):241–293
Li F, Wang W, Xu J, Yi J, Wang Q (2019) Comparative study on vulnerability assessment for urban buried 
gas pipeline network based on SVM and ANN methods. Process Saf Environ Prot 122:23–32
Li X, Bing L, Zhang W, Lam W (2019b) Exploiting BERT for end-to-end aspect-based sentiment analysis. 
arXiv preprint arXiv: 19100 0883
Li YM, Li TY (2013) Deriving market intelligence from microblogs. Decis Support Syst 55(1):206–217
Ligthart A, Catal C, Tekinerdogan B (2021) Systematic reviews in sentiment analysis: a tertiary study. Artif 
Intell Rev 54:4997–5053
Lin C, He Y (2009) Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
conference on information and knowledge management, pp 375–384
Ling M, Chen Q, Sun Q, Jia Y (2020) Hybrid neural network for Sina Weibo sentiment analysis. IEEE 
Trans Comput Soc Syst 7(4):983–990
Liu B (2012) Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synth Lect Hum Lang Technol 5(1):1–167
Liu B, Zhang L (2012) A survey of opinion mining and sentiment analysis. In: Aggarwal C, Zhai C (eds) 
Mining text data. Springer, Boston, pp 415–463
Liu B et al (2010) Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. Handb Nat Lang Process 2(2010):627–666
Liu P, Qiu X, Huang X (2016) Recurrent neural network for text classification with multi-task learning. 
arXiv preprint arXiv: 16050 5101
Lu B, Ott M, Cardie C, Tsou BK (2011) Multi-aspect sentiment analysis with topic models. In: 2011 IEEE 
11th international conference on data mining workshops. IEEE, pp 81–88

==== Page 46 ====
5776 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
Mackey TK, Miner A, Cuomo RE (2015) Exploring the e-cigarette e-commerce marketplace: identifying 
internet e-cigarette marketing characteristics and regulatory gaps. Drug Alcohol Depend 156:97–103
Majumder N, Hazarika D, Gelbukh A, Cambria E, Poria S (2018) Multimodal sentiment analysis using hier -
archical fusion with context modeling. Knowl-Based Syst 161:124–133
Maks I, Vossen P (2012) A lexicon model for deep sentiment analysis and opinion mining applications. 
Decis Support Syst 53(4):680–688
McDuff D, El Kaliouby R, Cohn JF, Picard RW (2014) Predicting ad liking and purchase intent: large-scale 
analysis of facial responses to ads. IEEE Trans Affect Comput 6(3):223–235
Medhat W, Hassan A, Korashy H (2014) Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: a survey. Ain 
Shams Eng J 5(4):1093–1113
Mendon S, Dutta P, Behl A, Lessmann S (2021) A hybrid approach of machine learning and lexicons to sen-
timent analysis: enhanced insights from twitter data of natural disasters. Inf Syst Front 23:1145–1168
Meng J, Long Y, Yu Y, Zhao D, Liu S (2019) Cross-domain text sentiment analysis based on cnn_ft method. 
Information 10(5):162
Mezquita Y, Alonso RS, Casado-Vara R, Prieto J, Corchado JM (2020) A review of k-nn algorithm based on 
classical and quantum machine learning. In: International symposium on distributed computing and 
artificial intelligence. Springer, pp 189–198
Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J (2013) Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. 
arXiv preprint arXiv: 13013 781
Miotto R, Wang F, Wang S, Jiang X, Dudley JT (2018) Deep learning for healthcare: review, opportunities 
and challenges. Brief Bioinform 19(6):1236–1246
Mite-Baidal K, Delgado-Vera C, Solís-Avilés E, Espinoza AH, Ortiz-Zambrano J, Varela-Tapia E (2018) 
Sentiment analysis in education domain: a systematic literature review. In: International conference 
on technologies and innovation. Springer, pp 285–297
Mohammad SM (2017) Challenges in sentiment analysis. In: A practical guide to sentiment analysis. 
Springer, pp 61–83
Moraes R, Valiati JF, Neto WPG (2013) Document-level sentiment classification: an empirical comparison 
between SVM and ANN. Expert Syst Appl 40(2):621–633
Moraes R, Valiati JF, Neto WPG (2013) Document-level sentiment classification: an empirical comparison 
between SVM and ANN. Expert Syst Appl 40(2):621–633
Moreo A, Romero M, Castro J, Zurita JM (2012) Lexicon-based comments-oriented news sentiment ana-
lyzer system. Expert Syst Appl 39(10):9166–9180
Mowlaei ME, Abadeh MS, Keshavarz H (2020) Aspect-based sentiment analysis using adaptive aspect-
based lexicons. Expert Syst Appl 148:113234
Mukherjee A, Venkataraman V, Liu B, Glance N (2013) What yelp fake review filter might be doing? In: 
Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media, vol 7
Naseem U, Razzak I, Musial K, Imran M (2020) Transformer based deep intelligent contextual embedding 
for twitter sentiment analysis. Futur Gener Comput Syst 113:58–69
Ortigosa-Hernández J, Rodríguez JD, Alzate L, Lucania M, Inza I, Lozano JA (2012) Approaching senti-
ment analysis by using semi-supervised learning of multi-dimensional classifiers. Neurocomputing 
92:98–115
Oueslati O, Cambria E, HajHmida MB, Ounelli H (2020) A review of sentiment analysis research in Arabic 
language. Futur Gener Comput Syst 112:408–430
Paré DJ (2003) Does this site deliver? B2B e-commerce services for developing countries. Inf Soc 
19(2):123–134
Park HW, Park S, Chong M (2020) Conversations and medical news frames on twitter: infodemiological 
study on covid-19 in South Korea. J Med Internet Res 22(5):e18897
Park S, Kim Y (2016) Building thesaurus lexicon using dictionary-based approach for sentiment classifica-
tion. In: 2016 IEEE 14th international conference on software engineering research, management and 
applications (SERA), pp 39–44, https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ SERA. 2016. 75161 26
Parvin SA, Sumathi M, Mohan C (2021) Challenges of sentiment analysis-a survey. In: 2021 5th Interna-
tional conference on trends in electronics and informatics (ICOEI). IEEE, pp 781–786
Patel HH, Prajapati P (2018) Study and analysis of decision tree based classification algorithms. Int J Com-
put Sci Eng 6(10):74–78
Patil N, Lathi R, Chitre V (2012) Customer card classification based on c5. 0 & cart algorithms. Int J Eng 
Res Appl 2(4):164–167
Peng M, Zhang Q, Jiang Yg, Huang XJ (2018) Cross-domain sentiment classification with target domain 
specific information. In: Proceedings of the 56th annual meeting of the association for computational 
linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 2505–2513

==== Page 47 ====
5777
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
Peng Y, Yan S, Lu Z (2019) Transfer learning in biomedical natural language processing: an evaluation of 
BERT and ELMo on ten benchmarking datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv: 19060 5474
Pennington J, Socher R, Manning CD (2014) Glove: global vectors for word representation. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pp 
1532–1543
Pham TH, Le-Hong P (2017) End-to-end recurrent neural network models for vietnamese named entity rec-
ognition: word-level vs. character-level. In: International conference of the Pacific Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Springer, pp 219–232
Piryani R, Madhavi D, Singh VK (2017) Analytical mapping of opinion mining and sentiment analysis 
research during 2000–2015. Inf Process Manag 53(1):122–150
Plank B, Søgaard A, Goldberg Y (2016) Multilingual part-of-speech tagging with bidirectional long short-
term memory models and auxiliary loss. arXiv preprint arXiv: 16040 5529
Poria S, Cambria E, Winterstein G, Huang GB (2014) Sentic patterns: dependency-based rules for concept-
level sentiment analysis. Knowl-Based Syst 69:45–63
Poria S, Chaturvedi I, Cambria E, Hussain A (2016) Convolutional MKL based multimodal emotion recog-
nition and sentiment analysis. In: 2016 IEEE 16th international conference on data mining (ICDM). 
IEEE, pp 439–448
Poria S, Cambria E, Hazarika D, Mazumder N, Zadeh A, Morency LP (2017) Multi-level multiple atten-
tions for contextual multimodal sentiment analysis. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on data 
mining (ICDM). IEEE, pp 1033–1038
Poria S, Hussain A, Cambria E (2018a) Combining textual clues with audio-visual information for multi-
modal sentiment analysis. In: Multimodal sentiment analysis. Springer, pp 153–178
Poria S, Majumder N, Hazarika D, Cambria E, Gelbukh A, Hussain A (2018) Multimodal sentiment analy -
sis: addressing key issues and setting up the baselines. IEEE Intell Syst 33(6):17–25
Poria S, Hazarika D, Majumder N, Mihalcea R (2020) Beneath the tip of the iceberg: Current challenges 
and new directions in sentiment analysis research. IEEE Trans Affect Comput
Pravalika A, Oza V, Meghana N, Kamath SS (2017) Domain-specific sentiment analysis approaches for 
code-mixed social network data. In: 2017 8th international conference on computing, communication 
and networking technologies (ICCCNT). IEEE, pp 1–6
Qiu G, He X, Zhang F, Shi Y, Bu J, Chen C (2010) DASA: dissatisfaction-oriented advertising based on 
sentiment analysis. Expert Syst Appl 37(9):6182–6191
Quinlan JR (2014) C4. 5: programs for machine learning. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Rana TA, Cheah YN (2016) Aspect extraction in sentiment analysis: comparative analysis and survey. Artif 
Intell Rev 46(4):459–483
Rao D, Ravichandran D (2009) Semi-supervised polarity lexicon induction. In: Proceedings of the 12th con-
ference of the European chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009), pp 675–682
Rao G, Huang W, Feng Z, Cong Q (2018) LSTM with sentence representations for document-level senti-
ment classification. Neurocomputing 308:49–57
Ravi K, Ravi V (2015) A survey on opinion mining and sentiment analysis: tasks, approaches and applica-
tions. Knowl-Based Syst 89:14–46
Razon A, Barnden J (2015) A new approach to automated text readability classification based on concept 
indexing with integrated part-of-speech n-gram features. In: Proceedings of the international confer -
ence recent advances in natural language processing, pp 521–528
Remus R (2013) Modeling and representing negation in data-driven machine learning-based sentiment anal-
ysis. In: ESSEM@ AI* IA, pp 22–33
Revathy R, Lawrance R (2017) Comparative analysis of c4. 5 and c5. 0 algorithms on crop pest data. Int J 
Innovative Res Comput Commun Eng 5(1):50–58
Ritter A, Etzioni O, Clark S (2012) Open domain event extraction from twitter. In: Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 1104–1112
Rizos G, Hemker K, Schuller B (2019) Augment to prevent: short-text data augmentation in deep learning 
for hate-speech classification. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on informa-
tion and knowledge management, pp 991–1000
Rognone L, Hyde S, Zhang SS (2020) News sentiment in the cryptocurrency market: an empirical compari-
son with forex. Int Rev Financ Anal 69:101462
Ruffer N, Knitza J, Krusche M (2020) # Covid4Rheum: an analytical twitter study in the time of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Rheumatol Int 40(12):2031–2037
Rui H, Liu Y, Whinston A (2013) Whose and what chatter matters? The effect of tweets on movie sales. 
Decis Support Syst 55(4):863–870
Salah Z, Al-Ghuwairi ARF, Baarah A, Aloqaily A, Qadoumi B, Alhayek M, Alhijawi B (2019) A systematic 
review on opinion mining and sentiment analysis in social media. Int J Bus Inf Syst 31(4):530–554

==== Page 48 ====
5778 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
Sánchez-Rada JF, Iglesias CA (2019) Social context in sentiment analysis: formal definition, overview of 
current trends and framework for comparison. Inf Fusion 52:344–356
Sann R, Lai PC (2020) Understanding homophily of service failure within the hotel guest cycle: applying 
NLP-aspect-based sentiment analysis to the hospitality industry. Int J Hosp Manag 91:102678
Saunders D (2021) Domain adaptation for neural machine translation. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge
Schouten K, Frasincar F (2015) Survey on aspect-level sentiment analysis. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 
28(3):813–830
Sharma A, Lyons J, Dehzangi A, Paliwal KK (2013) A feature extraction technique using bi-gram probabili-
ties of position specific scoring matrix for protein fold recognition. J Theor Biol 320:41–46
Shayaa S, Jaafar NI, Bahri S, Sulaiman A, Wai PS, Chung YW, Piprani AZ, Al-Garadi MA (2018) Senti-
ment analysis of big data: methods, applications, and open challenges. IEEE Access 6:37807–37827
Singh JP, Irani S, Rana NP, Dwivedi YK, Saumya S, Roy PK (2017) Predicting the “helpfulness’’ of online 
consumer reviews. J Bus Res 70:346–355
Singh K, Sen I, Kumaraguru P (2018) A twitter corpus for Hindi-English code mixed POS tagging. In: 
Proceedings of the sixth international workshop on natural language processing for social media, pp 
12–17
Singh M, Jakhar AK, Pandey S (2021) Sentiment analysis on the impact of coronavirus in social life using 
the BERT model. Soc Netw Anal Min 11(1):1–11
Singh RK, Sachan MK, Patel R (2021) 360 degree view of cross-domain opinion classification: a survey. 
Artif Intell Rev 54(2):1385–1506
Singh S, Gupta P (2014) Comparative study id3, cart and c4. 5 decision tree algorithm: a survey. Int J Adv 
Inf Sci Technol 27(27):97–103
Socher R, Perelygin A, Wu J, Chuang J, Manning CD, Ng AY, Potts C (2013) Recursive deep models for 
semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In: Proceedings of the 2013 conference on 
empirical methods in natural language processing, pp 1631–1642
Soleymani M, Garcia D, Jou B, Schuller B, Chang SF, Pantic M (2017) A survey of multimodal senti-
ment analysis. Image Vis Comput 65:3–14
Stappen L, Schuller B, Lefter I, Cambria E, Kompatsiaris I (2020) Summary of MuSe 2020: multimodal 
sentiment analysis, emotion-target engagement and trustworthiness detection in real-life media. 
In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp 4769–4770
Straka M, Hajic J, Straková J (2016) UDPipe: trainable pipeline for processing CoNLL-U files perform-
ing tokenization, morphological analysis, pos tagging and parsing. In: Proceedings of the tenth 
international conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC’16), pp 4290–4297
Subhashini L, Li Y, Zhang J, Atukorale AS, Wu Y (2021) Mining and classifying customer reviews: a 
survey. Artif Intell Rev 54:6343–6389
Sun C, Huang L, Qiu X (2019) Utilizing BERT for aspect-based sentiment analysis via constructing aux-
iliary sentence. arXiv preprint arXiv: 19030 9588
Taboada M, Brooke J, Tofiloski M, Voll K, Stede M (2011) Lexicon-based methods for sentiment analy -
sis. Comput Linguist 37(2):267–307
Thet TT, Na JC, Khoo CS (2010) Aspect-based sentiment analysis of movie reviews on discussion 
boards. J Inf Sci 36(6):823–848
Tian Y, Galery T, Dulcinati G, Molimpakis E, Sun C (2017) Facebook sentiment: reactions and emo-
jis. In: Proceedings of the fifth international workshop on natural language processing for social 
media, pp 11–16
Tran T, Ba H, Huynh VN (2019) Measuring hotel review sentiment: an aspect-based sentiment analy -
sis approach. In: International symposium on integrated uncertainty in knowledge modelling and 
decision making. Springer, pp 393–405
Tripathy A, Agrawal A, Rath SK (2015) Classification of sentimental reviews using machine learning 
techniques. Procedia Comput Sci 57:821–829
Tubishat M, Idris N, Abushariah MA (2018) Implicit aspect extraction in sentiment analysis: review, 
taxonomy, oppportunities, and open challenges. Inf Process Manag 54(4):545–563
Turney PD, Littman ML (2003) Measuring praise and criticism: inference of semantic orientation from 
association. ACM Trans Inf Syst 21(4):315–346
Uysal AK, Murphey YL (2017) Sentiment classification: feature selection based approaches versus deep 
learning. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on computer and information technology (CIT). 
IEEE, pp 23–30
Valdivia A, Luzíón MV, Herrera F (2017) Neutrality in the sentiment analysis problem based on fuzzy 
majority. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on fuzzy systems (FUZZ-IEEE). IEEE, pp 1–6
Valdivia A, Luzón MV, Cambria E, Herrera F (2018) Consensus vote models for detecting and filtering 
neutrality in sentiment analysis. Inf Fusion 44:126–135

==== Page 49 ====
5779
A survey on sentiment analysis methods, applications, and…
1 3
Valencia F, Gómez-Espinosa A, Valdés-Aguirre B (2019) Price movement prediction of cryptocurren-
cies using sentiment analysis and machine learning. Entropy 21(6):589
Van de Camp M, Van den Bosch A (2012) The socialist network. Decis Support Syst 53(4):761–769
Varelas G, Voutsakis E, Raftopoulou P, Petrakis EG, Milios EE (2005) Semantic similarity methods 
in wordnet and their application to information retrieval on the web. In: Proceedings of the 7th 
annual ACM international workshop on Web information and data management, pp 10–16
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L, Polosukhin I (2017) 
Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv: 17060 3762
Vateekul P, Koomsubha T (2016) A study of sentiment analysis using deep learning techniques on Thai 
twitter data. In: 2016 13th international joint conference on computer science and software engi-
neering (JCSSE). IEEE, pp 1–6
Vechtomova O (2017) Disambiguating context-dependent polarity of words: an information retrieval 
approach. Inf Process Manag 53(5):1062–1079
Venugopalan M, Gupta D (2015) Exploring sentiment analysis on twitter data. In: 2015 eighth interna-
tional conference on contemporary computing (IC3). IEEE, pp 241–247
Vijay D, Bohra A, Singh V, Akhtar SS, Shrivastava M (2018) Corpus creation and emotion prediction 
for Hindi-English code-mixed social media text. In: Proceedings of the 2018 conference of the 
North American chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: student research work -
shop, pp 128–135
Wadawadagi R, Pagi V (2020) Sentiment analysis with deep neural networks: comparative study and 
performance assessment. Artif Intell Rev 53:6155–6195
Wang G, Sun J, Ma J, Xu K, Gu J (2014) Sentiment classification: the contribution of ensemble learning. 
Decis Support Syst 57:77–93
Wang Z, Ho SB, Cambria E (2020) Multi-level fine-scaled sentiment sensing with ambivalence han-
dling. Int J Uncertain Fuzziness Knowl-Based Syst 28(04):683–697
Wankhade M, Annavarapu CSR, Verma MK (2021) CBVoSD: context based vectors over sentiment domain 
ensemble model for review classification. J Supercomput 1–37
Weerasooriya T, Perera N, Liyanage S (2016) A method to extract essential keywords from a tweet using 
NLP tools. In: 2016 sixteenth international conference on advances in ICT for emerging regions 
(ICTer). IEEE, pp 29–34
Wilson T, Wiebe J, Hoffmann P (2009) Recognizing contextual polarity: an exploration of features for 
phrase-level sentiment analysis. Comput Linguist 35(3):399–433
Wu D, Chi M (2017) Long short-term memory with quadratic connections in recursive neural networks for 
representing compositional semantics. IEEE Access 5:16077–16083
Wu P, Li X, Shen S, He D (2020) Social media opinion summarization using emotion cognition and convo-
lutional neural networks. Int J Inf Manag 51:101978
Xia H, Yang Y, Pan X, Zhang Z, An W (2020) Sentiment analysis for online reviews using conditional ran-
dom fields and support vector machines. Electron Commer Res 20(2):343–360
Xia Y, Cambria E, Hussain A, Zhao H (2015) Word polarity disambiguation using Bayesian model and 
opinion-level features. Cognit Comput 7(3):369–380
Xing FZ, Cambria E, Welsch RE (2018) Natural language based financial forecasting: a survey. Artif Intell 
Rev 50(1):49–73
Yadav A, Vishwakarma DK (2020) Sentiment analysis using deep learning architectures: a review. Artif 
Intell Rev 53(6):4335–4385
Yan-Yan Z, Bing Q, Ting L (2010) Integrating intra-and inter-document evidences for improving sentence 
sentiment classification. Acta Autom Sinica 36(10):1417–1425
Yang B, Cardie C (2014) Context-aware learning for sentence-level sentiment analysis with posterior regu-
larization. In: Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics 
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pp 325–335
Yaseen Q et  al (2021) Spam email detection using deep learning techniques. Procedia Comput Sci 
184:853–858
Yousif A, Niu Z, Tarus JK, Ahmad A (2019) A survey on sentiment analysis of scientific citations. Artif 
Intell Rev 52(3):1805–1838
Yuan Z, Wu S, Wu F, Liu J, Huang Y (2018) Domain attention model for multi-domain sentiment classifica-
tion. Knowl-Based Syst 155:1–10
Yue L, Chen W, Li X, Zuo W, Yin M (2019) A survey of sentiment analysis in social media. Knowl Inf Syst 
60(2):617–663
Zhang Z, Wang L, Zou Y, Gan C (2018) The optimally designed dynamic memory networks for targeted 
sentiment classification. Neurocomputing 309:36–45

==== Page 50 ====
5780 M. Wankhade et al.
1 3
Zhao W, Guan Z, Chen L, He X, Cai D, Wang B, Wang Q (2017) Weakly-supervised deep embedding for 
product review sentiment analysis. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 30(1):185–197
Zhao Y, Xu X, Wang M (2019) Predicting overall customer satisfaction: Big data evidence from hotel online 
textual reviews. Int J Hosp Manag 76:111–121
Zhu X, Goldberg AB (2009) Introduction to semi-supervised learning. Synth Lect Artif Intell Mach Learn 
3(1):1–130
Zuo E, Zhao H, Chen B, Chen Q (2020) Context-specific heterogeneous graph convolutional network for 
implicit sentiment analysis. IEEE Access 8:37967–37975
Zvarevashe K, Olugbara OO (2018) A framework for sentiment analysis with opinion mining of hotel 
reviews. In: 2018 Conference on information communications technology and society (ICTAS). 
IEEE, pp 1–4
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

