==== Page 1 ====
ORIGINAL ARTICLEInternational Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-022-01647-y
impact on human life [ 1–3]. As great progress has been 
made in AI technology in recent years, various application 
fields have stepped into intelligence [ 4, 5]. On the road of AI 
development, models, computing power, chip performance, 
and other technical issues have been the focus of academic 
research, so that AI technology can continue to evolve. For 
machines to truly approach the level of human thought, 
they need to be trained with vast amounts of real data [ 6, 
7]. However, cloud computing power, data security, data 
silos and other risks will inevitably become constraints for 
AI to win user trust, collect private data, and achieve large-
scale implementation [ 8]. Therefore, it is an urgent need for 
a practical and effective technique to alleviate the above 
problems and make the AI full of vitality again. Under this 
background, the concept of “federated learning (FL) " came 
into being.
The notion of FL is first proposed by Google in 2016, 
mainly to make android mobile phone users update mod -
els locally without revealing private personal data [ 9]. After 
then, Google implemented an application-oriented FL sys -
tem. The designed FL system, which focused on running 
federated average (FedAvg) algorithms on mobile phones, 
can perform federated analytics and be applied to monitor 
statistics for large-scale cluster equipment without record -
ing raw device data to the cloud server. FL is one of the most 1 Introduction
Since the concept of artificial intelligence (AI) was put for -
ward in 1956, AI technology has more and more profound 
 Zhihua Cui
cuizhihua@tyust.edu.cn
Jie Wen
wj_110926@163.com
Zhixia Zhang
15634969919@163.com
Yang Lan
lanyangvip1020@163.com
Jianghui Cai
jianghui@tyust.edu.cn
Wensheng Zhang
wensheng.zhang@ia.ac.cn
1 School of Electronic Information Engineering, Taiyuan 
University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan, China
2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan 
University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan, China
3 The State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Control and 
Management of Complex Systems, Institute of Automation 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, ChinaAbstract
Federated learning (FL) is a secure distributed machine learning paradigm that addresses the issue of data silos in building 
a joint model. Its unique distributed training mode and the advantages of security aggregation mechanism are very suit -
able for various practical applications with strict privacy requirements. However, with the deployment of FL mode into 
practical application, some bottlenecks appear in the FL training process, which affects the performance and efficiency 
of the FL model in practical applications. Therefore, more researchers have paid attention to the challenges of FL and 
sought for various effective research methods to solve these current bottlenecks. And various research achievements of 
FL have been made to promote the intelligent development of all application areas with privacy restriction. This paper 
systematically introduces the current researches in FL from five aspects: the basics knowledge of FL, privacy and security 
protection mechanisms in FL, communication overhead challenges and heterogeneity problems of FL. Furthermore, we 
make a comprehensive summary of the research in practical applications and prospect the future research directions of FL.
Keywords  Federated learning · Machine learning · Privacy protection · Personalized federated learningReceived: 16 May 2022 / Accepted: 29 August 2022 / Published online: 11 November 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022A survey on federated learning: challenges and applications
Jie Wen1 · Zhixia Zhang1 · Yang Lan2 · Zhihua Cui2 · Jianghui Cai2 · Wensheng Zhang3
1 3

==== Page 2 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535concerned technologies in the field of privacy computing. 
With its advantages of lightweight technology pathway and 
deployment scheme, FL has become the mainstream solu -
tion and product choice in many privacy computing applica -
tion scenarios. And as the development and perfection of FL 
applications, a large quantity of research achievements of 
FL field has emerged.
FL is a secure distributed machine learning technique 
that cooperatively performs FL algorithms on multiple 
scattered edge devices or servers under the condition that 
the private information is not leave local [ 10]. FL transfers 
the task of data training to each local client, and the com -
munication between client and server is through parameter 
interaction rather than direct data interaction. The server 
only participates in simple parameter aggregation to update 
the global model. Such FL scheme can realize the protec -
tion of local user data on the basis of saving the computing 
and storage resources of the server. FL can obtain a global 
model with superior performance through the communica -
tion between client and server. This approach is contrasts 
with traditional centralized training, where all separate local 
datasets are gathered to a center server for training model 
[11]. Compared to the traditional centralized machine learn -
ing methods [ 12], FL techniques can realize multiple fed -
erated agencies to build a unified model between the safe, 
efficient, and compliance of multi-source data applications 
of the ecological system [ 13–15]. Meanwhile, the perfor -
mance of federated model is similar to that of the model 
trained through data integration. FL realizes the interagency 
sharing of data fusion, through the system expansion of 
sample size and increase the data dimension for high-pre -
cision model building for big data and application support, 
which can provide high-quality big data services and create 
more value for social development.
However, with the explosion of privacy computing plat -
forms and products, the number of FL products put into 
practical application gradually increases, and some chal -
lenges have also raised. At present, the research on FL tech -
nology is still in continuous improvement. By combing the 
existing literature, we concluded that research on current FL 
mainly faces three bottlenecks: privacy and security threats, 
heterogeneity challenges, and huge communication over -
head of FL [ 16]. Compared with traditional privacy-protect -
ing computing technologies, FL is essentially characterized 
by exposing certain parameter data and assuming that these 
data do not reveal sensitive information. However, a grow -
ing body of research has found that this hypothesis is not 
necessarily objective. In FL, there are still hidden dangers of 
parameters leakage and attack by malicious operations [ 17]. 
The research for effective privacy protection techniques and 
attack mitigation method remains a focus of FL. At the same 
time, when large quantities of clients participate in FL, the problem that communication overhead of FL is far greater 
than the computational overhead cannot be ignored. There -
fore, communication efficiency problem is also the main 
challenges in FL. Additionally, any locally available data 
point distribution is not representing the overall data distri -
bution because the data distribution varies widely between 
clients. The heterogeneity of client data distribution leads 
to global model drift. Also, each client is constrained by 
device resources and their tasks, and the models trained by 
clients participating in federated tasks are often different. 
All of these show the challenges of current FL techniques in 
practical applications.
FL continues to develop multiple practical applications 
while overcoming challenges. FL techniques have been 
deeply applied in many fields, such as: intelligent medical 
[18], recommendation systems, smart city [ 19], finance and 
insurance, edge of computing [ 20], intrusion detection et al. 
To meet the needs of practical applications, more efficient 
FL algorithms are sought to strike a balance between secu -
rity and efficiency. Different institutions realize the applica -
tion of FL through the secure connection of platforms so that 
the data cooperation model based on FL will develop in a 
legal and compliant direction. The motivation for this paper 
is to survey the existing literatures and summarize advanced 
methods and techniques in the FL field. We outlined the 
basic definition and categorization of FL, and reviewed the 
latest FL research, including different strategies for solving 
the challenges of privacy security, communication costs, 
and heterogeneity. Then we discussed how the FL frame -
work can be applied to various application scenarios suc -
cessfully, and the research achievements are introduced for 
several current application directions of FL. Additionally, 
we analyzed the current research status and prospect for the 
development of FL in the future.
The contributions of this paper to the FL research are as 
follows:
(1) It provides an in-depth survey and analysis of the latest 
papers on FL.
(2) It concerns the practical application prospects of FL and 
the challenges faced in the process of practical applica -
tions, and has unique views on the current development 
and future prospects of FL.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. The basics knowl -
edge of FL is introduced in Sect. 2. Sect. 3 depicts privacy 
and security threats to FL and surveys and empirically 
evaluates mitigation methods.  Sect. 4 surveys communi -
cation problem of FL and reviews various communication-
efficient mechanisms. Sect. 5 discusses the solutions for the 
problem of heterogeneity in FL. Sect.6 introduces the cur -
rent research status of FL in many fields. And in Sect. 7, 
1 3514

==== Page 3 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535the vision of the future of FL is pointed out. Finally, Sect.  8 
gathers concluding remarks.
2 The basics knowledge of federated 
learning
For making a better overview of FL research, the basic 
concepts, training framework, and classification of FL are 
detailed introduced in this section.
2.1 Overview of federated learning
FL is a secure distributed learning framework in which a 
virtual model can be constructed to address the matter of 
dispersive clients collaborating needless to expose raw infor -
mation [ 21]. The virtual model is an optimal global model 
for aggregating data from all participants and each partici -
pant serves the local objective using the obtained model. 
FL can achieve that the results of this modeling be much of 
similar to the traditional centralized training model [ 22], in 
which data from multiple clients are brought together in a 
same center server for modeling. In a federated mechanism, 
it is generally assumed that participants have the same iden -
tity and support the establishment of shared data policies. 
Because the data is not directly transferred, it does not affect 
data specifications or compromises user privacy.
First, we define the basic concept of FL: Define N 
participants in FL, all of whom want to merge their data 
{P1,P2,···,PN} to train a global model. A frequently 
used approach is to gather all the data together and use 
total data P=P1∪P2∪···∪PN to train a model Msum 
with a performance of Vsum. FL is a learning framework 
where participants co-training a common model Mfed with 
a performance of Vfed, in which no participant exposes its 
private data to others. Let ε be non-negative, then the per -
formance loss of FL model is expressed as:
 |Vfed−Vsum|<ε ((1))
The learning process of FL is achieved by minimizing a loss 
function, which is calculated on each client using a weighted 
aggregration method. And the goal of FL is to minimize the 
following objective function (2).
 minf(w)=N/summationdisplay
k=1nk
nFk(w) ((2))Where, N represents the number of clients, nk is the amount 
of data on the k−thclient, Fk(w) is the local objective 
function of the k−th client.
FL allows a small range of performance deviation 
between the trained global federated model and the cen -
tralized training model. After several rounds of efficient 
federated global training, the performance of global model 
will continue to enhance and the convergence approaches 
to the performance of the centralized model [ 23]. In this 
basis, the basic framework of FL is introduced in Fig.  1. 
And the overall process of FL is as follows: Firstly, each 
client downloads the initial common model from the center 
server; Secondly, each client trains the model through their 
own local data until the local model converges; Thirdly, the 
client encrypts the model parameters and uploads them to 
the server; Finally, the server aggregates the uploaded gradi -
ents or parameters through the FL algorithm and updates the 
global model for next training. Looping through the above 
process, the client and the server communicate continuously 
until the global federated model converges.
2.2 The categorization of federated learning
In the light of the degree of overlap of data features in the 
client dataset, FL methods are usually subdivided into hori -
zontal federated learning (HFL), vertical federated learning 
(VFL) and federated transfer learning (FTL), which are suit -
able for solving different practical problems. The specific 
categorization illustration is shown in Fig.  2. Then, each 
category is briefly introduced.
Horizontal federated learning  For the dataset of each client, 
if the overlap of data features is larger than that of users, 
that is, there are more of the same data features and fewer of 
the same users, this is called horizontal federated learning 
(HFL) [ 24]. HFL is guided by the feature dimension of the 
data, and takes out the parts with the same characteristics of 
the participants but different users for joint training. In the 
process of HFL, the training sample space is enlarged by the 
Fig. 1  The basic framework of FL 
1 3515

==== Page 4 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535which can deal with problems beyond the capabilities of 
existing HFL and VFL. FTL models can learn from source 
domain to target domain based on the similarity of data or 
models among participants [ 30]. In most applications, tags 
in the source domain are used to predict the accuracy of tags 
in the target domain [ 31].
3 Privacy and security challenges in 
federated learning
Before the FL was put forward, machine learning privacy 
protection problem has been always been a hot research 
topic [ 8]. As an innovative technology, the research direc -
tion of FL is also closely related to previous privacy pro -
tection techniques. FL provides a security mechanism to 
protect data privacy, which can secure the transmission of 
model while protecting local sensitive data. However, even 
under the protection of the FL security mechanism, there 
are still various types of attacks that can be against the FL 
system, thereby destroying the reliability of the FL system 
and threatening the data privacy of the participants [ 32]. In 
this section, we will briefly review three different privacy-
protection technologies, identify the potential attacks and 
look for specific ways to prevent malicious hazards.sample union between participants, thereby improving the 
accuracy and generalization ability of model [ 25].
Vertical federated learning  Unlike HFL, the dataset char -
acteristics of VFL are largely different between clients. For 
dataset of clients, the overlap of users is greater than that 
of data features, that is, each client dataset has more of the 
same users, and the data features are hardly duplicated [ 26]. 
HFL is a kind of FL based on feature dimensions, which is 
segmented according to feature dimensions. HFL takes com -
mon users as data alignment orientation and takes out the 
parts of participants with the same users but not completely 
the same characteristics for joint training [ 27]. Therefore, 
during the joint training, sample alignment of each partici -
pant’s data is required first to obtain repeated data of users, 
and then training on selected data sets.
Federated transfer learning  HFL and VFL require all par -
ticipants to have the same feature space or sample space to 
build an efficient shared machine learning model. However, 
in more real scenarios, the datasets owned by each partici -
pant may be highly different [ 28, 29]. At the same time, it 
can help build an effective and accurate global model with 
only a small amount of data (samples and features do not 
overlap) and with less labels, while complying with data pri -
vacy and security regulations. This has given rise to a new 
category of FL, called federated transfer learning (FTL), 
Fig. 2  The categories of FL 
1 3516

==== Page 5 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535because the number of parameters is typically several orders 
of magnitude smaller than the size of the data, the computa -
tional overhead of the encryption process is greatly reduced. 
Therefore, under the low safety requirements, using SMC 
technology to build a security model can be exchanged for 
improved efficiency.
3.1.2 Differential privacy
After user data is encrypted and uploaded to the center 
server, malicious server can use the encrypted data to infer 
the characteristics of the user group, but cannot parse the 
information of an individual. This attack method is called 
differential attack. Aiming at this threaten, differential pri -
vacy (DP) technology can use random noise to drown the 
original data, making it impossible for attackers to reverse 
the original data from the database. The main way to imple -
ment DP is to add noise to the result set to solve the privacy 
protection problem of a single query. DP has rigorous data 
theory, and its essence is the protection of computational 
results rather than computational process. The advantage of 
DP is that it has a privacy protection model that is strictly 
independent of background knowledge and can theoreti -
cally resist any attack.
In view of the advantages of DP in data privacy pro -
tection, researchers migrated it to the FL system, and by 
combining DP with other technologies, many models of 
privacy protection were generated. In the federated optimi -
zation process, certain malicious participants may launch 
the differential attack to affect the federated model security. 
For solving this issue, Geyer et al. [ 40] designed a feder -
ated optimization algorithm with DP protection strategy. 
The goal is to achieve a balance between privacy loss and 
model performance while hiding customer contributions 
and private data during training. Huang et al. [ 41] designed 
an asynchronous FL privacy protection computing model. 
It protects data privacy while reducing noise to be added 
by using an adaptive DP mechanism. Xiong et al. [ 42] con -
ducted an in-depth analysis for privacy leakage problem in 
FL. Based on in-depth analysis, a new FL algorithm with 
differential privacy, 2DP-FL, is proposed to implement pri -
vacy protection by adding noise when training local models 
and distributed global models.
Most of the existing FL models train the deep neural net -
works, and the number of parameters transmitted during FL 
is often large [ 43, 44], so the communication cost of SMC 
cannot be ignored. Therefore, FL based on DP technology 
is often adopted in consideration of communication costs. 
The principle of FL based on DP is mainly to add noise to 
parameter information for data safe transmission, which will 
not generate a high communication cost or computing cost. 
However, since DP technique added noise to the parameters, 3.1 Privacy protection technique in federated 
learning
As a secure machine learning technology with privacy pro -
tection, the degree of protection of information privacy by 
FL is largely guaranteed by security encryption technol -
ogy [ 33]. Since the advent of encryption technology, it has 
become the focus of many scholars, which greatly pro -
tects privacy information from disclosure. At present, the 
traditional encryption techniques accepted by most schol -
ars include secure multi-party computing, differential pri -
vacy, and homomorphic encryption. These three privacy 
encryption methods provide basic guarantee for the secure 
transmission of parameters or gradients in FL. Next, these 
encryption techniques used in FL will be briefly introduced 
as follows.
3.1.1 Secure multi-party computing
Secure multi-party computing (SMC) was originated in 
1982 with Yao’s Millionaire problem [ 34], mainly used to 
protect the input data of each party participating in coopera -
tion. In this process, sensitive data is protected by encryp -
tion between parties. The SMC security model typically 
involves multiparty and provides security guarantee in a 
zero-knowledge simulation framework. And the parties 
know nothing but inputs and outputs. Throughout the cal -
culation process, parties always have absolute control over 
the data they own. In the related studies on SMC, one of 
the most advanced SMC frameworks is Sharemind [ 35], 
which is a secure multi-party computing system that allows 
user to process data without seeing it. With various research 
on private computing, SMC technology is becoming more 
mature. Xiong et al. [ 36] proposed a robust reversible image 
watermarking scheme using SMC technology based on 
lightweight encryption. And the proposed scheme based on 
bit prediction error extension (PEE) is guaranteed by SMC. 
An et al. [ 37] proposed a privacy-aware indoor location 
algorithm based on SMC to protect the private information 
of specific location. These efforts require users’ data to be 
secretly shared between non-colluding client.
With the development of FL, SMC has been improved 
and migrated to federated system to protect sensitive data 
by encrypting parameters. Bonawitz et al. [ 38] built a pri -
vacy-preserving FL framework, where SMC can securely 
aggregate the clients’ parameters, and be robust to clients’ 
exit. Xu et al. [ 39] proposed a non-interactive and verifiable 
privacy protection FL model, and proposed a novel privacy 
gradient aggregation scheme using random matrix coding 
and secure two-party computation. These SMC models lead 
to huge communication cost because of multiple interac -
tions involving in the learning process. However, in FL, 
1 3517

==== Page 6 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535local parameters. The proposed algorithm allows each cli -
ent to use different HE private keys in the same FL-based 
distributed cryptosystem, ensuring the privacy of param -
eters. These privacy-protected schemes effectively pre -
vent privacy disclosure of shared parameters in FL and is 
robust to collusion between clients and servers. Meanwhile, 
the development of HE technology is limited by the large 
amount of time cost during encryption operation. In the 
light of this issue, Zhang et al. [ 54] optimized previous HE 
by scaling gradients in advance and then cutting and post-
quantization encryption, which successfully decreases the 
encryption cost and the total number of ciphertext, as well 
as saving costs.
For clarity, we list the characteristic of three kinds of pri -
vacy protection techniques in Table 1.
3.2 Security attack and solutions in federated 
learning
In addition to improving the necessary data protection 
mechanism, it is also necessary to prevent malicious attacks 
from causing security risks of the federated system [ 55]. 
People often intuitively equate security and privacy, but 
there is actually a difference between the two. Security can 
guarantee the confidentiality and integrity of data, while 
privacy can further refine the privacy of personal informa -
tion. Privacy prevails when dealing with private data, while 
security means protecting data from unauthorized access. In 
FL, there are various types of attacks that can against the 
FL system to compromise the security of federated model 
and local participants’ model. In this segment, we intro -
duce the two most common types of attacks that FL studies: 
poisoning attacks and Byzantine attacks. And the existing 
research works of each attack method are introduced to 
understand the current development of FL security protec -
tion mechanism.
3.2.1 Poisoning attack
In the FL mechanism, poisoning attack tends to tamper, 
destroy or pollute the client’s local training dataset or model 
generated in the FL training process by means of poisoning, 
so as to affect the security of FL system [ 56]. The existing 
data poisoning types in FL are usually subdivided into data 
poisoning and model poisoning categories, which posed 
great threats to the security of FL.
Data poisoning attackers maliciously tamper with local 
client data’s source tags or characteristics to influence the 
training result of federated models [ 57]. Because of the 
distributed nature of FL deployment, it is difficult to deter -
mine whether a client is participating in FL in good faith, 
so detecting data poisoning is a challenging task. Data this affected the availability of model. To alleviate this prob -
lem, Sun et al. [ 45] combined DP with functional encryp -
tion, proposed a hybrid privacy protection scheme for FL, 
and used an interactive key generation method, which 
avoided the collusion problem and obtained a good balance 
between privacy protection and model accuracy. Fan et al. 
[46] constructed an adaptive DP method to increase noise 
adaptively according to the importance of features during 
model training. And a multi-objective optimization model 
is established, which can balance the conflicting indexes 
of accuracy and privacy protection effectively by adopting 
multi-objective optimization algorithm [ 47–49].
3.1.3 Homomorphic encryption
Homomorphic encryption (HE) is an encryption algo -
rithm which meets the homomorphic operation nature of 
the ciphertext. That is, it allows users to perform specific 
algebraic operations on ciphertext directly, and the result of 
ciphertext calculation is the same as that of plaintext encryp -
tion after the same operation. The design of an efficient HE 
algorithm involves some cryptography knowledge based on 
the complexity theory of mathematical computation. If a HE 
algorithm supports any form of ciphertext calculation, it is 
called fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) [ 50]. If par -
tial ciphertext computation is supported, for example, only 
addition, multiplication, or a limited number of additions 
is supported, it is called semi-homomorphic encryption or 
partially homomorphic encryption (PHE). It is worth not -
ing that when operating on an encrypted model using HE 
technique, all participants of these operations are required to 
share the same encryption key and the same decryption key.
In FL, HE allows the center server to carry out alge -
braic operations directly on encrypted parameters without 
decryption. Zhang et al. [ 51] proposed a privacy-protection 
and verifiable FL scheme. The scheme combines the chi -
nese residual theorem and Paillier homomorphic encryp -
tion technology to deal with shared gradients, which can 
realize privacy-protected FL with low computational and 
communication costs. However, once participants who hold 
the same secret key collude with each other, the FL scheme 
will unable to guarantee user privacy security. In addition, 
in FL, the server can extract the information of the training 
dataset from the shared gradient by using the public key, 
which may maliciously tamper with the calculation results, 
thus influencing the accuracy of the federated global model. 
To solve above issues, Ma et al. [ 52] made a multi-key HE 
protocol, in which model updates are encrypted through 
aggregated public keys and decryption requires cooperation 
among all participating devices. Park et al. [ 53] used HE 
technique to design a privacy-protected FL algorithm that 
enables centralized servers to directly aggregate encrypted 
1 3518

==== Page 7 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535DP approach with noise-adding mechanism is applied in the 
FL framework [ 61].
Another type of poisoning attack is caused by model poi -
soning. Some malicious attackers in FL can bring in hidden 
backdoor functionality to the local client model or global 
federated model, causing the model produce a specific error 
output. Model poisoning can take advantage of the fact 
that malicious participants in FL can directly influence the 
performance of federated global model, making the attack 
effect more powerful than training data poisoning attacks. In 
order to defense and reduce poisoning attack in FL, Zhao et 
al. [62] put forward a poisoning attack defense mechanism, 
which generates audit data through generative adversarial 
network during training [ 63], and then eliminates adversar -
ies who upload malicious models through the accuracy of 
audit models. Observing the effect of local model poison -
ing on the global model of FL, Shi et al. [ 64] designed a 
federated exception analysis enhanced distributed learn -
ing framework to implement active defense in FL. In this poisoning is a more covert type of attack than model poi -
soning. While the principle of ensuring participants’ privacy 
security, the central server is not clear about participants’ 
personal data and local training process. When the attacker 
can only affect the data collection process of the client of 
FL system, but cannot directly destroy the model trained by 
FL, such attacks are often difficult to detect. In recent years, 
some defense schemes have been studied to against data 
poison attack that can delete outliers by calculating the sim -
ilarity between data information [ 58]. In the aspect of this 
way, Tian et al. [ 59] proposed a strategy for detecting and 
suppressing potential outliers to defend against data poison -
ing attacks in FL. In the FL scenario of traffic flow predic -
tion, Qi et al. [ 60] came up with a FL framework which 
using consortium blockchain technique. The model trained 
from distributed vehicles need be verified and then stored on 
the blockchain to effectively prevent data poisoning attacks. 
In addition, to further protect data security on blockchain, a Privacy 
mechanismReference Contribution Advantage Disadvantage
Secure 
multi-party 
computing[35] Allow users to process data without seeing it Throughout 
the calcula -
tion process, 
parties always 
have absolute 
control over 
the data they 
ownCause huge 
communica -
tion cost in 
multi-party 
interaction[36] Use SMC technology to achieve a robust 
reversible image watermarking scheme
[37] Protect the private information of specific 
location in privacy-aware indoor location 
application
[38] Can securely aggregate the clients’ parameters 
in FL
[39] Propose a novel privacy gradient aggrega -
tion scheme using random matrix coding and 
secure two-party computation
Differential 
privacy[40] Achieve a balance between privacy loss and 
model performance while hiding customer 
contributions and private data during training.Has a privacy 
protection 
model that is 
strictly inde -
pendent of 
background 
knowledge 
and can theo -
retically resist 
any attackNumerous 
noises will 
affect the avail -
ability of model [41] Protect data privacy while reducing noise to 
be added by using an adaptive DP mechanism
[42] 2DP-FL is proposed to implement privacy 
protection by adding noise when training 
local models and distributed global models
[45] Combine DP with functional encryption, 
which avoided the collusion problem and 
obtained a good balance between privacy 
protection and model accuracy.
[46] Build a multi-objective optimization model 
to balance the conflicting indexes of accuracy 
and privacy protection effectively
Homo -
morphic 
encryption[51] Realize privacy-protected FL with low com -
putational and communication costs.Allow the 
center server to 
carry out alge -
braic opera -
tions directly 
on encrypted 
param -
eters without 
decryptionLarge amount 
of time cost dur -
ing encryption 
operation[52] Model updates are encrypted through aggre -
gated public keys and decryption requires 
cooperation among all participating devices
[53] Enables centralized servers to directly aggre -
gate encrypted local parameters
[54] Optimize previous HE by scaling gradients in 
advance and then cutting and post-quantization 
encryptionTable 1  The difference of several 
privacy protection techniques 
1 3519

==== Page 8 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535method to dynamically enhance the detection performance 
of Byzantine attacks with non-IID data. Different from the 
above methods of selecting trusted participants, Li et al. 
[69] focused on detecting the Byzantine model and identify 
the attacker in FL, puts forward a Byzantine resistant secure 
blockchained FL framework. the framework by introducing 
the validator to parallel execution of heavy validation work -
flow, improve the efficiency of the model validation, and 
through the Byzantine consistency validation to detect Byz -
antine attack resistance. The framework introduces valida -
tors to perform heavy validation workflows in parallel and 
detects Byzantine attacks through Byzantine anti-confor -
mance validation, which greatly improves the efficiency of 
model verification. Based on the in-depth study of specific 
attack behavior of Byzantine attackers, various protection 
mechanisms and strategies provide a strong guarantee for 
the detection and defense methods of Byzantine attacks.
Furthermore, the differences of several attack and defense 
strategies are listed in Table 2.
4 Communication challenge in federated 
learning
Communication overhead is also a major bottleneck for 
FL, because the communication cost is far greater than the 
computation cost when numerous edge devices are send -
ing their model parameters to central server. The commu -
nication cost is too large in the training process, resulting 
in low training efficiency of FL, which is not conducive to 
the application of FL in practical engineering field. There -
fore, for an efficient FL algorithm, it is necessary to enhance 
the communication efficiency. In the existing research for 
reducing communication cost of FL, the respond solution 
strategies from three aspects are often considered: federated 
learning optimization algorithm, client selection, and model 
compression. In this section, we summarize the researchers’ 
efforts to mitigate the communication cost challenge of FL 
in these three perspectives.
4.1 Federated Learning optimization algorithm
In the FL training process, the clients generate the local 
model after optimization processing steps such as gradient 
descent (GD) algorithm, and then transmit the trained model 
to the center server for aggregation. The performance of the 
local training model directly determines the performance of 
the federated model. Researchers have studied the influence 
of global communication iteration times between client and 
server and the local training times of client on FL perfor -
mance [ 70]. And it is verified that increasing local iteration 
times and decreasing the global communication round can framework, clients and server cooperate to analyze model 
exceptions and ensure the security and validity of the global 
model. Based on the characteristics of distributed learning 
mechanism for FL, the attack range of FL is larger than that 
of centralized learning, and the concealment is stronger. 
During the training and testing phases, any internal dishon -
est participant or external malicious attacker can have a very 
serious impact on the final performance of the federated 
global model. It is necessary to better understand the poten -
tial attacks of FL to improve the effectiveness and robust -
ness of detection and defense methods.
3.2.2 Byzantine attack
Many FL usually encourages as many clients as possible 
with good data quality to participate in FL training by incen -
tive mechanism, but does not consider the malicious clients 
attack problem in FL training process. In recent years, more 
individuals pay attention to the security of distributed learn -
ing, among which the Byzantine threat problem is the most 
important. Poisoning attack mainly considers the attack on 
a single user or a server, while Byzantine attack mainly con -
siders the collusion of multiple users in distributed learning 
environment. In FL, a malicious attacker may control mul -
tiple clients, known as Byzantine users. Byzantine users can 
upload fake data due to unreliable communication channels, 
corrupted hardware, or even malicious attacks, lead to the 
global model is manipulated by attackers and cannot be con -
verged. As an active internal attack pattern, Byzantine attack 
can easily harm the normal communication between client 
and server in FL. So, the defense and detection of Byzantine 
attack has been the hot issues in FL security research [ 65].
To better detect and defend attacks, researchers have 
conducted various research work on Byzantine attacks from 
different technologies and strategies. Ma et al. [ 66] put for -
ward a credibility-based approach to defend against Byz -
antine attacks. For Byzantine attacks with non-independent 
and identical distributed (non-IID) datasets, reliability indi -
cators were designed to evaluate the reliability of knowl -
edge transmitted by clients, and the reliability was updated 
according to the knowledge information shared by clients 
each round. At the same time, in the basic of secure two-
party computing protocol, an effective privacy protection 
parameter aggregation protocol is put forwarded. The pro -
posed method can identify Byzantine attackers accurately 
and update global model securely. Similarly, Zhai et al. 
[67] designed a Byzantine robust model for FL by evalu -
ating the reliability of non-IID data. However, the specific 
difference is that the reliability assessment method in this 
paper combines the adaptive anomaly detection model and 
data verification, in which adaptive mechanism and trans -
fer learning [ 68] are introduced into the anomaly detection 
1 3520

==== Page 9 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535Based on it, the FedAvg algorithm proposed by McMa -
han can reduce the communication cost by increasing local 
training times to reduce the communication round [ 9]. 
However, when the model converges to a certain extent, 
increasing training times can no longer alleviate the com -
munication cost challenge. More researchers try to optimize 
the FL framework algorithm to improve the training effi -
ciency and convergence of federated model, lead to reduce 
the federated communication rounds. Liu et al. [ 71] consid -
ered the momentum term related to the last iteration opti -
mization in gradient descent algorithm and proposed to use 
momentum gradient descent in the local model update pro -
cess of FL system to realize the accelerated convergence of 
the local model and improve the communication efficiency 
of FL. Wu et al. [ 72] used adaptive a learning rate algorithm 
to optimize the GD process, avoiding model overfitting and 
fluctuation, and effectively ensure efficient training of FL 
under the condition of limited communication cost. On the 
other hand, optimization the aggregation mode of the model 
can also improve federated model convergence efficiency 
and greatly reduce the communication rounds. Wu et al. [ 73] 
proposed a federated adaptive weighting algorithm based on 
observing the contribution of client nodes to the aggregation 
of federated global model. In each round of communica -
tion, different weights are adaptively allocated according 
to the clients’ contribution to update global model. And the effectively boost the convergence efficiency of the global 
model while ensuring the performance of the federated 
model. Therefore, a useful way to reduce the communica -
tion overhead is to reduce the frequency of communica -
tion and increase the time interval of model aggregation by 
improving the efficiency and performance of local training.Table 2  The difference of several attack and defense strategies
Attack mode Attack 
characteristicsReference Defense 
method
Poi-
soning 
attackData 
poisoningMaliciously 
tamper with 
local cli -
ent data’s 
source tags or 
characteristics[59] Detect and sup -
press potential 
outliers to 
defend attacks
[60] The model 
trained from 
distributed 
vehicles need 
be verified and 
then stored on 
the blockchain 
to prevent 
data poisoning 
attacks
Model 
poisoningBring in hid -
den backdoor 
functionality 
to the local 
client model or 
global federated 
model, causing 
the model pro -
duce a specific 
error output[62] Came up with a 
FL framework 
which using 
consortium 
blockchain 
technique
[64] Clients 
and server 
cooperate to 
analyze model 
exceptions 
and ensure the 
security and 
validity of the 
global model
Byzantine attack Exist malicious 
participants in FL 
training[66] Put forward 
a credibility-
based approach 
to defend 
against Byzan -
tine attacks.
[67] Designed a 
Byzantine 
robust model 
for FL by 
evaluating the 
reliability of 
non-IID data
[69] Introduce the 
validator to par -
allel execution of 
heavy valida -
tion workflow 
to improve the 
efficiency of the 
model validation
Fig. 3  Heterogeneity challenge and solutions in a federated learning 
environment 
1 3521

==== Page 10 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535efficient. Du et al. [ 82] adopted an efficient client selection 
scheme based on the shortest upload time to minimize the 
total training time of the FL, and designed a scheduling 
mechanism based on the maximum remaining bandwidth, 
which greatly reducing the upload time of each iteration and 
affecting the number of iterations. Nowadays, most of FL 
technology has been applied to the edge wireless network 
environment. With the complexity of the network environ -
ment of client devices and information of clients participat -
ing in practical federated tasks, the client selection problem 
has gradually become a complex optimization problem [ 83, 
84] that needs to be studied urgently.
4.3 Model compression
In addition to reducing the communication rounds by opti -
mizing the FL training algorithm and selecting the best cli -
ent, model compression can also significantly reduce the 
scale of parameter transmission, which is a direct and useful 
strategy to improve the algorithm communication efficiency 
[85]. Especially in federated neural network, the parameters 
of deep neural network model are often millions, and the 
communication cost of transmission parameters is very big 
[86]. Li et al. [ 87] analyzed data redundancy in data set and 
propose a coreset-based FL framework. The novel frame -
work used a smaller network model on the coreset instead 
of training the model on the whole dataset using the regular 
network model, thus achieving similar accuracy to training 
using the full data set while indirectly reducing the amount 
of data transferred by each client. Lu et al. [ 88] proposed 
an efficient asynchronous FL mechanism in edge network 
computing environment. In this mechanism, the client node 
adaptively calculates the threshold according to the parame -
ter changes in each round during model training to compress 
and reduce parameter. Li et al. [ 89] proposed two communi -
cation-efficient FL frameworks based on CS method, which 
are called CS-FL and 1-bit CS-FL. In the CS-FL, local 
updates are compressed into analog compression measure -
ments, which are then uploaded to the server by participants. 
Another 1-bit CS-FL method is to sparse local updates and 
compress them into 1-bit compressed measurements. Both 
of these methods can efficiently compress the uplink and 
downlink data during FL training.
Researchers have designed a variety of data compression 
methods to achieve efficient communication FL algorithm, 
but there is a general problem that the conflict between com -
munication resources and computing resources, communi -
cation resources and model training performance needs to 
be paid attention [ 90]. Most data compression methods are 
lossy, and the improvement of communication efficiency 
is at the cost of model accuracy [ 91]. Aiming at this kind 
of optimization problem with conflict among multiple contribution of client is first evaluated by the angle between 
local gradient vector and global gradient vector, and then 
quantified into weight coefficients by a nonlinear mapping 
function. These studies on federated learning optimization 
algorithms focus on accelerating the convergence time of 
global models by improving the training efficiency of local 
models and optimizing the aggregation mechanism, so as to 
achieve efficient communication.
4.2 Client selection
The classic FedAvg algorithm adopts the strategy of ran -
domly selecting clients [ 9], which may slow down the train -
ing efficiency and performance of global model. Because in 
a synchronous FL environment, the server needs to wait for 
model updates from all clients selected to participate in the 
FL task until the last client completes uploading the local 
model. Meanwhile, the clients in FL have some differences 
in computing capacity and communication resources, which 
leads to the instability of participants and makes the high 
communication cost become one of the efficiency bottle -
necks of FL. In practical FL applications, the client selec -
tion scheme participating in federated directly affects the 
efficiency and performance of federated model [ 74, 75].
Considering from this perspective, Liu et al. [ 76] studied 
an orthogonal method to identify irrelevant updates made 
by clients by detecting whether local model updates are 
consistent with the trend of global model updates, so as to 
avoid transmitting those irrelevant parameters to the server 
and reduce the occupation of network resources. Deng et al. 
[77] proposed an automated-quality-awareness based client 
selection framework, which taken into account various fac -
tors affecting learning performance, adopted reinforcement 
learning method [ 78, 79]. And it automatically evaluated 
the model quality of clients, and automatically selects high-
quality clients for the federated task within a limited budget, 
which significantly improves learning efficiency. Lai et al. 
[80] proposed a framework that prioritized client partici -
pation in FL training using existing data that provided the 
greatest utility in improving model accuracy and the ability 
to run training quickly.
Additionally, in practical scenarios, some clients have 
limited computing resources or are in poor wireless chan -
nel conditions, which will lead to long global training delay 
of federated model. Therefore, the problem of client selec -
tion under resource constraints is also the focus of current 
research. For responding to this issue, Nishio [ 81] et al. 
proposed a new FL protocol, Fedcs, where the deadline for 
downloading, updating and uploading local models was pre -
set. Then, greedy selection was adopted to enable the server 
to aggregate as many clients’ update as possible during 
the restricted time, which made the whole training process 
1 3522

==== Page 11 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535al. [102] against the current challenges of federated edge 
learning (FEEL) with limited communication bandwidth, 
scarce energy, and heterogeneous data distribution, and 
proposed a device scheduling algorithm considering data 
quality, which prioritizes devices with high quality data 
while minimizing FEEL completion time and energy con -
sumption of participating devices. It greatly improves the 
effectiveness and efficiency of FL training while alleviat -
ing the challenge of data heterogeneity. Furthermore, on the 
basis of considering this challenge, Li et al. [ 69] proposed a 
meta-learning-based personalized FL method which consid -
ering the non-IID characteristics of spatiotemporal data for 
solving he spatiotemporal prediction problem of urban con -
struction. The global spatial-temporal schema diagram is 
automatically constructed through data federation, and each 
client customizes its own personalized model by evaluating 
the differences between the global schema diagram and the 
local schema diagram. For non-IID data with noisy, Hu et al. 
[103] proposed a FL framework based on federated Kalman 
filter (FKF) confidence. It used a convolutional adversarial 
generative network with advanced auxiliary classifiers as 
feature extraction to pre-train the data, and then the confi -
dence parameters to each client are generated by the FKF, 
which overcomes the challenge of data heterogeneity and 
realizes efficient aggregation of FL. These methods greatly 
alleviate the heterogeneity of data between clients in FL, 
but it is obvious that the actual optimization focus of these 
methods is different, so they adopted different methods. 
Data heterogeneity problem will affect different stages of 
FL training process, such as client selection stage, model 
transmission stage and aggregation stage. Therefore, in the 
study of data heterogeneity, the influence of heterogeneity 
challenge on the training and application of FL model needs 
to be deeply analyzed when the data heterogeneity problem 
is studied.
5.2 Model heterogeneity
In the process of parameters aggregation in FL, the local 
model structure of each client is typically required to be 
uniform. However, such assumptions are not realistic in 
the actual scenario of FL. As each client is not necessarily 
the same and located in different spaces, and the resource 
profiles of mobile devices participating in FL tasks are not 
always the same. The communication volume, computing 
power and data possessed by each client are very different 
and these factors will strictly limit the model structure of 
each client’s local training, resulting in structural differ -
ences among the client models. When the computing power 
and storage capacity of a client are small, only a simple 
model can be trained locally on the client, rather than overly 
complex models as required by the server. Meanwhile, in objectives [ 92, 93], researchers began to try to use multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) to get the opti -
mal solution [ 94–96]. Zhu et al. [ 97] tried to use MOEA to 
optimize the structure of neural network model in FL, and 
achieved optimal compression of network model param -
eters, thus achieving small communication cost and good 
global model performance synchronously. On the basis of 
the study of this problem, Lan et al. [ 98] applied FL to skin 
cancer detection applications to ensure efficient skin can -
cer detection while protecting patient data privacy. In the 
designed strategy, the communication cost of FL is reduced 
by sparse the global model, and an MOEA is used to bal -
ance the conflict between the communication overhead, 
accuracy, loss and AUC of global federated model.
5 Heterogeneity challenge in federated 
learning
Traditional FL usually aggregates all selected client-side 
model parameters or gradients to construct a common feder -
ated global model. In the process of aggregation, researchers 
gradually discovered the federated heterogeneity problems 
in practical applications, such as the data heterogeneity 
problem attribute to the non-IID of data for each client, and 
model heterogeneity problem with different size of each cli -
ent model structure caused by different device resource con -
straints and personalized task, these heterogeneity problems 
may reduce the performance of the global model or makes it 
difficult to get convergence to some extent [ 99].
5.1 Data heterogeneity
In a real FL scenario, clients participating in FL are often 
scattered in different areas with different user activity, result -
ing in inconsistent data volume collected by each client and 
data distribution of each client. Therefore, the amount of 
data and data distribution of different clients participating 
in practical FL application are usually heterogeneous. For 
different clients with heterogeneous data, traditional direct 
average aggregation approach will lead to model drift prob -
lem and affect the convergence and precision of the global 
model [ 100]. As such, an effective FL method should be 
found according to the specific distribution of client data and 
the specific situation in the actual application environment.
To solve the statistical heterogeneity, scholars also have 
done lots of studies. Wang et al. [ 101] proposed an effective 
polynomial time algorithm to schedule workloads on dif -
ferent clients. For the problem of heterogeneous data, they 
converted it into an average cost minimization optimization 
problem and used a greedy algorithm to seek for balance 
between calculation time and calculation accuracy. Taik et 
1 3523

==== Page 12 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535information fusion. In the shallow feature layer of each cli -
ent model, FL can be used to achieve multi-features fusion, 
while the deep layer is specially designed to achieve local 
personalized tasks. On the other hand, when the client mod -
els are of the same type but have different model structures 
with personalized task requirements, the problem of model 
heterogeneity is also called parameter heterogeneity. In this 
case, each client can transform different model structures 
into the same structure through some mappings approach 
for federation. While in the local model training, each cli -
ent can selectively learn the federated model to help guide 
the training of the local model [ 110], so as to build the local 
personalized model.
In Fig.3 below, we briefly summary the solutions pro -
posed by these relevant literatures for the two heteroge -
neous challenges.
6 The application of federated learning
In the big data environment, users’ personal information and 
behavioral data can be recorded in mobile smart devices or 
edge servers. So, data privacy protection provides a nec -
essary guarantee for intelligent development, and various 
fields pay more attention to the security and privacy of pri -
vate information. With the joint efforts of many scholars, FL 
has acted important role in the fields of various industries. 
And the current mainstream FL application areas are health 
care, finance, industry and urban services. In this section, 
we describe in detail the application of FL in these classic 
scenarios.
6.1 Federated learning in intelligent medical
In the medical field, individuals usually pay more attention 
to the privacy information of patients can not be disclosed, 
at the same time, various hospitals cannot exchange patient 
information privately, so it is quite suitable to use FL tech -
nique for protecting pathological information [ 111]. When 
applying FL to health care applications, each hospital rep -
resents the individual client, and the server can be the data 
center of the government agency. In this way, each hospi -
tal downloads the initial common model from the server 
and trains it with local data. After completion, the model 
information is encrypted and uploaded to the server, and the 
global model is updated through the federation algorithm. In 
this way, the data center will get a disease detection model 
with superior performance. The combination of FL and 
intelligent medicine application is shown in the Fig. 4.
FL has been used to build various disease detection mod -
els. Under the current severe epidemic situation, it solved 
COVID-19 detection, DNA sequencing and other problems, traditional FL, the common federated model is constructed 
through collaborative training of clients, while the model 
obtained by local training of clients essentially serves local 
tasks, and unified model type can limit the performance of 
local task execution, so the local model of clients is usu -
ally heterogeneous under the guidance of personalized tasks 
and local resources constrict [ 104]. The heterogeneity of the 
model allows different clients to design local models of dif -
ferent types and structural sizes based on their computational 
power. And overcoming the problem of inability to directly 
integrate models caused by heterogeneity while maintaining 
the personalization of the local model is the current chal -
lenge for FL. Aiming at above practical challenges caused 
by model heterogeneity in aggregation mechanism of FL, 
researchers have conducted many extensive studies.
In order to alleviate model heterogeneity problem and 
obtain high-quality personalized model for each client, 
some scholars have focused on personalized FL methods. 
Mills et al. [ 105] used the idea of multitasking to develop 
a multi-task FL algorithm for personalized federated model 
training, which introduced a non-federated batch normaliza -
tion layer in federated deep neural network. The proposed 
algorithm allows users to personalize the training model 
according to their own local data, thus facilitating the per -
formance and convergence speed of the local client model. 
Ni et al. [ 106] proposed a federated codistillation algorithm, 
which added a distillation term to the local objective func -
tion so that the local model could be trained based on the 
output of global model. In addition, the proposed algorithm 
was further extended to federated two-way codistillation 
to personalize the local model for each device. Yang et 
al. [107] designed a new FL framework, which trains the 
secure and personalized distributed model through FTL to 
implement the application of secure image steganography. 
Liu et al. [ 108] considered task individualization in the 
framework of federated random forest. It used locally sensi -
tive hash method to calculate the similarity of users, carried 
out collaborative training for similar users, and made use 
of the characteristics of ensemble learning to incrementally 
select models, so as to carry out personalized training for 
the models.
Summarize the above research work on personalization 
of FL, we can see that the heterogeneity of model in FL can 
be roughly divided into the heterogeneity of model types 
and the heterogeneity of model structures. The model types 
(e.g. different neural networks, random tree, etc.) and the 
structures of model (e.g. different neural network depths 
etc.) used by different clients are different due to the limi -
tation of client device resources or the influence of local 
task individuation [ 109]. When the local model types of 
each client are different, some feature extraction methods 
can be used to extract data features abstractly to achieve 
1 3524

==== Page 13 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535authorized by users. The emergence of FL provides a good 
paradigm to solve this problem, especially in cross-domain 
recommendation, including short video recommendation, 
social platform, online shopping platform and etc. The fed -
erated recommendation system typically includes federal -
ization of recommendation algorithm based on collaborative 
filtering [ 118], federalization of recommendation algorithm 
based on deep learning and federation of recommendation 
algorithm based on meta-learning. In the vertical federated 
recommendation framework, the server is not limited to the 
data generated by users in this field, at the same time, we 
can also refer to the data of users in other areas, so as to 
provide users with high-quality content. The combination 
of FL and recommendation system is shown in the Fig. 5.
To further enhance the accuracy of the recommenda -
tion system and strengthen the deep integration of FL and 
recommendation system, many scholars have done carious 
research [ 119, 120]. Du et al. [ 121] proposed a user-level 
distributed matrix decomposition framework. Inspired by 
federation learning, the framework can learn the global 
model by collecting gradient information of client. Duan et 
al. [122] proposed a federated recommendation algorithm 
that allows each cloud to share weights and cooperatively 
train the global model, while combining matrix factorization 
with 8-bit quantization to reduce communication overhead 
and network bandwidth. Caballero et al. [ 123] proposed an 
activity recommendation model based on secure federated 
network Eduroam. The system can provide personalized 
information in the campus environment according to per -
sonal data of user. Muhammad et al. [ 124] proposed a FL-
based recommendation algorithm: FedFast, which improves 
the classical FedAvg algorithm and accelerates the training 
of distributed recommendation model.
Under the premise that the user data is not local, the 
encrypted parameter information is transmitted between cli -
ents and server to train a federated recommendation model 
with good performance. Moreover, the combination of FL and showed good detection performance. For example, 
Ouyang et al. [ 112] proposed a COVID-19 collaborative 
early warning framework based on blockchain and intelli -
gent contract to predict the detection results of new cases. 
This framework crowdsourced the task to medical establish -
ments, social institutions and individuals to collaborate for 
early warning. And Dayan et al. [ 113] proposed a FL model, 
which predicts the future oxygen demand of patients with 
COVID-19 symptoms by inputting vital signs, laboratory 
data and chest x-rays, and better predicts the clinical out -
come of patients with COVID-19, which lays a foundation 
for the wider application of FL in health care. Furthermore, 
an auxiliary diagnosis model for cancer patients based on 
FL is proposed by Ma et al. [ 114]. With the help of federated 
diagnostic model, doctors can provide personalized nutri -
tional plans and treatment options for patients, and prolong 
the life of patients. This model has a certain guiding signifi -
cance in the field of cancer rehabilitation medicine.
In the medical field, patient data is sensitive data, and 
many patients are reluctant to share their private data for 
intelligent testing services. In this situation, the security and 
effectiveness of FL technology provide feasible suggestions 
for the application of intelligent services in the medical 
field. The combination of FL and medical industry can build 
a disease detection model with good performance without 
harming private information of patient, which promotes the 
process of intelligence of medical industry [ 115].
6.2 Federated learning in recommended system
Traditional recommender systems need to collect and ana -
lyze large amounts of user data to recommend content or 
services [ 116, 117], but due to the concern of privacy secu -
rity and data island problem, this operation is often not 
Fig. 5  Federated recommendation system 
Fig. 4  Federated intelligent medicine 
1 3525

==== Page 14 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535the privacy of PM2.5 prediction data, but also reduces trans -
mission consumption in smart city sensing applications. Li 
et al. [ 69] proposed a spatio-temporal prediction technology 
to protect privacy through combining FL, which ensured 
spatio-temporal prediction accurate under the premise of 
protecting data privacy in construction of smart cities. Yuan 
et al. [ 134] proposed a federated deep learning algorithm 
based on spatio-temporal long-term and short-term net -
work, which used observed historical traffic data to predict 
traffic flow, ensuring data privacy and effectively alleviating 
traffic congestion in smart cities.
The emergence of FL provides a new paradigm for build -
ing smart city. This effectively protects the data privacy, 
promotes the sharing and fusion of data at all levels of city, 
taps the potential value of urban data, and further promoting 
the process of urban intelligent construction, so that citizens 
could fully enjoy high-quality urban services.
6.4 Federated learning in finance and insurance
In order to fully analyze and utilize big data, cooperation 
among financial institutions has gradually become the trans -
formation trend of financial and insurance industry [ 135]. 
In recent years, some financial institutions have carried out 
FL applications, mainly focusing on risk control, marketing, 
anti-money laundering and other aspects. The application of 
FL in financial scenarios, including HFL helps many banks 
train credit of depositor forecasting models, and VFL helps 
different financial institutions predict loan repayment abil -
ity. No matter which kind of FL is used, it will help financial 
scenarios to better understand investment ability of custom -
ers and credit rating scores. Similarly, participants in FL 
in the financial field will be different financial institutions, 
which keep investment information of user, and will train 
different global models for different financial tasks under 
the assumption that the data are not exposed [ 136]. The 
combination of FL and finance application is shown in the 
Fig. 7.
However, most of the combinations of FL and finance 
application are still in the early research stage and have not 
been put into large-scale application. At present, there is a 
classic application of FL in the financial field is WeBank 
institution used FL in the risk management of small and 
micro business credit and personal loans, which helps bank 
solve third-party data for risk control modeling. And then 
better predict and score the credit information of enter -
prises, as well as the insurance claims of users. Based on the 
credit risk assessment applications, Cheng et al. [ 137] pro -
posed an efficient privacy-protection boosting tree frame -
work based on VFL, which implements privacy-preserving 
joint machine learning training on vertically segmented cli -
ent credit score data.and recommendation system aims to provide users with 
accurate and feasible recommend services on the premise 
of protecting privacy and trade secrets user, which promot -
ing the progress of recommendation technology in various 
commerce institutions.
6.3 Federated learning in smart city
The development of the city is inseparable from the joint 
efforts of government agencies, private enterprises and indi -
viduals [ 125, 126], and the improvement of data privacy 
requirements leads to the data center can not provide data 
for third parties at will [ 127, 128]. This limits the exchange 
of data at different levels. The emergence of FL effectively 
solves the problem of data isolated island and integrates 
data at all levels of the city in order to provide better urban 
applications and transportation services for citizens [ 129, 
130]. When FL is applied to smart city construction, govern -
ment agencies and private enterprises will act as data own -
ers, that is, clients. And the urban data management center 
will become the service. In order to solve various problems 
in the construction of smart cities, the service will unite with 
different levels of institutions in the city to train a global 
model, it will deal with different tasks, so as to provide more 
convenient urban services for citizens [ 131]. The combina -
tion of FL and smart city application is shown in the Fig. 6.
In view of this, many researchers have conducted a series 
of studies on the application of FL in urban development. 
Jiang et al. [ 132] made an in-depth description on the fea -
sibility of FL in smart city perception, and summarized the 
open problems and challenges in applications, so as to pro -
vide guidance for scholars on this topic. Putra et al. [ 133] 
proposed federated compression learning, which ensures 
Fig. 6  Federated learning in smart city 
1 3526

==== Page 15 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–5356.5 Federated learning in edge computing
As the information technology rapid evolves, the functions 
of personal mobile devices have gradually become intelli -
gent, which provides an effective guarantee for processing 
distributed edge data safely in FL [ 138]. The combination of 
edge computing and FL enables edge devices to train a com -
mon machine learning model with superior performance 
without sending source data to cloud devices [ 139]. And the 
Fig. 8 provides a diagram of this combination.
To effectively combine marginal computing with FL, 
scholars have carried out research from different angles. Ye 
et al. [ 140] proposed an edge FL framework, which sepa -
rates the local model update process that should be imple -
mented independently by mobile devices. Then the outputs 
of the mobile device are aggregated to the server, which 
improves the training efficiency and reduces the interac -
tion frequency. Jiang et al. [ 141] proposed a novel FL algo -
rithm with adaptive learning rate to meet different precision 
requirements and speed up the local training process. And 
a fair aggregation strategy is designed to minimize the pre -
cision difference between terminal devices. For improving 
the communication efficiency of federated edge computing, 
the network resources and training rate of the edge side is 
considered in practical learning, and an asynchronous fed -
eration learning is designed in edge computing. Wang et 
al. [142] proposed an efficient asynchronous joint learning 
method to alleviate the inefficiency caused by the hetero -
geneity and autonomy of edge nodes. This method allows 
edge clients to choose some models from cloud to update 
asynchronously according to the local data distribution, so 
as to decrease the amount of computation and communica -
tion and promote the efficiency of FL. To further protect 
the data privacy at the edge, Liu et al. [ 143] considered the 
asynchronous convergence FL of obsolete coefficients and 
uses blockchain networks to aggregate and generate global 
model. It not only protects privacy, but also avoids com -
munication interruption caused by abnormal training fail -
ure of local equipment, special attacks and etc. At the same 
time, Chen et al. [ 144] proposed a FL parameter aggregation 
method based on mutual information, which can resist mali -
cious node attacks and maintain the robustness of FL.
With the progress of the Internet of things, FL also pro -
vides the possibility for the secure interconnection of edge 
computing data [ 145]. On the other hand, with the deep -
ening of the concept of privacy protection, federated edge 
computing has more and more potential and potential value. 
further make edge computing towards the direction of 
integration.As a field with strong demand for privacy protection, 
the combination of financial industry with FL effectively 
provides a very superior paradigm for breaking down the 
barriers of financial data and promoting the intelligent 
application of financial and insurance enterprises.
Fig. 9  Federated intrusion detection 
Fig. 8  Federated learning in edge computing 
Fig. 7  Federated learning applications in financial 
1 3527

==== Page 16 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–5356.6 Federated leaning in intrusion detection
Intrusion detection is a commonly used network secu -
rity defense technology. Nowadays, the deep learning 
techniques are usually used to achieve network intrusion 
detection to achieve higher detection accuracy [ 146, 147]. 
However, deep learning machine learning model training 
often requires plenty of data, in reality, some institutions 
lack of network intrusion detection data sets, which is dis -
advantageous to the training of the model [ 148, 149]. At the 
same time, uploading data from all institutions for central -
ized in-depth learning and training will face privacy issues.
The emergence of FL alleviates the above problems to 
some extent, and the Fig. 9 shows a effective diagram of this 
combination To further improve the recognition accuracy of 
intrusion detection under the federated framework, Tang 
et al. [ 150] proposed a FL-based network intrusion detec -
tion method, which allows multiple institutions to jointly 
carry out in-depth learning and training under the condition 
of retaining local data. At the same time, Zhao et al. [ 151] 
proposed an intelligent intrusion detection method based on 
FL-assisted long short-term memory. Liu et al. [ 143] pro -
posed a cooperative intrusion detection mechanism based 
on FL, which reduces the resource utilization of the central 
server and ensures data security and privacy. Furthermore, 
in order to ensure the security of the global model, the block -
chain is employed to store and share the training model. Li 
et al. [ 152] proposed a new federated deep learning scheme, 
which used convolution neural network and gated loop unit 
to build an efficient intrusion detection model, which allows 
multiple industrial clusters to build this model in the way 
of privacy protection. And a reliable communication proto -
col based on Paillier cryptosystem is designed to protect the 
security of the model parameters transmission.
The application of FL in intrusion detection not only 
ensures a high detection rate, but also protects the data pri -
vacy of various institutions, and alleviates the problem of 
data island faced by intrusion detection.
Furthermore, these are the papers on the applied work of 
FL technology and we list them in Table 3. The papers in 
Table 3 are categorized according to the type of FL appli -
cation domain and the FL challenges it addresses. Some 
papers mainly focus on the privacy challenge of federated 
learning technology in different domain scenarios, and the 
other part focuses on other communication and heterogene -
ity challenges faced by federated learning in applications.Table 3  The research work of FL applications
Reference Application Contribution Major FL chal -
lenges solved
[112], 
[113], 
[114]Intelligent 
medicalApplying federated 
learning techniques 
to disease detectionprotect patients’ 
sensitive data 
and eliminate 
the data island 
challenge
[121], 
[123]Recom -
mendation 
systemProposed a user-level 
distributed matrix 
decomposition 
frameworkLearn the global 
model under 
strict privacy 
requirements
[122], 
[124]Recom -
mendation 
systemAllow each cloud to 
share weights and 
cooperatively train 
the global model,Reduce com -
munication 
overhead
[132] Smart city Made an in-depth 
description on the 
feasibility of FL in 
smart city percep -
tion, and summarized 
the open problems 
and challenges in 
applicationsProvide guid -
ance for schol -
ars on FL topic
[133] Smart city Proposed federated 
compression learningProtect the pri -
vacy of PM2.5 
prediction data, 
and reduce 
transmission 
consumption
[69], [134]Smart city Proposed a spatio-
temporal prediction 
technologyProtect personal 
privacy
[137] Finance and 
insuranceProposed an efficient 
privacy-protection 
boosting tree 
framework for the 
credit risk assessment 
applicationsprotect users’ 
sensitive data 
and eliminate 
the data island 
challenge
[140], 
[141], 
[143]Edge 
computingProposed an edge FL 
frameworkImprove 
the training 
efficiency and 
reduce the inter -
action frequency
[142] Edge 
computingProposed an efficient 
asynchronous joint 
learning methodAlleviate the 
heterogene -
ity challenge 
and decrease 
the amount of 
computation and 
communication
[144] Edge 
computingProposed a FL 
parameter aggrega -
tion method based on 
mutual informationResist malicious 
node attacks
[150], [151], 
[143], [152]Intrusion 
detectionProposed a FL-based 
network intrusion 
detection method and 
designed secure pro -
tection mechanismsReduce the 
resource utiliza -
tion of the central 
server and ensures 
data security and 
privacy
1 3528

==== Page 17 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535communication ability between devices. In the traditional 
federated algorithm, researchers often focused on the con -
vergence of global federated model. While the convergence 
of the global model often requires many communications 
between the client and the server, which undoubtedly results 
in a lot of communication costs [ 158]. And due to the influ -
ence of regional economy, network bandwidth and other 
factors, different enterprises participating in FL have differ -
ent communication resource restriction. At the same time, 
the fairness of cooperation in FL is also a problem to be 
considered in the design of federated learning algorithm. 
The traditional FL mechanism makes the clients obtain the 
same global model, ignores the different contributions of 
participants and the incentive mechanism in the cooperative 
system, which is not conducive to the participation of more 
participants in the FL system, thus hindering the sustainable 
development of the FL system. These considerations have 
gradually led to the design of FL algorithms more efficient 
and comprehensive. At present, there is still no a universal 
FL algorithm can solve all the challenges in practical appli -
cation. With the implementation of the practical application 
platform of FL, the optimization objectives and training 
methods of FL under different requirements and resource 
constraints should also be appropriately readjusted, and the 
FL algorithm also needs to be combined with specific train -
ing methods and aggregation mechanisms. Therefore, it is 
still particularly important to optimize FL framework and 
design efficient FL algorithm to improve the overall effi -
ciency of FL, reduce the communications cost between cli -
ents and servers, ensure the model fairness, and encourage 
enterprises to invest more awards for enhancing the training 
performance of global model.
(3) Develop the selection strategy of large-scale clients 
in FL. In the training of FL global model, the global perfor -
mance is greatly affected by client data quality, client reputa -
tion and credibility, training resources, energy consumption 
and other factors [ 159]. Meanwhile, because many of the 
clients participating in FL are intelligent user devices, they 
are in the mobile geographical location and dynamic net -
work environment, which result in unstable training effi -
ciency. With the popularization and large-scale applications 
of FL, the number of mobile clients participating in FL is 
increasing exponentially. Subsequently, it is necessary to 
consider both scheduling strategy efficiency and how to 
select high-quality [ 160, 161], stable performance clients in 
a complex FL environment to balance more selection targets 
[162]. On the other hand, as a key step in FL algorithm, cli -
ent selection is performed for each communication round, 
which makes client selection a dynamic scheduling problem 
[163]. Therefore, it has become the focus and difficulty of 
many scholars to study an efficient client dynamic selection 
scheme, which dynamically select high-quality clients from 7 Prospect for federated learning
Nowadays, the rapid development of AI accelerates the 
process of intelligent digitization in various industries, 
which brings the problems of data fragmentation and data 
island [ 153, 154], it hinders the data sharing among vari -
ous fields and can not fully tap the potential value of data. 
The emergence of FL has alleviated the above issues to a 
certain degree and became the focus of many scholars. The 
development of FL is faced with multiple challenges, and no 
single strategy can comprehensively solve these bottlenecks 
in the practical application of FL technology. Although 
scholars have conducted some research on all aspects of FL 
which being as a kind of new-developed privacy-protection 
machine learning technique, there are still some aspects 
worth paying attention for scholars to studying and explor -
ing in depth.
(1) Research on more efficient encryption algorithms and 
defensive attack methods to improve the security of FL. 
With the continuous breakthrough of information technol -
ogy, the means of lawbreakers to steal user information are 
increasing [ 155]. The emergence of new DOS and DDOS 
attacks and new computer viruses increases the disclosure 
risk of user private information [ 156]. This hinders the data 
sharing among the enterprises participating in FL, and can -
not fully tap the potential value of the data, resulting in huge 
economic losses. It is necessary to design more superior 
encryption method and attack detection method to enhance 
the security of FL and defend more kinds of attack dangers 
[157]. To ensure data security and improve encryption effi -
ciency, some hardware-based encryption techniques should 
also be focused on. Some researchers also are considering 
the combination of emerging protection technologies such 
as block chain and FL to ensure the cross-domain learning 
security of FL. Meanwhile, due to the increasing scale of 
current FL deployments involving servers and a large num -
ber of client nodes, the types and number of attacks that 
may be attacked are far greater than centralized training 
methods. In the future, whether large-scale client participa -
tion can effectively continue to ensure the security of FL 
is debatable. Since the client uploads parameters instead 
of local data in FL, it is difficult for the server to identify 
malicious clients directly. Therefore, in addition to the exist -
ing client-side statistical information, it is necessary to use 
external source information that can be obtained in practical 
applications. External source information largely can help 
service providers find safe and efficient defense methods 
and accurately identify attacks and intrusions that are not 
easy to detect.
(2) Research on more efficient federated learning algo -
rithms. In the period of big data, more requirements have 
been raised for the computing power of equipment and the 
1 3529

==== Page 18 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535coal [ 167], power dispatching [ 168] and other fields. For 
example, in the education field, a multi-data source stu -
dent information sharing platform can be build due to the 
accumulation of a large amount of data in students’ physi -
cal and mental health research, and the data value sharing 
is realized under the condition of guaranteeing the privacy 
of data source, so security FL becomes a worthy solution. 
And in the process of dealing with government data, many 
government departments are reluctant to share personal data 
because the lack of credible data asset right confirmation 
scheme. Under such circumstances, FL can be integrated 
with big data development components to solve the data 
island of government departments and achieve secure cross-
departmental sharing and sharing of government and social 
data, effectively reducing the risk of data leakage.
At the moment, the FL has a promising application pros -
pect. But the FL technique applied to more fields is very 
much a blank area, which need to be explore to make FL 
applied to all aspects of people daily lives and lower the risk 
of privacy information disclosure in the big data era [ 169].
In recent years, the amount of literature on FL has grown 
exponentially, which show that people have paid more atten -
tion to the importance of privacy protection. As a solution of 
traditional machine learning in security protection, FL can 
fully release the productivity of big data and solve the prob -
lem of privacy protection. However, in the face of various 
application requirements in the actual complex environment 
and the deficiency of FL, it is necessary to dynamically opti -
mize FL training according to objectives and constraints. FL 
is not only the union of models, but also the union of knowl -
edge and non-sensitive information. The idea of federated 
learning can provide a feasible solution for other areas of 
research that are not only machine learning area.
8 Conclusion
FL technique, as one of the important solutions of privacy 
protection, has gained rapid development and enough atten -
tion in recent years. From the basic knowledge and frame -
work of FL to the methods and strategies for solving above 
challenges, researchers have carried out careful research on 
the various branches of FL, and have done a lot of research 
work in each branch. Researchers have a more in-depth 
understanding of FL, and based on this to achieve a perfect 
combination of FL with various applications.
This paper summarized the current research achieve -
ments of FL, systematically introduced the concept of FL, 
the challenges faced by the development of FL, and the 
research direction of FL combined with various applica -
tions. On the basis of these, we made a deep thinking and 
analysis on the development of FL in the future and the a large number of clients to optimize the global model and 
enhance the robustness of FL. In the future development of 
FL, the problem of client selection is bound to develop in 
large scale and complexity, and it is gradually important to 
efficiently select the client suitable for FL in the changing 
environment.
(4) Research on new model fusion method in multi-
modal FL. Due to the diversity and heterogeneity of data of 
enterprise devices in different fields, clients participating in 
FL can provide different forms of data, including pictures, 
voice, text, and etc., this is the multi-modal data. Different 
data types make it necessary for clients to train different 
local models to perform locally personalized tasks. When 
the clients carry out FL, it is very difficult for the server 
to directly aggregate the different modal models uploaded 
by the client. This heterogeneity mentioned here is differ -
ent from the model heterogeneity challenge in Sect. 5.2. 
The heterogeneity here refers to the different structures and 
types of models due to different data forms, not just dif -
ferent structures. For example, one client trains text data, 
another client trains image data, and the types and struc -
tures of network models suitable for processing local tasks 
are different. Therefore, how to mine the huge value hidden 
in different modal data, establish the relationship between 
different modal models, realize the fusion of multi-modal 
models, and improve the performance of local models, is 
the current research focus of multi-modal FL. In this case, 
when updating the global model, the server needs to design 
a new model fusion method to deal with the model uploaded 
by the client before the update, in order to better update the 
global model, and enable FL to provide personalized ser -
vices for the different clients.
(5) Deepen the research and application of FL in vari -
ous fields. The development of FL has experienced three 
stages: traditional privacy protection, FL and security FL. 
Basically, all kinds of commonly used machine learning 
algorithms can adopt FL method for model training, sup -
port structured, text, image and other types of data sources, 
and can be applied in sample classification, path program -
ming [ 164], regression prediction, image recognition [ 165, 
166], gene analysis, natural language and other tasks. In 
recent years, FL has played an important role in health care, 
finance, Internet of things, urban services and other fields 
where there is a strictly requirement for privacy protection. 
Based on the characteristics of distributed learning approach 
in FL, it also plays a prominent part in relieving the storage 
pressure and computing pressure of central server, adjusting 
data distribution structure and optimizing federated train -
ing mode. Besides to promote cooperation between different 
regions and different fields and further promote commer -
cial development, scholars should pay some attention to the 
application of FL in education, e-government, meteorology, 
1 3530

==== Page 19 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–53512. Li H (2021) Image error correction of hockey players’ step-by-
step pull shooting based on Bayesian classification. Int J Comput 
Sci Math 14(2):185–195
13. Li A, Zhang L, Wang J, Han F, Li X (2022) Privacy-Preserving 
Efficient Federated-Learning Model Debugging. IEEE Trans Par -
allel Distrib Syst 33(10):2291–2303
14. Pereira A, Mazza L, Pinto P et al (2022) Deep convolutional 
neural network applied to Trypanosoma cruzi detection in blood 
samples. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 19(1):1–17
15. Zhou Y , Sai Y , Yan L (2021) An improved extension neural net -
work methodology for fault diagnosis of complex electromechan -
ical system. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 18(4):250–258
16. Liu J, Huang J, Zhou Y et al (2022) From distributed machine 
learning to federated learning: a survey. Knowl Inf Syst 
64(4):885–917
17. Cui Z, Zhao Y , Cao Y et al (2021) Malicious Code Detection 
under 5G HetNets Based on a Multi-Objective RBM Model. 
IEEE Network 35(2):82–87
18. Liang B, Cai J, Yang H (2022) A new cell group clustering algo -
rithm based on validation & correction mechanism. Expert Syst 
Appl 193:116410
19. Long T, Jia Q (2021) Matching Uncertain Renewable Supply with 
Electric Vehicle Charging Demand—A Bi-Level Event-Based 
Optimization Method. Complex Syst Model Simul 1(1):33–44
20. Zhou H, Yang G, Dai H, Liu G (2022) PFLF: Privacy-Preserving 
Federated Learning Framework for Edge Computing. IEEE Trans 
Inf Forensics Secur 17:1905–1918
21. Jiang J, Hu L et al (2020) BACombo-Bandwidth-Aware Decen -
tralized Federated Learning. Electronics 9(3):440
22. Wang C, Liu Z, Wei H, Chen L, Zhang H (2021) Hybrid Deep 
Learning Model for Short-Term Wind Speed Forecasting Based 
on Time Series Decomposition and Gated Recurrent Unit. Com -
plex Syst Model Simul 1(4):308–321
23. Cui Z, Wen J, Lan Y et al (2022) Communication-efficient feder -
ated recommendation model based on many-objective evolution -
ary algorithm. Expert Syst Appl 201:116963
24. Zhang K, Song X, Zhang C, Yu C (2022) Challenges and future 
directions of secure federated learning: a survey. Front Comput 
Sci 16(5):165817
25. Feng C, Liu B et al (2022) Blockchain-Empowered Decentral -
ized Horizontal Federated Learning for 5G-Enabled UA Vs. IEEE 
Trans Industr Inf 18(5):3582–3592
26. Dai M, Xu A, Huang Q, Zhang Z, Lin X (2021) Vertical federated 
DNN training. Phys Communication 49:101465
27. Gu B, Xu A et al (2020) Privacy-Preserving Asynchronous Verti -
cal Federated Learning Algorithms for Multiparty Collaborative 
Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2008. 06233
28. Li B, Liang Y , Gan Z et al (2021) Research on multi-UA V task 
decision-making based on improved MADDPG algorithm and 
transfer learning. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 18(2):82–91
29. Guan J, Cai J, Bai H, You I (2021) Deep transfer learning-based 
network traffic classification for scarce dataset in 5G IoT systems. 
Int J Mach Learn Cybernet 12(11):3351–3365
30. Yang Y , Cai J, Yang H, Zhang J, Zhao X (2020) TAD: A trajectory 
clustering algorithm based on spatial-temporal density analysis. 
Expert Syst Appl 139:112846
31. Xu J, Zhang Z et al (2021) A many-objective optimized task 
allocation scheduling model in cloud computing. Appl Intell 
51(6):3293–3310
32. Cai X, Geng S, Zhang J et al (2021) A Sharding Scheme-Based 
Many-Objective Optimization Algorithm for Enhancing Security 
in Blockchain-Enabled Industrial Internet of Things. IEEE Trans 
Industr Inf 17(11):7650–7658
33. Cavusoglu U, Kokcam AH (2021) A new approach to design 
S-box generation algorithm based on genetic algorithm. Int J Bio-
Inspired Comput 17(1):52–62bottleneck problems to be broken. This research work is 
expected to help scholars in the field of FL to understand 
the development and current research status of FL, and pro -
vide strong support for the further development of FL. In the 
field of FL, future research will continue to focus on privacy 
and security protection mechanism, client cooperation train -
ing mode and fairness, robustness, personalized federated 
learning mechanism, so as to facilitate the deployment and 
application of FL technology for in-depth exploration.
Acknowledgements  This work is supported by the National 
Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 
No.2018YFC1604000, the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under Grant No.61806138, No.U1636220, No.61961160707 
and No.61976212; Science and Technology Development Foundation 
of the Central Guiding Local under Grant No. YDZJSX2021A038; 
China University Industry-University-Research Collaborative Innova -
tion Fund (Future Network Innovation Research and Application Proj -
ect) under Grant No. 2021FNA04014; Outstanding Innovation Project 
for Graduate Students of Taiyuan University of Science and Technol -
ogy under Grant No. XCX211004 and No. XCX212081.
Data Availability  Data sharing not applicable to this article as no data -
sets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
References
1. Zhang Z, Zhao M et al (2022) An efficient interval many-objec -
tive evolutionary algorithm for cloud task scheduling problem 
under uncertainty. Inf Sci 583:56–72
2. Wang H, Xie F, Li J, Miu F (2022) Modelling, simulation and 
optimisation of medical enterprise warehousing process based on 
FlexSim model and greedy algorithm. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 
19(1):59–66
3. Cai X, Hu Z, Chen J (2020) A many-objective optimization rec -
ommendation algorithm based on knowledge mining. Inf Sci 
537:148–161
4. Ren Y , Sun Y et al (2019) Adaptive Makeup Transfer via Bat 
Algorithm. Mathematics 7(3):273
5. Yang Y , Cai J, Yang H, Zhao X (2021) Density clustering with 
divergence distance and automatic center selection. Inf Sci 
596:414–438
6. Hemalatha B, Rajkumar N (2021) A modified machine learning 
classification for dental age assessment with effectual ACM-JO 
based segmentation. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 17(2):95–104
7. Cui Z, Zhao P et al (2021) An improved matrix factorization 
based model for many-objective optimization recommendation. 
Inf Sci 579:1–14
8. Kuze N, Ishikura S et al (2021) Classification of diversified web 
crawler accesses inspired by biological adaptation. Int J Bio-
Inspired Comput 17(3):165–173
9. Mcmahan H et al (2017) Communication-Efficient Learning of 
Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In: proceedings of the 
20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Sta -
tistics, PMLR  54: 1273–1282
10. Yang Q, Liu Y , Chen T, Tong Y (2019) Federated Machine Learn -
ing: Concept and Applications. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol 
10(2):1–19
11. Wang L, Meng Z, Yang L (2022) A multi-layer two-dimensional 
convolutional neural network for sentiment analysis. Int J Bio-
Inspired Comput 19(2):97–107
1 3531

==== Page 20 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535Proceedings of the 2020 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual 
Technical Conference, USENIX Association, USA, pp. 493–506
55. Cai X, Niu Y , Geng S et al (2020) An under-sampled software 
defect prediction method based on hybrid multi-objective cuckoo 
search. Concurrency and Computation-Practice & Experience 
32(5):e5478
56. Cui Z, Du L, Wang P et al (2019) Malicious code detection based 
on CNNs and multi-objective algorithm. J Parallel Distrib Com -
put 129:50–58
57. Chan P, He Z, Li H, Hsu C (2018) Data sanitization against adver -
sarial label contamination based on data complexity. Int J Mach 
Learn Cybernet 9(6):1039–1052
58. Yang Y , Cai J, Yang H et al (2022) ISBFK-means: A new clus -
tering algorithm based on influence space. Expert Syst Appl 
201:117018
59. Tian Y , Zhang W, Simpson A, Jiang Z (2021) Defending Against 
Data Poisoning Attacks: From Distributed Learning to Federated 
Learning.The Computer Journal,bxab192
60. Qi Y , Hossain M, Nie J, Li X (2021) Privacy-preserving block -
chain-based federated learning for traffic flow prediction. Future 
Generation Computer Systems-the International Journal of 
Escience 117:328–337
61. Cui Z, Xue F, Zhang S et al (2020) A Hybrid BlockChain-Based 
Identity Authentication Scheme for Multi-WSN. IEEE Trans Serv 
Comput 13(2):241–251
62. Zhao Y , Chen J, Zhang J et al (2022) Detecting and mitigating 
poisoning attacks in federated learning using generative adver -
sarial networks. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and 
Experience 34(7):e5906
63. Li X, Cao S, Gao L, Wen L et al (2021) A Threshold-Control Gen -
erative Adversarial Network Method for Intelligent Fault Diagno -
sis. Complex Syst Model Simul 1(1):55–64
64. Shi S, Hu C, Wang D, Zhu Y , Han Z (2022) Federated Anomaly 
Analytics for Local Model Poisoning Attack. IEEE J Sel Areas 
Commun 40(2):596–610
65. Zhai K, Ren Q, Wang L, Yan C (2022) Byzantine-robust feder -
ated learning via credibility assessment on non- IID data. Math 
Biosci Eng 19(2):1659–1676
66. Ma X, Jiang Q, Shojafar M et al (2022) DisBezant: Secure and 
Robust Federated Learning Against Byzantine Attack in IoT-
Enabled MTS. IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1109/TITS.2022.3152156
67. Zhai K, Ren Q, Wang J, Yan C (2022) Byzantine-robust federated 
learning via credibility assessment on non-IID data. Math Biosci 
Eng 19(2):1659–1676
68. Zhang M, Mo L (2021) MGWHD-SVM: maximum weighted het -
eroscedastic migration learning algorithm. Int J Comput Sci Math 
14(1):89–106
69. Li W, Wang S (2022) Federated meta-learning for spatial-temporal 
prediction. Neural Comput Appl. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00521-021-06861-3
70. McMahan H, Moore E, Ramage D, Arcas B (2016) Federated 
Learning of Deep Networks using Model Averaging.arXiv pre -
print arXiv:1602. 05629
71. Liu W, Chen L, Chen Y , Zhang W (2020) Accelerating Federated 
Learning via Momentum Gradient Descent. IEEE Trans Parallel 
Distrib Syst 31(8):1754–1766
72. Wu X, Zhang Y , Shi M et al (2022) An adaptive federated learn -
ing scheme with differential privacy preserving. Future Genera -
tion Computer Systems 127:362–372
73. Wu H, Wang P (2021) Fast-Convergent Federated Learning 
With Adaptive Weighting. IEEE Trans Cogn Commun Netw 
7(4):1078–1088
74. Bao W, Wu C et al (2021) Edge Computing-Based Joint Client 
Selection and Networking Scheme for Federated Learning in 
Vehicular IoT. China Commun 18(6):39–5234. Yao A (1982) Protocols for secure computations. In: Proceedings 
of the 23rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Com -
puter Science  pp. 160–164
35. Bogdanov D, Willemson J (2008) Sharemind: A Framework for 
Fast Privacy-Preserving Computations. In: Proceedings of Euro -
pean Symposium on Research in Computer Security , Springer, 
pp. 192–206
36. Xiong L, Han X, Yang C, Shi Y (2022) Robust Reversible Water -
marking in Encrypted Image With Secure Multi-Party Based on 
Lightweight Cryptography. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Tech -
nol 32(1):75–91
37. An J, Wang Z et al (2021) Know Where You are: A Practical Pri -
vacy-Preserving Semi-Supervised Indoor Positioning via Edge-
Crowdsensing. IEEE Trans Netw Serv Manage 18(4):4875–4887
38. Bonawitz K, Ivanov V , Kreuter B et al (2017) Practical Secure 
Aggregation for Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning. Pre -
sented at the Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference 
on Computer and Communications Security, available: https://
doi.org/10.1145/3133956.3133982
39. Xu Y , Peng C, Tan W et al (2022) Non-interactive verifiable pri -
vacy-preserving federated learning. Future Generation Computer 
Systems 128:365–380
40. Geyer R, Klein T, Nabi M (2017) Differentially Private Federated 
Learning: A Client Level Perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1712. 
07557
41. Huang J, Cheng X, Ji Z et al (2022) AFLPC: An Asynchro -
nous Federated Learning Privacy-Preserving Computing Model 
Applied to 5G-V2X. Security and Communication Networks 
2022: 9334943
42. Xiong Z, Cai Z, Takabi D, Li W (2022) Privacy Threat and 
Defense for Federated Learning With Non-i.i.d. Data in AIoT. 
IEEE Trans Industr Inf 18(2):1310–1321
43. Sattler F, Wiedemann S et al (2020) Robust and Communication-
Efficient Federated Learning From Non-i.i.d. Data. IEEE Trans 
Neural Networks Learn Syst 31(9):3400–3413
44. Taşkıran M, Yetiş S (2021) Deep learning based tobacco products 
classification. Int J Comput Sci Math 13(2):167–176
45. Sun Z, Feng J, Yin L et al (2022) Fed-DFE: A Decentralized Func -
tion Encryption-Based Privacy-Preserving Scheme for Federated 
Learning. Cmc-Computers Mater Continua 71(1):1867–1886
46. Fan T, Cui Z (2021) Adaptive differential privacy preserving based 
on multi-objective optimization in deep neural networks. Concur -
rency and Computation-Practice & Experience 33(20):e6367
47. Cai X, Zhang M et al (2019) Analyses of inverted generational 
distance for many-objective optimisation algorithms. Int J Bio-
Inspired Comput 14(1):62–68
48. Li W, Ye X, Huang Y , Mahmoodi S (2022) Adaptive Dimensional 
Learning with a Tolerance Framework for the Differential Evolu -
tion Algorithm. Complex Syst Model Simul 2(1):59–77
49. Xi J, Zheng L (2021) Cuckoo search with dual-subpopula -
tion and information-sharing strategy. Int J Comput Sci Math 
14(4):315–327
50. Wang W, Gan Y , V ong C, Chen C (2020) Homo-ELM: fully 
homomorphic extreme learning machine. Int J Mach Learn 
Cybernet 11(7):1531–1540
51. Zhang X, Fu A, Wang H et al (2020) A Privacy-Preserving and 
Verifiable Federated Learning Scheme. In: proceedings of the 
ICC 2020–2020 IEEE International Conference on Communica -
tions (ICC)  pp. 1–6
52. Ma J, Naas S, Sigg S, Lyu X (2021) Privacy-preserving federated 
learning based on multi-key homomorphic encryption.arXiv pre -
print arXiv:2104. 06824
53. Park J, Lim H (2022) Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning 
Using Homomorphic Encryption. Appl Sci 12(2):734
54. Zhang C, Li S, Xia J et al (2020) BatchCrypt: Efficient Homo -
morphic Encryption for Cross-Silo Federated Learning. In: 
1 3532

==== Page 21 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–53596. Qiao K, Liang J, Qu B et al (2022) Differential Evolution with 
Level-Based Learning Mechanism. Complex Syst Model Simul 
2(1):35–58
97. Zhu H, Jin Y (2020) Multi-Objective Evolutionary Feder -
ated Learning. IEEE Trans Neural Networks Learn Syst 
31(4):1310–1322
98. Lan Y , Xie L, Cai X, Wang L (2022) A many-objective evolution -
ary algorithm based on integrated strategy for skin cancer detec -
tion. KSII Trans Internet Inf Syst 16(1):80–96
99. Wang Q, Li Q et al (2021) Efficient federated learning for 
fault diagnosis in industrial cloud-edge computing. Computing 
103(10):2319–2337
100. Zhang J, Chen X, Wang C et al (2022) FedAda: Fast-convergent 
adaptive federated learning in heterogeneous mobile edge com -
puting environment. World Wide Web-Internet and Web Informa -
tion Systems. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11280-021-00989-x
101. Wang C, Yang Y , Zhou P (2021) Towards Efficient Scheduling of 
Federated Mobile Devices Under Computational and Statistical 
Heterogeneity. IEEE Trans Parallel Distrib Syst 32(2):394–410
102. Taïk A, Mlika Z, Cherkaoui S (2022) Data-Aware Device Sched -
uling for Federated Edge Learning. IEEE Trans Cogn Commun 
Netw 8(1):408–421
103. Hu K, Wu J, Weng L (2021) A novel federated learning approach 
based on the confidence of federated Kalman filters. Int J Mach 
Learn Cybernet 12(12):3607–3627
104. Tan A, Yu H, Cui L, Yang Q (2022) Toward Personalized Feder -
ated Learning. IEEE Trans Neural Networks Learn Syst. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3160699
105. Mills J, Hu J, Min G (2022) Multi-Task Federated Learning for 
Personalised Deep Neural Networks in Edge Computing. IEEE 
Trans Parallel Distrib Syst 33(3):630–641
106. Ni X, Shen X, Zhao H (2022) Federated optimization via knowl -
edge codistillation. Expert Syst Appl 191:116310
107. Yang H, He H, Zhang W, Cao X (2021) FedSteg: A Federated 
Transfer Learning Framework for Secure Image Steganalysis. 
IEEE Trans Netw Sci Eng 8(2):1084–1094
108. Liu S, Wang J, Zhang W (2022) Federated personalized ran -
dom forest for human activity recognition. Math Biosci Eng 
19(1):953–971
109. Rao C, Li R (2021) Research on prediction method on RUL of 
motor of CNC machine based on deep learning. Int J Comput Sci 
Math 14(4):338–346
110. Liang B, Cai J, Yang H (2022) Grid-DPC: Improved density 
peaks clustering based on spatial grid walk. Appl Intell DOI. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03705-y
111. Xu X, Peng H, Bhuiyan M et al (2022) Privacy-Preserving Fed -
erated Depression Detection From Multisource Mobile Health 
Data. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 18(7):4788–4797
112. Ouyang L, Yuan Y , Cao Y , Wang F (2021) A novel framework of 
collaborative early warning for COVID-19 based on blockchain 
and smart contracts. Inf Sci 570:124–143
113. Dayan I, Poth H, Zhong A et al (2021) Federated learning for pre -
dicting clinical outcomes in patients with COVID-19. Nat Med 
27(10):1735–
114. Ma Z, Zhang M, Liu J et al (2022) An Assisted Diagnosis Model 
for Cancer Patients Based on Federated Learning. Front Oncol 
12:860532
115. Mabrouk M, Afify H, Marzouk S (2021) 3D reconstruction of 
structural magnetic resonance neuroimaging based on computer 
aided detection. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 17(3):174–181
116. Cai X, Hu Z, Zhao P et al (2020) A hybrid recommendation sys -
tem with many-objective evolutionary algorithm. Expert Syst 
Appl 159:113648
117. Xie L, Hu Z, Cai X et al (2021) Explainable recommendation 
based on knowledge graph and multi-objective optimization. 
Complex & Intelligent Systems 7(3):1241–125275. Hu M, Wu D, Zhou Y et al (2020) Incentive-Aware Autonomous 
Client Participation in Federated Learning. IEEE Trans Parallel 
Distrib Syst 33(10):2612–2627
76. Liu S, Yu G, Yin R, Yuan J, Shen L, Liu C (2022) Joint Model 
Pruning and Device Selection for Communication-Efficient Fed -
erated Edge Learning. IEEE Trans Commun 70(1):231–244
77. Deng Y , Lyu F, Ren J et al (2022) AUCTION: Automated and 
Quality-Aware Client Selection Framework for Efficient Feder -
ated Learning. IEEE Trans Parallel Distrib Syst 33(8):1996–2009
78. Liao Z, Li S (2021) Solving Nonlinear Equations Systems with an 
Enhanced Reinforcement Learning Based Differential Evolution. 
Complex Syst Model Simul 2(1):78–95
79. Luo L, Zhao N, Lodewijks G (2021) Scheduling Storage Process 
of Shuttle-Based Storage and Retrieval Systems Based on Rein -
forcement Learning. Complex Syst Model Simul 1(2):131–144
80. Lai F, Zhu X, Madhyastha H, Chowdhury M (2021) Oort: Effi -
cient federated learning via guided participant selection. In: Pro -
ceedings of the 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems 
Design and Implementation , OSDI 2021, pp. 19–35
81. Nishio T, Yonetani R (2019) Client Selection for Federated 
Learning with Heterogeneous Resources in Mobile Edge. In: 
Proceedings of ICC 2019–2019 IEEE International Conference 
on Communications (ICC)  pp. 1–7
82. Du C, Xiao J, Guo W (2022) Bandwidth constrained client selec -
tion and scheduling for federated learning over SD-WAN. IET 
Commun 16(2):187–194
83. Gong W, Liao Z, Mi X et al (2021) Nonlinear Equations Solv -
ing with Intelligent Optimization Algorithms: A Survey. Complex 
Syst Model Simul 1(1):15–32
84. Zhao F, Di S, Cao J et al (2021) A Novel Cooperative Multi-Stage 
Hyper-Heuristic for Combination Optimization Problems. Com -
plex Syst Model Simul 1(2):91–108
85. Li J, Cao F, Cheng H, Qian Y (2021) Learning the number of fil -
ters in convolutional neural networks. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 
17(2):75–84
86. Hu Y , Yan X (2021) Neural network-assisted expensive optimisa -
tion algorithm for pollution source rapid positioning of drinking 
water. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 17(4):227–235
87. Li K, Xiao C (2021) CBFL: A Communication-Efficient Feder -
ated Learning Framework From Data Redundancy Perspective. 
IEEE Syst J. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2021.3119152
88. Lu X, Liao Y , Lio P, Pan H (2020) An Asynchronous Federated 
Learning Mechanism for Edge Network Computing. J Comput 
Res Dev 57(12):2571–2582
89. Li C, Li G, Varshney P (2021) Communication-Efficient Feder -
ated Learning Based on Compressed Sensing. IEEE Internet of 
Things Journal 8(20):15531–15541
90. Cheng X, You M, Ma X (2021) Bi-level optimisation model of 
modular product family with adaptability consideration. Int J 
Comput Sci Math 14(4):357–368
91. Cai J, Yang Y , Yang H, Zhao X, Hao J (2022) ACM Trans Knowl 
Discovery Data. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3522592 . ARIS: A 
Noise Insensitive Data Pre-processing Scheme for Data Reduc -
tion Using Influence Space
92. Cui Z, Zhao L, Zeng Y et al (2021) A Novel PIO Algorithm with 
multiple selection strategies for many-objective optimization 
problems. Complex Syst Model Simul 4(1):291–307
93. Cai X, Wang P et al (2019) Multi-Objective Three-Dimensional 
DV-Hop Localization Algorithm With NSGA-II. IEEE Sens J 
19(21):10003–10015
94. Hou Z, Hou J (2021) Joint estimation of battery state-of-charge 
based on the genetic algorithm - adaptive unscented Kalman fil -
ter. Int J Comput Sci Math 14(1):1–16
95. Wang P, Xue F, Li H et al (2019) A Multi-Objective DV-Hop 
Localization Algorithm Based on NSGA-II in Internet of Things. 
Mathematics 7(2):184
1 3533

==== Page 22 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535137. Cheng K, Fan T, Jin Y et al (2021) SecureBoost: A Lossless Fed -
erated Learning Framework. IEEE Intell Syst 36(6):87–98
138. Salawudeen A, Umoh I, Sadiq B, Oyenike O, Mu’azu M (2022) 
An adaptive ant colony optimisation for improved lane detection 
in intelligent automobile vehicles. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 
19(2):108–123
139. Chen Z, Chen Z, Geng Y (2022) Modelling and empirical analy -
sis of the VMI-3PL system of cloud service platform in industry 
supply chain. Int J Comput Sci Math 15(1):60–71
140. Ye Y , Li S, Liu F et al (2020) EdgeFed: Optimized Federated Learn -
ing Based on Edge Computing. IEEE Access 8:209191–209198
141. Jiang H, Liu M, Yang B et al (2020) Customized Federated Learn -
ing for accelerated edge computing with heterogeneous task tar -
gets. Comput Netw 183:107569
142. Wang Q, Li Q, Wang K et al (2021) Efficient federated learning 
for fault diagnosis in industrial cloud-edge computing. Comput -
ing 103(10):2319–2337
143. Liu H, Zhang S, Zhang P et al (2021) Blockchain and Federated 
Learning for Collaborative Intrusion Detection in Vehicular Edge 
Computing. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 70(6):6073–6084
144. Chen N, Li Y , Liu X, Zhang Z (2021) A mutual information based 
federated learning framework for edge computing networks. 
Comput Commun 176:23–30
145. Zheng Z, Wu S, Huang Q, Yang J (2022) Research on localisation 
algorithm of large irregular workpiece for industrial robot. Int J 
Comput Sci Math 15(1):30–42
146. Zhang Y , Cai X, Zhu H, Xu Y (2020) Application an improved 
swarming optimisation in attribute reduction. Int J Bio-Inspired 
Comput 16(4):213–219
147. Cai X, Geng S, Wu D, Chen J (2021) Unified integration of many-
objective optimization algorithm based on temporary offspring 
for software defects prediction. Swarm Evol Comput 63:100871
148. Zhang Z, Xie L (2020) A many-objective integrated evolution -
ary algorithm for feature selection in anomaly detection. Concur -
rency and Computation-Practice & Experience 32(22):e5861
149. Melis M, Scalas M et al (2022) Do gradient-based explanations 
tell anything about adversarial robustness to android malware? 
Int J Mach Learn Cybernet 13(1):217–232
150. Tang Z, Hu H, Xu C (2022) “A federated learning method for net -
work intrusion detection. Concurrency and Computation: Prac -
tice and Experience 34(10):e6812
151. Zhao R, Yin Y , Shi Y , Xue Z (2020) Intelligent intrusion detection 
based on federated learning aided long short-term memory. Phys 
Communication 42:101157
152. Li B, Wu Y , Song J et al (2021) DeepFed: Federated Deep Learn -
ing for Intrusion Detection in Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems. 
IEEE Trans Industr Inf 17(8):5615–5624
153. Fallahpour A, Barri K, Wong K et al (2021) An integrated data 
mining approach to predict electrical energy consumption. Int J 
Bio-Inspired Comput 17(3):142–153
154. Cai X, Cao Y et al (2021) Multi-objective evolutionary 3D face 
reconstruction based on improved encoder-decoder network. Inf 
Sci 581:233–248
155. Zhang Z, Cao Y , Cui Z et al (2021) A Many-Objective Optimiza -
tion Based Intelligent Intrusion Detection Algorithm for Enhanc -
ing Security of Vehicular Networks in 6G. IEEE Trans Veh 
Technol 70(6):5234–5243
156. Ko I, Chambers D, Barrett E (2021) Recurrent autonomous auto -
encoder for intelligent DDoS attack mitigation within the ISP 
domain. Int J Mach Learn Cybernet 12(11):3145–3167
157. Al-Hazaimeh O, Al-Jamal M, Alomari A et al (2022) Image 
encryption using anti-synchronisation and Bogdanov transforma -
tion map. Int J Comput Sci Math 15(1):43–59
158. Qin Z, Li G, Ye H (2021) Federated Learning and Wireless Com -
munications. IEEE Wirel Commun 28(5):134–140118. Cui Z, Xu X, Xue F et al (2020) Personalized Recommendation 
System Based on Collaborative Filtering for IoT Scenarios. IEEE 
Trans Serv Comput 13(4):685–695
119. Lin G, Liang F, Pan W, Ming Z (2021) FedRec: Federated Recom -
mendation With Explicit Feedback. IEEE Intell Syst 36(5):21–29
120. Jie Z, Chen S, Lai J, Arif M, He Z (2022) Personalized federated 
recommendation system with historical parameter clustering. J 
Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12652-022-03709-z
121. Du Y , Zhou D, Xie Y , Shi J, Gong M (2021) Federated matrix 
factorization for privacy-preserving recommender systems. Appl 
Soft Comput 111:107700
122. Duan S, Zhang D, Wang Y et al (2020) JointRec: A Deep-Learn -
ing-Based Joint Cloud Video Recommendation Framework for 
Mobile IoT. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7(3):1655–1666
123. Caballero A, Garcia-Valverde T, Pereniguez F, Botia J (2016) 
Activity recommendation in intelligent campus environments 
based on the Eduroam federation. J Ambient Intell Smart Environ 
8(1):35–46
124. Muhammad K, Wang Q, O’Reilly-Morgan D et al (2020) Fed -
Fast: Going beyond Average for Faster Training of Federated 
Recommender Systems. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIG -
KDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining, KDD 2020, pp. 1234–1242
125. Wang F, Xu X, Chen M et al (2021) Simulation Research on Fire 
Evacuation of Large Public Buildings Based on Building Infor -
mation Modeling. Complex Syst Model Simul 1(2):122–130
126. Shen Y , Yu L, Li J (2022) Robust Electric Vehicle Routing Prob -
lem with Time Windows under Demand Uncertainty and Weight-
Related Energy Consumption. Complex Syst Model Simul 
2(1):18–34
127. Zhang J, Zhu Z, Chang Y et al (2019) Demand Estimation of 
Water Resources based on Coupling Algorithm. In: Proceed -
ings of the 31st Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2019 
CCDC), pp. 714–719
128. Wang H, Wang W, Cui Z et al (2018) A new dynamic firefly 
algorithm for demand estimation of water resources. Inf Sci 
438:95–106
129. Lu H, Dong X, Cao X (2022) Motion Model of Floating Weather 
Sensing Node for Typhoon Detection. Complex Syst Model 
Simul 2(1):96–111
130. Zhang Y , Xin D (2021) Short-term traffic flow prediction model 
based on deep learning regression algorithm. Int J Comput Sci 
Math 14(2):155–166
131. Jiang C, Li R, Chen J et al (2021) Modelling the green supply 
chain of hotels based on front-back stage decoupling: perspec -
tive of ant colony labour division. Int J Bio-Inspired Comput 
18(2):176–188
132. Jiang J, Kantarci B, Oktug S, Soyata T (2020) Federated learn -
ing in smart city sensing: Challenges and opportunities. Sensors 
20(21):6230
133. Putra K, Chen H, Prayitno (2021) Federated compressed learn -
ing edge computing framework with ensuring data privacy for 
pm2.5 prediction in smart city sensing applications. Sensors 
21(13):4586
134. Yuan X, Chen J, Yang J et al (2022) FedSTN: Graph Represen -
tation Driven Federated Learning for Edge Computing Enabled 
Urban Traffic Flow Prediction. IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2022.3157056
135. Liu L, Song M, Wang X et al (2021) Aircraft pushback slot allo -
cation bi-level programming model based on congestion pricing. 
Int J Comput Sci Math 14(3):249–262
136. Li Y , Chen C, Liu N, Huang H et al (2021) A Blockchain-Based 
Decentralized Federated Learning Framework with Committee 
Consensus. IEEE Network 35(1):234–241
1 3534

==== Page 23 ====
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics (2023) 14:513–535167. Cai X, Zhang J, Ning Z et al (2021) A Many-Objective Multistage 
Optimization-Based Fuzzy Decision-Making Model for Coal 
Production Prediction. IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst 29(12):3665–3675
168. Chen S, Zhang J, Bai Y et al (2021) Blockchain Enabled Intelli -
gence of Federated Systems (BELIEFS): An attack-tolerant trust -
able distributed intelligence paradigm. Energy Rep 7:8900–8911
169. Cui Z, Zhang J et al (2020) Hybrid many-objective particle swarm 
optimization algorithm for green coal production problem. Inf Sci 
518:256–271
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); 
author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this arti -
cle is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law. 159. Yang M, Qian H, Wang X, Zhou Y , Zhu H (2022) Client Selec -
tion for Federated Learning With Label Noise. IEEE Trans Veh 
Technol 71(2):2193–2197
160. Wang L, Pan Z, Wang J (2021) A Review of Reinforcement 
Learning Based Intelligent Optimization for Manufacturing 
Scheduling. Complex Syst Model Simul 1(4):257–270
161. Wu X, Cao Z, Wu S (2021) Real-Time Hybrid Flow Shop Sched -
uling Approach in Smart Manufacturing Environment. Complex 
Syst Model Simul 1(4):335–350
162. Cai X, Wang P et al (2020) Weight convergence analy -
sis of DV-hop localization algorithm with GA. Soft Comput 
24(23):18249–18258
163. Peng W, Lin J, Ma X (2021) A bi-objective optimisation approach 
for the critical chain project scheduling problem. Int J Comput 
Sci Math 13(4):311–330
164. Bai H, Fan T, Niu Y (2022) Multi-UA V Cooperative Trajectory 
Planning Based on Many-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm. 
Complex Syst Model Simul 2(2):130–141
165. Lv D (2022) Scale parameter recognition of blurred moving 
image based on edge combination algorithm. Int J Comput Sci 
Math 15(2):168–182
166. Swain D, Bijawe S, Akolkar P et al (2021) Diabetic retinopathy 
using image processing and deep learning. Int J Comput Sci Math 
14(4):397–409
1 3535

