==== Page 1 ====
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 120:1–4, 2020 2nd Annual Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control
A Theoretical Analysis of Deep Q-Learning
Jianqing Fan JQFAN @PRINCETON .EDU
Princeton University
Zhaoran Wang ZHAORAN .WANG @NORTHWESTERN .EDU
Northwestern University
Yuchen Xie YCXIE @U.NORTHWESTERN .EDU
Northwestern University
Zhuoran Yang ZY6@ PRINCETON .EDU
Princeton University
Editors: A. Bayen, A. Jadbabaie, G. J. Pappas, P. Parrilo, B. Recht, C. Tomlin, M.Zeilinger
1Abstract
Despite the great empirical success of deep reinforcement learning, its theoretical foundation is less
well understood. In this work, we make the ﬁrst attempt to theoretically understand the deep Q-
network (DQN) algorithm (Mnih et al., 2015) from both algorithmic and statistical perspectives. In
speciﬁc, we focus on a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN that fully captures its key features. Under mild
assumptions, we establish the algorithmic and statistical rates of convergence for the action-value
functions of the iterative policy sequence obtained by DQN. In particular, the statistical error char-
acterizes the bias and variance that arise from approximating the action-value function using deep
neural network, while the algorithmic error converges to zero at a geometric rate. As a byprod-
uct, our analysis provides justiﬁcations for the techniques of experience replay and target network,
which are crucial to the empirical success of DQN. Furthermore, as a simple extension of DQN, we
propose the Minimax-DQN algorithm for zero-sum Markov game with two players. Borrowing the
analysis of DQN, we also quantify the difference between the policies obtained by Minimax-DQN
and the Nash equilibrium of the Markov game in terms of both the algorithmic and statistical rates
of convergence.
Keywords: Deep Q-Learning, Markov Decision Process, Zero-Sum Markov Game
Introduction. In this work, we aim to provide theoretical guarantees for DQN (Mnih et al., 2015),
which can be cast as an extension of the classical Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and Dayan, 1992)
that uses deep neural network to approximate the action-value function. Although the algorithmic
and statistical properties of the classical Q-learning algorithm are well-studied, theoretical analysis
of DQN is highly challenging due to its differences in the following two aspects.
First, in online gradient-based temporal-difference reinforcement learning algorithms, approx-
imating the action-value function often leads to instability. Baird (1995) proves that this is the
case even with linear function approximation. The key technique to achieve stability in DQN is
experience replay (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015). In speciﬁc, a replay memory is used to store the
1. Extended abstract. Full version appears as arXiv reference, arXiv:1901.00137.
c2020 J. Fan, Z. Wang, Y . Xie & Z. Yang.

==== Page 2 ====
A T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF DEEPQ-L EARNING
trajectory of the Markov decision process (MDP). At each iteration of DQN, a mini-batch of states,
actions, rewards, and next states are sampled from the replay memory as observations to train the
Q-network, which approximates the action-value function. The intuition behind experience replay
is to achieve stability by breaking the temporal dependency among the observations used in training
the deep neural network.
Second, in addition to the aforementioned Q-network, DQN uses another neural network named
the target network to obtain an unbiased estimator of the mean-squared Bellman error used in train-
ing the Q-network. The target network is synchronized with the Q-network after each period of
iterations, which leads to a coupling between the two networks. Moreover, even if we ﬁx the target
network and focus on updating the Q-network, the subproblem of training a neural network still
remains less well-understood in theory.
In this paper, we focus on a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN, which is amenable to theoretical
analysis while fully capturing the above two aspects. In speciﬁc, we simplify the technique of ex-
perience replay with an independence assumption, and focus on deep neural networks with rectiﬁed
linear units (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton, 2010) and large batch size. Under this setting, DQN is re-
duced to the neural ﬁtted Q-iteration (FQI) algorithm (Riedmiller, 2005) and the technique of target
network can be cast as the value iteration. More importantly, by adapting the approximation results
for ReLU networks to the analysis of Bellman operator, we establish the algorithmic and statistical
rates of convergence for the iterative policy sequence obtained by DQN. As we will show in the
main results, the statistical error characterizes the bias and variance that arise from approximating
the action-value function using neural network, while the algorithmic error geometrically decays to
zero as the number of iteration goes to inﬁnity.
Furthermore, we extend DQN to two-player zero-sum Markov games (Shapley, 1953). The
proposed algorithm, named Minimax-DQN, can be viewed as a combination of the Minimax-Q
learning algorithm for tabular zero-sum Markov games (Littman, 1994) and deep neural networks
for function approximation. Compared with DQN, the main difference lies in the approaches to
compute the target values. In DQN, the target is computed via maximization over the action space.
In contrast, the target obtained computed by solving the Nash equilibrium of a zero-sum matrix
game in Minimax-DQN, which can be efﬁciently attained via linear programming. Despite such a
difference, both these two methods can be viewed as approximately applying the Bellman opera-
tor to the Q-network. Thus, borrowing the analysis of DQN, we also establish theoretical results
for Minimax-DQN. Speciﬁcally, we quantify the suboptimality of policy returned by the algorithm
by the difference between the action-value functions associated with this policy and with the Nash
equilibrium policy of the Markov game. For this notion of suboptimality, we establish the both algo-
rithmic and statistical rates of convergence, which implies that the action-value function converges
to the optimal counterpart up to an unimprovable statistical error in geometric rate.
Our contribution is three-fold. First, we establish the algorithmic and statistical errors of the neu-
ral FQI algorithm, which can be viewed as a slight simpliﬁcation of DQN. Under mild assumptions,
our results show that the proposed algorithm obtains a sequence of Q-networks that geometrically
converges to the optimal action-value function up to an intrinsic statistical error induced by the ap-
proximation bias of ReLU network and ﬁnite sample size. Second, as a byproduct, our analysis
2

==== Page 3 ====
A T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF DEEPQ-L EARNING
justiﬁes the techniques of experience replay and target network used in DQN, where the latter can
be viewed as a single step of the value iteration. Third, we propose the Minimax-DQN algorithm
that extends DQN to two-player zero-sum Markov games. Borrowing the analysis for DQN, we
establish the algorithmic and statistical convergence rates of the action-value functions associated
with the sequence of policies returned by the Minimax-DQN algorithm.
References
Leemon Baird. Residual algorithms: Reinforcement learning with function approximation. In
Machine Learning Proceedings 1995 , pages 30–37. Elsevier, 1995.
Hongshen Chen, Xiaorui Liu, Dawei Yin, and Jiliang Tang. A survey on dialogue systems: Recent
advances and new frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.01731 , 2017.
Jens Kober and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. In Reinforcement Learn-
ing, pages 579–610. Springer, 2012.
Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and teach-
ing.Machine learning , 8(3-4):293–321, 1992.
Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
Machine Learning Proceedings 1994 , pages 157–163. Elsevier, 1994.
V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
V olodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1928–1937, 2016.
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines.
InInternational conference on machine learning , pages 807–814, 2010.
Martin Riedmiller. Neural ﬁtted Q iteration–ﬁrst experiences with a data efﬁcient neural reinforce-
ment learning method. In European Conference on Machine Learning , pages 317–328. Springer,
2005.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1889–1897, 2015.
Lloyd S Shapley. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 39(10):
1095–1100, 1953.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
3

==== Page 4 ====
A T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF DEEPQ-L EARNING
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of Go
without human knowledge. Nature , 550(7676):354, 2017.
Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient
methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , pages 1057–1063, 2000.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning , 8(3-4):279–292, 1992.
4

