==== Page 1 ====
A U-Net Based Discriminator for Generative Adversarial Networks
Edgar Sch ¨onfeld
Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
edgar.schoenfeld@bosch.comBernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.com
Anna Khoreva
Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
anna.khoreva@bosch.com
Abstract
Among the major remaining challenges for generative
adversarial networks (GANs) is the capacity to synthesize
globally and locally coherent images with object shapes and
textures indistinguishable from real images. To target this
issue we propose an alternative U-Net based discrimina-
tor architecture, borrowing the insights from the segmenta-
tion literature. The proposed U-Net based architecture al-
lows to provide detailed per-pixel feedback to the generator
while maintaining the global coherence of synthesized im-
ages, by providing the global image feedback as well. Em-
powered by the per-pixel response of the discriminator, we
further propose a per-pixel consistency regularization tech-
nique based on the CutMix data augmentation, encourag-
ing the U-Net discriminator to focus more on semantic and
structural changes between real and fake images. This im-
proves the U-Net discriminator training, further enhancing
the quality of generated samples. The novel discriminator
improves over the state of the art in terms of the standard
distribution and image quality metrics, enabling the genera-
tor to synthesize images with varying structure, appearance
and levels of detail, maintaining global and local realism.
Compared to the BigGAN baseline, we achieve an average
improvement of 2.7FID points across FFHQ, CelebA, and
the proposed COCO-Animals dataset.
1. Introduction
The quality of synthetic images produced by genera-
tive adversarial networks (GANs) has seen tremendous im-
provement recently [ 5,20]. The progress is attributed
to large-scale training [ 32,5], architectural modiﬁcations
[50,19,20,27], and improved training stability via the use
of different regularization techniques [ 34,51]. However,
despite the recent advances, learning to synthesize images
with global semantic coherence, long-range structure and
the exactness of detail remains challenging.
One source of the problem lies potentially in the discrim-Progression during training
real
fake
Figure 1: Images produced throughout the training by our
U-Net GAN model (top row) and their corresponding per-
pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator (bottom row).
The synthetic image samples are obtained from a ﬁxed noise
vector at different training iterations. Brighter colors corre-
spond to the discriminator conﬁdence of pixel being real
(and darker of being fake). Note that the U-Net discrimina-
tor provides very detailed and spatially coherent response
to the generator, enabling it to further improve the image
quality, e.g. the unnaturally large man’s forehead is recog-
nized as fake by the discriminator and is corrected by the
generator throughout the training.
inator network. The discriminator aims to model the data
distribution, acting as a loss function to provide the gener-
ator a learning signal to synthesize realistic image samples.
The stronger the discriminator is, the better the generator
has to become. In the current state-of-the-art GAN models,
the discriminator being a classiﬁcation network learns only
a representation that allows to efﬁciently penalize the gen-
erator based on the most discriminative difference between
real and synthetic images. Thus, it often focuses either on
the global structure or local details. The problem ampliﬁes
as the discriminator has to learn in a non-stationary envi-
8207


==== Page 2 ====
ronment: the distribution of synthetic samples shifts as the
generator constantly changes through training, and is prone
to forgetting previous tasks [ 7] (in the context of the dis-
criminator training, learning semantics, structures, and tex-
tures can be considered different tasks). This discriminator
is not incentivized to maintain a more powerful data repre-
sentation, learning both global and local image differences.
This often results in the generated images with discontinued
and mottled local structures [ 27] or images with incoherent
geometric and structural patterns (e.g. asymmetric faces or
animals with missing legs) [ 50].
To mitigate this problem, we propose an alternative dis-
criminator architecture, which outputs simultaneously both
global (over the whole image) and local (per-pixel) deci-
sion of the image belonging to either the real or fake class,
see Figure 1. Motivated by the ideas from the segmentation
literature, we re-design the discriminator to take a role of
both a classiﬁer and segmenter. We change the architecture
of the discriminator network to a U-Net [ 39], where the en-
coder module performs per-image classiﬁcation, as in the
standard GAN setting, and the decoder module outputs per-
pixel class decision, providing spatially coherent feedback
to the generator, see Figure 2. This architectural change
leads to a stronger discriminator, which is encouraged to
maintain a more powerful data representation, making the
generator task of fooling the discriminator more challeng-
ing and thus improving the quality of generated samples
(as also reﬂected in the generator and discriminator loss
behavior in Figure S1). Note that we do not modify the
generator in any way, and our work is orthogonal to the
ongoing research on architectural changes of the generator
[20,27], divergence measures [ 25,1,37], and regulariza-
tions [ 40,15,34].
The proposed U-Net based discriminator allows to em-
ploy the recently introduced CutMix [ 47] augmentation,
which is shown to be effective for classiﬁcation networks,
for consistency regularization in the two-dimensional out-
put space of the decoder. Inspired by [ 47], we cut and mix
the patches from real and synthetic images together, where
the ground truth label maps are spatially combined with
respect to the real and fake patch class for the segmenter
(U-Net decoder) and the class labels are set to fake for the
classiﬁer (U-Net encoder), as globally the CutMix image
should be recognized as fake, see Figure 3. Empowered
by per-pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator, we fur-
ther employ these CutMix images for consistency regular-
ization, penalizing per-pixel inconsistent predictions of the
discriminator under the CutMix transformations. This fos-
ters the discriminator to focus more on semantic and struc-
tural changes between real and fake images and to attend
less to domain-preserving perturbations. Moreover, it also
helps to improve the localization ability of the decoder. Em-
ploying the proposed consistency regularization leads to astronger generator, which pays more attention to local and
global image realism. We call our model U-Net GAN.
We evaluate the proposed U-Net GAN model across sev-
eral datasets using the state-of-the-art BigGAN model [ 5]
as a baseline and observe an improved quality of the gen-
erated samples in terms of the FID and IS metrics. For
unconditional image synthesis on FFHQ [ 20] at resolu-
tion256×256, our U-Net GAN model improves 4FID
points over the BigGAN model, synthesizing high quality
human faces (see Figure 4). On CelebA [ 29] at resolution
128×128we achieve 1.6point FID gain, yielding to the best
of our knowledge the lowest known FID score of 2.95. For
class-conditional image synthesis on the introduced COCO-
Animals dataset [ 28,24] at resolution 128×128we observe
an improvement in FID from 16.37to13.73, synthesizing
diverse images of different animal classes (see Figure 5).
2. Related work
Generative adversarial networks. GAN [ 14] and its con-
ditional variant [ 33] have recently demonstrated impres-
sive results on different computer vision tasks, including
image synthesis [ 38,50,19,5,20,27,10]. Plenty of
efforts have been made to improve the training and per-
formance of GANs, from reformulation of the objective
function [ 31,1,26,37], integration of different regulariza-
tion techniques [ 51,34,40,48] and architectural changes
[38,19,13,27]. To enhance the quality of generated sam-
ples, [ 38] introduced the DCGAN architecture that employs
strided and transposed convolutions. In SAGAN [ 50] the
self-attention block was added to improve the network abil-
ity to model global structure. PG-GAN [ 19] proposed to
grow both the generator and discriminator networks to in-
crease the resolution of generated images. Other lines of
work focused mainly on improving the discriminator by ex-
ploiting multiple [ 36,13,11] and multi-resolution [ 45,42]
discriminators, using spatial feedback of the discriminator
[17], an auto-encoder architecture with the reconstruction-
based feedback to the generator [ 52] or self-supervision to
avoid catastrophic forgetting [ 7]. Most recently, the atten-
tion has been switched back to the generator network. Style-
GAN [ 20] proposed to alter the generator architecture by
injecting latent codes to each convolution layer, thus allow-
ing more control over the image synthesis process. COCO-
GAN [ 27] integrated the conditional coordination mecha-
nism into the generator, making image synthesis highly par-
allelizable. In this paper, we propose to alter the discrimina-
tor network to a U-Net based architecture, empowering the
discriminator to capture better both global and local struc-
tures, enabled by per-pixel discriminator feedback. Local
discriminator feedback is also commonly applied through
PatchGAN discriminators [ 18]. Our U-Net GAN extends
this idea to dense prediction over the whole image plane,
with visual information being integrated over up- and down-
8208


==== Page 3 ====
sampling pathways and through the encoder-decoder skip
connections, without trading off local over global realism.
Mix&Cut regularizations. Recently, a few simple yet
effective regularization techniques have been proposed,
which are based on augmenting the training data by cre-
ating synthetic images via mixing or/and cutting samples
from different classes. In MixUp [ 49] the input images and
their target labels are interpolated using the same randomly
chosen factor. [ 43] extends [ 49] by performing interpola-
tion not only in the input layer but also in the intermedi-
ate layers. CutOut [ 9] augments an image by masking a
rectangular region to zero. Differently, CutMix [ 47] aug-
ments training data by creating synthetic images via cut-
ting and pasting patches from image samples of different
classes, marrying the best aspects of MixUp and CutOut.
Other works employ the Mix&Cut approaches for consis-
tency regularization [ 44,4,51], i.e. penalizing the classiﬁ-
cation network sensitivity to samples generated via MixUp
or CutOut [ 49,9]. In our work, we propose the consistency
regularization under the CutMix transformation in the pixel
output space of our U-Net discriminator. This helps to im-
prove its localization quality and induce it to attend to non-
discriminative differences between real and fake regions.
3. U-Net GAN Model
A ”vanilla” GAN consists of two networks: a generator
Gand a discriminator D, trained by minimizing the follow-
ing competing objectives in an alternating manner:
LD=−Ex[logD(x)]−Ez[log(1−D(G(z)))],
LG=−Ez[logD(G(z))]1.(1)
Gaims to map a latent variable z∼p(z)sampled from
a prior distribution to a realistic-looking image, while D
aims to distinguish between real xand generated G(z)im-
ages. Ordinarily, GandDare modeled as a decoder and an
encoder convolutional network, respectively.
While there are many variations of the GAN objective
function and its network architectures [ 23,30], in this paper
we focus on improving the discriminator network. In Sec-
tion3.1, we propose to alter the Darchitecture from a stan-
dard classiﬁcation network to an encoder-decoder network
– U-Net [ 39], leaving the underlying basic architecture of D
– the encoder part – untouched. The proposed discriminator
allows to maintain both global and local data representation,
providing more informative feedback to the generator. Em-
powered by local per-pixel feedback of the U-Net decoder
module, in Section 3.2we further propose a consistency
regularization technique, penalizing per-pixel inconsistent
predictions of the discriminator under the CutMix transfor-
mations [ 47] of real and fake images. This helps to improve
1This formulation is originally proposed as non-saturating (NS) GAN
in [14].
G
G(z)zx
real/fakereal/fake
DU
encDU
decFigure 2: U-Net GAN. The proposed U-Net discriminator
classiﬁes the input images on a global and local per-pixel
level. Due to the skip-connections between the encoder and
the decoder (dashed line), the channels in the output layer
contain both high- and low-level information. Brighter col-
ors in the decoder output correspond to the discriminator
conﬁdence of pixel being real (and darker of being fake).
the localization quality of the U-Net discriminator and in-
duce it to attend more to semantic and structural changes
between real and fake samples. We call our model U-Net
GAN . Note that our method is compatible with most GAN
models as it does not modify the generator in any way and
leaves the original GAN objective intact.
3.1. U­Net Based Discriminator
Encoder-decoder networks [ 2,39] constitute a power-
ful method for dense prediction. U-Nets [ 39] in particular
have demonstrated state-of-art performance in many com-
plex image segmentation tasks. In these methods, similarly
to image classiﬁcation networks, the encoder progressively
downsamples the input, capturing the global image context.
The decoder performs progressive upsampling, matching
the output resolution to the input one and thus enabling pre-
cise localization. Skip connections route data between the
matching resolutions of the two modules, improving further
the ability of the network to accurately segment ﬁne details.
Analogously, in this work, we propose to extend a dis-
criminator to form a U-Net, by reusing building blocks of
the original discriminator classiﬁcation network as an en-
coder part and building blocks of the generator network as
the decoder part. In other words, the discriminator now con-
sists of the original downsampling network and a new up-
sampling network. The two modules are connected via a
bottleneck, as well as skip-connections that copy and con-
catenate feature maps from the encoder and the decoder
modules, following [ 39]. We will refer to this discriminator
asDU. While the original D(x)classiﬁes the input image
xinto being real and fake, the U-Net discriminator DU(x)
additionally performs this classiﬁcation on a per-pixel ba-
sis, segmenting image xinto real and fake regions, along
with the original image classiﬁcation of xfrom the encoder,
8209


==== Page 4 ====
see Figure 2. This enables the discriminator to learn both
global and local differences between real and fake images.
Hereafter, we refer to the original encoder module of the
discriminator as DU
encand to the introduced decoder mod-
ule asDU
dec. The new discriminator loss is now can be com-
puted by taking the decisions from both DU
encandDU
dec:
LDU=LDU
enc+LDU
dec, (2)
where similarly to Eq. 1the loss for the encoder LDUencis
computed from the scalar output of DU
enc:
LDU
enc=−Ex[logDU
enc(x)]−Ez[log(1−DU
enc(G(z)))],(3)
and the loss for the decoder LDU
encis computed as the mean
decision over all pixels:
LDU
dec=−Ex/bracketleftBig/summationdisplay
i,jlog[DU
dec(x)]i,j/bracketrightBig
−Ez/bracketleftBig/summationdisplay
i,jlog(1−[DU
dec(G(z))]i,j)/bracketrightBig
.(4)
Here,[DU
dec(x)]i,jand[DU
dec(G(z))]i,jrefer to the discrim-
inator decision at pixel (i,j). These per-pixel outputs of
DU
decare derived based on global information from high-
level features, enabled through the process of upsampling
from the bottleneck, as well as more local information from
low-level features, mediated by the skip connections from
the intermediate layers of the encoder network.
Correspondingly, the generator objective becomes:
LG=−Ez/bracketleftBig
logDU
enc(G(z))
+/summationdisplay
i,jlog[DU
dec(G(z))]i,j/bracketrightBig
,(5)
encouraging the generator to focus on both global structures
and local details while synthesizing images in order to fool
the more powerful discriminator DU.
3.2. Consistency Regularization
Here we present the consistency regularization technique
for the U-Net based discriminator introduced in the previous
section. The per-pixel decision of the well-trained DUdis-
criminator should be equivariant under any class-domain-
altering transformations of images. However, this property
is not explicitly guaranteed. To enable it, the discrimina-
tor should be regularized to focus more on semantic and
structural changes between real and fake samples and to pay
less attention to arbitrary class-domain-preserving perturba-
tions. Therefore, we propose the consistency regularization
of theDUdiscriminator, explicitly encouraging the decoder
moduleDU
decto output equivariant predictions under the
CutMix transformations [ 47] of real and fake samples. TheReal Fake
Original
images
Real/fake
ratior0.28 0.68 0.31 0.51
Mask
M
CutMix
images
DU
decsegm.
map
DU
encclass.
score0.31 0.60 0.36 0.43
Figure 3: Visualization of the CutMix augmentation and
the predictions of the U-Net discriminator on CutMix im-
ages. 1st row: real and fake samples. 2nd&3rd rows:
sampled real/fake CutMix ratio rand corresponding binary
masksM(color code: white for real, black for fake). 4th
row: generated CutMix images from real and fake sam-
ples. 5th&6th row: the corresponding real/fake segmen-
tation maps of DUwith its predicted classiﬁcation scores.
CutMix augmentation creates synthetic images via cutting
and pasting patches from images of different classes. We
choose CutMix among other Mix&Cut strategies (cf. Sec-
tion2) as it does not alter the real and fake image patches
used for mixing, in contrast to [ 49], preserving their original
class domain, and provides a large variety of possible out-
puts. We visualize the CutMix augmentation strategy and
theDUpredictions in Figure 3.
Following [ 47], we synthesize a new training sample
˜xfor the discriminator DUby mixing xandG(z)∈
RW×H×Cwith the mask M:
˜x= mix(x,G(z),M),
mix(x,G(z),M) = M ⊙x+(1−M)⊙G(z),(6)
whereM∈ {0,1}W×His the binary mask indicating if
the pixel (i,j)comes from the real ( Mi,j= 1) or fake
(Mi,j= 0) image,1is a binary mask ﬁlled with ones, and
⊙is an element-wise multiplication. In contrast to [ 47],
the class label c∈ {0,1}for the new CutMix image ˜xis
set to be fake, i.e. c= 0. Globally the mixed synthetic
image should be recognized as fake by the encoder DU
enc,
otherwise the generator can learn to introduce the CutMix
augmentation into generated samples, causing undesirable
artifacts. Note that for the synthetic sample ˜x,c= 0andM
8210


==== Page 5 ====
are the ground truth for the encoder and decoder modules of
the discriminator DU, respectively.
Given the CutMix operation in Eq. 6, we train the dis-
criminator to provide consistent per-pixel predictions, i.e.
DU
dec/parenleftbig
mix(x,G(z),M)/parenrightbig
≈mix/parenleftbig
DU
dec(x),DU
dec(G(z)),M/parenrightbig
,
by introducing the consistency regularization loss term in
the discriminator objective:
Lcons
DU
dec=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleDU
dec/parenleftBig
mix(x,G(z),M)/parenrightBig
−mix/parenleftBig
DU
dec(x),DU
dec(G(z)),M/parenrightBig/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
,(7)
where denotes /bardbl · /bardbl theL2norm. This consistency loss is
then taken between the per-pixel output of DU
decon the Cut-
Mix image and the CutMix between outputs of the DU
decon
real and fake images, penalizing the discriminator for in-
consistent predictions.
We add the loss term in Eq. 7to the discriminator objec-
tive in Eq. 2with a weighting hyper-parameter λ:
LDU=LDU
enc+LDU
dec+λLcons
DU
dec.. (8)
The generator objective LGremains unchanged, see Eq. 5.
In addition to the proposed consistency regularization,
we also use CutMix samples for training both the encoder
and decoder modules of DU. Note that for the U-Net GAN
we use the non-saturating GAN objective formulation [ 14].
However, the introduced consistency regularization as well
as the U-Net architecture of the discriminator can be com-
bined with any other adversarial losses [ 1,26,37].
3.3. Implementation
Here we discuss implementation details of the U-Net
GAN model proposed in Section 3.1and3.2.
U-Net based discriminator. We build upon the recent
state-of-the-art BigGAN model [ 5], and extend its discrim-
inator with our proposed changes. We adopt the BigGAN
generator and discriminator architectures for the 256×256
(and128×128) resolution with a channel multiplier ch=
64, as described in detail in [ 5]. The original BigGAN dis-
criminator downsamples the input image to a feature map
of dimensions 16ch×4×4, on which global sum pool-
ing is applied to derive a 16chdimensional feature vector
that is classiﬁed into real or fake. In order to turn the dis-
criminator into a U-Net, we copy the generator architec-
ture and append it to the 4×4output of the discrimina-
tor. In effect, the features are successively upsampled via
ResNet blocks until the original image resolution ( H×W)
is reached. To complete the U-Net, the input to every de-
coder ResNet block is concatenated to the output features
of the encoder blocks that share the same intermediate reso-
lution. In this way, high-level and low-level information are
effectively integrated on the way to the output feature map.Hereby, the decoder architecture is almost identical to the
generator, with the exception of that we change the number
of channels of the ﬁnal output from 3toch, append a ﬁnal
block of1×1convolutions to produce the 1×H×Woutput
map, and do not use class-conditional BatchNorm [ 8,12]
in the decoder, nor the encoder. Similarly to [ 5], we pro-
vide class information to DUwith projection [ 35] to the
ch-dimensional channel features of the U-Net encoder and
decoder output. In contrast to [ 5] and in alignment with [ 6],
we ﬁnd it beneﬁcial not to use a hierarchical latent space,
but to directly feed the same input vector zto BatchNorm
at every layer in the generator. Lastly, we also remove the
self-attention layer in both encoder and decoder, as in our
experiments they did not contribute to the performance but
led to memory overhead. While the original BigGAN is a
class-conditional model, we additionally devise an uncon-
ditional version for our experiments. For the unconditional
model, we replace class-conditional BatchNorm with self-
modulation [ 6], where the BatchNorm parameters are con-
ditioned only on the latent vector z, and do not use the class
projection of [ 35] in the discriminator.
All these modiﬁcations leave us with a two-headed dis-
criminator. We compute the GAN loss at both heads with
equal weight. Analogously to BigGAN, we keep the hinge
loss [ 50] in all basic U-Net models, while the models that
also employ the consistency regularization in the decoder
output space beneﬁt from using the non-saturating loss [ 14].
Our implementation builds on top of the original BigGAN
PyTorch implementation2.
Consistency regularization. For each training iteration a
mini-batch of CutMix images (˜x,c= 0,M)is created with
probability pmix. This probability is increased linearly from
0to0.5between the ﬁrst nepochs in order to give the gen-
erator time to learn how to synthesize more real looking
samples and not to give the discriminator too much power
from the start. CutMix images are created from the existing
real and fake images in the mini-batch using binary masks
M. For sampling M, we use the original CutMix imple-
mentation3: ﬁrst sampling the combination ratio rbetween
the real and generated images from the uniform distribution
(0,1)and then uniformly sample the bounding box coordi-
nates for the cropping regions of xandG(z)to preserve the
rratio, i.e. r=|M|
W∗H(see Figure 3). Binary masks Malso
denote the target for the decoder DU
dec, while we use fake,
i.ec= 0, as the target for the encoder DU
enc. We setλ= 1.0
as it showed empirically to be a good choice. Note that the
consistency regularization does not impose much overhead
during training. Extra computational cost comes only from
feeding additional CutMix images through the discrimina-
tor while updating its parameters.
2https://github.com/ajbrock/BigGAN-PyTorch
3https://github.com/clovaai/CutMix-PyTorch
8211


==== Page 6 ====
Figure 4: Images generated with U-Net GAN on FFHQ with resolution 256×256when interpolating in the latent space (left
to right). Note the high quality of synthetic samples and very smooth interpolations, maintaining global andlocal realism.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets. We consider three datasets: FFHQ [ 20],
CelebA [ 29] and the subset of the COCO [ 28] and Open-
Images [ 24] images containing animal classes, which we
will further on refer to as COCO-Animals. We use FFHQ
and CelebA for unconditional image synthesis and COCO-
Animals for class-conditional image synthesis, where the
class label is used. We experiment with 256×256resolution
for FFHQ and 128×128for CelebA and COCO-Animals.
CelebA is a human face dataset of 200k images, featur-
ing∼10k different celebrities with a variety of facial poses
and expressions. Similarly, FFHQ is a more recent dataset
of human faces, consisting of 70k high-quality images with
higher variation in terms of age, ethnicity, accessories, and
viewpoints. The proposed COCO-Animals dataset consists
of∼38k training images belonging to 10animal classes,
where we choose COCO and OpenImages (using the hu-
man veriﬁed subset with mask annotations) samples in the
categories bird, cat, dog, horse, cow, sheep, giraffe, zebra,
elephant , and monkey . With its relatively small size and im-
balanced number of images per class as well as due to its
variation in poses, shapes, number of objects, and back-
grounds, COCO-Animals presents a challenging task for
class-conditional image synthesis. We choose to compose
this dataset in order to perform conditional image genera-tion in the mid- to high-resolution regime, with a reason-
able computational budget and feasible training time. Other
datasets in this order of size either have too few examples
per class (e.g. AwA [ 46]) or too little inter- and intra-class
variability. In contrast, the intra-class variability of COCO-
Animals is very high for certain classes, e.g. bird and mon-
key, which span many subspecies. For more details we refer
to Section DandEin the supplementary material.
Evaluation metrics. For quantitative evaluation we use the
Fr´echet Inception distance (FID) [ 16] as the main metric,
and additionally consider the Inception score (IS) [ 41]. Be-
tween the two, FID is a more comprehensive metric, which
has been shown to be more consistent with human evalua-
tion in assessing the realism and variation of the generated
images [ 16], while IS is limited by what the Inception clas-
siﬁer can recognise, which is directly linked to its training
data [ 3]. If one learns to generate something not present in
the classiﬁer’s training data (e.g. human faces) then IS can
still be low despite generating high quality images since that
image does not get classiﬁed as a distinct class.
In all our experiments, FID and IS are computed using
50k synthetic images, following [ 19]. By default all re-
ported numbers correspond to the best or median FID of ﬁve
independent runs achieved with 400k training iterations for
FFHQ and COCO-Animals, and 800k training iterations for
CelebA. For evaluation, we employ moving averages of the
generator weights following [ 5,19], with a decay of 0.9999 .
8212


==== Page 7 ====
Figure 5: Images generated with U-Net GAN trained on COCO-Animals with resolution 128×128.
Note that we do not use any truncation tricks or rejection
sampling for image generation.
Training details. We adopt the original training parame-
ters of [ 5]. In particular, we use a uniformly distributed
noise vector z∈[−1,1]140as input to the generator, and
the Adam optimizer [ 22] with learning rates of 1e-4and
5e-4forGandDU. The number of warmup epochs nfor
consistency regularization is set to 200for COCO-Animals
and20for FFHQ and CelebA. In contrast to [ 5], we operate
with considerably smaller mini-batch sizes: 20for FFHQ,
50for CelebA and 80for COCO-Animals. See Section F
andBin the supplementary material for more details.
4.2. Results
We ﬁrst test our proposed U-Net discriminator in two
settings: unconditional image synthesis on FFHQ and class-
conditional image synthesis on COCO-Animals, using the
BigGAN model [ 5] as a baseline for comparison. We report
our key results in Table 1and Figure 6.
In the unconditional case, our model achieves the FID
score of7.48, which is an improvement of 4.0FID points
over the canonical BigGAN discriminator (see Table 1). In
addition, the new U-Net discriminator also improves over
the baseline in terms of the IS metric ( 3.97vs.4.46). The
same effect is observed for the conditional image generation
setting. Here, our U-Net GAN achieves an FID of 13.73,
improving 2.64points over BigGAN, as well as increases
the IS score from 11.77to12.29. Figure 6visualizes the
mean FID behaviour over the training across 5 independent
runs. From Figure 6it is evident that the FID score drops
for both models at the similar rate, with a constant offset for
the U-Net GAN model, as well as the smaller standard de-
viation of FID. These results showcase the high potential of
the new U-Net based discriminator. For a detailed compari-
son of the FID mean, median and standard deviation across
5 runs we refer to Table S2in the supplementary material.
Qualitative results on FFHQ and COCO-Animals are
shown in Figure 4and Figure 5. Figure 4displays human
faces generated by U-Net GAN through linear interpola-
tion in the latent space between two synthetic samples. WeMethodFFHQ COCO-Animals
Best Median Best Median
FID↓IS↑FID↓IS↑FID↓IS↑FID↓IS↑
BigGAN [ 5] 11.48 3.97 12.42 4.02 16.37 11.77 16.55 11.78
U-Net GAN 7.48 4.46 7.63 4.47 13.73 12.29 13.87 12.31
Table 1: Evaluation results on FFHQ and COCO-Animals.
We report the best and median FID score across 5 runs and
its corresponding IS, see Section 4.2for discussion.
FFHQ COCO-Animals
100k 200k 300k 400k
training iterations102030FIDBigGAN
U-Net GAN
100k 200k 300k 400k
training iterations152025FIDBigGAN
U-Net GAN
Figure 6: FID curves over iterations of the BigGAN model
(blue) and the proposed U-Net GAN (red). Depicted are the
FID mean and standard deviation across 5 runs per setting.
observe that the interpolations are semantically smooth be-
tween faces, i.e. an open mouth gradually becomes a closed
mouth, hair progressively grows in length, beards smoothly
fade or appear, and hair color changes seamlessly. Fur-
thermore, we notice that on several occasions men appear
with pink beards. As FFHQ contains a fair share of peo-
ple with pink hair, we suspect that our generator extrapo-
lates hair color to beards, enabled by the global and local
DUfeedback during the training. Figure 5shows generated
samples on COCO-Animals. We observe diverse images
of high quality. We further notice that employing the class-
conditional projection (as used in BigGAN) in the pixel out-
put space of the decoder does not introduce class leakage or
inﬂuence the class separation in any other way. These ob-
servations conﬁrm that our U-Net GAN is effective in both
unconditional and class-conditional image generation.
Ablation Study. In Table 2we next analyze the individ-
ual effect of each of the proposed components of the U-Net
8213


==== Page 8 ====
Method COCO-Animals FFHQ
BigGAN [ 5] 16.55 12 .42
U-Net based discriminator 15.86 10 .86
+ CutMix augmentation 14.95 10 .30
+ Consistency regularization 13.87 7 .63
Table 2: Ablation study of U-Net GAN on FFHQ and
COCO-Animals. Shown are the median FID scores. The
proposed components lead to better performance, on aver-
age improving the median FID by 3.7points over BigGAN.
Method FID ↓IS↑
PG-GAN [ 19] 7.30 –
COCO-GAN [ 27] 5.74 –
BigGAN [ 5] 4.54 3.23
U-Net GAN 2.95 3.43
Table 3: Comparison with the state-of-the-art models on
CelebA (128×128). See Section 4.2for discussion.
GAN model (see Section 3for details) to the baseline ar-
chitecture of BigGAN on the FFHQ and COCO-Animals
datasets, comparing the median FID scores. Note that each
of these individual components builds on each other. As
shown in Table 2, employing the U-Net architecture for the
discriminator alone improves the median FID score from
12.42to10.86for FFHQ and 16.55to15.86for COCO-
Animals. Adding the CutMix augmentation improves upon
these scores even further, achieving FID of 10.30for FFHQ
and14.95for COCO-Animals. Employing the proposed
consistency regularization in the segmenter DU
decoutput
space on the CutMix images enables us to get the most out
of the CutMix augmentation and to leverage better the per-
pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator, without impos-
ing much computational or memory costs. In effect, the me-
dian FID drops to 7.63for FFHQ and to 13.87for COCO-
Animals. Overall, we observe that the proposed compo-
nents of U-Net GAN improve performance in terms of FID.
Comparison with the state of the art. Table 3shows
that U-Net GAN compares favourably with the state of the
art on CelebA. The BigGAN baseline already outperforms
COCO-GAN, the best result reported in the literature to the
best of our knowledge, lowering FID from 5.74to4.54,
whereas U-Net GAN further improves FID to 2.954. Note
that BigGAN belongs to just one of the two state-of-the-art
GAN families, led by BigGAN and StyleGAN, and their
respective further improvements [ 51,53,21]. While in this
paper we base our model on BigGAN, it would be interest-
ing to also apply the U-Net discriminator to StyleGAN.
Discriminator response visualization. Experimentally
we observe that DU
encandDU
decoften assign different real/-
4FID scores for CelebA were computed with the standard TensorFlow
Inception network for comparability. The PyTorch and TensorFlow FIDs
for all datasets are presented in the supplementary material in Table S1.
DU
decFigure 7: Predictions of the encoder DU
encand decoder
DU
decduring training, in a batch of 50generated samples.
For visualization, the DU
decscore is averaged over all pixels.
Note that quite often decisions of DU
encandDU
decare not
coherent. As judged by the U-Net discriminator, samples
in the upper left are locally plausible but not globally co-
herent (in orange), whereas samples in the lower right look
globally coherent but have local inconsistencies (example in
purple: giraffe with too many legs and vague background).
fake scores per sample. Figure 7visualizes the per-sample
predictions for a complete training batch. Here, the decoder
score is computed as the average per-pixel prediction. The
scores correlate with each other but have a high variance.
Points in the upper left quadrant correspond to samples that
are assigned a high probability of being real by the decoder,
but a low probability by the encoder. This implies realism
on a local level, but not necessarily on a global one. Sim-
ilarly, the lower right quadrant represents samples that are
identiﬁed as realistic by the encoder, but contain unrealistic
patches which cause a low decoder score. The fact that the
encoder and decoder predictions are not tightly coupled fur-
ther implies that these two components are complementary.
In other words, the generator receives more pronounced
feedback by the proposed U-Net discriminator than it would
get from a standard GAN discriminator.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an alternative U-Net based ar-
chitecture for the discriminator, which allows to provide
both global and local feedback to the generator. In addition,
we introduce a consistency regularization technique for the
U-Net discriminator based on the CutMix data augmenta-
tion. The proposed changes result in a stronger discrimina-
tor, enabling the generator to synthesize images with vary-
ing levels of detail, maintaining global and local realism.
We demonstrate the improvement in FID over the state-of-
the-art BigGAN model [ 5] on three different datasets.
8214


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and L ´eon Bottou.
Wasserstein generative adversarial networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017.
2,5
[2] Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla.
Segnet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture
for image segmentation. Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 2017. 3
[3] Shane T. Barratt and Rishi Sharma. A note on the inception
score. arXiv:1801.01973 , 2018. 6
[4] David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian G Goodfellow, Nico-
las Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin Raffel. Mixmatch: A
holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019.
3
[5] Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large
scale GAN training for high ﬁdelity natural image synthe-
sis. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR) , 2019. 1,2,5,6,7,8
[6] Ting Chen, Mario Lucic, Neil Houlsby, and Sylvain Gelly.
On self modulation for generative adversarial networks.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) , 2018. 5
[7] Ting Chen, Xiaohua Zhai, Marvin Ritter, Mario Lucic, and
Neil Houlsby. Self-supervised gans via auxiliary rotation
loss. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR) , 2019. 2
[8] Harm de Vries, Florian Strub, J ´er´emie Mary, Hugo
Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin, and Aaron C. Courville. Mod-
ulating early visual processing by language. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. 5
[9] Terrance Devries and Graham W. Taylor. Improved reg-
ularization of convolutional neural networks with cutout.
arXiv:1708.04552 , 2017. 3
[10] Rahul Dey, Felix Juefei-Xu, Vishnu Naresh Boddeti, and
Marios Savvides. Rankgan: A maximum margin ranking
gan for generating faces. In Asian Conference on Computer
Vision (ACCV) , 2018. 2
[11] Thang Doan, Jo ˜ao Monteiro, Isabela Albuquerque, Bog-
dan Mazoure, Audrey Durand, Joelle Pineau, and R. Devon
Hjelm. Online adaptative curriculum learning for gans. In
AAAI , 2018. 2
[12] Vincent Dumoulin, Jonathon Shlens, and Manjunath Kudlur.
A learned representation for artistic style. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. 5
[13] Ishan P. Durugkar, Ian Gemp, and Sridhar Mahadevan. Gen-
erative multi-adversarial networks. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. 2
[14] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2014. 2,
3,5
[15] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent
Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Improved training ofWasserstein GANs. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. 2
[16] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. GANs trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-
rium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS) , 2017. 6
[17] Minyoung Huh, Shao-Hua Sun, and Ning Zhang. Feedback
adversarial learning: Spatial feedback for improving genera-
tive adversarial networks. In Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. 2
[18] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A
Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adver-
sarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1125–1134,
2017. 2
[19] Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
Progressive growing of GANs for improved quality, stabil-
ity, and variation. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2018. 1,2,6,8
[20] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
InConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , 2019. 1,2,6
[21] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hell-
sten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing and
improving the image quality of stylegan. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.04958 , 2019. 8
[22] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2015. 7
[23] Karol Kurach, Mario Lu ˘ci´c, Xiaohua Zhai, Marcin Michal-
ski, and Sylvain Gelly. The GAN landscape: Losses,
architectures, regularization, and normalization. arXiv:
1807.04720 , 2018. 3
[24] Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Ui-
jlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab Kamali, Stefan
Popov, Matteo Malloci, Tom Duerig, and Vittorio Ferrari.
The open images dataset v4: Uniﬁed image classiﬁcation,
object detection, and visual relationship detection at scale.
arXiv:1811.00982 , 2018. 2,6
[25] Chun-Liang Li, Wei-Cheng Chang, Yu Cheng, Yiming Yang,
and Barnab ´as P´oczos. MMD GAN: Towards deeper under-
standing of moment matching network. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. 2
[26] Jae Hyun Lim and Jong Chul Ye. Geometric gan.
arXiv:1705.02894 , 2017. 2,5
[27] Chieh Hubert Lin, Chia-Che Chang, Yu-Sheng Chen, Da-
Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Coco-gan:
Generation by parts via conditional coordinating. In Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2019. 1,2,
8
[28] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, Lubomir D.
Bourdev, Ross B. Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva
Ramanan, Piotr Doll ´ar, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft
coco: Common objects in context. In European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2014. 2,6
8215


==== Page 10 ====
[29] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang.
Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2015. 2,6
[30] Mario Lu ˘ci´c, Karol Kurach, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain
Gelly, and Olivier Bousquet. Are GANs created equal? A
large-scale study. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2018. 3
[31] Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond Y . K. Lau,
and Zhen Wang. Multi-class generative adversarial networks
with the L2 loss function. arXiv:1611.04076 , 2016. 2
[32] Jacob Menick and Nal Kalchbrenner. Generating high ﬁ-
delity images with subscale pixel networks and multidimen-
sional upscaling. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2019. 1
[33] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative
adversarial nets. arXiv:1411.1784 , 2014. 2
[34] Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and
Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization for generative ad-
versarial networks. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2018. 1,2
[35] Takeru Miyato and Masanori Koyama. cGANs with projec-
tion discriminator. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2018. 5
[36] Gonalo Mordido, Haojin Yang, and Christoph Meinel.
Dropout-gan: Learning from a dynamic ensemble of dis-
criminators. arXiv:1807.11346 , 2018. 2
[37] Sebastian Nowozin, Botond Cseke, and Ryota Tomioka. f-
GAN: Training generative neural samplers using variational
divergence minimization. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2016. 2,5
[38] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsuper-
vised representation learning with deep convolutional gener-
ative adversarial networks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2016. 2
[39] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
InMICCAI , 2015. 2,3
[40] Kevin Roth, Aurelien Lucchi, Sebastian Nowozin, and
Thomas Hofmann. Stabilizing training of generative adver-
sarial networks through regularization. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017. 2
[41] Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki
Cheung, Alec Radford, Xi Chen, and Xi Chen. Improved
techniques for training GANs. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2016. 6
[42] Rishi Sharma, Shane T. Barratt, Stefano Ermon, and Vi-
jay S. Pande. Improved training with curriculum gans.
arXiv:1807.09295 , 2018. 2
[43] Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Christopher Beckham, Amir Na-
jaﬁ, Ioannis Mitliagkas, David Lopez-Paz, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. Manifold mixup: Better representations by interpolat-
ing hidden states. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) , 2019. 3
[44] Vikas Verma, Alex Lamb, Juho Kannala, Yoshua Bengio,
and David Lopez-Paz. Interpolation consistency training for
semi-supervised learning. In IJCAI , 2019. 3[45] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao,
Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-resolution image
synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans.
InConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , 2018. 2
[46] Yongqin Xian, Christoph H. Lampert, Bernt Schiele, and
Zeynep Akata. Zero-shot learninga comprehensive evalua-
tion of the good, the bad and the ugly. Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2018. 6
[47] Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk
Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo. Cutmix: Regu-
larization strategy to train strong classiﬁers with localizable
features. In International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) , 2019. 2,3,4
[48] Dan Zhang and Anna Khoreva. PA-GAN: Improving GAN
training by progressive augmentation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019. 2
[49] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N. Dauphin, and
David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimiza-
tion. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR) , 2018. 3,4
[50] Han Zhang, Ian J. Goodfellow, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and
Augustus Odena. Self-attention generative adversarial net-
works. In International Conference on Machine learning
(ICML) , 2019. 1,2,5
[51] Han Zhang, Zizhao Zhang, Augustus Odena, and Honglak
Lee. Consistency regularization for generative adversarial
networks. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR) , 2020. 1,2,3,8
[52] Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-
based generative adversarial network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03126 , 2016. 2
[53] Zhengli Zhao, Sameer Singh, Honglak Lee, Zizhao Zhang,
Augustus Odena, and Han Zhang. Improved consistency reg-
ularization for gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04724 , 2020.
8
8216


