==== Page 1 ====
Active Safety System for Semi-Autonomous Teleoperated Vehicles
Smit Saparia1, Andreas Schimpe2and Laura Ferranti3
Abstract — Autonomous cars can reduce road trafﬁc accidents
and provide a safer mode of transport. However, key technical
challenges, such as safe navigation in complex urban environ-
ments, need to be addressed before deploying these vehicles on
the market. Teleoperation can help smooth the transition from
human operated to fully autonomous vehicles since it still has
human in the loop providing the scope of fallback on driver.
This paper presents an Active Safety System (ASS) approach for
teleoperated driving. The proposed approach helps the operator
ensure the safety of the vehicle in complex environments,
that is, avoid collisions with static or dynamic obstacles. Our
ASS relies on a model predictive control (MPC) formulation
to control both the lateral and longitudinal dynamics of the
vehicle. By exploiting the ability of the MPC framework to deal
with constraints, our ASS restricts the controller’s authority
to intervene for lateral correction of the human operator’s
commands, avoiding counter-intuitive driving experience for
the human operator. Further, we design a visual feedback
to enhance the operator’s trust over the ASS. In addition,
we propose an MPC’s prediction horizon data based novel
predictive display to mitigate the effects of large latency in
the teleoperation system. We tested the performance of the
proposed approach on a high-ﬁdelity vehicle simulator in the
presence of dynamic obstacles and latency.
©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.I. INTRODUCTION
From the introduction of the seat belt to Automatic
Emergency Braking (AEB) systems, vehicles have become
increasingly safer. Despite the technological improvements,
more than 25 thousand fatalities due to road accidents were
reported just in the EU in 2017 [1]. These reports also
highlighted that95 % of the fatalities were caused by
human errors. Fully autonomous vehicles might present the
solution to reduce such accidents by removing the human
from the loop. Fully autonomous vehicles, however, may still
fail in trafﬁc situation a human could easily handle, such as
parking places or pedestrian crossing areas. To smooth the
transition from human-driven vehicles to fully autonomous
vehicles, teleoperated driving can play a fundamental role.
In Teleoperated Driving (ToD), a human operator drives
the vehicle from a workstation equipped with steering wheel
and gas/brake pedals. The generated control commands are
transmitted to the vehicle via a mobile network for execution.
1S. Saparia was with the Institute for Automotive Technology at the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany and Department of
Cognitive Robotics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
smit.saparia at outlook.com
2A. Schimpe is with the Institute for Automotive Technology at the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85748 Garching bei München,
Germany. andreas.schimpe at tum.de.
3L. Ferranti is with Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands l.ferranti at
tudelft.nl. Her work is supported by the NWO VENI grant (n.
18165).
Fig. 1: System architecture for Teleoperated Driving showing
major components in the closed loop.
The operator can view the vehicle’s environment on the
monitors as captured by vehicle’s cameras. This transmission
of signals via the mobile network introduces latency. As
Fig. 1 shows, there are two types of latency to consider,
that are, actuator latency and glass latency . The actuator
latency is the time taken by the signals to travel from
the input devices at workstation to the actuators on the
vehicle via the mobile network. The glass latency is the time
taken by camera information to travel from camera on the
vehicle to the monitors at the workstation via the mobile
network. These latency deﬁnitions account for the time spent
by signals at various stages in hardware as well as in the
network.
ToD has several challenges, such as large latency, complete
connection loss, or reduced situation awareness. Large la-
tency in the network can lead to unstable real time control of
the vehicle [2]. To mitigate the effects of latency, techniques
like predictive display can be employed. In worst cases, a
complete connection loss poses a threat to make teleopera-
tion useless and dangerous at the same time. Nevertheless,
strategies like redundant mobile networks are deployed to
overcome such an issue [3]. Another challenge in ToD is
reduced situational awareness. It becomes difﬁcult to judge
velocity and location of the obstacles and this problem ag-
gravates in the peripheral region of the view. In tight driving
scenarios, the chances of collision increase and hence a driver
assistance system to help avoid collision proves beneﬁcial as
shown in [4]. As Fig. 1 shows, the human operator generates
steering and velocity commands that are then manipulated
by the controller to generate safe collision free control inputs
for the vehicle. Since human operator (from the workstation)
and the system (with the ﬁnal authority) control the vehicle,
it can be stated as a case of uncoupled shared control [5].
To mitigate the issue of conﬂict of control interest between
human operator and the system, a feedback is necessary toarXiv:2106.14554v1  [cs.RO]  28 Jun 2021

==== Page 2 ====
communicate the intent of the system to the human operator.
A. Contributions
To address the above challenges, this paper presents an
active safety system for collision avoidance using Model
Predictive Control (MPC) in a shared control framework
speciﬁcally for a teleoperated road vehicle, building on
the approach presented in [4]. First, we propose a driver
assistance system (Sec. II), based on MPC, for a teleoperated
semi-autonomous road vehicle. The primary objective is to
track the input references as generated by the human operator
and intervene when deemed necessary to avoid collision
with static or dynamic obstacles. As compared to [4], the
approach presented in this paper controls both, the longitu-
dinal and lateral dynamics of the vehicle. In addition, our
design introduces a restriction on the controller’s authority
to override human operator to improve the operator trust on
the automation. Furthermore, we introduce potential ﬁelds
in the MPC formulation to efﬁciently achieve a collision
free manoeuvre. Second, we propose a visual feedback (Sec.
III) to communicate system’s intent and enhance trust in
the human operator over the system to mitigate conﬂict
of control interest. Third, we propose an MPC data-based
predictive display technique (Sec. IV) to mitigate effects of
high latency in a teleoperation setup. Finally, the proposed
approach is validated using a high-ﬁdelity vehicle simulator
with the simulated human operator (Sec. V).
B. Related Work
Our work spans across different areas. For this reason,
this section provides an overview of the relevant literature on
shared control, obstacle avoidance, visual feedback and pre-
dictive display with a main focus on MPC-based approaches.
Shared Control: Several shared control approaches have
been proposed in the literature, such as model-based cou-
pled shared control, model-based uncoupled shared control,
model-free uncoupled shared control (as deﬁned in [5]).
In uncoupled shared control, automation has ﬁnal authority
to implement the input to the vehicle unlike in coupled
shared control. A model-based shared control models the
shared control behaviour, mostly using a driver model. A
model-based coupled shared control approach is followed
in [6], where human driver and steering system models are
incorporated into a lateral controller design. Modelling the
driver requires actual driving tests as shown in [7] and the
driver model becomes speciﬁc to a particular driving style.
A model-free uncoupled shared control approach is fol-
lowed in [8], where a ﬁnal steering command as a weighted
combination of driver and automation input according to
a tailored threat metric is computed. Tuning of this threat
metric is not trivial and only lateral control was showcased in
this work. Finally, a model-based uncoupled shared control
approach is followed in [9], [10] and [4]. In [9], a model
predictive contouring control (MPCC) framework is used
for automation where center of the lane is considered as
a reference path. Another optimization problem considers
driver inputs and a decaying function is used to compute aweighted combination of driver and automation inputs. This
approach considers both lateral and longitudinal control, but
cannot be used for the case of teleoperation where availabil-
ity of information of lane center via perception module is
not reliable. The authors in [10] and [4] directly incorporate
driver’s steer commands into the objective function of MPC
for only lateral control, where the objective is to match the
driver inputs.
Obstacle Avoidance: Obstacles and ego vehicle can be
directly modelled in the constraints of the MPC formulation
asgeometrical shapes , based on which a collision free
criterion can be incorporated into the problem formulation
of controller, as proposed, for example, in [11] and [12] in
the context of fully autonomous vehicles. Reactive methods,
such as potential ﬁelds, can also be incorporated in the
MPC formulation instead of explicitly modelling obstacles
in the constraints. The authors of [13] represented crossable
and non-crossable obstacles with different potential ﬁelds.
The authors of [4] modelled the obstacles as higher-order
ellipses and formulated a potential function such that the
front vehicle corners are pushed away from the obstacles.
This potential function is incorporated into the objective
of the MPC problem formulation. The advantage of using
potential function over spatial constraint is that the size of
the optimization problem does not grow with the number of
obstacles in the scenario [9], [11]. Therefore, the solution
time of the problem is not expected to increase with the
increase in the number of obstacles.
Visual Feedback: A feedback is necessary for the con-
troller to communicate its intent to the human driver. A haptic
feedback on steering wheel is used in [14], to assist human
operator in challenging situations and helps prevent collision
of teleoperated vehicle. However, haptic feedback on steering
wheel can be used only for lateral control. The authors in [15]
showcased the beneﬁt of having visual feedback along with
haptic shared control for obstacle avoidance. Haptic feedback
on steering wheel cannot communicate future vehicle state
that might affect current driver inputs. This is supposedly
compensated by a visual feedback. Monitors in teleopera-
tion can be used to illustrate future vehicle positions. This
advantage is exploited in this work.
Predictive Display: As presented in [16], predictive
display can be used to predict ego vehicle position, to com-
pensate for the delay in signal transmission. This involves
projecting the predicted vehicle position images on the video
stream. However, these techniques assume constant vehicle
velocity and road wheel angle in the predictions.
II. SHARED CONTROL APPROACH
A. Prediction Model
The teleoperated vehicle is expected to be driven at slow
speeds with moderate driving. Hence, the prediction model
chosen in this approach for the MPC is the following

==== Page 3 ====
kinematic bicycle model [17]:
_x=vcos ( +) (1a)
_y=vsin ( +) (1b)
_ =v
lrsin () (1c)
_v=a (1d)
= tan 1lr
lf+lrtan()
(1e)
wherexandyare coordinates of the center of mass (CoM)
of the vehicle,  is the heading angle of the vehicle in the
inertial frame, vis the vehicle velocity, lfandlrare the
distances between CoM and front and rear axles respectively.
is the angle that the velocity vector makes with the
longitudinal axis of the vehicle, ais the acceleration of the
CoM andis the road wheel angle (RWA) of the front
wheels. To simplify the notation, we deﬁne the following
states and input quantities, that are, z:= [x;y; ;;v ], and
u:= [_;a]respectively.
B. Modelling Ego Vehicle and Rectangular Obstacles
The collision avoidance criteria are incorporated in the
MPC problem formulation by approximating the ego vehicle
and the rectangular obstacle as geometric shapes. The ego
vehicle is represented with four longitudinally shifted circles
of radiusr, along its longitudinal axis [12]. The beneﬁt of
representing the ego vehicle with circles instead of just using
front vehicle corners as in [4] for collision avoidance is that
it ensures that the ego vehicle stays collision free from the
obstacles with a downside of an increase in the computational
burden. A rectangular obstacle is represented with a higher
order ellipse. The implicit function, as proposed in [4], that
describes the shape of the obstacle in inertial frame is given
by,
em
i(xci;yci) =
R()(xci xm
obs(t))
majn
+
R()(yci ym
obs(t))
minn
 1(2)
fori2f1;2;3;4g. Here, (xci;yci)represents the center of
theithego vehicle circle and (xm
obs(t);ym
obs(t))represents
the center of the mthobstacle.R()is the rotation matrix,
depending on the heading of the obstacle. The semi-axis
of theandand the even order nof the ellipse help deﬁne
the size of the bounding ellipse. Therefore, we deﬁne
maj=a+randmin=b+r; (3)
wherea:=fL=2;b=fB=2,f=np
2andris the radius
of the ego vehicle. LandBare the length and breadth of
the obstacle respectively.
C. Potential Field for Collision Avoidance
Building on [4], we rely on a repulsive potential ﬁeld
approach for collision avoidance. The potential ﬁeld Pis
a sum of individual potential functions for mobstacles for
all theicircles of the ego vehicle, that is,
P=X
mX
iPm
i(x;y); (4)where the potential function, for the ithcircle for the mth
obstacle is as follows
Pm
i(x;y) =
(em
i(xci;yci) + 1): (5)
In the equation above, andare the design parameters that
speciﬁes the strength and slope of the potential function.
It should be noted that emis the implicit function that
represents the shape of the mthobstacle, which is already
given by (2). When the ego vehicle is in collision with
the obstacle, the value of embecomes zero and hence Pm
i
equates to. To make the obstacle as non-crossable for the
vehicle, this information is used to formulate a constraint in
MPC formulation.
The potential ﬁeld approach for collision avoidance en-
sures that the size of MPC problem stays constant irrespec-
tive of the number of obstacle, an advantage over the spatial
constraint approach.
D. Model Predictive Control Formulation
We rely on MPC to achieve the navigation objectives. The
MPC controller repeatedly solves a constrained optimiza-
tion problem to compute an optimal sequence of control
commands that minimize a desired cost function Jover a
ﬁnite horizon N. At every sampling instance, only the ﬁrst
element of this control sequence is applied in closed loop.
This section details our MPC problem formulation.
The objectives of the controller are (i)to match the human
operator’s inputs (i.e., andv),(ii)ensure collision avoid-
ance, and (iii) restrict the controller authority to intervene
to avoid surprises for the human operator. To achieve the
objectives above we deﬁne the following MPC:
min
z;u;SNX
k=1Jk(zk;uk;Sk) (6a)
subject to zk+1=f(zk;uk) (6b)
z0=z(t) (6c)
mink+1max (6d)
vminvk+1vmax (6e)
_min_k_max (6f)
aminakamax (6g)
dev min s
k+1k+1 ref(t)dev max +s
k+1(6h)
Pk+1;i+sp
k+1(6i)
k2(0;N 1);
wherezk,uk, andSkare the state, command, and slack vari-
ables (discussed below) at prediction step k. The MPC con-
troller minimizes the cost (6a) subject to the constraints (6b)-
(6i). The cost Jkis deﬁned as follow:
Jk:=JP
k+J
k+Jv
k+JS
k: (7)
The ﬁrst term of the cost function, namely JP, is associated
with the potential ﬁeld to ensure a collision free motion and
it is deﬁned as follows:
JP
k=WPPk(xk;yk); (8)

==== Page 4 ====
Fig. 2: Rviz1illustration of visual feedback to be added on top
of video stream on the screens at workstation. The maximum
and minimum vehicle trajectory due to the corresponding
controller intervention is shown by the green controller
authority cone. Obstacles are represented by red cubes.
whereWPis a weighting factor and Pis deﬁned according
to (4), for all the circles representing the ego vehicles and
for all the obstacles.
The second term of the cost function penalizes the deviation
of controller input from the reference or human operator’s
inputrefwith the penalty W,
J
k=W(ref(t) k)2(9)
The third term of the cost function penalizes the deviation
of controller input vfrom the reference or human operator’s
inputvrefwith the penalty Wv
Jv
k=Wv(vref(t) vk)2(10)
The last term in the cost function is used to penalize, with a
penaltyWs, slack variables Sk:= [s
k; sp
k]Twhich are used
to soften constraints (6h) and (6i):
JS
k=WsS2
k: (11)
Constraint (6b) represents the dynamic coupling. In addition,
note thatf(zk;uk)represents the discritized kinematic bicy-
cle model equations presented in equations (1). Constraints
(6d) and (6f) limits the RWA and its rate of change _,
respectively. Furthermore, Constraints (6e) and (6g) limit the
velocityvand acceleration aof the vehicle, respectively.
Constraint (6h) restrict the controller’s authority to deviate
from the reference RWA at time t. This makes the controller
action moderate in the lateral sense and helps avoid larger
mismatch between human operator’s intentions and the con-
troller’s action. Finally, together with the potential ﬁeld in the
cost function, constraint (6i) helps ensure collision avoidance
by making the obstacles uncrossable. The upper limit of this
constraint is governed by as found in (5). Constraint (6i)
is softened to practically avoid infeasible solutions, while a
high penalty on the slack variables in the cost function limits
such a constraint violation.
1http://wiki.ros.org/rviz
Fig. 3: System Architecture for MPC Data-Based Predictive
Display.
III. MPC DATA-BASED VISUAL FEEDBACK
To further raise human operator’s trust and understand-
ing of the system behaviour, a feedback can be used to
communicate the intention of system to the human operator
as discussed in I-B. Our proposed visual feedback contains
information on the region of future vehicle positions due
to controller authority, as deﬁned by constraint (6h), and
future vehicle path, shown by white tracks, due to com-
plete sequence of steering wheel angle and velocity inputs
by controller. This feedback is proposed to be added as
graphical illustration on top of the video stream on screens
at workstation. The visual feedback is expected to help the
human operator better understand the possible positions of
the vehicle according to both the operator’s and controller’s
inputs. It aims at avoiding any surprises or conﬂict if the
controller intervenes. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 2.
IV. MPC DATA-BASED PREDICTIVE DISPLAY
This section discusses our proposed predictive display
method. Our predictive display exploits the MPC predictions
to mitigate the effects a high network latency can have on
the teleoperation. Recall that the reference module in Fig.
1 generates reference inputs based on the state feedback it
receives, which is delayed by time equal to glass latency.
These reference inputs are further delayed by a time equal
to the actuator latency during the transmission to the MPC
module. During this time the ego vehicle would have trav-
elled by time equal to this total round trip latency. The goal
of our predictive display is to attempt predicting the ego
vehicle position during the time frame of a total round trip
latency. This predicted vehicle position can be used to enrich
the camera images before they are displayed on the screens
at the workstation.
Authors in [16] propose a full prediction method, which
relies on a bicycle model (as presented in (1)) for prediction
assuming constant vehicle velocity and RWA. This method
is taken as baseline for comparison with the proposed MPC
data based Predictive Display in section V-B.
In our approach, the idea is that MPC’s predicted state
corresponding to time equal to total round trip latency could
be used as state feedback. This simpliﬁes the process and
needs no new calculations as in [16]. MPC already uses a

==== Page 5 ====
model of the system and sets of constraints and objective to
calculate optimal evolution of states and inputs. This method
also eliminates the assumptions of constant velocity and
RWA. Fig. 3 illustrates this concept.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The validation of the approach was carried out with
simulations in MATLAB/Simulink®. For simulations, a high
ﬁdelity car model from IPG CarMaker [18] was used as
plant to test the designed controller. A V olvo XC90 T6 AWD
was used as the testing vehicle. The optimization of MPC
problem is carried out through acados , an open source
software package with a collection of solvers for fast em-
bedded optimization intended for fast embedded applications
[19]. Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) is used as the
solver by acados . The algorithm runs well below 50 ms
on an Intel Core i7-4600 2.10 Ghz 2 Core CPU with 8
GB of RAM and hence it can be expected to perform even
better when run on a powerful hardware of the experimental
vehicle. The system architecture for ToD is shown in Fig.
1. The architecture consists of two main blocks, that are,
(i)the workstation, where the human operator generates
reference inputs of velocity and RWA, (ii)the teleoperated
vehicle equipped with the proposed MPC controller. In a real
setup, the signals between these two blocks are transmitted
over a commercial 4G LTE network and hence delayed
due to network latency. In a simulation setup, delay blocks
are added separately to artiﬁcially introduce this latency in
simulations. For simulations, the reference block generates
reference velocity, whose values are predeﬁned as a function
of time. In addition to this, the reference block simulates the
human operator using a Feedback Linearized Path Tracking
Controller (FBLC), taken from [20]. The control law used
to simulate the human operator is deﬁned as follows
FBL(t) = arctan 1eL(t) 2vsin (eH(t))
v2cos(eH(t))
(12)
where, the lateral and heading errors are eLandeH, respec-
tively, andvis the current vehicle velocity. The correction
for heading error and lateral error can be prioritized using the
gains1and2. The errors, eLandeHare computed with
respect to the reference tracking point along the trajectory,
which is again a function of lookahead distance. To include
the effect of visual feedback to the human operator, we added
another feedback term. This term penalizes the deviation
between the operator SWA (RWA) or the calculated FBLand
the current SWA (RWA), with the proportional gain 3. Thus,
the overall simulated human operator’s RWA input becomes:
ref(t) =FBL(t) +3((t0) FBL(t)) (13)
The CarMaker plant cannot take velocity input directly
and hence a Cruise Control (CC) is designed to translate
the desired velocity from MPC into corresponding Gas and
Brake pedal values. A basic CC is formulated based on a
proportional-integral controller.
The sampling time of MPC is set to ts= 50 ms since
the solution times are well within this limit. The order of
-10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
X (m)-53-52-51-50-49-48-47-46-45-44Y (m)Trajectory Driven
ReferenceFig. 4: Trajectory Driven for Overtake Scenario. Progression
of ego vehicle with ASS is shown in shades of blue. Pro-
gression of ego vehicle with Baseline controller is shown in
shades of green. Progression of oncoming obstacle (dynamic)
is shown in shades of red. Stationary obstacle is shown
in grey color. The shades go from light to dark with the
progression of time.
the ellipsenis taken as 4. The potential function parameters
are tuned to = 0:1and= 2. This tuning results in a
close manoeuvre of the vehicle around the obstacles. ToD is
expected to be performed at low speed due to the perils of
remote driving at high speed. Therefore, these simulations
consider only low speed ( 3 m=s) scenarios where the effect
of latency is not so crucial and hence a constant latency in the
simulation is considered. In the following, the performance
of the proposed controller, namely, our Active Safety System
(ASS), is compared with a baseline approach which does
not have longitudinal control capability and restriction on
deviation of RWA from its corresponding reference. Section
V-A compares the two approaches in a scenario that involves
overtaking a stationary obstacle with another dynamic ob-
stacle in the scene. In addition, Section V-B illustrates our
MPC-data-based predictive display concept.
A. Overtake Scenario
This scenario considers the ego vehicle trying to overtake
a stationary obstacle along its path (e.g., a parked car).
While overtaking, the ego vehicle has to deal with an
upcoming vehicle proceeding in the opposite lane. At every
sampling time, the dynamic obstacles are elongated in size
over the prediction horizon assuming their current heading
and velocity stays constant. Effectively converting them into
large static obstacles with changing locations and dimen-
sions. Thus, collision avoidance of the dynamic obstacles is
accounted for in a conservative manner, with a possibility
of reducing this conservatism by accounting for predicted
obstacle positions along the horizon by a perception module.
Fig. 4 shows the behavior of the ego vehicle with our
ASS approach. The reference path (green dashed line) of
the ego vehicle’s CoM is purposefully designed in such
a way that the ego vehicle collides with the stationary
obstacle while going around. The ASS-based ego vehicle
brakes when encountering the oncoming obstacle, and then
overtakes the stationary obstacle when there is free space.

==== Page 6 ====
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (s)0123Velocity (m/s)Velocity in m/s
ASS
Baseline
Reference(a) Velocity
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time (s)-100102030RWA (deg)RWA in deg
ASS
Baseline
Reference
(b) RWA 
Fig. 5: Longitudinal velocity and RWA of the ego vehicle
in the overtake scenario.
This behavior is reﬂected in the velocity and RWA results
in Fig. 5, which compares our method (blue lines) with the
baseline controller (red lines). The velocity plot in Fig. 5a
highlights the contribution of our ASS on the control of
the vehicle. As the ﬁgure shows, our system reduces the
vehicle velocity to prevent collisions, in contrast with the
constant reference signal provided by the operator. As Fig. 5b
highlights, our ASS avoids collision by correcting the RWA
at time 40 s, where the RWA differs from reference RWA.
Thus, longitudinal and lateral control capabilities of the ASS
are highlighted here. The vehicle with Baseline controller
fails to stop after encountering the oncoming obstacle and
collides with it since it does not have any longitudinal
control capability. The end of its trajectory represents the
point where the vehicle leaves the road boundary and hence
the simulation gets aborted by CarMaker. This highlights
the drawback of not having longitudinal control capability.
In addition to this, the RWA plot in Fig. 5b also shows a
large deviation of RWA from reference RWA. This steering
behaviour is highly counter-intuitive to what the human
operator wishes to do, potentially raising trust issues over
the system. In comparison to this, even though the ASS
steering proﬁle is showing considerable deviation from the
reference RWA, it remains well around the range of reference
and follows the reference back again. This highlights the
importance of restricting the controller’s authority to deviate
from the reference RWA by using the constraint (6h).
B. Predictive Display
The predictive display is expected to nullify the effect of
latency and produce results equivalent to that for no latency
in system. Fig. 6 compares the performance of our ASS with
our proposed predictive display (dashed purple line) with the
baseline approach [16] (solid light blue line) and our ASS
without predictive display (solid red line). The performance
of our method with no latency is used as a benchmark. In
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
X (m)-54-53-52-51-50-49-48-47Y (m)Trajectory Driven
Reference Trajectory
NO Latency
Lat, No Pred Disp
Lat, Baseline Pred Disp
Lat, MPC Pred DispFig. 6: Trajectory of the CoM of the ego vehicle driving
through closely placed obstacles with latency.
addition, the stationary obstacles are represented by higher
order ellipse (brown) and they are inﬂated by the radius
of the ego circle as represented by the large ellipses (red).
The reference trajectory (green dashed line) is purposefully
designed for a collision with obstacles. In this simulation, we
consider a total round trip latency of 500 ms . The trajectory
driven by the CoM of the ego vehicle for both the cases with
predictive displays (Baseline and MPC data-based) overlap
the trajectory with no latency in the system. This proves
that both predictive display techniques equally nullify the
effect of latency. Nevertheless, the advantage of the proposed
MPC-data-based predictive display method over the baseline
method lies in the fact that it does not assume constant
velocity and RWA for predicting vehicle position. It also
removes extra calculation step of predicting vehicle position
using a bicycle model as done in [16].
It should be noted that, even in the absence of any latency
mitigation technique, the vehicle trajectory stays collision
free, verifying that the controller is efﬁcient to avoid collision
even with delayed (outdated) reference inputs.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presented an ASS approach for teleoperated
vehicles based on model predictive control. The ASS controls
both the lateral and longitudinal vehicle’s dynamics allowing
the vehicle to perform a large range of maneuvers and avoid
collision by both braking and steering intervention. Collision
avoidance is achieved by using artiﬁcial potential ﬁelds in the
MPC controller. Our ASS also has an added restriction on
the controller’s authority to prevent large deviations from the
human operator’s RWA inputs. In addition, we proposed a
visual feedback in the form of graphical presentation on the
monitors of workstation. Finally, to mitigate the effects of
large latency in a teleoperation setup, we proposed a novel
MPC data-based predictive display method. We tested our
approach by using a high ﬁdelity vehicle model for plant and
a realistic environment. The simulation results highlighted
the advantages of our ASS for teleoperation compared to
existing baselines. Future work includes experimental vali-
dation of the proposed work.

==== Page 7 ====
APPENDIX
The MPC penalties and FBLC gains for the corresponding
scenarios are summarized in the following table.
TABLE I: MPC penalties and FBLC gains.
WPWWvWs123
Overtake Scenario 0.1 1031 1051 2 0.25
Predictive Display 0.1 1021 1051 2 0.25
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was presented at the workshop for Road Vehicle
Teleoperation (WS09), IV2021.
REFERENCES
[1] EPRS European Commission 2017. (2019) Road fatal-
ity statistics in the eu (infographic). [Online].
Available: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/
20190410STO36615/road-fatality-statistics-in-the-eu-infographic
[2] H. Pongrac, “Gestaltung und evaluation von virtuellen und telepräsen-
zsystemen an hand von aufgabenleistung und präsenzempﬁnden,”
2011.
[3] R. Baldwin. (2018) Phantom auto will drive your autonomous
car if it gets confused. [Online]. Available: https://www.engadget.com/
2018-04-05-phantom-auto-will-drive-your-autonomous-car-if-it-gets-confused.
html
[4] A. Schimpe and F. Diermeyer, “Steer with me: A predictive, potential
ﬁeld-based control approach for semi-autonomous, teleoperated road
vehicles,” in 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC) , 2020, pp. 1–6.
[5] M. Marcano, S. Díaz, J. Pérez, and E. Irigoyen, “A review of
shared control for automated vehicles: Theory and applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Human-Machine Systems , vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 475–491,
2020.
[6] Z. Ercan, A. Carvalho, S. Lefèvre, F. Borrelli, H. E. Tseng, and
M. Gokasan, “Torque-based steering assistance for collision avoidance
during lane changes,” 2016.
[7] P. Falcone, M. Ali, and J. Sjoberg, “Predictive threat assessment via
reachability analysis and set invariance theory,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1352–1361, Dec
2011.
[8] S. Anderson, S. Peters, T. Pilutti, and K. Iagnemma, “An optimal-
control-based framework for trajectory planning, threat assessment,
and semi-autonomous control of passenger vehicles in hazard avoid-
ance scenarios,” International Journal of Vehicle Autonomous Systems ,
vol. 8, pp. 190–216, 10 2010.
[9] W. Schwarting, J. Alonso-Mora, L. Paull, S. Karaman, and D. Rus,
“Safe nonlinear trajectory generation for parallel autonomy with a
dynamic vehicle model,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems , vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 2994–3008, Sep. 2018.
[10] S. M. Erlien, S. Fujita, and J. C. Gerdes, “Shared steering control using
safe envelopes for obstacle avoidance and vehicle stability,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 17, no. 2, pp.
441–451, Feb 2016.
[11] L. Ferranti, B. Brito, E. Pool, Y . Zheng, R. M. Ensing, R. Happee,
B. Shyrokau, J. F. P. Kooij, J. Alonso-Mora, and D. M. Gavrila,
“Safevru: A research platform for the interaction of self-driving
vehicles with vulnerable road users,” in 2019 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV) , June 2019, pp. 1660–1666.
[12] B. Brito, B. Floor, L. Ferranti, and J. Alonso-Mora, “Model predictive
contouring control for collision avoidance in unstructured dynamic
environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 4459–4466, Oct 2019.
[13] Y . Rasekhipour, A. Khajepour, S. Chen, and B. Litkouhi, “A potential
ﬁeld-based model predictive path-planning controller for autonomous
road vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1255–1267, May 2017.
[14] A. Hosseini, F. Richthammer, and M. Lienkamp, “Predictive haptic
feedback for safe lateral control of teleoperated road vehicles in urban
areas,” in 2016 IEEE 83rd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC
Spring) , 2016, pp. 1–7.[15] W. Vreugdenhil, S. Barendswaard, D. A. Abbink, C. Borst, and
S. M. Petermeijer, “Complementing haptic shared control with
visual feedback for obstacle avoidance,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 52,
no. 19, pp. 371 – 376, 2019, 14th IFAC Symposium on Analysis,
Design, and Evaluation of Human Machine Systems HMS 2019.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2405896319319263
[16] F. Chucholowski, S. Büchner, J. Reicheneder, and M. Lienkamp,
“Prediction methods for teleoperated road vehicles,” in Conference
on Future Automotive Technology - Focus Electromobility, Garching.
Bayern Innovativ GmbH , 01 2013.
[17] J. Kong, M. Pfeiffer, G. Schildbach, and F. Borrelli, “Kinematic and
dynamic vehicle models for autonomous driving control design,” in
2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2015, pp. 1094–1099.
[18] Ipg automotive gmbh. [Online]. Available: https://ipg-automotive.
com/products-services/simulation-software/carmaker/
[19] R. Verschueren, G. Frison, D. Kouzoupis, N. van Duijkeren,
A. Zanelli, B. Novoselnik, J. Frey, T. Albin, R. Quirynen, and
M. Diehl, “acados: a modular open-source framework for fast
embedded optimal control,” arXiv preprint , 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13753
[20] K. Burnett, A. Schimpe, S. Samavi, M. Gridseth, C. W. Liu, Q. Li,
Z. Kroeze, and A. P. Schoellig, “Building a winning self-driving car
in six months,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , 2019, pp. 9583–9589.

