==== Page 1 ====
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7949–7962,
November 16–20, 2020. c2020 Association for Computational Linguistics7949Active Learning for BERT: An Empirical Study
Liat Ein-Dor, Alon Halfon, Ariel Gera, Eyal Shnarch, Lena Dankin, Leshem Choshen
Marina Danilevsky, Ranit Aharonov, Yoav Katz and Noam Slonim
IBM Research
fliate, alonhal, arielge, eyals, lenad, leshem.choshen, katz, noams g@il.ibm.com,
mdanile@us.ibm.com, ranit.aharonov2@ibm.com
Abstract
Real world scenarios present a challenge for
text classiﬁcation, since labels are usually ex-
pensive and the data is often characterized by
class imbalance. Active Learning (AL) is a
ubiquitous paradigm to cope with data scarcity.
Recently, pre-trained NLP models, and BERT
in particular, are receiving massive attention
due to their outstanding performance in var-
ious NLP tasks. However, the use of AL
with deep pre-trained models has so far re-
ceived little consideration. Here, we present
a large-scale empirical study on active learn-
ing techniques for BERT-based classiﬁcation,
addressing a diverse set of AL strategies and
datasets. We focus on practical scenarios of
binary text classiﬁcation, where the annota-
tion budget is very small, and the data is of-
ten skewed. Our results demonstrate that AL
can boost BERT performance, especially in
the most realistic scenario in which the ini-
tial set of labeled examples is created using
keyword-based queries, resulting in a biased
sample of the minority class. We release our
research framework, aiming to facilitate future
research along the lines explored here.
1 Introduction
Automatic text classiﬁcation is a well studied prob-
lem in Natural Language Processing (NLP), with
great practical importance and numerous real world
applications (Aggarwal and Zhai, 2012). There are
two major hurdles to developing effective text clas-
siﬁers in practice, as well as to developing classi-
ﬁers in other domains – the lack of labeled data, and
class imbalance (Japkowicz and Stephen, 2002).
Text classiﬁers often require high quantities of la-
beled data for model training. However, collecting
such labeled data is a notoriously expensive and
time-consuming process, and shortage of labeled
data is exacerbated when the desired class has a
These authors equally contributed to this work.relatively low prior in the data. In such a scenario,
even going through the burden of labeling a ran-
dom sample may yield an insufﬁcient number of
positive instances to properly train a classiﬁer. Our
focus in this work is on this challenging coupled
setup, frequently encountered by real-world users
– where labeled data is scarce andthe prior of the
desired class is small.
A classical approach for coping with limited an-
notation resources is Active Learning (AL) (Cohn
et al., 1996). In this paradigm, one assumes that un-
labeled data are abundant, and the goal is to focus
the expensive labeling process on the most infor-
mative instances. Many AL strategies have been
proposed, aiming to minimize the labeling burden,
or if taken from a different perspective – maximize
the value of labeling a small set of examples. Im-
portantly, the usefulness of an AL strategy naturally
depends on the classiﬁcation scheme with which it
is coupled. A successful AL approach for a Naive
Bayes classiﬁer may not be that effective for a mod-
ern deep-learning algorithm such as CNN, and vice
versa.
A more recent relevant development is the in-
troduction of pre-trained NLP models (cf. Qiu
et al., 2020), which have been shown to substan-
tially improve state-of-the-art results in numerous
NLP tasks. A prominent example is the BERT
model (Devlin et al., 2018), which has received
massive attention from the NLP research commu-
nity since its inception. However, the use of AL
with deep pre-trained models for text classiﬁcation
– and BERT in particular – has so far received sur-
prisingly little consideration. Thus, while recent
papers have demonstrated the value of AL for vari-
ous deep-learning text classiﬁcation schemes (Shen
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Siddhant and Lip-
ton, 2018; Prabhu et al., 2019), the potential of AL
combined with BERT is yet to be explored. First,
given the unique properties of pre-trained models,

==== Page 2 ====
7950and the expectation that such models will yield ad-
equate performance even with small amounts of
training data, it is unclear a priori whether – and
to what extent – established AL paradigms can
further enhance their classiﬁcation performance.
Moreover, more recent Deep AL strategies, such as
Core-Set (Sener and Savarese, 2017) and Dropout
(Gal and Ghahramani, 2016), were developed in the
vision domain for CNNs. The value of these strate-
gies on top of the BERT transformer architecture
remains unclear.
Our goal in this work is threefold. We study the
potential of (i) various AL strategies; (ii) in con-
junction with BERT, an arguably outstanding text
classiﬁcation scheme; (iii) within a highly chal-
lenging – yet common – real-world scenario of
class imbalance and scarce labeled data. To address
this goal, we conduct a systematic study, consider-
ing traditional and advanced AL strategies coupled
with BERT for a wide range of datasets. We focus
on three scenarios: A balanced setting, serving as a
reference, where the prior of the class of interest is
not too small; the more challenging imbalanced set-
ting, where the class prior is 15% but we assume
a way to obtain an unbiased set of positive sam-
ples to be used for initial training; and ﬁnally, the
imbalanced-practical setting, which is similar to
the imbalanced one, but takes a step further towards
a truly practical setup, in which there is no access
to an unbiased positive sample. Instead, we assume
the user has access to a biased sample, hopefully
enriched with positive examples, obtained by issu-
ing simple queries of keywords associated with the
positive class.
Our results convey that AL strategies can boost
BERT performance, under the challenging setting
of a small annotation budget and highly skewed
data, especially in the more practical real-world
settings. We release our research framework1, in-
cluding access to all datasets, an implementation of
multiple AL strategies, and an associated automatic
evaluation framework, aiming to facilitate further
research along the lines explored here.
2 Related Work
AL has been widely used in many ﬁelds to suc-
cessfully decrease the labeling effort involved in
the training process. A good summary of active
learning works prior to the advances in deep learn-
1https://github.com/IBM/
low-resource-text-classification-frameworking can be found in Settles (2009). Advances in
deep learning have given rise to extensive research
into deep active learning, which aims to adapt the
classic AL framework to the special properties of
DNNs. Deep AL presents some speciﬁc challenges.
Since DNNs are computationally heavy, training
a new model whenever a single training sample is
added is highly impractical. This requires a shift
to batch mode active learning, where a batch of ex-
amples is queried at every iteration. Moreover, the
tendency of the softmax layer to over-conﬁdence
has led to the development of various uncertainty-
based strategies tailored to the special properties of
DNNs (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016).
Most of the works in deep active learning fo-
cus on image classiﬁcation with convolutional neu-
ral networks (Sener and Savarese, 2017; Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016; Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz,
2019). Recent papers have demonstrated the
value of deep active learning for text classiﬁcation
(Zhang et al., 2017; Siddhant and Lipton, 2018;
Prabhu et al., 2019; Lowell et al., 2018), but in gen-
eral did not study AL for BERT. One exception is
Zhang and Zhang (2019) who applied an ensemble
of AL strategies to BERT for the task of intent clas-
siﬁcation. However, this work focuses on a single
task, and does not address the effect of small and
imbalanced data. Additionally, Shelmanov et al.
(2019) and Liu et al. (2020) focused on particu-
lar variants of BERT (BioBERT and BERT-CRF)
and studied a single or two speciﬁc tasks, with a
small collection of AL strategies. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to systematically
explore advanced strategies like Core-Set (Sener
and Savarese, 2017), Dropout (Gal and Ghahra-
mani, 2016), Expected Gradient Length (Huang
et al., 2016) and Discriminative Active Learning
(Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019) for BERT, in
various settings and a diversity of tasks.
3 Empirical Evaluation
3.1 Data
We consider 10datasets (see Table 1) that cover
a variety of domains, and for each we select one
target class as our classiﬁcation goal, thus creating
a set of binary classiﬁcation tasks. Three datasets
are originally skewed, i.e., the target class prior is
15%: Wiki Attack (Wulczyn et al., 2017), which
annotates Wikipedia discussions for offensive con-

==== Page 3 ====
7951No. Dataset Size Class Prior
1 Subjectivity-imb 5,556 subjective 10%
2 Polarity-imb 5,923 positive 10%
3 AG’s News-imb 17,538 world 10%
4 Wiki attack 21,000 general 12%
5 ISEAR 7,666 fear 14%
6 TREC 5,952 location 15%
7 AG’s News 21,000 world 25%
8 CoLA 9,594 unacceptable 30%
9 Subjectivity 10,000 subjective 50%
10 Polarity 10,662 positive 50%
Table 1: Dataset details: size, target (positive) class,
and its prior in the dataset.
tent;2ISEAR (Shao et al., 2015), which annotates
personal reports for emotion; and TREC (Li and
Roth, 2002) which considers the answer type of
questions. In four datasets the target class prior
is20% 50%: AG’s News (Zhang et al., 2015),
which categorizes news articles; CoLA (Warstadt
et al., 2018), which annotates sentences for gram-
matical acceptability; Subjectivity (Pang and Lee,
2004), which classiﬁes movie snippets into sub-
jective or objective; and Polarity (Pang and Lee,
2005), which includes sentiment analysis on movie
reviews. In addition, we enriched the imbalanced
datasets by creating imbalanced versions of three
balanced datasets via sub-sampling the target class
instances towards a prior of 10% (Table 1, rows
1–3).
Each dataset was split into train, dev, and test
sets, keeping the original split, if exists, and oth-
erwise applying a 70%=10%=20% split, respec-
tively. For large datasets, we limit the sizes to
15K=3K=3Krespectively by randomly sampling
from each set. The complete details along with
links to all datasets are provided in Appendix A.
3.2 Experimental setup
We apply pool-based active learning (Settles, 2009)
in batch mode, using BERT as the classiﬁca-
tion model. Seven selection strategies are exam-
ined over the 10fully labeled binary classiﬁcation
datasets described above. The use of fully labeled
datasets enables simulating manual labeling (Yang
and Loog, 2018). Per dataset, we use its train set as
the initial pool of examples from which instances
are selected for labeling.
We assume an initial annotation budget that en-
ables labeling 100examples, used to create an ini-
2This data set contains offensive language. IBM abhors
use of such language and any form of discrimination.tial seed L. In some setups, Lmay contain addi-
tional instances without their ground truth labels,
and in general the way Lis selected depends on
the experimental scenario, as described below. We
denote by Uthe instances in the pool that do not
belong to L.
For a given AL strategy, a single experiment
starts with the seed L, used to train BERT as the
initial classiﬁer (iteration 0). Next, we conduct
5iterations. In each, the AL strategy selects a
batch of 50unlabeled instances from Uthat are
added to Lalong with their true labels, and BERT is
trained over these expanded data. Note, the BERT
ﬁne-tuning in each iteration is done from scratch,
to avoid overﬁtting data from previous rounds, as
suggested in Hu et al. (2018). In each experiment,
all AL strategies start with the same initial seed.
The reported results are the average over 5different
experiments, i.e., 5different initial seeds.
For each AL strategy, we consider the following
three scenarios:
Balanced: Here, the positive class prior is not very
low, hence a randomly selected sample is expected
to have a sufﬁcient number of positive examples.
Correspondingly, the seed Lis simply deﬁned as
100instances sampled at random from the pool.
We apply this scenario to datasets with 20% 50%
of positive labels.3
For datasets with a positive class label 15%, a
random seed of 100instances led to unstable BERT
runs (data not shown), presumably due to the com-
bination of small and highly skewed training data
resulting from such random selection. Hence, for
these imbalanced datasets, we consider the two sce-
narios described below. In both cases, we expand
the initial set of 100labeled examples with another
set of 100instances, selected at random from the
remaining data, which are all added to Lwith a
negative label. In other words, the low prior of
the positive class naturally implies high prior of
the negative class, enabling to expand the fully la-
beled 100instances with an additional set of 100
instances that are – weakly – labeled as negative
examples (without the need for additional annota-
tion budget). Hence, in both scenarios described
below, Lcontains a total of 200examples.
Imbalanced: Here, the 100fully labeled examples
are drawn at random from the positive examples in
the dataset, hence all 100are indeed positive, and
3Although not all these datasets are strictly balanced, we
chose this name for brevity of presentation.

==== Page 4 ====
7952are further an unbiased sample of the positive class.
In this setting we assume high-precision heuristics
that enable generating a relatively unbiased sample;
but in many real-world cases such heuristics may
not exist, or are expected to have limited coverage
and would not enable sampling at will4. Thus, such
heuristics cannot be assumed to yield a large train-
ing set, but may nevertheless be used for obtaining
a small initial seed in an active learning setting.
Imbalanced-practical: In this scenario, we simu-
late a more realistic setting in which a user attempts
to obtain as many positive examples as possible us-
ing the budget of 100annotations. To this end,
we design a simple keyword-based query for each
dataset, which aims to retrieve a set of instances
enriched with positive examples, using words as-
sumed to be associated with the positive class. We
opted for keyword-based queries as they are of-
ten used in practice in real-world scenarios. We
apply the query to the pool, and randomly draw
100instances from the query result, which are then
added to the seed with their ground truth labels.
Note that these 100examples are expected to be
enriched with positive examples, yet in a biased
manner, since by construction, all examples match
the query we started with. Speciﬁcally, this sce-
nario was tested on four datasets for which a simple
string (or sub-string) match query with enough hits
could be deﬁned: (i) for the fearclass in ISEAR the
query is [ fear orafraid orscared orscary ] (fear,
for example, can also capture fearsome ); (ii) for
the TREC location class, [ Where orcountr orcit]
(matching citcaptures both the singular and plural
of city); (iii) for the Wiki attack class, [ [A-Z]! ]
(capturing a word ending with an upper case letter
which is immediately followed by an exclamation
mark, e.g., IDIOT! ), and (iv) for the AG’s News-
imbworld class the query is a list of countries and
territories separated by ‘or’. It is likely that better
queries could be deﬁned. However, our goal here
was to simulate a realistic setting in which a user
relies on a relatively simple heuristic, and to exam-
ine the behavior of AL with BERT when initiated
with a potentially biased seed.
3.3 Active Learning Strategies
We consider several AL strategies for choosing the
batch of 50instances to label in each iteration. In
4For instance, for the task of classifying emotional sit-
uations, the preﬁx “This is a situation where I felt afraid:”
indicates that the following sentence belongs to the fear class,
but is expected to be rare within the corpus.addition, as a baseline, we consider a Random
strategy, where batch instances are chosen at ran-
dom from the unlabeled set.
Least Conﬁdence (LC, Lewis and Gale, 1994):
selects instances for which the model is least cer-
tain according to the max-entropy decision rule.
Monte Carlo Dropout (Dropout , Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016): Similar to LC, but instance un-
certainty is calculated using Monte Carlo Dropout
on10inference cycles, with the max-entropy ac-
quisition function5.
Perceptron Ensemble (PE): Selects instances
with highest uncertainty – similarly to LC – but av-
eraging over an ensemble of models. Here, we use
a light-weight ensemble strategy to overcome the
unrealistic computational cost required for training
an ensemble of BERT models. PE is composed
of10perceptrons which are trained to solve the
original task using L, where the perceptron inputs
are the CLS vectors of the ﬁne-tuned BERT model.
Expected Gradient Length (EGL , Huang et al.,
2016): selects instances with the largest expected
gradient norm, as they are expected to wield a
large inﬂuence on the model. The expectation is
computed over the posterior distribution of labels
for the example according to the trained model.
Core-Set (Sener and Savarese, 2017): selects in-
stances that best cover the dataset in the learned
representation space (CLS), using the greedy
method described in Sener and Savarese (2017).
Discriminative Active Learning (DAL , Gissin
and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019): This approach aims to
select instances that make L most representative of
the entire pool. We follow the exact method used
in Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz (2019).
We chose these strategies as spanning the lead-
ing state-of-the-art approaches in the AL do-
main: uncertainty-sampling (LC and Dropout),
uncertainty-sampling using ensemble methods
(PE), expected model change (EGL), and diversity
sampling (DAL and Core-Set).
3.4 Implementation Details
Overall, the results presented here consist of 2,520
ﬁne-tuning experiments ( 14dataset-scenario com-
binations5initial seeds(1base model + ( 7
selection strategies 5iterations)). In order to
run multiple experiments in parallel, experiments
were performed on IntelRXeon CPU E5-2699 v4
5other functions were shown to yield similar results (Gissin
and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019)

==== Page 5 ====
7953Random LC Dropout EGL Core-Set DAL PE
<1 84 840 1106 98 167 370
Table 2: Runtimes (in seconds) for a single iteration
for different AL strategies, assuming 7,000 unlabeled
examples.
@ 2.20GHz, with 88 CPUs and 748 GB of RAM.
BERT training and inference were performed on
NvidiaRTesla K80 GPUs (single GPU per run).
Table 2 lists AL batch selection runtimes for dif-
ferent AL strategies. Runtimes for all strategies
except Random are dominated by BERT inference,
as BERT model outputs are used in selecting batch
instances. Notably, two strategies demand longer
inference times: EGL due to the gradient calcu-
lation, and Dropout due to the larger number of
inference cycles (10).
3.5 BERT Training Details
In each ﬁne-tuning run, BERT BASE (110M para-
maters) was trained for 5epochs, using a learning
rate of 510 5, and keeping the best model based
on its performance on the dev set. In practice, dev
sets may be unavailable, particularly under a lim-
ited annotation budget. Using a dev set to reduce
variance and noise between runs helps stabilize
the results, but importantly, we veriﬁed that ignor-
ing the dev data and setting a constant number of
epochs yields qualitatively similar, albeit noisier,
results. Our experiments showed that increasing
the batch size had a substantial effect on improv-
ing the stability of BERT results. However, due
to memory limitations of the GPU, increasing the
batch size comes at the expense of the maximal
sequence length. We empirically determined that
setting the batch size to 50, and the maximal se-
quence length to 100tokens (after WordPiece tok-
enization), yielded the best results. We otherwise
used the default settings in the TensorFlow imple-
mentation of BERT.
3.6 AL Research Framework
Our open-source framework allows a user to exper-
iment with the active learning strategies in ( x3.3)
and evaluate their performance over the datasets in
(x3.1). The framework also supports adding new
AL strategies, making it easy to evaluate their po-
tential.Strategy Balanced Imbalanced Imbalanced
practical
Core-Set 10 2<10 5<10 8
Dropout <10 3<10 8<10 8
EGL       <10 4<10 8
LC <10 5<10 9<10 7
DAL <10 2<10 5<10 6
PE       <10 2<10 6
Table 3: Wilcoxon test p-values (after Bonferroni cor-
rection) for different AL strategies compared to Ran-
dom.    denotes insigniﬁcant results ( p0:05).
4 Results
We report results for the AL strategies ( x3.3) in
three experimental scenarios ( x3.2). Following the
standard in the ﬁeld, we use accuracy as the classiﬁ-
cation metric for the balanced scenario, and F16for
the imbalanced and imbalanced-practical scenarios,
where the prior for positives is relatively low.
Figure 1 depicts the classiﬁcation quality (accu-
racy or F1) per iteration for each dataset, for the
relevant scenarios. For clarity of presentation, we
only plot the Random baseline and three strategies
that represent the different approaches. As can be
seen in the full ﬁgure in the Appendix (Figure 3),
the other strategies behave similarly.
In most datasets, all AL strategies performed
better than the Random baseline, even in cases
where the baseline results were already very good,
e.g., AG’s News and Subjectivity. Interestingly,
the largest improvements were observed in the
imbalanced-practical scenario. Here, the AL strate-
gies improve the F1 of the Random baseline by a
large margin of 4 8%on average. These results
demonstrate that AL can indeed enhance BERT
results when the annotation budget is small, espe-
cially for datasets having a low prior for positive
examples, as is the case in many real-world set-
tings.
To check the signiﬁcance of the differences, we
calculate the Wilcoxon p-value7for every AL strat-
egy compared to the Random baseline, per sce-
nario, and perform a Bonferroni correction to ad-
just for the multiple strategies examined. To cal-
culate the p-value for a strategy Sper scenario,
we compare the classiﬁcation metric for all pairs
(Sdik; Rdik)such that Ris the Random baseline
results, d2D, where Dis the set of datasets in-
6computed at the default threshold of 0:5
7We chose Wilcoxon p-value because of its non-parametric
nature.

==== Page 6 ====
7954Balanced
Imbalanced
Imbalanced-practical
Figure 1: AL strategies compared to the Random baseline in the balanced (top row), imbalanced (two middle
rows) and imbalanced-practical (bottom row) scenarios. Train size indicates the size of L, where each iteration
adds 50samples.

==== Page 7 ====
7955cluded in the scenario, i= (1:::5)is the iteration
index, and k= (1:::5)is the experiment number.
As can be seen in Table 3, all the examined AL
strategies signiﬁcantly and consistently outperform
the Random baseline when the dataset is highly
skewed ( imbalanced andimbalanced-practical sce-
narios). All strategies except PE and EGL also
outperform the baseline for the balanced scenario.
While AL strategies improve over the Random
baseline, apparently no single strategy consistently
outperforms all its counterparts. This ﬁnding
echoes Lowell et al. (2018), who studied AL for
text classiﬁcation and sequence tagging in non-
BERT models, and demonstrated the brittleness
and inconsistency of AL results. For signiﬁcance
analysis, we calculate the p-value for every pair
of strategies per scenario in a similar manner to
the one described above per strategy versus Ran-
dom, correcting for the multiple pairs examined,
and indeed ﬁnd no overall signiﬁcant performance
difference between any pair of AL strategies. Note,
however, that some AL strategies are more efﬁcient
than others with respect to runtime - see Table 2.
As may be expected, using a seed with posi-
tive labels obtained by a query, which is naturally
biased towards instances that satisfy the query, typ-
ically results in an initial model with lower F1,
compared to starting with an unbiased set of pos-
itive examples (compare iteration 0per dataset in
Figure 1 between the imbalanced-practical andim-
balanced scenarios). Interestingly, though, after
several iterations, the AL strategies seem to bridge
the gap and end up with similar classiﬁcation per-
formance in both scenarios. We further examined
whether the increase in F1 for the imbalanced sce-
narios is driven by an increase in precision or recall.
We ﬁnd that in the imbalanced-practical scenario,
the improvement in F1 is completely dominated by
an increase in recall, supporting the notion that the
AL strategies enable the model to extrapolate and
generalize beyond the biased sample obtained by
the query8. In contrast, in the imbalanced scenario
the increase in F1 is mostly driven by an increase
in precision. For the precision and recall curves,
see Figures 4 and 5 in the Appendix.
To conclude, our analyses suggest two results
that were not trivial to begin with. Applying AL
to BERT can further boost the performance of this
top performing model. Furthermore, even when
8The low recall of the queries can be seen in Table 5 in the
Appendix.initiated with a biased seed of positive examples –
as may often occur in practice – AL strategies can
swiftly generalize from this seed and signiﬁcantly
improve the model recall, ending up with overall
strong F1 performance.
5 Analysis
We perform a comparative analysis of the different
AL strategies, aiming to better understand their rel-
ative advantages and disadvantages, and provide
some insights that may lead to improved AL strate-
gies in future work.
To enable an appropriate comparison, this anal-
ysis is performed after the initial BERT model is
trained and each AL strategy has selected 50exam-
ples for labeling. Correspondingly, all strategies
select examples from the same unlabeled set U
while using outputs from the same BERT model.
We measure two batch properties which are known
in the literature to impact AL effectiveness:
Diversity: Choosing a batch of diverse examples
is often better than choosing one containing very
similar and perhaps redundant examples. Follow-
ing Zhdanov (2019), we deﬁne the Diversity of a
setBas:
D(B) =0
@1
jUjX
xi2Umin
xj2Bd(xi; xj)1
A 1
(1)
where xidenotes the representation of the [CLS]
token of example iobtained by the model which
was trained using L, andd(xi; xj)denotes the Eu-
clidean distance between xiandxj.
Representativeness: A known issue with AL
strategies, especially the uncertainty-based ones, is
their tendency to select outlier examples that do not
properly represent the overall data distribution. We
thus examine the representativeness of the selected
batches. We rely on the KNN-density measure pro-
posed by Zhu et al. (2008), in which the density of
an example is quantiﬁed by the average distance
between the example in question and its K most
similar examples (i.e., K nearest neighbors) within
U, based on the [CLS] representations as above.
An example with high density degree is less likely
to be an outlier. We deﬁne the representativeness
of a batch as one over the average KNN-density
of its instances using the Euclidean distance with
K= 10 .
The diversity and representativeness of the dif-
ferent strategies are depicted in Figure 2, where for

==== Page 8 ====
7956
Figure 2: Diversity (left) and Representativeness (right) of the batches selected by the different AL strategies in
each of the three scenarios.
each scenario we average results over all datasets
and seed selections. As expected, the batch-aware
strategies, DAL and Core-Set, which were de-
signed to increase diversity, are characterized by
the most diverse batches, with DAL achieving the
highest diversity values, demonstrating the suc-
cess of using mini-queries (Gissin and Shalev-
Shwartz, 2019) to reduce redundancy of the se-
lected examples. In contrast, the other strategies
tend to select less diverse batches, i.e., they are
prone to choose redundant examples, especially in
theimbalanced-practical scenario. Thus, combin-
ing these approaches with methods that encourage
diversity (e.g., He et al., 2014; Zhdanov, 2019;
Ash et al., 2019) can potentially lead to further
improvement in their resultant prediction perfor-
mance. In terms of representativeness, DAL, which
is a representativeness-driven method, again con-
sistently leads across the scenarios. In contrast,
the tendency of the greedy core-set version to se-
lect outliers (Sener and Savarese, 2017), is indeed
reﬂected in its relatively low representativeness
scores. Interestingly, this is not the case for the
imbalanced-practical scenario. This result can
be attributed to the high bias of L towards query
matches, which results in poor representativeness
of L, which in turn leaves the main ”responsibility”
for representing the dataset on the batch examples
selected from U. A deeper investigation of this
result is left for further investigation. Other strate-
gies have low representativeness scores compared
to DAL, implying that they can be improved by
combining them with techniques for encouraging
representativeness and avoiding outliers.
A popular approach for improving classiﬁcation
quality is combining several, preferably comple-
mentary, AL strategies. In order to ﬁnd pairs ofstrategies with high synergistic potential, we mea-
sured the overlap between the batches selected by
each pair of strategies. Our analysis shows that
for all pairs of strategies, the expected batch over-
lap is relatively low, and does not exceed 15%.
In general, overlap was higher in the imbalanced
scenarios, probably due to the general incentive
to select positive examples, which are rare in the
data. Also, the overlap within the uncertainty-based
strategies was generally quite high. Nevertheless,
the highest overlap between batches was between
EGL (which is not an uncertainty-based approach)
and LC. We leave for future work to try a combi-
nation of strategies with low overlap as a way to
improve classiﬁcation even further.
6 Conclusions
The recent emergence of pre-trained models, with
BERT as a prominent example, is reshaping the
NLP arena (Qiu et al., 2020). The promise em-
bodied in these models is their ability to exploit
massive unlabeled textual data to learn versatile,
arguably universal language representations. These
representations, in turn, are proven to be effective
for a multitude of downstream NLP tasks.
A parallel line of research, dating back nearly
three decades, is the notion of AL, aiming to mini-
mize labeling burden within the supervised learn-
ing paradigm. The pairing of these two inﬂuential
threads raises non-trivial questions. For example,
BERT arguably attains excellent performance with
relatively little labeled data, used to ﬁne-tune this
pre-trained model for a concrete task. It is not ob-
vious to begin with, to what extent AL strategies
can be used to outperform this already high bar.
To the best of our knowledge, the present work
provides the ﬁrst systematic study in this context,

==== Page 9 ====
7957while focusing on the prevalent problem of text
classiﬁcation. Moreover, we further focus our at-
tention on a scenario well known to many practi-
tioners – and notoriously difﬁcult from a learning
perspective – that of building a classiﬁer when the
class of interest is scarce in the data at hand. Aim-
ing to further bridge the gap between research and
practice, in our imbalanced-practical mode we sim-
ulate a user within this challenging scenario, armed
only with simple queries to deﬁne the labeled seed
that will bootstrap the AL process. Our results
demonstrate the potential of AL on top of BERT,
especially in this latter scenario. Notably, a training
data seed resulting from a simple query is expected
to capture only limited, and perhaps somewhat ob-
vious, aspects of the class under consideration. Our
study shows that the initial BERT model indeed suf-
fers from poor prediction performance, mainly due
to low recall values. However, while the random
AL baseline is limited in its ability to help BERT
emerge from this poor initial model, AL strategies
turn out to be very helpful. Using the AL pipeline,
BERT improves its recall by a large margin, gen-
eralizing beyond the narrow data it was initially
exposed to.
This work focused on various binary classiﬁca-
tion tasks. A natural future direction is to conduct
a similar empirical investigation of AL over BERT
in the context of multi-class classiﬁcation and re-
gression tasks. It would also be interesting to inves-
tigate the realm of larger annotation budgets, and
more recent BERT variants (Liu et al., 2019; Lan
et al., 2019). Finally, the present work focused on
existing AL strategies, which were mostly devel-
oped in the vision domain for CNNs. The devel-
opment of novel AL methods, that are tailored for
pre-trained models such as BERT, seems like an
important direction for future work. We hope that
the experimental results and analyses reported here,
as well as the release of the research framework
we developed, would be instrumental for these and
other future studies.
References
Charu C Aggarwal and ChengXiang Zhai. 2012. A sur-
vey of text classiﬁcation algorithms. In Mining text
data, pages 163–222. Springer.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krish-
namurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal.
2019. Deep batch active learning by diverse, un-certain gradient lower bounds. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.03671 .
David A Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I Jor-
dan. 1996. Active learning with statistical models.
Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research , 4:129–
145.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing.
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2016. Dropout as a
bayesian approximation: Representing model uncer-
tainty in deep learning. In international conference
on machine learning , pages 1050–1059.
Daniel Gissin and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. 2019. Dis-
criminative active learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.06347 .
Tianxu He, Shukui Zhang, Jie Xin, Pengpeng Zhao,
Jian Wu, Xuefeng Xian, Chunhua Li, and Zhiming
Cui. 2014. An active learning approach with uncer-
tainty, representativeness, and diversity. The Scien-
tiﬁc World Journal , 2014.
Peiyun Hu, Zachary C Lipton, Anima Anandkumar,
and Deva Ramanan. 2018. Active learning with par-
tial feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07427 .
Jiaji Huang, Rewon Child, Vinay Rao, Hairong Liu,
Sanjeev Satheesh, and Adam Coates. 2016. Active
learning for speech recognition: the power of gradi-
ents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.03226 .
Nathalie Japkowicz and Shaju Stephen. 2002. The
class imbalance problem: A systematic study. In-
telligent Data Analysis , pages 429–449.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learn-
ing of language representations.
David D Lewis and William A Gale. 1994. A sequen-
tial algorithm for training text classiﬁers. In SI-
GIR’94 , pages 3–12. Springer.
Xin Li and Dan Roth. 2002. Learning question clas-
siﬁers. In COLING 2002: The 19th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics .
Mingyi Liu, Zhiying Tu, Zhongjie Wang, and Xiaofei
Xu. 2020. Ltp: A new active learning strategy
for bert-crf based named entity recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.02524 .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach.

==== Page 10 ====
7958David Lowell, Zachary C Lipton, and Byron C Wallace.
2018. Practical obstacles to deploying active learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.04801 .
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental edu-
cation: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity sum-
marization based on minimum cuts. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-04) , pages 271–
278, Barcelona, Spain.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: Ex-
ploiting class relationships for sentiment categoriza-
tion with respect to rating scales. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL’05) , pages 115–
124, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Ameya Prabhu, Charles Dognin, and Maneesh Singh.
2019. Sampling bias in deep active classiﬁ-
cation: An empirical study. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.09389 .
Xipeng Qiu, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao,
Ning Dai, and Xuanjing Huang. 2020. Pre-trained
models for natural language processing: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08271 .
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. 2017. Active learn-
ing for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00489 .
Burr Settles. 2009. Active learning literature survey.
Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Computer Sciences.
Bo Shao, Lorna Doucet, and David R. Caruso. 2015.
Universality versus cultural speciﬁcity of three emo-
tion domains: Some evidence based on the cascad-
ing model of emotional intelligence. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology , 46(2):229–251.
A. Shelmanov, V . Liventsev, D. Kireev, N. Khromov,
A. Panchenko, I. Fedulova, and D. V . Dylov. 2019.
Active learning with deep pre-trained models for se-
quence tagging of clinical and biomedical texts. In
2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinfor-
matics and Biomedicine (BIBM) , pages 482–489.
Yanyao Shen, Hyokun Yun, Zachary C Lipton, Yakov
Kronrod, and Animashree Anandkumar. 2017.
Deep active learning for named entity recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05928 .
Aditya Siddhant and Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. Deep
bayesian active learning for natural language pro-
cessing: Results of a large-scale empirical study.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. Neural network acceptability judgments.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12471 .
Ellery Wulczyn, Nithum Thain, and Lucas Dixon. 2017.
Wikipedia Talk Labels: Personal Attacks. .Yazhou Yang and Marco Loog. 2018. A benchmark
and comparison of active learning for logistic regres-
sion. Pattern Recognit. , 83:401–415.
Leihan Zhang and Le Zhang. 2019. An ensemble
deep active learning method for intent classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of the 2019 3rd International Con-
ference on Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence , pages 107–111.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
siﬁcation. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems , pages 649–657.
Ye Zhang, Matthew Lease, and Byron C Wallace. 2017.
Active discriminative text representation learning.
InThirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence .
Fedor Zhdanov. 2019. Diverse mini-batch active learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05954 .
Jingbo Zhu, Huizhen Wang, Tianshun Yao, and Ben-
jamin K Tsou. 2008. Active learning with sampling
by uncertainty and density for word sense disam-
biguation and text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (Coling 2008) , pages 1137–1144.
A Datasets
In this paper we used the following datasets:
Subjectivity: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/
people/pabo/movie-review-data/ .
Polarity: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/
people/pabo/movie-review-data/ .
AG’s News: http://groups.di.unipi.it/
˜gulli/AG_corpus_of_news_articles.
html .
We used the version from: https:
//pathmind.com/wiki/open-datasets
(look for the link Text Classiﬁcation
Datasets ).
Wiki attack: https://figshare.com/
articles/Wikipedia_Talk_Labels_
Personal_Attacks/4054689 .
ISEAR: https://www.unige.
ch/cisa/research/
materials-and-online-research/
research-material/ .
TREC: https://cogcomp.seas.upenn.edu/
Data/QA/QC/
CoLA: https://nyu-mll.github.io/CoLA/

==== Page 11 ====
7959no. dataset class # train prior # dev prior # test prior imb.
1 AG’s News-imb world 12,569 10% 2,456 10% 2,513 10% Y
2 Subjectivity-imb subjective 3,919 10% 560 10% 1,077 10% Y
3 Polarity-imb positive 4,142 10% 588 10% 1,193 10% Y
4 Wiki attack general 15,000 12% 3,000 11% 3,000 12% Y
5 ISEAR fear 5,366 14% 766 15% 1,534 15% Y
6 TREC location 4,674 15% 778 15% 500 16% Y
7 AG’s News world 15,000 25% 3,000 26% 3,000 25% N
8 CoLA unacceptable 7,592 30% 959 30% 1,043 31% N
9 Subjectivity subjective 7,000 50% 1,000 50% 2,000 52% N
10 Polarity positive 7,463 50% 1,066 50% 2,133 50% N
Table 4: Datasets, target classes and the split for train/dev/test sets with the class prior in each set (imb.= imbal-
anced).
dataset-category query precision recall F1
ISEAR-fear fear/afraid/scared/scary 0.92 0.24 0.38
TREC-location Where/countr/cit 1.00 0.48 0.65
Wiki attack-general [A-Z]! 0.48 0.08 0.14
AG’s news-imb or over a list of countries and territories 0.32 0.42 0.36
Table 5: Queries performance on the test set
Table 4 provides details about their split into train,
dev, and test sets. For each set its size and the
prior of the target class is presented. Information
about the performance on the test set of the queries
used in the Imbalanced-practical scenario is given
in Table 5.

==== Page 12 ====
7960Balanced
Imbalanced
Imbalanced-practical
Figure 3: AL strategies compared to the Random baseline in the balanced (top row), imbalanced (two middle
rows) and imbalanced-practical (bottom row) scenarios. Train size indicates the size of L.

==== Page 13 ====
7961Imbalanced
Imbalanced-practical
Figure 4: Precision of AL strategies and the Random baseline in the imbalanced (two top rows) and imbalanced-
practical (bottom row) scenarios. Train size indicates the size of L.

==== Page 14 ====
7962Imbalanced
Imbalanced-practical
Figure 5: Recall of AL strategies and the Random baseline in the imbalanced (two top rows) and imbalanced-
practical (bottom row) scenarios. Train size indicates the size of L.

