==== Page 1 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based 
Reinforcement Learning 
Kashyap Todi 
kashyap.todi@gmail.com 
Aalto University 
Finland 
Luis A. Leiva 
luis.leiva@uni.lu 
University of Luxembourg 
Luxembourg Gilles Bailly 
gilles.bailly@sorbonne-universite.fr 
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR 
France 
Antti Oulasvirta 
antti.oulasvirta@aalto.f 
Aalto University 
Finland 
t1tnCurrent
 State
Adapted
 Statesobserved
values
adaptOpen
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitOpen
Save
Rename
Move To...PrintExportSave As...New
Duplicate
Exita1a2an
a1a2an
t0Open
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
Exitt0
t1
t2TimeCurrent Design Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Adapted Design Final Design
... ...
...s0
s1
s11s12s1ns2snestimated
values
Figure 1: We present a model-based reinforcement learning approach for adaptive UIs that can improve usability while avoid-
ing unexpected changes that surprise the user or require relearning. An interface is adapted by simulating several possible 
sequences of adaptations and evaluating them using predictive models in HCI. This approach avoids greedy, disadvantageous 
adaptations, and may anticipate possible user responses even with limited observation data. 
ABSTRACT 
Adapting an interface requires taking into account both the positive 
and negative efects that changes may have on the user. A carelessly 
picked adaptation may impose high costs to the user – for example, 
due to surprise or relearning efort – or “trap” the process to a 
suboptimal design immaturely. However, efects on users are hard 
to predict as they depend on factors that are latent and evolve 
over the course of interaction. We propose a novel approach for 
adaptive user interfaces that yields a conservative adaptation policy: 
It fnds benefcial changes when there are such and avoids changes 
when there are none. Our model-based reinforcement learning 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445497 method plans sequences of adaptations and consults predictive 
HCI models to estimate their efects. We present empirical and 
simulation results from the case of adaptive menus, showing that 
the method outperforms both a non-adaptive and a frequency-based 
policy. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and 
tools. 
KEYWORDS 
Adaptive User Interfaces; Reinforcement Learning; Predictive Mod-
els; Monte Carlo Tree Search 
ACM Reference Format: 
Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2021. 
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning. In 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 
8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445497 


==== Page 2 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Adaptive user interfaces can autonomously change the content, 
layout, or style of an interface to improve their ft with the user’s 
capabilities and interests. This paper looks at a foundational tech-
nical problem of adaptive interfaces that lies at the intersection 
of human–computer interaction and machine learning research: 
How to select adaptations? An adaptive system must decide what to 
adapt, and when – or when not – to make changes. Diferent com-
putational approaches to this problem have been studied, among 
others, rule-based systems, heuristics, bandits, Bayesian optimisa-
tion, and supervised learning (see section 2). Although positive em-
pirical results have been obtained (e.g., [4, 13, 17, 46, 49, 51, 52, 54]), 
known approaches have been criticised for being unpredictable and 
unreliable; they pick detrimental adaptations unacceptably often 
[16, 22, 33, 36, 56]. 
Estimation of utility is required for selecting an adaptation. Utility 
– in this case – refers to the usefulness of an adaptation to the user, 
or how it is perceived to beneft interaction when possible costs 
are taken into account. Picking an adaptation can be considered 
a hypothesis on how useful it is for user. Unfortunately, utility 
is very hard to estimate accurately – hard both at design time 
as well as interactively from the kind of data these systems have 
access to, such as clicks or viewing duration. In machine learning 
terms, utility is latent. Moreover, in adaptive interaction, utility 
is also non-stationary. That is, the skills and interests of the user 
evolve over time. A change that would make sense in the beginning 
when the user is novice with the design may be devastating for an 
experienced user. 
We believe that adaptive systems could provide greater benefts 
by planning sequences of adaptations that gracefully lead a user 
through gradual changes. However, non-stationarity makes plan-
ning challenging: considering only a short period of time (i.e. a 
short horizon) can result in suboptimal designs. An adaptation that 
is overft to a novice could be impossible to recover from later on 
when the user is more experienced. On the other hand, planning 
a long sequence of adaptations increases the size of search space, 
growing exponentially with the length of the planning horizon. 
Model-based reinforcement learning is here developed as a princi-
pled and efective approach to these issues. We defne the adaptation 
problem as a stochastic sequential decision problem [ 7], where the 
adaptive system should plan a sequence of adaptations over a long 
horizon. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of machine learning 
methods appropriate for this type of problems. Typically, a policy is 
learnt via trial-and-error that maximises future cumulative utility. 
Our RL approach is model-based as it uses predictive HCI models to 
estimate utility. These models simulate consequences – benefts and 
costs – of possible adaptation sequences without actually executing 
them [28, 50]. However, their application is conditioned on their 
accuracy: They should accurately predict short-term costs such as 
due to relearning as well as longer-term improvements to perfor-
mance. Generally, such models are available at least in the areas 
of pointing, menu interaction, and graphical layouts. In compari-
son with an alternative, the model-free approach, the model-based 
approach requires less training and better generalises across condi-
tions [28, 50]. However, fnding the best adaption – by assessing the 
value of each sequence of adaptations with predictive models – is computationally costly, especially when considering sequences of 
changes over a long horizon. To solve this computational problem 
in an online setting, we use a combination of Monte Carlo Tree 
Search (MCTS) for planning, and deep learning to boost perfor-
mance. To avoid extensive trial-and-error with users in the loop, 
our deep learning models are trained ofine using HCI models. 
Our general approach can be applied for various HCI applica-
tions, such as adaptive mobile homescreens, graphical layouts, and 
application menus. We demonstrate it specifcally in the context of 
adaptive menus. The task is to adapt the interface by changing the 
arrangement and grouping of menu items (Figure 1), thus improving 
the menu’s usability. We exploit and extend multiple menu search 
models from literature to estimate the upper and lower bounds of 
the value of an adaptation as well as their change as the user learns. 
This helps us form an adaptation policy that accounts for diferent 
user strategies and avoids adaptations that incur high costs to users. 
Our technical evaluation shows that our solution can tackle realistic 
problem sizes, and fnd favourable adaptations, on a commodity 
computer. Finally, we present results from an empirical evaluation 
where the approach compared favourably against a non-adaptive 
baseline design and a frequency-based adaptation policy. 
To sum up, this paper makes three key contributions: 
(1) A new formulation for adaptive interfaces that formalises 
them as a stochastic sequential decision-making problem; 
(2) Development of model-based reinforcement learning for 
planning adaptations in the case where users learn; 
(3) Application in adaptive menus with demonstrated benefts 
to usability. 
2 PREVIOUS WORK: MACHINE LEARNING 
METHODS FOR ADAPTIVE INTERFACES 
Our work contributes to methods for adaptive interfaces designed to 
operate autonomously, that is without explicit feedback or training 
samples from user. The core computational problem we review 
here is how to pick an adaptation; we do not cover issues like 
prior elicitation, explainability, nor the design space of intelligent 
interaction techniques. 
2.1 Rules, heuristics, and logic 
Early work on this topic studied rule systems, heuristics, and logic 
as the basis of deciding what to adapt (see, e.g., [44]). For exam-
ple, in menu-based interaction, most systems still follow a heuristic 
approach, where adaptation is picked based on hand-written heuris-
tics that exploit click frequency, visit duration, recency or other 
specifc features that can be computed from observation data [ 21]. 
These approaches, in general, are feasible only when sensed input 
is highly predictive of the most appropriate adaptation. Another 
limitation is that writing a comprehensive and accurate rule sys-
tem requires plenty of foresight. A rule system must be developed 
that, on the one hand, covers conceivable conditions the system 
can enter and, on the other, can graciously resolve conficts when 
multiple rules apply. 

==== Page 3 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
2.2 Machine learning 
The prevailing understanding is that learning is a key capability 
for adaptive systems [32]. Two learning capabilities are needed: (1) 
inference, the capability to update assumptions about the user based 
on observations; and (2) decision-making, the capability to choose 
appropriate adaptation in the light of assumptions about the user 
[41]. The two challenges can be relaxed, for example if user state is 
trivially known, or if the state is highly predictive of appropriate 
adaptation. In the latter case, the problem can be approached as a 
supervised learning problem, where a mapping is learned between 
user data and suitable adaptations. While this approach has been 
successful for input techniques, such as gesture recognition [57], it 
is an open question if this scales up to adaptive interfaces, which 
must not only learn user state but fexibly decide how to intervene 
in the user interface. A practical obstacle is how to obtain a dataset 
that describes the consequences of possible adaptations on possible 
users. 
In the rest of the section, we focus on the general case, where 
both inference and decision-making are required and non-trivial. 
2.3 Bandit systems and Bayesian optimisation 
Bandit systems are one of the most successful probabilistic ap-
proaches to this problem, not only for recommendation systems 
but also for interface design and adaptation [38]. Each adaptation 
is modelled as an ‘arm’ associated with a distribution describing 
expected gains. Given prior data and new evidence on the mea-
sured success of an adaptation, bandits use Bayes theorem to update 
expectation. Importantly, a principled solution is ofered to the ex-
ploration/exploitation problem. Methods like Thompson sampling 
can optimally balance between exploring actions, to learn about 
which actions work, and exploitation, to converge to good designs. 
Bayesian optimisation generalises bandit systems to the case of 
multiple interrelated decision variables [47]. It is a global optimisa-
tion method that tries to fnd optimal adaptation by probing to a 
black box function; here, the user. It is a robust and sample-efcient 
and well-suited for noisy, expensive-to-evaluate functions. The 
method uses a surrogate model for approximating the model ft 
across the parameter space and quantify uncertainty. This is neces-
sary for the acquisition rule to address the exploration–exploitation 
trade-of. This way, it is possible to learn adaptive responses via 
trial and error. Applications have been shown in human-in-the-loop 
design of interface features [15] and adaptation of low-dimensional 
design features [30]. However, while bandits and BO have been 
successful in simpler adaptation problems, like recommendations 
and calibration of interface parameters, their intrinsic limitation 
is that they are myopic; that is, they do not plan over a series of 
changes – a capability we need in adaptive interaction. 
2.4 Reinforcement learning 
Unlike bandits, reinforcement learning permits learning policies for 
sequences of actions where rewards are not immediately achievable. 
While applications have been shown for example in crowdsourcing 
[14], dialogue systems [58], and gaze-based interactions [20], a 
known limitation with the prevailing model-free RL approach is still 
the extensive amount of poor attempts (or trials) that are required to learn a good policy [50] This makes it poorly suitable for situations 
with very large state-action spaces. 
Model-based RL uses a predictive model to simulate possibilities 
without frst trying them out, which is useful for adaptive interfaces, 
because it signifcantly improves the efciency of fnding good 
solutions [28]. A policy can be determined with much fewer trials, 
and if the model is good, at times directly. Outside of user interfaces, 
we fnd applications of model-based RL, for example in board games, 
robots, video games [29], as well as behaviour-change applications, 
such as in generating behavioural instructions for people with 
dementia [23]. A grand obstacle for applications in adaptive systems 
is the model: where to get a good one? A related problem is that 
of drift: prediction errors can have a compounding, cumulative 
efect on planning performance. In HCI, although previous work 
has explored the use of model-free RL (e.g., see [35]), model-based 
RL has not been explored in adaptive interfaces at large, as far as 
we know. Also, while predictive models have been used for one-
shot design generation [42], design space exploration [53], and for 
selecting a single action in a myopic manner [27, 51], they have not 
been used for simulation-based planning in an adaptive system. 
In this paper, we approach the fundamental problem of select-
ing user interface adaptations by applying model-based RL, and 
exploiting predictive HCI models, to simulate and plan adaptations. 
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION 
We formulate the problem of adaptation as a stochastic sequential 
decision-making problem [7]. The adaptive system must decide what 
to adapt, if anything, given its observations. It should pick a se-
quence of adaptations in order to maximise their expected value 
to user over a longer window of interactions. For example, in our 
application example later on, we optimise for performance improve-
ments in menu selection tasks achievable over multiple sessions of 
interactions. Further, in a stochastic problem, the world is neither 
fully known nor under the control of the system. In our case, while 
the system can change the interface, it cannot change the human, 
which has its own latent processes. For example, humans learn 
and change interests. This complicates the problem: Any greed-
ily chosen adaptation may lead to irreversibly poor interactions 
later on. Thus, adaptations must be picked with a horizon of such 
developments in mind. 
In the following, we formulate this problem as a Markov decision 
process (MDP). The beneft of an MDP formulation is that it ofers a 
rigorous and actionable understanding of the problem. In particular, 
it (1) illuminates the decision problem, (2) links it to a body of 
theoretical results and practical approaches in AI and ML research, 
and (3) points toward appropriate algorithmic solutions. 
The problem of adaptive interfaces is that of maximising ex-
pected cumulative discounted rewards r(st , at ) from acting accord-
ing to an optimal policy π ∗ (see e.g. [26]): 
" #∞Õ 
π ∗ = argmax Eπ γ t r(st , at ) (1) 
π t =0p(st +1 |st , at ) 
where, 
• s ∈ S is a state of interaction; This consists of both the 
interface design ( d) and the user ( u) 

==== Page 4 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
• a ∈ A is an adaptation; i.e. a change that can be carried out 
on the interface. 
• p is a transition function; it provides the probability of transi-
tioning from state s to state st +1 after performing adaptation 
a; i.e., p(st +1 |st , at ). 
• r is a reward collected for making adaptation a in state s. 
• γ is a discount factor controlling for how much to favour 
immediate (small γ ) vs. long-term (large γ ) reward. 
Consider the case of adapting the homescreen layout of smart-
phones, consisting of a grid of application icons. Here, a state s of 
the system consists of both the homescreen design d and latent state 
of the user u who is interacting with the device. More specifcally, 
the design d can encapsulate factors such as the arrangement of 
icons, their grouping or relationship to other icons, and other rele-
vant features. With regard to the user u, aspects such as expertise, 
interests, and abilities, can be considered. 
Given an initial homescreen design, with which the user has 
interacted, an adaptation a would result in a new design by, for 
example, changing the layout or ordering of icons. Upon adaptation, 
the transition function p specifes how the internal state of the user 
(e.g. their expertise) changes along with the external design state. 
The reward r then signifes the beneft an adaptation provides to 
the user by improving future interactions, for example, by reducing 
the time required to select an icon. Finally, the discount factor 
γ indicates to the adaptive system how immediate benefts and 
long-term improvements contribute towards the reward. Given 
this setting, the goal of the system is to fnd a suitable policy τ 
that can be used to select adaptations that maximise the estimated 
cumulative reward. 
Finding a policy to select adaptations can be challenging for adap-
tive interfaces. While the true state of the design is fully observable, 
the system does not have access to the true state of the user. We can 
only estimate it through HCI models, where predictions provide 
us a belief about the user status (for the theoretical implications of 
this, see [2]). Further, due to the lack of user feedback, computing 
reward is not straightforward. Instead, predictive HCI models can 
be used to build objective functions related to performance and 
re-learning costs. Note that this formulation does not take a stance 
on what is the ‘right’ objective function. Finally, at any given state, 
there is a large number of possible adaptations that can change the 
design. When considering a sequence of adaptations over a long 
horizon, the state space grows exponentially. In the following, we 
describe how these challenges are addressed via model-based RL. 
4 METHOD: DEEP MODEL-BASED 
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 
The core of this approach considers planning: the selection of a 
sequence of adaptation with the goal of maximising utility to user. 
Planning algorithms such as minimax and A-star, among others, 
utilise a tree representation of the search space. They have found 
several applications (e.g. game-playing [8], circuit-routing [11], 
etc.). The tree consists of nodes, connected by branches, represent-
ing valid states and transitions between them. However, classic 
tree search algorithms often require expansion of the entire tree. This is computationally expensive given the large number of pos-
sible adaptations (breadth) and long horizons (depth) in adaptive 
interfaces. 
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has been successfully employed 
in various game-playing applications to plan a sequence of moves ef-
fciently (see [9]). MCTS can operate under uncertainty by analysing 
the most promising moves, and expanding tree nodes using random 
sampling based approaches. A well-known, inspiring application 
of MCTS is in AlphaGo [48], the computer program capable of 
playing the game of Go competitively against human players. A 
key insight here has been to incorporate neural networks to help 
predict which branches have highest expected value, and thereby 
deal with larger problem instances. In our work, we incorporate a 
value neural network to compute longer sequence cases faster. 
4.1 Planning with MCTS 
In contrast to game-playing applications, where a win/loss defnes 
the terminal state, our case does not have a well-defned horizon. 
The user could keep interacting for years. We thus need to estimate 
a cumulative reward over a horizon of reasonable length. In other 
parts, our solution follows standard implementations of MCTS 
(Figure 2): 
1. Selection : When a user concludes an interaction session, the 
root state s0 is given by the current design d0 and user observations 
u0. A state sj ∈ S is selected via Upper Confdence Trees (UCT), a 
widely used estimator in model-based planning [31]. A key feature 
is that it has a coefcient C to balance between exploration and 
exploitation when evaluating several possible UI adaptations: 
s 
rj ln niUCT = + C (2) nj nj 
where rj is the total reward for child state sj , nj is the number of 
times sj has been visited, and ni is the number of times parent state 
si has been visited. Exploration constant C in our application is set √ 
to 1/ 2 following convention. If all adaptations from the selected 
state sj have been previously explored, then selection is repeated 
until a leaf state is selected with unexplored adaptations. 
2. Expansion : The selected node sj is next expanded by picking 
an adaptation a ∈ A that results in a new state sj+1. At this point, 
nj+1, rj+1 = 0. In our application, we further assume that the ex-
panded state is either visible or invisible to the user. Invisibility can 
be exploited to plan multiple adaptations in a single turn. 
3. Roll-outs and simulations : During one roll-out, as the tree 
has no value estimates to inform the selection of consequential 
states, adaptations {a0, . . . , aN } ∈ A are chosen at random, and 
rewards are estimated using predictive HCI models. All models 
simulate what would happen with that adaptation sequence and 
return an estimate of values over the whole window. This is repeated 
for a fxed number of steps, given by the horizon H , and cumulative 
rewards are computed for each predictive model: 
HÕ 
rj+1 = rk (3) 
k=j+2 

==== Page 5 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2
u11d11u1nd1nu0d0
u11d11
u1n1d1n1u1nd1nu0d0
undn
u11d11
u1n1d1n1u1nd1nu1n1d1n1u1nd1n
t1
t2t0 t2
t3
tH...
... ... ...u1d1undnu2d2 ...u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2 ...select
select
expandsimulate
or
estimate
backpropogatePredictive Models
Value Network
 vθ1. Selection 2. Expansion 3. Roll-out 4. Backpropogation
Figure 2: Model-based planning of adaptations using Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Adaptations are selected using upper-
confdence trees (UCT). After expanding a new node (adaptation), reward estimates are obtained through roll-outs, and back-
propogated to the root node. The child with the highest value is picked as the next adaptation. 
4. Backpropagation : At the end of a simulation, the cumulative 
reward rj+1 is backpropagated from the newly-expanded state sj+1 
to the initial state s0, and values (rewards r and visits n) are updated. 
The above steps (1–4) are repeated several times to obtain value 
estimates for each adapted state. 
Selecting the next adaptation : Given these value estimates, 
the system can now choose the best adaptation (by setting C = 0 in 
Equation 2) to maximise expected utility for the user while avoiding 
costly changes. 
We support several ways for selecting adaptation that allows 
controlling for the trade-of between risk and gain. Our approach 
assumes that there are multiple predictive HCI models that bound 
the true behaviour, for example by ofering best-case and (realistic) 
worst-case estimates. Alternatively, predictive models can be in-
cluded to address multiple objectives, such as task completion time, 
cognitive load, and disruption [25]. Combining value estimations 
from all models, we can implement diferent objective functions, 
such as: 
(1) Average: The mean of rewards from each model gives total 
reward r, thus accounting for varying user strategies. 
(2) Optimistic: The system assumes optimal user strategy, and 
selects the model that maximises rewards. 
(3) Conservative: The system ensures that no user strategy is 
harmed by selecting the lowest-possible reward, and penal-
ising negative rewards. 
4.2 Value Estimation with Deep Neural 
Networks 
To address large problem sizes in online settings, where repeating 
a sufcient number of MCTS simulations to attain robust estimates 
is infeasible, we develop a deep neural network architecture that 
can efciently provide predictions in real-time. In place of roll-
outs, where simulations can be costly for longer horizons, a pre-
trained value network is used to directly obtain value estimates for 
unexplored states. 
... ...
......Concatenation
Input Branches 
(Model)InputDesign
FeaturesUser
Features
Output Branches
(Model)Value
PredictionsModel-based
Training DataFigure 3: Neural network architecture for obtaining value 
estimates. Training data is generated using HCI models. 
As illustrated in Figure 3, we propose an m-headed n-tailed ar-
chitecture that is trained end-to-end with backpropagation. Each of 
the m input parameters is treated as an independent model branch 
(head) that is eventually concatenated and passed to n independent 
model branches (tails). During ofine training, model-based data 
is generated using MCTS roll-outs from randomly sampled initial 
states. Value estimates, along with state (design and user) informa-
tion, are given as input samples to a deep neural network model. 
Elementary design and user features are parameterised with the 
neural network model. This is then used to predict value estimates 
for any given state in an online setting. Note that we decouple 
value estimations from objective functions (see above), leaving it 
up to the adaptive system to decide how to use information from 
multiple models. The main advantages of using neural networks 
for estimation are that they have high learning capacity, and can 
evaluate thousands of states in real-time without running expensive 
simulations. 
4.3 Applications in Adaptive Interfaces 
With certain conditions we outline here, the approach we outline 
is broadly useful across applications of adaptive interfaces. For ex-
ample, it can be used to adapt the structure of webpages layouts, 

==== Page 6 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
Open
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitActivationsFrequency observeCurrent
DesignAdapted
DesignUser Planning with MCTS
d0 , u0
d0 , u0
Pairwise Item
AssociationsPredictive
ModelsPredictive
ModelsPredictive
Models
d11u11u0d0
undn
u1n1d1n1u1nd1n ...u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2 ...
r’(s’,a,s) Feasible Adaptations A
Move an item
Swap two items
Move a group
Swap two groups
Add/remove a separator
Do nothingOpen
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitPredictions
min Δr, max Δr Move ‘Save’ 
to position 4
Pre-trained
Neural network
Figure 4: Menu adaptation with deep model-based RL. Given a current design and user observations, MCTS-based planning is 
used to select the next adaptation. Reward estimates are obtained either using predictive models or from a neural network. 
arrange icons on mobile homescreens, or reorganise application 
menus. Depending on the application, the goal or objective can dif-
fer and might include minimising selection time, increasing saliency, 
reducing cognitive load, increasing engagement, or a combination 
of them. The approach can handle diferent types of adaptations 
including the presentation of the graphical elements (position, size, 
colour, etc.) or their behaviour (number of elements, animations, 
etc.). 
For any application case, a core aspect of our approach relies 
on HCI models [42] to sufciently accurately capture the efects 
of these adaptations on the chosen goals. For instance, Fitts’ law 
[39] can be used to adapt the location and the size of an elements 
to minimise pointing time. Other practical limitations include the 
size of state–action space. In the following section, we demonstrate 
our approach with an application in adaptive menus, and present a 
novel HCI model to predict selection time in menus. 
5 APPLICATION: ADAPTIVE MENUS 
To demonstrate the applicability of our approach, we tackle a chal-
lenging and open question in the feld of adaptive interfaces: adap-
tive menus. Menus have received extensive attention in HCI re-
search because they are widely used, and adaptation has potential 
to improve usability [4, 55]. It is known that unexpected changes 
in menus can introduce a temporary performance drop, increase 
cognitive load, and potentially lead to the rejection of the adap-
tion/techniques [4, 55]. No general solution has been proposed 
for autonomous adaptation that could not only move items to the 
top, but handle reorganisations more comprehensively. We provide 
a general solution here considering linear menus with up to 20 
items, which covers a wide number of menus typically found in 
common operating systems, applications, and websites [3, 4, 6]. As 
menu adaptations, we only consider those modifying the position 
and grouping of items in the menus, leaving other presentation 
adaptations, such as highlighting and split menus, for future work. 
While we consider linear menus with textual labels, our solution 
can be extended to address the problem of adaptive homescreens 
(introduced in section 3) by extending the menu search model to 
consider two-dimensional grids and graphical icons. 5.1 Problem Defnition 
Following the general formulation in section 3, we frst defne the 
adaptive menu problem. Figure 4 presents an exemplary illustration. 
State (S): A state s ∈ S gives information about the menu design 
and the user. 
We defne a design d ∈ D as a pair < L, M > where L is a non-
hierarchical linear menu [40] containing an ordered list of items. An 
item is either a word or a separator (used to create semantic groups). 
M is an association matrix defning the semantic relatedness between 
menu items. In our implementation, M is given by the designer as 
binary relationships by specifying lists of related items. For common 
words, it can be inferred using word embedding models [43]. 
The system observes user clicks on menu items to approximate 
a user’s expertise and interest. We use a simplifed version of the 
learning component from ACT-R [1] to compute user expertise for 
each menu item il in a menu with n items: 
nÕ 
B(il ) = (T − Tj,il )−ρ (4) 
j=1 
where B(il ) is the level of activation of item i at location l in the 
memory, T is the current time, Tj,il is the time of the jth selection of 
il , and ρ is a decay parameter equal to 0.5. User interest (or prediction 
scheme [55]) is given by the frequency distribution of commands 
selected during the previous interaction session, containing N clicks. 
Additional statistical models of user interest and expertise [18, 19, 
21, 51], can be plugged into our architecture. 
Feasible Adaptations (A): The set of possible adaptations A, 
through which a menu can be reorganised, includes (1) moving a 
menu item to a certain position, (2) swapping two items, (3) adding 
or removing a separator, (4) moving an entire group, (5) swapping 
two groups, and (6) not making any changes. 
Transition function (p): We use MCTS, where the probabil-
ity of making an adaptation from state s0 to s1 is given by UCT 
(Equation 2). During planning, we balance between exploiting high-
reward adaptations and exploring others. When selecting an adap-
tation a to make on the current design d0, resulting in a new design 
d1, a greedy strategy is chosen: 
rjargmax (5) 
a nj 

==== Page 7 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Reward (r): We extend predictive HCI models of menu use to 
obtain reward estimates. A key feature of these models is to take 
into account the implicit cost of adaptations. Given a pair of menu 
designs and estimates of user expertise and interest, these models 
predict selection time for items for varying user strategies. For each 
model, the reward r then is the diference in average selection time, 
weighted by user interest. Rewards from multiple models can be 
combined using any of the objective functions given in section 4.1. 
When an adapted state is assumed to be displayed (visible) to 
the user, we simulate an interaction session (new clicks) based 
on user interest, and update expertise accordingly. Conversely, 
the system can use invisible states to withhold presentation and 
combine multiple adaptations, such that the state is used only as a 
pathway to another state without being displayed. Here, no user 
updates are applied. 
5.2 Models for Simulating Menu Search 
Several predictive models explain how users search within linear 
menus [5, 10, 12, 24, 40]. We build on these models to defne three 
search strategies, and use these to evaluate the utility of a menu 
design by simulating search tasks, illustrated in Figure 5: 
(1) Serial search : The user searches serially, from top to bottom, 
until the desired item is found in the menu. 
(2) Foraging search : Grouping of items is exploited such that the 
user only searches for the target within relevant groups. 
(3) Recall search : The user relies on memory to search for the 
desired item at an expected location in the menu. 
Our choice of the three models was made with the hypothesis that 
they would provide bounds for best-case and worst-case perfor-
mance. In the beginning, best-case performance would be governed 
by foraging and serial search, but as experience accumulates, the 
(rational) user would shift to foraging based and recall-based strate-
gies. But making the assumption that a user might – for reasons like 
lack of efort or interest – use a poor strategy allows us to defne a 
conservative policy for adaptation that is unlikely to annoy them. 
We note that it is possible to plug in additional search strategies (e.g. 
Random search [40]) without modifying the general architecture 
of the algorithm. 
Table 1: Key notations used in this section. 
Notation Description 
Target item i at location l 
Tmodel(i) il 
Search time for an item i with a given model 
δ Constant for cautious inspection cost of an item 
Constant surprise penalty when an item is not 
found as expected 
Ttrail Tc 
Constant pointing time when the cursor trails eye 
gaze 
Boolean relationship between items ik and il , from 
association matrix M 
B(il ) M(ik , il ) 
Activation level for i at l 
5.2.1 Serial search . When searching for a menu item ie at an 
expected position e, serial search [5, 13, 40] consists of a top-to-
bottom inspection of the menu, until the item is reached. Inspection (or reading) cost for any item il is given by: 
δ Tread(il ) = (6)1 + B(il )
where B(il ) is the activation of i at l, and δ is the cautious inspection 
cost constant when there is no activation. The total serial search 
time for a target at expected location e is thus given by: 
eÕ 
Tserial(ie ) = Tread(ij ) + Ttrail (7) 
j=1 
Where Ttrail is a constant pointing time assuming that the mouse 
cursor trails the eye-gaze (tracking strategy) during serial search 
[5, 10]. 
In an adapted menu, if the item’s new location a is before the 
expected location e (a ⩽ e), the search time reduces following 
Equation 7. However, if a is after e (a ⩾ e), surprise penalty Tc is 
imposed upon not fnding the item as expected. Following this, the 
user cautiously inspects the remaining items at a slower rate δ. The 
total search time is: 
Tserial(ia ) = Tserial(ie ) + Tc + (a − e)· δ + Tpointing (8) 
To support serial search, it is advantageous for an adaptive sys-
tem to move frequently-used items towards the top. 
5.2.2 Foraging search . Here, semantic structure (grouping) is 
exploited to avoid wasting time inspecting groups that most likely 
do not contain the target item [4]. The anchor, or frst element of 
a group, “signals” what is in the group. If the anchor is unrelated 
to the target, the user skips the group. If the anchor is related, the 
user performs a serial search within this group. 
Consider a menu where nд is the number of groups, nд (ie ) is the 
location of the group that contains the target (ie ), and e the expected 
target location within the group. M(дj , ie )∈[0, 1] specifes if ie is 
associated to an anchor дj . In a well-organised menu, where the 
anchor of one of the groups is related to the target item, foraging 
search time is: 
nÕд (ie )  
Tforage(ie ) = Tread(дj ) + (9) 
j=1 
min(e(дj ),s(дj ))Õ ª M(дj , ie )· Tread(ik )® + Ttrail 
k=1 ¬ 
where s(дj ) is the size of the group, and e(дj ) is the location of the 
target item te within group дj if it is located within the group, ∞ 
otherwise. Finally, Ttrail remains the constant pointing time when 
the mouse cursor trails the eye gaze. Thus, items within related 
groups are inspected serially until the target is successfully found. 
In a poorly organised menu, where the target item is not located 
within the expected group(s), a user frst attempts foraging search 
by inspecting all anchors, and all items within related anchors 
(given by Equation 9). Upon not fnding the item, a surprise penalty 
Tc is incurred, and the user reverts to serial search under caution 
from the top of the menu. 
To support foraging search, it is desirable for an adaptive system 
to create groups of related items, or eliminate groups where items 
have no associations. 

==== Page 8 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
Open
Save
PrintExportSave As..New
ExitSerial 
Open
Save
PrintExportSave As...New
ExitForaging
Open
Save
PrintExportSave As...New
ExitRecall
Open
Save
Save As...ExportPrintNew
ExitSerial
Open
Save
Save As...ExportPrintNew
ExitForaging
Open
Save
Save As...ExportPrintNew
ExitRecall
Local 
search
Revert to serial search from top
Target at expected locationa Target at unexpected locationb
Figure 5: Model-based simulation of search for a target item (’Save As...’). (a) when the target is at an expected location, search 
proceeds as expected; (b) when the target is at an unexpected location, a penalty is imposed upon not fnding the target at its 
expected location (indicated by ×), and search reverts to slower strategies. 
5.2.3 Recall search . Recall (direct) search [5] relies on user’s 
memory, given by activations B, to directly glance at items without 
inspecting the entire menu. For a target item i, if there are no 
activations Bi above a threshold θ (we use 0.5), the user reverts 
to serial search (Equation 7). When B(il ) ⩾ θ for a target il at 
location l, the user attempts recall search by inspecting the item at 
l (Equation 6). 
If found at l, the user then performs a pointing task. Here, the 
visual search and pointing task are performed sequentially as eye 
movement is faster than mouse movement [5]. We use Fitts’ law to 
estimate pointing time in menus: 
Tpointing(il ) = ap + bp · log(1 + il ) (10) 
where ap = 10.3 and bp = 4.8 according to [5]. 
If not found at l, after incurring surprise penalty Tc , the user 
attempts local search, by randomly inspecting Nlocal items in the 
vicinity of location l. 
Tlocal(il ) = Tc + δ · Nlocal + Ttrail (11) 
In non-ordered menus, Nlocal is equal to 2 times the number of items 
in the Fovea. In semantic menus, Nlocal is the number of items in 
the group. 
In an adaptive menu, the target item i might have been encoun-
tered at several locations. Here, the user attempts recall search at 
all locations l ∈ L where B(il ) ⩾ θ, until the target is found. The 
total recall search time for target ia at adapted location a is given 
by: 
l ±ÕN /2 
Trecall(ia ) = Tpointing(ia ) + Tread(il ) + Tlocal(il ) (12) 
l ∈L:B(il )⩾θ 
If recall search fails (a < L or B(t, a) < θ), the user eventually 
reverts to serial search under caution (Equation 8). 
To support recall, it is advantageous for an adaptive system to 
place frequently-encountered items at locations where they have 
been seen before. 5.3 Neural Network for Rewards Estimation 
The above search models enable us to predict selection times for 
varying user strategies. By simulating consequences of adaptations 
during roll-outs, we can estimate implications of design changes 
on user performance. However, given the varying length of menu 
sizes, running simulations with long horizons can be infeasible for 
online settings. For example, for a menu with 15 items, and up to 
8 separators, there are over 500 feasible adaptations. To address 
large problem sizes, we instantiate our general network architec-
ture (Figure 3) for adaptive menus. The key idea is to anticipate 
the rewards for a given menu adaptation taking into account the 
previous menu design and the user behaviour. The model inputs 
are: (1) design head: adapted menu design, association matrices of 
the current and adapted menu; (2) user head: previous and current 
clicks distribution. The model outputs reward predictions for each 
of the three search models: serial, foraging, and recall. Figure 6 
illustrates the model architecture. 
Each input is treated as an independent model branch (head) 
that is eventually concatenated and passed to three independent 
model branches (tails), one for each output reward. Each item in the 
adapted menu is converted to a one-hot encoded vector, fattened, 
and then passed to a fully connected layer. The association matrices 
are difed and passed to a long short-term memory (LSTM) layer, 
then passed to a fully connected layer. Finally, the click history 
is passed to an LSTM layer, which models sequential data and is 
Design DataCurrent
Matrix
Adapted
MatrixUser Data`
LSTM DropoutFully
ConnectedDifference LSTM DropoutFully
ConnectedCurrent
FrequencyEstimated
Frequency
Concatenator
Embedding Flatten DropoutFully
ConnectedAdapted
MenuDropoutFully
ConnectedFully
ConnectedReward
SerialDropoutFully
ConnectedFully
ConnectedReward
SerialDropoutFully
ConnectedFully
ConnectedReward
Serial
Difference
Figure 6: Our value network architecture takes menu design 
and user features as input to provide individual reward pre-
dictions. 

==== Page 9 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
designed to handle long-term dependencies, and is then passed to 
a fully connected layer. 
The concatenated inputs are passed to each network tail, which 
comprises two stacked fully connected layers. At the end of each 
tail, we use linear activation to predict each reward, since they are 
not bounded. For regularisation purposes, our architecture uses 
Dropout layers with drop rate 0.5 before each of the fully connected 
layers. This prevents overftting the model to the training data, 
improving generalisability to unseen data. The loss function for all 
model tails is the mean squared error (MSE), which is computed as 
the average of the squared diferences between the predicted and the 
actual values, which penalises large errors. We use the RMSProp 
optimiser, a popular stochastic gradient descent algorithm with 
momentums. We use learning rate η = 0.001 and decay factor 
β = 0.9 for the optimiser. We train the model for 200 epochs at 
most, using early stopping (10 epochs patience) to retain the best 
model weights, and monitor its performance on a validation set 
comprising 20% of training data. After training, our model achieved 
remarkable performance: MSE serial = 0.149, MSE f oraдe = 0.408, 
MSE r ecall = 0.431. 
6 EVALUATION 
We validate our method, applied to adaptive menus, through tech-
nical and empirical evaluations. 
6.1 Technical Evaluation 
We conducted a technical evaluation with realistic and challeng-
ing scenarios, where the adaptive system must adapt menus for 
simulated users. The two main questions we seek to answer are: 
(1) Can a model-based planning approach successfully and con-
sistently improve predicted usability? 
(2) Does our neural network based solution scale it up to address 
larger problem sizes? 
6.1.1 Tasks. 
Menu Designs and User Interest: We considered 3 menu sizes — 5, 
10, and 15 items — to address varying cases, from short contextual 
menus to longer application menus. In addition, up to 8 separa-
tors were allowed for grouping, resulting in menus with up to 23 
items. We picked common labels for menu items, where categories 
specifed pairwise associations (e.g. animals, furniture, vegetables, 
clothing). For each menu size, we created 4 starting menu designs 
by randomly assigning labels to item positions. We used a Zipfan 
distribution to reasonably model menu usage [13, 37]. We sampled 
8 diferent click histories by randomly assigning frequency to item 
labels. This resulted in 3×8×4 = 96 confgurations, each assigned 
to a diferent simulated user. 
Reward Estimation: We compare two methods of estimating re-
wards: model-based simulations and value neural network predictions. 
With model-based simulations, predictive models are used during 
roll-outs to estimate rewards for each state. With value network 
predictions, our pre-trained network models are used to predict 
value estimates for each state. 
6.1.2 Implementation. Our MCTS-based planning algorithm, and 
the predictive menu models, are implemented in Python 3.7. The 
value neural network is implemented with TensorFlow 2.0.0. We 
Gloves: 0.6
Carrot: 0.16Panda: 0.1Table: 0.06Beans: 0.06Bikini: 0.02(Others: 0)User Interest(Frequencies)
Predicted AverageSelection Time (s)
13.6s 7.2sCurrent AdaptedAdapt x 3Figure 7: A sample result from the simulation study, for a 15-
item menu design. In 3 steps, the menu was adapted to better 
suit the given user’s interests (‘Gloves’ group moved to the 
top), and improved some grouping (‘Carrot’ with ‘Potato’) as 
well. 
used a GNU/Linux server with an Intel Xeon Gold CPU @ 2.10 GHz 
(64 bit processor) for simulations. The execution of the study was 
automated such that trials were conducted sequentially, to avoid 
variations in computational resource usage. 
During each trial, a combination of {menu size × user history × 
menu design × objective function × reward source} was selected, 
and given as input to the system. In a constrained setting, the MCTS 
algorithm was allowed 400 iterations, and a shallow roll-out horizon 
of 4 steps, to build the search tree and fnd suitable adaptations. 
6.1.3 Result: Success Rate. With the above setup, we frst evaluated 
whether our approach, and implementation, could successfully iden-
tify promising adaptations. As dependent variable, we measured 
success rate of fnding benefcial adaptations. We defne a success-
ful trial as one where the predicted selection time is improved by 
adaptation. Figure 7 shows an example result for a challenging case 
with a 15-item menu. 
The overall success rate with model-based simulation was 92.7%, 
indicating that in most cases an improvement was found. Similarly, 
with the value network, success rate was 89.6%. These results sup-
port our approach towards planning menu adaptations that can 
improve user performance. 
6.1.4 Result: Scalability. To assess the scalability of our solution, 
we compared computation time for model-based simulations vs. 
value network predictions. In addition to the horizon of 4 steps 
used to evaluate success rate, we evaluated 3 other search depths – 

==== Page 10 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
Simulation
Value Network
4 6 8 1001020304050Completion Time in s (400 iterations)
Search Depth (Horizon)
Figure 8: Computation time for planning adaptations via 
model-based simulations vs. value network for varying 
search depths. Our value network exhibited consistent per-
formance for longer horizons. 
6, 8, and 10 – depicting a range of planning horizons, from short 
sequences to longer sequences. 
Figure 8 illustrates computation time results for each depth level 
(for 400 MCTS iterations). We observe that for depths ≤ 4, the value 
network does not provide much beneft. However, as search depth 
increases, while the computation time with our value network 
remains constant (mean M = 7.77s, SD = 1.0), it drastically increases 
with simulations (from M = 7.9s, SD = 3.5s at depth 4 to M = 39.0s, 
SD = 7.4 at depth 10). 
6.2 Empirical Evaluation 
The primary goal of this evaluation is to test whether our planning 
approach (henceforth MCTS) applied to linear menus improves 
performance in comparison with static menus (Static), and with 
the well-known frequency-based adaptive approach (Freqency) 
as a baseline (e.g. as in [34]). In MCTS, the menu adapts after each 
block by planning adaptations; in Static, the menu does not adapt 
over time; in Freqency, the menu adapts based on the frequency 
of clicks on menu items. To this end, we conducted a lab study 
where participants completed selection tasks in a within-subject 
design with three conditions (Static, Freqency, MCTS). 
6.2.1 Materials. For the experiment, linear menus with 15 item 
labels were randomly generated. Items labels were selected from 
common categories (e.g. animals, fruits, countries, etc.) to avoid 
prior biases. For each participant, two menus were generated for 
each of the three conditions, resulting in six unique menus. To 
avoid confusion, there were no overlaps in item labels or categories 
between the menus for a participant. 
For each menu within a condition, a Zipfan distribution, known 
to accurately capture real-world command selections [13, 37], with 
shape s = 1.5 was used to control the frequency distribution of 
target items. The same frequency distribution was used for all three 
conditions within a participant. Unique frequency distributions were generated for every participant, to consider variance in user 
interests. These frequency distributions were then used to generate 
sequences of target items, to be presented as stimulus during the 
trials. 
6.2.2 Participants. 18 participants (10 masculine, 8 feminine, 0 
others), aged 18 to 38 (mean 27.2), with varying educational back-
grounds, were opportunistically recruited. All participants reported 
frequent desktop or mobile, and web usage. Participation was com-
pensated with a movie ticket voucher (approx. €12.00). 
6.2.3 Apparatus. The experiment was conducted on a Macbook 
Pro, with a 15” Retina display. An Apple Magic Mouse with default 
tracking speed was used for selection tasks. The study interface 
was implemented using HTML and Javascript, and was displayed 
in a browser window. Timestamped cursor movements and clicks 
on menu items were recorded. 
6.2.4 Stimulus and Task. The target item name was displayed at 
the top of the browser window. Participants began a trial by clicking 
on a confrm button, upon which the menu was displayed directly 
below. Errors were logged, and participants had to select the target 
item to fnish the trial. Upon clicking the target item, the menu was 
hidden, and a short break was provided. 
6.2.5 Procedure and design. The experiment began with an intro-
ductory briefng and participant consent. In a within-subject exper-
imental design, each participant tested the three conditions (Static, 
Freqency, MCTS) sequentially. Condition order was counterbal-
anced between participants using a 3×3 Latin square. 
During each condition, the participant interacted with two difer-
ent menus during 3 blocks. Within a block, the two menus appeared 
in an alternating order, separated by short breaks (3 seconds). For 
each menu, 20 selection tasks (trials) were completed. We intro-
duced this design to refect the fact that (1) users perform several 
sessions of work in the real life (one session == 1 block), (2) users 
regularly switch between applications within a session, and thus 
use diferent menus [45]: we wanted to avoid undesirable efects due 
to repetitive selection within a single menu, and (3) each menu has 
a diferent selection frequency, given by two Zipfan distributions. 
Participants took mandatory breaks (1 minute) between two con-
secutive blocks, and longer breaks (5 minutes) between conditions 
where they answered open-ended interview questions. In summary, 
the design is: 18 participants × 3 conditions × 3 blocks × 2 menus 
× 20 selections = 6480 trials. 
6.2.6 Qantitative Results. 
Average Selection Time: We created a mixed-efect model for re-
peated measures analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) with se-
lection time (in ms) as dependent variable, conditions (Static, Fre-
qency, MCTS) as fxed independent variable, and participant ID 
and menu design as random variables. 
Condition had a statistically signifcant efect on selection time 
F (2, 17) = 5.47, p < 0.05, with grand means Static = 2283 ms, Fre-
qency = 2298 ms, and MCTS = 2162 ms (Figure 9a). Post-hoc test 
using Tukey HSD revealed that MCTS (2162 ms) was signifcantly 
faster (lower selection time) than both Freqency (2298 ms) and 
Static (2283 ms); the diference between Static and Freqency 
was not statistically signifcant. 

==== Page 11 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
 Condition
FrequencyStatic
MCTSSelection TIme (in ms)
200021002200230024002500
Static Frequency MCTS
Condition Item PositionSelection Time (in ms)
050010001500200025003000350040004500500055006000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15a b
Figure 9: (a) The MCTS condition was associated with signifcantly lower selection time as compared to the two baselines. Ver-
tical bars indicate 95% confdence intervals. (b) For items positioned lower in the menu, selection time in Freqency increased 
more drastically than other conditions. 
Target Item Position: Given the menu selection scenario, items 
near the top of the menu are typically faster to select than items 
that are near the bottom. However, this selection time depends not 
only on the cursor movement distance, but also the user’s ability 
to search for items in the menu. To get a better understanding of 
how the diferent conditions infuenced performance, we further 
looked at how target item positions in the menu infuence selection 
time. Figure 9b illustrates the linear increase in selection time with 
target position for the three conditions. It can be observed that 
while selection time for the top-most items (lower target positions) 
is quite similar for the three conditions, with MCTS being the 
fastest, it increases more drastically for the Freqency condition, 
as compared to Static and MCTS. When we exclude the top-three 
target items, the diference in selection time between MCTS (mean = 
2454 ms) and Freqency (mean = 2799 ms) is 344 ms (i.e. Freqency 
is about 15% slower). 
6.2.7 Qalitative Results. During the study, participants were not 
informed about adaptations (if any) in advance. After each block, 
we asked them whether they noticed changes to menus during use, 
and their opinions about these changes (if any). 15 participants 
commented that they noticed changes in the Freqency condition, 
but only 2 participants noticed how these changes were occurring. 
Participants commented that the reordering was confusing, and 
prevented them from remembering item locations: “I might skip 
down instead of checking the top, and then go back to the top. ” (P3). 
In the Static condition, participants could use their memory to 
directly access some items, but commented on the lack of proper 
grouping: “the items were not consistent in their grouping, and they 
were not intuitively grouped” (P11). In the MCTS condition, partici-
pants noticed that the categorisation of items into groups improved 
upon adaptation, and helped them in searching for related items: 
“the items were organised under categories often – that helped select 
items” (P18). 6.3 Summary 
Results from our simulation-based evaluation ofer evidence for 
our approach and technical solutions. First, MCTS-based planning 
consistently proposes adaptations that could improve predicted per-
formance (Figure 9a). Second, as search depth increases, our results 
indicate that value network is more efcient for estimating reward 
predictions. Further, results from our user study highlight benefts 
over a static and an adaptive baseline. Through model-based plan-
ning, we can adapt menus that improve overall performance, as 
given by reduced selection time. A common pitfall of the frequency-
based approach is that, although it can improve performance for 
commonly-used items or commands, it prevents recall and makes 
selection of other items increasingly difcult. In contrast, we ob-
served (Figure 9b) that adaptations made through our approach 
could provide these benefts while avoiding costly changes that 
require relearning and cause annoyance. 
7 CONCLUSION 
We have presented a model-based reinforcement learning method 
suitable for adaptive interactions. While recent successes of rein-
forcement learning have created renewed enthusiasm toward this 
Adapt x 1 Adapt x 1
4.41s 2.97s 2.46s 2.02sUIST: 0.275
Coffee: 0.125
Japan: 0.175
Italy: 0.150
CHI: 0.275CHI: 0.368
UIST: 0.211
Coffee: 0.053
Japan: 0.211Italy: 0.158
t0t1t2
Average Predicted
Selection TimeAverage Predicted
Selection Time
Figure 10: Sequential adaptation of a 5-item menu. The sys-
tem avoids greedily moving ‘Cofee’ (lowest frequency) at 
the frst step. In light of new observations, this change is jus-
tifed by the reduced user interest. 

==== Page 12 ====
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
approach in HCI, applications to adaptive user interfaces have re-
mained scarce. To apply this class of machine learning methods for 
selecting adaptations, we have proposed the use of predictive mod-
els in HCI for value estimation during planning. We have presented 
solutions to several consequent technical challenges, most notably: 
• How to model the decision problem in adaptive interfaces 
for model-based RL; 
• How to estimate MCTS roll-outs using HCI models; 
• How to design deep neural networks to boost planning. 
To study and demonstrate the viability of the approach, we have 
applied it to the challenging case of adaptive menus by extending 
predictive models. Our simulated and empirical evaluations suggest 
signifcant and practically valuable improvements to usability. Im-
portantly, the adaptive system does not require explicit user input, 
but is still able to perform conservatively without disadvantageous 
or annoying changes (Figure 10). Our empirical evaluation reveals 
that this approach can work even when starting from poor designs 
that would be hard to recover with approaches that do not con-
sider planning. Future adaptive applications can beneft from our 
general approach by exploiting and extending predictive models of 
interaction. 
Limitations and Future Work 
We see several exciting topics for future research on model-based RL 
and its applications in HCI. First, one limitation to the applicability 
of the approach is the requirement for accurate models of short- and 
long-term consequences of adaptations. So far we have assumed 
that such models are expressed as step-by-step computer simula-
tions or mathematical models. However, there is no reason why 
data-driven models (e.g. [59]) – trained on larger datasets of user 
data – could not be used for this purpose, signifcantly expanding 
the scope of possible applications. Second, algorithm engineering is 
needed to deploy this approach to larger applications. In particular, 
presently, with our computing resources, problem sizes of up to 20 
items are still within reach in the case of menu systems. To improve 
performance beyond that, techniques for GPU computation and 
more efcient training will need attention. Finally, while our work 
successfully used a value network, further improvements can be 
expected by implementing a policy network [48]. 
To conclude, we hope our work can be broadly appealing, and 
invite contributions from both the HCI and the machine learning 
community. At the core of model-based RL is an understanding 
of how users behave and what makes a good design in given con-
ditions. We believe that future applications can beneft from this 
approach to improve interactions. 
8 OPEN SCIENCE 
We support adoption and further research eforts by providing 
an open code repository, with examples and instructions, on our 
project page: https://userinterfaces.aalto.fi/adaptive. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank all study participants for their time, and colleagues and 
reviewers for their helpful comments. This work was funded by 
the Department of Communications and Networking (Comnet), 
the Finnish Center for Artifcial Intelligence (FCAI), Academy of Finland projects ‘Human Automata’ and ‘BAD’, Agence Nationale 
de la Recherche (grant number ANR-16-CE33-0023), and HumaneAI 
Net (H2020 ICT 48 Network of Centers of Excellence). 
REFERENCES 
[1] John R Anderson and Christian J Lebiere. 2014. The atomic components of thought. 
Psychology Press. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315805696 
[2] Mauricio Araya, Olivier Bufet, Vincent Thomas, and Françcois Charpillet. 2010. 
A POMDP Extension with Belief-dependent Rewards. In Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems 23, J. D. Laferty, C. K. I. Williams, J. Shawe-
Taylor, R. S. Zemel, and A. Culotta (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 64–72. https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2186810 
[3] Gilles Bailly, Eric Lecolinet, and Laurence Nigay. 2008. Flower Menus: A New 
Type of Marking Menu with Large Menu Breadth, within Groups and Efcient 
Expert Mode Memorization. In Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced 
Visual Interfaces (AVI ’08). 15–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/1385569.1385575 
[4] Gilles Bailly, Eric Lecolinet, and Laurence Nigay. 2016. Visual Menu Techniques. 
ACM Comput. Surv. 49, 4, Article 60 (Dec. 2016), 41 pages. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3002171 
[5] Gilles Bailly, Antti Oulasvirta, Duncan P. Brumby, and Andrew Howes. 2014. 
Model of Visual Search and Selection Time in Linear Menus. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). 3865–3874. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557093 
[6] Gilles Bailly, Antti Oulasvirta, Timo Kötzing, and Sabrina Hoppe. 2013. Men-
uOptimizer: Interactive Optimization of Menu Systems. In Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’13). 
331–342. https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502024 
[7] Richard E Bellman and Lotf Asker Zadeh. 1970. Decision-making in a fuzzy 
environment. Management science 17, 4 (1970), B–141. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
mnsc.17.4.B141 
[8] Mark G Brockington. 1996. A taxonomy of parallel game-tree search algorithms. 
ICGA Journal 19, 3 (1996), 162–174. 
[9] Cameron B. Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M. Lucas, Pe-
ter I. Cowling, Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon 
Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. 2012. A Survey of Monte Carlo Tree Search 
Methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 4, 1 
(2012), 1–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCIAIG.2012.2186810 
[10] Michael D. Byrne. 2001. ACT-R/PM and menu selection: applying a cognitive 
architecture to HCI. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 55, 1 (2001), 
41 – 84. https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2001.0469 
[11] Yuan Cai and Xiang Ji. 2018. ASA-routing: A-Star Adaptive Routing Algorithm for 
Network-on-Chips. In Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel Processing, Jaideep 
Vaidya and Jin Li (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 187–198. 
[12] Andy Cockburn and Carl Gutwin. 2009. A Predictive Model of Human Perfor-
mance With Scrolling and Hierarchical Lists. Human–Computer Interaction 24, 3 
(2009), 273–314. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370020902990402 
[13] Andy Cockburn, Carl Gutwin, and Saul Greenberg. 2007. A Predictive Model of 
Menu Performance. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’07). 627–636. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240723 
[14] Peng Dai, Christopher H Lin, Daniel S Weld, et al . 2013. POMDP-based control 
of workfows for crowdsourcing. Artifcial Intelligence 202 (2013), 52–85. 
[15] John J. Dudley, Jason T. Jacques, and Per Ola Kristensson. 2019. Crowdsourcing 
Interface Feature Design with Bayesian Optimization. In Proceedings of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland 
Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300482 
[16] Leah Findlater and Joanna McGrenere. 2004. A Comparison of Static, Adaptive, 
and Adaptable Menus. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (Vienna, Austria) (CHI ’04). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 89–96. https://doi.org/10.1145/985692.985704 
[17] Leah Findlater, Karyn Mofatt, Joanna McGrenere, and Jessica Dawson. 2009. 
Ephemeral Adaptation: The Use of Gradual Onset to Improve Menu Selection Per-
formance. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Boston, MA, USA) (CHI ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1655–1664. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518956 
[18] Stephen Fitchett and Andy Cockburn. 2012. AccessRank: Predicting What Users 
Will Do Next. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2239–2242. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676. 
2208380 
[19] Peter A Frensch. 1994. Composition during serial learning: A serial position 
efect. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 20 (1994), 423–423. 
[20] Christoph Gebhardt, Brian Hecox, Bas van Opheusden, Daniel Wigdor, James 
Hillis, Otmar Hilliges, and Hrvoje Benko. 2019. Learning Cooperative Per-
sonalized Policies from Gaze Data. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (New Orleans, LA, USA) 

==== Page 13 ====
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
(UIST ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 197–208. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347933 
[21] Camille Gobert, Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2019. SAM: 
A Modular Framework for Self-Adapting Web Menus. In Proceedings of the 24th 
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Marina del Ray, California) 
(IUI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 481–484. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3301275.3302314 
[22] Saul Greenberg and Ian H. Witten. 1985. Adaptive personalized interfaces—A 
question of viability. Behaviour & Information Technology 4, 1 (1985), 31–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01449298508901785 
[23] Jesse Hoey, Axel Von Bertoldi, Pascal Poupart, and Alex Mihailidis. 2007. As-
sisting persons with dementia during handwashing using a partially observable 
Markov decision process.. In International Conference on Computer Vision Systems: 
Proceedings (2007). 
[24] Anthony J. Hornof and David E. Kieras. 1997. Cognitive Modeling Reveals 
Menu Search in Both Random and Systematic. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’97). 107–114. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/258549.258621 
[25] Bowen Hui, Grant Partridge, and Craig Boutilier. 2009. A Probabilistic Men-
tal Model for Estimating Disruption. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Sanibel Island, Florida, USA) (IUI ’09). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 287–296. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/1502650.1502691 
[26] Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. 2019. When to trust 
your model: Model-based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems. 12498–12509. 
[27] Jussi P. P. Jokinen, Sayan Sarcar, Antti Oulasvirta, Chaklam Silpasuwanchai, 
Zhenxin Wang, and Xiangshi Ren. 2017. Modelling Learning of New Keyboard 
Layouts. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 4203–4215. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025580 
[28] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. 1996. Rein-
forcement learning: A survey. Journal of artifcial intelligence research 4 (1996), 
237–285. 
[29] Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Blazej Osinski, Roy H Camp-
bell, Konrad Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey 
Levine, et al. 2019. Model-based reinforcement learning for atari. arXiv:1903.00374 
(2019). 
[30] Sunjun Kim, Byungjoo Lee, Thomas van Gemert, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2020. 
Optimal Sensor Position for a Computer Mouse. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI 
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376735 
[31] Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. 2006. Bandit Based Monte-Carlo Planning. 
In Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on Machine Learning (Berlin, 
Germany) (ECML’06). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 282–293. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/11871842_29 
[32] Pat Langley. 1997. Machine learning for adaptive user interfaces. In Annual 
Conference on Artifcial Intelligence (KI 1997). 53–62. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
3540634932_3 
[33] Talia Lavie and Joachim Meyer. 2010-08. Benefts and Costs of Adaptive User 
Interfaces. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 68, 8 (2010-08), 508–524. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhcs.2010.01.004 
[34] Dong-Seok Lee and Wan Chul Yoon. 2004. Quantitative results assessing de-
sign issues of selection-supportive menus. International Journal of Industrial 
Ergonomics 33, 1 (2004), 41–52. 
[35] Katri Leino, Kashyap Todi, Antti Oulasvirta, and Mikko Kurimo. 2019. Computer-
Supported Form Design Using Keystroke-Level Modeling with Reinforcement 
Learning. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces: Companion (IUI ’19). 85–86. https://doi.org/10.1145/3308557.3308704 
[36] Luis Leiva. 2012. Interaction-Based User Interface Redesign. In Proceedings of the 
2012 ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Lisbon, Portugal) 
(IUI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 311–312. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2166966.2167028 
[37] Wanyu Liu, Gilles Bailly, and Andrew Howes. 2017. Efects of Frequency Dis-
tribution on Linear Menu Performance. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI 
’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1307–1312. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025707 
[38] J. Derek Lomas, Jodi Forlizzi, Nikhil Poonwala, Nirmal Patel, Sharan Shodhan, 
Kishan Patel, Ken Koedinger, and Emma Brunskill. 2016. Interface Design Op-
timization as a Multi-Armed Bandit Problem. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, USA) 
(CHI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4142–4153. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858425 [39] I. Scott MacKenzie. 1992. Fitts’ Law as a Research and Design Tool in Human-
Computer Interaction. Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7, 1 (March 1992), 91–139. https: 
//doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci0701_3
[40] Kent L Norman. 1991. The psychology of menu selection: Designing cognitive 
control at the human/computer interface. Intellect Books. 
[41] Antti Oulasvirta. 2018. Computational interaction. Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198799603.001.0001 
[42] Antti Oulasvirta, Niraj Ramesh Dayama, Morteza Shiripour, Maximilian John, 
and Andreas Karrenbauer. 2020. Combinatorial Optimization of Graphical User 
Interface Designs. Proc. IEEE 108, 3 (2020), 434–464. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JPROC.2020.2969687 
[43] Jefrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014. Glove: 
Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on 
empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). 1532–1543. 
[44] Angel R. Puerta, Henrik Eriksson, John H. Gennari, and Mark A. Musen. 1994. 
Model-Based Automated Generation of User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 
Twelfth National Conference on Artifcial Intelligence (Vol. 1) (Seattle, Washington, 
USA) (AAAI ’94). American Association for Artifcial Intelligence, USA, 471–477. 
[45] Reyhaneh Raissi, Evanthia Dimara, Jacquelyn H. Berry, Wayne D. Gray, and Gilles 
Bailly. 2020. Retroactive Transfer Phenomena in Alternating User Interfaces. In 
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376538 
[46] Andrew Sears and Ben Shneiderman. 1994. Split Menus: Efectively Using Se-
lection Frequency to Organize Menus. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 1, 1 
(March 1994), 27–51. https://doi.org/10.1145/174630.174632 
[47] Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Fre-
itas. 2015. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of Bayesian optimization. 
Proc. IEEE 104, 1 (2015), 148–175. 
[48] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George 
Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershel-
vam, Marc Lanctot, et al. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural 
networks and tree search. Nature 529, 7587 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature16961 
[49] Harold Soh, Scott Sanner, Madeleine White, and Greg Jamieson. 2017. Deep Se-
quential Recommendation for Personalized Adaptive User Interfaces. In Proceed-
ings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Limassol, 
Cyprus) (IUI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
589–593. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025171.3025207 
[50] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 2018. Reinforcement learning: An intro-
duction. MIT press. 
[51] Kashyap Todi, Jussi Jokinen, Kris Luyten, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2018. Famil-
iarisation: Restructuring Layouts with Visual Learning Models. In 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’18). 547–558. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3172944.3172949 
[52] Kashyap Todi, Jussi Jokinen, Kris Luyten, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2019. Individualis-
ing Graphical Layouts with Predictive Visual Search Models. ACM Trans. Interact. 
Intell. Syst. 10, 1, Article 9 (Aug. 2019), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3241381 
[53] Kashyap Todi, Daryl Weir, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2016. Sketchplore: Sketch and 
Explore with a Layout Optimiser. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems (Brisbane, QLD, Australia) (DIS ’16). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 543–555. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2901790.2901817 
[54] Theophanis Tsandilas and m. c. schraefel. 2007. Bubbling Menus: A Selective 
Mechanism for Accessing Hierarchical Drop-down Menus. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose, California, 
USA) (CHI ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1195–1204. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240806 
[55] Jean Vanderdonckt, Sara Bouzit, Gaëlle Calvary, and Denis Chêne. 2019. Exploring 
a Design Space of Graphical Adaptive Menus: Normal vs. Small Screens. ACM 
Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 10, 1, Article 2 (July 2019), 40 pages. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3237190 
[56] Roel Vertegaal. 2003. Attentive User Interfaces. Commun. ACM 46, 3 (March 
2003), 30–33. https://doi.org/10.1145/636772.636794 
[57] Ying Wu and Thomas S. Huang. 1999. Vision-Based Gesture Recognition: A Re-
view. In Gesture-Based Communication in Human-Computer Interaction, Annelies 
Brafort, Rachid Gherbi, Sylvie Gibet, Daniel Teil, and James Richardson (Eds.). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 103–115. 
[58] Steve Young, Milica Gašić, Blaise Thomson, and Jason D Williams. 2013. POMDP-
based statistical spoken dialog systems: A review. Proc. IEEE 101, 5 (2013), 
1160–1179. 
[59] Arianna Yuan and Yang Li. 2020. Modeling Human Visual Search Performance on 
Realistic Webpages Using Analytical and Deep Learning Methods. In Proceedings 
of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, 
HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376870 

