==== Page 1 ====
AI and the Everything in the Whole Wide World
Benchmark
Inioluwa Deborah Raji
Mozilla Foundation, UC Berkeley
rajiinio@berkeley.eduEmily M. Bender
Department of Linguistics
University of WashingtonAmandalynne Paullada
Department of Linguistics
University of Washington
Emily Denton
Google ResearchAlex Hanna
Google Research
Abstract
There is a tendency across different subﬁelds in AI to valorize a small collection
of inﬂuential benchmarks. These benchmarks operate as stand-ins for a range
of anointed common problems that are frequently framed as foundational mile-
stones on the path towards ﬂexible and generalizable AI systems. State-of-the-art
performance on these benchmarks is widely understood as indicative of progress
towards these long-term goals. In this position paper, we explore the limits of such
benchmarks in order to reveal the construct validity issues in their framing as the
functionally “general” broad measures of progress they are set up to be.
1 Introduction
In the 1974 Sesame Street children’s storybook Grover and the Everything in the Whole Wide World
Museum [Stiles and Wilcox, 1974], the Muppet monster Grover visits a museum claiming to showcase
“everything in the whole wide world”. Example objects representing certain categories ﬁll each room.
Several categories are arbitrary and subjective, including showrooms for “Things You Find On a Wall”
and “The Things that Can Tickle You Room”. Some are oddly speciﬁc, such as “The Carrot Room”,
while others unhelpfully vague like “The Tall Hall”. When he thinks that he has seen all that is there,
Grover comes to a door that is labeled “Everything Else”. He opens the door, only to ﬁnd himself in
the outside world.
As a children’s story, Grover’s described situation is meant to be absurd. However, in this paper, we
discuss how a similar faulty logic is inherent to recent trends in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) — and
speciﬁcally machine learning (ML) — evaluation, where many popular benchmarks rely on the same
false assumptions inherent to the ridiculous “Everything in the Whole Wide World Museum” that
Grover visits. In particular, we argue that benchmarks presented as measurements of progress towards
general ability within vague tasks such as “visual understanding” or “language understanding” are
as ineffective as the ﬁnite museum is at representing “everything in the whole wide world,” and for
similar reasons — being inherently speciﬁc, ﬁnite and contextual.
Benchmarks like GLUE [Wang et al., 2019a] or ImageNet [Deng et al., 2009] are often elevated to
become deﬁnitions of the essential common tasks to validate the performance of any given model. As a
result, often the claims that are justiﬁed through these benchmark datasets extend far beyond the tasks
they are initially designed for, and reach beyond even the initial ambitions for development. Despite
a presentation and acceptance as markers of progress towards general-purpose capabilities, there are
clear limitations of these benchmarks. In fact, the reality of their development, use and adoption
indicates a construct validity issue, where the involved benchmarks — due to their instantiation in
particular data, metrics and practice — cannot possibly capture anything representative of the claims
to general applicability being made about them. In this paper, we illuminate the over-reliance on the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.arXiv:2111.15366v1  [cs.LG]  26 Nov 2021

==== Page 2 ====
historical Common Task Framework (CTF) for machine learning as it inappropriately evolved into
what we understand today to be these benchmarks claiming to assess general capabilities. We do not
deny the utility of such benchmarks, but rather hope to point to the risks inherent in their framing.
Our goal is to dig into the details of what it means for us as a community to continue propping up
certain benchmarks with the rhetoric of “general” performance.
2 Background
2.1 Striving for Generality
The notion of a “general-purpose” AI can be traced, in part, back to the early days of the ﬁeld. In
the late 1950s, Newell et al. [1959] proposed the “General Problem Solver” in an attempt to create a
system that could solve a range of problems, as well as develop a general theory of problem solving.
While this project ultimately failed, it helped establish general intelligence as a goal within the
ﬁeld of AI. As Adam [1998] notes, the failure of the project was at the time attributed primarily to
implementation issues, rather than the perception of any ﬂaw in the formulation of a disembodied
and general-purpose problem solver as a meaningful goal.
Researchers now often use the term “generality” to refer to the development of AI systems that are
ﬂexible in nature, demonstrating competence on a wide range of tasks and in a wide range of settings,
hoping to mirror the adaptive cognitive abilities humans are perceived to possess [Shevlin et al.,
2019]. While discussions of “generality” might evoke the goal of artiﬁcial general intelligence [V oss,
2007, Pennachin and Goertzel, 2007], we set that aside in this paper and focus instead on the more
immediate (and logically prior) issue of claims of generality for a speciﬁc type of cognitive skill or
capability (e.g., vision or language), supposedly independent of context or application domains.
Within speciﬁc sub-ﬁelds and more pragmatic settings, researchers will often strive for the de-
velopment of general-purpose systems that capture a breadth of functionality or knowledge. The
development of general-purpose feature embeddings has also become a central research focus within
machine learning communities. Here, the goal is the development of representations — through
either unsupervised or supervised means — that can generalize (with minimal ﬁne-tuning) to a wide
range of other tasks they were not speciﬁcally developed for [e.g. Huh et al., 2016, Du et al., 2020,
Bommasani et al., 2021].
2.2 A Brief History of Benchmarking Practice in AI
Some assess AI progress by asking scientiﬁc and philosophical questions on the notion of intelligence,
thinking of AI as a method for modeling some general cognitive function. Others, particularly those
in the machine learning ﬁeld, evaluate performance based on the success of a model’s utility within
some practical applications. Although the former goals sparked the aspiration to measure general
cognitive capabilities, the latter application-based objectives are what data benchmarking has been
historically designed to communicate.
In this paper we describe a benchmark as a particular combination of a dataset or sets of datasets (at
least test data, sometimes also training data), and a metric, conceptualized as representing one or more
speciﬁc tasks or sets of abilities, picked up by a community of researchers as a shared framework
for the comparison of methods. The task is a particular speciﬁcation of a problem, as represented in
the dataset.1Ametric is a way to summarize system performance over some set or sets of tasks as
a single number or score. The metric provides a means of counting success and failure at the level
of individual system outputs and summarizing those counts over the full dataset. Models obtaining
the most favourable scores on the metrics for a benchmark are considered to be “state-of-the-art”
(SOTA) in terms of performance on the speciﬁed task. Here, we present a stylized history that’s far
from comprehensive, but attempts to provide the shape of the development of predecessors of current
machine learning benchmarking practice.
Before benchmarks were employed for algorithm selection in machine learning, they were used
for “computer selection” — i.e. the task of running a benchmark program on multiple computers
to determine which machine was most suitable for purchase. In 1962, Auberbach Corporation’s
Standard EDP Reports were developed as a way to directly assess the performance of machines
1This corresponds to Schlangen’s [2021] notion of extensional deﬁnition of tasks; see §4.1.
2

==== Page 3 ====
on speciﬁc prototype tasks, to avoid the tedious process of individually weighing the quality of
the various features of computers offered by different vendors. By 1976, benchmarking was a
fairly common practice in computing, with standard libraries of mock software programs created
for the purpose of testing speciﬁc subroutines for core functional tasks (i.e. ﬁle management, word
processing, etc.) being developed and used by the U.S. government as part of the assessment involved
in their procurement process for computer systems [Lewis and Crews, 1985].
Several linguists [e.g. Liberman, 2010, Church, 2018] have traced the inﬂuence of Fred Jelinek
at IBM and Charles Wayne at DARPA as crucial protagonists in the development of a common
framework for the quantitative assessment of computational linguistic tasks, notably within speech
recognition and machine translation. Beginning in the mid-1980s, Jelinek had been a driver in
developing what he had called the Common Task Framework (CTF). The Common Task Framework,
the precursor to modern data benchmarking in AI, was initially introduced in the 1980s as a response
to Wendell Pierce’s inﬂuential assertion of a ﬁeld “being deceived by the glamour of (a would-be)
theory, rather than actual performance” [Donoho, 2017, p.17]. The primary elements of the CTF
include (a) A publicly available training dataset with a list of feature measurements and a class
label for that observation; (b) A set of enrolled competitors whose common task is to infer a class
prediction rule from the training data; and (c) A scoring referee, to which competitors can submit
their prediction rule [Donoho, 2017, p. 572]. With DARPA’s sponsorship and IBM’s data, the CTF
soon became widely adopted as a common mode of research in machine translation and speech
recognition. Rather than experimental results that were updated “twice a year”, researchers could
evaluate their experiments every hour [Church, 2018], and, although major breakthroughs were still
rare, claims to incremental improvement enabled by this “quantitative comparison of alternative
algorithms on a ﬁxed task”, ensured that researchers could track steady progress regardless [Liberman,
2010]. Soon, similar NLP-related initiatives followed — such as Shared Task Evaluation Campaigns
(STECs) [Belz and Kilgarriff, 2006], Message Understanding Conferences (MUCs) [Grishman and
Sundheim, 1996], and Text REtrieval Conferences (TRECs) for information retrieval.2Later, STECs
within NLP coalesced around machine translation (NIST-MT)[Przybocki et al., 2009] and word sense
disambiguation (SENSEV AL)[Kilgarri, 1998].
Parallel developments also occurred in other ﬁelds. The Facial Recognition Technology (FERET)
program for automated facial recognition, inaugurated in 1993 [Phillips et al., 2000], was one of
the ﬁrst to bring a CTF type evaluation approach to the computer vision. The National Institute of
Standards (NIST) reports that, prior to the publication of their FERET database, “[o]nly a few of
these algorithms reported results on images utilizing a common database let alone met the desirable
goal of being evaluated on a standard testing protocol that included separate training and testing sets.
As a consequence, there was no method to make informed comparisons among various algorithms”
[Phillips et al., 2000, p. 2]. Meanwhile, modern reinforcement learning algorithms have traditionally
anchored to a culture of benchmarking, often evaluated on gaming environments like Atari, Starcraft,
Dota2, and Go. One of the ﬁrst games to widely capture the imagination of AI researchers was chess
which became a ﬁxture of US-Soviet Cold War competition and a stand-in for national technological
achievement. [Ensmenger, 2012, p. 6]. More generally, the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository
(UCI) [Dua and Graff, 2017] was created in 1987 as a response to many calls for machine learning
to have a centralized location for data in machine learning [Radin, 2017] and has morphed into a
repository for a wide array of tasks and data.
2.3 Construct Validity
If reproducibility and reliability are about the precision and thus the reliable repeatability of a ﬁnding,
then challenges with validity for machine learning would be focused on how the ﬁeld approaches
the question of accuracy — namely, how closely our evaluations hit the mark in appropriately char-
acterizing the actual anticipated behaviour of the system in the real world or progress on stated
motivations and goals for the ﬁeld. The accuracy of these evaluations is thus not just a question
of reporting consistency but an actual design task involving reﬂection on what the objectives of an
effective model involve, in addition to conscious decision making on how to best represent these
desired outcomes in evaluation metrics, data and methodology. In particular, construct validity is
an external validity issue related to how well an experimental setting relates to a research claim,
or, in the context of machine learning, how well the benchmark dataset, and associated metrics of
2https://trec.nist.gov
3

==== Page 4 ====
evaluation, represents a task [O’Leary-Kelly and V okurka, 1998]. It concerns how well designed — or
rather, how well constructed — the experimental setting is in relation to the research claim. Validity
issues have long been acknowledged broadly by the machine learning community as a particularly
difﬁcult task in benchmark design and development [Mitchell, 2021, Jacobs and Wallach, 2021, Malik,
2020] — however as Bowman and Dahl note, it remains a generally neglected issue as “[t]his criterion
is difﬁcult to fully formalize, and we know of no simple test that would allow one to determine if a
benchmark presents a valid measure of model ability” [Bowman and Dahl, 2021, p. 3].
3 Attempting to Benchmark General Capabilities
We now examine a particular style of benchmark dataset — and the accompanying practices of use —
that has gained in popularity in recent years. These benchmarks have been claimed to embed notions
of generality, both in their presentation by the creators and the manner in which they are adopted
and used by the machine learning community. Even when the creators of such benchmarks do not
explicitly purport to be establishing benchmarks for “general intelligence”, community practices
and overall hype have dramatized what it means for a model to perform well on these benchmarks.
The inspiration for the setup of these benchmarks is often explicitly linked to the general-purpose
capabilities and breadth of knowledge humans possess. In doing so, the ethos that surrounds these
datasets often extends beyond a reasonable scope of interpretation and inﬂuence, especially given the
limitations inherent in their construction.
In this paper, we argue that the aim of measuring general-purpose capabilities (i.e. goals such
as general-purpose object recognition, general language understanding or domain-independent
reasoning) cannot be adequately embodied in data-deﬁned benchmarks. We observe that current
trends inappropriately extend the Common Task Framework (CTF) paradigm to apply to the “task” of
performance in the abstract, distinct from real world objectives or context. Historically, the CTF was
developed precisely to introduce practically-oriented and tightly-scoped AI tasks — namely, automatic
speech recognition (ASR) or machine translation (MT) — where the required validation is whether the
benchmark accurately reﬂects the practical task being asked of the computer in its real-world context
[Donoho, 2017]. This new wave of poorly deﬁned “general” objectives completely subverts the
intention of its introduction and actually enables its use to promote — rather than counteract — claims
to “glamour and deceit” over substantial, meaningful progress.
3.1 Case Studies
We focus our analysis on two common benchmarks geared towards the assessment of general
capabilities — ImageNet and GLUE, described below. The discussion is scoped to dataset -based
benchmarks, and will not include much discussion of the role of gameplay demos in AI development.
3.1.1 ImageNet
We characterize ImageNet as a “general” benchmark due to several related observations. First, at
the time of development, the creators described ImageNet as representing “the most comprehensive
and diverse coverage of the image world” [Deng et al., 2009, p.1] and, retrospectively, Li described
the project as an “attempt to map the entire world of objects” [Gershgorn, 2017]. With general-
purpose visual object recognition framed as the ability to recognize a sizable breadth of objects in a
manner that rivals human capabilities [Liu et al., 2020], we observe ImageNet’s sheer size — both in
terms of number of categories and number of images per category — further informs its perception
as representing a general formulation of visual object recognition. At the time of its creation, it
offered 20 times the number of categories, and 100 times the number of total images as the most
popular training and evaluation benchmarks at the time, such as Caltech 101/256 [Kamarudin et al.,
2015, Grifﬁn et al., 2007], MSRC [Shotton et al., 2006] and PASCAL VOC [Everingham et al.,
2010]. Second, we observe community consensus that the task formalized in the ImageNet dataset
represents a meaningful milestone towards longer-term goals of artiﬁcial visual intelligence. Indeed,
Li has explicitly characterized large scale visual object recognition as the “north star” of computer
vision — a scientiﬁc quest that would deﬁne and guide the ﬁeld towards the ultimate goal of artiﬁcial
visual intelligence [Li, 2019], with ImageNet operating as the canonical instantiation. In their papers,
ImageNet authors are clear about the desire to situate the dataset as the deﬁnitive benchmark of
the ﬁeld. However, the hype surrounding ImageNet and the scope of the claims derived from it are
4

==== Page 5 ====
not localized the the ﬁeld of computer vision. For example, increased performance on ImageNet is
often explicitly referenced as an indication that the ﬁeld is progressing towards general-purpose AI
[Sutskever, 2018].
3.2 GLUE and SuperGLUE
The creators of GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation) [Wang et al., 2019a] and
SuperGLUE [Wang et al., 2019b] present these resources as “evaluation framework[s] for research
towards general-purpose language understanding technologies” [Wang et al., 2019b, p.1], noting
that, unlike human language understanding, most computer natural language understanding (NLU)
systems are task or domain-speciﬁc [Wang et al., 2019a]. When a human knows a language, they can
use that knowledge across any task that involves that language. Thus, a benchmark that tests whether
linguistic knowledge acquired through training on one task can be applied to other tasks, in principle,
tests for a speciﬁc and potentially well-deﬁned kind of generalizability.
Authors for GLUE and SuperGLUE describe both datasets as being “designed to provide a general-
purpose evaluation of language understanding that covers a range of training data volumes, task
genres, and task formulations” [Wang et al., 2019b, p.2]. In framing these benchmarks as general
language understanding evaluation benchmarks made up of a diverse set of language understanding
tasks, the authors suggest the notion that success on the particular tasks included demonstrates at least
progress towards a full-scale solution to language understanding, and explicitly describe such a set up
as being well positioned for “exhibiting the transfer-learning potential of approaches” [Wang et al.,
2019b, p.2]. As a comprehensive setup for a wide range of tests in a popular language (English),
this benchmark has been elevated to its current status as a general marker of progress for the NLP
community, and speciﬁcally the accepted evaluation platform for “general-purpose sentence encoders”
[Wang et al., 2019a].
4 Limits of Benchmarking General Capabilities
The imagined artifact of the “general” benchmark does not actually exist. Real data is designed,
subjective and limited in ways that necessitate a different framing from that of any claim to general
knowledge or general-purpose capabilities. In fact, presenting any single dataset in this way is
ultimately dangerous and deceptive, resulting in misguidance on task design and focus, under-
reporting of the many biases and subjective interpretations inherent in the data as well as enabling,
through false presentations of performance, potential model misuse. In this section, we walk through
the key arguments for how benchmarking is a limited approach to assess general model capabilities
and, in particular, discuss the risk of making this claim to generality in the context of the limited task
design ,de-contextualized data and performance reporting as well as inappropriate community use
common to such benchmarks in the ML context. For each of these limitations, we break down the
shortcoming and discuss the cited evidence and reasoning for our observations.
4.1 Limited Task Design
There is nothing systematic or organized about the deﬁnition and arrangement of the rooms in the
museum that Grover visits. He walks through arbitrary rooms of “Things That Make So Much Noise
You Can’t Hear Yourself Think”, “The Small Hall”, “The Carrot Room” and the like.
Similarly, the task formation for these benchmarks seems to happen independently of the intended
and declared problem space. Schlangen [2021] deﬁnes a task as a mapping from an input space to
an output space, deﬁned both intensionally (via a description of the task) and extensionally (via a
particular dataset, i.e. pairs of inputs and outputs matching the description). In machine learning,
the tendency is towards the latter scenario, where the benchmark task is deﬁned by a dataset, often
collected with such a task in mind [Scheuerman et al., 2021]. If the so-called “general” benchmarks
were legitimate tests of progress towards general artiﬁcial cognitive abilities, we would expect the
tasks they embody to be chosen systematically, or with reference to speciﬁc theories of the cognitive
abilities they model. Instead, what we observe looks more like samples of convenience: tasks
and collections of tasks arbitrarily built out of what is easily available to the team developing these
benchmarks, even if such constructions are theoretically unsound. Unlike with software benchmarking
[Lewis and Crews, 1985], the subtasks we see in machine learning “general” benchmarks are not
5

==== Page 6 ====
axiomatic — they were not actively designed as abstractions of any meaningful general function or
sub-function, and are often not systematically curated in nature. Instead, what we ﬁnd in the “general”
benchmarks are sets of categories reminiscent of the inconsistent hodgepodge of rooms that Grover
visits in the “Everything in the Whole Wide World Museum”.
4.1.1 Arbitrarily Selected Tasks and Collections
Concerns of this sort were raised during early benchmark development in the ﬁeld. UCI [Dua and
Graff, 2017] was one of the ﬁrst foci of shared tasks in machine learning development and contains
datasets which pertain to a collection of individual subtasks, with community benchmarking practice
coming to focus over time on the Iris, Adult, Wine, and Breast Cancer classiﬁcation datasets. Kiri
Wagstaff voiced concern for a poor logic in the selection of this combination of subtasks. She
noted that none of tasks included in this collection represent any reasonable proxy or abstraction of
real-world problems even scientists in the respective ﬁelds that produced each dataset would care
about. She notes, “Legions of (ML) researchers have chased after the best iris or mushroom classiﬁer.
Yet this ﬂurry of effort does not seem to have had any impact on the ﬁelds of botany or mycology. Do
scientists in these disciplines even need such a classiﬁer? Do they publish about this subject in their
journals?” [Wagstaff, 2012, p.2].
The classes in ImageNet are also seemingly arbitrary, ranging from speciﬁc dog breeds to high-level
notions like “New Zealand beach” [Russakovsky et al., 2015]. ImageNet labels are derived from
the 12 “subtrees” of the WordNet ontology [Miller, 1995]: mammal, bird, ﬁsh, reptile, amphibian,
vehicle, furniture, musical instrument, geological formation, tool, ﬂower, and fruit [Deng et al., 2009].
Despite being developed in another ﬁeld, with another purpose entirely, the English-language WordNet
hierarchy was adopted, nearly whole cloth, for use in structuring ImageNet. Little consideration
was given to the impact of the inclusion of certain words in the task of image classiﬁcation. The
consequences of this oversight were made tangible by the work of Birhane and Prabhu [2021] and
Crawford and Paglen [2019] which revealed the existence of a range of derogatory and offensive
categories in the “person” subtree. The primary categorical consideration the ImageNet creators did
discuss center around the inclusion of certain categories to ensure consistency with the categories in a
previously established PASCAL benchmark [Russakovsky et al., 2015].
Similarily, the subtasks of the GLUE benchmark are not much more carefully selected. The bench-
mark was initially designed as a suite with a stated goal to “spur development of generalizable NLU
systems” [Wang et al., 2019a, p.1], embodying the idea that a system capable of using linguistic
knowledge to understand language input would be able to do so across a variety of tasks. The included
tasks were curated following a set of 30 proposals sourced from with an informal survey of colleagues
in the NLP community [Wang et al., 2019a], and thus only really represent a collection of tasks
authors from the NLP community perceived as interesting problems at the time. To ﬁlter through
proposals, authors mainly rely on practical heuristics like “licensing issues, complex formats, and
insufﬁcient headroom” [ Ibid. p. 5] before referring to high level criteria to ﬁlter down to the ﬁnal eight
or nine included tasks. As a result, the collection of tasks included in the ﬁnal benchmark neither
systematically map out a range of speciﬁc linguistic skills required for understanding (lacking in par-
ticular any exploration of pragmatics [Qiu et al., 2020], or the proper handling of negation [Ettinger,
2020]) nor present a truly varied range of ways to deploy linguistic knowledge in comprehension.
While such a collection can effectively demonstrate a model’s ability to generalize performance
across the included tasks, this ability is not equivalent to general language understanding, nor is it
evidence that the solution to any task actually involves understanding the language in a sense that
linguists might recognize.
4.1.2 Critical Misunderstandings of Domain Knowledge and Application Problem Space
GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks combine linguistic competence (the ability to model a linguistic
system) with general commonsense and world reasoning as if they were equivalently scoped problems.
In reference to a diagnostic component of the benchmark, authors state that “this dataset is designed
to highlight common challenges, such as the use of world knowledge and logical operators, that we
expect models must handle to robustly solve the tasks” [Wang et al., 2019a, p.1]. Thus a benchmark
designed to test for generalizability across different language understanding tasks comes to subsume
not only the task of building up linguistic competence (e.g. logical operators) in the language in
question (English) but also the ability to acquire and deploy world knowledge. It is well established
6

==== Page 7 ====
that natural language understanding requires both linguistic processing and reasoning over the
combination of the linguistic signal, communicative common ground, and world knowledge [Hunter
et al., 2018], but while linguistic knowledge is relatively self-contained and reusable across different
textual domains, world knowledge is open-ended. Conﬂating these two abilities in a benchmark
that is easily (mis)interpreted as representing a much more general, ﬂexible, and robust set of
capabilities than it possesses, and thus inappropriately presented as comparable to the “human ability
to understand language” [Wang et al., 2019a].
Furthermore, language understanding relies not only on linguistic competence but also world knowl-
edge, commonsense reasoning, and the ability to model the interlocutor’s state of mind [Reddy, 1979,
Clark, 1996], none of which can be thoroughly tested through text-only tasks, such as GLUE.Several
researchers have raised the need to establish effective physical and social grounding as part of the
process of moving towards robust and effective natural language understanding, warning against
text-only learning as a limited approach [Bisk et al., 2020, Zellers et al., 2021]. Bender and Koller
[2020] additionally mention the tendency of machine learning researchers to misinterpret certain
benchmarks as capturing the model’s ability to decipher meaning in language, arguing that bench-
marks need to be constructed with care if they are to show evidence of “understanding” as opposed to
merely the ability to manipulate linguistic form sufﬁciently to pass the test.
4.2 De-contextualized Data and Performance Reporting
In “The Hall of Very, Very Light Things”, Grover ﬁnds a big rock and declares, “There has been
some mistake! This big rock is not light,” before deciding to move it to the “The Hall of Very, Very
Heavy Things”. However, such judgements are ultimately relative — that rock is certainly much less
heavy than the trailer truck in the latter room, and could be considered light in comparison. Nothing
about the museum is neutrally determined.
In this section, we explore one of the features that can lead researchers to mistakenly construe
a benchmark as “general”, namely the de-contextualization of its component tasks and datasets.
No dataset is neutral and there are inherent limits to what a benchmark can tell us — in fact, data
benchmarks are closed and inherently subjective, localized constructions. If anything, the claim
to generality will often act as cover, allowing those developing the benchmarks to escape the
responsibility of reporting details of these limitations. Part of the challenge of addressing this lack of
context is proper documentation for these datasets, which is often underdeveloped [Gebru et al., 2020,
Bender and Friedman, 2018] and the devaluation of the data work [Paullada et al., 2020, Sambasivan
et al., 2021, Hutchinson et al., 2020, Jo and Gebru, 2020].
4.2.1 Limited Scope
Even large datasets like ImageNet are ultimately closed systems, limited in their coverage of non-
Western contexts and temporally bounded. Torralba and Efros [2011] demonstrate how images from
the same class but different datasets are often distinguishable and embody a very speciﬁc style of
capturing some segment of the real world. Speciﬁcally, a well-critiqued limitation of ImageNet is
that the objects tend to be centered within the images, which does not reﬂect how “natural” images
actually appear [Barbu et al., 2019]. Additionally, it’s not clear that increasing the size of these
benchmarks to capture omitted content is even practically feasible in many cases — ImageNet authors
note the trade-off between annotation quality and size, remarking that “the scale [is] already imposing
limits on the manual annotations that are feasible to obtain” [Russakovsky et al., 2015, p.34]. There
are thus likely serious practical limits to making such benchmarks larger.
The notion of task diversity, not size, is repeated quite frequently by GLUE authors [Wang et al.,
2019a, p. 1,2,3,5] as a main differentiator from predecessors’ benchmarks, SentEval [Conneau and
Kiela, 2018] and decaNLP [McCann et al., 2018]. However, despite the expressed desire for the
benchmark to include a diverse range of tasks that “cover a diverse range of text genres, dataset
sizes, and degrees of difﬁculty” [Wang et al., 2019a, p. 1], compared to human linguistic activity,
the GLUE tasks are hardly diverse: two single-sentence tasks, two similarity and paraphrase tasks,
and four inference tasks. As noted in the development of a subsequent iteration of the benchmark,
SuperGLUE, “task formats in GLUE are limited to sentence- and sentence-pair classiﬁcation”[Wang
et al., 2019b, p. 1], requiring a subsequent expansion to include coreference resolution and question
answering (QA) task formats in SuperGLUE. SuperGLUE includes four question answering tasks,
two inference tasks, one word sense disambiguation task and one coreference task.
7

==== Page 8 ====
4.2.2 Benchmark Subjectivity
All datasets come with an embedded perspective — there is no neutral or universal dataset [Haraway,
1988, Stitzlein, 2004, Gebru, 2020, Denton et al., 2021, Scheuerman et al., 2021]. To present a dataset,
inherently both political and value-laden, as a completely neutral scientiﬁc artifact is irresponsible.
In benchmarks promoted to assess general capabilities, such as ImageNet and GLUE, such politics
remain unacknowledged — undiscussed and hidden for the sake of maintaining the claim to broad
relevance. However, denying DRdeletethe existence of unacknowledged context does not make it
disappear. In fact, this distorted data lens is often not limited in an arbitrary way, but limited in a
way that hurts certain groups of people — those without the power to deﬁne the data themselves. For
example, people who hold transgender and gender-nonconforming gender identities and non-white,
non-Western racial identities are underrepresented in mainstream face datasets [Merler et al., 2019],
and images of members of these communities are often tagged with racial or ethnic slurs, even on
large general use datasets such as MIT Tiny Images or ImageNet [Crawford and Paglen, 2019, Gehl
et al., 2017, Birhane and Prabhu, 2021].
GLUE and SuperGLUE target one speciﬁc language (i.e. English), not “language” in the abstract.
This very speciﬁc subset of American English text in the presence of annotation artifacts [Gururangan
et al., 2018] results in inherently subjective outcomes [Waseem et al., 2020].3
The ImageNet creators did attempt to diversify their dataset by translating image queries into other
languages, including Chinese, Spanish, Dutch and Italian to source representations for the ﬁnal
English-labeled categories [Deng et al., 2009]. However, when analyzing country level geo-location
data for the 2011 version of the dataset, 45% of the images were found to be sourced from the US, and
over 60% from a small selection of Western countries in North America and Europe [Shankar et al.,
2017]. In fact, only 1% and 1.2% of images are from China and India respectively, despite the fact
that those countries are the most populous countries on the planet [Shankar et al., 2017]. This lack
of geo-diversity of sources manifests in poor dataset representation, as the dataset becomes visually
anchored to a speciﬁc dominant cultural context. de Vries et al. [2019] found that if ImageNet was
developed using the results of Hindi online image queries, rather than English ones, the result would
be a dataset that looks drastically different, embodying completely new visual representations of not
only socially deﬁned concepts, such as “wedding”, but also everyday objects, such as “spice”.
4.3 Inappropriate Community Use
When Grover arrived at the museum, he was excited and inspired by its claim to contain every object
in the “Whole Wide World” — however, once he enters, his focus is only redirected to whatever is
selected to be highlighted in the museum. Despite his initial interest being motivated by the pursuit
of generality, it is only really the subset of consciously-included objects that actually captures his
attention.
When individual dataset creators and communities overstate the generality of these benchmark
datasets, they elevate them to the status of a target the entire ﬁeld should be aiming for. This
benchmark focus can escalate to the point of researchers falling into the trap of uncritically chasing
algorithmic improvement as measured by these datasets, losing sight of the potential for performance
mismatch with the real world or more relevant problem formulations.
4.3.1 Limits of Competitive Testing
Chasing “state of the art” (SOTA) performance is a very peculiar way of doing science — one that
focuses on empirical and incremental work rather than hypothesis-based scientiﬁc inquiry [Hooker,
1995]. In 1995, Lorenza Saitta criticized benchmark chasing as “allow[ing] researchers to publish
dull papers that proposed small variations of existing supervised learning algorithms and reported
their small-but-signiﬁcant incremental performance improvements in comparison studies” [Radin,
2017, p. 61]. Thomas and Uminsky go so far as to present metric chasing as an ethical issue, stating
that “overemphasizing metrics leads to manipulation, gaming, a myopic focus on short-term goals,
and other unexpected negative consequences” [Thomas and Uminsky, 2020, p. 1].
3Waseem et al. [2020] are discussing NLP datasets and modeling in general, not GLUE, SuperGLUE or
other similar benchmarks speciﬁcally. However, their general points apply: any given dataset represents the
embodied viewpoint of its authors and annotators, and furthermore, datasets constructed without attention to
whose viewpoints are being represented will likely over-represent hegemonic ones. See also Bender et al. [2021].
8

==== Page 9 ====
Furthermore, Kiri Wagstaff points out some inherent ﬂaws of the aggregate performance evaluation
format for many “general” benchmarks and leader boards. She notes that “80% accuracy on Iris
classiﬁcation might be sufﬁcient for the botany world, but to classify as poisonous or edible a
mushroom you intend to ingest, perhaps 99% (or higher) accuracy is required. The assumption of
cross-domain comparability is a mirage created by the application of metrics that have the same range,
but not the same meaning. Suites of experiments are often summarized by the average accuracy across
all datasets. This tells us nothing at all useful about generalization or impact, since the meaning of an
x% improvement may be very different for different data sets (or classes).” [Wagstaff, 2012, p.3]
Wagstaff here calls out the fact that the task is not just poorly formulated but also likely measured
inappropriately, in a way that makes the results difﬁcult to interpret meaningfully.
Despite these issues, both GLUE and ImageNet authors situate the benchmark datasets within
designed competitive environments. GLUE authors cite “the leaderboard and error analysis toolkit”
as a differentiating factor [Wang et al., 2019a, p.3], while ImageNet authors detail the format of “an
annual competition and corresponding workshop” [Russakovsky et al., 2015, p.1,49].
4.3.2 Redirection of Focus for the Field
Benchmarks have always been historically inﬂuential, and are often created intentionally to incentivize
interest in certain research topics. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) invested
in excess of $6.5 million for the FERET facial recognition challenge from 1993 to 1998, in order
to encourage research participation on a technology of interest to the sponsoring agency — the
Department of Defense [Phillips et al., 2000]. The Netﬂix Prize, which ran from 2006 to 2009, was
launched by Netﬂix, an online DVD-rental and video streaming service, in order to drive innovation
for the development of collaborative ﬁltering algorithms that improved the quality of automated
movie recommendations [Bennett et al., 2007]. However, there is a notable difference between
such competitions and those involving what are presented as “general” benchmarks — namely, the
PASCAL VOC challenge running from 2005 to 2012, the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (ILSVRC) running annually from 2010 to 2017, and the GLUE/SuperGLUE leaderboard,
which has been running since 2018. The focus of competitions involving “general” benchmarks are
much further detached from grounded applications, with tasks more vaguely deﬁned. As a result,
these competitions become interpreted as signiﬁcant markers of success across a variety of relevant
sub-domains, and their popularity grows accordingly as that competition is elevated to represent the
ultimate showcase of algorithmic performance.
Benchmarks also inﬂuence the nature of the dominant algorithmic approaches attempted. In the
1960s, chess caused the AI community to hyper-focus on deep-tree searching and the minimax
algorithms, which were most effective on improving game performance. Both of these methods
came to dominate the algorithmic development of this time, resulting in the neglect of alternate
problems and approaches [Ensmenger, 2012]. Dotan and Milli [2020] note how trends for algorithmic
development in ML are driven by performance on particular benchmarks, and how these trends result
in shifts to the entire research program of the ﬁeld. “General” benchmarks in particular often inspire
resource-intensive models: both through presenting very large training sets for models to consume
and by conﬂating size (of both training set and thus model) with generality. The current deep learning
movement would not have been possible without ImageNet [Alom et al., 2018]. In a similar way,
the success of BERT models, a breakthrough of language model development, was ﬁrst effectively
demonstrated using GLUE [Devlin et al., 2019].
4.3.3 Justiﬁcation for Practical out of Context or Unsafe Applications
General benchmarks also get mentioned in marketing copy for commercial machine learning products,
with performance on the benchmark presented as evidence of real-world technical achievement. This
context is when the signiﬁcance of benchmarks is most severely distorted, when performance on
benchmarks is not just the tool for algorithmic selection, but actually presented as some reliable
marker of expected model achievement in deployment. For instance, in January 2021, Microsoft
claimed “DeBERTa surpassing human performance on SuperGLUE marks an important milestone
toward general AI.” [He et al., 2021].ImageNet is equally elevated as an indicator of commercial
model success — so much so that Baidu cheated on the benchmark in order to inﬂate product
performance claims in marketing [Simonite, 2015].
9

==== Page 10 ====
Poor performance on minority subgroups could possibly be disguised in aggregate and de-
contextualized “general” benchmarks to justify deployment. We already know from examples
of deployed, commercial products in facial recognition [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018] that unbal-
anced representation impacts performance on certain groups over others, though this disproportionate
performance is often hidden in aggregate performance measures on what turn out to be biased
benchmarks [Merler et al., 2019, Raji and Buolamwini, 2019].
5 Alternative Roles for Benchmarking and Alternative Evaluation Methods
In preceding sections, we have explored the ways in which “general” benchmarks fail to serve as
effective measures of progress in machine learning. Now we ask: What can be done instead? This is
not a question of “ﬁxing”, “improving” or “expanding” the current “general” benchmarks — after all,
the solution to addressing the issues inherent to the “Everything in the Whole Wide World” museum
is not to add more rooms. The presentation of a data benchmark as being able to exist independent of
context, scope and speciﬁcity is itself a false premise for machine learning evaluation.
Instead, we note two paths forward. First, we argue that benchmarks should be developed, presented
and understood as intended — to evaluate concrete, well-scoped and contextualized tasks. Second,
when probing for more broad model objectives, behaviors and capabilities, we propose that the
ﬁeld explore alternative evaluation methods. The following are some starting points on evaluation
techniques to explore further in machine learning as an alternative to benchmarking (further details in
Appendix A):
•The systematic development of test items (see Appendix A.1), in the form of testsuites [e.g.
Lehmann et al., 1996, Ribeiro et al., 2020], audits [e.g. Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018], and
adversarial testing [e.g. Ettinger et al., 2017, Niven and Kao, 2019]. These techniques can
help map out which aspects of the problem space remain challenging and/or check for the
potential for harms coming from system biases.
•System output analysis / behavioural testing (see Appendix A.2), including error analysis
[e.g. van Miltenburg et al., 2021], disaggregated analysis [e.g. Raji and Buolamwini, 2019],
and counterfactual analysis [e.g. Garg et al., 2019, Hutchinson et al., 2020]. These techniques
can reveal the kinds of failure modes a system might produce, and potentially their causes.
•Ablation testing (see Appendix A.3) [e.g. Newell, 1975] allows researchers insight into the
speciﬁc contributions of different system components.
•Techniques for analyzing model properties (see Appendix A.4) that are orthogonal to system
outputs such as proﬁling energy consumption [e.g. Henderson et al., 2020, Schwartz et al.,
2020], memory requirements [e.g. Ethayarajh and Jurafsky, 2020], and stability in the face
of perturbations to training data [e.g. Sculley et al., 2018].
6 Conclusion
The situation with Grover and the museum’s claims are clearly ridiculous — yet in machine learning,
we follow the exact same logical fallacies to justify the elevation of a select number of benchmarks
operating as general benchmarks for the ﬁeld. However, there is no dataset that will be able to capture
the full complexity of the details of existence, in the same way that there can be no museum to
contain the full catalog of everything in the whole wide world. Open-world, universal and neutral
datasets don’t exist, and current methods of benchmarking do not offer meaningful measures of
general capabilities.
The effective development of benchmarks is critical to progress in machine learning, but what makes
a benchmark effective is not the strength of its arbitrary and false claim to “generality” but its
effectiveness in how it helps us understand as researchers how certain systems work — and how
they don’t. Benchmarking, appropriately deployed, is not about winning a contest but more about
surveying a landscape — the more we can re-frame, contextualize and appropriately scope these
datasets, the more useful they will become as an informative dimension to more impactful algorithmic
development and alternative evaluation methods (see Appendix A). Given the alternative roles and
interpretations for evaluation we could explore, it is essential that we move quickly beyond the
narrow-yet-totalizing lens of the “Everything in the Whole Wide World” benchmarks.
10

==== Page 11 ====
7 Acknowledgments
The authors thank Sam Bowman, Julian Michael, and Ludwig Schmidt for comments on earlier
drafts of this work, as well as the organizers and attendees of the NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on ML
Retrospectives, Surveys, and Meta-Analyses for providing an early venue for this work. We also
thank the reviewers for their comments.
References
Alison Adam. Artiﬁcial Knowing: Gender and the Thinking Machine . Routledge, USA, 1998. ISBN
0415129621.
Md Zahangir Alom, Tarek M Taha, Christopher Yakopcic, Stefan Westberg, Paheding Sidike,
Mst Shamima Nasrin, Brian C Van Esesn, Abdul A S Awwal, and Vijayan K Asari. The history
began from AlexNet: A comprehensive survey on deep learning approaches. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01164 , 2018.
Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the
limits of object recognition models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
9453–9463, 2019.
Anja Belz and Adam Kilgarriff. Shared-task evaluations in HLT: Lessons for NLG. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference , pages 133–135, 2006.
Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. Data statements for natural language processing: To-
ward mitigating system bias and enabling better science. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 6:587–604, 2018. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00041. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/Q18-1041.
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. Climbing towards NLU: On meaning, form, and understand-
ing in the age of data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 5185–5198, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.463. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.463.
Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big?
 . InProceedings of FAccT 2021 ,
2021.
James Bennett, Stan Lanning, et al. The Netﬂix prize. In Proceedings of KDD cup and workshop ,
volume 2007, page 35. New York, 2007.
Abeba Birhane and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Large image datasets: A pyrrhic win for computer vision?
In2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 1536–1546,
2021. doi: 10.1109/WACV48630.2021.00158.
Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Jesse Thomason, Jacob Andreas, Yoshua Bengio, Joyce Chai, Mirella
Lapata, Angeliki Lazaridou, Jonathan May, Aleksandr Nisnevich, Nicolas Pinto, and Joseph Turian.
Experience grounds language. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8718–8735, Online, November 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.703.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021.
Samuel R. Bowman and George Dahl. What will it take to ﬁx benchmarking in natural language
understanding? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 4843–4855,
Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.
385. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.385.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency , pages 77–91,
2018.
Timothy Christensen and Benjamin Connault. Counterfactual sensitivity and robustness, 2019.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.00989.
Kenneth Ward Church. Emerging trends: A tribute to Charles Wayne. Natural Language Engineering ,
24(1):155–160, January 2018. ISSN 1351-3249, 1469-8110. doi: 10.1017/S1351324917000389.
Herbert H. Clark. Using Language . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. Senteval: An evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05449 , 2018.
Kate Crawford and Trevor Paglen. Excavating AI: The politics of images in machine learning training
sets. Excavating AI , 2019.
Terrance de Vries, Ishan Misra, Changhan Wang, and Laurens van der Maaten. Does object recogni-
tion work for everyone? In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops , pages 52–59, 2019.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Emily Denton, Alex Hanna, Razvan Amironesei, Andrew Smart, and Hilary Nicole. On the ge-
nealogy of machine learning datasets: A critical history of imagenet. Big Data & Society , 8(2):
20539517211035955, 2021. doi: 10.1177/20539517211035955. URL https://doi.org/10.1177/
20539517211035955.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Jesse Dodge, Suchin Gururangan, Dallas Card, Roy Schwartz, and Noah A. Smith. Show your
work: Improved reporting of experimental results. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2185–2194, Hong Kong, China,
November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1224. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D19-1224.
David Donoho. 50 Years of Data Science. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 26(4):
745–766, October 2017. ISSN 1061-8600. doi: 10.1080/10618600.2017.1384734.
Ravit Dotan and Smitha Milli. Value-laden disciplinary shifts in machine learning. In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAT* ’20, page 294,
New York, NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450369367. doi:
10.1145/3351095.3373157. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3373157.
Jingfei Du, Myle Ott, Haoran Li, Xing Zhou, and Veselin Stoyanov. General purpose text embeddings
from pre-trained language models for scalable inference. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 3018–3030, Online, November 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.ﬁndings-emnlp.271.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.
Nathan Ensmenger. Is chess the drosophila of artiﬁcial intelligence? A social history of an algorithm.
Social Studies of Science , 42(1):5–30, 2012. doi: 10.1177/0306312711424596. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0306312711424596. PMID: 22530382.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Kawin Ethayarajh and Dan Jurafsky. Utility is in the eye of the user: A critique of NLP leaderboard
design. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 4846–4853, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.393.
Allyson Ettinger. What BERT is not: Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:34–48, 2020.
Allyson Ettinger, Sudha Rao, Hal Daumé III, and Emily M. Bender. Towards linguistically gen-
eralizable NLP systems: A workshop and shared task. In Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Building Linguistically Generalizable NLP Systems , pages 1–10, Copenhagen, Denmark,
September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-5401. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W17-5401.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. The
PASCAL visual object classes (VOC) challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision , 88(2):
303–338, 2010.
Federico Fancellu and Bonnie Webber. Translating negation: A manual error analysis. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Seman-
tics (ExProM 2015) , pages 2–11, Denver, Colorado, June 2015. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W15-1301. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1301.
Sahaj Garg, Vincent Perot, Nicole Limtiaco, Ankur Taly, Ed H. Chi, and Alex Beutel. Counterfactual
fairness in text classiﬁcation through robustness. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society , AIES ’19, page 219–226, New York, NY , USA, 2019. Association
for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450363242. doi: 10.1145/3306618.3317950. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3317950.
Timnit Gebru. Race and gender. In Markus D. Dubber, Frank Pasquale, and Sunit Das, editors, The
Oxford Handbook of Ethics of AI , pages 253–270. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2020.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets, 2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09010.
Robert W Gehl, Lucas Moyer-Horner, and Sara K Yeo. Training computers to see internet pornogra-
phy: Gender and sexual discrimination in computer vision science. Television & New Media , 18
(6):529–547, 2017.
Dave Gershgorn. The data that transformed AI research—–and possibly the world. Quartz ,
2017. https://qz.com/1034972/the-data-that-changed-the-direction-of-ai-research-and-possibly-
the-world/.
Gregory Grifﬁn, Alex Holub, and Pietro Perona. Caltech-256 object category dataset, 2007. California
Institute of Technology.
Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. Message understanding conference-6: A brief history. In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Computational Linguistics - Volume 1 , COLING ’96, pages
466–471, USA, 1996. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/992628.992709.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and
Noah A. Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 107–112, New Orleans, Louisiana,
June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N18-2017. URL https:
//www.aclweb.org/anthology/N18-2017.
Donna Haraway. Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial
perspective. Feminist Studies , 14(3):575–599, 1988.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Microsoft deberta surpasses human
performance on the superglue benchmark, 2021. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
blog/microsoft-deberta-surpasses-human-performance-on-the-superglue-benchmark/.
13

==== Page 14 ====
Benjamin Heinzerling. NLP’s Clever Hans moment has arrived. Blog post, available at https:
//bheinzerling.github.io/post/clever-hans/, accessed July 25, 2019, 2019.
Peter Henderson, Jieru Hu, Joshua Romoff, Emma Brunskill, Dan Jurafsky, and Joelle Pineau.
Towards the systematic reporting of the energy and carbon footprints of machine learning. Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 21(248):1–43, 2020. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-312.html.
John N Hooker. Testing heuristics: We have it all wrong. Journal of heuristics , 1(1):33–42, 1995.
Md Mosharaf Hossain, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Eduardo Blanco, and Alexis Palmer. It’s not a
non-issue: Negation as a source of error in machine translation. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 3869–3885, Online, November 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.ﬁndings-emnlp.345.
Mi-Young Huh, Pulkit Agrawal, and A. Alexei Efros. What makes imagenet good for transfer
learning? NIPS Workshop on Large Scale Computer Vision Systems , 2016.
Julie Hunter, Nicholas Asher, and Alex Lascarides. A formal semantics for situated conversation.
Semantics and Pragmatics , 11:10, 2018.
Ben Hutchinson, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Denton, Kellie Webster, Yu Zhong, and Stephen
Denuyl. Social biases in NLP models as barriers for persons with disabilities. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5491–5501, Online,
July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.487. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.487.
Abigail Z. Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. Measurement and fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT ’21, page 375–385,
New York, NY , USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383097. doi:
10.1145/3442188.3445901. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445901.
Eun Seo Jo and Timnit Gebru. Lessons from archives: Strategies for collecting sociocultural data
in machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , FAT* ’20, page 306–316, New York, NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781450369367. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372829. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3351095.3372829.
Heribert Kahmen and Wolfgang Faig. Surveying . Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1988.
Nur Shazwani Kamarudin, Mokhairi Makhtar, Syed Abdullah Fadzli, Mumtazimah Mohamad,
Fatma Susilawati Mohamad, and Mohd Fadzil Abdul Kadir. Comparison of image classiﬁcation
techniques using Caltech 101 dataset. Journal of Theoretical & Applied Information Technology ,
71(1), 2015.
Adam Kilgarri. Senseval: An exercise in evaluating word sense disambiguation programs. In Proc.
of the ﬁrst international conference on language resources and evaluation , pages 581–588, 1998.
Sabine Lehmann, Stephan Oepen, Sylvie Regnier-Prost, Klaus Netter, Veronika Lux, Judith Klein,
Kirsten Falkedal, Frederik Fouvry, Dominique Estival, Eva Dauphin, Hervé Compagnion, Judith
Baur, Lorna Balkan, and Doug Arnold. TSNLP — Test Suites for Natural Language Processing. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 711 – 716,
Kopenhagen, Denmark, 1996.
Byron C Lewis and Albert E Crews. The evolution of benchmarking as a computer performance
evaluation technique. MIS Quarterly , pages 7–16, 1985.
Fei-Fei Li. Fei-Fei Li — Where Did ImageNet Come From?, 2019. URL https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Z7naK1uq1F8.
Mark Liberman. Fred Jelinek. Computational Linguistics , 36(4):595–599, 2010.
Li Liu, Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, Paul Fieguth, Jie Chen, Xinwang Liu, and Matti Pietikäinen.
Deep learning for generic object detection: A survey. International Journal of Computer Vision ,
128(2):261–318, 2020.
14

==== Page 15 ====
Momin M. Malik. A hierarchy of limitations in machine learning. CoRR , abs/2002.05193, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05193.
Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. The natural language
decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08730 , 2018.
Michele Merler, Nalini Ratha, Rogerio S. Feris, and John R. Smith. Diversity in faces, 2019.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10436.
George A Miller. WordNet: A lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM , 38(11):
39–41, 1995.
George A Miller and Patricia E Nicely. An analysis of perceptual confusions among some English
consonants. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 27(2):338–352, 1955.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchin-
son, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model report-
ing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAT*
’19, page 220–229, New York, NY , USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287596. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596.
Melanie Mitchell. Why AI is harder than we think. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12871 , 2021.
Allen Newell. A tutorial on speech understanding systems. In D. Raj Reddy, editor, Speech
Recognition: Invited Papers Presented at the 1974 IEEE Symposium , pages 4–54. Academic Press,
New York, 1975.
Allen Newell, John C. Shaw, and Herbert A. Simon. Report on a general problem-solving program.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Information Processing , pages 256–264, 1959.
Timothy Niven and Hung-Yu Kao. Probing neural network comprehension of natural language
arguments. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4658–4664, Florence, Italy, 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1459.
Scott W O’Leary-Kelly and Robert J V okurka. The empirical assessment of construct validity. Journal
of operations management , 16(4):387–405, 1998.
Amandalynne Paullada, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Emily M Bender, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna.
Data and its (dis)contents: A survey of dataset development and use in machine learning research.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05345 , 2020.
Cassio Pennachin and Ben Goertzel. Contemporary approaches to artiﬁcial general intelli-
gence. In Ben Goertzel and Cassio Pennachin, editors, Artiﬁcial General Intelligence , pages
1–30. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. ISBN 978-3-540-68677-4. doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-68677-4_1. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-68677-4_1.
P Jonathon Phillips, Hyeonjoon Moon, Syed A Rizvi, and Patrick J Rauss. The FERET evaluation
methodology for face-recognition algorithms. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence , 22(10):1090–1104, 2000.
Mark Przybocki, Kay Peterson, Sébastien Bronsart, and Gregory Sanders. The NIST 2008 metrics for
machine translation challenge—overview, methodology, metrics, and results. Machine Translation ,
23(2):71–103, 2009.
XiPeng Qiu, TianXiang Sun, YiGe Xu, YiGe Shao, Ning Dai, and XuanJing Huang. Pre-trained
models for natural language processing: A survey. SCIENCE CHINA Technological Sciences , 63
(10):1872–1897, 2020. URL https://engine.scichina.com/publisher/ScienceChinaPress/journal/
SCIENCECHINATechnologicalSciences/63/10/10.1007/s11431-020-1647-3.
Joanna Radin. “Digital Natives”: How Medical and Indigenous Histories Matter for Big Data. Osiris ,
32(1):43–64, September 2017. ISSN 0369-7827, 1933-8287. doi: 10.1086/693853.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. Actionable auditing: Investigating the impact of
publicly naming biased performance results of commercial AI products. In Proceedings of
the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , AIES ’19, page 429–435, New
York, NY , USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450363242. doi:
10.1145/3306618.3314244. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314244.
Michael J Reddy. The conduit metaphor: A case of frame conﬂict in our language about language.
In Andrew Ortony, editor, Metaphor and Thought , pages 164–201. Cambridge University Press,
1979.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4902–4912, Online, July 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.442. URL https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/2020.acl-main.442.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision , 115(3):
211–252, December 2015. ISSN 0920-5691, 1573-1405. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highﬁll, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh, and Lora M
Aroyo. “everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data cascades in high-stakes
AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages
1–15, 2021.
Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Alex Hanna, and Emily Denton. Do datasets have politics? Disciplinary
values in computer vision dataset development. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction , 5(CSCW2):1–37, 2021.
David Schlangen. Targeting the benchmark: On methodology in current natural language processing
research. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
2: Short Papers) , pages 670–674, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-short.85. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-short.85.
Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren Etzioni. Green AI. Commun. ACM , 63(12):
54–63, November 2020. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3381831. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3381831.
D. Sculley, Jasper Snoek, Alexander B. Wiltschko, and A. Rahimi. Winner’s curse? On pace, progress,
and empirical rigor. In ICLR , 2018.
Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D Sculley. No
classiﬁcation without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the
developing world. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08536 , 2017.
Henry Shevlin, Karina V old, Matthew Crosby, and Marta Halina. The limits of machine intelligence.
Science & Society , 20(10), 2019.
Jamie Shotton, John Winn, Carsten Rother, and Antonio Criminisi. Textonboost: Joint appearance,
shape and context modeling for multi-class object recognition and segmentation. In European
conference on computer vision , pages 1–15. Springer, 2006.
Tom Simonite. Why and how Baidu cheated an artiﬁcial intelligence test. MIT Technology Review ,
2015.
Norman Stiles and Daniel Wilcox. Grover and the Everything in the Whole Wide World Museum .
Random House, New York, 1974. Illustrations by Joe Mathieu.
Sarah M Stitzlein. Replacing the ‘view from nowhere’: A pragmatist-feminist science classroom.
Electronic Journal of Science Education , 9(2), 2004.
16

==== Page 17 ====
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for deep
learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , pages 3645–3650, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1355. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-1355.
Ilya Sutskever. Recent advances in deep learning and AI from OpenAI, 2018. Keynote talk at AI
Frontiers Conference.
Rachel Thomas and David Uminsky. The problem with metrics is a fundamental problem for AI,
2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08512.
Antonio Torralba and Alexei A Efros. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In CVPR 2011 , pages 1521–1528.
IEEE, 2011.
Emiel van Miltenburg, Miruna Clinciu, Ond ˇrej Dušek, Dimitra Gkatzia, Stephanie Inglis, Leo
Leppänen, Saad Mahamood, Emma Manning, Stephanie Schoch, Craig Thomson, and Luou Wen.
Underreporting of errors in NLG output, and what to do about it. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Natural Language Generation , pages 140–153, Aberdeen, Scotland,
UK, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
inlg-1.14.
Peter V oss. Essentials of general intelligence: The direct path to artiﬁcial general intelligence. In Ben
Goertzel and Cassio Pennachin, editors, Artiﬁcial General Intelligence , pages 131–157. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
Kiri L. Wagstaff. Machine learning that matters. In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference
on International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’12, page 1851–1856, Madison, WI,
USA, 2012. Omnipress. ISBN 9781450312851.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019 , 2019a.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel Bowman. SuperGLUE: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
understanding systems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3266–3280,
2019b.
Zeerak Waseem, Smarika Lulz, Joachim Bingel, and Isabelle Augenstein. Disembodied machine learn-
ing: On the illusion of objectivity in NLP, 2020. https://openreview.net/forum?id=fkAxTMzy3fs.
Dominikus Wetzel and Francis Bond. Enriching parallel corpora for statistical machine translation
with semantic negation rephrasing. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and
Structure in Statistical Translation , pages 20–29, Jeju, Republic of Korea, July 2012. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W12-4203.
Jacob Yerushalmy. Statistical problems in assessing methods of medical diagnosis, with special
reference to X-ray techniques. Public Health Reports (1896-1970) , pages 1432–1449, 1947.
Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Elizabeth Clark, Lianhui Qin, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. TuringAd-
vice: A generative and dynamic evaluation of language use. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies , pages 4856–4880, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.386. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.386.
A Appendix A: Details of Alternative Evaluation Methods
17

==== Page 18 ====
Figure 1: Photo of a bench-
mark in Edinburgh, by Jeremy
Atherton, used without mod-
iﬁcation according to license
CC-BY-SA-2.5The etymology for the term “benchmark” refers to a mark that was
added to buildings to indicate the position of a surveyor’s bench (see
Fig. 1), itself a tool for creating a level surface on which to put a
leveling rod, used in the process of surveying. This etymological
source contrasts with the use of benchmarks for charting the state of
the art: surveyors are not in the business of measuring the furthest
anyone has gone along some particular trail but rather in understand-
ing the shape of the landscape and how it has changed over time
[Kahmen and Faig, 1988].
We can take further inspiration from the ﬁeld of surveying, as we
think about how the measurements we take relate to the terrain we
wish to understand: “A surveyor is not only charged with providing
results derived from [their] measurements, but also has to give an
indication of the quality and reliability of these. This requires a clear
understanding of the functional and stochastic relationships between
measured quantities and derived results, as well as a solid under-
standing of the external factors that inﬂuence the measurements.”
[Kahmen and Faig, 1988, p.1].
We describe in this appendix other methodologies that can move us towards the perhaps more
worthy goal of ﬁlling in our picture of the landscape. In turn, we provide an overview of alternative,
underexplored evaluation techniques including testsuites, audits and adversarial testing; system output
analysis; ablation testing; and analysis of model properties.
A.1 Testsuites, Audits and Adversarial Testing
Typical benchmark evaluation datasets are sampled from some larger dataset (e.g. via a train/test
split) such that the frequency distribution of test item types in the test data is inﬂuenced by their
distribution in that underlying dataset. In contrast, testsuites and audits speciﬁcally design their test
sets to map out some space of test item types and evaluate systems in terms of the extent to which
they can handle them.4The testsuite-based approach has a long history in NLP, with notable early
publications including Lehmann et al. [1996] and recent work such as Ribeiro et al. [2020].
There are various approaches to the design of such test suites. A more audit-like methodology,
exempliﬁed by Buolamwini and Gebru [2018], creates test sets balanced for sensitive categories
so as to be able to test for differential performance across those categories. On the other hand,
explicit adversarial testing seeks to explore the edges of a system’s competence by ﬁnding minimally
contrasting pairs of examples where the system being tested succeeds on one member of the pair
and fails on the other [Ettinger et al., 2017].5Importantly, these evaluation approaches are designed
around diagnosing particular areas of system failure: the point of the tests isn’t to show which systems
can “solve” them but to understand which aspects of the problem space remain challenging and
represent the operational limits in deployment.
A.2 System Output Analysis
System output analysis is another way to explore the system output in detail. This can take the form
of error analysis, disaggregated analysis, and counterfactual analysis.
Error analysis Error analysis involves the detailed analysis of system errors, by either mechanically
or manually inspecting system inputs. Mechanical analysis can include simple techniques such as
developing a confusion matrix in labeling tasks. A confusion matrix compares expected labels to
system output labels and provides a summary of which categories are most reliably labeled and which
are most frequently confused for each other. (This is an old technique, initially used in the study of
human phonetic perception [Miller and Nicely, 1955] and related to even earlier work comparing
4A notable exception to the trend of benchmarks to not include test suites is GLUE, which includes among
its component tests a testsuite mapping out various linguistic constructions in English [Wang et al., 2019a].
5Adversarial testing also includes work like Niven and Kao [2019] that discovers what kind of spurious cues
systems are leveraging to effectively “cheat” on a particular benchmark and creates alternate versions of the
testsets that neutralize those cues.
18

==== Page 19 ====
medical diagnostics when lacking access to ground truth [Yerushalmy, 1947].) Other mechanical
analyses include looking at errors by easily automatically measurable properties of system input such
as sentence length or presence or number of out of vocabulary items.
More detailed error analysis digs into the speciﬁc system inputs to look for patterns that can’t
necessarily be measured automatically and might not be modeled in any way by the system being
evaluated. For example, error analysis of a sentiment analysis system might ﬁnd that it is frequently
tripped up by sarcasm or in a simpler case by sentences with phenomena such as coordination or
subordinate clauses. Error analysis of a machine translation (MT) system might ﬁnd that it frequently
fails on examples with negation [Wetzel and Bond, 2012, Fancellu and Webber, 2015, Hossain et al.,
2020]. Error analysis can turn up important problems that don’t have a large effect on the metric. For
example, metrics for MT systems (including but not limited to BLEU) are also not good at measuring
the impact of negation errors [Hossain et al., 2020].
Disaggregated analysis Disaggregated analysis can reveal disparate patterns of performance that
may not be visible through aggregate metrics alone. This method has been leveraged within the
ground-breaking audit of facial analysis systems, performed by Buolamwini and Gebru [2018], that
evaluated performance across unitary and intersectional subgroups deﬁned by gender and Fitzpatrick
skin type. This analysis revealed signiﬁcant disparities in model performance — with darker-skinned
female subjects experiencing the highest error rates — that was not visible through examination of
aggregate performance metrics alone. The method of disaggregated analysis has since been adopted
by a myriad of auditing and evaluation works [e.g. Raji and Buolamwini, 2019] and integrated into
frameworks of standardized model reporting [Mitchell et al., 2019]. Following these works, we
encourage researchers to report performance metrics on socially salient slices of their dataset, in
addition to the full test set.
Counterfactual analysis Counterfactual analysis is another technique of model evaluation and
assessment that has gained in popularity in recent years. At a high level, these methods evaluate
how a model’s output changes in response to a counterfactual change in the input. This method has
been leveraged for fairness-informed analysis of natural language processing systems by comparing
model performance on paired inputs that differ only in a reference to a sensitive identity group [Garg
et al., 2019, Hutchinson et al., 2020]. While both counterfactual analysis and disaggregated analysis
have been leveraged to disparities in model performance for different sensitive groups, counterfactual
analysis can additionally provide insight into causal mechanisms underlying particular patterns in
performance. Counterfactual analysis can also be leveraged to assess model robustness to small
distribution shifts [Christensen and Connault, 2019].
The results of system output analysis tend to be rich and detailed and not amenable for quick cross-
system comparison. But this is a feature, in our view, and not a bug: the goal, after all, is not anoint
one system the winner (until some new system claims that spot), but rather to understand how aspects
of system design map onto different aspects of the problem space so as to inform the next iteration of
system development.
A.3 Ablation Testing
Another well-established technique for understanding system performance is ablation testing. Abla-
tion testing, as named by Newell [1975] by analogy with similar studies in biology, involves isolating
the contributions of different system components by removing them, one by one, and evaluating the
modiﬁed system. In statistical NLP prior to deep learning approaches, ablation testing was commonly
applied to different feature sets to explore the extent to which systems were using information
captured by different aspects of input representation. Ablation testing can also be performed on
subsets of training data to explore the effect of e.g. in-domain v. out-of-domain training data or
on components of system architecture, to the extent that these can be removed without completely
disabling the system. Heinzerling [2019], in a discussion inspired by Niven and Kao [2019], suggests
various data ablations that can be applied to test data as well, to investigate what cues a system might
be relying on.
19

==== Page 20 ====
A.4 Analysis of Model Properties
System performance on test items (in aggregate as in test sets in standard benchmarks or in detail as in
error analysis or test suites or audits) is only one facet of systems to consider, especially when trying
to gauge which approaches are most feasible for practical applications. Other dimensions include
energy consumption (both for development and testing) [Strubell et al., 2019, Henderson et al., 2020,
Schwartz et al., 2020, Ethayarajh and Jurafsky, 2020]; memory and compute requirements, which
may be more or less constrained depending on the deployment context [Ethayarajh and Jurafsky,
2020, Dodge et al., 2019]; and stability in the face of perturbations to the training data [Sculley et al.,
2018]. This latter is especially important for systems that need to be continually retrained in order
to handle changing input data, such as named entity recognition system that need to keep up with
different public ﬁgures of note.
20

