==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2112.07467v8  [cs.CY]  6 Sep 2024
∗Published in: IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society, V ol. 4, No. 2, p p. 171–187, 2023. DOI: 10.1109/TTS.2023.3257303AI Ethics Principles in Practice:
Perspectives of Designers and Developers
Conrad Sanderson, David Douglas, Qinghua Lu, Emma Schleige r, Jon Whittle,
Justine Lacey, Glenn Newnham, Stefan Hajkowicz, Cathy Robi nson, David Hansen
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisat ion (CSIRO), Australia
Abstract —As consensus across the various published AI ethics
principles is approached, a gap remains between high-level
principles and practical techniques that can be readily ado pted
to design and develop responsible AI systems. We examine the
practices and experiences of researchers and engineers fro m
Australia’s national scientiﬁc research agency (CSIRO), w ho are
involved in designing and developing AI systems for many app li-
cation areas. Semi-structured interviews were used to exam ine
how the practices of the participants relate to and align wit h a
set of high-level AI ethics principles proposed by the Austr alian
Government. The principles comprise: (1) privacy protecti on
and security, (2) reliability and safety, (3) transparency and
explainability, (4) fairness, (5) contestability, (6) acc ountability,
(7) human-centred values, (8) human, social and environmen tal
well-being. Discussions on the gained insights from the int erviews
include various tensions and trade-offs between the princi ples,
and provide suggestions for implementing each high-level p rin-
ciple. We also present suggestions aiming to enhance associ ated
support mechanisms.
Index Terms —AI ethics, ethics principles, responsible AI,
responsible design, system design, artiﬁcial intelligenc e, machine
learning, automation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapidly increasing use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI),
which includes machine learning (ML), throughout society
has already produced signiﬁcant beneﬁts across a variety of
ﬁelds, and promises to deliver more in the future [ 30], [35],
[38]. As AI becomes more ubiquitous there are rising concerns
regarding its use and development [ 13], [56]. AI may be used
in applications that reinforce existing biases and histori cal
disadvantage in society (e.g., involving gender, race, soc io-
economic background), infringe individual privacy, and ma ke
opaque decisions that affect people’s lives (e.g., automat ed
assessment of job applications) [ 14], [20], [51]. Responses to
these concerns are well underway in many countries. A recent
review of international principles and guidelines for AI et hics
included 84 such documents [ 34]. Out of the numerous ethics
frameworks and guidelines produced by governments and
organisations, a broad consensus is emerging around what th e
major principles of AI ethics should be [ 25].
Governments and organisations are beginning to develop
mechanisms to make high-level AI ethics frameworks more
actionable in practice. Governance, regulation, and legal
frameworks concerning the development and use of AI sys-
tems and associated technologies are emerging in many coun-tries [ 11], [69]. The European Union has recently proposed a
legal framework for AI for its member states [ 21]. A recent
report by the Australian Human Rights Commission has
recommended introducing legal accountability for both gov -
ernment and public sector uses of AI, as well as establishing
an independent AI Safety Commissioner [ 23].
However, there is still a large gap between high-level AI
principles and practical techniques that can be readily use d in
the design and development of responsible AI systems [ 45],
[48]. More speciﬁcally, current high-level principles appear
more focused on end users and people affected by AI technolo-
gies, rather than developers of AI systems. Furthermore, et hics
principles are just one of a range of governance mechanisms
and policy tools necessary to promote the ethical developme nt
and use of AI technologies.
In this work semi-structured interviews are used to better
understand the existing practices and perspectives of scie ntists
and engineers that develop and/or use AI/ML technologies
across a broad range of projects and application domains.
The insights and challenges gleaned from the interviews are
analysed within a wider context, aiming to provide suggesti ons
and caveats which may be helpful when placing the high-level
AI ethics principles into practice.
The interview participants are from the Commonwealth Sci-
entiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), whic h
is Australia’s national science agency. The organisation i s re-
sponsible for conducting scientiﬁc research in many indust rial
application areas, including biosecurity, health, agricu lture,
and environment. Recent efforts include increasing the upt ake
of AI/ML across these areas. The Australian Government’s
voluntary high-level AI ethics principles [ 2] are used as a
framing structure for the interviews, as well as the subsequ ent
analysis. This set of principles is treated as a representat ive
of the many similar principles proposed by other government s
and organisations [ 25], [34].
We continue the paper as follows. Section IIoverviews
related work. Section IIIdescribes the methods used to
conduct the interviews and the subsequent thematic analyse s.
Section IVpresents the salient results from the interviews, in
terms of observations, practices and challenges for each of the
high-level ethics principles. Section Vprovides a discussion of
the insights from the interviews and provides suggestions f or
implementing each high-level principle. Section VIprovides

==== Page 2 ====
suggestions to enhance associated support mechanisms at
organisational and design levels. Concluding statements a re
given in Section VII.
II. R ELATED WORK
The development and deployment of responsible AI requires
users to adopt a largely implicit set of high-level ethics pr inci-
ples into explicit practices. High-level principles such a s trans-
parency and explainability may require various approaches to
implement within an AI system depending on its purpose and
the user requirements [ 4]. However, the availability of useful
ethical design speciﬁcations for AI designers and develope rs
is currently lacking [ 48], with a recent review highlighting
various limitations [ 47]. These limitations include the lack
of methods that support the proactive design of transparent ,
explainable and accountable systems, in contrast to the les s
useful post-hoc explanations of system outputs. Existing m eth-
ods overemphasised AI ‘explicability’ (which is necessary but
not sufﬁcient for transparency and explainability), and sk ewed
to assessing the impact of an AI system on individuals rather
than on society or groups. Finally, the examined methods wer e
found to be difﬁcult to implement and typically positioned a s
discourse aids to document design decisions [ 47].
The limited support for tools available for designers and
developers demonstrates a gap in what is available and
what is useful for adopting responsible, or ethical, design
approaches [ 43], [48]. The implementation of ethics principles
in practice requires an improved understanding of the pract ices
of designers and developers of AI systems, and how they relat e
to high-level ethics principles. By building this understa nding,
organisations can better position themselves to develop th e
support required to produce and use AI systems responsibly.
A recent interview study involving high-level organisatio nal
leaders (such as CEOs) provides empirical evidence that a
promising approach to operationalise AI ethics principles is
via four sets of practices [ 61], [62]: (i) governance, (ii) AI
design and development, (iii) competence and knowledge
development, (iv) stakeholder communication.
The operationalisation of AI ethics can be also framed
as a design process rather than an end goal [ 16], [46].
Fostering an understanding of the complexities and challen ges
of implementing responsible AI provides the foundation for
iterative and adaptive approaches rather than as the comple tion
of activity checklists. The implementation of responsible , or
ethical, design has been characterised across three compli men-
tary design approaches [ 18], summarised below.
•Ethics inDesign , which requires designers and developers
to consider the purpose of the AI system under develop-
ment, and the likely consequences of its use [ 18]. Part of this
involves considering the values (or motivating principles )
reﬂected in the design and purpose of the AI system [ 24].
This has parallels with efforts to incorporate human values
in software engineering [ 70], [72]. Anticipating the negativeeffects of failing to account for an ethical principle may
also highlight potential issues that might otherwise be
overlooked [ 43], [78].
•Ethics byDesign , which concerns the behaviour of AI
systems in deployment. The functions of systems should
reﬂect ethical principles, such as minimising harm. This
also covers constraints imposed on permissible actions and
decisions the AI system may make [ 18]. This is particularly
signiﬁcant for autonomous systems that may come into
contact with humans or animals during their operation, and
for AI systems that may be used to recommend decisions
that affect people’s lives.
•Ethics forDesigners , which refers to the ethics that mo-
tivate and govern the developers of AI systems, and may
include professional codes of conduct, ethical principles ,
and regulatory requirements [ 18]. These design approaches
characterise the complex and dynamic task of developing
responsible AI. In turn, the infrastructure required from
organisations and governing bodies to effectively support
responsible AI must be responsive to those complexities
and the evolving nature of the ﬁeld.
III. M ETHODS
The interview participants were CSIRO scientists and en-
gineers who design, develop, or implement systems with
AI components (such as ML). An initial set of participants
was sought via calls for participation circulated within th e
organisation, where the main selection criterion was self-
reported involvement with research and/or development wor k
that notably included the use of AI methods and/or tech-
nologies. The initial phase was followed by a snowballing
technique where additional participants were recruited th rough
suggestions by preceding participants. The number of parti c-
ipants increased until a saturation point of perspectives w as
deemed to have been reached [ 15], [31]. In total, 21 interviews
were conducted.
The participants represented a cross-section of experienc e
and responsibility; the positions of the interviewees incl uded:
team leader (8), group leader (4), principal research scien -
tist (2), principal research engineer (1), senior research sci-
entist (4), research scientist (1), postgraduate student ( 1). The
gender division was approximately 24% female and 76% male.
Each participant was provided with a summarised version
of the Australian AI ethics principles (see Table I), prior to
their interview. The interview protocol aimed to ﬁrst evoke 3
to 4 principles that were most pertinent to each participant as
encountered in their work. Each of the principles chosen by t he
participant was then examined through the following prompt s:
(i)how did the principle express itself in their work, (ii)how
was the principle addressed, (iii)what tools/processes would
be useful for addressing the principle. Subsequent questio ns
aimed to cover relevant overlaps with the following areas:
software development, machine learning, and ethics in AI.
Participants were then asked to consider other ethical fact ors

==== Page 3 ====
TABLE I
An adapted summary of the voluntary high-level ethics princ iples for AI, as promulgated by the Australian Government [ 2].
Principle Summary
Privacy Protection and Security AI systems should respect a nd uphold privacy rights and data protection, and
ensure the security of data.
Reliability and Safety AI systems should reliably operate i n the context of their intended purpose
throughout their lifecycle.
Transparency and Explainability There should be transpare ncy and responsible disclosure to ensure people
know when they are being signiﬁcantly impacted by an AI syste m, and can
ﬁnd out when an AI system is engaging with them. Explainabili ty includes
what the AI system is doing and why, and may include the system ’s processes
and input data.
Fairness AI systems should be inclusive and accessible, and should not involve or
result in unfair discrimination against individuals or gro ups.
Contestability When an AI system signiﬁcantly impacts a per son, group or environment,
there should be a timely process to allow people to challenge the use or
output of the system.
Accountability Those responsible for the various phases of the AI system lifecycle should
be identiﬁable and accountable for the outcomes of the syste m, and human
oversight of AI systems should be enabled.
Human-centred Values AI systems should respect human right s, diversity, and the autonomy of
individuals.
Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-
beingAI systems should beneﬁt individuals, society, and the envi ronment.
not covered by the high-level principles but encountered an d
potentially addressed in their work.
The interviews were conducted in a conversational setting
by three interviewers that had signiﬁcantly different rese arch
backgrounds and experience. The interviews ranged in lengt h
from 22 to 59 minutes, with a median length of 37 minutes.
All the interviews were done from February to April 2021.
A. Thematic Analysis
The transcripts of the interviews were analysed using
methods from the ‘codebook’ school of thematic analysis,
where themes are understood as ‘domain summaries’ and
given before starting analysis, and the codes developed dur ing
the analysis are assigned to these themes [ 9]. The high-level
principles (see Table I) were used as the domain summaries.
Concepts in the text were given a broad theme and a more
speciﬁc subtheme (if necessary), and were attached to the mo st
relevant high-level principle.
The analysis was accomplished at a semantic level, which
focused on describing and interpreting patterns identiﬁed in
the interview transcripts, instead of looking for underlyi ng
assumptions or concepts in the transcripts [ 8]. The thematic
analyses derived from the interview transcripts were inde-
pendently cross-checked by the three interviewers to ensur e
consensus on themes and inter-rater reliability.B. Ethics Approval and Consent
This study was approved by CSIRO’s Social and Inter-
disciplinary Science Human Research Ethics Committee, in
accordance with the National Statement on Ethical Conduct
in Human Research [ 49]. The approval included the scope of
the study, the selection and contact of potential participa nts,
the interview protocol, and the de-identiﬁcation requirem ents
for the transcripts. Informed consent was sought and obtain ed
from each participant prior to their interview.
C. Limitations
The interview participants were selected via solicitation
emails and peer suggestions, which may pose a threat to inter -
nal validity. The selection and availability of interviewe es may
have constrained the span and nature of perspectives and hen ce
outcomes of this study. Although selection bias is possible
when the participants are not randomly selected, the threat
to internal validity is partially alleviated as the intervi ewers
had no contact with the interviewees beforehand. To reduce
the risk of missing information and interviewer subjectivi ty,
each interview included three interviewers with signiﬁcan t
differences in their research backgrounds and experience. The
interviewers worked jointly to pose questions, which aids i n
increasing the depth and range of inquiry, as well as reducin g
the likelihood of subjective bias.

==== Page 4 ====
While this study aims to include Indigenous viewpoints,
no information was sought about the interviewees’ ethnic
background and none of the interviewees provided such
information. This may have affected the interpretation and
expression of Indigenous viewpoints.
This study was undertaken in one organisation, which may
pose a threat to external validity; the opinions provided by the
interviewees may not be representative of the larger AI deve l-
opment community. To reduce this threat, we ensured that the
interviewees had various roles and degrees of expertise, an d
worked on a variety of research areas and projects (for both
internal and external customers). While having interviewe es
from more organisations would be desirable, we believe our
study can be relevant to many AI/ML researchers and system
development teams; the observations and comments given by
our interviewees provide insights into the challenges deve lop-
ers are facing in dealing with AI ethics issues during resear ch,
development and deployment.
IV. R ESULTS
In this section we present the salient points resulting from
the thematic analysis of the interviews, covering practice s,
challenges and insights relating to each of the high-level
principles shown in Table I. The occurrence of themes related
to the principles across the interviews is shown in Table II.
Quotations and paraphrased sentences are ascribed to inter -
view participants via markers in the shorthand form of P##,
where ## is a two-digit participant identiﬁer (01 to 21).
A. Privacy Protection and Security
For addressing this principle, participants suggested met h-
ods such as federated machine learning [ 37], [77], aggregation
of data, removing personally identiﬁable information, and
differential privacy [ 19], [26]. As an example, partitioning
data across distributed machines was mentioned as a method
of protecting privacy for genomic data: “[various] researc h
institutions from around the world can collaborate, becaus e
TABLE II
Occurrence of themes related to AI ethics principles within
the 21 interviews.
Principle Occurrence
Privacy Protection and Security 17 / 21 (81%)
Reliability and Safety 19 / 21 (90%)
Transparency and Explainability 18 / 21 (86%)
Fairness 10 / 21 (48%)
Contestability 8 / 21 (38%)
Accountability 13 / 21 (62%)
Human-Centred Values 3 / 21 (14%)
HSE Well-being 11 / 21 (52%)they don’t have to give up their data. They don’t have to share
their data in the clear” (P03). There are also strong practic al
reasons for doing so: “[t]he machine learning methods that a re
running on those, they are split across multiple nodes anywa y,
[...] with the idea that they only ever use a portion of the
genome. Not because it’s safer, but because it’s more efﬁcie nt.
It’s faster [...], that’s the reason why it’s possible to ana lyse
the whole genome at the same time” (P03).
The impact on ML models trained using altered data
(with personally identiﬁable information removed) is unce r-
tain (P19). Differential privacy may also have a negative
impact of the utility of ML models (P05). The concerns about
the impact of differential privacy methods and removing PII
are examples of the tension between protecting privacy and
producing accurate ML models: “that’s the real challenge th at
we are always dealing with, this privacy and utility trade-
off” (P05). There are also possible trade-offs between priv acy
and other principles, such as Reliability ,Accountability , as
well as Transparency and Explainability (P01, P07, P09). For
example, to determine the accountability for failure in a pr o-
cess may involve using sensitive information that stakehol ders
are not willing to share due to their stated requirement for
privacy (P07).
Privacy concerns were mentioned as a reason to avoid using
sensitive data: “we have deliberately worked on data that
doesn’t have any privacy concerns, because of the difﬁculty of
working with data that does” (P09). Synthetic data and stan-
dard machine learning datasets were mentioned as alternati ves
to using sensitive data (P05). Minimising the amount of data
needed was also mentioned as a design goal (P02).
Gaining and maintaining the trust of collaborators and data
providers was identiﬁed as an important motivation for priv acy
and data protection. “Whether their concern is correct or
not, that doesn’t even matter here. If I don’t get that trust,
they’re not collaborating” (P07). Similarly, another part icipant
observed that in their practice “you build the trust with the data
providers [...] so more people can give you data and increase
your data representability” (P02).
Approval from the human research ethics committee was
mentioned as important for conﬁrming the requirements for
working with sensitive data (P11, P17, P19). Privacy impact
assessments were also mentioned as another process for iden -
tifying potential privacy issues (P10), in order to underst and
privacy concerns, build provisions to enable privacy contr ols,
and allow people to highlight things that they did not want
to make visible in the platform. These assessments may
highlight issues that require consultation with external c lients:
“we’ve had to manage [...] our client’s expectations around
[the] additional effort needed in the privacy [...] side of
things” (P10).
External collaborators may impose access restrictions on
their data (P01, P17). Clients may also require that data
remains within their network environment, which requires
researchers to perform their work on the client’s servers (P 17,

==== Page 5 ====
P19). The access restrictions attached to sensitive data ma y
prevent projects from proceeding: “sometimes early meetin gs
with potential customers [...], we’ll raise that quite earl y as
saying, what data do you have and what’s the access like to
that data? Because sometimes that’s the gatekeeper for con-
tinuing the project or not” (P17). Concerns were raised abou t
provision of data to third parties without explicit agreeme nt:
“I gave you data and I consent for a particular application
and that’s it. If somebody else wants my data they should ask
me” (P11).
One interviewee suggested that access to sensitive data
can be partial and conditional: “[y]ou can [allow] certain
applications to access certain areas of your genome. So if it ’s
a research project [...] you might enable them to see the whol e
data at the same time” (P03). Furthermore, in the context of
genomics, the data would be encrypted and “you as the patient
own the [decryption] key” (P03).
Privacy concerns differ from project to project (P10). Acci -
dental collection of sensitive data was mentioned as an issu e
for autonomous systems (P12, P13). Projects that involve
Indigenous data need to respect the cultural context of that
data: “[s]o when we talk to Indigenous people about where
data is and who owns it and who can beneﬁt from it, it gets
affected by things like whose country it is, whose knowledge
is going to be part of that, is it gendered spaces, is it sacred
spaces that we are looking at?” (P14).
B. Reliability and Safety
Participants often mentioned that the quality and amount
of training data is very important. One interview noted that
“if you’re training a model with not a lot of data and you
come across an edge case, you can actually get some really
weird results” (P09). Obtaining a sufﬁcient number of sampl es
can be challenging, as obtaining one sample can be high
in terms of both ﬁnancial cost and time cost in domains
such as genomics (P03). Furthermore, awareness of potentia l
mismatches between training data and data used during de-
ployment is necessary to prevent the trained model from bein g
unsuitable for its intended purpose (P04, P18). During syst em
development, it is also important to consider how to respond
to incomplete data: “[D]o we just operate in its absence or do
we assume it’s true or assume it’s false or make some other
determination?” (P16). Hidden variables that aren’t captu red
within the data are a signiﬁcant problem (P02).
Prior information can be used to reduce the need for large
amounts of training data. “So, if you have a weather model,
climate model, and some chemistry process, built inside, th en
you probably need the less of this data” (P02). However, usin g
prior information can be difﬁcult within machine learning
models. “[Y]ou can say it’s a prior model, [...] but it’s
drawn from [...] scientiﬁc literature, or based on the exper t
knowledge, but it’s really hard to see that [it’s] some nice
distribution that you can easily put into the model” (P02).
One interviewee pointed out that there might be multiple AI
algorithms suitable for a task, and developers need to asses spotential candidates according to several categories (P09 ).
Instead of focusing only on accuracy, there are “trade-offs in
terms of data complexity versus accuracy” (P09). Furthermo re,
robustness can be adversely affected: “the push for accurac y is
not always beneﬁcial, because it can include complexity and
perturbation effects, [...] and then you have these situati ons
that basically explode because of their complexity” (P09).
Within the ﬁeld of autonomous systems, it was noted that
although machine learning is a trend and works well for many
types of applications (e.g., recognition), it is important to
ﬁnd the right mix of traditional proven technology and newer
machine learning technology (P12).
Bugs in the implementation of AI systems can produce
“erroneous results, erroneous inferences, [and] could hav e led
to dangerous decisions downstream” (P16). Failing safely i s
deemed to be of prime importance and is considered “as you’re
building the system” (P16). However, “there’s only so much
you can think ahead, about what those failure modes might
be” (P16).
As degradation of system performance may occur during
deployment, AI systems may need recalibrated on new data.
“If you build a model on 10 year old data, then you’re not
representing the current state of risks for certain disease . [...] as
a minimum, [recalibration] on new data would probably be [.. .]
more meaningful” (P18). Furthermore, the systems may need
to be completely rebuilt to properly take advantage of newer
and/or more comprehensive data which was not considered
during the initial deployment (P18).
AI systems were also noted as being difﬁcult to verify:
“you can always have a pure statistics approach and build the
system and let it run in the environment. But when do you
have a complete assessment really? Especially with systems
that change over time and based on sensory input [...] it’s
very difﬁcult” (P12). How AI models may be veriﬁed will
depend on their context. Where ML models are being used
to emulate existing processes, expert judgement is necessa ry
to determine how close the model’s predictions are to the
modelled process (P04).
The element of safety also extends to the physical context
within which an AI system will be used. As one participant
explained, “it’s not just the AI data that has to be safe, it’s
actually its application and use [...] reliability and safe ty,
throughout its whole life cycle and its application into the
real world become really critical questions” (P14). Expert s in
all associated disciplines (hardware engineers, software engi-
neers, end users, and other stakeholders) should be involve d
in the design (P12). AI developers rely on domain experts to
ascertain whether the AI system is correctly following exis ting
legal rules in the application domain (P06).
Tracking the use of an AI system has been suggested
as useful for building user trust in the reliability of the
system (P15). Furthermore, in conjunction with the ability
to override the system’s suggestions, usage tracking would
allow users to note the differences in outcomes: “[the syste m]

==== Page 6 ====
suggested doing one scenario, we chose to do another, this is
the result we got [...] did we do the job that we expected? Or
did we do the job that the system expected?” (P15).
The need for large amounts of data to improve accuracy is
in tension with the goal of minimising data collection and us e
to protect privacy (P02). In tension with the Fairness principle,
in certain scenarios (such as medical applications), devel opers
may have to restrict the scope of data as much as possible
(e.g., use data only from people within an ethnic group), in
order to make it easier to build an AI solution that works as
intended (P11).
A concern raised by interviewees is the usage of AI systems
after their development (i.e., during deployment). One not ed
an instance where their AI system was designed to provide rec -
ommendations according to criteria agreed with a client, an d
yet these recommendations were ignored in decision making
by the client as other criteria were used in practice (P08).
Another participant noted that nuances about the collected
data and the assumptions made in analysing the data used
to train an ML model are likely to be lost when the model is
used in practice: “you can put all those cautions in place but
they won’t necessarily be respected in practice and you’ve g ot
very little control over that” (P01). Due to the lack of contr ol
over the use of AI technologies after their development, som e
researchers and/or developers may disclaim accountabilit y:
“whether the [system] works in 10 years, it’s not under our
control [...] and we shouldn’t really care about it” (P11).
In the context of autonomous systems, the operations of
drones are regulated but AI technology embedded in drones
is currently not regulated (P12). The regulations include t hat
“autonomous ﬂight is prohibited [...] in the sense that the ﬂ ight
is not managed by [a remote] human pilot” (P12). However,
this raises a question of reliability: “if [there is] a [targ et
following] mode enabled in [the] system [...] you have to
have a human pilot monitoring this system and disengaging
that system at any time [...] so now the question is [...] what
happens if [the] remote pilot is really there, ﬂicks the [dis able]
switch and the system doesn’t react? The remote pilot is
not always in full control of [the UA V] because of technical
reasons” (P12).
Reliability and safety are signiﬁcant concerns for au-
tonomous systems: “how dependable is the autonomy?” (P12).
Where AI is used in robotic systems, the quality of the
hardware used in the system is an important safety consid-
eration (P12). The hardware underneath needs to be certiﬁed
or qualiﬁed to industry standards (P12).
C. Transparency and Explainability
In discussing this principle, the majority of participants
focused on the explainability of decisions made by AI system s.
One participant observed: “Whenever you provide estimates
or outputs from an algorithm, they need to be explained in
some way, and so you need to be very open and transparent
about what you’ve done, how you’ve pre-processed your data,how you’ve applied the algorithms, even some of the ﬁne-
tuning of the algorithms [and] the hyperparameters” (P09).
Transparency and explainability were also seen as importan t
for accountability to clients and users: “[...] it’s essent ial,
because when you give a prediction, or when the prediction
is wrong [...], then you have to give people some sort of
explanation” (P02).
The degree of possible explainability depends on the form
of AI used. Symbolic AI uses deﬁned rules to process data,
and allows for the chain of reasoning used to produce an out-
put to be identiﬁed. In contrast, statistical (or non-symbo lic)
AI, such as that used in machine learning, develops rules
from the data used to train it [ 35], [6]. Statistical AI methods
were generally thought to be less transparent and explainab le
than symbolic AI. One participant noted: “the AI I use are
equations – we can’t solve these equations easily; we develo p
an algorithm for solving these equations, but we know what’s
happening. We know what these algorithms are doing. It’s not
a black box. The issue is the solution then is quite complex
to understand so that’s where explainability of a solution a nd
explainability of AI is a very important topic for us” (P08).
The factors and data used to make a particular recommenda-
tion may also be presented to the user: “it gives them a way to
[...] trace back to the actual patient record [...] to see why the
system thought what it did” (P19). The level of explainabili ty
may also depend on the intended audience (P17).
Explainability may weigh more than performance regarding
trust in AI. Fine-grained interpretability is needed in AI s ys-
tems to be clear which part of the outcomes are substantiated
and which parts are uncertain (P03). Showing the current ste p
in the decision-making process is helpful to improve user tr ust
in ML models (P11). The output of the model is often not that
useful to assist users to make decisions, unless the system
shows the indicators and factors for why that prediction was
given (P17). One participant pointed out when the team had
initial stakeholder meeting, no one asked about the predict ive
performance of the algorithm, but wanted to have a look at
risk proﬁles behind the risk score (P18).
Participants also noted that trade-offs between accuracy a nd
explainability may be necessary. There are algorithms whic h
provide good results but cannot explain how they arrived
at that results (P19). “You may end up choosing possibly
a suboptimal method that is transparent and explainable,
as opposed to the optimal method that [...] is [a] black
box” (P17). Another participant stated that “there have bee n
instances where we’ve chosen an explainable model which has
slightly [lower] performance [than] a non-explainable mod el
which has higher performance but would be harder to convey
the reasoning behind the prediction” (P18).
Transparency was often linked to the norms of scientiﬁc
publications and access to scientiﬁc data to allow reproduc ibil-
ity of results. “Transparency has to do with an open science,
you want people to be able to reproduce your results” (P11).
Releasing the source code for AI applications was also

==== Page 7 ====
mentioned as a means of transparency, especially as part of
publishing research (P11). However, practical concerns of ten
prevent this from occurring: “often it doesn’t happen becau se
it costs money to do, you have to spend time to clean it up,
to maintain it, to publish it and so on. Second, you decrease
the commercial value of it usually” (P11). Another particip ant
noted that it would be useful to have ofﬁcial guidance about
the requirements for publishing AI source code as open sourc e
as part of research publications (P09).
One hurdle for transparency is the use of proprietary data
in the training of AI models. The use of non-releasable
proprietary data makes reproducibility difﬁcult for resea rchers
outside of the original project team (P13). Clients may also
require any research publications about an AI application t o be
approved by them before submission (P09). This is part of a
broader tension between openness and commercial incentive s:
“Where it becomes a little bit challenging is where there’s
commercial in conﬁdence [information] or the commercial
sensitivities around what you’re doing, and you may not be
wanting to disclose exactly what you’ve done” (P09). This
tension may be resolved in initial client negotiations: “[o ur
clients] understand we are a research organisation and one o f
our KPIs is publications as well. So this was all put on the
table and discussed in the negotiation phase” (P13).
One response to making AI research reproducible is to use
public datasets (P11). A further alternative was to use synt hetic
data: “you can have synthetic data sets that carry the [...] t he
same sort of statistical properties so that you can then run
your algorithms and so you can make them open source and
[...] people can test algorithms and do a bunch of independen t
review and checking [...] without using the actual data” (P0 1).
It was also noted that clients needed to be transparent in
their claims of how AI applications are (or are not) being
used: “we want to make sure we deliver the tool and then it’s
up to the stakeholder decision maker to follow or not follow
our recommendations - but I want them to not misrepresent
the way they’re making their recommendation” (P08).
One participant argued that an understanding of risk was
more important than explainability: “[o]nce I know that it
works most of the time I don’t need explainability, I don’t
need transparency. It’s just temporary to establish the ris k
proﬁle” (P11). Another participant noted that transparenc y is
only a concern if something goes wrong, and drew a parallel
with relying on air travel without understanding how aircra ft
operate (P02).
Traditionally, in statistics, people have used simpler lin ear
models and assign meaning to the parameters. In machine
learning, developers often only think around the predic-
tions (P21). The meanings connected to parameters are less
well understood in machine learning techniques as opposed t o
more classical statistical techniques although they are re ally
the same thing in a certain sense (P21).D. Fairness
Participants interpreted fairness in various ways. P03 un-
derstood fairness as training ML models on diverse data,
and discussed several methods of addressing bias within the
data used to train the AI system. Omitting data from over-
represented groups so that groups are more equally represen ted
in the data was one method, although there is the risk that
the data removed will reﬂect the researchers’ own cognitive
biases (P03).
Downsampling populations that are over-represented in the
data was another method of addressing bias, although it was
described as “a very crude approach [to] the problem because
you’re getting rid of samples that you think are going to be
identical. If they are then that’s probably ﬁne. But in the va st
majority of the complex applications that we have, there is
probably still a subtle variation in there that might be the
crucial thing for the machine learning methods to pick up. Yo u
don’t know from the beginning” (P03). Placing judiciously
selected weights on data was suggested as a method of
maintaining variation in the data while also countering ove r-
representation in the data (P03). However, manually adjust ing
the weights has its own problems: “you’re going in with
an assumption that you know how to tune this thing, which
basically goes against machine learning as such, [...] wher e it’s
purely data driven” (P03). Even though mitigation approach es
may address some problems, biases in the data were still seen
as an inevitability (P03, P09).
Incomplete data was identiﬁed as a problem for ensuring
fairness. “Sometimes you can be limited in what data [you
have] available to use in the ﬁrst place” (P01). As one
participant noted, “you can only tweak the data that you
have” (P03). The cost of obtaining data was also noted as
a problem (P03).
Due to the potential impact of biases within the training
data affecting the recommendations of the AI system, user
judgement in accepting results (or a ‘human-in-the-loop’) was
suggested as a potential response (P03). User judgement may
be supported by indicating whether the sample being tested
has a close resemblance to the data used to train the ML
model (P03). Another participant noted that it is important
for users to understand the context of the system so that the
representations of people made by that system are judged
fairly (P10).
For historical clinical data, discriminatory language was
noted as a potential problem for fairness (P16). “[A]ll the
clinical concepts [...] have a preferred label associated w ith
them and a set of synonyms. Of course, over time, the social
acceptability of certain terms changes. So, we’ve provided
feedback to ensure that, where we’ve come across those terms ,
that they get updated in the reference data” (P16).
Some participants noted the differences in interpreting fa ir-
ness as ‘non-discrimination’ and as the opposite to ‘unfair
discrimination’. The removal of identifying information f rom
data was mentioned as a method of ensuring fairness (P07).

==== Page 8 ====
This is fairness as non-discrimination. However, discrimi na-
tion (in the form of exclusion criteria) was mentioned as a
necessity for research using medical data: “[y]ou want to
remove as much variance as possible to ﬁnd out the signal
that you want, and it comes only later to see if that signal
is applicable to other groups” (P11). This discrimination
would not necessarily be ‘unfair discrimination’. The same
participant also noted that “there are applications where y ou
absolutely want it to be fair for everybody the same way. For
example if you do a loan application, a loan application if yo u
have an [AI system], you know that for this particular one it
has to be the same no matter what is the population” (P11)
Fairness in the distribution of beneﬁts and burdens from
using the AI system was also mentioned: “the people [bearing
the] costs should be the ones also getting the beneﬁts out of
it in the end” (P07). The beneﬁts of AI systems trained on
biased data may be unevenly distributed (P02).
Another participant questioned whether fairness is necess ar-
ily linked with transparency: “[w]hat’s interesting about that
fairness principle is it assumes that openness and transpar ency
is going to be our only pathway for an ethical outcome” (P14).
Maintaining the ownership of data may conﬂict with the goal
of making the data accessible to others (P14). However, whil e
the data used by the AI system may not be open and accessible
to others, the methods developed to analyse and present the
data can be made open and accessible (P14).
The role of fairness was unclear in contexts where the AI
system is not used to make decisions that directly impact
individuals, communities, or groups (P08).
E. Contestability
Where the AI system is used for decision support, con-
testability is implemented by allowing the user to overrule
the recommended decision (P18). This was explained with
an example of a system used in clinical contexts: “there was
actually a deﬁned process where if a patient was not ﬂagged
as being high risk, [...] clinicians were still allowed to in clude
the patient into the next step clinical review” (P18).
One issue identiﬁed with contestability is the difﬁculty of
revising the initial assumptions and design choices made in
collecting and analysing the data used by the AI system: “if
your results or the product is somehow sensitive to initial
assumptions or choices made [...], it’s not like you’re goin g
to be able [...] to run things again with different assumptio ns
and choices” (P01).
Another problem for contestability is the complexity of the
explanation of the AI system’s decision making (P03). This
complexity may prevent clients and users from contesting
the system’s output: “it’s just another layer of complexity
that I don’t think they’ll be interested in or in a position
to understand it. But I don’t know whether they would be
able to critically evaluate or contest, as you say, what has
come out of it” (P20). Another aspect of this was data where
the relationships were not well understood. Genomic datawas given as an example: “basically, there is no one-on-one
relationship between typically higher blood counts, say, a nd
these other negative outcomes. For genomic [data] it could b e
the whole range. So therefore this interpretability is real ly not
as clear-cut” (P03).
Contestability was also interpreted as interpretability o f
an AI system’s decisions, and overlapping with the princi-
ple of transparency and explainability (P03). One example
mentioned was the logging and time stamping data collected
by autonomous systems: “if someone says [...] you took
data [...] there where you were not allowed to do this and
whatever. I mean we can say this is what happened. So it’s
all logged” (P12).
One interviewee pointed out it is hard to get people to trust
an AI system that is just telling them to do something but
doesn’t give them the choice to disagree with the system (P15 ).
F . Accountability
Transparency and explainability were seen as important for
accountability: “if you want some accountability, you need
to ﬁnd [an] explanation. So, the model [needs] to support
the interpretability” (P02). Transparency assists accoun tability
by allowing domain experts to identify anomalies in the
data (P18). The reproducibility of published results is an
important form of accountability for academic researchers .
“For us, the only bad thing is we publish a paper and then
people try to reproduce it, and nobody can” (P11).
Testing the AI system was identiﬁed as important for
accountability. Test data may be developed in collaboratio n
with the client to evaluate the system (P18). The system may
also be evaluated empirically: “that’ll be done in terms of
having some unseen set of data, which is human labelled,
has some ground truth, and that we evaluate the system on
that” (P17). Accountability for the data used to train the ML
model was attributed to the provider (P16).
There were differences in opinion over accountability for
the outcomes of decisions based on an AI system’s recommen-
dations. One researcher noted that “the creator of technolo gy is
as responsible for what happens to the technology as the peo-
ple who make the decision how to use the technology” (P12).
Similarly, another observed that “at some stage, your predi c-
tion is wrong and there’s some loss, then who is responsible
for this? I believe the problem exists now, but, when you
deploy a model, the problem can be more complicated. [...]
[S]ome sort of framework should be established for who
actually responsible for this” (P02). However, another arg ued
that this form of accountability did not apply to projects th at
are still within the research and development stage (P13). T he
lack of control over the use of AI technologies after their
development was also noted as a justiﬁcation for disclaimin g
accountability by developers: “Whether the [system] works in
10 years, it’s not under our control” (P11).
Accountability is also important for ensuring the reliabil ity
and safety of AI systems. Logging and recording of metadata

==== Page 9 ====
used by the AI system in making decisions is important for
reviewing the system’s output (P04). Accountability is imp or-
tant for the adoption of autonomous systems: “I think with
ML, we’ve seen examples [...], especially in the autonomous
car industry, where there’s research being done into accide nts
and [...] if you can dig into detail what happened, why that
happened, I think that brings a lot more security and safety,
[...] both commercially and to the customers as well” (P13).
For Indigenous end-users and collaborators, accountabili ty
extended beyond the outputs of the AI system to the larger
process of applying an AI system itself: “The other part of
that accountability though was that [Indigenous collabora tors
and co-creators] said we have to beneﬁt from the process,
not just the outcome” (P14). AI projects were accountable
to indigenous collaborators and co-creators for the capaci ty-
building with digital technologies that the projects enabl ed
with their indigenous partners (P14).
G. Human-Centred Values
Participants noted the difﬁculty in clearly noting the pres -
ence of human-centred values in their projects: “Values are
often implicit. They’re not stated explicitly in things” (P 1).
It was also observed that human-centred values were less
applicable to applications that did not involve direct huma n
contact with the AI system (P12).
Human-centred values were mentioned largely in relation
to projects co-created with Indigenous groups that are buil t
on Indigenous knowledge. The cross-cultural context where
the AI system is used needs to considered: “The problem is
that sometimes when we design AI, we don’t take that care to
think about which system it’s going to be put into. We just do
it as a prototype to then to be deployed everywhere” (P14).
Indigenous knowledge, rights and practices should also be
incorporated into the design and deployment of AI systems,
including how and why data is collected where data will be
physically stored (P14). AI systems for Indigenous groups
should also reﬂect their ethics and worldviews: “I think it w as
really interesting to actually push that a bit further and sa y
actually, let’s make really explicit biases in [an Indigeno us-
focused project] that actually [make] sense to Indigenous
people. So we didn’t just do it on (...) human-centred [value s],
we really pushed it to say how do we make [the AI] learn so
that it actually is really biased to an Indigenous group” (P1 4).
H. Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-being
Human well-being was mentioned in relation to privacy
(P13). It was also described as a motivation for AI appli-
cations in controlling invasive species that are human dise ase
vectors (P04). The potential of harmful future application s of
AI were mentioned as issues for human well-being (P20, P21).
Two participants mentioned concerns about applications of
AI systems that they regarded as having contested impacts on
human and social well-being, such as facial recognition [ 10],
[52] and dual-use applications (P11, P12). “[T]here is aspectrum of stuff where everybody has a comfort line [...].
It has nothing to do with privacy, fairness, and all those
issues [mentioned in the principles]. It’s a completely dif ferent
topic” (P11).
Uncertainty over the social impact of new technologies was
also mentioned: “[t]he difﬁcult thing really is to understa nd
[...] how the technology really affects society. It’s not an easy
thing to see” (P12). Concerns were also raised about data
analyses and recommendations that may have uneven beneﬁts
and reinforce disadvantage in society (P01).
Environmental well-being was mentioned as a motivation
for AI projects that use environmental data (P04, P09). It wa s
also identiﬁed as being signiﬁcant for clients: “environme ntal
well-being was a big concern for them, not only because
they are very environmentally concerned, but also because t hat
imposes requirements that some other customers [of the clie nt]
have” (P07).
AI projects may also contribute to environmental well-bein g
by supporting environmental decision making: “the hope is
that [...] in some cases we would be involved in helping
people making decisions when it matters the most [...] for a
threatened species or ecosystem” (P08). However, this impa ct
depends on the client following the recommendations of the
AI system (P08).
Social well-being was identiﬁed as an important issue for
projects that involve Indigenous communities. The informa tion
made available by AI systems helped Indigenous people to
collect information about dangerous areas in their land, an d as
a means of allowing them to maintain a connection to country
even if they physically remote from it (P14).
V. D ISCUSSION AND SUGGESTIONS
In this section we discuss the observations and insights
gained from the interviews and place them in wider con-
text, with the aim of providing suggestions and caveats for
consideration when implementing the high-level AI ethics
principles. In the same vein as the preceding results sectio n,
the discussion is organised into subsections, covering eac h of
the high-level principles.
A. Privacy Protection and Security
This principle was largely interpreted as the protection of
sensitive data and privacy across the lifespan of a system,
both during the development and deployment. Sensitive data
in this context may include data indicating racial or ethnic
origin, political and religious beliefs, genetic and biome tric
data, health-related data (including mental health), sexu al
orientation, ﬁnancial data, as well as criminal offences an d
convictions [ 22]. Participants noted the importance of appro-
priate security methods to protect both the data and the AI
system using the data.
Trust with collaborators and data providers is an important
motivation for ensuring privacy and data protection. Colla b-
orators and data providers must have trust in the team and

==== Page 10 ====
organisation to not abuse the data and disclose their privat e
information.
Privacy impact assessments and human research ethics
committee reviews are important tools for identifying priv acy
risks and consequences, as well as resolving potential issu es,
which may include recommendations on software engineering
best practices. However, it must be noted that the applicabi lity
of human research ethics committees is necessarily limited
in scope, as such committees typically only review research
projects which directly involve humans. It is possible that a
given project may not perform research involving humans, an d
still have privacy concerns.
Software engineering best practices may include the use of
open algorithms and open systems with a good security track
record. This may include proactive public disclosure and co r-
rection/patching of security vulnerabilities, as opposed to the
practice of security through obscurity , where the algorithms
and systems are kept secret/proprietary. The efﬁcacy of the
latter practice has been questioned in the literature [ 32], [42].
Methods for protecting sensitive data in ML model training
data may negatively affect the usefulness of the model. In
general, the richer the data is, more accurate and/or reliab le
ML models can be built [ 6], [29]. On the other hand, privacy
risks are likely to be reduced when less data is made availabl e
or used. To fulﬁl privacy requirements, developers may need
to aggregate the data so that the risk of uniquely identifyin g
individuals is reduced. However, this has to be carefully
weighed against the utility (accuracy and reliability) of t he
ML models.
Privacy concerns differ from project to project, where col-
laborators and clients may impose restrictions on data acce ss
by researchers. Access restrictions on sensitive data may p re-
vent projects from proceeding, and in some cases alternativ es
to sensitive data may be available. Data requirements need
to be associated with speciﬁc kinds of privacy measures the
customers/collaborators want to have in place. For example ,
a customer/collaborator might be willing to share only coar se
information about the outcome of a process, excluding any
ﬁner details about the process (such as the steps of the proce ss
or data used within the process).
Much effort has been put into technologies that reduce the
need to have complete access to training data. For example,
federated learning [ 37], [77] is a privacy preserving technique
and can be considered as an architectural design pattern to
deal with the trade-off between privacy and reliability, as well
as various requirements/restrictions placed by data provi ders.
Software architecture decisions are needed to ensure data
privacy and security; for example, which components read th e
data and which components share data outside the system.
Differential privacy [ 19], [26] is a type of privacy-
preserving method that is intended to be robust against mem-
bership inference attacks and attribute inference attacks which
are speciﬁc for AI systems. Membership inference can be used
to deduce whether a certain individual’s data is used as part of
the model training. Attribute inference aims to infer missi ngparts of data for a given individual by using partial data fro m
the individual’s record in conjunction with the output of an
AI algorithm. Differential privacy means the learned model
should not depend too much on any individual’s data. The
standard way to achieve the differential privacy property i s to
inject “noise” in the computation. Differential privacy ca n be
treated as an architectural design pattern for privacy; exa mples
include deliberate perturbation or random alteration of in put
data, model parameters, and/or output data.
More restricted access control should be applied to sensiti ve
data (e.g., genomics data), including only using a portion o f
data, never locating the data at the same space in the same
time, only sharing the insights of the data, encrypting the d ata
while letting only the data owner own the decryption key.
Implementation of this principle may involve proper gov-
ernance and management for all data used and generated by
AI systems [ 2]. Furthermore, appropriate security measures
should be used for both the data and the AI system using the
data. This may include identiﬁcation of potential security vul-
nerabilities within the underlying hardware and/or softwa re;
open-source software may be preferable due to not relying on
the questionable security through obscurity approach. Security
measures should also include appropriate mitigation measu res
for unintended applications of AI systems, and/or potentia l
abuse of AI systems. Robustness to adversarial attacks shou ld
also be taken into account, where deliberately corrupted da ta is
given to AI systems with the aim of confusing the systems to
produce unintended or adverse outcomes [ 12], [67], potentially
reducing privacy and/or leaking sensitive data.
B. Reliability and Safety
Participants interpreted this principle as meaning that th e AI
system should produce accurate and reproducible recommen-
dations. The ability to produce reliable AI systems is often
largely dependent on the volume and quality of training data
that is available [ 6], [29]. AI systems may be unreliable if
they are used in a context that differs from the one they
are developed for. AI systems are difﬁcult to verify, and
may require expert assessment if they are used to replace an
existing process or model. Reliability and safety are criti cal
for autonomous systems.
For situations where obtaining sufﬁcient samples can be
costly (in terms of time, effort, and/or ﬁnancial cost), active
learning [63] may be beneﬁcial and can be considered as a
design pattern. The overall goal in active learning is to ﬁnd the
most informative training samples so that AI models can be
successfully built from a relatively small number of traini ng
samples. As an example of active learning, initial limited
data (samples) is used to build an initial model that has the
ability to indicate where (i.e., areas of sample space) it is most
uncertain; the locations with the highest uncertainty are t hen
used to guide (either automatically or manually) the select ion
of new samples to be obtained, which are then used to reﬁne

==== Page 11 ====
the model. This iterative learning process is repeated unti l the
model has sufﬁcient ﬁdelity and/or reaching a cost threshol d.
In designing of AI systems, it may be useful to explicitly
consider unintended operation due to faulty implementatio n
(including software bugs), and erroneous/incomplete data (in-
cluding training data and data used during deployment). In
both cases the system should be able to fail safely by design
(also known as fail-safe ). This may include designing the
system to refuse to provide an output (e.g., recommendation )
or explicitly marking the output as potentially unreliable . The
system should provide reasoning for the refusal and unrelia ble
output, such as incomplete input data, or a large mismatch
between training data and given data.
The choice of the underlying algorithms should take into
account at least three aspects and the trade-offs between th em:
accuracy, robustness, and explainability. The system shou ld
provide reliable outputs across a range of operating condit ions
(i.e., robustness) expected during operation, and not simp ly
the best possible accuracy in a very narrow range (e.g., on
a limited test dataset). For example, maximising accuracy
in well controlled settings may have detrimental impact on
accuracy within less controlled settings in actual deploy-
ment [ 75], including situations with missing, incomplete, or
erroneous data. Hence focusing only on accuracy in a narrow
range of conditions increases risk of unreliable operation in
a wider range of conditions. In application contexts where
explainability is desired or required, lower model complex ity
may be preferred, at the possible cost of reduction in accura cy.
To achieve reliable functionality, the range of operating
conditions may need to be explicitly limited, possibly in
tension with the Fairness principle. Training data may only be
available for a set of operating conditions or speciﬁc subse ts
of people (e.g., limited in age range, limited in ethnicity) .
Operation beyond the training data may result in unreliable or
erroneous outputs, and in turn may result in loss of trust in
the AI system.
For building trust in the reliability of an AI system, it may
be useful to keep track of usage, noting the suggestions made
by the system and which suggestions are followed by the user
(cf.Contestability principle). This can be used to determine
where the system works as designed, and where the system
needs to be improved. This can also be used as an aid to
improve the design of the system, by taking into account new
data and/or speciﬁcations that were initially not used.
To address performance degradation over time, regularly
scheduled recalibration and/or retraining of AI models can
be useful, in order to take into account changes and/or im-
provements to the available data [ 36]. Furthermore, automatic
measurement of the nature and quality of input data (e.g.,
missing values, intermittent availability, increase/dec rease in
rate of data) can be used to automatically issue alerts that a n
AI system may not be performing as designed.
Implementation of this principle may involve adopting
safety measures that are proportionate to the magnitude of
potential risks [ 2]. AI systems may need to be veriﬁed,validated and monitored on a continual basis to ensure they
maintain their operation for the intended purpose. Continu al
risk management should be used to address any identiﬁed
problems. Responsibility for safety measures, monitoring , test-
ing, and risk management should be clearly and appropriatel y
identiﬁed.
C. Transparency and Explainability
While the principle is deﬁned with the Transparency and
Explainability components having distinct meanings (see Ta-
bleI), the two components were often observed to be inter-
changeable from the interviewees’ perspective, and interp reted
often to mean only Explainability .
Interpretability and explainability can treated as distin ct
requirements for AI systems. An explanation of a model
result is a description of how a model produces an outcome.
This explanation may need to be placed in terms that are
understandable by the target audience; there may be more tha n
one target audience. For example, deep neural networks can b e
completely explainable in terms of relatively straightfor ward
mathematics, but the sheer amount of parameters is such
networks makes them difﬁcult to interpret [ 4]. An interpretable
model should provide users with a description of what a
stimulus, such as a data point or model output, means in
context. The degree of required explainability should be a
consideration in deciding which algorithms should be used.
Interpretability is critical to building human trust in AI.
To improve interpretability, decision outcomes can be mark ed
with a probability indicator (e.g., 60% accuracy estimate) . To
improve trust, explainable interfaces can be designed to sh ow
graphical representation of the decision making process an d
indicators of why a speciﬁc decision was made. Explaining
decisions with useful scenarios and the potential impact of
various inputs is helpful to improving trust in the system. I n
other contexts, explainability may be a temporary requirem ent
until users understand how the model works. Once users
understand how it works, transparency and explainability m ay
still be needed for veriﬁcation and troubleshooting.
Model outputs and explanations should be presented in
ways that relate to the users’ background, culture and pref-
erences. The granularity of the explanation should also be
considered when explaining decisions. High-level explana tions
may be sufﬁcient for some users and contexts, while others
may require more detailed explanations of the AI system’s
decision.
Thorough documentation is needed for explainability. Re-
producibility checklists that are already used by some venu es
for scientiﬁc publishing overlap with the documentation re -
quirements for explainability. For example, one project te am
used a simple clustering algorithm and recorded the decisio ns
including the choice of clustering algorithm, the choice of
predictor variables, how to represent categorical data nu-
merically, how to handle correlations between variables, a nd
how to normalise or scale data. Sensitivity analysis is also

==== Page 12 ====
useful to understand the sensitivities and the uncertainty in
decision making if there are resources to do so. Accuracy
(e.g., sensitivity and speciﬁcity) on training and testing data
should also be documented.
A simpliﬁed model can be helpful for explaining how a
complex model works by giving an idea of the criteria affect-
ing the complex model’s decision making. More speciﬁcally,
improvements in explainability may be obtained through the
use of model approximation techniques (including surrogat e
modelling and model emulation), where simpliﬁed ML models
are used to represent more complex models [ 1], [7]. Here
the aim is to produce a less complex model and/or more
explainable model, while preserving as much ﬁdelity of the
more complex model as possible. One team developed al-
gorithms/tools to simplify the complexity of solutions by
providing compact representation to ﬁnd the most important
components, e.g., ﬁnd a smaller decision tree that performs
almost as well as the more complex one. Furthermore, Shapely
values and Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanatio ns
are two model agnostic techniques that can be used to aid
explainability [ 50].
D. Fairness
This principle addresses widespread concerns about the
potential for AI systems to reﬂect (and potentially reinfor ce)
existing inequalities within society. This covers both the
accessibility of AI systems to users with diverse abilities and
cultural backgrounds, and how decisions made based on the
recommendations of these systems may disproportionately a f-
fect disadvantaged groups. Decisions made with the assista nce
of AI systems also need to comply with anti-discrimination
laws [ 2].
Concerns about fairness cover both biases embedded within
the data used to train ML models, and biases embedded
in AI systems themselves [ 17]. These biases may be pre-
existing individual and societal biases of those developin g
the system, technical biases resulting from how the system
is implemented, or emergent biases resulting from the conte xt
within which the system is used [ 27].
In the interviews, fairness was understood as decisions mad e
on unbiased data, as non-discrimination, and equal distrib ution
of beneﬁts and burdens of the output of AI systems.
There are multiple deﬁnitions and measures of fairness, and
choosing between them is both a technical problem and a
question of values [ 74]. Algorithms cannot satisfy multiple
deﬁnitions of fairness at the same time [ 74]. The appropriate
deﬁnition and measure of fairness for an AI project should be
discussed between the project team, clients, and stakehold ers
at the start of the project.
Adjustments to ML models to promote fairness may occur
in the input data for the model (pre-processing), in the
processing performed by the model, or in the output of the
model (post-processing) [ 50]. Software libraries that imple-
ment bias mitigation methods should be considered if they ar e
appropriate for the methods, tools, and goals of AI projects [5].A record should be kept of the methods used for pre-
processing (or cleaning) data that is then used as inputs the ML
model [ 28]. This includes data used for training the model, as
well as data used during deployment of the model [ 44]. The
methods include approaches for inferring missing values (o r
how missing values in data are handled), which components
(ﬁelds) of data are explicitly omitted, which components of
data are explicitly used, and the speciﬁc approaches employ ed
for mitigation of various biases (e.g., placing weights on d ata
during training and deployment). See also the discussion on
theAccountability principle in Section V-F, which proposes a
related reproducibility checklist concept.
If the data used for training and/or deployment of ML
models comes from a third-party source, the data should not b e
used blindly. The source should be queried about any known
biases and potential biases within the data, and how the data
was collected. Knowledge of the biases in the data can help
with the design and application of bias mitigation approach es.
E. Contestability
Contestability can be considered as critical for building t rust
in AI. Those affected by either the output of an AI system
or by decisions made based on the output of these systems
should have the opportunity to question these outcomes and
correct them if they are in error. In particular, vulnerable
groups should be considered during the development and use
of AI systems.
Contestability may be implemented by allowing users to
override the recommendations and decisions of AI systems. I t
may be difﬁcult to revise the initial assumptions and design
decisions in the system if they are contested by those affect ed.
The explanation of the AI system’s decision process may also
be too complex for users to understand (cf. Transparency and
Explainability principle), or the relationships in the data may
not be well understood. Contestability was also understood as
interpretability.
The explainability of an AI system is important for speciﬁc
aspects of how it produced the output to be contested. In
addition to satisfying explainability requirements to tho se
affected by the AI system (e.g., descriptions of the system
and underlying algorithms), information on how to contest
the system’s output should also be provided. The means of
obtaining this information and how to contest this output ma y
be included with the description of the output provided to
those affected by it.
The ability to opt-in or opt-out of AI systems should be
provided to users if possible. More speciﬁcally, an explici t
option may be provided to the user to disagree with decisions
given by an AI system.
Where the output of the AI system is to augment an expert’s
decision making, it may be necessary to conﬁrm whether
regulatory approval is necessary for such decision support .
This may be the case if the system is assisting decisions that
are diagnostic or therapeutic in nature.

==== Page 13 ====
F . Accountability
The participants interpreted this principle as accountabi lity
for the methods and data used by an AI system, as well as
the outputs of the system.
Accountability relates to transparency and explainabilit y;
giving an explanation for an AI system was seen as a re-
quirement for being accountable for it. Evaluating the syst em
through test data is important for accountability. There is no
consensus on who is accountable for the outcomes of decision s
made based on the system’s recommendations. Accountabilit y
is also associated with reliability and safety, and is seen a s
important for the acceptance of autonomous systems. For in-
digenous collaborators and co-creators, accountability e xtends
beyond the outputs of the system itself to the beneﬁts of the
larger process that the AI system is embedded within.
A possible complicating factor in accountability is that so me
AI systems may continue to learn post-deployment, using,
for example, data provided by users. If there are issues with
the new data, the accountability boundary is blurred betwee n
the original developers of such systems and the users of the
systems.
Accountability is expected to be role-level and associated
with traceability and reproducibility. AI systems may prov ide
end users a method to track their historical use of the system
(e.g., to discover faults through an immutable log) and allo w
them to provide feedback. Handover points in the developmen t
process may be identiﬁed to ensure traceability and account -
ability, as handover points are where traceability may be lo st.
If a method developed by design works for a particular
client for a speciﬁc dataset, it is challenging to maintain
reproducibility. In current practice, project leaders hav e to
describe why they want to use data, how they are going to
use it, what they are going to do with the data, what are the
risks, what is the consent, who is going to have access to that
data, for how long you are going to keep it, and what happens
to the data at the end of the project. This current practice ma y
be augmented by introducing a reproducibility checklist that
provides the information necessary to reproduce the output of
an AI system. This checklist may include:
•how the data was pre-processed
•how the data was scaled or normalised
•the approaches used to mitigate biases (see Section V-D)
•how hyperparameters were conﬁgured in the model
•the algorithms chosen for use in the system
•the choice of prediction variables
•the numerical representation of categorical data
•how correlation between variables was handled
Domain knowledge needs to be reﬂected within the AI
system. There may be various versions of domain knowledge
frameworks that may be useful to employ in AI systems that
operate in specialised domains.
Collaboration and co-creation of AI projects with groups
who are end-users or signiﬁcantly affected by the system’soutput is a powerful means of making these systems ac-
countable to them. Techniques from participatory design, c o-
design (collaborative design) and citizen-led projects ma y be
useful to consider for AI projects with signiﬁcant communit y
impacts [ 66], [68], [71].
G. Human-Centred Values
Human values within projects are rarely stated explicitly,
and may not be apparent within projects where the AI system
does not interact with human users. Principles such as Fairness
and Privacy can be useful for ensuring that AI systems
are aligned with human values. AI projects co-created with
Indigenous people should reﬂect Indigenous worldviews and
knowledge practices.
Human values have been well studied within software
engineering [ 70], [33], [72], where Schwartz’s well-evidenced
set of universal values are used [ 59], [60]. The resulting
approaches can be adapted to address human values and
concerns in AI systems. Human-centred values may also be
partially addressed by fostering diversity within develop ment
teams, as a wide range of perspectives can identify potentia l
concerns about how the system may affect people’s rights.
Indigenous cultural and intellectual property rights know l-
edge sharing protocols and practices need to be respected
and protected. As such, Indigenous people should co-design
AI projects to ensure the incorporation of Indigenous knowl -
edge systems and governance systems. The CARE principles
(Collective Beneﬁt, Authority to Control, Responsibility and
Ethics) for Indigenous data governance [ 54], and the Our
Knowledge Our Way best practice guidelines [ 76] can enable
the combination of Indigenous knowledge, science and AI
system design to be woven together, in order to empower
Indigenous people and decision-making. Examples of how to
translate CARE principles into AI system design are given
in [55]. In turn, this may help with the implementation of
other principles, such as Privacy Protection and Security , and
Accountability .
It may be necessary to perform due diligence into potential
reputational risks for an organisation by working with par-
ticular business partners in controversial applications o f AI
systems, such as dual-use and defence applications.
H. Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-being
Existing and potential future applications of AI were men-
tioned as a risk for human well-being. Privacy was mentioned
as an aspect of human well-being. Uncertainty about the
social impact of new technologies was also mentioned. En-
vironmental well-being was seen as a motivation for project s
that use environmental data, and was seen as important to
clients. Social well-being was an important aspect of proje cts
that involve Indigenous people. The effects of deploying an
AI system may be recorded to better understand the beneﬁts
gained and burdens imposed by introducing the system.

==== Page 14 ====
Respect for culture is important in AI projects, where
there may be race- or group-speciﬁc aspects to data, model
outputs or decisions. Cultural concerns may be incorporate d
into both functional and data requirements for AI projects. For
Indigenous projects, Indigenous people need to be involved in
environmental decision-making. For example, critical env iron-
mental decisions can take into account Indigenous knowledg e.
VI. S UPPORT MECHANISMS
Based on the insights primarily synthesised from our in-
terview study, below we provide two sets of suggestions that
may help with the implementation of the high-level ethical
principles into practice. The ﬁrst set covers organisation al
support, while the second set suggests the use of design note s
as a companion to high-level ethics principles.
A. Organisational Support
For organisations that want to be ethical with AI, devising
an implementation process of AI ethics principles is a step
towards building capacity and capability for being ethical with
AI. The potential beneﬁts may include gained trust leading
to competitive advantage, retention of highly-skilled sta ff,
avoidance of reputational damage, as well as responsivenes s
and readiness for regulatory requirements.
Adoption of responsible AI as a fundamental aspect of an
organisation’s digital strategy may be beneﬁcial for long t erm
development and growth. Within organisations or departmen ts
devoted to scientiﬁc research, a digital strategy can inclu de
investment in the responsible development and use of AI to
accelerate scientiﬁc discovery through the use of current a nd
future digital technologies (e.g., digital assistants, au tomation
and robotics).
It may be useful to provide organisation-wide training and
processes to increase awareness and understanding of high-
level AI principles followed by organisation-wide adoptio n
and implementation of such principles. This can be accom-
plished through a set of seminars, and/or recommended onlin e
learning modules. The chosen principles can be the gener-
ally accepted AI ethics principles [ 34], or a speciﬁc set of
principles such as the Australian AI ethics principles [ 2], as
summarised in Table I.
Several interviewees noted that the high-level principles do
not provide guidance as to where AI should and should not be
used (e.g., in projects with dual-use applications and/or n on-
civilian focus). As such, it may be useful to deﬁne a speciﬁc
organisational policy on the permissible uses of AI systems .
Analysis of existing software, systems, and/or projects th at
use AI technologies may yield areas where consideration
and/or implementation of the AI ethics principles can be ad-
vantageous and/or prudent. In addition to looking at intern ally
produced software and systems, liaison with external softw are
producers/providers (which includes closed-source/prop rietary
software as well as open-source software) to ensure softwar e
used within an organisation adheres to AI ethics principles .
This may have a useful and far-reaching side effect in that th ehigh-level AI ethics principles operationalised in extern ally
produced software can positively affect the functioning of
many other organisations (on a global scale) which also use
the same software.
It may be beneﬁcial to start each project with a Data Planner
(RDP) [ 3], where the need and/or use of AI technologies
can be identiﬁed. This allows the identiﬁcation of applicab le
high-level AI ethics principles within the context of each
project, which in turn spurs the formulation of plans for
addressing/implementing each applicable principle. The R DP
may be helpful in providing links to useful material that rai ses
awareness of the principles; it may also be helpful for build ing
a vignette to facilitate addressing applicable principles . As a
useful side effect, use of the RDP may lead to an increase in
the organisational knowledge of the AI ethics principles, a s
well as an increase in the pool of methods and approaches for
operationalising each principle.
Related to RDP, the application of dataset datasheets [28] is
encouraged whenever a dataset is created and/or an existing
dataset used for AI models, projects and/or products. Such
datasheets cover characteristics of given datasets, such a s
their motivation, composition, collection/acquisition m ethods,
applied cleaning/pre-processing, added labels, recommen ded
uses, etc. Given that datasets are an integral part of the dev el-
opment and use of AI systems, the use of dataset datasheets
can increase accountability and transparency. In the same v ein,
use of model cards [44] is also encouraged in order to describe
the characteristics of AI models, such as their type, versio n,
intended use, performance (error rates and associated metr ics),
as well as the names and versions of associated datasets used
for training and evaluation of the models.
B. Design Notes for Developers
Current high-level principles, such as the Australian AI
ethics principles [ 2], appear more focused on end users and
people affected by AI technologies, rather than developers
of AI systems. This results in a mismatch between the
underlying intent of the principles and how the principles a re
to be implemented. To address this mismatch, the high-level
principles can be extended with a mapping between the presen t
principles and a set of design notes aimed at developers, such
as suggestions and speciﬁc attributes to keep in mind while
designing and implementing AI systems.
Examples of suggestions that can be part of the design
notes are given in the discussion in Section V. We note that
the listed approaches reﬂect the content of the interviews
and the surrounding discussions for each principle, and are
hence not exhaustive. As such, including recommendations
and suggestions from relevant literature [ 41], [53], [62], [64],
[65] may yield a richer picture.
The proposed design notes may also include reusable design
methods, where the design and implementation of system
components, as well as their integration, follows known pro -
cess/design patterns that are aligned with high-level AI et hics
principles [ 39], [40].

==== Page 15 ====
Within the Australian AI ethics principles [ 2], the Privacy
Protection and Security principle covers seemingly closely
related topics. However, in practice the two notions of secu rity
and privacy are distinct, and can be treated as two separate
principles in the proposed design notes in order to better
match developers’ understanding and practice. Security in
this context typically means security at the software and
deployment level, where best practices in software enginee ring
and deployment can be used. Privacy protection in the contex t
of AI systems involves the careful treatment of sensitive da ta,
where approaches speciﬁc to AI need to be used. This includes
approaches such as federated machine learning, deidentiﬁc a-
tion, and differential privacy. Using these approaches may
affect the utility (e.g., accuracy and reliability) of AI sy stems,
and hence must be carefully considered and weighed against
the degree of required privacy protection.
A related compounding problem exists in the Transparency
and Explainability principle, where the two components have
distinct meanings. Yet from the developers’ perspective, t he
two components were often observed to be interchangeable
and interpreted often to mean Explainability , resulting in
theTransparency component being de-emphasised. In order
to address this downside, the Transparency component can
be separated into a separate stand-alone principle within t he
proposed design notes. While it may be tempting to join
Transparency with the related Contestability principle, from
developers’ perspective these two principles are distinct tasks
and hence require separate solutions. In a similar vein, the
Reliability and Safety principle covers two related yet distinct
issues, which may be better treated separately.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this interview study, the unique requirements, constrai nts
and objectives of the diverse range of projects that partic-
ipants have been involved in provide valuable insights into
the complexities of designing and developing responsible, or
ethical, AI systems. Using high-level AI principles propos ed
by the Australian Government provided a structure for the
analysis and discussions, which in turn yielded insight int o
how the ethics principles were interpreted in the context of
the professional experience of the participants.
A notable challenge that emerged was balancing the ten-
sions and trade-offs that were inherent to using the princip les1.
Tensions were highlighted between the practical approache s
used for implementing privacy and security, transparency a nd
explainability, as well as accuracy. For example, techniqu es
may be used to develop an AI system that provides highly
accurate outputs with the caveat that those outputs are not
explicitly explainable. Similarly, the development of a hi ghly
explainable AI system may be vulnerable to privacy risks. In
these cases, a choice can be made to prioritise one set of valu es
over another [ 73].
1In follow-up work we have examined in more detail various tra de-offs and
frameworks for resolving them [ 57], [58].Weighing the risks and beneﬁts of such decisions requires
the implementation of supportive mechanisms and should not
fall to the designers and developers of AI systems alone [ 62].
The ability to assess risk was also presented as critical acr oss
the interviews as a way to gauge the degree of oversight,
accountability, reliability and explainability required for an AI
system.
We note that the existence of the principles alone does
not guarantee ethical AI [ 45]. Further infrastructure, beyond
the organisational level, may be required to build the capa-
bility and capacity of AI developers and designers to create
responsible AI [ 62]. High-level support and governance of
AI development to support the practice of implementing
principles is required. Such support could be in the form
of professional codes and regulatory frameworks, as well as
legal and professional accountability mechanisms to uphol d
professional standards and provide users with redress for
negligent behaviour [ 45].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues (Andreas Duenser,
Liming Zhu, Ross Darnell, Dan Gladish) for reviewing drafts
of this work. We would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for comments and suggestions that led to the im-
provements of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Asher, B. F. W. Croke, A. J. Jakeman, and L. J. M. Peete rs.
A review of surrogate models and their application to ground water
modeling. Water Resources Research , 51(8):5957–5973, 2015.
[2] Australian Government Dept. Industry, Science and Reso urces.
Australia’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence Ethics Framework, 201 9.
Online. URL: https://industry.gov.au/publications/aus tralias-artiﬁcial-
intelligence-ethics-framework (accessed: 12 Apr 2023).
[3] Australian Research Data Commons. Data management plan s, 2022.
Online. URL: https://ardc.edu.au/resources/aboutdata/ data-management-
plans (accessed: 21 Sep 2022).
[4] A. Barredo Arrieta, N. D´ ıaz-Rodr´ ıguez, J. Del Ser, A. B ennetot,
S. Tabik, A. Barbado, S. Garcia, S. Gil-Lopez, D. Molina, R. B enjamins,
R. Chatila, and F. Herrera. Explainable artiﬁcial intellig ence (XAI):
Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges towar d responsible
AI.Information Fusion , 58:82–115, 2020.
[5] R. K. E. Bellamy, K. Dey, M. Hind, S. C. Hoffman, S. Houde, e t al.
AI Fairness 360: An extensible toolkit for detecting, under standing, and
mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias. arXiv:1810.01943 , 2018.
[6] C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . Springer,
2006.
[7] A. Bolt, C. Sanderson, J. J. Dabrowski, C. Huston, and P. K uhnert.
A neural emulator for uncertainty estimation of ﬁre propaga tion.
Procedia Computer Science , 222:367–376, 2023.
[8] V . Braun and V . Clarke. Using thematic analysis in psycho logy.
Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3(2):77–101, 2006.
[9] V . Braun, V . Clarke, N. Hayﬁeld, and G. Terry. Thematic An alysis.
InHandbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences , pages
843–860. Springer, 2019.
[10] J. Buolamwini and T. Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectio nal accuracy
disparities in commercial gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency , pages 77–91, 2018.
[11] C. Cath. Governing artiﬁcial intelligence: ethical, l egal and techni-
cal opportunities and challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sc iences ,
376(2133):20180080, 2018.

==== Page 16 ====
[12] A. Chakraborty, M. Alam, V . Dey, A. Chattopadhyay, and D . Mukhopad-
hyay. A survey on adversarial attacks and defences. CAAI Transactions
on Intelligence Technology , 6(1):25–45, 2021.
[13] M. Christoforaki and O. Beyan. AI ethics – a bird’s eye vi ew.Applied
Sciences , 12(9):4130, 2022.
[14] M. Coeckelbergh. AI Ethics . The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
2020.
[15] R. Colvin, G. B. Witt, and J. Lacey. Approaches to identi fying
stakeholders in environmental management: Insights from p ractitioners
to go beyond the ‘usual suspects’. Land Use Policy , 52:266–276, 2016.
[16] M. d’Aquin, P. Troullinou, N. E. O’Connor, A. Cullen, G. Faller, and
L. Holden. Towards an ‘ethics by design’ methodology for AI r esearch
projects. In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pages
54–59, 2018.
[17] D. Dawson, E. Schleiger, J. Horton, J. McLaughlin, C. Ro binson,
G. Quezada, J. Scowcroft, and S. Hajkowicz. Artiﬁcial intel ligence:
Australia’s ethics framework. Report EP191846, CSIRO, 201 9.
[18] V . Dignum. Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Springer International
Publishing, 2019.
[19] C. Dwork. Differential privacy: A survey of results. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (LNCS) , 4978:1–19, 2008.
[20] V . Eubanks. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Proﬁle,
Police, and Punish the Poor . Picador, New York, NY , 2018.
[21] European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the E uropean
Parliament and of the Council Laying Down Harmonised Rules o n
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act) and A mending Certain
Union Legislative Acts, 2021. Document 52021PC0206 (1).
[22] European Union. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the Europe an Parliament
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natura l persons
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement
of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Dat a Protection
Regulation). Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union L 119 , 4 May 2016.
[23] S. Farthing, J. Howell, K. Lecchi, Z. Paleologos, P. Sai ntilan, and E. San-
tow. Human Rights and Technology. Report, Australian Human Rights
Commission, 2021. Online. URL: https://humanrights.gov. au/our-
work/rights-and-freedoms/publications/human-rights- and-technology-
ﬁnal-report-2021 (accessed: 14 Dec 2021).
[24] M. A. Ferrario, W. Simm, J. Whittle, C. Frauenberger, G. Fitzpatrick,
and P. Purgathofer. Values in computing. In CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 660–667,
2017.
[25] J. Fjeld, N. Achten, H. Hilligoss, A. C. Nagy, and M. Srik umar.
Principled artiﬁcial intelligence: Mapping consensus in e thical and
rights-based approaches to principles for AI. Berkman Klei n Center
for Internet & Society at Harvard University, Research Publ ication
No. 2020-1, 2020.
[26] A. Friedman and A. Schuster. Data mining with different ial privacy. In
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data M ining ,
pages 493–502, 2010.
[27] B. Friedman and H. Nissenbaum. Bias in computer systems .ACM
Transactions on Information Systems , 14(3):330–347, 1996.
[28] T. Gebru, J. Morgenstern, B. Vecchione, J. W. Vaughan, H . Wallach,
H. Daum´ e III, and K. Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communica-
tions of the ACM , 64(12):86–92, 2021.
[29] I. Goodfellow, Y . Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning . MIT Press,
2016.
[30] S. Hajkowicz, S. Karimi, T. Wark, C. Chen, M. Evans, N. Re ns,
D. Dawson, A. Charlton, T. Brennan, C. Moffatt, S. Srikumar, and
K. Tong. Artiﬁcial intelligence: Solving problems, growin g the economy
and improving our quality of life. Report EP191848, CSIRO, 2 019.
[31] N. Hall, J. Lacey, S. Carr-Cornish, and A.-M. Dowd. Soci al licence to
operate: understanding how a concept has been translated in to practice
in energy industries. Journal of Cleaner Production , 86:301–310, 2015.
[32] J.-H. Hoepman and B. Jacobs. Increased security throug h open source.
Communications of the ACM , 50(1):79–83, 2007.
[33] W. Hussain, H. Perera, J. Whittle, A. Nurwidyantoro, R. Hoda, R. A.
Shams, and G. Oliver. Human values in software engineering: Con-
trasting case studies of practice. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , 48(5):1818–1833, 2022.[34] A. Jobin, M. Ienca, and E. Vayena. The global landscape o f AI ethics
guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence , 1(9):389–399, 2019.
[35] B. Koopman, D. Bradford, and D. Hansen. Exemplars of art iﬁcial
intelligence and machine learning in healthcare. Report EP 203543,
CSIRO, 2020.
[36] G. A. Lewis, S. Echeverr´ ıa, L. Pons, and J. Chrabaszcz. Augur:
A step towards realistic drift detection in production ML sy stems.
InIEEE/ACM International Workshop on Software Engineering f or
Responsible Artiﬁcial Intelligence (SE4RAI) , pages 37–144, 2022.
[37] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith. Federated l earning:
Challenges, methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine , 37(3):50–60, 2020.
[38] N. Liu, P. Shapira, and X. Yue. Tracking developments in artiﬁcial
intelligence research: constructing and applying a new sea rch strategy.
Scientometrics , 126(4):3153–3192, 2021.
[39] Q. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, J. Whittle, D. Douglas, and C. Sander son.
Software engineering for responsible AI: An empirical stud y and opera-
tionalised patterns. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP ), 2022.
[40] Q. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, J. Whittle, D. Zowghi, and A. Jacquet .
Responsible AI pattern catalogue: A collection of best prac tices for
AI governance and engineering. ACM Computing Surveys , 56(7):1–35,
2024.
[41] M. M¨ antym¨ aki, M. Minkkinen, T. Birkstedt, and M. Vilj anen. Deﬁning
organizational AI governance. AI and Ethics , 2(4):603–609, 2022.
[42] R. T. Mercuri and P. G. Neumann. Security by obscurity. Communica-
tions of the ACM , 46(11):160, 2003.
[43] P. Mikalef, K. Conboy, J. E. Lundstr¨ om, and A. Popoviˆ c . Thinking
responsibly about responsible AI and ‘the dark side’ of AI. European
Journal of Information Systems , 31(3):257–268, 2022.
[44] M. Mitchell, S. Wu, A. Zaldivar, P. Barnes, L. Vasserman , B. Hutchin-
son, E. Spitzer, I. D. Raji, and T. Gebru. Model cards for mode l
reporting. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
pages 220–229, 2019.
[45] B. Mittelstadt. Principles alone cannot guarantee eth ical AI. Nature
Machine Intelligence , 1(11):501–507, 2019.
[46] J. Morley, A. Elhalal, F. Garcia, L. Kinsey, J. M¨ okande r, and L. Floridi.
Ethics as a service: A pragmatic operationalisation of AI et hics. Minds
& Machines , 31(2):239–256, 2021.
[47] J. Morley, L. Floridi, L. Kinsey, and A. Elhalal. From wh at to how: An
initial review of publicly available AI ethics tools, metho ds and research
to translate principles into practices. Science and Engineering Ethics ,
26(4):2141–2168, 2020.
[48] J. Morley, L. Kinsey, A. Elhalal, F. Garcia, M. Ziosi, an d L. Floridi.
Operationalising AI ethics: barriers, enablers and next st eps. AI &
Society , 2021.
[49] National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). National
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research - Updated, 20 18.
Online. URL: https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/about-us/public ations/national-
statement-ethical-conduct-human-research-2007-updat ed-2018.
[50] A. Nielsen. Practical Fairness . O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA, 2021.
[51] C. O’Neil. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases
Inequality and Threatens Democracy . Allen Lane, London, 2016.
[52] I. D. Raji, T. Gebru, M. Mitchell, J. Buolamwini, J. Lee, and E. Denton.
Saving face: Investigating the ethical concerns of facial r ecognition
auditing. In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pages
145–151, 2020.
[53] I. D. Raji, A. Smart, R. N. White, M. Mitchell, T. Gebru, B . Hutchinson,
J. Smith-Loud, D. Theron, and P. Barnes. Closing the AI accou ntability
gap: Deﬁning an end-to-end framework for internal algorith mic auditing.
InConference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 2020.
[54] Research Data Alliance International Indigenous Data Sovereignty In-
terest Group. CARE Principles of Indigenous Data Governanc e.Global
Indigenous Data Alliance , 2019. Online. URL: https://www.gida-
global.org/care (accessed: 07 Sep 2022).
[55] C. J. Robinson, T. Kong, R. Coates, I. Watson, C. Stokes, P. Pert,
A. McConnell, and C. Chen. Caring for indigenous data to eval uate
the beneﬁts of indigenous environmental programs. Environmental
Management , 68:160–169, 2021.

==== Page 17 ====
[56] M. Ryan, J. Antoniou, L. Brooks, T. Jiya, K. Macnish, and B. Stahl.
Research and practice of AI ethics: A case study approach jux taposing
academic discourse with organisational reality. Science and Engineering
Ethics , 27(2), 2021.
[57] C. Sanderson, D. Douglas, and Q. Lu. Implementing respo nsible AI:
Tensions and trade-offs between ethics aspects. In International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , 2023.
[58] C. Sanderson, E. Schleiger, D. Douglas, P. Kuhnert, and Q. Lu.
Resolving ethics trade-offs in implementing responsible A I. In IEEE
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (CAI) , pages 1208–1213, 2024.
[59] S. H. Schwartz. An Overview of the Schwartz Theory of Bas ic Values.
Online Readings in Psychology and Culture , 2(1), 2012.
[60] S. H. Schwartz, J. Cieciuch, M. Vecchione, E. Davidov, R . Fischer,
C. Beierlein, A. Ramos, M. Verkasalo, J.-E. L¨ onnqvist, K. D emirutku,
O. Dirilen-Gumus, and M. Konty. Reﬁning the theory of basic i ndividual
values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 103(4):663–688,
2012.
[61] A. Sepp¨ al¨ a. Implementing ethical AI: From principle s to AI governance.
Master’s thesis, Turku School of Economics, University of T urku, 2021.
[62] A. Sepp¨ al¨ a, T. Birkstedt, and M. M¨ antym¨ aki. From et hical AI principles
to governed AI. In International Conference on Information Systems ,
2021.
[63] B. Settles. Active Learning . Morgan & Claypool, 2012.
[64] B. Shneiderman. Bridging the gap between ethics and pra ctice: Guide-
lines for reliable, safe, and trustworthy human-centered A I systems.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , 10(4):1–31, 2020.
[65] B. Shneiderman. Responsible AI: Bridging from ethics t o practice.
Communications of the ACM , 64(8):32–35, 2021.
[66] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, editors. Routledge International Hand-
book of Participatory Design . Routledge, London and New York, 2013.
[67] R. S. Siva Kumar, M. Nystr¨ om, J. Lambert, A. Marshall, M . Goertzel,
A. Comissoneru, M. Swann, and S. Xia. Adversarial machine le arning –
industry perspectives. In IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops , 2020.
[68] J. Southern, R. Ellis, M. A. Ferrario, R. McNally, R. Dil lon, W. Simm,
and J. Whittle. Imaginative labour and relationships of car e: Co-
designing prototypes with vulnerable communities. Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change , 84:131–142, 2014.
[69] B. C. Stahl, J. Antoniou, M. Ryan, K. Macnish, and T. Jiya . Organi-
sational responses to the ethical issues of artiﬁcial intel ligence. AI &
Society , 37(1):23–37, 2022.
[70] J. Whittle. Is your software valueless? IEEE Software , 36(3):112–115,
2019.
[71] J. Whittle, M. A. Ferrario, and W. Simm. Community-Univ ersity
Research: A Warts and All Account. In Into the Wild: Beyond the
Design Research Lab , pages 115–147. Springer, 2020.
[72] J. Whittle, M. A. Ferrario, W. Simm, and W. Hussain. A cas e for human
values in software engineering. IEEE Software , 38(1):106–113, 2021.
[73] J. Whittlestone, R. Nyrup, A. Alexandrova, and S. Cave. The role
and limits of principles in AI ethics: Towards a focus on tens ions. In
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 2019.
[74] P.-H. Wong. Democratizing algorithmic fairness. Philosophy &
Technology , 33(2):225–244, 2020.
[75] Y . Wong, M. T. Harandi, C. Sanderson, and B. C. Lovell. On robust
biometric identity veriﬁcation via sparse encoding of face s: Holistic vs
local approaches. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN) , 2012.
[76] E. Woodward, R. Hill, P. Harkness, and R. Archer. Our Knowledge Our
Way in Caring for Country . NAILSMA and CSIRO, 2020. Online. URL:
http://www.csiro.au/ourknowledgeourway (accessed: 07 S ep 2022).
[77] Q. Yang, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Y . Tong. Federated machine l earning.
ACM Trans. Intelligent Systems and Technology , 10(2):1–19, 2019.
[78] P. J. ˚Agerfalk, K. Conboy, K. Crowston, J. E. Lundstr¨ om, S. L.
Jarvenpaa, S. Ram, and P. Mikalef. Artiﬁcial intelligence i n information
systems: State of the art and research roadmap. Communications of the
Association for Information Systems , 50(1):420–438, 2022.

