==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)https://doi.org/10.1007/s44206-022-00013-3
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
AI Ethics, Ethics Washing, and the Need to Politicize Data 
Ethics
Gijs van Maanen1 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Many commercial actors in the tech sector publish ethics guidelines as a means to 
‘wash away’ concerns raised about their policies. For some academics, this phenom -
enon is reason to replace ethics with other tools and methods in an attempt to make 
sure that the tech sector does not cross any moral Rubicons. Others warn against 
the tendency to reduce a criticism of ‘ethics washing’ into one of ethics simpliciter. 
In this essay, I argue firstly that the dominant focus on principles, dilemmas, and 
theory in conventional ethical theories and practices could be an explanation of it 
lacking resistance to abuse by dominant actors, and hence its rather disappointing 
capacity to stop, redirect, or at least slow down big tech’s course. Secondly, drawing 
from research on casuistry and political philosopher Raymond Geuss, this essay will 
make a case for a question, rather than theory or principle-based ethical data prac -
tice. The emphasis of this approach is placed on the acquisition of a thorough under -
standing of a social-political phenomenon like tech development. This approach 
should be replenished with one extra component to the picture of the repoliticized 
data ethics drawn so far: the importance of ‘exemplars,’ or stories. Precisely the fact 
that one should acquire an in-depth understanding of the problem in practice will 
also allow one to look in the past, present, or future for similar and comparable sto -
ries from which one can learn.
Keywords  AI ethics · Ethics washing · Political theory · Geuss · Casuistry
“Not only rules, but also examples are needed for establishing a practice. Our rules leave loop-holes 
open, and the practice has to speak for itself” (Wittgenstein, 1969 , para. 139).
 * Gijs van Maanen 
 gijsvanmaanen@soverin.net
1 Molengraaff Institute for Private Law, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
Received: 25 October 2021 / Accepted: 22 July 2022 /Published online: 2 August 2022

==== Page 2 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
1 Introduction
The growing number of ethical guidelines, ethical committees, and ethicists that 
can be found in both the public and private sectors nowadays prompts researchers 
within the computer and data science community to question the role that ‘eth -
ics’ plays within the tech industry (Green, 2021 ; Jobin et al., 2019 ; Metcalf et al., 
2019 ; Morley et al., 2019 ; Schiff et al., 2020 ). The idea and practice of ethics, 
according to critics, is used by companies to wash away the concerns raised by 
a company’s behavior or a techno-political crisis (Wagner, 2018 ). Ethics, also, 
allows one to strategically ‘shop’ for the principles that limit one’s action as lit -
tle as possible while simultaneously presenting oneself as contributing towards 
the common good. The pessimistic implication of this behavior could be to look 
for alternative tools and methodologies to make sure that the tech sector does not 
cross any moral Rubicons. Think for instance about replacing ethics for science 
and technology studies (STS) (Sloane, 2019 ), new forms of ‘data justice’ (Taylor, 
2019 ), or about playing safe and falling back to a human rights regime (Yeung 
et al., 2020 ). Some of the more optimistically inclined scholars in this debate beg 
to differ, and warn against the tendency to reduce a criticism of ‘ethics washing’ 
into one of ethics simpliciter (Bietti, 2020 ). While these optimists are right in 
emphasizing the danger of conflating a company’s usage of ethics, and ethics as 
a valuable and important activity, the apparent incapacity of ‘ethics’ and ethicists 
to resist against this ‘abuse’ might be indicative for a limitation for relying on 
ethics as a tool, method, or attitude in this particular context (Maanen, 2020 ).
In this essay, I argue that the focus on principles, dilemmas, and theory in 
popular ethical theories and practices could be one of the factors that explain its 
lacking resistance to abuse by dominant actors. Section  1 introduces the corner -
stone of most types of (tech) ethics: ‘the’ ethical question. In Sect.  2, I intro -
duce the problem this essay deals with, with the help of an influential AI eth -
ics example. I suggest here that the discussed work exemplifies a particular way 
of doing ethics characterized by the formulation of moral principles and frame -
works. Section  3 speculates on why there is a seeming abundance of principle-
oriented works on data ethics with the help of research done by Albert R. Jonsen 
and Stephan Toulmin (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 ). The authors show that for the 
biggest chunk of Western history, a practice-oriented mode of moral reasoning 
was dominant. This form of ethics, however, lost its popularity in the seventeenth 
century, to be replaced by a more theory and principle-focused alternative. Ever 
since, the dominant approach in ethics or moral philosophy is one focusing on 
theories, principles, and generalizations. This, however, has disadvantages, to be 
discussed in Sect.  4, where I draw from the work of Raymond Geuss to make a 
case for a question, rather than theory or principle-based ethical practice. The 
emphasis of this approach is placed on the acquisition of a thorough understand -
ing of social-political phenomena (like tech development). In two Sects.  5 and 6, 
I draw out two consequences of the practice-oriented approach put forward so far: 
the need to do empirical research, and the importance of ‘exemplars’ or stories. 
Section  7 relates the argument developed so far to similar (academic) attempts to Page2of23 9

==== Page 3 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
politicize the practice of data science and ethics. The question answered here is to 
what extent the label of ‘ethics’ still characterizes my proposal.
For both heuristic and methodological reasons, the scope of this essay is limited. 
It focuses on one type of ethics, which is placed in opposition to practice-oriented 
alternatives. This kind of ethics is primarily being practiced by academics,1 though 
it is more and more being co-opted by industry and, as such, also practiced there 
(Green, 2021 ; Hu, 2021 ). Empirically speaking, the boundaries between ethics as 
academic inquiry, and ethics as practiced in industry, are thus hard to draw. Because 
of this interminglement of academia and industry, I argue near the end of this paper 
for the explicit acknowledgement of the situatedness of one’s ethical research, 
including its susceptibility to (mis)use by others. By mainly engaging in ethics in a 
principled and constructive manner without acknowledging its politics,2 one disre -
gards and by doing so accepts  the mutual dependencies existing between research 
and commerce. It is lastly good to note that this essay is limited to a genealogy-
based explanation for AI ethics’ susceptibility to be washed by the private sector. 
Other possible explanatory factors—e.g., academic funding structures; lobbying 
power—are hinted at but not studied extensively for this essay.
2  The Ethical Question
Most ethics attempt to answer the ethical question of what one should do, or how 
one should live.3 Ethics is then considered the practice or tool to be used to approach 
an answer to this question. ‘Within’ ethics, usually three different approaches to for -
mulating an answer to the ethical question can be identified. There are deontological 
approaches focusing on rules and duties, teleological ones emphasizing the impor -
tance of evaluating consequences, and others that focus on virtues (Ananny, 2016 , 
p. 94). Deontological approaches within the context of AI ethics attempt to codify 
ethical theories and principles, and conceive ethics as intimately connected to policy 
and regulation. Teleological or consequentialist ones attempt to predict or estimate 
the risks new technologies could pose and, based on such evaluations, determine if 
how and in what way a technology should be implemented. Virtue ethicists, lastly, 
are interested in how practitioners incorporate ethical norms in the design process. 
Forms of ‘Value Sensitive Design’ (VSD) could be associated with such a take on 
the ethical question (Greene et al., 2019 , pp. 2123–2124; Jacobs et al., 2021 ).
The differences between the three different approaches are large—theoretically, 
practically, and popularity-wise. What makes them, in the end, ‘subareas’ of eth -
ics is their explicit or implicit acceptance of the ethical question, and the attempt to 
supply it with answers. Popularity-wise, the most dominant AI ethics approach in 
1 And not necessarily  the one practiced by data scientists or engineers.
2 Or by understanding ethics as a domain independent from science and politics (Sætra & Fosch-Villaronga, 
2021 ).
3 See Williams ( 2010 ). See, within the context of AI ethics, Ananny ( 2016 , p. 94); Delacroix and Wagner 
(2021 , p. 2).Page3of239

==== Page 4 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
academia appears to be ‘deontology,’ wherein answers to the ethical question are put 
in the form of lists of principles, values, and maxims (Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 112). This 
makes it a ‘law conception of ethics,’ which either aims to be like law, or to be one 
of the ingredients to be inserted into law’s construction (Rességuier & Rodrigues, 
2020 ). Throughout this essay, this prioritization of the ethical question, and the most 
prevalent deontological answers to it, will be questioned.
3  The Problem of Ethics (Washing)
The writing and publishing of lists of ethical principles that should help academics 
and practitioners determine ethical boundaries is big business.4 Not only do public 
and private actors for various reasons try their very best to keep up with this trend 
(Schiff et  al., 2020 ; Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ; Yeung et  al., 2020 ), academics also 
have a weak spot for the regular publishing of lists of important moral principles 
that should (help to) regulate individual and collective behavior in the tech world. 
One example of such a contribution is a paper written by Luciano Floridi and Josh 
Cowls (Floridi & Cowls, 2019 ). It starts with the diagnosis that there are simply 
too many ethical lists and guidelines floating around, which are causing confusion, 
information overload, and even stimulate the kind of ‘ethics shopping’ we previ -
ously linked to the phenomenon of ethics washing.5 What, then, to do about this 
problem? Floridi and Cowls read and analyzed six of these guidelines, found a lot of 
similarities, and put forward a framework encompassing the principles listed, plus 
one extra they thought to be missing. Doing AI ethics, here, is thus the analysis of 
principles that relate to a particular technology (AI). Floridi and Cowls argue that 
their principles ought to serve as the ‘architecture’ used to build policies around the 
globe, with as small caveat that it be, “(…) broadened to incorporate a more geo -
graphically, culturally, and socially diverse array of perspectives.” And this seems to 
be going well: according to the authors, the framework has ‘influenced’ the OECD’s 
Recommendations of the Council on Artificial Intelligence. The suggestion made 
here is that the framework presented is of such a high quality that it was valuable 
enough to be included in a document composed by a large and important interna -
tional organization. What this exactly means in practice, how this framework was 
able to make this happen, and what this implies for the numerous guidelines that 
were not included, is not discussed.6
I take Floridi and Cowls’ paper exemplary for a particular way of doing ethics 
where the construction of clearly defined and coherent ethical frameworks is of prime 
importance.7 Researchers identify various reasons for doing ethics in this way. From 
4 See e.g. https://  inven  tory. algor  ithmw  atch.  org/ about .
5 See also, Floridi ( 2019 ).
6 It is also unclear how Floridi and Cowls’ reading of the guidelines used relates to the various motivates 
attributed to the writing of such guidelines by various actors. Does it make a difference for the (moral?) 
quality of such a list when a particular document’s primary function is a company’s self-promotion?
7 I hereby thus presuppose the existence of interactions and mutual influence between academic instances 
of data ethics, and their commercial counterparts. On the mutual dependencies  existing between tech eth -
ics and big tech, see Hu ( 2021 ). Taylor and Dencik identified several other ‘nodes’ of the data ethics net -Page4of23 9

==== Page 5 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
within a ‘data ethics’ perspective, wherein the practice of doing ethics is connected 
with regulation and law, ‘hard ethics’ are concerned with values, responsibilities, 
rights, and duties (Floridi, 2018 ). The construal of ethical principles is therefore 
directly relevant and related to the writing of regulation and legislation.8 Forms of 
‘soft ethics’ provide guidance “over and beyond existing regulation,” and presup -
pose the legitimacy of existing legal frameworks and human rights (Floridi, 2018 ). 
From this perspective, the convergence of many of the AI ethics lists and guidelines 
is indicative of the gradual identification of what is considered good  practice (Taddeo 
& Floridi, 2018 ).9
The second step of this type of ethics is the translation of principles into practice, 
as a means to remove the gaps and frictions separating them (Floridi et al., 2018 ; 
Morley et al., 2020 ; Stix, 2021 ). When translations are successful, these guidelines 
and frameworks could, for instance, be used to promote internal organizational 
change by helping individuals act better, set behavioral standards in- and outside of 
the organization, or promote (moral) organizational leadership (Jobin et al., 2019 ; 
Metcalf et al., 2019 ; Schiff et al., 2020 ). The actual enforcement of principles does 
not always have to be their aim. From an academic point of view, ethical frame -
works can be understood as scientific output, illustrating the growth of our knowl -
edge about what is good and right.
Whether these promises come true is, however, debated. Thilo Hagendorff, for 
instance, cites the results of a controlled study that shows the complete lack of effect 
of ethical guidelines on the behavior of software engineers (Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 
108). But regardless of whether this result can be extrapolated to other contexts and 
principles get ‘lost in translations,’10 the fact that especially commercial actors par -
ticipate more in the production of ethical guidelines than in the enforcing of ethical 
guidance does makes these lists more susceptible to be used as paper tigers, rather 
than attempts to improve policy and practice. And just like tech developers should, 
arguably, be held accountable (if not responsible) for the problematic usage of their 
technical products, do I think that producers of lists and guidelines have a responsi -
bility for the kind of (mis)use of their academic products by commercial actors. If 
data scientists have a ‘politics’ because they are capable of influencing the world, 
data ethical practices are equally political (Green, 2018 ).11 Moreover,
8 See also Delacroix and Wagner ( 2021 ); Seger ( 2022 ).
9 But see also Rudschies et al. ( 2020 ).
10 On this see also Mittelstadt ( 2019 ).
11 As said above, neat distinctions between the domain of ethics and that of politics are hard to sustain 
both empirically and normatively. On the politics of (social) science, see e.g. Law and Urry ( 2004 ).work (Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ). See also Green et  al., who explained why it is relevant to study those 
guidelines in the following way: “we suggest these statements represent the transformation of ethics and 
design into discourses about  ethics and design. And as with discourse broadly, these statements legitimate 
(delegitimize) certain practices, providing “answers to the spoken or unspoken questions ‘Why should we 
do this’ or ‘Why should we do this in this way?’” (italics in original) (Greene et al., 2019 , p. 2124).Footnote 7 (continued)Page5of239

==== Page 6 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
(…) detached, universal rules have a habit of becoming dissociated from the 
original moral urgency that led to their drafting. Ethics codes that have sub -
stantial effect on institutions can result in an infrastructure whose effective 
management demands more attention than the actual ethical commitments 
underlying the code. It is important to recognize the risk that the universalism 
and detachment favored by philosophical ethics can lead away from facing the 
most concrete ethical challenges and instead leave us with routinized obedi -
ence to an infrastructure. (Metcalf, 2014 , p. 7).12
For these and other reasons,13 authors have been putting forward alternative 
approaches as means to combat problematic techno-political structures. Examples 
are the aforementioned STS, global data justice, and human rights approaches. Oth -
ers have tried to slow down the move away from ethics as a valuable tool or practice. 
Ethics could, the argument goes, still be of value in an educational or possibly even 
organizational context (Bates et  al., 2020 ; Mittelstadt, 2019 ; Moore, 2020 ; Taebi 
et al., 2019 ). The problem is that it is not clear what then ethics’ contribution would, 
could, or ought to be in combating ethics washing in the tech industry. In the next 
section, I put forward an explanation for ethics’ limited contribution in this context, 
based on criticism raised by political philosophers on dominant strands of moral and 
political philosophy. I thus take this criticism to be also helpful in making sense of 
the construction of ethical guidelines in the tech sector.
4  From Theory to Practice; from  Phronesis to Episteme
Top-down attempts to define ‘good principles’ and eventually arrive at ‘good prac -
tices’ (Floridi & Cowls, 2019 ) correspond to what Raymond Geuss calls ‘ethics 
first’ approaches, and what Albert R. Jonsen and Stephan Toulmin would label as 
‘theoretical,’ rather than ‘practical’ accounts of ethics. Jonsen and Toulmin’s work 
on casuistry supplies us with both an historical explanation of why there is in gen -
eral a predominance towards the construction of ethical frameworks and theories 
(and why this was not popular for the biggest chunk of human history), and argue 
for a revival of a forgotten and discredited mode of ethical practice: casuistry. I first 
quickly summarize their argument before coming back to that of Geuss in Sect.  4, 
who allows us to critique the practice of casuistry as well.
In the 1970s, Jonsen and Toulmin were members of the ‘National Commission for 
the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research,’ which was 
set up after the controversial Roe v. Wade decision by the Supreme Court (Jonsen & 
Toulmin, 1988 , pp. 16–17). The commissions’ job was to investigate all sorts of ethi -
cal issues related to the research on vulnerable human beings and consisted of experts 
with a wide variety of backgrounds. One might expect that discussing ethical issues 
12 More downsides are listed by Boddington (Boddington, 2020 , pp. 129–130).
13 Lobbying and funding structures could also affect the kind of research being done by tech scholars, 
though that is always hard to prove. See e.g. Clarke et al. ( 2021 ).Page6of23 9

==== Page 7 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
and dilemmas with individuals with totally different (personal, religious, educational) 
upbringing might not be the best decision if one wants to come to agreements and 
advice. Such a discussion would probably end up in a verbal trench war where every 
commissioner hides behind her or his moral principles. To Jonsen and Toulmin’s sur -
prise, this was far from the case: the commission was usually capable of finding agree -
ment on what to do when they discussed specific issues in practice. Agreement was 
not based on the construction of consensus on the level of principles (because this was 
absent), but on a “shared perspective on what was specifically at stake in particular 
kinds of human situations” (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 18). Only at the moment the 
commission left the realm of practical affairs and entered that of moral reasoning did 
differences of opinion start to emerge. For Jonsen and Toulmin, their experiences as 
members of the National Commission were indicative for two different understandings 
of ethics and morality. The first one emphasizes the importance of finding universally 
valid principles. The other aims to arrive at an understanding of ethical issues and 
their context. The problem was that the approach stimulating argumentative deadlock 
seemed to be the most widespread, if not dominant, understanding of ethics up until 
today.14
This difference between a more ‘theoretical’ or ‘principle’-oriented account 
of ethics, and a ‘practical’ and practice-oriented one can be traced back at least 
2500 years ago when Aristotle distinguished between two modes of knowing ( epis-
teme  and phronesis ) and placed the practice of ethics in the second category, and by  
doing so made it effectively a practical rather than theoretical affair (Jonsen & Toulmin,  
1988 , Chapter  1). In contrast to episteme —whose statements have an idealized, 
atemporal, and necessary character—practicing phronesis  is concrete, temporal, and  
presumptive. Phronesis  is the art of judging what to do in concrete situations, with -
out assuming that the judgments will hold for everyone, everywhere, and every time. 
Aristotle’s emphasis on the practical issue-based character of moral practice, where 
phronesis  was to be found of greater importance that the ‘correct’ label (whether 
‘ethical,’ ‘legal,’ or ‘political’) attached to the issue in question, eventually man -
aged to influence a branch of religious problem-solving called casuistry. Casuistry 
involved the attempt to make sense of moral issues in their practical context by 
applying a mixture of case-study analysis, comparison with similar cases, and (reli -
gious) principles. Though the casuists never formalized their methods in a theory of 
some kind, Jonsen and Toulmin were able to distill from the cases they studied sev -
eral common features that they summarized in the following way. Casuistry.
is the analysis of moral issues, using procedures of reasoning based on para -
digms and analogies, leading to the formulation of expert opinions about the 
existence and stringency of particular moral obligations, framed in terms of 
rules or maxims that are general but not universal or invariable, since they 
hold good with certainty only in the typical conditions of the agent and cir -
cumstances of action (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 257).
14 Though Jonsen and Toulmin wrote in the 1980s, I take more recent works by ‘political realist’ as indi -
cations that their argument for moral philosopher generally still makes sense.Page7of239

==== Page 8 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Like their medical colleagues, those practicing casuistry required a degree of 
phronesis  to be able to judge whether their analysis was appropriate. This judg -
ment did not revolve only around the question what rules should be considered and 
what could be learned from them, but also to what extent the application of the 
rules within or across several cases was fair and appropriate. This required in-depth 
knowledge about the circumstances out of which the issue presented itself, which 
also informed one’s understanding and application of the relevant (moral) principles 
applied.
Not surprisingly, some found the casuistic method to be lax and disrespectful 
towards the important moral beliefs of Christian faith. Blaise Pascal, the famous 
mathematician, accused the casuists of being unfaithful because as they “(…) pur -
sued their analysis of the moral life into more and more detailed cases, they seemed 
to move further and further away from the clear light of these beliefs.” (Jonsen & 
Toulmin, 1988 , p. 238). The casuists tried to connect the strong religious impera -
tives of their times with the worldly demands they encountered through the continu -
ous adjustments of these principles, and where both being accused of being lenient 
“towards the claims of morality” or of contradicting the maxims and principles they 
(personally) hold so dear (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 259). Pascal’s criticism set 
into motion a move towards the attempt to further ground and stabilize ethical theory, 
at the cost of improving its practice. Next to these theoretical worries about casuist 
moral practice, the slow deterioration of the Catholic Church further complicated the 
lives of professional casuists. What is appropriate casuistry is not to be distilled from 
the arguments put forward by individual professionals alone, but intimately relates to 
the institutional culture of which they are part—just like in medicine. And the impor -
tance of this explanatory factor for the deterioration of the practice of casuistry is not 
to be overstated. Next to theoretical and methodological validity, a proper function -
ing moral practice like casuistry also needs a secure institutional embedding. Medi -
cal ethics always had such an environment, which helped practitioners to determine 
whether they were doing well or not. Moral casuistry too—up until the moment this 
was broken down when religion slowly started to lose its dominance and ‘Enlighten -
ment’ thinkers (e.g., Galileo, Descartes, Newton, Grotius) started to look for more 
secure scientific, and rhetorically convincing foundations, which set the standard for 
moral-legal ones (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , pp. 275–276, 331).
Moving forward two centuries, Jonsen and Toulmin argue that the move away from 
practical affairs into moral theory was still taking place in the twentieth century. Moral 
philosophers in Britain and the USA (e.g., Moore, Perry, Ross, Stevenson, Rawls, 
Hare) were only interested in practical issues to the extent that these could serve as 
“(…) new ways of testing the intellectual merits of rival theoretical positions” (Jonsen 
& Toulmin, 1988 , p. 281). Though there were some exceptions (James, Dewey), moral 
philosophy was often considered to be of theoretical nature—this in complete contra -
distinction with how Aristotle understood ethics.15
15 The situation for political philosophy, specifically, was not that different. See e.g. Forrester ( 2019 , 
Chapter 8); Freeden ( 2018 , pp. 348–351).Page8of23 9

==== Page 9 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
Following Jonsen and Toulmin’s analysis, it is no surprise that the kind of data 
ethics undergirding our example of an academic ethical AI framework is also posi -
tioned as opposed to a form of computer ethics focusing on practitioners, prone to 
“(…) the spreading of ad hoc or casuistic approaches to ethical problems” (Floridi 
& Sanders, 2002 , p. 1).16 Casuist forms of computer ethics, for Floridi and Sanders, 
lack a thorough conceptual foundation and because of that are at risk of presenting 
conservative and dogmatic answers to the question of what needs to be done, and 
of presenting ethical problems as simple. In contrast to such a professional com -
puter ethics, a more ‘mature’ theory is needed that explains the meaning of informa -
tion and digital ethics.17 And such a digital ethics “(…) studies and evaluates moral 
problems relating to data and information  (…), algorithms  (…), and correspond -
ing practices  and infrastructures  (…) in order to formulate and support morally 
good decisions (…)” (Floridi, 2018 , pp. 3–4). The overabundance of guidelines and 
frameworks, however, suggests that the identification of moral problems and moral 
principles (as episteme ) tips the scale at the cost of more practice-oriented work (as 
in phronesis ).
5  The Problem of Ethics (Washing): A Political Proposal
Jonsen and Toulmin suggested that the strong focus on the truth or strength of ethi -
cal principles forecloses a lot of different ways wherein ethics or morality could be 
practiced and be meaningful to human life (Jonsen & Toulmin, 1988 , p. 302). I sug -
gested that the dominant form of AI ethics indicates that their conclusion is also 
valid to that discussion.18 Throughout various essays Cambridge-based philosopher 
Raymond Geuss takes a similar issue with this limiting, limited, but nevertheless 
dominant view on ethics to be found in Western academia. Already the question 
‘what ought I do’ seems to assume that there is some determinate answer to be found 
and that that is also the most important question one should ask and also answer if 
your business card reads ‘ethicist,’ ‘philosopher,’ or ‘Chief Ethical and Humane Use 
Officer’ (Geuss, 2005a ; Kinstler, 2020 ). In this section, I draw from Geuss to com -
plicate the picture of ethics sketched by Jonsen and Toulmin. Jonsen and Toulmin 
argued for a revival of a moral practice wherein the judgment of professionals about 
particular issues within their context would help in determining what to do. I first 
explain what kind of ethics is implicit when one aims to help someone finding out 
what to do. I then deal with the assumption that specific individuals are burdened 
with the task of helping people answer that question within the context of ethics 
16 A recent study of papers published in two influential AI/computer science conferences “shows that 
there is a great tendency for abstract discussions of such topics devoid of structural and social factors and 
specific and potential harms” (Birhane et al., 2022 , p. 13).
17 See e.g. Floridi and Taddeo ( 2016 ).
18 Green points at two other sectors—ethics in science and corporate ethics—where similar problems 
with respect to the usage and abuse of ethics are present (Green, 2021 , pp. 216–218). This supports my 
argument that the problems present in AI ethics can be explained as symptoms of a more general way of 
understanding ethics in (Western) academia.Page9of239

==== Page 10 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
washing in the tech industry. I argue thirdly that a more broadly conceived under -
standing of ethics, combined with a more open understanding of who and where 
does such an ‘ethics,’ is more appropriate to our context than casuist (and principle-
based) approaches.
Let’s start with the idea that ethics is about finding out ‘what I should do’. This 
question seems to be present in many of the published ethical guidelines and prin -
ciples. But formulating this question is as old as moral philosophy itself and goes 
back to the times when Aristotle laid down the first bricks of the building that would 
eventually grow into medieval casuistry (to be broken down some centuries later). 
And the assumption that any individual at every moment would and should be able 
to ask the question what to do, and also find an answer to it (often grounded in some 
external authority like god or reason), is still the most dominant understanding of 
ethics to be found in the Western world (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 44–45).
The first thing one can learn from Geuss’ reading of several Central-European 
thinkers (e.g., Hegel, Nietzsche, Adorno, Heidegger, Kierkegaard) is that the ethi -
cal question assumes the existence of an ‘Ego’ (Nietzsche) with a limited number 
of possible courses of action of which he can freely choose (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 
54–55).19 Nietzsche (in Geuss’ reading) rejects this view on human decision-making 
because it presumes a false choice between free and unfree decisions. Instead of 
assuming that people are free to decide to engage in a morally good or bad activity, 
concrete20 human beings have different wills or interests that have an influence on 
whether they want to answer, let alone ask, the ethical question in the first place. 
An individual’s capacity should thus be taken into consideration when thinking 
about whether ethics is a valuable addition to a particular individual’s life, or not. 
For some mighty individuals, answering the question what one is ought to do might 
be one of the last things they think about when living their life. Others, by contrast, 
simply lack the means, capacities, or time to engage in such reflections (Wright, 
2021 , p. 126).
This also relates to a second criticism levied by some of the thinkers discussed by 
Geuss. Both Hegel, Nietzsche, and Heidegger damned the idea that specific individ -
uals like philosophers or casuists are the most capable of dealing with the question 
‘what ought I do?’. Better ask the experts in the respective domains out of which 
an issue arises, than relying on a philosopher and his knowledge about Theory, the 
World, and the Good (Geuss, 2005a , pp. 51–59).21 This criticism connects well to a  
comment by danah boyd and Solon Barocas that it is too easy to criticize the tech 
experts for not respecting important values of some sort without having any under -
standing of how the technology in question is being construed in practice (boyd & 
Barocas, 2017 ).22 Geuss, and boyd and Barocas hint here at an important and com -
plicated question to be asked within the context of this essay: who should do ethics? 
19 From a different angle, Annemarie Mol also argues for the need to move beyond a ‘politics of choice’ 
(Mol, 2014 , pp. 178–179). See also Amoore ( 2020 , p. 66).
20 See Benhabib ( 1992 ).
21 See for a similar approach Tully ( 2008 ).
22 See also Lee et al. ( 2020 ).Page10of23 9

==== Page 11 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
I take these authors’ commentary to imply that it would be worrisome to do ethics 
from far away and/or in isolation from the practice concerned.23 This, I add, for three 
reasons. First, good criticism and phronesis  require a thorough understanding of the 
activity being judged. Proper judgment depends on a thorough analysis of the prob -
lem (Geuss, 2010 ).24 Second, the legitimacy or value of one’s judgment depends 
on how it relates to the norms, values, and sensibilities that structure the practice 
in question (Bennett, 2001 , pp. 156–157). Your judgment, and its implicit moral 
presuppositions, should have some traction in the context to which it is directed, to 
be able to make sense. Lastly, the quality of your intervention also depends on its 
uptake in practice (Krause, 2015 ). Evaluating and reflecting from afar, would not do 
much good. There are thus epistemological, moral, and practical reasons to be found 
that put into question the idea that individual philosophers are best equipped to deal 
with the question what someone should do. I will come back to this below.
But the question is not only if philosophers ought to be answering the ethical 
question, but whether individuals überhaupt  are the kind of entities that should 
attempt to change their reality by helping others or themselves act ethically. Espe -
cially Theodor Adorno was pessimistic about this. Individual attempts to instantiate 
social change, whether by philosophers or Chief Ethical and Humane Use Officers,
(…) may be morally praiseworthy but cannot be more than a palliative meas -
ure, and will certainly not be sufficient to deal with the deep-rooted and sys -
tematic social and economic sources of suffering.25
One cannot, according to Adorno, reasonably hope that individuals have the 
capacity to change the kind of systematic injustices we as inhabitants of the modern 
world face.26 Especially not, Geuss adds, when one is merely looking into what one 
ought to do. These and some other arguments lead Geuss to argue for a broadening 
of our understanding of what ethics is or could be to avoid restricting oneself to only 
look at a limited set of ‘ethical’ issues, topics, and methods out of which an individ -
ual should choose.27 The arts, history, and politics are some of the domains to which 
Geuss draws attention. And that is also something we should do when dealing with 
the issue at stake: ethics washing.28
Fortunately, in later work, Geuss gives a more elaborate answer to the question 
what these arguments imply for political philosophy and, as I suggest, our politi -
cized conception of data ethics. Geuss rejects here understandings of philosophy and 
25 As quoted in Geuss ( 2005b , p. 113).
26 While the Holocaust was in the background of Adorno’s writing, forms of ‘surveillance capitalism,’ 
‘data colonialism,’ and a ‘surveillance culture’ could be named as the structural features that currently 
position “the individual at the losing end of the equation.” (Beraldo & Milan, 2019 , p. 4).
27 Compare the long lists of values and ethical issues related to AI, which seem to suggest that a reader 
can choose  not only which value he could ‘use,’ but also what ethical problem could be relevant to his 
context.
28 See the other essays in the several volumes quoted, and specifically Geuss ( 2005c ). See for recent sim -
ilar arguments three blog posts published at the Ada Lovelace Institute (Powell, 2021 ; Tasioulas, 2021 ; 
Vallor, 2021 ).23 Compare “Ethics thus operates at a maximum distance from the practices it actually seeks to govern” 
(Hagendorff, 2020 , p. 112).
24 And moreover, an embeddedness in the practice one’s judging. On this, see Fossen ( 2021 ).Page11of239

==== Page 12 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
ethics that start with the formulation of the most ideal moral situation, and after that 
apply that to practice (Geuss, 2008 , p. 6). ‘Ethics first’ approaches seem to assume 
that ethics is a discipline one can study separate from empirical reality and scientific 
approaches like history, sociology, and economics, and that it is possible to formu -
late a limited number of moral principles that apply to and prescribe the actions of 
individual human beings. Broadly along the same lines as the previously discussed 
practically minded casuists,29 Geuss argues that political philosophers should start 
with human practices and investigate action rather than beliefs, take into account 
history into their analysis, and acknowledge the fact that acting politically requires 
the skill to judge whether some course of action is appropriate in a certain context 
or not (Geuss, 2008 , pp. 9–16). Theories are unlikely, as Geuss argues, to help one 
to make such political  judgments. And politics is in the end, due to the intermingle -
ment of academia and industry, and whether they like it or not, the activity ethicists 
are engaged in (and what they also should  explicitly be engaged in).
Arriving at a proper understanding of the political context you study is thus to 
be the most important first step doing ‘realist’ political theory.30 And instead of 
principles, questions are the way to go. Geuss identifies three broadly formulated 
questions which function as starting points when acting politically (Geuss, 2008 , pp. 
23–36).31 These are (in my own words):
• Who does or could do what to whom for whose benefit?
• What is the right moment on which I or we should commence this or that action?
• What are the ‘legitimatory mechanisms’ in place and how do they relate to the 
proposed course of action?
Asking yourself these three questions forces you to make sense of the compli -
cated social-political context wherein one is thrown, its various temporal charac -
teristics (past, present, future) while also considering the relevant norms and val -
ues that have an impact on why some actors do what they do, or not, and how you 
should relate to them. Doing so is especially valuable in a context where the main 
units of analysis—‘AI’; ‘algorithms’; ‘machine learning’—are highly ambiguous. 
While some scholars, for instance, understand algorithms as ‘technicalities,’ others 
argue that one should study these as constantly changing cultural objects.32 Assum -
ing it is important to understand what one’s judging when practicing ethics, paying 
careful attention to how particular technologies, norms, human beings, and organi -
zations interrelate is crucial. In the light of Geuss’ own discussion of the limitations 
of conventional ethics, I add one more question to be asked:
29 But different due to his dismissal of the relevance of ‘the ethical question.’.
30 The other four phases identified by Geuss are evaluating, orientation, conceptual innovation, and ide -
ology analysis and criticism. Though these are important components of Geuss’ realist political philoso -
phy, I take them to be less relevant for the topic at hand. On realist political philosophy, see e.g. Prinz 
(2019 ); Rossi ( 2019 ).
31 See, for a similar argument within the context of AI ethics and robotics, Keay  ( 2020 ).
32 See this illustrative discussion in Dourish ( 2016 ); Seaver ( 2017 ).Page12of23 9

==== Page 13 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
• With whom should I engage in the process of question and answering?33
Since one’s understanding of the social-political context is increased when one inter -
acts with this context itself, and one’s action is probably also more effective and legiti -
mate when one acts not alone, it is crucial to question the collective character of one’s 
intervention. Especially this is often ignored in list-based approaches (Metcalf, 2014 ).
There are thus three intimately related but different advantages of Geuss’ more 
‘realistic’ political philosophy noticeable. By starting with the attempt to understand 
a political practice first, you (a) will improve the epistemological character of one’s 
evaluation or critique. You are better capable of understanding why not only some -
thing is ‘good’ or ‘bad’ in a particular (cultural) context, but also how the ‘good’ and 
the ‘bad’ are constituted in the practice, and during one’s interacting with the prac -
tice. Especially this feature sets a practice-oriented approach apart from approaches 
that presuppose the relevance of particular norms prior  to engaging in their analysis. 
You (b) will also improve the normative character of the critique when the practice, 
its history and future, and ‘legitimizing mechanisms,’ are properly studied because 
you will be able to explain better why your evaluation has moral relevance in that 
particular context (if any). A and b combined will increase (c), the practical uptake 
of one’s intervention. One example to illustrate this is the act of criticizing Amazon 
for the damaging impact of their ‘Echo dots’ on the environment.34 It is relatively 
easy to argue that Amazon should stop their activities and adopt a more friendly or 
even ‘just’ attitude towards the environment. But even if you as individual would be 
able to convince Amazon to change their business model, the fact that Amazon is 
part of a global capitalist structure will not solve the problem because a Google or 
some other company will take Amazon’s place. This example pertains to show that 
it matters hugely how critique is presented and organized, and how in general the 
criticism itself is related to the criticized practice. Should your intervention have an 
individual or collective character? Should it be internal or external to the practice 
studied? Is its scope local or global? Are you interested in instantiating reform (criti -
cize BP) or revolution (fight capitalism)?35 When you want to change the tech indus -
try, answers to these and other questions should be looked for and be incorporated 
and explicated in one’s own analysis.36 And questions like these only pop up when 
you start by asking questions—like, for instance, those four listed above—and not 
by formulating lists of principles and guidelines.
36 You cannot rely solely on one’s disciplinary background to only do ‘law,’ ‘ethics,’ ‘environment,’ or ‘pri -
vacy’ because the appropriate tool one should pick depends on the character of the practice in question. Of 
course, what the practice is depends on the glasses one’s wearing, which are tainted by one’s background. There 
is a complicated interaction between practice-understanding, problem-definition, and methodology, though I 
suspect that the dominant research chronology is still background  → solution  → application  → practice – which I 
thus criticize in this essay.33 This addition amounts to an internal criticism of Geuss’ latent existentialism. I thank Joel Anderson 
for this suggestion.
34 I adjusted an example Geuss used in Geuss ( 2014 , pp. 78–79), with the help of Crawford and Joler 
(2018 ).
35 Ben Green notes that data scientists have a more reformist rather than revolutionary attitude towards 
ethics (Green, 2018 , pp. 25–26). On such ‘dilemmas,’ see Sætra et al. ( 2021 ).Page13of239

==== Page 14 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
6  Contemplation, Action, and Empirical Research
One dominant way of answering the ethical question is thus the deontology-like 
method of writing ethical guidelines and lists. One reason for practicing ethics in 
this way is the idea that the identification of moral principles will trickle up into 
legislation helping to enforce morally good behavior. Such an approach is to be pre -
ferred, the argument goes, over more context or casuist alternatives because these 
are less capable of identifying what is good and enforcing actors’ behavior in a clear 
and consistent manner.37 Theorizing about what is morally good, thus in the end, 
after a complicated process of translating principles into practice, helps bringing 
about this good in practice.
The implicit ethical question presupposed in such reasoning, however, can be 
criticized for its individualistic character. Not only is the idea that one should make 
decisions  based on limited conceptions of individuality, one can also question the 
presumption that a specific category of individuals is best equipped to answer them, 
and moreover, whether the implicit focus on individual behavior is appropriate. I 
argued for the value of starting engagement with techno-political practices in prac-
tice, rather than in deontological theory, by asking four broadly formulated ques -
tions. These questions form the basis of a more practice and empirically minded 
approach towards the studying of (dubious) techno-political practices.
The notion of practice is crucial here. Practices can be described as “self-organizing 
and self-investigating phenomena” and what kind of norms and meanings they enact 
is something to be studied rather than presupposed (Lynch, 2001 , p. 140). Moreover, 
identifying and imposing moral principles from afar might amount to the unwar -
ranted imposition of the good, the right, or the just (Boddington, 2020 , p. 127). For 
reasons like these, scholars from a variety of disciplines have been arguing for more 
practice rather than theory-focused forms of research. Political theorists presented 
forms of public, ethnographic, or ‘realist’ ‘theories,’38 ‘praxiographers’ emphasized 
the importance of—surprise!—‘practice,’39 and others argued for ‘empirical philoso -
phy,’40 while science and technology scholars have called for more attention for more 
experimental forms of political ontology (Marres, 2013 ) and sociotechnical analyses 
(Green, 2021 ). Especially Marres’ work is helpful here because it explicates what 
proper political  judgment amounts to. Rather than analyzing if and how technolo -
gies have consequences for democracy and politics, and what this than means for our 
moral evaluation of them, Marres argues that the analysts’ challenge is to redescribe 
how technologies transform  practices of politics and democracy, and the norms they 
constitute, themselves. Algorithmic decision-making, for instance, does not merely 
affect how promptly a citizen receives her decision (and whether this is good, bad, 
37 The criticism sometimes raised against ‘realist’ political theorists that they reify a dichotomy between 
‘real’ and ‘ideal’ forms of theorizing is thus equally applicable to (ideal) forms of data ethics.
38 See e.g. Herzog and Zacka ( 2017 ); Sleat ( 2018 ); Tully ( 2008 ).
39 See e.g. Lynch ( 2001 ); Mol ( 2014 ).
40 See e.g. Dubbeld ( 2005 ); Mol ( 1994 ).Page14of23 9

==== Page 15 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
accountable, or transparent), but also has implications for how the process of decision-
making, and hence the ‘decision,’ should be understood.
The thread connecting these different ‘turns to practice’ seems to be the idea that 
sociotechnical assemblages cannot be understood, governed, and criticized with -
out a proper grasp of their functioning in practice, and that such a grasp cannot be 
attained from a distance, or ‘in theory’.41 Just like Bernard Williams worried about 
the ‘limits’ of philosophy that reduces the ethical question to one of rights and duties 
(Williams, 2010 ), we should worry about attempts to reduce good tech development 
to one of the translation and implementation of moral truths.
7  From Principles to Exemplars
In the epigraph above, Wittgenstein suggested that there are limits to how rules could 
structure practices because of the self-sufficiency of practices, and that one needs 
examples  for this as well. The presentation of examples can be understood not as 
mere illustration of an important moral value, but as an independently valuable ‘tool’ 
in the analysts’ toolbox. Part of the reason why it is important to study both past, pre -
sent, and future of the context wherein a particular moral issue might (or might not) 
play has to do with the fact that few issues are so new, innovative, and revolutionary 
that we really have nothing else to do than to come up with a new guideline, paper, or 
book explaining what to do.42 Revolutions are, by definition, rare.
Being reminded about especially the historical predecessors to the kind of issue you 
are interested in does not only contribute to the fabrication of the kind of collective 
memories that are important for the continuation or disintegration of communities and 
institutions—both are crucial within the context of ethics washing (Mittelstadt, 2019 ). 
Doing such research as part of your ethical–political judgment also supplies you with 
exemplars that you could follow (or not).
In a forthcoming chapter, David Owen explains in what way the work of James 
Tully—a ‘realist’ colleague of Geuss (Honig & Stears, 2014 )—differs from ideal 
and principle-oriented political philosophy (Owen, Forthcoming ). Owen argues that 
Tully (and in my reading also Geuss) enacts a form of political philosophy where 
not principles but ‘exemplars’ are to be sought for. The difference is that.
(…) principles aim to tell us what, as an agent, we ought to do or be, exem -
plars manifest what it is to be an agent characterized by such doing or being 
(or, to put it another way, principles tell us another world is possible, exem -
plars show us that another world is actual). Second, whereas a principle articu -
lates norms in their generality, an exemplar discloses norms through its indi -
viduality. (Owen, Forthcoming )
41 Paul B. De Laat’s thorough attempt to diffuse the ethics washing critique based on commercial actor’s 
self-published material illustrates this (de Laat, 2021 ). As he explains himself, it is not possible to say 
much about companies’ actual adherence to ethical norms and their implementation based on material 
found online.
42 Though academic practice often suggests otherwise. See also Uricchio ( 2018 ).Page15of239

==== Page 16 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Authors narrating exemplars thus draw from the past, present, or future to show 
us that the world can indeed be different, and by focusing on how in other circum -
stances the world was and is indeed different, they allow those concerned to learn 
from these stories. The kind of learning involved is not that of the imitation of the 
application of a rule (e.g., the check-box approach to ethics and law), but is meant to 
give guidance through ‘following’ (Owen, Forthcoming ). Or, in other words, stories 
about individuals or collectives that attempt to bring about change to tech compa -
nies will help elucidating the kind of questions, worries, and challenges such actions 
might generate. What can we learn, for instance, from Floridi and Cowls’ success in 
composing and communicating their list of principles? How did such a process go? 
How did they manage to get into the field? And how does being the head of a pres -
tigious research institute effect such an activity?
A good example of academic work done along the lines of the argument pre -
sented so far is Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein’s Data Feminism . Next to its 
embrace of a ‘power challenging’ approach operationalized in the form of a dismissal 
of status quo-affirming concepts like ‘ethics,’ ‘fairness,’ ‘accountability,’ and ‘trans -
parency’ (D’Ignazio & Klein, 2020 , pp. 59–64) is their book also packed with stories 
narrating the attempts of collectives to challenge techno-mediated oppressive struc -
tures. From Joy Buolamwini’s analysis of the racist features of face-analysis soft -
ware, to María Salguero’s mapping of feminicide in Mexico, to the massive ‘Google 
walkout’ at the end of 2018, D’Ignazio and Klein’s inclusion of these stories informs 
readers about how and why individuals and collectives tried to deal with big tech’s 
oppressive characteristics. These stories are not mere illustrations of the quality of 
D’Ignazio and Klein’s argument, or smaller pieces of the jigsaw puzzle that when 
finished would be able to supply us with an answer to the ethical question. “What 
is most important is not that we all share the same starting [or end43] point, but 
rather that we nurture all these emerging ecosystems and build links between them 
(D’Ignazio & Klein, 2020 , p. 214).”
8  From Ethics to Politics, or What Is Left of Ethics?
Throughout this essay I argued for the importance of a more-than-theoretical ethi -
cal approach towards the growing influence of (commercial) technology on soci -
ety, by emphasizing the importance of empirically informed analysis of techno-
political practices. Ethics in this framing becomes more than the identification of 
important values, is an inherently collective and interactive endeavor, and requires 
the acknowledging of the conflictual character of doing political work. In a recent 
‘tweet,’ political philosopher Annette Zimmermann posted an adjusted version of 
the ‘types of scientific paper’ cartoon by XDCD, wherein she identified various 
‘types of AI ethics’ (Zimmermann, 2021 ). The argument presented so far in this 
essay fits comfortably within the ‘Why ethics (and philosophy more broadly) can’t 
possibly address questions of power’-type, and also has close affinities with other 
43 I add.Page16of23 9

==== Page 17 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
recent calls for more politicized, activist, feminist, and power hierarchy-sensitive 
calls to action (Barabas et al., 2020 ; Beraldo & Milan, 2019 ; D’Ignazio & Klein, 
2020 ; Green, 2018 ; Ruppert et  al., 2017 ; Sloane, 2019 ; Taylor & Dencik, 2020 ). 
From a variety of academic backgrounds (e.g., STS, feminist theory, anthropology, 
social movement studies), scholars thus try to make sense of the problematic appro -
priation of ethics by the tech sector. What remained undeveloped so far, ironically, 
is substantive philosophical reflection onto why the formulation of principles and 
guidelines is so dominant, what this tells us about how ethics is (implicitly) being 
understood in the ‘Western’ (tech) world.44 I hope to contribute to this discussion by 
providing a historically informed reformulation of ethics, where the asking of ques -
tions, empirical analysis, and the usage of exemplars has priority over the construc -
tion of ethical theories, principles, or guidelines. The question remaining is whether 
the label ‘ethics’ is still appropriate for the ‘repoliticized ethics’ that I am arguing 
for.
The answer to this question is negative. When Wagner and Delacroix made refer -
ence to both Mouffe, Williams, and Geuss when arguing for a ‘supportive interface’ 
between answers to the ethical question and regulation, they seem to have overem -
phasized the constructive character of this relationship (Delacroix & Wagner, 2021 ). 
For them, just like in Floridi’s digital ethics, and Seger’s ‘principled’ approach 
(Seger, 2022 ), ethics and legislation are important components of a regulatory appa -
ratus. What for Mouffe, Williams, Geuss, and other scholars is also, and maybe more, 
important are the agonistic elements of making ethical–political judgments.45 At least 
two claims could be distilled from the works of these authors. First, there are dif -
ferences, tensions, and incompatibilities between individuals, worldviews, societies, 
and theories which cannot all be completely removed through processes of delibera -
tion, theorizing, or consensus forming. Second, there is also value in not attempting 
to remove all these differences, and to also support activities that disrupt, contest, 
and say ‘no’ to ossified modes of thinking or doing.46 Extrapolating these thoughts 
to our AI ethics discussion, I argue that the relationship between (academic) ethics, 
especially in its popular deontological form and political practice, and legal/corporate 
practice, could and should not only be understood in terms of support, consensus, and 
recommendations, and be opened to allow room for contentious alternatives.47
44 An exception is Terzis, who presents an existentialist critique of AI ethics that depends on individuals’ 
capacity to reflect on their freedom and responsibilities (Terzis, 2020 ). Though I sympathize with Terzis’ 
attempt to bring philosophy in the data and computer science community, I worry that his emphasis on 
one overarching value to aim for (a transcendental collective form of freedom) is in the end susceptible to 
the same concerns raised to other principle- and list-based approaches.
45 See e.g. Crawford ( 2016 ); Schaap ( 2006 ).
46 See for a relevant example of refusal (Barabas, 2020 ). An argument explaining how ‘saying no’ could 
even be part of the conceptual apparatus of arguably one of the most consensus-oriented theories of 
democracy can be found here (White & Farr, 2012 ).
47 In this context, Noortje Marres writes that the focus on ethical clarity “(…) risks distracting attention 
and support away from forms of enquiry that are less clearly ‘identifiable,’” like epistemological and 
methodological issues that new technologies also bring about. See Marres ( 2018 , p. 184).Page17of239

==== Page 18 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
For reasons like these, one should be wary of Floridi’s explicit rejection of ‘solution-  
less’ types of ethics that do not provide ‘acceptable recommendations’ because 
that unduly limits the kind of practices human beings can engage in in response to  
the excessive influence of technologies on their lives (Floridi, 2018 , p. 7). Accept -
ing such restrictive definitions of ‘digital ethics’ “(…) is to allow the existing social 
formation to dictate the terms on which it can be criticized, and to allow it to impose 
a theoretically unwarranted burden of positive proof on any potential critic” (Geuss, 
2008 , p. 96). Moreover, the idea that it is always worthwhile to try to implement 
and translate ethics as answer to the ethical question in commercial practices should 
be reformulated as a question in itself rather than as aim everyone should strive 
towards.48 Acting politically, then, is a collective and potentially contentious activ -
ity. While I do not deny that some forms of ethics can also be characterized as such, 
I suggest that labeling such practices as ‘politics’ rather than ‘ethics’ makes them 
less susceptible to be washed away in the PR machinery of the tech sector. Doing 
so, secondly, also emphasizes their practical, bottom-up character, which lastly also 
invites non-academics to the discussion. You do not have to be an expert in Kant, 
Bentham, or Aristotle to be able to participate in AI politics.
For these reasons, I argue, quite unoriginally, for a strengthening of forms of ‘data 
politics’ to tip the scale in favor of more practice and politics-oriented forms of (aca -
demic) research, as a means to even out the excessive focus on ethics in its princi -
ple and theory-casted form.49 For the individual ‘ethicists’ herself, this reorientation 
will amount to transforming from an ‘universal intellectual,’ interested in “society 
as a whole and what is ‘just and true for all,’” to a ‘specific intellectual’ analyzing 
“games of truth, relations of power and ethics in the practical systems in which he 
or she is engaged, their historical formation and possibilities of modification.”50 The 
move from theory to practice at the level of the practice of AI/digital ethics , I argue, 
is thus accompanied by a move from universality to specificity at the level of the 
individual researcher . ‘Ethicists,’ whether in academia or elsewhere, should ask for 
new business cards, replace ‘ethical’ by ‘politics,’ and their guidelines with an in-
depth analysis and a good story or two.
9  Outro
I want to end this essay with two comments. First, an important question my argu -
ment touched upon was concerned with the meaning of ethical–political judgments, 
and how this is reflected in academic products. I argued for a certain reflexivity con -
cerning the establishment and embeddedness of the theories, guidelines, and recom -
mendations produced by ethicists and philosophers. It matters how questions and 
48 Linnet Taylor and Lina Dencik rhetorically ask whether ethics should always be integrated (Taylor & 
Dencik, 2020 , p. 9).
49 Academic ‘unoriginality’ thus does not amount to political irrelevance.
50 The distinction is Foucault’s and is explained here by James Tully. See Tully ( 2008 , p. 103). Foucault 
talks about it here (Foucault, 1994 ).Page18of23 9

==== Page 19 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
arguments are presented, by whom, to whom, when, and where, and ignoring these 
components of one’s ethical–political judgment does not help in understanding how 
particular types of academic work do what they do. Making such characteristics 
more explicit helps to analyze and value ethicists’ contributions, and is thus con -
ducive to empirical scrutiny of their work.51 Second, my argument’s primary aim 
was to make a case for the need to diversify the types of ethics to be found by point -
ing at some downsides of theory-oriented, list-producing, and regulation-directed 
approaches. Through showing that this dominant way of doing ethics had not been 
around for a large part of human history, I open up conceptual room for other ethical 
repertoires and by doing so also contribute to the defusing of worries that collec -
tive, contextual, or more political forms of action might not fit or belong in current 
tech practices.52 At this moment, indeed, this might be not how tech development in 
general goes,53 but that does not mean that change is inevitable, and that we should 
accept the prevalent mode of doing and understanding ethics. Ethics, in other words, 
does not necessarily have to be the individualistic and abstract academic practice 
it often is, and I urge readers into reflecting about how they position themselves as 
ethicists, what kind of role their academic products have, what it means to engage 
in what kind of evaluations, in what way they acknowledge their situatedness as 
researchers (especially vis-à-vis industry), and last but not least what kind of ‘the -
ory of change’ implicitly motivates their work. Do you think that being ‘close’ to 
the tech industry helps instantiating change, or would it be better to stand further 
away from the target of one’s criticism (Sætra et al., 2021 )? Based on the argument 
developed throughout this essay, the kind of ethical research currently popular is 
arguably too close or at least too easily subsumed into industry, which does seem to 
make it more difficult for those interested in change situated afar (Sætra et al., 2021 ). 
Acknowledging this is the first step in broadening the ethical repertoires, which will 
allow practice and contentious-minded approaches to make a stronger case for their 
viability, to in the end also get that seat at the negotiation table (reform), or the 
capacity to demolish it altogether (revolution).
Acknowledgements  I thank Annemarie Balvert, Tineke Broer, Markus Furendal, Catherine Koekoek, 
Charlotte van Oirsouw, Linnet Taylor, Eva van Vugt, the reviewers from CEPE/IACAP 2021, and two 
anonymous reviewers for their comments on earlier versions of this essay.
Author Contribution  Gijs van Maanen is the only author of this paper.
Funding  I received financial support from the Dutch Research Council (NWO 313–99-330). The revision 
of the document took place while I was being supported by a grant from the European Research Council 
(grant number 716971).
Data Availability  Not applicable.
Code Availability  Not applicable.
51 Which is still lacking and also difficult to conduct.
52 On the advantages of genealogies, see Prinz and Raekstad ( 2020 ).
53 Compare for instance how ‘privacy’ is currently being practiced (Waldman, 2021 , Chapter 1).Page19of239

==== Page 20 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Declarations  
Ethics Approval  Not applicable.
Informed Consent  Not applicable.
Competing Interests  The author declares no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis -
sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/ 
 licen  ses/ by/4.  0/.
References
Amoore, L. (2020). Cloud ethics: algorithms and the attributes of ourselves and others . Duke University 
Press.
Ananny, M. (2016). Toward an ethics of algorithms: Convening, observation, probability, and timeliness. 
Science, Technology, & Human Values,  41(1), 93–117.
Barabas, C. (2020). Refusal: a beginning that starts with an end . Medium. https://  medium.  com/@  chels  ea_  
barab  as/ refus  al-a- begin  ning-  that- starts-  with-  an- end- 2b055  bfc14  be. Accessed 29 July 2022.
Barabas, C., Doyle, C., Rubinovitz, J., & Dinakar, K. (2020). Studying up: reorienting the study of algo -
rithmic fairness around issues of power. Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Account -
ability, and Transparency , 167–176.
Bates, J., Cameron, D., Checco, A., Clough, P., Hopfgartner, F., Mazumdar, S., Sbaffi, L., Stordy, P., & de 
la Vega de León, A. (2020). Integrating FATE/critical data studies into data science curricula: where 
are we going and how do we get there? Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Account -
ability, and Transparency , 425–435. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  33510  95. 33728  32
Benhabib, S. (1992). Situating the self . Polity Press.
Bennett, J. (2001). The enchantment of modern life: Attachments, crossings, and ethics . Princeton Uni -
versity Press.
Beraldo, D., & Milan, S. (2019). From data politics to the contentious politics of data. Big Data & Soci -
ety, 6(2), 1–11. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  20539  51719  885967
Bietti, E. (2020). From ethics washing to ethics bashing: a view on tech ethics from within moral philoso -
phy. Proceedings of the ACM FAT* Conference , 210–219.
Birhane, A., Ruane, E., Laurent, T., Brown, M. S., Flowers, J., Ventresque, A., & Dancy, C. L. (2022). The 
forgotten margins of AI ethics.  ArXiv:2205.04221 [Cs] . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  35311  46. 35331  57
Boddington, P. (2020). Normative modes: Codes and standards. In M. D. Dubber, F. Pasquale, & S. Das 
(Eds.), The Oxford handbook of ethics of AI  (pp. 125–140). Oxford University Press.
boyd, D., & Barocas, S. (2017). Engaging the ethics of data science in practice. Communications of  
the ACM,  60(11), 23–25.
Clarke, L., Williams, O., & Swindells, K. (2021). How Google quietly funds Europe’s leading tech pol -
icy institutes. New Statesman . https://  www.  newst  atesm  an. com/  scien  ce- tech/  big- tech/  2021/  07/ how-  
google-  quiet  ly- funds-  europe-  s- leadi  ng- tech-  policy-  insti tutes . Accessed 29 July 2022.
Crawford, K. (2016). Can an algorithm be agonistic? Ten scenes from life in calculated publics. Science, 
Technology, & Human Values,  41(1), 77–92. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  01622  43915  589635
Crawford, K., & Joler, V. (2018). Anatomy of an AI system . Anatomy of an AI System. http://  www.  anato  myof.  
ai. Accessed 29 July 2022.Page20of23 9

==== Page 21 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
de Laat, P. B. (2021). Companies committed to responsible AI: From principles towards implementation and 
regulation? Philosophy & Technology,  34(4), 1135–1193. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s13347-  021- 00474-3
Delacroix, S., & Wagner, B. (2021). Constructing a mutually supportive interface between ethics and reg -
ulation. Computer Law & Security Review,  40, 105520. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1016/j.  clsr. 2020.  105520
D’Ignazio, C., & Klein, L. F. (2020). Data feminism . The MIT Press.
Dourish, P. (2016). Algorithms and their others: Algorithmic culture in context. Big Data & Society,  3(2), 
1–11. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  20539  51716  665128
Dubbeld, L. (2005). Empirische Filosofie. Krisis,  6(4), 91–94. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1347/  kris.6.  4. 91
Floridi, L. (2018). Soft ethics and the governance of the digital. Philosophy & Technology,  31(1), 1–8. 
https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s13347-  018- 0303-9
Floridi, L. (2019). Translating principles into practices of digital ethics: Five risks of being unethical. 
Philosophy & Technology,  32(2), 185–193. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s13347-  019- 00354-x
Floridi, L., & Cowls, J. (2019). A unified framework of five principles for AI in society. Harvard Data 
Science Review , 1.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum, V., Luetge, C., Madelin, R., 
Pagallo, U., Rossi, F., Schafer, B., Valcke, P., & Vayena, E. (2018). AI4People—an ethical frame -
work for a good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds and 
Machines,  28(4), 689–707. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11023-  018- 9482-5
Floridi, L., & Sanders, J. W. (2002). Mapping the foundationalist debate in computer ethics. Ethics and 
Information Technology,  4(1), 1–9.
Floridi, L., & Taddeo, M. (2016). What is data ethics? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,  
374(2083), 20160360. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1098/  rsta. 2016.  0360
Forrester, K. (2019). In the shadow of justice: Postwar liberalism and the remaking of political philoso -
phy. Princeton University Press.
Fossen, T. (2021). Political legitimacy as an existential predicament. Political Theory . https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1177/  00905  91721  10478  42
Foucault, M. (1994). Truth and power. In Power  (Vol. 3, pp. 111–133). Penguin Books.
Freeden, M. (2018). Political realism. In M. Sleat (Ed.), Politics recovered: Realist thought in theory and 
practice  (pp. 344–368). Columbia University Press.
Geuss, R. (2005a). Outside ethics. In Outside ethics  (pp. 40–66). Princeton University Press.
Geuss, R. (2005b). Suffering and knowledge in Adorno. In Outside ethics  (pp. 111–130). Princeton Uni -
versity Press.
Geuss, R. (2005c). Virtue and the good life. In Outside ethics  (pp. 78–96). Princeton University Press.
Geuss, R. (2008). Philosophy and real politics . Princeton University Press.
Geuss, R. (2010). Political judgment in its historical context. In Politics and the imagination  (pp. 1–16). 
Princeton University Press.
Geuss, R. (2014). Must criticism be constructive? In A world without why  (pp. 68–90). Princeton Univer -
sity Press.
Green, B. (2018). Data science as political action: grounding data science in a politics of justice.  ArXiv:1811.03435 
[Cs]. http://  arxiv.  org/ abs/ 1811.  03435
Green, B. (2021). The contestation of tech ethics: a sociotechnical approach to ethics and technology in 
action.  ArXiv:2106.01784 [Cs] . http://  arxiv.  org/ abs/ 2106.  01784
Greene, D., Hoffmann, A. L., & Stark, L. (2019). Better, nicer, clearer, fairer: a critical assessment of the 
movement for ethical artificial intelligence and machine learning . 2122–2131.
Hagendorff, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines. Minds and Machines,  30(1), 
99–120. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11023-  020- 09517-8
Herzog, L., & Zacka, B. (2017). Fieldwork in political theory: five arguments for an ethnographic sensi -
bility. British Journal of Political Science , 1–22.
Honig, B., & Stears, M. (2014). James Tully’s agonistic realism. In On global citizenship: James Tully in 
dialogue  (pp. 131–152). Bloomsbury.
Hu, L. (2021). Tech ethics: speaking ethics to power, or power speaking ethics? Journal of Social Com -
puting , 2(3), 238–248. https://  doi. org/ 10. 23919/  JSC. 2021.  0033
Jacobs, M., Kurtz, C., Simon, J., & Böhmann, T. (2021). Value sensitive design and power in socio-technical 
ecosystems. Internet Policy Review , 10(3). https://  polic  yrevi  ew. info/ artic les/ analy  sis/ value-  sensi  tive- 
design-  and- power-  socio-  techn  ical- ecosy  stems
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). Artificial intelligence: The global landscape of ethics guide -
lines. Nature Machine Intelligence,  1(9), 389–399. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1038/  s42256-  019- 0088-2Page21of239

==== Page 22 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society  
1 3
Jonsen, A. R., & Toulmin, S. (1988). The abuse of casuistry: A history of moral reasoning . University of 
California Press.
Keay, A. (2020). AI ethics: we need to walk the walk, not just talk. Arm Blueprint . https://  www.  arm. com/  
blogs/  bluep  rint/ ai- robots-  ethics . Accessed 29 July 2022.
Kinstler, L. (2020). Ethicists were hired to save tech’s soul. Will anyone let them? Protocol . https://  www.  
proto  col. com/  ethics-  silic on- valley . Accessed 29 July 2022.
Krause, S. R. (2015). Freedom beyond sovereignty: Reconstructing liberal individualism . University of 
Chicago Press.
Law, J., & Urry, J. (2004). Enacting the social. Economy and Society,  33(3), 390–410. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1080/  03085  14042  00022  5716
Lee, J., Young, M., Krafft, P. M., & Katell, M. A. (2020). Power and technology: Who gets to make the 
decisions? Interactions,  28(1), 38–46. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  34424  20
Lynch, M. (2001). Ethnomethodology and the logic of practice. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr Cetina, & E. 
von Savigny (Eds.), The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory  (pp. 140–157). Routledge.
Marres, N. (2013). Why political ontology must be experimentalized: On eco-show homes as devices of 
participation. Social Studies of Science,  43(3), 417–443. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  03063  12712  475255
Marres, N. (2018). Digital sociology the reinvention of social research . Polity.
Metcalf, J. (2014). Ethics codes: history, context, and challenges . Council for Big Data, Ethics, and 
Society.
Metcalf, J., Moss, E., & boyd, danah. (2019). Owning ethics: Corporate logics, Silicon Valley, and the 
institutionalization of ethics. Social Research: An International Quarterly,  86(2), 449–476.
Mittelstadt, B. (2019). Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. Nature Machine Intelligence,  1(11), 
501–507. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1038/  s42256-  019- 0114-4
Mol, A. (1994). Ondertonen en boventonen. Over empirische filosofie. In D. Pels & G. De Vries (Eds.), 
Burgers en Vreemdelingen: Opstellen over Filosofie en Politiek  (pp. 77–84). Van Gennep.
Mol, A. (2014). The body multiple: ontology in medical practice . Duke University Press.
Moore, J. (2020). Towards a more representative politics in the ethics of computer science. Proceedings 
of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 414–424. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1145/  33510  95. 33728  54
Morley, J., Floridi, L., Kinsey, L., & Elhalal, A. (2019). From what to how: an initial review of publicly 
available AI ethics tools, methods and research to translate principles into practices. ArXiv:1905.06876 
[Cs].  http://  arxiv.  org/ abs/ 1905.  06876
Morley, J., Floridi, L., Kinsey, L., & Elhalal, A. (2020). From what to how: An initial review of publicly 
available AI ethics tools, methods and research to translate principles into practices. Science and 
Engineering Ethics,  26(4), 2141–2168. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11948-  019- 00165-5
Owen, D. (Forthcoming). On exemplarity and public philosophy. In D. Karmis & J. Maclure (Eds.), Civic 
freedom in an age of diversity: the public philosophy of James Tully . McGill–Queen’s University 
Press.
Powell, A. B. (2021). Otherwises, and the contribution of the arts and humanities to ethical AI . https://  www.  
adalo  velac  einst itute.  org/ blog/  other  wises-  contr  ibuti on- arts- human  ities-  ethic al- ai/. Accessed 29 Jul 2022
Prinz, J. (2019). Realism in political theory, ethnographic sensibility, and the moral agency of bureau -
crats. Polity,  52(1), 64–87. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1086/  706521
Prinz, J., & Raekstad, P. (2020). The value of genealogies for political philosophy. Inquiry , 0(0), 1–20. 
https://  doi. org/ 10. 1080/  00201  74X.  2020.  17627  29
Rességuier, A., & Rodrigues, R. (2020). AI ethics should not remain toothless! A call to bring back the teeth 
of ethics. Big Data & Society,  7(2), 2053951720942541. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  20539  51720  942541
Rossi, E. (2019). Being realistic and demanding the impossible. Constellations,  26(4), 638–652. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1111/  1467-  8675.  12446
Rudschies, C., Schneider, I., & Simon, J. (2020). Value pluralism in the AI ethics debate – different 
actors, different priorities. The International Review of Information Ethics , 29. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
29173/  irie4 19
Ruppert, E., Isin, E., & Bigo, D. (2017). Data politics. Big Data & Society . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  
20539  51717  717749
Sætra, H. S., Coeckelbergh, M., & Danaher, J. (2021). The AI ethicist’s dilemma: Fighting Big Tech by 
supporting Big Tech. AI and Ethics . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s43681-  021- 00123-7
Sætra, H. S., & Fosch-Villaronga, E. (2021). Research in AI has implications for society: How do we 
respond? Morals & Machines,  1(1), 60–73. https://  doi. org/ 10. 5771/  2747-  5174-  2021-1-  60
Schaap, A. (2006). Agonism in divided societies. Philosophy & Social Criticism,  32(2), 255–277.Page22of23 9

==== Page 23 ====
(2022) 1:9 Digital Society
1 3
Schiff, D., Biddle, J., Borenstein, J., & Laas, K. (2020). What’s next for AI ethics, policy, and govern -
ance? A global overview. Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 
153–158. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  33756  27. 33758  04
Seaver, N. (2017). Algorithms as culture: Some tactics for the ethnography of algorithmic systems. Big 
Data & Society,  4(2), 1–12. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1177/  20539  51717  738104
Seger, E. (2022). In defence of principlism in AI ethics and governance. Philosophy & Technology,  35(2), 
45. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s13347-  022- 00538-y
Sleat, M. (Ed.). (2018). Politics recovered: realist thought in theory and practice . Columbia University 
Press.
Sloane, M. (2019). Inequality is the name of the game: thoughts on the emerging field of technology, 
ethics and social justice. Proceedings of the Weizenbaum Conference 2019 "Challenges of Digital 
Inequality - Digital Education, Digital Work, Digital Life , 1–9. https://  www.  ssoar.  info/ ssoar/  handle/  
docum  ent/ 62583 . Accessed 29 July 2022.
Stix, C. (2021). Actionable principles for artificial intelligence policy: Three pathways. Science and Engi -
neering Ethics,  27(1), 15. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11948-  020- 00277-3
Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2018). How AI can be a force for good. Science,  361(6404), 751–752. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1126/  scien  ce. aat59  91
Taebi, B., van den Hoven, J., & Bird, S. J. (2019). The importance of ethics in modern universities of technol -
ogy. Science and Engineering Ethics,  25(6), 1625–1632. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11948-  019- 00164-6
Tasioulas, J. (2021). The role of the arts and humanities in thinking about artificial intelligence (AI) . 
https://  www.  adalo  velac  einst  itute.  org/ blog/  role-  arts- human  ities-  think  ing- artifi  cial- intel ligen  ce- ai/. 
Accessed 29 July 2022.
Taylor, L. (2019). Global data justice. Communications of the ACM,  62(6), 22–24. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1145/  33252  79
Taylor, L., & Dencik, L. (2020). Constructing commercial data ethics. Technology and Regulation , 1–10. 
https://  doi. org/ 10. 26116/  techr  eg. 2020.  001
Terzis, P. (2020). Onward for the freedom of others: marching beyond the AI Ethics  [Preprint]. SocArXiv. 
https://  doi. org/ 10. 31235/  osf. io/ 3xzaf
Tully, J. (2008). Public philosophy in a new key. Vol. I: Democracy and civic freedom.  Cambridge Uni -
versity Press.
Uricchio, W. (2018). Data, culture and the ambivalence of algorithms. In M. T. Schafer & K. Van Es 
(Eds.), The datafied society: studying culture through data  (pp. 126–137).
Vallor, S. (2021). Mobilising the intellectual resources of the arts and humanities . https://  www.  
adalo  velac  einst  itute.  org/ blog/  mobil  ising-  intel  lectu  al- resou  rces-  arts-  human  ities/ . Accessed 29 
July 2022.
Maanen, G. van (2020). Ethics washing: Een introductie. Algemeen Nederlands Tijdschrift Voor Wijsbe -
geerte,  112(4), 462–467. https://  doi. org/ 10. 5117/  ANTW2  020.4.  020. VANM
Wagner, B. (2018). Ethics as an escape from regulation. from “ethics washing” to ethics shopping? In E. 
Bayamlioğlu, I. Baraliuc, L. Janssens, & M. Hildebrandt (Eds.), Being profiled: Cogitas Ergo Sum  
(pp. 84–88). Amsterdam University Press.
Waldman, A. E. (2021). Industry unbound: The inside story of privacy, data, and corporate power . Cam -
bridge University Press.
White, S. K., & Farr, E. R. (2012). “No-saying” in Habermas. Political Theory,  40(1), 32–57.
Williams, B. (2010). Ethics and the limits of philosophy . Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On certainty  (G. E. M. Anscombe & G. H. von Wright, Eds.; D. Paul & G. E. M. 
Anscombe, Trans.). Harper & Row.
Wright, E. O. (2021). How to be an anti-capitalist in the 21st century . Verso.
Yeung, K., Howed, A., & Pogrebna, G. (2020). AI governance by human rights-centered design, delib -
eration, and oversight: An end to ethics washing. In M. D. Dubber, F. Pasquale, & S. Das (Eds.), 
The Oxford handbook of ethics of AI  (pp. 77–106). Oxford University Press.
Zimmermann, A. (2021). Had to do it. Couldn’t not do it. #AIEthics https://t.  co/ xOog2  DReeR  
[Tweet]. @DrZimmermann . https://  twitt  er. com/  DrZim  merma  nn/ status/  13885  26687  81465  6004/  
photo/1 . Accessed 29 July 2022.Page23of239

