==== Page 1 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future
Directions
Sukhpal Singh Gill*a, Minxian Xub, Carlo Ottavianic, Panos Patrosd, Rami Bahsoone,
Arash Shaghaghif, Muhammed Goleca, Vlado Stankovskig, Huaming Wuh, Ajith Abrahami,j,
Manmeet Singhk,l, Harshit Mehtam,n, Soumya K. Ghosho, Thar Bakerp, Ajith Kumar Parlikadq,
Hanan Lutﬁyyar, Salil S. Kanheres, Rizos Sakellariout, Schahram Dustdaru, Omer Ranav,
Ivona Brandicwand Steve Uhliga
aSchool of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK,
bShenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China,
cDepartment of Computer Science and York Centre for Quantum Technologies, University of York, York, UK,
dDepartment of Software Engineering, University of Waikato, Hamilton, Aotearoa New Zealand,
eSchool of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK,
fDepartment of Information Systems and Business Analytics, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia,
gFaculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
hCenter for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
iMachine Intelligence Research Labs, Auburn, WA, USA,
jCenter for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia,
kJackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA,
lCentre for Climate Change Research, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune, India,
mWalker Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cockrell School of Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA ,
nDell Technologies, Austin, Texas, USA,
oDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India,
pDepartment of Computer Science, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, UAE,
qInstitute for Manufacturing, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK,
rDepartment of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada,
sSchool of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia,
tDepartment of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK,
uDistributed Systems Group, Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria,
vSchool of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiﬀ University, Cardiﬀ, UK,
wFaculty of Informatics, Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria,
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords :
Next Generation Computing
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Cloud Computing
Fog Computing
Edge Computing
Serverless Computing
Quantum Computing
Machine LearningABSTRACT
Autonomiccomputinginvestigateshowsystemscanachieve(user)speciﬁed“control”outcomes
ontheirown,withouttheinterventionofahumanoperator.Autonomiccomputingfundamentals
havebeensubstantiallyinﬂuencedbythoseofcontroltheoryforclosedandopen-loopsystems.
In practice, complex systems may exhibit a number of concurrent and inter-dependent control
loops.Despiteresearchinto autonomicmodelsformanagingcomputerresources, rangingfrom
individualresources(e.g.,webservers)toaresourceensemble(e.g.,multipleresourceswithina
datacenter),researchintointegratingArtiﬁcialIntelligence(AI)andMachineLearning(ML)to
improve resource autonomy and performance at scale continues to be a fundamental challenge.
The integration of AI/ML to achieve such autonomic and self-management of systems can be
achieved at diﬀerent levels of granularity, from full to human-in-the-loop automation. In this
article, leading academics, researchers, practitioners, engineers, and scientists in the ﬁelds of
cloudcomputing,AI/ML,andquantumcomputingjointodiscusscurrentresearchandpotential
futuredirectionsfortheseﬁelds.Further,wediscusschallengesandopportunitiesforleveraging
AI and ML in next generation computing for emerging computing paradigms, including cloud,
fog, edge, serverless and quantum computing environments.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 1 of 43arXiv:2203.04159v1  [cs.DC]  5 Mar 2022

==== Page 2 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
1. Introduction
Autonomic Computing Initiative (ACI) from IBM were among the ﬁrst industry-wide initiatives for the design of
computersystemsthatrequirelimitedhumaninteractiontoachieveperformancetargets[1].TheTivolisystemsdivision
atIBMfocusedinitiallyatperformancetuningoftheDB2databasesystemusingautonomiccomputingprinciples.The
initiative was heavily inspired by observations from the functioning and coordination of the human nervous system
and human cognition—i.e., the autonomic nervous system acts and reacts to stimuli independent of an individual’s
consciousinput;anautonomiccomputingenvironmentfunctionswithahighlevelofArtiﬁcialIntelligence(AI),while
remaining invisible to users [2]. Additionally, a human nervous system achieves multiple outcomes concurrently and
seamlessly (e.g., internal temperature changes, breathing rates ﬂuctuate, and glands secrete hormones as a response
to stimulus) adhering to pre-deﬁned/evolved “limits” and norms, and acting on impulses sensed or learned from the
body itself or the environment. As for the human body, an autonomic computing environment is expected to work in
responsetothedataitcollects,sensedorlearned,withoutanindividualdirectlycontrollingfunctionsusedtomanage
a system [3].
Autonomic computing—also referred to as self-adaptive systems—is a ﬁeld of investigation that studies how
systemscanachieve desirable behavioursontheirown[4].Itiscommonforthesesystemstobereferredtoas“self-*”
systems,where“*”standsforthebehaviourtype[5],suchas:self-conﬁguration,self-optimization,self-protectionand
self-healing [6].
An autonomic system’s capacity to adapt to environmental changes is referred to as “self-conﬁguring” [7]. The
system automatically upgrades missing or obsolete components depending on error messages/alerts generated by
a monitoring system [8]. A self-optimizing autonomic system is one that can enhance its own performance by
successfully completing computational jobs submitted to it, reducing resource overload and under-utilization [9].
Self-protection is an autonomic system’s capacity to defend itself against potential cyber-attacks and intrusions. The
system should also be detecting and preventing harmful assaults on the autonomic coordinator managing the overall
system [10]. Self-healing is a system’s ability to discover, evaluate and recover from errors on its own, without the
need for human intervention [2]. By decreasing or eliminating the eﬀect of errors on execution, this self-* property
improves performance through fault tolerance [11].
Theultimatevisionisthatneitherself-managedsystemsnorself-healingsystemsneedtobeconﬁguredorupdated
manually [12]. In a broader sense, self-managed systems should be capable of controlling all of the aforementioned
behaviours [13].
Diﬀerent practical systems realise these outcomes to varying levels of granularity and success. Also, the level of
humaninterventionandcontrolcanvary.AspartofIBM’sAutonomicComputingparadigm,theAutonomicManager
(AM) is a smart entity that interacts with the environment via management interfaces (Sensors and Eﬀectors) and
performsactionsbasedontheinformationreceivedfromsensorsandrulesestablishedinalow-levelknowledgebase.
TheAMissetupbyanadministratorusinghigh-levelwarningsandacts.Figure1illustratesIBM’sautonomicapproach
inoperation[1].InitialmonitorsacquiresensordataforregularinspectionofQualityofService(QoS)metricswhilst
engaging with external hardware and send this data to the next component for further evaluation. In the Analyze and
Plan modules, data collected from the monitoring module is analysed and appropriate action plans are drawn up in
response to system warnings. Using the results of the data analysis, this autonomic system takes appropriate actions
in response to the generated warnings. After a thorough review, which includes veriﬁcation and validation to provide
guarantees that the adaptation will indeed work, the plan is put into action by the Executor, whose primary goal is to
ensure that the QoS of an executing application is maintained. An Executor monitors changes in the knowledge base
and acts based on the results of the analysis.
<Correspondingauthorat:SchoolofElectronicEngineeringandComputerScience,QueenMaryUniversityofLondon,London,E14NS,UK.
s.s.gill@qmul.ac.uk (S.S. Gill*); mx.xu@siat.ac.cn (M. Xu); carlo.ottaviani@york.ac.uk (C. Ottaviani);
panos.patros@waikato.ac.nz (P. Patros); r.bahsoon@cs.bham.ac.uk (R. Bahsoon); arash.shaghaghi@rmit.edu.au (A. Shaghaghi);
m.golec@qmul.ac.uk (M. Golec); vlado.stankovski@fri.uni-lj.si (V. Stankovski); whming@tju.edu.cn (H. Wu);
ajith.abraham@ieee.org (A. Abraham); manmeet.singh@utexas.edu (M. Singh); harshit.mehta@utexas.edu (H. Mehta);
skg@cse.iitkgp.ac.in (S.K. Ghosh); tshamsa@sharjah.ac.ae (T. Baker); aknp2@cam.ac.uk (A.K. Parlikad); hanan@csd.uwo.ca (H.
Lutﬁyya); salil.kanhere@unsw.edu.au (S.S. Kanhere); rizos@manchester.ac.uk (R. Sakellariou); dustdar@dsg.tuwien.ac.at (S.
Dustdar); ranaof@cardiff.ac.uk (O. Rana); ivona.brandic@tuwien.ac.at (I. Brandic); steve.uhlig@qmul.ac.uk (S. Uhlig)
ORCID(s):0000-0002-3913-0369 (S.S. Gill*)
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 2 of 43

==== Page 3 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                
                             
Sensors  
Monitor              
 
Effectors  
Analyze        
 
Plan                   
 
Executor         
     
Knowledge Base                              
Figure 1: MAPE-K loop for Autonomic Computing
1.1. AI/ML for Next Generation Computing: A Vision
AI and ML can be used to support and develop autonomic behaviours based on data collected about systems
operations.MLtechniques,forexample,canbeusedtodiscoverpatternsintheworkload,wherethesepatternscanbe
usedtooptimiseresourcemanagement[14].Additionally,tomitigatemodeluncertainty,ML-baseddynamicalsystem
identiﬁcation methods, such as recurrent neural networks, could be adaptively invoked by the autonomic manager to
achieveself-learning.Thus,black-andgray-boxmodelsofthemanagedsystemcanbegeneratedduringaconceptdrift
andsubsequentlyveriﬁedtochecktheirsanityoreven,detectmission-criticalalterationsofthesystem’soperation[15].
Further, AI may be employed in the analysis and planning stages of autonomic systems that are often arranged as
monitor-analyze-plan and execute (MAPE) cycles [16], in addition to the use of techniques from control theory. It is
thecombinationoffeedbackcontrolwithdata-drivenmodelconstructionusingMLthatoﬀerskeybeneﬁtsinsupport
autonomic self-management.
Among the notable types of autonomous computing solutions: feedback-based control is one common solution.
Theuseofself-organizingsystems,suchasparticleswarmoptimisation,cellularautomataandgeneticalgorithms,are
others. In the ﬁrst category of solutions, systematic techniques for designing closed-loop systems capable of tracking
systemperformanceandalteringcontrolparametersareprovidedbyautonomiccomputing[17].Thereisavastcorpus
of control theory literature and design tools that are used in these techniques. When it comes to the second type of
solution, a variety of newly developing peer-to-peer approaches are now being employed to create massively scaled
self-managing networks [18].
1.2. Motivation and Aim
Autonomic computing has been integrated in computing paradigms such as cloud, fog, edge, serverless and
quantum computing using AI/ML techniques [19]. The use of autonomic computing techniques is particularly
signiﬁcant when there is a large number of potential conﬁguration options for a system. The greater the potential
parameterspaceoverwhichconﬁgurationoptionscanvary,thegreaterthepotentialtooptimisesearchoverthisspace
ofpossibleoptions.Autonomiccomputingtechniquesaremostuseful underthehood ,i.e.asaprogrammaticinterface
that can be invoked directly [20] from an application.
There are many applications that can manage node failures, network setup/updates and a limited ability to carry
outperformanceoptimizationontheirownsincemostpeer-to-peernetworksarefundamentallyautonomous.AI-and
ML-basedself-managingcapabilitiesarebecomingincreasinglycommoninwebservicesanddatacentermanagement
software, allowing these systems to automatically adapt to shifting workloads [21]. However, autonomic features are
not always included in schedulers and workﬂow managers, as such systems frequently lack the ability to monitor
system condition and provide real-time feedback, making it diﬃcult for these systems to be fully autonomous [22].
Integrating “tuning” capability that makes use of AI/ML techniques can extend the capability of such systems. For
instance, self-managed computing platforms, such as Hadoop/MapReduce, provide self-healing and self-organizing
capabilities that enable the use of a large number of resources [23].
AI-andML-basedautonomiccomputingwillbecomeprevalentwithincreasingscaleandinterconnectivityofour
systems,makingmanualadministrationandadaptationofsuchsystemschallengingandexpensive.WeexpectAI-and
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 3 of 43

==== Page 4 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
ML-basedautonomiccomputingwillbethenorminthefuture—withhumanusersstillabletoinﬂuencethebehaviour
of these systems through the use of judiciously integrated interfaces. Crucially, with the advent of cyberphysical
systems and digital twins, quality-assured and mission-critical adaptations will become mandatory because the self-
adaptive software will be responsible for physical assets, such as the unit operations of a processing plant.
But how should self-adaptive systems and AI/ML be combined? According to IBM, an autonomic system must
meet the following eight criteria for computing systems using AI and ML techniques [2, 8, 9, 10, 24, 25, 26, 27]:
•The resources that are available to the AI-powered system, as well as the capabilities and limits of the system,
must be known by the system.
•As the computing environment changes, e.g., because of a concept drift, the system must be able to adapt and
reconﬁgure autonomously.
•An eﬃcient computer process requires a system that can maximise its performance via AI- and ML-based
prediction.
•When an error occurs, the system should be able to ﬁx itself or redirect processes away from the source of the
issue.
•To ensure overall system security and integrity, the system must be able to detect, identify, and respond to
numerous forms of threats automatically.
•Astheenvironmentchanges,thesystemmustbeabletointeractwithanddevelopcommunicationprotocolswith
other systems.
Despite the system’s transparency, it must be able to predict demand on its resources, which can be forecasted
with AI/ML techniques. Small, even inconspicuous computers will be able to communicate with each other across
more linkednetworks, leading tothe notion of “TheInternet of Everything(IoE)”, thanks inpartto the emergenceof
ubiquitous computing and autonomic computing [28]. Crucially, AI-powered self-adaptive systems promise to cost-
eﬀectivelyandsustainablymeetchangingrequirementsinachangingenvironmentandinthepresenceofuncertainty—
vs., just adding more and more resources. Hence, in conjunction with the latest AI and ML techniques, autonomic
computing is being studied and applied by a number of industry giants.
1.3. Beneﬁts of AI/ML-integrated Next Generation Computing
AI-basedAutonomiccomputing’sprimaryadvantageislowertotalcostofownership[29].Asaresult,maintenance
expenditureswillbesigniﬁcantlyreduced.Therewillalsobeareductioninthenumberofpeopleneededtomaintainthe
systems. AI-powered automated IT systems will save deployment and maintenance costs, time, and boost IT system
stability. Companies will be able to better manage their business using IT systems that can adopt and implement
directives based on business strategy and can make alterations in response to changing surroundings, according to
the higher-order advantages. Server consolidation is another beneﬁt of using AI-based autonomic computing, since it
reduces the cost and human labour required to maintain huge server farms [30]. Management of computer systems
should be made easier using AI for autonomous computing. As a result, computing systems will be signiﬁcantly
improved. Another example of an application is server load distribution, which may be accomplished by distributing
workacrossseveralservers[31].Further,cost-eﬀectiveandsustainablepowersupplypoliciescanbeaccomplishedby
continuously monitoring the power supply.
As a consequence of AI, the following changes have occurred in autonomic computing:
•Cost-eﬀective:Usingcomputersystemsinsteadofon-sitedatacentreshasitsadvantages.Despitethehighinitial
costs,organisationsmayeasilyacquireAItechnologyviaamonthlychargeinthecloud.SystemsusingAImay
analyse data without involving a human being.
•Autonomic: Enterprises may become more eﬃcient, strategic, and insight-driven through the use of AI cloud
computing.AIhasthepotentialtoboostproductivitybyautomatingtediousandrepetitivetasks,aswellasdoing
data analysis without the use of operator interaction.
•Data Organization: Real-time personalisation, anomaly detection, and management scenario prediction may be
achieved by integrating AI technology with Google Cloud Stream analytics.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 4 of 43

==== Page 5 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Table 1
Comparison of Our Survey with Other Survey Articles. := method supports the property.
Works 12345678910 11 Publication Year
Varghese and Buyya [32] x 2018
Abdulkareem et al. [33] x x 2019
Gill et al. [19] xx 2019
Massimo et al. [34] x x 2020
Li et al. [36] x x 2020
Kumar el al. [35] x x 2021
Hassan et al. [37] x x 2021
Our Survey (This Paper) xxxxxxxxxxx 2022
Abbreviations: 1: Prospective Model, 2: AI, 3: Cloud Computing, 4: Fog Computing, 5: Edge Computing, 6: Serverless Computing,
7: Quantum Computing, 8: Explainable AI (XAI), 9: Risks and Beneﬁts of AI-integrated Next Generation Computing, 10: Hype
Cycle, and 11: Intelligent Edge.
•MakingIntelligentDecisions:Intelligence-baseddatasecurityiscriticalasmorecloud-basedappsaredeployed.
Network traﬃc tracing and analysis made possible by AI-powered network security technologies. As soon
as an abnormality is discovered, AI-powered systems can raise a red signal. Such strategy safeguards crucial
information.
1.4. Related Surveys and Our Contributions
As the area of computing continues to expand, there is a need for a fresh visionary work to review, upgrade and
consolidatethecurrentevidenceanddiscusspotentialtrendsandfutureperspectivesintheﬁeldofcomputing.Varghese
andBuyya[32]introducedaninnovativesurveyonnextgenerationcloudcomputing,whichdoesnotconsiderAI/ML.
Abdulkareem et al. [33] presented a review on AI for fog computing only. Massimo et al. [34] explored literature for
AI-based edge computing. Gill et al. [19] presented a review on AI for cloud computing. The surveys from Kumar el
al.[35]andLietal.[36]highlightedthepotentialroleofAIinquantumcomputing.ThesuitabilityofAIforserverless
computing is described in Hassan et al. [37].
BycombiningAI/MLwithcloud,fog,edge,serverless,andquantumcomputing,we’vecreatedtheﬁrstreviewofits
kind.Addingtotheprevioussurveys,thisnewresearchgivesanewimaginativeapproachtoassessingandidentifying
the most current research challenges. Table 1 compares our review with existing surveys based on diﬀerent criteria.
1.4.1. Our Focus
This paper leverages the expanding domain of Internet of Things (IoT), edge computing and the computing
continuum as an exemplar application for AI-powered adaptation. There is a tremendous growth on applications that
leveragesuchtechnologies,suchassmartagriculture,environmentalmonitoring,industrialdigitaltwins,smartcities,
managementofrenewableenergygeneration/storage,etc.Nevertheless,ourdiscussioncanbeexpandedtootherﬁelds
as well.
1.5. Article Organization
The rest of this article is organized as illustrated in Figure 2. Section 2 proposes a conceptual model. Section 3 is
presentingvisionanddiscussingvariousemergingtrendsinAIforcloud,fog,edge,serverlessandquantumcomputing.
Section 4 discusses the new research developments related to autonomic computing with embedded intelligence.
Section 5 discusses the use of Explainable AI (XAI) for next-generation computing. Section 6 presents the potential
risks of autonomic computing approaches that make use of AI/ML algorithms. Section 7 gives the hype cycle for
autonomic computing and highlights the future directions. Section 8 concludes and summarizes the paper.
2. A Prospective Model for Next Generation Computing Systems
ToshowtherelationshipbetweenAI/MLandautonomouscomputingsystems,weproposeaprospectivesoftware
architecture model as shown in Figure 3. Our proposal integrates advanced technologies to oﬀer eﬀective computing
services that fulﬁll the demand for a variety of IoT applications.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 5 of 43

==== Page 6 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 AI for Next Generation 
Computing : Emerging  Trends 
and Future Directions  A Prospective Model 
for Next Generation 
Computing Systems  Explainable AI (XAI) 
for Next Generation 
Computing  Potential Risks of 
AI-integrated 
Computing  AI for Computing: 
Current Status and 
Open Challenges  Cloud Computing  Fog Computing  Edge Computing  Serverless 
Computing  
Cloud 
Computing  Fog 
Computing  Edge 
Computing  Serverless 
Computing  Miscellaneous  Emerging  Trends and 
Future Directions  
 
Quantum 
Computing  Open 
Challenges  
Quantum 
Computing  Quantum 
Artificial 
Intelligence  
(QAI)  Open 
Challenges  Open 
Challenges  Open 
Challenges  Open 
Challenges  
Figure 2: The organization of this survey
2.1. IoT Applications
Gateway devices will be used by IoT/edge devices and end users to communicate with computer systems,
abstracting away the interactions with sensors and actuators/eﬀectors located on the edge [38]. The system will
communicate with various and multiple instances of IoT applications (such as healthcare, smart city, farming, and
weather monitoring) or their digital twins to eﬃciently provide AI and other autonomic services [39].
2.2. Resource Manager
Distributedsystems,includingIoTedgeplatforms,requireadaptiveandfault-tolerantmanagementofresourcesand
schedulingoftasks.Theproposedresourcemanagementmodulemaintainsthesetofavailableandreservedresources
(the number of CPUs utilised, the amount of memory, the price of resources, the kind of resources, and how many
resourcesthereare)aswellasthedesiredresources,constraints(e.g.,placement)andQoSperdeployedtask.Further,
themoduleincorporatesdatasuppliedbytheproviderontheaccessibleandscheduledresources,aswellastheresource
speciﬁcation (resource identity, resource category, conﬁguration, data, use information, and pricing of resource).
When evaluating QoS, the QoS manager ﬁgures out how long it will take to complete a given workload. Priority
queues(workloadswithanurgentdeadlineinexecutionstate)arecreatedforcriticalcloudworkloadsbasedonService
LevelAgreement(SLA)details,whichincludesdetailsaboutthehighestandlowestviolationprobabilityandpenalty
rate in the case of SLA violation. The service manager is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the system’s
operation. With the use of SLA and QoS information, a mapper may assign workloads to adequate resources, taking
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 6 of 43

==== Page 7 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
 
 
 
                                                                                                        supports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
                           
                             
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Container 
Functions   Placement Manager  
 
 
 
 
 
VMs    
 
 
 
 
Azure/AWS
/Openstack    
 
 
 
 
Fog/Edge 
Hosts  
 
 Container 
Orchestration  Application 
Assignment  Resource 
Allocation  FaaS  Database  
Manager  
SaaS  
Sensors  
PaaS  
AI/ML Agent  
IaaS  
Monitor             
To Monitor 
Status  
Effectors  
Knowledge Base                              
Self-Configuration  
Self-Optimization  
Security 
Manager  IoT 
Devices  
Analyze       
To Manage 
alerts  
Gateway  
Self-
Healing  
Plan                  
To Select an 
Action  
Self-
Protection  
Application Administrator  
Executor        
To Execute 
Action  
Quantum 
Computing Module  Serverless 
Administrator  
Resource Manager  
 
 
QoS 
Manager  
SLA 
Manager  
Service 
Manager  
Workload 
Manager  
Figure 3: A Prospective Model for AI-integrated Next Generation Computing
intoconsiderationbothSLAandQoS.Afterallocatingtheworkloadstotheavailableresources,theresourcemanager
createsaworkloadschedulebypredictingitusingAI.Inordertocompletetaskswithinacertainbudgetandtimeframe,
theresourceschedulermakeseﬃcientuseofthesystem’sresources,whicharepredictedviaAI/MLtechniques.Finally,
whereverpossible,theresourcemanagerwillbeprovidingexplainableguaranteesunderuncertainty—potentiallyusing
explainable AI methods—that the proposed adaptation will indeed meet the desired QoS.
2.3. Autonomic Model
This future model employs IBM’s autonomic computing model [1], which emphasises self-healing, self-
conﬁguring, self-protecting, and self-optimizing features.
•Self-healing is aimed at making all required modiﬁcations to recover from defects in order to keep the system
runningwithoutinterruption[27].Software,network,andhardwareerrorsmustnotimpairtheeﬃciencyofthe
algorithm or workload regardless of their severity [10]. Any unintended exception in high resource-intensive
applicationscancauseasoftware,hardwareornetworkfailure.AI-basedsystemscanleverageavarietyofdata
sourcesandsensordatatogeneratefaultmodelsandenablepredictive—insteadofreactive—faultdetectionand
maintenance.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 7 of 43

==== Page 8 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Theprimarygoalofself-protectionistokeepthesystemsecurefromhostilepurposefulactsbykeepingtrackof
suspiciousactivityandrespondingappropriatelyinordertokeepthesystemrunningsmoothly[9].Topreventan
attack,thesystemmustbeabletotellthediﬀerencebetweenwhatislawfulandwhatisnot.AI-basedprediction
systems can be used to achieve this: for instance, the system could be trained to detect vulnerabilities in the
communications conﬁgurations/policies or identify code smells in the user-submitted functions/lambdas.
•Installing missing or obsolete parts without requiring any human interaction is the primary goal of self-
conﬁguration. Depending on the situation, a developer may need to reinstall speciﬁc components or perform
software upgrades [2]. Self-conﬁguration takes care of the cost of resources and penalties for SLA violations,
which can be predicted in advance through AI/ML.
•Dynamicschedulingapproachesareusedtomatchjobsandworkloadstothebestavailableresourcesintheself-
optimizing aspect [27]. The autonomic element’s input is used to constantly enhance the system’s performance
through dynamic scheduling. AI/ML based adaptive scheduling can be used for data-intensive applications
because it is ﬂexible and can be adjusted to a changing environment with ease. Further, the impact of diﬀerent
QoS characteristics on system performance can be measured automatically [8].
Modelsforcomplexdistributedsystemsthatcanself-heal,self-conﬁgure,self-optimiseandself-protecthavebeen
developedusingthisidea.Autonomicelements(AEs)areprimarilyinchargeofmanagingresourcesontheirown[1].
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of the many components that make up an AE system. Interaction between
all the AEs is necessary for the sharing of messages on system performance. AEs complete a necessary sub-task to
maintain the system’s performance based on interaction. There are four stages to the IBM model of an autonomic
system [1]: Monitor, analyse, plan, and execute are the four steps in the process, which will be supported by AI/ML
models to improve the monitoring, analysing, planning and execution. Further, AI-powered techniques could also
improve the eﬃciency of the persistence (knowledge) component of the MAPE-K loop, especially in eﬀectively
resolving state synchronization in a highly-distributed and potentially unreliable environment.
2.3.1. Sensors
SensorsgatherdataontheQoSmetricsofthepresentstatenodes’performance[2,8,9,10].Inputfromcomputation
elementsisﬁrstsenttothemanager,whichsubsequentlysendsthisinformationtoMonitorsthroughthemanagernode.
Faults(software,network,andhardware),freshupdatesoncomponentstatus(outdatedormissing),andsecuritythreats
are all included in the recent developments (intrusion detection rate).
2.3.2. Monitor
Initiallymonitorsdatafromtheresourcemanagernodetocontinuallycheckperformancevariancesbycontrasting
AI-basedpredictedandrealoutcomes[2,8,9,10].ThethresholdvalueofQoSmetrics,whichalsocontainsthehighest
value of SLA violation, is already recorded in the knowledge base. The faults (network, software, and hardware),
fresh upgrades of resources (obsolete or lost), security assaults, variation in QoS parameters, and SLA violations are
noted, and this data is transmitted to the next module for more investigation. Each node has a QoS agent deployed to
monitorandpredicttheperformanceoftheabove-mentionedQoSparametersforself-optimization.Self-protectionis
achievedbyinstallingsecurityagentsonallprocessingnodes,whicharethenutilisedtotrackdownbothundiscovered
andrecognizedattacks.Afteranalysingthesystem’scurrentdatabase,additionalabnormalitiescanbepredictedusing
AI/ML.Systeminvasionsandsystemabusearedetectedandclassiﬁedaseithernormalorabnormalutilisingitsmonitor
and the system’s attributes are compared with metadata. Hardening agents for software, networks, and hardware will
be reducing attack surfaces by identifying corresponding ﬂaws to achieve self-healing and self-protection. When a
new node is introduced to the cloud, the hardware hardening agent scans the drivers and validates the replica of the
original drivers. The new node is inserted when the device driver has veriﬁed it. This node will create a warning if it
is still present in the system. The performance of the software and hardware components is monitored by agents for
self-conﬁguration.Thesoftwarecomponentagentretrievestheactivecomponentconditionforallsoftwarecomponents
that are employed on separate processing nodes.
2.3.3. Analyze and Plan
Whenthemonitoringmodulesendsdata,theAnalyzeandPlanunitevaluatesitandidentiﬁesastrategyforreacting
tothealarm[2,8,9,10].AfteraQoSagentgeneratesanalert,theanalysisunitbeginspredictingQoSmetricsassociated
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 8 of 43

==== Page 9 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
with a speciﬁc node. ‘DOWN’ status is reported for that unit, and the unit is restarted, and the state of that node is
measured. Alternatively, new resources are added if the node state goes to ‘ACTIVE’. After an alarm is sent by a
hardware or software agent, the analysis unit begins examining the behaviour of the node’s hardware and software
(self-healing).Node‘N’shouldbesetto“DOWN”ifanalertisproducedduringworkloadexecutionandrestarted,to
measure the state of that node. The execution of the node’s state switches to ‘ACTIVE’ if execution is continued, or
alternativelyanotherreliablenodeischosen.Self-protectionbeginsbyexaminingattacklogsonceanalarmisproduced
bythesecurityagentandasignatureiscreatedbytheanalysingcomponent.Afteranalarmisissuedbyahardwareor
softwarecomponent,theanalysisunitbeginsstudyingthebehaviourofanode’shardwareandsoftwarecomponents.It
isnecessarytodesignateahardwarecomponentas“DOWN”,resetthefailedcomponent,andthenstartitagaininorder
to predict whether or not it is “CRITICAL” or “ERROR”. Again when the data has been processed, this framework
takes care of implementing the alert-related actions on its own.
Further,beforeanyadaptationdoestakeplace,themoduleswillﬁrstprovideevidencethattheproposedplanwill
indeed complete successful. This is achieved using a combination of formal guarantees, which can be derived from
theuseofcontroltheory.AnAI-modelcanalsobeusedtopredictwhentheusersmightissueagoalupdate–basedon
external information or other types of operational data—and prepare/assess an adaptation plan ahead of time.
2.3.4. Executor
Aplanisputintoactionbytheexecutor[2,8,9,10],whoseprimarypurposeinself-optimizationtoenhanceQoS
and execute tasks within a pre-deﬁned deadline. Using the data from the analyzer, the executor may quickly, cheaply
andeﬃcientlyaddanewnodetothepoolofresources.Iftheresourcesarenotalreadyinthepoolofavailableresources,
then notify the user and negotiate a SLA before adding a new node from the backup pool of resources with the least
amountofworkload,priceandpowerusagerequirements.TheseaspectscanbepredictedinadvanceusingAI/ML.A
node that is not reliable should be replaced with a node that is the most stable amongst those available. To relaunch
the node, the current status of a node is stored (checkpointed). The node is then restarted. If the problem persists, an
alert is subsequently generated.
Forself-healing,wheneveranewcomponentisintroduced,itshouldbelinkedtoothercomponentsandrestarted.
2.3.5. Eﬀector
New policies, regulations, and notiﬁcations are sent to other computing nodes via the eﬀector [2, 8, 9, 10], which
serves as an interface between the various computing nodes. Through the eﬀector, the computing nodes can work
together to form a more powerful system. It is worthwhile mentioning that a system-of-systems approach is likely to
beleveragedforsuchapplications;hence,eﬀectorsofatopsystemmightbetriggeringadaptationofabottomsystem
and so on.
2.3.6. Knowledge Base
Themainaspectsofinformationstoredintheknowledgebasearethefollowing:(a)Thecurrentandpreviousstates
of the system (including deployed applications, available computing resources, etc.), whose values are read via the
system’smonitors.(b)Thedesiredstateofthesystem,whichisdrivenbyspeciﬁcationssetbytheuser/admin/operator
ofthesystem;theyincludebothfunctionalrequirements,suchasthemicroservicesnetworkofdeployedapplications,
as well as nonfunctional requirements, such as QoS Service Level Objectives (SLOs) on desired response time, tail
latency,targetresourceutilization,etc.(c)Current,pastandpredictedmodels—aswellasmetamodelsandsurrogate
models—ofthesystemanditsenvironmentgeneratedviaAI/MLaswellastheeﬃcacyofthevariousAI/MLmethods
used for their training. (d) Current and past execution plans that are devised by the planner module and implemented
by the executor module. (e) The actual code of the various interfaces the system provides to enable informed self-
adaptationbyautonomicallyincorporatingimprovedmethodsforvariousoperatingaspects.Forexample,newAI/ML,
scheduling and resource management algorithms, could be selected by the self-adaptation algorithm and added in,
which would eliminate the need for the software engineering team to have to patch the system. (f) Further, the
Knowledge Base will maintain pre-stored policies with predeﬁned conﬁgurations to support system management. It
is the responsibility of the system administrator to periodically update the policies stored in the Knowledge Base to
reﬂect changes in resource scheduling regulations. A system admin will be replaced by an AI-based autonomic agent
to handle the execution automatically.
Crucially, the knowledge module needs to provide a centralized location for the various running tasks, which
could be executed as threads, processes and of course across multiple nodes of the distributed cluster, to safely
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 9 of 43

==== Page 10 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
store and exchange information. This kind of architecture is required for highly distributed systems; otherwise, direct
communication between the various units will result in dramatic slowdowns due to locking and contention, increase
the attack surface or even worse, into system failure due to synchronization issues, such as race conditions, that can
invalidate information manipulated by multiple actors. Finally, the knowledge base needs to be replicated, potentially
across multiple reliability zones, to assure business continuity in cases of hardware and communication failures or
even a catastrophe that knocks down a whole datacenter. As such, distributed consensus and adaptive data recovery
algorithms are required to maintain data validity.
2.4. Service Management Layer
There is a database manager in this position (which manages the data of IoT applications eﬀectively). AI-based
systems can be used by Security Manager to predict and guard against external threats on task execution [40].
Application data may be securely sent during task execution with the help of a blockchain service. At runtime, the
serverlessmanagercontrolsthecloudresourcesthatIoTapplicationsareconsuming.WiththeintegrationofServerless
datapipelineswithquantumcomputers,eﬃcientloadbalancinganddynamicprovisioningmaybeachievedfortheedge
computing paradigm. It is the responsibility of the application manager to control the deployment of IoT applications
and to provide data for the allocation of resources in advance, which can be achieved using AI/ML. The placement
module serves as a bridge between the application manager and the application placement module.
Fourcategoriesofservicesareincludedatthebottomlayer[40]:function(FaaS),software(SaaS),platform(PaaS),
andinfrastructure(IaaS).Functioncontainersareusedtoprovideavirtualenvironmentforcomputersystemsthatcan
be dynamically scaled up and down. SaaS uses the notion of virtualization based on VMs to deliver cloud-based
services.PlatformasaservicecanbeprovidedviaMicrosoftAzure,AmazonWebService(AWS),orOpenStack.By
loweringlatencyandreactiontimeattheedgedevices,fogandedgecomputingmaybeusedtodelivertheinfrastructure
service.Orchestratingcontainersusingorchestrationisanintermediarystepbetweendeployingcontainersasaservice
and deploying them as software as a service (SaaS). The placement of IoT applications for dynamic provisioning and
management is handled by application placement, which is a bridge between SaaS and PaaS. Machine learning and
artiﬁcialintelligence-basedapproachesareusedtoschedulethecloudresourcesofPaaSandIaaS[41].Usingquantum
technology, the system is able to perform nonce or Proof-of-work (PoW) computations in a fraction of the time.
3. AI for Computing: Current Status and Open Challenges
It is very important to identify the research opportunities for leveraging AI and ML in next generation computing
for emerging computing paradigms, including cloud, fog, edge, serverless and quantum computing environments as
shown in Figure 4. This section discusses various new trends and open challenges in AI-integrated next generation
computing.
3.1. Cloud Computing
It is becoming increasingly evident that the rise of cloud computing and the rise of AI are mutually reinforcing.
Asaresult,usingAIinthecloudcanimprovethecloud’sperformance,eﬃciency,anddigitaltransformation[42].AI
in the cloud computing environment is a crucial key to enabling organisations to become more eﬃcient, strategic and
insight-driven,whileatthesametimeprovidinggreaterﬂexibility,agilityandcostsavings[43].Asaresult,weturned
to industry insiders for their insights about the expanding importance of AI in cloud computing.
AIandcloudcomputingmaybecombinedinavarietyofwaystoenhancecloudcomputing.AItoolsandsoftware
aresynchedwiththepowerofcloudcomputinginordertoprovideanenhancedvaluetotheexistingcloudcomputing
environments[44].Thiscombinationmakesenterpriseseﬃcient,strategic,andinsightful.Dataandapplicationshosted
on the cloud allow businesses to be more responsive and adaptable, while also saving money for the company as
a whole [44]. Existing capabilities gain intelligence, and customers receive an excellent experience, thanks to the
additionofthisadditionallayerofAIthataidsinthegenerationofinsightsfromdata[44].Asaresult,businessesmay
proﬁtfromatremendouslydistinctivemix.Cloudislikeavideogame,whichemitsanenormousquantityofoperating
dataandtelemetry,muchlikeaTeslaelectricvehicle[45].Asaresult,AI-basedcloudcomputingisbasicallyAIOps,
whichusesalgorithmstomakesenseofallthisdataratherthanrelyingonhumans[46,47].Inthepost-COVIDfuture,
cloud-computing investment increased by 37 percent to $29 billion in the ﬁrst quarter of 2020 compared to the ﬁrst
quarter of 2019 [48]. Integrating AI and cloud computing can therefore help businesses get closer to their consumers
while also increasing their operational eﬃciency [49].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 10 of 43

==== Page 11 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Next 
Generation 
Computing 
Paradigms Cloud 
Computing
Fog 
Computing
Edge 
ComputingServerless 
ComputingQuantum 
Computing
Figure 4: Emerging computing paradigms
Cloud computing environments and solutions are helping businesses to become more agile, adaptable, and cost-
eﬀectivebecausethissigniﬁcantlycutsinfrastructureadministrationexpensesforcorporations[50].Asawaytohandle
enormousdatarepositories,simplifydata,improveworkﬂows,andcreatereal-timeinsightsforday-to-dayoperations,
AI gives companies more freedom. The operational weight may be shifted from processes and people to engineering
and data [51]. That is why AI is boosting cloud computing in a variety of ways. The Software as a Service (SaaS)
paradigm is currently being used to successfully employ cloud-based AI [52]. SaaS companies are incorporating AI
into their solutions, which provides clients and end-users with enhanced capabilities. Another method businesses
are adopting AI to enhance their present cloud infrastructure is through AI as a service [53]. The use of AI makes
applications more ﬂexible and eﬃcient, reducing mistakes and increasing production.
The cloud native paradigm derived from cloud computing has shifted the traditional monolithic cloud application
into light-weight, loose-coupled and ﬁne-grained microservices [54]. This paradigm can support the applications
to be updated in a much more eﬃcient manner. However, due to the increased number and time-sensitive features
of microservices, their eﬃcient management can be challenging. AI/ML based solutions can address some of the
challenges,forinstance,neuralnetworkbasedapproachcanbeappliedtopredictworkloadsofmicroservices,andML
based techniques can be utilized to analyze the dependency of microservices.
The following are various advantages to deploying AI in the cloud:
•Enhanceddatamanagement:Dataiskingintoday’sdata-drivenworld,whichnecessitatesbetterwaystohandle
it. An enterprise’s ability to keep track of that data is a major hurdle [55]. Cloud-based AI tools and apps that
recognise, update, catalogue, and provide real-time data insights to clients. AI techniques may also be used to
detectfraudulentactivityandidentifyanomaloussystemtrends[56].Banksandotherﬁnancialinstitutionsrely
heavily on this technology to remain competitive and safe in today’s high-risk climate.
•Automation: Intelligent automation can now be implemented throughout a whole business thanks to the
combinationofAIandthecloud,whichremovesthelastremainingroadblocks[57].Predictivenessisenhanced
byAIsincealgorithmicmodelsdrawonhistoricaldataandotherpatternstodeliverin-the-momentinsights[58].
AI and cloud computing solutions can help businesses go from semi-structured to unstructured documents
cognitivelyautomatedwhilealsopushingthefrontiersofeﬀectiveinfrastructuremanagement,resultinginlittle
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 11 of 43

==== Page 12 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
downtime and impact [59]. As a result, the cost of doing business is transformed, and the customer experience
is transformed as well.
•CostSavings:Cloudcomputingallowsbusinessestojustpayfortheresourcestheyutilise.Thissavesasigniﬁcant
amountofmoneycomparedtothetypicalinfrastructureexpendituresofbuildingandmaintainingmassivedata
centres [60]. Saved money may be utilised to build more strategic AI tools and accelerators, which can then
be used to increase revenue and save the company money at the core [61]. This will lead to better operational
quality and cheaper expenses.
3.1.1. Open Challenges
The following issues that may arise when these two technologies are combined:
•Integration: It is never easy to get started with a seamless integration of two diﬀerent technologies. In order to
accomplishthisintegration,companiesmustﬁrstmovealloftheirappsandtechnologiestothecloud[57].This
is no small feat for many companies. Businesses may only begin to consider cloud-based AI after undergoing
such a seismic shift. Thus, the technological sync is excessively reliant on companies that are implementing
tangible digital transformations of their systems.
•Inadequatedata:Largedatasetswithhigh-qualitydataareidealforAItechnologies.Businessesmustmakesure
thattheirdataisbothaccessibleandcleaninorderforAItobeofanyuse[62].Becausedataisoftenunorganised
or missing, this is a big diﬃculty. It is critical that the solution’s value be derived from high-quality data.
•Securityandprivacyissues:Topreventdatabreaches,businessesmustbevigilantaboutprotectingtheirsensitive
and ﬁnancial information from adversaries, who are likely to target them [63].
ThissynchronisationofAIwiththecloudnecessitatestremendousknowledge,resources,andﬁnancialinvestment
if it is to be worthwhile for businesses. It is only when cloud computing and AI systems are properly integrated that
companies will be able to utilise a wide range of powerful machine learning capabilities, such as image recognition
and natural language processing [64, 65]. As a result, additional businesses will follow suit in the future. Businesses
will require an AI cloud in order to keep up with the rapid advancements in cloud computing. After successful
implementation of it, AI operations will eventually become the standard approach for cloud management [47]. The
cloudisalreadyapowerfultechnology,buttheybelievethatAIwillmakeitevenmoreso.Withthiscombination,data
analysis and management will undergo a radical shift. The marriage of AI with the cloud is a game-changer and will
bring unparalleled value to end-users in a world ﬂooded with vast volumes of data [62]. Now that cloud computing
andAIaremorewidelyavailable,theyareproducingupheavalinawiderangeofindustriesthroughouttheglobe.Itis
clear that technology has moved from being merely operational to one of strategic importance. AI is expected to help
the company tackle new and more visible challenges, as well as open up a new universe for its potential clients.
3.2. Fog Computing
Fog computing was established to supplement cloud computing services because of the rising use of the IoT and
the necessity to handle and store massive amounts of produced data [66]. IoT applications with minimal reaction
time requirements can be supported by fog computing, which provides basic network services [67]. It is diﬃcult to
distribute IoT application activities eﬃciently inside fog nodes in order to fulﬁl QoS and quality of experience (QoE)
restrictions due to fogs’ scattered, heterogeneous, and restricted resource nature [68]. Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X),
healthmonitoringandindustrialautomationemployfogcomputingbecauseitprovidescomputingcapabilitiesnearto
theusertomeetreactiontimeexpectationsfortheseapplications[69].Asaresult,theseappscreateenormousamounts
of information from the widespread use of IoT devices. Because of delays in long-distance data transmission and
network congestion, cloud computing is unable to meet latency requirements [66]. It provides a network of gateways,
routers, and compute nodes between the source of data and cloud computing centres. Because of the low latency
and energy eﬃciency, as well as the reduction in bandwidth required for data transport, fog computing extends cloud
computing [70]. Fog nodes can be used to process sensitive data instead of sending it to the cloud, which improves
security[71].UsingthedatageneratedfromvariousIoTdevices,theseapplicationsaimtoprovidehelpfulinformation
while also addressing latency concerns [67]. In recent years, researchers have increasingly turned to AI to help them
analyse large amounts of data for the aforementioned uses. AI’s Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 12 of 43

==== Page 13 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
subﬁeldsgiveusefuldatainsightsanddecisionhelp[72,73].Followingthat,wearediscussingsomeoftheAI-enabled
fog computing technologies that make these applications possible.
For the IoT, 5G signiﬁes more than just a new era of wireless innovation. More than trillions of sensors, gadgets,
and machines are powered by AI and run autonomously from the data centre to the edge of the network [72, 73].
In terms of speeding up data analysis and decision making, fog computing and edge computing are the two best
technologies. Many “fog devices” will be networked and co-located as part of a distributed computing system known
as fog computing [66]. Edge management, data collection, monitoring, analytics, and streaming all take place at the
edgeofthenetworkinthefogcomputingnodes[74].Whilefogcomputingiscapableofconnectingalimitednumber
ofdevices,thistechnologyhasafargreatercapabilitytohandlereal-timerequestsandtoaggregatedatafromamuch
larger numberof sources. Input-responsedelay is thereforegreatly reduced. Wehave been ableto access resourcesof
alltypes,havescalablearchitectureswiththepressofabutton,andutilisethemfromanywheresinceAmazon’scloud
was launched in 2006 [75]. Cisco claimed in 2008 that IoT, is the one of the technologies that will beneﬁt from the
cloud, but its roots date back to 1999 [76]. For example, we can save sensor data and act on it, automate processes
using AI, and react in real time to circumstances that previously necessitated direct involvement. When IoT was ﬁrst
introduced, it promised to extend to both professional and personal areas, and how sensorization and communication
protocolshadtochangetomeetthesenewdemands[77].Newparadigmshaveemergedasaresultoftheintegrationof
sensordataandtheapplicationofAItoit.Newtermslike“Smarthome”arebeingusedtodescribenewtechnologies
thatmakeiteasierandmoreconvenienttomanageourhomes’energyuseandotheraspectsofourdailylives[78].Ona
broaderscale,theterm“SmartCity”isusedtodescribecities,while“SmartFactory”isusedtodescribemanufacturing
andprocessingfacilities.Onethingtheyallhaveincommonistheutilisationofdataandautomateddecision-making
in combination with automation, which can be easily achieved using AI and ML techniques.
An example of this is altering the conﬁguration of a computer or railway, putting the brakes on an autonomous
automobile,orsendingawarningforapreventativemaintenance.Itisevidentfromtheexamplesthatdecision-making
and action-taking cannot be done on the cloud, but rather on devices that are closer to the sensors that collect the
data. In contrast to cloud computing, fog computing oﬀers a variety of advantages for IoT applications [79]. First and
foremost, quicker and real-time processing are possible because local processing is used rather than relying on the
cloud. As a result of the large number of IoT devices already in use and expected in the future, less network traﬃc
meansbettercommunication.Additionally,moreappsmaybedevelopedandoperatedeverywherethereisanInternet
connection. We need to think how AI could help in the automation?
3.2.1. Open Challenges
Researchonapplicationdeploymenthasalreadybeendoneinseveraldomains,suchasindustryandmanufacturing,
but there are still a number of issues that need to be addressed.
•Execution Time: For both service providers and customers, time is the most pressing issue. One of the key
motivationsforputtingsoftwareinthefogistospeedupuserreactiontime.Thetimeparameterwasoneofthe
performance indicators investigated in the literature [80, 81]. When there are more demands, the QoS suﬀers.
This diﬃculty has been partially alleviated by the presented techniques, but it remains a concern [82]. In the
application placement problem, applied techniques for optimising time performance metrics in the category of
deep learning algorithms [83, 84, 85]. We may be able to achieve better outcomes if we use diﬀerent machine
learning algorithms and evolutionary algorithms or novel combinatorial techniques.
•Mobility-awareness:Fogcomputing’slackofmobilitysupportmaybenoticedwhendealingwithalargenumber
of mobile users with varying application needs [86]. Consequently, migration methods and architectures that
can handle a wide range of mobility activities are required. Migrating VMs or containers is something that has
been discussed in a few publications [87]. Moving to a new location may be expensive, as well. Reinforcement
learning(RL)approacheslikeQ-learningandState–Action–Reward–State–Action(SARSA)havebeenusedto
study this topic [88], but it remains a challenge in practical contexts where there are many requests [89, 90].
•ResourceScheduling:Anotherproblemtheauthorsencounterismanagingresourcesinadynamicenvironment
like fog, which has a limited amount of resources and a short reaction time for the user. The Fog environment
is less ﬂexible than the cloud when it comes to resource sharing [91]. Therefore, the issue of eﬃcient resource
utilisationmuststillbeaddressed.Resourceallocationwasbasedonasurveyofexistingresearchandtheuseof
neural networks, support vector machines, and k-nearest neighbours (KNNs) [92].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 13 of 43

==== Page 14 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Energy-eﬃciency: The amount of energy used if supplied policies and algorithms are improved, idle fog nodes
may be turned-oﬀ and energy consumption can be avoided in combination with QoS and QoE since the
applicationmodulesaresituatedinthedispersedfognodes[80,81].Energyconsumptionandcostareinﬂuenced
bymemory,CPU,andbandwidthusewhichcanbepredictedusingmachinelearningmethodsincludeK-means,
KNNs, logistic regressions, branch and bounds and Deep Q-Network (DQN) and SARSA [93].
•Security and privacy: Fog infrastructure is critical to determining the security of the applications because of
securityconcernssuchasinformationdegradation,identitydisclosure,replay,anddenialofserviceassaults[94].
Authentication,encryption,anddataintegrationallneedtobeimplementedindynamiccomputingsettingsdue
to the lack of control that users have over their information [94].
•Fault-tolerance and availability: One of the primary reasons for the development of fog computing was to
improvedependability.Whenitcomestofogcomputing,diﬃcultieslikesensorfailure,alackofaccessnetwork
coverage in a particular region or the entire network, service platform failure, and a broken user interface
system connection are all part of the equation [72]. Another challenge in the fog environment is to increase
theavailabilityofapps.AheuristicapproachtoimprovingserviceavailabilityandQoSistomapapplicationsto
fogcommunitiesandthentransitivelyputtheirservicesonthefogdevices’community,accordingtotheservice
placement problem [66].
Images, video, natural language processing (NLP), and robotics are some of the more recent fog computing
applications that are only starting to emerge [64, 65]. Fog computing’s picture placement and processing is one of
the most widely utilised sectors of AI in research and industry, with the goal of diﬀerentiating objects or people from
one another and the capacity to classify and discriminate photos based on image processing algorithms [95]. The use
of fog computing for image processing-based applications decreases response time and improves QoS. Placement in
fog settings with eﬀective scheduling algorithms might be beneﬁcial in circumstances linked to medical applications
that demand precision in image processing and fast processing of medical data [33]. According to a literature, deep
learning algorithms, such as Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), can
be used in the image processing area in fog [96].
AnotherareaofinterestinthesectorisNLP[96].Forsoundprocessingandrecognition,cloudandfogenvironments
are needed to store data. For security reasons, deep learning approaches with sound imitation might be useful. For
example, scenarios for smart homes and processing and identifying the homeowner’s speech from outsiders should
be done with care and speed, wherein eﬀective scheduling methods for placement of NLP applications in fog will be
proposed.Techniquesfromtheﬁeldofdeeplearningmaybebeneﬁcialhere.Industry,trade,agriculture,andhealthall
beneﬁtgreatlyfromrobotics,makingitanessentialissuefordiscussion[33].Incircumstanceswhenquickjudgments
must be made, the usage of fog environments that employ machine learning to process and make decisions, may
be acceptable. In order for robots to communicate data, they require an environment like fog that responds quickly
to their commands [97]. IoT deﬁnes each robot as an item capable of interacting with other IoT things and other
robots [98]. Literature reported [97, 98, 99] that deep learning approaches for placement robot tasks in fog, however
furtherresearchisneeded.Inthefuture,methodsandschedulingalgorithmsforfogcomputing’sapplicationplacement
problemwillneedtobeestablisheddependingonthetypesandcategoriesofrequestapplications,accordingtoresearch
and evaluations of literature [100]. An application placement issue in fog for robotics or simple image, video, audio
processing is an example of this type of diﬃculty [101]. As a result, the QoS and QoE will be enhanced using AI.
3.3. Edge Computing
Distributedcomputinghasevolvedfromcontentdeliverynetworkstobecomeagenerallyacceptedandcommonly
used edge computing paradigm that brings processing and data storage closer to the end user’s location [102][103].
Instant data that is created by the user, and only for the user, requires compute and storage on the edge, but big
data always requires cloud-based storage [104]. As customers spend more time on mobile devices, businesses have
recognisedtheyneedtomovekeycomputationtothedeviceinordertoservicemorecustomers.Theedgecomputing
market has a chance to develop as a result of this. By the year 2023, it is expected to reach $1.12 trillion [105]. 74
percent of all data will need to be handled on the edge by 2022, according to Gartner, compared to 91 percent of all
data currently being processed in centralised systems [105].
Customers are more concerned about their privacy and want to know how and where their data is acquired
and maintained. After completing the app’s authentication procedure, a slew of businesses serve their clients by
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 14 of 43

==== Page 15 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
oﬀeringapplicationswithAI-enabledtailoredfeatures[106].Theseaidusersinprotectingtheirpersonalinformation.
Customers often utilise speakers, phones, tablets, and robots to access AI-enabled gadgets [107]. Multiple levels of
encryption and a dynamic encryption process are required due to the sensitive and personal nature of the data. Edge
nodesfacilitatetheconstructionofahighlydistributedarchitectureandhelpestablishtheappropriatesecuritystrategy
for each device [108]. There are worries about latency when data is sent across networks and devices since services
aredispersedatboththenetworkanddevicelevels.Duetothisdelay,theworkmustbedoneontheﬂy.Havingseveral
endpoints of load balancing is a need when an application has to be end-to-end resilient and have a widely spread
architecture.Resiliencyatthedevicelevelisincreasedbythefactthatdatacomputingservicesareclosertothemobile
deviceorontheedge(referredtoasa“cloudlet”)[109].Wehavetothink,howthesechallengescanbeovercameusing
AI?
Edge computing is a major enabler for AI, giving high-quality performance at a low cost. This is the best way
to understand the link between AI and edge computing. We can beneﬁt from the marriage of AI with cutting-edge
computers [110]. Edge Computing helps AI-enabled applications overcome the technical problems of AI-enabled
applications because of the data- and compute-intensive nature of AI. AI and machine learning systems absorb vast
volumesofdatatospotpatternsanddeliverreliablesuggestions[111].Cloud-basedstreamingofhigh-deﬁnitionvideo
data results in latency issues and increased costs, since huge bandwidth is utilised, in AI use cases requiring video
analysis [84]. When ML triggers, decisions and actions must be made in real time, the latency and dependence on
central processing in the cloud are detrimental. Processing and decision making may be done at the source of data,
which means that actions can be taken at the edge and backhaul expenses can be avoided, making the edge an ideal
location for data processing [112]. Rather of storing sensitive data on the cloud, the edge stores client location data.
Streaming data to the cloud only includes the most important information and data sets, leaving the rest of the data
behind [113].
Duetotheirscatteredandcomplicatednature,edgecomputingnetworkshavebroughtseveralissueswhenitcomes
to infrastructure management. There are a number of activities that must be completed in order to eﬀectively manage
resources.TheseincludeworkloadestimationandtaskschedulingaswellasVMconsolidation,resourceoptimization,
and energy conservation [114]. In dynamic, fast changing settings and in real-time scenarios, traditional pre-deﬁned
rules, largely based on operation research approaches, have been used for resource management in the past. AI-based
technologies are increasingly being employed to address these concerns, particularly when decisions must be made.
Approaches including AI, ML, and DL have become widespread in recent years. On the other hand, deciding where
to carry out a work on the edge is a diﬃcult choice that takes into account aspects such as the amount of traﬃc on
edge servers and the mobility of users [115]. In order to further on the element of user mobility, the cache must be
able to forecast where the user will go. For the sake of reducing expenses and energy consumption, it is located at
an appropriate edge server. Reinforcement learning, neural network models, and genetic algorithms are some of the
approaches that are employed [116].
In the commercial and industrial sectors, the advantages of Edge have quickly spread. Speciﬁcally, the reduction
of IT equipment’s growing expenditures on cloud and network bandwidth. All of the company’s activities take place
in diﬀerent parts of the world. Only an estimated 1% of the monitoring data is relevant for business insights like
anomaly identiﬁcation or future event prediction, despite the fact that the cloud and big data centres are overﬂowing
with data [117]. Edge delivers high-quality business services through local processing, analytics, and local devices.
Thisistheoperationaleﬃciencyandsigniﬁcanceoftheedge,sinceitpreventsthetransferofterabytesofunnecessary
data to the cloud/data centres and only communicates pertinent actionable data to the end user [118]. Every day, new
andcreativeapplicationsforedge’scapabilitiesemerge.Edgecomputingstillhasaprobleminmovingtothelast-mile
of dispersed networks, but new use cases in industrial applications show a strong convergence with AI in particular,
oﬀeringsubstantialvaluetobusinesses[119].Intheautomotive,construction,process,andmanufacturingindustries,
augmented reality, virtual reality, and mixed reality are becoming increasingly popular [118]. This necessitates a
scalable, highly adaptable, and quick-to-respond computing infrastructure that is always available. Provides a low-
latency experience and application instances that are near to the end user AI and machine learning have a plethora of
uses in Edge Computing. NLP and CNN are two developing technologies that are used in a wide range of everyday
applications[96].Smartretail,contactcentres,security,andlegalassistantshipallbeneﬁtfromNLP’sabilitytoparse
humanvoice,recognisehandwritingandclassifytext.Usecasessuchasqualitycontrol,facialidentiﬁcation,healthcare,
and industrial safety can beneﬁt from CNN capabilities in visualisation algorithms, which enable to detect faces and
other visual data [96].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 15 of 43

==== Page 16 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.3.1. Open Challenges
As compared to cloud, fog, or serverless computing, the problems of edge computing environments are markedly
diﬀerent. As a result, the edge environment is plagued by issues related to scalability and performance, especially
when dealing with mission-critical data and applications [111]. It is tough to keep track of the health and state of
each IT component, especially when there are so many remote edge locations to keep track of, much alone visualise
and analyse their inﬂuence on other linked equipment, when considering the scale issue [120]. Highly dispersed and
diversenetworksdeﬁneedgesettings.Becauseofthedisparatenatureoftheinfrastructure’scomponentsandthehigh
costs associated with acquiring the various skills and resources required, this creates “edge silos”, which only serves
tocomplicatemattersfurther[84].Tohandletheextremelydispersedandheterogeneousedgeenvironment,AI-based
intelligent software is crucial. It helps to collect and unify data from many sources and provides a highly abstracted
“low touch” monitoring and administration, which eliminates human involvement. It is also possible to have entire
client security without the client’s involvement thanks to automated security and responses. You may pick from a
varietyofsuppliers,avoidingvendor“lock-in”,andswitchoutequipmentwithnonegativeimpactonyourbusinessor
cutting-edge eﬃciency [112].
Additionally, real-time performance management between end points, such as consumers and cloud/data centres,
is a critical issue [113]. End-to-end views and data repositories at all sites are supported by technology tools that
continually monitor performance metrics and data ﬂow. For situations when edge equipment fails or is unavailable,
edgeinfrastructurehasbuilt-inredundancytoisolate,repairandsustainacceptablelevelsoffunctioning[114].Ifyou
run an edge data centre where multiple teams are in charge of diﬀerent portions of the infrastructure, you’ll run into
certainineﬃciencies.Advancedcorrelationandanalytics,basedonAI,arequitehelpfulinthissituationforexamining,
consolidating, and unifying data from many sources, transforming data into information, and communicating that
information with the concerned roles in the team. Information that can be used to help automated processes is
supplied [115].
The followings are the key open issues of adopting AI in edge computing:
•With tremendous advantages, edge computing has a number of challenges to overcome. Edge computing
adoption is being stiﬂed by some of the causes listed above. Edge computing has no legal, societal, or ethical
framework for the use of AI. We need to do more study on the present benchmark tools and techniques. Newer
technologieshaveahardtimebeingintegratedintoexistinglegacyindustrialsystemssincetheyaren’tmodular.
Informationsecurityissuesandalackofintegrationtestingwithnewentrantsfurtherlimittechnologyuse[116].
•Small and inexpensive, most edge devices do not require third-party API authentication, leaving them open to
exploitation [104]. They are designed with simplicity of use and low cost in mind, not security in mind. Edge
devicesthatgatherpersonalinformation,suchasemailaddresses,phonenumbers,healthinformation,andcredit
carddata,areontheriseasaresultofspecialisedapps[121].ThenecessityforanAIbasedsecurityframework
before beginning large-scale and sensitive edge initiatives naturally causes IT and network administrators to be
apprehensive [117].
•For AI-integrated edge workﬂows, new software frameworks and toolkits are needed [111]. Working with
heterogeneous hardware and platforms, as well as the resources available in a workﬂow, will be supported by
these software frameworks [96].
•When it comes to the administration of edge devices, there are no set standards and regulations that apply
universally. The complexity of the IoT network architecture increases as more IoT devices are added to
the edge [118]. There is still much to learn about the local consequences of IoT standards for diﬀerent
companiesacrossdiﬀerentgeographies,despitethefactthattheUSandUKgovernmentshaveproducedthem.
Organizations require a framework of regulations and criteria before they can make the decision to shift their
dataandapplicationassetstoAI-integratededgecomputingenvironments,accordingtotheirperspective[115].
•Only by fully integrating edge computing into existing cloud architecture can its full potential be realised
usingAI,makingedgecomputingthecrucialmissingconnectionbetweendatasources(thedevices)andcloud
computing (core network) [107] because edge nodes have a limited storage and computing capacity [110].
•The main strength of this system is its tight interaction with the cloud. As more businesses move to a multi-
cloud environment, it becomes more diﬃcult for the cloud to set up a redundant AI-integrated edge network
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 16 of 43

==== Page 17 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
to accommodate incoming data traﬃc from numerous nodes [108]. High bandwidth needs and redundant data
reporting and routing requirements for IT managers have increased the search for cloud suppliers capable of
meeting these demands [111].
•Additionally, establishing an AI-integrated edge computing environment requires an initial investment in edge-
enabled software frameworks and hardware [109]. The fact that this investment typically has to compete with
other company objectives makes it a bottleneck. In developing countries, this problem is exacerbated.
•Manysmallandmedium-sizedbusinesses(SMEs),ITmanagers,andgovernmentdecision-makersareunaware
of the possibilities and applications of AI-integrated edge computing [84]. It may take some time for nations
inAsia-Paciﬁcthatarestilllearningaboutcloudcomputingtoadoptitscapabilitiesforedgecomputing.Micro
datacentres,ratherthanedgeworkloads,arepreferredbymostserviceprovidersinemergingeconomies,asthey
are more cost-eﬀective [112].
•With the arrival of 5G, billions of devices will be able to communicate with each other, and the network will
see a rise in the rate at which connected devices are added and removed [105]. IT managers’ judgement in
implementingedgecomputingwillalwaysbequestionedandadoptionwillneverachieveitsfullpotentialwithout
a standard, proven, and recognised edge monitoring technology [113].
•Faster R&D interventions and innovations in security, governance and standards/frameworks are the road to
alleviate the diﬃculties for the adoption of AI-integrated edge computing [114].
Satellites in low-Earth orbit (LEO) are being built by private ﬁrms including SpaceX and Amazon to give
worldwide broadband internet access [122]. It will be vital to determine if and how edge computing principles could
be implemented in LEO satellite networks as the group of subscribers to such a access network increases.
3.4. Serverless Computing
Whenitcomestodesigningcloud-nativeapps,serverlesscomputingisbecomingincreasinglypopular.Serverless
is a cloud computing paradigm that abstracts away the management of operational aspects [123]. Because developers
no longer have to worry about maintaining infrastructure, serverless computing is likely to expand considerably
quicker [124]. Because of this, cloud service providers may more easily manage infrastructure and automated
provisioning with serverless computing. The time and resources required for infrastructure management are also
reducedasaresultof[125].Itisthepurposeofserverlesscomputingtoguaranteethattheﬁnestserverlesstechnologies
are used so that the investment is minimised and the return is highest [126]. Serverless computing and infrastructure
are characterised by the following terms:
•Functions: Using event-driven models, serverless functions are implemented in serverless computing. Because
thecodeisautomaticallyexecutedaseventsoccur,theyareabletospeedupthedevelopmentprocess[127].As
a result, numerous services can be linked to the present application. Using these features, you may eﬀectively
create the pay-per-execution model [128]. It is billed for the time and resources used on executing code under
this paradigm.
•Kubernetes: Developers have the option of bringing their own containers to Kubernetes through Serverless
Kubernetes [129]. In Kubernetes-managed clusters, these containers may be automatically scaled up or scaled
down. In order to deal with exceptional traﬃc situations and ﬂuctuating workloads, this automatic scaling
function is activated.
•Workﬂows:Alow-codeorno-codeapproachisusedwithserverlessworkﬂows[130].Itisanaimofthismethod
to reduce the planning overheads associated with several activities at once. With these processes, developers
mayconnectvariouscloudandon-premisesservices.ServerlesscomputinghasthecapabilitytolearnnewAPIs
or standards, so interactions do not need to be coded [131].
•Application environments: Both the back-end and front-end of a serverless application environment are hosted
on a dedicated server service. Fully-managed services via dedicated servers assume responsibility for the
application’sscalability,security,andcompliancemonitoring[132].Asaresult,runninganAI-basedapplication
on a serverless computing platform is signiﬁcantly simpler, as serverless computing meets the dynamic
scalability and security requirements of applications while still conforming to industry standards [133].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 17 of 43

==== Page 18 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•API Gateway: An API gateway that is both centrally controlled and entirely managed is achievable with a
serverless API gateway [37]. This application makes it feasible to administer, secure, and analyse APIs on a
globalscale.Themanagementofauthorisationandotherservices(suchascontentanduserservices)istherefore
madesimplerforaserverlessAPIgateway.ServerlesscomputinginfrastructureenablesautomatedAPIsupport
using AI and database connectivity for every service that requires it, as stated previously [134].
PlatformsacrosstheboardareembracingAIbecauseitisthefutureoftechnology.We’vebeenabletomakebetter,
faster judgments because of these AI-powered platforms. They’ve changed the way businesses do business, the way
customersinteractwiththem,andthewaywegatherandanalysebusinessdata.Complicatedmachinelearningsystems
haveasigniﬁcantimpactontheproductivityandeﬃciencyofdevelopers[124].Aserverlessdesign,ontheotherhand,
addressesmostoftheissuesthatdevelopersexperience.Usingaserverlessarchitecture,themachinelearningmodels
areproperlyhandledandtheresourcesareeﬀectivelymanaged[135].Asaresultofthisdesign,developersmayspend
more time and resources working on AI model training rather than server infrastructure management.
Complex challenges typically need the development of machine learning systems. They analyse and preprocess
data,trainmodels,andﬁne-tuneAImodels,amongotherthings.Asaresult,APIsshouldbeabletorunsmoothly[136].
Serverless computing and AI should be used to ensure that data storage and message delivery are uninterrupted.
Machine learning models may beneﬁt greatly from serverless architecture, which oﬀers a wide range of options and
advantages [137]. Virtually little administration is required to run any form of application or back-end service. As
incoming requests of any traﬃc volume come in, the infrastructure provider allocates its own computing execution
power accurately.
AI/ML integrated serverless architecture will have following merits:
•Fair pricing: Serverless design makes execution-based pricing possible, so you only pay for services that are
really being used [138]. As a result, the pricing model is more ﬂexible and the cost is signiﬁcantly reduced.
•Independent work: Serverless computing enables the development teams to operate autonomously with little
intervention and delays. Models are viewed as distinct functions because of this. Invoking this function has no
impact on the rest of the system and can be done at any time [37].
•Autoscaling: This feature frees up the developer to work on other projects while the system adjusts itself to the
changingscope[139].Storagepredictionisnolongernecessarywhenusingautoscalingbecausedevelopersmay
make changes on the ﬂy.
•Pay-as-per-usage:Usinganewmodelcalled“pay-per-use”,customersonlypayforresourceswhentheyreallyuse
them.Youdon’tpayfortheamountofserverswithserverlesscomputing,butratherfortheuseofservices[140].
Combined with the scale-to-zero feature of serverless, one just has to pay for the number of executions and the
length of time resources are utilised for.
•Hassle-free server management: Serverless computing provides backend services that may be accessed only
whentheyareneeded,freeingusersfromtheburdenofmanagingservers[141].Aserverlessserviceeliminates
theneedfortheusertobeconcernedwiththeinfrastructurethatunderpinstheservice.Withserverlessbackends,
serviceprovidersdon’thavetomodifytheirsetupsiftheywanttoraiseorreducetheamountofbandwidththey
arereservingorpayingfor[139].Itwasdiﬃcultandexpensiveforwebdeveloperstoownthehardwarenecessary
to run a server before the introduction of the Internet.
•High availability: Serverless programmes have become more popular due to their built-in availability and fault
tolerance. No need to construct services that will deliver these features to your application, therefore you don’t
have to. Your company doesn’t need to invest in new capabilities because they are constantly available [142].
By reinventing automation and enhancing the corporate environment, AI has taken over today’s life and made it
easier. Machine learning algorithms on serverless architecture may be used in a variety of ways to make jobs easier
and data more accurate [139]:
•Applications that employ GPS gather user data, such as their location and their purchasing habits, to provide
suggestions about their preferences or the next thing they should buy. AI assesses the frequency of alerts and
suggestsanumberofoptionsthattheappusersmaybeabletobearandenjoybeforeturningoﬀthenotiﬁcations.
Using this method ensures that clients ﬁnd the material useful and enriches the user experience [140].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 18 of 43

==== Page 19 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Using AI models, it is possible to examine a customer’s ﬁnancial viability before recommending an increase in
purchasing power. Prior to requesting any further information, the system will run a credit check to determine
their creditworthiness. As soon as all of the prior invoices have been paid, the system decides if the transaction
should go through or be put on hold.
•As part of logistics, it is important to keep an eye on the routes and determine how traﬃc overloads inﬂuence
customers. In order to help businesses make better decisions and enhance customer service, AI analyses the
routes and proposes alternate routes [136].
3.4.1. Open Challenges
The following is a quick description of the open issues and challenges that serverless computing presents for AI
applications:
•Vendor locking: If a company has committed to a cloud-based provider that provides technological implemen-
tation, switching suppliers will be diﬃcult. The lack of industry-wide standards is responsible for around half
of the challenges to cloud computing adoption [143]. To understand the consequences of vendor lock-in, no
amount of investigation or study can be relied upon. Those who fail to keep an eye out for traps end up falling
prey to them. In addition, a serverless interface must be carefully monitored because of the multiple risks it
presents [144].
•Switching vendors: Lock-in circumstances can be seen in two diﬀerent ways, depending on who is looking at
the event. In their opinion, the problem with serverless computing today is not the programme itself. Another
contributing cause is serverless computing, a new and fragmented technology that now has a younger audience
that is overly reliant on it [145]. Businesses should only agree to a platform after conducting comprehensive
research and receiving multiple oﬀers from rival service providers. A single cloud may be all you need instead
of hurrying to implement a slew of diﬀerent ones.
•Less transparency: As the backend infrastructure is handled by an outside company, there is less transparency
abouthowthingsactuallyfunction.Theprogram’sinnerworkingsmaybeobscured,especiallyifitinteractswith
otherapplications.Hereareafewexamplesofhowthismaybeputtogooduse:Thesecuritymeasuresassociated
with an external PaaS service connected to your application, for example, are generally not well known [146].
•Others are in-charge of infrastructure management: Because our infrastructure is in the hands of a third party,
itismorediﬃculttohaveacomprehensiveunderstandingoftheentiresystem.Usingend-user-targeteddevices
underthisparadigm,infrastructure isunderthecontrolofanother ﬁrm,malwarecannonethelessinﬁltrateyour
environment [147].
•Sustainability: An increasing amount of data generated on the edge is being submitted to the cloud for ML
training/inference;theoveralltransmissionenergyisaround30%ofthetotalenergyrequirementsofdatacenters
globally and rising fast. Research is required to ensure the upcoming serverless paradigm is sustainable with a
focusonpower-oﬀtechniques,increasedcomputationaldensityviasmartworkloadconsolidation,submittingthe
kilobytes-long function to the data vs., submitting terrabytes of data to the function, and eﬀectively combining
serverless edge resources for multitenant clients—e.g., by sharing artiﬁcial neural network layers with an
acceptable tradeoﬀ in accuracy [148].
AIhasrevolutionisedmarketresearchandcustomerbehaviour.Customers’preferencesarerecordedandanalysed
by an AI model, which then shows their customised content. Serverless computing simpliﬁes the AI development
process by removing the need for a dedicated server. As a result, serverless architecture entails handing over the
management and monitoring of the infrastructure to a third party. That is why it is a good idea to work with a
reputable cloud service provider. To guarantee that the infrastructure works smoothly, the cloud provider must have
handled multiple comparable projects and have expertise in hosting and handling AI/machine learning and serverless
architectures.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 19 of 43

==== Page 20 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.5. Quantum Computing
Quantum computing promise is to be the one technology that has the potential to fundamentally alter AI. This
section introduces the capabilities of quantum computing and its potential inﬂuences on AI and the economy [149].
The consequences of this approach to computation could aﬀect a considerable range of aspect of intellectual and
economic activities on our societies. With the enormous inﬂuence is AI having, all across the world, the combination
with Quantum computing may have a multiplier eﬀect to trigger a revolutionary eﬀect on AI.
Quantum computing utilises a novel approach to data and information processing: Information, encoded in the
quantum states of quantum systems, is processed accordingly to the law of quantum mechanics opening up some
opportunitiesthatarenotavailabletotheclassicalwayofprocessinginformation.Forexample,quantumsuperposition
and quantum entanglement [150]. Quantum entangled is the property of quantum systems of limiting the amount of
information an observer may obtain on parts of a global quantum state, making it impossible to provide a complete
description from the knowledge of only the component states. The term “superposition” refers to the possibility of
combining quantum state in order to produce another valid quantum state.
Previous features of quantum systems trigger, from one side, the power of quantum computing (if suﬃciently
shielded from interactions with environment), but represent also the main limitations that do not allow an eﬃcient
simulationofquantumsystemsbypresentcomputersystems,evenAI-poweredsupercomputers.Infact,thescalingof
thephasespacewithinwhichcompositequantumsystemsevolvegrowthsexponentiallywiththenumberofcomponent
systems.
TheunitofinformationusedbyQuantumcomputersisthequbit,whichreplacesthebitusedinclassicalcomputers.
The state of a qubit ð ë, which could be an atom, a photon, a circuit, etc., can be represented, mathematically, as a
vector in the complex Hilbert space [150], with two mutually orthogonal basis states ^ð0ë,ð1ë`as follows
ð ë=að0ë+bð1ë; (1)
where ðað2+ðbð2= 1,anda;bËCareComplexnumbers.Theexploitationofquantumsuperposition(SeeEq.(1)),and
quantumentanglementiswhatmakesquantumcomputingconsiderablymorepowerfulforcertaintasksthanclassical
counterpart [150].
The simulation of quantum systems has been the original scope motivating the endeavour to build a quantum
computer [151], but it has only been after the discovery of quantum algorithms able to achieve practical goals that
the interest in building this devices started to attract increasing attention. After the seminal works to formalize the
concept of quantum computer [152], several algorithms followed that allowed to achieve tasks that were considered
hard for classical computers. The discovery of the Shor’s algorithm [153] provided an eﬃcient solution for factoring
large numbers, that had critical implications for crypto-analysis, boosting studies in both quantum computation and
quantum cryptography. Running eﬀectively the Shor algorithm on a working quantum hardware, however, it would
requirealevelofaccuracyinimplementingregisterinitialization,quantumoperationsonmultiplequbits,andstorage
of quantum states that are not yet achieved by current state-of-the-art devices [154]. It is also worth to mention
that quantum computers have their own limitations. For example, it is not expected that they can eﬃciently solve
NP-hard optimization problems [155] and, coming to searching, the speed-up oﬀered by quantum computers scales
quadratically with respect to the time needed by a classical computer (Grover’s algorithm [156]).
Buildingaquantumcomputeris,infact,notaneasytask:asexperimentalistsknowprettywell,theadvantagesof
quantum computing, oﬀered by features like quantum superposition and entanglement, tend to vanish exponentially
faster with the size and complexity (i.e., the number of quantum systems involved) of the hardware. Nevertheless,
in recent years, we have seen a spectacular increase in the interest of major high-tech players (IBM, Microsoft,
Google, Amazon, Intel, Honeywell), and a ﬂourishing of many young companies aiming at proposing solutions for
quantumcomputing,withvariouscoretechnologiesemployed,rangingformsuperconductingdevises[154],totrapped
ions [157], to integrated light circuits [158]. These are just some of the many companies that are today ﬁnancing
quantuminitiativesandareinterestedindevelopingthistechnology.Despitethediﬃcultchallengesahead,GoogleAI
group has made signiﬁcant progress during the recent years [154], achieving what is known as quantum advantage
building a programmable quantum computer, named Sycamore. Similarly, IBM has recently announced the ﬁrst
quantum computer to pack more than 100 qubits in their hardware, Eaglechip [159], representing only a ﬁrst step
of busy research and engineering program during which the tech-giant is planning to push ﬁgures to more than 1000
qubitsby2023.However,assaid,thechallengestopreservethedelicatefeaturesofcompositequantumstatesrelyon
the ability to shield these devices from the external environment to allow coherent quantum evolution to take place
under the presence of even very small amount of noise. For this reason these devices need ultra-low temperature of
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 20 of 43

==== Page 21 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
fractions of Kelvin, which pose challenges also for designing the appropriate materials able to perform well at such
low temperatures.
3.5.1. Open Challenges
While universal quantum computers remain the long term challenge of quantum computing, Noisy intermediate-
ScaleQuantum(NISQ)devicesareaforeseeabletargettoachieveintheforthcomingyears.Withsuchdevicesphysicist
maystarttoeﬀectivelysimulatecomplexcompositequantumsystems,andshouldbeabletostudyexoticquantumstates
that have not been accessible in physics laboratory yet.
Forthenextstep,onceNISQdeviceswillbereliableandwelldeveloped,wewillneedtoovercomethelimitations
imposedbythepresenceofnoiseduringcomputation,bysupportingthemaincomputingunitwitheﬀectivequantum
error correction (QEC) circuitry. That may open road towards fault-tolerant quantum computation that will need to
involve thousands and more qubits. In fact, QEC requires a considerable cost in terms of the number of qubits and
logic gates to be implemented. The road towards the implementation of complex operations like those needed by the
Shor factoring algorithm is still long but while the research is focused on improving the performance of quantum
devicesandtheoptimizationofquantumoperations,numerousentrepreneursarealsointerestedinproducingquantum
softwaresolutions.Consequently,manyinvestorsareexpectedtoinvestinstart-upcompaniesthatarerevolvingaround
quantum computing technologies, and in perspective the interest in quantum computing is likely to increase.
Pharmaceutical investors’ interest in quantum computing has sparked. Many sectors can beneﬁt from quantum
computers and commercial solutions. The ﬁnancial industry, healthcare, genetics, pharmacology, transportation,
sustainability, and cybersecurity are all direct beneﬁciaries of quantum computing [160]. Quantum computing’s
potentialhasbeenpickedupbythebankingindustry.Financialanalystsfrequentlymakeuseofquantumcomputational
modelsthatincorporateprobabilitiesandassumptionsabouthowmarketsandportfoliosoperate.Todothis,quantum
computers might help by processing data faster, running better foresight models, and balancing conﬂicting options
more accurately. They might also assist in the resolution of complex optimization problems, such as portfolio risk
optimization and fraud detection [161].
Quantum algorithms in IBM’s Cloud Computing platforms outperform classical Monte Carlo simulations,
accordingtoaresearchthecompanyjustpresented.Thereisalotofpotentialforthehealthcarebusinesstoproﬁtfrom
quantum solutions. Quantum computing might lead to improved approaches to personalised medicine by allowing
quickergenomicanalysistocreatepersonalisedtreatmentstrategiesspeciﬁctoeachpatient[162].Genealogyresearch
generatesalotofdata.Asaresult,analysingDNAinformationrequiresasigniﬁcantamountofprocessingpower[163].
Currently, companies are reducing the costs and resources needed to sequence the human genome; but, a powerful
quantum computer might sift through this data considerably faster, making genome sequencing more eﬃcient and
scalable [164].
Another area where drug development might beneﬁt from quantum computing is in the ﬁeld of protein fold-
ing[165].Thismighthelpspeedupdrugdiscoveryeﬀortsbymakingiteasiertopredicttheeﬀectsofpharmacological
compounds [166].
A crucial aspect where quantum computers, and the promise to build one, have had considerable impact is in
the ﬁeld of security and cryptography. Public-key cryptosystems are the foundation of today’s era of communication.
Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) encryption is in fact the most common cryptosystems for securing transmission of
data over networks, and its working mechanism and security requires factoring large prime numbers, beyond the
capabilities of current classical computing limits. However, as mentioned above, quantum computing capabilities,
exploitingShor’sfactoringalgorithmmayrenderssuchencryptionmodelsobsolete.Thishasledtoincreasingresearch,
and investment, over the last decades to build safe cryptosystems in a quantum computing era, and the projections
for the next years show this interest to grow, e.g., Toshiba’s quantum cryptography revenue target is $3 billion by
2030 [167]. In the meantime, while the eﬀorts to design and implement eﬀective quantum-key distribution (QKD)
protocols expand, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has also issued recommendations for
post-quantum cryptography standards [168]. It has begun a process to request, assess, and standardise one or more
public-key cryptography algorithms that are resistant to eavesdropping performed by quantum hardware.
Quantumcomputershavealsobeenproposedforenvironmentalapplications,inthehopethatquantumcomputing
mayopenupnewavenuesfordealingwithclimatecrises,identifyingandoptimisingprocessthatmayhelpcopewith
global warming and other climate change eﬀects [169].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 21 of 43

==== Page 22 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.5.2. Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence (QAI)
Quantum computing is more eﬀective than classical computing in managing large amounts of data. A quantum
algorithmisamathematicalalgorithmthatexecutesonarealisticmodelofquantumcomputation;thequantumcircuitry
ofcomputationisthemostoftenusedmodel.Thestateofaquantumcomputingsystemcanbeseenastheinformation
encodedinthephysicalquantumstatesupportingthespeciﬁcimplementation.Quantuminformationtheoryisbasedon
thesefundamentalobject,quantumbits(theunitofinformation),quantumgates(thedevicesthatoperatesonquantum
bits), and quantum channels that connect gates and circuitry to preserve quantum superposition and entanglement.
Quantum computers can handle and process exponentially larger amount of data than conventional computers can,
because they intrinsically incorporate and manage the tensor product structure of composite quantum systems, which
thenumberofparametersneededtoobtainacompletedescriptionscaleas 2N,whereNisthenumberofqubits.So,for
instance,ifN= 100thevectorspaceinwhichthequantumsystemevolveswouldhaveadimensionthatis 2100.That
meansthatwhilewemayneeda 100qubitsonaquantumcomputer(assumingthatwedonotneederrorcorrection)to
describetheevolutionofcompositesystem,thesamedescribedonaclassicalmachine,wouldrequire 2100parameters.
Itisthenclearthatquantumcomputersareintrinsicallypreparedinmanagingtheevolutionofsystemsdescribedbya
large number of parameters.
Quantum devices, coherently controlling quantum superposition and entanglement, can exploit quantum paral-
lelism,i.e.,theycansimultaneously exploremultipleevolution.Forexample,inclassicaldecisiontheproblemisoften
represented as a decision tree , where the evolution of the decision path is determined by a binary choice and the state
of initialization of the register. This method becomes less eﬀective when the creation of branches form each decision
split-pointslowsdownbecausethetimeneededtoobtainanoutcometodecidethesplitistoolong.Quantumdevices,
exploiting quantum superposition to initialize the input register, and quantum evolution (that coherently preserves
superposition)mayexplore,simultaneously,thevariouspossiblebranchesofadecision,speedingupconsiderablythe
application of these kind of decision-tree approaches. It is still diﬃcult to provide a certain foreseeable future for the
developmentandtoknowpreciselyhowandwhenwewillhaveacompleteanddeepapplicationofquantumadvantage,
however it is reasonable to say that the exponential speedup of quantum computing will involve all sort of problems
with large amounts of data to manage, like pattern recognition, or training in machine learning models.
Trainingofmachinelearningmodels,likeinreinforcementlearningbasemuchoftheireﬀectivenessonthespeed
atwhichthe agentslearn,interactingwiththeenvironment:Theyinteract,obtainsomefeedback,andadapt(learning)
their behaviour on the base of the feedback received. This approach has been conﬁrmed, e.g., in a recent experiment
[170] where not only the training of agents has been improved and accelerated by using a quantum channel, but it
has been also integrated to implement a hybrid quantum/classical scenario, using a very promising integrated nano-
photonic processor, where classical communication are used for tuning and to achieve the optimal control of the
learning progress.
Clearly, if the computational speedup is exponential, as it is for quantum computing vs classical, when dealing
withlargeamountsofdata,suchaspeedupmayhaveapplicationonmanydiﬀerentaspectsofthedevelopmentofAI.
Figure 5 provides a clear view of quantum computing with AI for modern applications.
Biometric recognition and autonomous driving are two critical examples that can utilize QAI for processing
workloads. The fact that quantum computers can process more data in a shorter time than traditional computers has
revealed the concept of QAI [171]. An example scheme for QAI is given in Figure 5. QAI involves combination of
Quantum Computing and AI to achieve superior performance results compared to classical AI [172]. Reinforcement
Learning(RL)isawell-establishedbranchofMLthataimstomaximizetherewardbytrialanderrorbymeansofanthe
agent[139].ItiscertainthatcombiningRLwithQuantumComputingwillleadtogreatadvancesincomputingsystems.
With quantum computers accelerating machine learning, the potential for impact is certain to be enormous[173].
Applications of quantum AI for quantum search, quantum game theory, quantum Algorithms for decision problems,
algorithms for learning are shown in the Figure 5.
The ability of quantum computing to execute a task quickly, may be helpful for AI systems employed, e.g., in
problemsrelatedtoautonomousdrivingnatural,naturallanguageprocessing(NLP)algorithms[174]and,ingeneral,
in tasks where classical approaches are extremely time-consuming and expensive. Characters and words are the basis
forthecurrentalgorithms.Theideaofbecoming“meaningaware”isagoalofquantumalgorithms[175].Tobuildreal-
timespeechpatterns,thesealgorithmsmayusephrasesandparagraphs.Itisimportanttonotethatpredictiveanalytics
are a key AI application and commercial use case. Massive amounts of data can be used to train AI systems that are
adeptatmachinelearninganddeeplearning.However,complexandambiguousissuessuchasstockmarketprojections
and climate change control systems require unique data created by quantum principles employing entanglement
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 22 of 43

==== Page 23 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
෍𝑿𝟐
Quantum CPU
AgentActionReward StateQD QDBiometric 
Recognition 
Autonomous 
Driving QD: Quantum Data        c0
1
AlgorithmsQubit
Quantum 
ChannelQuantum 
Channel
Figure 5: Overview of Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and superpositions [169]. New discoveries in Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms intended for quantum computers,, or
QuantumArtiﬁcialIntelligence(QAI),areexpectedtodeliverthecriticalbreakthroughsrequiredtoadvancethescience
of climate change. Improvements in weather and climate forecasting as a consequence of this research are predicted
to have a cascading eﬀect on a wide range of socioeconomic advantages. For example, NASA has established the
Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (QuAIL), which is dedicated to investigating the possibilities of using
quantum computers and algorithms to machine learning problems in NASA’s missions.
NanotechnologyandnanosciencemayalsobeintegratedintoAIforverysmall,microscopicdevicesatmolecular,
atomic,andsubatomiclevels,thankstoquantumcomputing.Quantumphysicsﬁndsuseinnanotechnology.Theseare
onlyafewexamplesofquantumcomputing’simpactonAIandmachinelearning[176].Machinelearningapplications
for quantum devices are already being developed, in the hope to employ quantum computing to speed up the training
of machine learning models and produce more eﬃcient algorithms for learning [172]. Machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence are likely to beneﬁt from improvements in quantum computing technology even before a comprehensive
quantum computing solution is ready. Hence, the ﬁeld of Quantum Machine Learning (QML) is expected to pick up,
followed by its autonomic expansion, Adaptive Quantum Machine Learning, which will be able to leverage quantum
computing to adaptively achieve self-learning.
Open-source quantum machine learning library TensorFlow Quantum (TFQ) is available from Google [177].
Cirq is integrated with TensorFlow and provides high-level abstractions for the design and implementation of
both discriminative and generative quantum-classical models by providing quantum computing primitives that are
compatible with existing TensorFlow APIs, along with high-performance quantum circuit simulators. Quantum
computinghas,indeed,thepotentialtotransformAIinanumberofways.Constraintresolution,uncertaintyhandling,
and constraint fulﬁlment will all be improved by quantum computing, as will adaptive machine learning and spatial
andtemporalreasoning[178].Evenifquantumcomputingisstillinitsinfancynow,fromacommercialandeconomic
standpoint, it is an excellent moment for startups to join this path. The future of our economy will not be decided by
cryptocurrencies, but rather by quantum computing solutions [179].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 23 of 43

==== Page 24 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
4. Modern Autonomic Computing with Embedded Intelligence
Thissectiondiscussesthenewresearchdevelopmentsrelatedtoautonomiccomputingwithembeddedintelligence.
New advances in intelligent edge, intelligent things and sensors as actuators are detailed here.
4.1. Intelligent Edge
IoTisbringingbillionsofnewgadgetsonline,creatinganunprecedentedamountofdatathatwillbechallengingto
manage.Over75billionIoTdevicesareexpectedtobeinusebytheyear2025,accordingtoresearch[180].Businesses
aredevelopingandinstallingmoreandmorethingsmeanttoimprovetheend-userexperienceandalsogeneratemassive
amounts of data, such as linked automobiles, smart metres, and in-store sensors. This new data, meanwhile, requires
real-time collection, management, and processing [181]. Exactly how will this happen? One approach to go forward
may be through the use of edge and fog computing [182].
Edge computing is expected to get a huge amount of attention than fog computing in the next years, but what
exactly is it? As opposed to typical cloud computing, in which data is stored and handled in a central location, edge
computing processes data on-the-ﬂy [183]. The cloud and edge are not mutually exclusive in fog computing, which
means that some computation can be done in the cloud, while other parts are handled by edge devices.
As a result, the data sent between linked devices might take too long, and edge computing utilises signiﬁcantly
less network capacity than traditional computing. Time can be saved by processing it locally on the device or inside a
localnetwork[66].Edgecomputing,ontheotherhand,mightprovidecloudcomputingwithmuch-neededassistance
in dealing with the massive amounts of data generated by the IoT and other connected devices [169].
Inbothfogandedge,emergingIoTdevicesgenerateandtransferdata,andtheprocessingcapacityofthosedevices
is used to accomplish operations which might normally be carried out in the cloud. Both fog and edge allude to these
new IoT device locations in the network. As a result, they help organisations lessen their dependence on the cloud
by sending data to analytics platforms, where it can be analysed and turned into useful information. Corporations
may cut down on network latency by using edge and fog technologies to reduce their reliance on cloud platforms for
data analysis. As a result, you will be able to make data-driven decisions faster. In addition, because edge devices
lack storage capacity, they must send data to the cloud when real-time processing is ﬁnished so that analytics may be
conducted on it.
With today’s cloud computing, bandwidth, and processing power, business communication network focuses
primarilyonsupportingallofyourdistantapplications,aswellasoﬀeringinﬁnitestoragespace.Thatwilleventually
change. In order to get the most out of data, it must be processed in real time, at the edge [66]. Looking for future,
network infrastructures must be more adaptive and willing to manage a far greater number of smart devices than
they currently are now. Having the decision-making process near to where the data is created is essential for real-
time intelligence. For example, self-driving cars or self-maintaining smart manufacturing equipment can make fast
judgments on the go [184]. Real-time engine performance data generated by sensors installed in aeroplanes can be
usedtotakepreventativeactionbeforetheaircraftreturnsfromthesky.Thesavingsmightbesubstantial.Acompany’s
ability to deliver processing power and an intelligent environment will increase as it expands its network of corporate
endpoints.
We will need quicker and more reliable data processing as our demand for data grows and billions of devices
are linked to the network. Despite the beneﬁts of cloud computing, the development of IoT and mobile devices has
necessitated ever higher bandwidth requirements [185]. Cloud computing isn’t required by every smart device, and
avoiding transferring data back and forth over the cloud is a good idea in some circumstances. The edge may help
enterprises become more nimble, decrease expenses, minimise latency, and better regulate network capacity [186].
How to provide enough computing power for intelligent applications at the edge has become a serious challenge.
Intelligent edge is a promising way that pushes intelligence to the Edges of Internet, which has played the role of
intelligentdecision-makinginmanyaspectsofedgecomputing,includingtaskoﬄoading,edgecaching,andresource
scheduling. Among them, edge oﬄoading is a distributed computing paradigm that provides computing services for
edgecaching,edgetraining,andedgeinference.ByintegratingmethodssuchasDistributedMachineLearning(DML),
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) and Collaborative Machine Learning (CML) into the edge computing, it is
beneﬁcial to cope with the explosive growth of communication and computing of emerging IoT applications [187],
and achieve the energy-eﬃcient and real-time processing [188].
Instead, single pass AI techniques that can operate on resource-restricted environments have been proposed. For
instance, an alternative to traditional machine learning is data-stream mining. This ML paradigm treats its datasets
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 24 of 43

==== Page 25 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
as individual datapoints coming in one at a time, while performing adapting learning with a ﬁnite memory budget.
From an autonomics perspective, data-stream mining also leverages the notion of adaptive concept drifts, i.e., to save
resourcesontheedge,thedata-streammodelisretrainedonlywhenitsperformancecrossesbellowathreshold[189].
4.2. Intelligent Things
Intelligence integrated in a technology relates to the capacity of a product to analyse and consider its own
performance.Inaddition,itmustbeabletodealwiththeworkloadanditsownworkingconditions[190].Asaresultof
this,theoverallexperienceoftheenduserisenhanced.Whenbuildinganewproducts/services,itisimportanttokeep
inmindthenotionofself-evaluationoftheproductbasedondatafromembeddedsensors[191].Abusinessintelligence
systemmustbeattheheartofanintegralmodeltoproductorserviceintroduction.Employinganembeddedintelligent
systemandamachinelearningalgorithmmodelisamajorbeneﬁt[192].Thismaybeassessedbylookingathowwell
it performs in areas like launching smart product systems and setting up smart business services, to name just two.
With the help of this cutting-edge infrastructure, it is possible to better understand and anticipate how the business
landscape will shift in the future [193]. Because of this, it is an area where human analysts typically fall short. As a
result,machineintelligencecapabilitiesbasedonsensorsintegratedincurrentgadgetsandgoodshavebecomeaneed
in today’s corporate environment [194].
The convergence of emerging applications and machine intelligence capabilities has led to an evolution in this
process [190, 191, 192, 193, 194]. Embedded intelligence is increasingly being used to design the future IoT:
•AI: Human-machine intelligence synthesis is what this term denotes. In a speciﬁc gadget or service, the ability
to make choices like the intellectual is possible.
•DataIntegrity:Devicehistorymaybetrackedusingblockchain,abusinessintelligenceapplicationorinnovation.
Blockchain is made up of strings of interconnected block headers and blocks bodies [195]. The block body
consists of all transactions in the block. The block header, on the other hand, is generated using the hash value,
timestampofthepreviousblock,andaMerklerootofthetransactionsitcontains.Therefore,eachblockiscreated
usingthehashvalueofthepreviousblockandlinkedtoeachother.Interferingwithanyblockwillchangethehash
valueofthatblockandthusallblockswillbeaﬀected.ThispromisestheavailabilityofBlockchaintechnologyin
protectingtheintegrityofdata[196].Blockchaintechnology,apartfromcryptocurrency(e.g.,Bitcoin),hasbeen
used to further enhance and optimise existing solutions such as cloud storage (e.g., [197]), authentication (e.g.,
[198]),health-care(e.g.,[199]),andmore.Integratingblockchainallowstohaveaclearaudittrailofthedataand
models used to verify the machine decision process, which will lead to increasing the device’s trustworthiness
[200].Thelatterisofextremeimportanceinmachine-to-machinecommunication.Furthermore,runningAIcode
overDecentralizedAutonomousOrganization(DAO)withsmartcontractsattachedtoitlimitscatastrophicrisk
scenarios by limiting the action space.
•Smart Healthcare: Utilizing IoT in the healthcare business may pay out. As a result, healthcare would be even
more widely available, and progress could proceed at a rapid pace.
•Predictive Maintenance: Predictive maintenance is a notion that has emerged as a result of the growth of the
InternetofThings.Thismeansthepractiseofaddingsensorstohouseholdappliancessothattheymaysendout
notiﬁcations when they need to be serviced.
From natural language processing, face recognition, bio-medicine to autonomous driving, more and more
intelligent applications are being deployed on IoT devices [201]. Due to the slow hardware development in small-
sized equipment, the contradiction between the limited computing capacity of IoT devices and running complicated
AI applications cannot be eﬃciently solved in a short time [202]. In addition, there remains signiﬁcant challenges
in developing system-level, algorithm-level, architectural-level or infrastructure-level technologies for embedded
intelligence, e.g., real-time decision making, energy-eﬃcient Deep Neural Network (DNN) training and DNN
inference, and security deployments.
4.3. Things as Sensor-Actuator Network
Cyber-PhysicalSystems(CPS)arethenextgenerationofembeddedInformationandCommunicationsTechnology
(ICT) systems that employ sensor-actuator networks to oﬀer users with a wide range of smart applications and
services by being aware of their physical surroundings [203]. With the help of autonomous control loops, many IoT
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 25 of 43

==== Page 26 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
sensors are conceivable because of the inclusion of improved processing and analysis of data collected by sensors,
as well as planning and executing plans utilizing actuators [204]. Methods are needed to aid in the design and
developmentofthesesystemsbecauseoftheircomplexity[205].InthecontextofCPS,thesystemsthatareembedded
orsoftwareintegratedintophysicalthings,networked,andoﬀeringresidentsandcompanieswithawiderangeofsmart
applications and services are referred to as ICT systems [206].
Transport systems, buildings, electricity grids, and water infrastructure are all examples of CPS [207]. This type
of CPS is meant to detect and react to the physical environment, allowing for quick, reliable autonomic control loops
combining sensing and actuation, perhaps with linguistic and cognitive capabilities, as well [208]. Using wireless
sensor/actornetworks,CPScanmonitorandrespondtothephysicalenvironment.Sensorsandotheralternativesources
collecthistoricalandreal-timedata,whichisusedtoperformadvancedanalysisandprocessinginthetypeofautonomic
control loops [209]. These loops then plan and execute actions in accordance with a set of goals or rules. Real-time
or historical data is used to support this implementation [210]. There are several elements that make CPS systems
diﬃcult to manage, including the use of a wide range of sensors and actuators, the necessity for real-time processing
of enormous amounts of data, and the implementation of plans for issue solving [211]. As a result of the system’s
complexity,engineersneedtoolsandtechniquestoaidtheminthedesigningprocess;adaptivedigitaltwinsarepoised
to play a signiﬁcant role in de-risking such complex engineering and cyber-physical projects.
5. Explainable AI (XAI) for Next Generation Computing
Intelligent decisions are critical to the success of computing initiatives. Is a computing system stable and robust
enough to execute workloads? Are the trained models black boxes or causally explainable? These are just a few
examples of challenges that are faced before a computing system can be implemented [212]. Inaccurate decision-
making is expensive in terms of both cost and resource usage when it comes to these complex and advanced
technologies [213]. There have been a number of AI/ML applications in computing systems to enhance decision-
makingforallocationofresourcesandenergyeﬃciency.Nevertheless,theseAI/MLmodels’predictionsforcomputing
systems are still not practical, explainable, or executable [214]. AI/ML models are frequently hampered by these
constraints. Even if QoS continues to be a primary concern, some recent research have turned their attention to
explaining how QoS is achieved [215]. Is there anything that researchers can do to further the advancement of the
computing community? As a result, a thorough understanding of Explainable AI (XAI) and hands-on expertise with
XAI tools and approaches [216] is needed in order to make informed resource management decisions (an example
application of AI for Computing). These issues may be addressed by using Explainable AI approaches, such as
formulatingpredictionsaboutresourceandenergyusageandSLAdeviationsandthenimplementingtimely,intelligent
action to solve them. In order to make computing more feasible, explainable, and executable, XAI prediction models
must be properly implemented.
6. Potential Risks of AI-integrated Computing
AI can save money, but it requires a highly-trained workforce, that can be expensive at the start. AI’s other
drawbacks in computing systems would include following ones:
•Internet Connectivity Issues: ML/AI techniques based on autonomous computing are frequently hindered by
slow internet connections. There seems to be a latency between transferring information to the cloud/fog/edge
andreceivingreplies,evenifautonomiccomputingisfasterthantraditionalcomputing.MLmethodsforservers
are prone to this issue since forecasting speed is among the most important considerations.
•Privacy of Data: AI systems need an enormous quantity of data, which include information on customers and
providers. Understanding who owns the data is far more beneﬁcial than having private information that can’t
be attributed to a speciﬁc individual. Challenges about data security and compliance with regulations arise
frequently when businesses make utilisation conﬁdential material. Autonomic computing with AI necessitates
privacy regulations and data security.
•PossibilityofErrors:AlthoughAImayseemexciting,likewithanyexperimentation,itisn’talwayseﬀectivein
accomplishing its goals. During its search for solutions, the AI system generated many problematic statements
on sensitive topics. With AI, there is a high risk of mistakes because to the many options. Before further usage
of this innovation, trust and control must be established.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 26 of 43

==== Page 27 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Over-relianceonAIModels:Asitstands,AI/MLalgorithmsareonlyasmallpartofcomplexsoftware-intensive
systems. Software engineers leverage them for completing highly specialized tasks, while designing an large
apparatus of more traditional algorithms around them, including sensor-data sanitization and ﬁltering. Further,
anAImodelisonlyasgoodasthedataitwastrainedon.Hence,strongdataengineeringprocessesarerequired
to select appropriate/representative datasets and conduct various data engineering steps as well as thorough
review processes need to be followed when transfer learning models are selected. Hence, from an autonomics
perspective,allthesestepsneedtobecarefullyhandledbytheMAPE-Kloop,whichwillessentiallyneedtoact
both as a software and a data engineer when conducting adaptations to the ML models.
7. Emerging Trends and Future Directions
On the basis of current research, we’ve selected a number of computing study ﬁelds for three distinct maturity
levels (5 years, 5 to 10 years, and more than ten years). We have identiﬁed a number of emerging technologies
over the next decade, all of which have the potential to make eﬃcient use of AI/ML-integrated next-generation
computing [122, 217, 218, 219]. Figure 6 depicts the hype cycle for next-generation computing. There has been a
lotofstudydoneoncloudcomputingandIoT,butserverlesscomputingiscurrentlyatitspeak.Undertheumbrellaof
computing, research ﬁelds including fog computing, edge computing, AI Orchestration, and mobile edge computing
areonlygettingstarted.Itmighttakeuptotenyearsfortheapplicationofcomputingintheseﬁeldstoreachmaturity.
However,thehypecycleforExplainableAI(XAI),AIengineering,hyperscaleedgecomputing,distributedenterprise,
sustainability,quantumInternetandquantumMLisprojectedtolastmorethantenyears.Thehypearoundsmartrobots,
digital twins, cyber security, edge AI, human-centric AI, edge intelligence, dew computing and privacy enhancing
computation is at an all-time high. It is anticipated that they will be fully developed in less than ﬁve years under the
umbrella of autonomous computing. Expected to signiﬁcantly evolve in the next ﬁve to ten years, MLOps, AIOps,
AI-integrated electric vehicles (EV), decision intelligence and exascale computing have likewise hit their height
of overblown expectations. Generative AI, hyperautomation, neuromorphic computing, hybrid quantum computing,
digital ﬁnance, 6G and quantum computing all have a long way to go before they reach the heights of the hype cycle.
Gridcomputingandvirtualizationhavereceivedalotofattentioninthepastseveralyears,andtheymightcontinueto
do so over the next ﬁve years.
In the following, we have highlighted a number of unsolved problems and research paths that require further
investigation.
7.1. Cloud Computing
•New ensemble machine learning approaches for container management systems, such as Docker Swarm and
Kubernetes, are needed to govern user-based QoS-based container clusters.
•CloudservicedependabilityandQoSmustbemaintainedthroughtheuseofadvancedmachineordeeplearning
techniques.
•Network virtualization must be provided at a reasonable cost in an SDN-based cloud computing environment
that uses AI/ML models to minimise energy consumption and boost dependability.
•Using AI/ML, cloud-based Big Data analysis tools may ﬁnd trends in client behaviour, make better decisions,
and better understand their customers. It is a diﬃcult challenge that has to be solved in order to ensure that
scaling choices are executed or processed in a timely manner utilising AI/ML.
•Thermal-aware task and resource scheduling can be improved by using new AI/ML-inspired methodologies.
•AI/ML-based autonomic computing is becoming increasingly important as the IoT and scientiﬁc applications
grow.
7.2. Fog Computing
•ItisimperativethatthenewestAIandMLapproachesbeusedinordertoforecastsecurityvulnerabilitiesinthe
fog layer and IoT devices because of their intrinsic decentralisation.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 27 of 43

==== Page 28 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Innovation TriggerThe peak of inflated 
Expectations Trough of 
Disillusionment Slope of 
EnlightenmentPlateau of 
ProductivityExpectation/InterestHuman Centric AICloud ComputingServerless ComputingHype Cycle for AI-integrated Next Generation Computing 
Maturity/Time Mobile Cloud 
ComputingSmart Robots 
Nuclear Quantum 
Computing
1-5 Years 5-10 Years >10 YearsExplainable AI (XAI)
Approximate 
ComputingHybrid Quantum 
ComputingDew 
Computing
Generative AIMobile Edge ComputingMLOps /AIOpsExascale Computing
Neuromorphic 
ComputingQuantum ML
Edge Intelligence 
AI Orchestration Quantum Internet
Fog ComputingIoT
Edge Computing VirtualizationGrid Computing
Decision Intelligence
HyperautomationAI Engineering 
Digital Finance AI-integrated EVSustainability
Distributed Enterprise
Privacy Enhancing 
Computation Cyber Security
6GDigital TwinsHyperscale Edge ComputingEdge AI
Figure 6: Hype Cycle for AI-integrated Next Generation Computing
•AI-based deep learning approaches are needed to estimate resource requirements in advance for diﬀerent
geographic resources for fog and cloud computing, which need new policies for provisioning and scheduling
resources.
•On diverse fog environments, state-of-the-art AI/ML approaches may be employed to schedule tasks.
7.3. Edge Computing
•Moderncomputingsystems,whichincorporateedgedevicesascomponentofdatacenters,demandspeciﬁcIoT-
based apps to be created in order to provide for more encrypted transmission and to protect the privacy of data.
•Due to the resource limitations of IoT edge devices, which can’t run the robust security software and ﬁrewalls
built for desktop PCs, Blockchain technology must be used to enhance security using AI/ML. Moreover,
innovative software architectures such as that facilitate IoT devices patching and maintenance could be further
enhanced by leveraging AI and ML.
•AI/ML-based automated decision-making, rather than human-encoded heuristics, presents a lucrative path for
optimising edge systems with massive volumes of data through engineering speed and eﬃciency.
•AI-based big data analytics methods are needed to handle edge device data in IoT applications at runtime.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 28 of 43

==== Page 29 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
7.4. Serverless Computing
•AI may be used to enhance the delay and reaction time of tasks in Serverless computing for IoT applications.
•AutomaticheartdiseasedetectioninIoTandServerlesscomputingcontextsrequiresanensembledeeplearning-
based intelligent healthcare system.
•How can deep learning on IoT devices increase real-world performance in AI-based intelligent systems by
leveraging Serverless Computing?
•ServerlesssystemscanbeneﬁtfromthreatmitigationstrategiesbasedonAI/ML,suchasclusteringmodel-based
security analysis.
7.5. Quantum Computing
•Toincrease the size of current quantum chips, keeping under control the amount of noise present during the
evolution of the quantum states.
•Toenter,infull,withintheeraofNoisyIntermediate-ScaleQuantum(NISQ)devices,whichshouldallowusto
simulate the dynamics of complexquantum systems.
•To integrate quantum chip with quantum error correction (QEC) that will allow to progress towards Fault-
TolerantQuantumComputation(FTQC).Thatwillallowtosimulatethedesignandbehaviourofnovelmaterials
on general purpose quantum computers, opening up new possibilities in virtually all area of knowledge, from
physics matter to the design of novel AI applications.
•Developcloudquantumcomputinginfrastructuresthat,verylikely,willbethewayinwhichwewillusequantum
computer and simulators: as a booster supporting our local, classical devices.
•TohandlethemassiveamountsofdatacreatedbyIoTdevices,powerfulAIandreinforcementlearningmaybe
used.
•ThemostrecentAIandML-basedmethodsmaybeutilisedtodynamicallydiscoverandrectifyfaultstoprovide
a valued and dependable service. Recent AI and ML approaches can enhance dependability, but they can also
raise system complexity by increasing data processing, which results in higher training costs for AI and ML
techniques as a side eﬀect.
7.6. Miscellaneous
Theadvancementsincloud,fog,andedgeinthecontextofIoThaveleadtoconceptssuchasCloud-to-Things.The
following are interesting research directions to explore:
•The ability to form Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) is a concept fundamental to the Cloud-
to-Things computing continuum.
•Rules and agreements can take the form of Blockchain-enabled smart contracts, thus providing for trust among
the actors and organizing computing across the continuum [220].
AI/ML can also open up new research directions when used in conjunction with blockchain technology:
•Smart Oracles can be used to establish decentralised monitoring of vertically and horizontally distributed
heterogeneous infrastructures.
•AI/MLandknowledge managementmethodscanbeincorporated bothwithinfunctionsofBlockchain-enabled
smart contracts and Smart Oracles.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 29 of 43

==== Page 30 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
8. Conclusions and Summary
Computing systems have advanced computer science in the past couple of decades and are now the heart of the
corporateworld,providingservicesbasedonCloud,Fog,Edge,Serverless,andQuantumComputing.Manyreal-world
problems that require low latency and response time have been solved due to modern computing systems. This has
helped young talents around the globe to launch start-ups allowing large computing capacity for solving challenging
problems to speed up scientiﬁc progress.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) have become increasingly popular
in recent years because of the advances in accuracy pioneered by them in areas such as computer vision, natural
language processing and other allied applications. For training these models, massive amounts of data has been
collected in the previous few years in addition to the development in state-of-the-art computing hardware such as the
GraphicsProcessingUnit(GPU),Google’sTensorProcessingUnit(TPU)andAITesla’sDojoProcessingUnit(DPU).
ComputationalresearchersandpractitionersshouldbeawareofAI/ML/DLalgorithmsandmodels.WithAI/ML/DL,
moderncomputingmayproﬁtfrommoreeﬃcientresourcemanagement,whilecomputingisavitalplatformforhosting
AI/ML/DLservicesbecauseofitshugecomputationalcapacity.Thismeansthatbothsidesgainfromtheother.Large-
scalecomputingpowerandexternaldatasourcesareneededformanyAI/ML/DLtechniques,whichmaybemoreeasily
obtainedviacomputingsystems.ThisisespeciallyimportantnowthatmethodsfortrainingsophisticatedAI,ML,and
DLmodelscanbeimplementedinparallelandinlargequantities.Tothatend,itisforeseenthatcontinuedinterestin
AI/ML/DLapplicationswillspurnewresearchintowell-establisheddatacentreresourcemanagementissuesincluding
VM provisioning, consolidation, and load balancing, while also making it easier to cope with scale-out challenges.
InnovativeresearchonExplainableAI(XAI)mightpavethewayformorewidespreaduseofAIinmoderncomputer
systems.
AI and ML are bringing important necessary demands for computing systems in the upcoming years, from large-
scaleheterogeneousIoTandsensornetworksgeneratingextremelyhugedatastreamstostore,maintain,andinvestigate
to QoS-aware (latency, energy, cost, response time) customised computing service adapting for an array of hardware
devices while maximising for multicriteria including software-level QoS constraints and ﬁnancial restraints. As a
result of these needs, new methodologies and research strategies are needed to harness the AI and ML models
in order to overcome the challenges such as latency and scalability as well as resource and security management.
As a cost-eﬀective technique to increase computing application performance, scaling and ﬂexibility are functional
abilities that are yet to completely utilise AI and ML models. AI and ML may be strategically used in resource
management and scheduling techniques to maximise QoS to improve modern computing. At this time, there are
no comprehensive models of service resilience, autonomous methods for managing availability and reliability, and
provisioningalgorithmsthatarecognizantoffailuresinthecurrentresearch.Next-generationorfuturisticcomputing
couldbeestablishedwiththehelpofAI/MLtechniques,whichcanhandletheseproblemsquicklyandeﬀectively.The
implementationofAI/ML-basedresourcemanagementpoliciescanhelpdatatoautomaticallyadjusttheirownenergy
usage and deliver QoS without aﬀecting the system’s reliability. AI and ML techniques may also be used to predict
thedemandforenergyusageinadvancebycombiningrenewableandnon-renewableenergysources.Further,AI/ML
modes can be used to analyse Big Data for security breaching. Figure 7 shows the summary of new trends and future
directions for AI-integrated next generation computing.
In this article, we have given our vision and explored numerous new trends in AI and ML for cloud, fog, edge,
serverless and quantum computing, as well as for other computing platforms and technologies. This is a holistic
futuristic research article that has drawn together breakthroughs and highlighted the obstacles remaining to be solved
in implementing the use of AI/ML for modern computing. We have also developed a conceptual framework for
integratingcutting-edgetechnologyinthefuturetoprovideeﬀectivecomputingservices.Newresearchdevelopments
related to autonomic computing with embedded intelligence have been discussed. In addition, various potential risks
ofAI-integratednextgenerationcomputinghavebeenpresented.Thisworkrecognisedrecentsigniﬁcantchallengesin
AI/ML-embeddednextgenerationcomputingandhassummarisedresearchﬁndingswithlimitations.Additionally,this
futuristic work has examined how current computing issues would be aﬀected by new trends. In this visionary work,
potentialresearchdirectionsforAI/ML-basednext-generationormoderncomputingarehighlighted.ItisclearthatAI
andMLcanbeusedtosolvecomplicatedissuesinthefuture,andthisforward-thinkingstrategyinspiresotherscholars
andresearcherstofollowsuitinasimilarfashion.Weexpectthatthisvisionaryresearchwillbeusefultopractitioners,
scientists, engineers and researchers who are interested in conducting research in any area of AI/ML-integrated next
generation computing in the future.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 30 of 43

==== Page 31 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
 
Emerging  
Trends and 
Future 
Directions  
Edge 
Computing  
Miscellaneous  
• To provide for more encrypted 
transmission and to protect the 
privacy of data in edge devices  
using AI/ML . 
• Blockchain technology must be 
used to enhance security using 
AI/ML for edge computing  
• AI/ML -based automated decision -
making for optimizing edge 
systems with massive volumes of 
data.  
• AI-based big data analytics to 
Figure 7: Summary of Emerging Trends and Future Directions for AI-integrated Next Generation Computing
Declaration of Competing Interests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenoknowncompetingﬁnancialinterestsorpersonalrelationshipsthatcouldhave
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Fatos Xhafa (Editor-in-Chief) and anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions and
guidanceonimprovingthecontentandqualityofthispaper.WealsothankProf.RajkumarBuyya(TheUniversityof
Melbourne)andDrFelixCuadrado(TechnicalUniversityofMadrid)fortheircommentsandsuggestionsforimproving
the paper. Regarding funding, Minxain Xu has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62102408).
References
[1] J. O. Kephart, D. M. Chess, The vision of autonomic computing, Computer 36 (1) (2003) 41–50.
[2] S. Singh, I. Chana, R. Buyya, Star: Sla-aware autonomic management of cloud resources, IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing (2017).
[3] M. Parashar, S. Hariri, Autonomic computing: concepts, infrastructure, and applications, CRC press, 2018.
[4] M. Puviani, R. Frei, Self-management for cloud computing, in: 2013 Science and Information Conference, IEEE, 2013, pp. 940–946.
[5] M.C.Huebscher,J.A.McCann,Asurveyofautonomiccomputing—degrees,models,andapplications,ACMComputingSurveys(CSUR)
40 (3) (2008) 1–28.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 31 of 43

==== Page 32 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[6] E.Elmroth,J.Tordsson,F.Hernández,A.Ali-Eldin,P.Svärd,M.Sedaghat,W.Li,Self-managementchallengesformulti-cloudarchitectures,
in: European Conference on a Service-Based Internet, Springer, 2011, pp. 38–49.
[7] J. O. Kephart, R. Das, Achieving self-management via utility functions, IEEE Internet Computing 11 (1) (2007) 40–48.
[8] S.Singh,I.Chana,Qos-awareautonomicresourcemanagementincloudcomputing:asystematicreview,ACMComputingSurveys(CSUR)
48 (3) (2015) 1–46.
[9] S.S.Gill,I.Chana,M.Singh,R.Buyya,Chopper:anintelligentqos-awareautonomicresourcemanagementapproachforcloudcomputing,
Cluster Computing 21 (2) (2018) 1203–1241.
[10] S. S. Gill, R. Buyya, Resource provisioning based scheduling framework for execution of heterogeneous and clustered workloads in clouds:
from fundamental to autonomic oﬀering, Journal of Grid Computing 17 (3) (2019) 385–417.
[11] H. Derbel, N. Agoulmine, M. Salaün, Anema: Autonomic network management architecture to support self-conﬁguration and self-
optimization in ip networks, Computer Networks 53 (3) (2009) 418–430.
[12] K. Herrmann, G. Muhl, K. Geihs, Self management: the solution to complexity or just another problem?, IEEE distributed systems online
6 (1) (2005).
[13] J.O.Kephart, J.Lenchner,Asymbioticcognitive computingperspectiveonautonomiccomputing, in:2015IEEEInternational Conference
on Autonomic Computing, IEEE, 2015, pp. 109–114.
[14] J.O.Kephart,W.E.Walsh,Anartiﬁcialintelligenceperspectiveonautonomiccomputingpolicies,in:Proceedings.FifthIEEEInternational
Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems and Networks, 2004. POLICY 2004., IEEE, 2004, pp. 3–12.
[15] C. Anderson, T. G. Walmsley, P. Patros, A self-learning architecture for digital twins with self-protection, in: 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Systems Companion (ACSOS-C), IEEE, 2021, pp. 291–292.
[16] E.Rutten,N.Marchand,D.Simon,Feedbackcontrolasmape-kloopinautonomiccomputing,Softwareengineeringforself-adaptivesystems
iii. assurances (2017) 349–373.
[17] P.K.Donepudi,Applicationofartiﬁcialintelligenceinautomationindustry,AsianJournalofAppliedScienceandEngineering7(1)(2018)
7–20.
[18] Z. Ullah, F. Al-Turjman, L. Mostarda, R. Gagliardi, Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning in smart cities, Computer
Communications 154 (2020) 313–323.
[19] S. S. Gill, S. Tuli, M. Xu, I. Singh, K. V. Singh, D. Lindsay, S. Tuli, D. Smirnova, M. Singh, U. Jain, et al., Transformative eﬀects of iot,
blockchainandartiﬁcialintelligenceoncloudcomputing:Evolution,vision,trendsandopenchallenges,InternetofThings8(2019)100118.
[20] R. Buyya, S. N. Srirama, G. Casale, R. Calheiros, Y. Simmhan, B. Varghese, E. Gelenbe, B. Javadi, L. M. Vaquero, M. A. Netto, et al., A
manifesto for future generation cloud computing: Research directions for the next decade, ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 51 (5) (2018)
1–38.
[21] R.Kettimuthu,Z.Liu,I.Foster,P.H.Beckman,A.Sim,K.Wu,W.-k.Liao,Q.Kang,A.Agrawal,A.Choudhary,Towardsautonomicscience
infrastructure:architecture,limitations,andopenissues,in:Proceedingsofthe1stInternationalWorkshoponAutonomousInfrastructurefor
Science, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[22] M. Harman, The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in software engineering, in: 2012 First International Workshop on Realizing AI Synergies in
Software Engineering (RAISE), IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[23] S.López-Huguet,A.Pérez,A.Calatrava,C.deAlfonso,M.Caballer,G.Moltó,I.Blanquer,Aself-managedmesosclusterfordataanalytics
with qos guarantees, Future Generation Computer Systems 96 (2019) 449–461.
[24] M. Salehie, L. Tahvildari, Autonomic computing: emerging trends and open problems, ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes 30 (4)
(2005) 1–7.
[25] M.R.Nami,K.Bertels,Asurveyofautonomiccomputingsystems,in:Thirdinternationalconferenceonautonomicandautonomoussystems
(ICAS’07), IEEE, 2007, pp. 26–26.
[26] M.A.Tarbell,Aiandthetranscendenceoftrueautonomy,in:Micro-andNanotechnologySensors,Systems,andApplicationsXI,Vol.10982,
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019, p. 1098223.
[27] H. Psaier, S. Dustdar, A survey on self-healing systems: approaches and systems, Computing 91 (1) (2011) 43–73.
[28] T. Lynn, P. Rosati, P. T. Endo, Toward the intelligent internet of everything: Observations on multidisciplinary challenges in intelligent
systems research, Technology, Science, and Culture: A Global Vision (2018) 52.
[29] A.G.Ganek,C.P.Hilkner,J.W.Sweitzer,B.Miller,J.L.Hellerstein,Theresponsetoitcomplexity:autonomiccomputing,in:ThirdIEEE
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications, 2004.(NCA 2004). Proceedings., IEEE, 2004, pp. 151–157.
[30] N. Chaurasia, M. Kumar, R. Chaudhry, O. P. Verma, Comprehensive survey on energy-aware server consolidation techniques in cloud
computing, The Journal of Supercomputing 77 (10) (2021) 11682–11737.
[31] L.Zhou,H.Wen,R.Teodorescu,D.H.Du,Distributingdeepneuralnetworkswithcontainerizedpartitionsattheedge,in:2nd ^USENIX `
Workshop on Hot Topics in Edge Computing (HotEdge 19), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[32] B. Varghese, R. Buyya, Next generation cloud computing: New trends and research directions, Future Generation Computer Systems 79
(2018) 849–861.
[33] K. H. Abdulkareem, M. A. Mohammed, S. S. Gunasekaran, M. N. Al-Mhiqani, A. A. Mutlag, S. A. Mostafa, N. S. Ali, D. A. Ibrahim, A
reviewoffogcomputingandmachinelearning:concepts,applications,challenges,andopenissues,IEEEAccess7(2019)153123–153140.
[34] M. Merenda, C. Porcaro, D. Iero, Edge machine learning for ai-enabled iot devices: A review, Sensors 20 (9) (2020) 2533.
[35] A.Kumar,S.Bhatia,K.Kaushik,S.M.Gandhi,S.G.Devi,A.D.J.Diego,A.Mashat,Surveyofpromisingtechnologiesforquantumdrones
and networks, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 125868–125911.
[36] Y. Li, M. Tian, G. Liu, C. Peng, L. Jiao, Quantum optimization and quantum learning: A survey, Ieee Access 8 (2020) 23568–23593.
[37] H. B. Hassan, S. A. Barakat, Q. I. Sarhan, Survey on serverless computing, Journal of Cloud Computing 10 (1) (2021) 1–29.
[38] S.S.Goel,A.Goel,M.Kumar,G.Moltó,Areviewofinternetofthings:qualifyingtechnologiesandboundlesshorizon,JournalofReliable
Intelligent Environments 7 (1) (2021) 23–33.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 32 of 43

==== Page 33 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[39] F. Desai, et al., Healthcloud: A system for monitoring health status of heart patients using machine learning and cloud computing, Internet
of Things 17 (2022) 100485.
[40] S.S.Gill,Quantumandblockchainbasedserverlessedgecomputing:Avision,model,newtrendsandfuturedirections,InternetTechnology
Letters (2021) e275.
[41] M. Xu, A. N. Toosi, R. Buyya, A self-adaptive approach for managing applications and harnessing renewable energy for sustainable cloud
computing, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing 6 (4) (2021) 544–558. doi:10.1109/TSUSC.2020.3014943 .
[42] T.Pusztai,A.Morichetta,V.C.Pujol,S.Dustdar,S.Nastic,X.Ding,D.Vij,Y.Xiong,Sloscript:Anovellanguageforimplementingcomplex
cloud-native elasticity-driven slos, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), IEEE, 2021, pp. 21–31.
[43] S.Tuli,etal.,Hunter:Aibasedholisticresourcemanagementforsustainablecloudcomputing,JournalofSystemsandSoftware184(2022)
111124.
[44] A. Abdelaziz, M. Elhoseny, A. S. Salama, A. Riad, A machine learning model for improving healthcare services on cloud computing
environment, Measurement 119 (2018) 117–128.
[45] L. Ulrich, Top 10 tech cars: The scramble for electric dominance has begun, IEEE Spectrum 57 (4) (2020) 30–39.
[46] A.Masood,A.Hashmi,Aiops:Predictiveanalytics&machinelearninginoperations,in:CognitiveComputingRecipes,Springer,2019,pp.
359–382.
[47] Y. Dang, Q. Lin, P. Huang, Aiops: real-world challenges and research innovations, in: 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion), IEEE, 2019, pp. 4–5.
[48] Can you meet customer demand for cloud-based computing? (2019).
URL https://www.pwc.com/us/en/tech-effect/cloud/covid19-cloud-infrastructure.html
[49] S.Nastic,A.Morichetta,T.Pusztai,S.Dustdar,X.Ding,D.Vij,Y.Xiong,Sloc:Servicelevelobjectivesfornextgenerationcloudcomputing,
IEEE Internet Computing 24 (3) (2020) 39–50.
[50] M.Younas,D.N.A.Jawawi,M.A.Shah,A.Mustafa,M.Awais,M.K.Ishfaq,K.Wakil,Elicitationofnonfunctionalrequirementsinagile
development using cloud computing environment, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 209153–209162.
[51] G.Breiter,M.Behrendt,Lifecycleandcharacteristicsofservicesintheworldofcloudcomputing,IBMJournalofResearchandDevelopment
53 (4) (2009) 3–1.
[52] D. Pop, Machine learning and cloud computing: Survey of distributed and saas solutions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08767 (2016).
[53] P. Elger, E. Shanaghy, AI as a Service: Serverless machine learning with AWS, Manning Publications, 2020.
[54] Z.Zhong,M.Xu,M.A.Rodriguez,C.Xu,R.Buyya,Machinelearning-basedorchestrationofcontainers:Ataxonomyandfuturedirections,
ACM Computing Surveys (2022).
[55] R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, J. J. Rodrigues, Optimized big data management across multi-cloud data centers: Software-deﬁned-
network-based analysis, IEEE Communications Magazine 56 (2) (2018) 118–126.
[56] S.Rajeswari,V.Ponnusamy,Ai-basediotanalyticsonthecloudfordiabeticdatamanagementsystem,in:IntegratingAIinIoTAnalyticson
the Cloud for Healthcare Applications, IGI Global, 2022, pp. 143–161.
[57] L. Surya, Streamlining cloud application with ai technology, International Journal of Innovations in Engineering Research and Technology
[IJIERT] ISSN (2018) 2394–3696.
[58] T. E. Marshall, S. L. Lambert, Cloud-based intelligent accounting applications: accounting task automation using ibm watson cognitive
computing, Journal of Emerging Technologies in Accounting 15 (1) (2018) 199–215.
[59] N. Jha, D. Prashar, A. Nagpal, Combining artiﬁcial intelligence with robotic process automation—an intelligent automation approach, in:
Deep Learning and Big Data for Intelligent Transportation, Springer, 2021, pp. 245–264.
[60] J. Robertson, J. M. Fossaceca, K. W. Bennett, A cloud-based computing framework for artiﬁcial intelligence innovation in support of
multidomain operations, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management (2021).
[61] G. Horn, P. Skrzypek, K. Materka, T. Prze/uni017Adziek, Cost beneﬁts of multi-cloud deployment of dynamic computational intelligence
applications, in: Workshops of the International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications, Springer, 2019, pp.
1041–1054.
[62] G.González,C.L.Evans,Biomedicalimageprocessingwithcontainersanddeeplearning:Anautomatedanalysispipeline:Dataarchitecture,
artiﬁcial intelligence, automated processing, containerization, and clusters orchestration ease the transition from data acquisition to insights
in medium-to-large datasets, BioEssays 41 (6) (2019) 1900004.
[63] S.Chatterjee,S.K.Ghosh,R.Chaudhuri,S.Chaudhuri,Adoptionofai-integratedcrmsystembyindianindustry:fromsecurityandprivacy
perspective, Information & Computer Security (2020).
[64] A. Carvalho, A. Levitt, S. Levitt, E. Khaddam, J. Benamati, Oﬀ-the-shelf artiﬁcial intelligence technologies for sentiment and emotion
analysis:atutorialonusingibmnaturallanguageprocessing,CommunicationsoftheAssociationforInformationSystems44(1)(2019)43.
[65] M.Blohm,C.Dukino,M.Kintz,M.Kochanowski,F.Koetter,T.Renner,Towardsaprivacycompliantcloudarchitecturefornaturallanguage
processing platforms., in: ICEIS (1), 2019, pp. 454–461.
[66] J. Singh, et al., Fog computing: A taxonomy, systematic review, current trends and research challenges, Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing 157 (2021) 56–85.
[67] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, M. Palaniswami, Internet of things (iot): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions, Future
generation computer systems 29 (7) (2013) 1645–1660.
[68] R. Mahmud, S. N. Srirama, K. Ramamohanarao, R. Buyya, Quality of experience (qoe)-aware placement of applications in fog computing
environments, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 132 (2019) 190–203.
[69] W.Tong,A.Hussain,W.X.Bo,S.Maharjan,Artiﬁcialintelligenceforvehicle-to-everything:Asurvey,IEEEAccess7(2019)10823–10843.
[70] S.S.Gill,S.Tuli,A.N.Toosi,F.Cuadrado,P.Garraghan,R.Bahsoon,H.Lutﬁyya,R.Sakellariou,O.Rana,S.Dustdar,etal.,Thermosim:
Deep learning based framework for modeling and simulation of thermal-aware resource management for cloud computing environments,
Journal of Systems and Software 166 (2020) 110596.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 33 of 43

==== Page 34 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[71] U. Maroof, A. Shaghaghi, S. Jha, Plar: Towards a pluggable software architecture for securing iot devices, in: Proceedings of the 2nd
International ACM Workshop on Security and Privacy for the Internet-of-Things, 2019, pp. 50–57.
[72] Z.Zou,Y.Jin,P.Nevalainen,Y.Huan,J.Heikkonen,T.Westerlund,Edgeandfogcomputingenabledaiforiot-anoverview,in:2019IEEE
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 51–56.
[73] F.Firouzi,B.Farahani,A.Marinšek,Theconvergenceandinterplayofedge,fog,andcloudintheai-driveninternetofthings(iot),Information
Systems (2021) 101840.
[74] Y. K. Teoh, et al., Iot and fog computing based predictive maintenance model for eﬀective asset management in industry 4.0 using machine
learning, IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2021).
[75] J.Czentye,I.Pelle,A.Kern,B.P.Gero,L.Toka,B.Sonkoly,Optimizinglatencysensitiveapplicationsforamazon’spubliccloudplatform,
in: 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.
[76] M.Satyanarayanan,Abriefhistoryofcloudoﬄoad:Apersonaljourneyfromodysseythroughcyberforagingtocloudlets,GetMobile:Mobile
Computing and Communications 18 (4) (2015) 19–23.
[77] S. Tuli, et al., ithermofog: Iot-fog based automatic thermal proﬁle creation for cloud data centers using artiﬁcial intelligence techniques,
Internet Technology Letters 3 (5) (2020) e198.
[78] K.E.Skouby,P.Lynggaard,Smarthomeandsmartcitysolutionsenabledby5g,iot,aaiandcotservices,in:2014InternationalConference
on Contemporary Computing and Informatics (IC3I), IEEE, 2014, pp. 874–878.
[79] S.S.Gill,Amanifestoformodernfogandedgecomputing:Vision,newparadigms,opportunities,andfuturedirections,in:Operationalizing
Multi-Cloud Environments, Springer, 2022, pp. 237–253.
[80] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, S. Addepalli, Fog computing and its role in the internet of things, in: Proceedings of the ﬁrst edition of the
MCC workshop on Mobile cloud computing, 2012, pp. 13–16.
[81] R. K. Naha, S. Garg, D. Georgakopoulos, P. P. Jayaraman, L. Gao, Y. Xiang, R. Ranjan, Fog computing: Survey of trends, architectures,
requirements, and research directions, IEEE access 6 (2018) 47980–48009.
[82] M. Goudarzi, H. Wu, M. Palaniswami, R. Buyya, An application placement technique for concurrent iot applications in edge and fog
computing environments, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 20 (4) (2020) 1298–1311.
[83] N.C.Luong,Y.Jiao,P.Wang,D.Niyato,D.I.Kim,Z.Han,Amachine-learning-basedauctionforresourcetradinginfogcomputing,IEEE
Communications Magazine 58 (3) (2020) 82–88.
[84] S.Naveen,M.R.Kounte,Insearchofthefuturetechnologies:Fusionofmachinelearning,fogandedgecomputingintheinternetofthings,
in: International conference on Computer Networks, Big data and IoT, Springer, 2018, pp. 278–285.
[85] S.-Y. Lin, Y. Du, P.-C. Ko, T.-J. Wu, P.-T. Ho, V. Sivakumar, et al., Fog computing based hybrid deep learning framework in eﬀective
inspection system for smart manufacturing, Computer Communications 160 (2020) 636–642.
[86] D.Wang,Z.Liu,X.Wang,Y.Lan,Mobility-awaretaskoﬄoadingandmigrationschemesinfogcomputingnetworks,IEEEAccess7(2019)
43356–43368.
[87] M. Waqas, Y. Niu, M. Ahmed, Y. Li, D. Jin, Z. Han, Mobility-aware fog computing in dynamic environments: Understandings and
implementation, IEEE Access 7 (2018) 38867–38879.
[88] T.Zhao,W.Zhang,H.Zhao,Z.Jin,Areinforcementlearning-basedframeworkforthegenerationandevolutionofadaptationrules,in:2017
IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 103–112.
[89] J.Wang,H.Ke,X.Liu,H.Wang,Optimizationforcomputationaloﬄoadinginmulti-accessedgecomputing:Adeepreinforcementlearning
scheme, Computer Networks (2022) 108690.
[90] D.Wang,X.Tian,H.Cui,Z.Liu,Reinforcementlearning-basedjointtaskoﬄoadingandmigrationschemesoptimizationinmobility-aware
mec network, China Communications 17 (8) (2020) 31–44.
[91] J.Rusman,Z.Tahir,A.E.U.Salam,Fogcomputingconceptimplementationinworkerrordetectionsystemoftheindustrialmachineusing
support vector machine (svm), in: 2019 International Seminar on Research of Information Technology and Intelligent Systems (ISRITI),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 160–164.
[92] A. Majumdar, T. Debnath, S. K. Sood, K. L. Baishnab, Kyasanur forest disease classiﬁcation framework using novel extremal optimization
tuned neural network in fog computing environment, Journal of medical systems 42 (10) (2018) 1–16.
[93] A.Ray,CompassionateArtiﬁcialIntelligence:FrameworksandAlgorithms,CompassionateAILab(AnImprintofInnerLightPublishers),
2018.
[94] F. Hussain, R. Hussain, S. A. Hassan, E. Hossain, Machine learning in iot security: Current solutions and future challenges, IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (3) (2020) 1686–1721.
[95] J.P.Queralta,T.N.Gia,H.Tenhunen,T.Westerlund,Edge-aiinlora-basedhealthmonitoring:Falldetectionsystemwithfogcomputingand
lstmrecurrentneuralnetworks,in:201942ndinternationalconferenceontelecommunicationsandsignalprocessing(TSP),IEEE,2019,pp.
601–604.
[96] M.Rihan,M.Elwekeil,Y.Yang,L.Huang,C.Xu,M.M.Selim,Deep-vfog:Whenartiﬁcialintelligencemeetsfogcomputinginv2x,IEEE
Systems Journal (2020).
[97] A. K. Tanwani, N. Mor, J. Kubiatowicz, J. E. Gonzalez, K. Goldberg, A fog robotics approach to deep robot learning: Application to object
recognitionandgraspplanninginsurfacedecluttering,in:2019InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),IEEE,2019,
pp. 4559–4566.
[98] N. Tian, A. K. Tanwani, J. Chen, M. Ma, R. Zhang, B. Huang, K. Goldberg, S. Sojoudi, A fog robotic system for dynamic visual servoing,
in: 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1982–1988.
[99] L. Li, K. Ota, M. Dong, Deep learning for smart industry: Eﬃcient manufacture inspection system with fog computing, IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics 14 (10) (2018) 4665–4673.
[100] B. A. NG, S. Selvakumar, Anomaly detection framework for internet of things traﬃc using vector convolutional deep learning approach in
fog environment, Future Generation Computer Systems 113 (2020) 255–265.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 34 of 43

==== Page 35 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[101] T. Pusztai, F. Rossi, S. Dustdar, Pogonip: Scheduling asynchronous applications on the edge, in: 2021 IEEE 14th International Conference
on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2021, pp. 660–670.
[102] S. Nastic, T. Pusztai, A. Morichetta, V. C. Pujol, S. Dustdar, D. Vii, Y. Xiong, Polaris scheduler: Edge sensitive and slo aware workload
scheduling in cloud-edge-iot clusters, in: 2021 IEEE 14th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2021, pp. 206–
216.
[103] M. Xu, Q. Zhou, H. Wu, W. Lin, K. Ye, C. Xu, Pdma: Probabilistic service migration approach for delay-aware and mobility-aware mobile
edge computing, Software: Practice and Experience 52 (2) (2022) 394–414. arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1002/spe.3014 ,doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.3014 .
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/spe.3014
[104] W. Yu, F. Liang, X. He, W. G. Hatcher, C. Lu, J. Lin, X. Yang, A survey on the edge computing for the internet of things, IEEE access 6
(2017) 6900–6919.
[105] Edge ai is the next wave of ai (2020).
URL https://towardsdatascience.com/edge-ai-is-the-next-wave-of-ai-a3e98b77c2d7
[106] T. Pusztai, A. Morichetta, V. C. Pujol, S. Dustdar, S. Nastic, X. Ding, D. Vij, Y. Xiong, A novel middleware for eﬃciently implementing
complex cloud-native slos, in: 2021 IEEE 14th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2021, pp. 410–420.
[107] W.Sun,J.Liu,Y.Yue,Ai-enhancedoﬄoadinginedgecomputing:Whenmachinelearningmeetsindustrialiot,IEEENetwork33(5)(2019)
68–74.
[108] Z.Lv,D.Chen,R.Lou,Q.Wang,Intelligentedgecomputingbasedonmachinelearningforsmartcity,FutureGenerationComputerSystems
115 (2021) 90–99.
[109] T. Hao, Y. Huang, X. Wen, W. Gao, F. Zhang, C. Zheng, L. Wang, H. Ye, K. Hwang, Z. Ren, et al., Edge aibench: towards comprehensive
end-to-end edge computing benchmarking, in: International Symposium on Benchmarking, Measuring and Optimization, Springer, 2018,
pp. 23–30.
[110] S. B. Calo, M. Touna, D. C. Verma, A. Cullen, Edge computing architecture for applying ai to iot, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2017, pp. 3012–3016.
[111] A.Shakarami,M.Ghobaei-Arani,A.Shahidinejad,Asurveyonthecomputationoﬄoadingapproachesinmobileedgecomputing:Amachine
learning-based perspective, Computer Networks (2020) 107496.
[112] S.Deng,H.Zhao,W.Fang,J.Yin,S.Dustdar,A.Y.Zomaya,Edgeintelligence:Theconﬂuenceofedgecomputingandartiﬁcialintelligence,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (8) (2020) 7457–7469.
[113] B. Yang, X. Cao, X. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Qian, Mobile-edge-computing-based hierarchical machine learning tasks distribution for iiot, IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 7 (3) (2019) 2169–2180.
[114] G. Zhu, D. Liu, Y. Du, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, Toward an intelligent edge: Wireless communication meets machine learning, IEEE
communications magazine 58 (1) (2020) 19–25.
[115] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, J. Zhang, Edge intelligence: Paving the last mile of artiﬁcial intelligence with edge computing,
Proceedings of the IEEE 107 (8) (2019) 1738–1762.
[116] J.-H. Huh, Y.-S. Seo, Understanding edge computing: Engineering evolution with artiﬁcial intelligence, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 164229–
164245.
[117] R. Ranjan, Streaming big data processing in datacenter clouds, IEEE Cloud Computing 1 (1) (2014) 78–83.
[118] Z. Chen, Q. He, L. Liu, D. Lan, H.-M. Chung, Z. Mao, An artiﬁcial intelligence perspective on mobile edge computing, in: 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Smart Internet of Things (SmartIoT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 100–106.
[119] Z. Xu, W. Liu, J. Huang, C. Yang, J. Lu, H. Tan, Artiﬁcial intelligence for securing iot services in edge computing: a survey, Security and
Communication Networks 2020 (2020).
[120] S. Tuli, et al., Healthfog: An ensemble deep learning based smart healthcare system for automatic diagnosis of heart diseases in integrated
iot and fog computing environments, Future Generation Computer Systems 104 (2020) 187–200.
[121] A.Dhillon,etal.,Iotpulse:machinelearning-basedenterprisehealthinformationsystemtopredictalcoholaddictioninpunjab(india)using
iot and fog computing, Enterprise Information Systems (2020) 1–33.
[122] D.Bermbach,A.Chandra,C.Krintz,A.Gokhale,A.Slominski,L.Thamsen,E.Cavalcante,T.Guo,I.Brandic,R.Wolski,Onthefutureof
cloud engineering, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), IEEE, 2021, pp. 264–275.
[123] S.Kounev,C.Abad,I.Foster,N.Herbst,A.Iosup,S.Al-Kiswany,A.A.-E.Hassan,B.Balis,A.Bauer,A.Bondi,etal.,Towardadeﬁnition
for serverless computing, Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 21201 (2021).
[124] P. Castro, V. Ishakian, V. Muthusamy, A. Slominski, The rise of serverless computing, Communications of the ACM 62 (12) (2019) 44–54.
[125] G.C.Fox,V.Ishakian,V.Muthusamy,A.Slominski,Statusofserverlesscomputingandfunction-as-a-service(faas)inindustryandresearch,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.08028 (2017).
[126] I.E.Akkus,R.Chen,I.Rimac,M.Stein,K.Satzke,A.Beck,P.Aditya,V.Hilt, ^SAND `:Towardshigh-performanceserverlesscomputing,
in: 2018 Annual Technical Conference, 2018, pp. 923–935.
[127] H. Lee, K. Satyam, G. Fox, Evaluation of production serverless computing environments, in: 2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on
Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2018, pp. 442–450.
[128] A.Jangda,D.Pinckney,Y.Brun,A.Guha,Formalfoundationsofserverlesscomputing,ProceedingsoftheACMonProgrammingLanguages
3 (OOPSLA) (2019) 1–26.
[129] W. Lloyd, S. Ramesh, S. Chinthalapati, L. Ly, S. Pallickara, Serverless computing: An investigation of factors inﬂuencing microservice
performance, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), IEEE, 2018, pp. 159–169.
[130] Z. Al-Ali, S. Goodarzy, E. Hunter, S. Ha, R. Han, E. Keller, E. Rozner, Making serverless computing more serverless, in: 2018 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2018, pp. 456–459.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 35 of 43

==== Page 36 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[131] S. K. Mohanty, G. Premsankar, M. Di Francesco, et al., An evaluation of open source serverless computing frameworks., in: CloudCom,
2018, pp. 115–120.
[132] L. Feng, P. Kudva, D. Da Silva, J. Hu, Exploring serverless computing for neural network training, in: 2018 IEEE 11th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE, 2018, pp. 334–341.
[133] A.Pérez,G.Moltó,M.Caballer,A.Calatrava,Serverlesscomputingforcontainer-basedarchitectures,FutureGenerationComputerSystems
83 (2018) 50–59.
[134] I. Baldini, P. Castro, K. Chang, P. Cheng, S. Fink, V. Ishakian, N. Mitchell, V. Muthusamy, R. Rabbah, A. Slominski, et al., Serverless
computing: Current trends and open problems, in: Research advances in cloud computing, Springer, 2017, pp. 1–20.
[135] M. Golec, et al., ifaasbus: A security and privacy based lightweight framework for serverless computing using iot and machine learning,
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 18 (5) (2022) 3522–3529. doi:10.1109/TII.2021.3095466 .
[136] A. Eivy, J. Weinman, Be wary of the economics of" serverless" cloud computing, IEEE Cloud Computing 4 (2) (2017) 6–12.
[137] H.Wang,D.Niu,B.Li,Distributedmachinelearningwithaserverlessarchitecture,in:IEEEINFOCOM2019-IEEEConferenceonComputer
Communications, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1288–1296.
[138] V. Gupta, S. Phade, T. Courtade, K. Ramchandran, Utility-based resource allocation and pricing for serverless computing, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2008.07793 (2020).
[139] L.Schuler,S.Jamil,N.Kühl,Ai-basedresourceallocation:Reinforcementlearningforadaptiveauto-scalinginserverlessenvironments,in:
2021 IEEE/ACM 21st International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid), IEEE, 2021, pp. 804–811.
[140] Z. Tu, M. Li, J. Lin, Pay-per-request deployment of neural network models using serverless architectures, in: Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations, 2018, pp. 6–10.
[141] M. Bilal, M. Canini, R. Fonseca, R. Rodrigues, With great freedom comes great opportunity: Rethinking resource allocation for serverless
functions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14845 (2021).
[142] J. R. Douceur, R. P. Wattenhofer, Optimizing ﬁle availability in a secure serverless distributed ﬁle system, in: Proceedings 20th IEEE
Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, IEEE, 2001, pp. 4–13.
[143] S.Nastic,T.Rausch,O.Scekic,S.Dustdar,M.Gusev,B.Koteska,M.Kostoska,B.Jakimovski,S.Ristov,R.Prodan,Aserverlessreal-time
data analytics platform for edge computing, IEEE Internet Computing 21 (4) (2017) 64–71.
[144] A.Glikson,S.Nastic,S.Dustdar,Devicelessedgecomputing:extendingserverlesscomputingtotheedgeofthenetwork,in:Proceedingsof
the 10th ACM International Systems and Storage Conference, 2017, pp. 1–1.
[145] L. Baresi, D. F. Mendonça, Towards a serverless platform for edge computing, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Fog Computing
(ICFC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–10.
[146] L.Baresi,D.F.Mendonça,M.Garriga,Empoweringlow-latencyapplicationsthroughaserverlessedgecomputingarchitecture,in:European
Conference on Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing, Springer, 2017, pp. 196–210.
[147] C.Cicconetti,M.Conti,A.Passarella,Adecentralizedframeworkforserverlessedgecomputingintheinternetofthings,IEEETransactions
on Network and Service Management 18 (2) (2020) 2166–2180.
[148] P. Patros, J. Spillner, A. V. Papadopoulos, B. Varghese, O. Rana, S. Dustdar, Toward sustainable serverless computing, IEEE Internet
Computing 25 (6) (2021) 42–50.
[149] S. S. Gill, A. Kumar, H. Singh, M. Singh, K. Kaur, M. Usman, R. Buyya, Quantum computing: A taxonomy, systematic review and future
directions, Software: Practice and Experience 52 (1) (2022) 66–114.
[150] M. Nielsen, I. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[151] R. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers, International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21 (1981) 467.
[152] D.Deutsch,Quantumtheory,thechurch–turingprincipleandtheuniversalquantumcomputer,ProceedingsoftheRoyalSocietyofLondon.
A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 400 (1818) (1985) 97.
[153] P. Shor, Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete loga- rithms on a quantum computer, SIAM Review 41 (2) (1999)
303–332.
[154] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. Brandao, D. A. Buell, et al., Quantum
supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor, Nature 574 (7779) (2019) 505–510.
[155] C.H.Bennett,E.Bernstein,G.Brassard,U.Vazirani,Strengthsandweaknessesofquantumcomputing,SIAMjournalonComputing26(5)
(1997) 1510–1523.
[156] L. K. Grover., Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle in a haystack, Physical Review Letters 79 (2) (1997) 325.
[157] J. M. e. a. Pino, Demonstration of the trapped-ion quantum ccd computer architecture, Nature 592 (2021) 209–213.
[158] E. Gibney, Quantum gold rush: the private funding pouring into quantum start-ups, Nature 574 (2019) 22–24.
[159] P. Ball, First quantum computer to pack 100 qubits enters crowded race, Nature 599 (2021) 542.
[160] P.K.Padhi,F.Charrua-Santos,Quantumbiotechandinternetofvirusthings:Towardsatheoreticalframework,AppliedSystemInnovation
4 (2) (2021) 27.
[161] W. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. Needs, G. Rajagopal, Quantum monte carlo simulations of solids, Reviews of Modern Physics 73 (1) (2001) 33.
[162] A.Caputo,V.Merhej,K.Georgiades,P.-E.Fournier,O.Croce,C.Robert,D.Raoult,Pan-genomicanalysistoredeﬁnespeciesandsubspecies
based on quantum discontinuous variation: the klebsiella paradigm, Biology Direct 10 (1) (2015) 1–12.
[163] M. Di Ventra, M. Taniguchi, Decoding dna, rna and peptides with quantum tunnelling, Nature nanotechnology 11 (2) (2016) 117–126.
[164] L.Spector,H.Barnum,H.J.Bernstein,N.Swamy,Findingabetter-than-classicalquantumand/oralgorithmusinggeneticprogramming,in:
Proceedings of the 1999 Congress on Evolutionary Computation-CEC99 (Cat. No. 99TH8406), Vol. 3, IEEE, 1999, pp. 2239–2246.
[165] A. e. a. Robert, Resource-eﬃcient quantum algorithm for protein folding, npj Quantum information 7 (38) (2021).
[166] W. G. Richards, Quantum pharmacology, Elsevier, 2013.
[167] Toshiba targets $3 billion revenue in quantum cryptography by 2030 (2020).
URL https://www.reuters.com/article/us-toshiba-cyber-idUSKBN2730KW
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 36 of 43

==== Page 37 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[168] Post-quantum cryptography (2020).
URL https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography
[169] M. Singh, et al., Quantum artiﬁcial intelligence for the science of climate change, arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10855 (2021).
[170] V. Saggio, B. E. Asenbeck, A. Hamann, T. Strömberg, P. Schiansky, V. Dunjko, N. Friis, N. C. Harris, M. Hochberg, D. Englund, S. Wölk,
H. J. Briegel, P. Walther, Experimental quantum speed-up in reinforcement learning agents, Nature 591 (2021) 229–236.
[171] K. N. Sgarbas, The road to quantum artiﬁcial intelligence, arXiv preprint arXiv:0705.3360 (2007).
[172] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, S. Lloyd, Quantum machine learning, Nature 549 (7671) (2017) 195–202.
[173] H.-Y. Huang, M. Broughton, M. Mohseni, R. Babbush, S. Boixo, H. Neven, J. R. McClean, Power of data in quantum machine learning,
Nature Communications 12 (1) (2021). doi:10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9 .
[174] R. Ayanzadeh, Quantum artiﬁcial intelligence for natural language processing applications, in: Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2018, pp. 273–273.
[175] K.Meichanetzidis,S.Gogioso,G.DeFelice,N.Chiappori,A.Toumi,B.Coecke,Quantumnaturallanguageprocessingonnear-termquantum
computers, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04147 (2020).
[176] G. M. Sacha, P. Varona, Artiﬁcial intelligence in nanotechnology, Nanotechnology 24 (45) (2013) 452002.
[177] M.Broughton,G.Verdon,T.McCourt,A.J.Martinez,J.H.Yoo,S.V.Isakov,P.Massey,R.Halavati,M.Y.Niu,A.Zlokapa,etal.,Tensorﬂow
quantum: A software framework for quantum machine learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02989 (2020).
[178] V.Dunjko,H.J.Briegel,Machinelearning&artiﬁcialintelligenceinthequantumdomain:areviewofrecentprogress,ReportsonProgress
in Physics 81 (7) (2018) 074001.
[179] S. Holmes, L. Chen, Assessment of quantum threat to bitcoin and derived cryptocurrencies, Cryptology ePrint Archive (2021).
[180] J. Toldinas, B. Lozinskis, E. Baranauskas, A. Dobrovolskis, Mqtt quality of service versus energy consumption, in: 2019 23rd International
Conference Electronics, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[181] R. P. Dick, L. Shang, M. Wolf, S.-W. Yang, Embedded intelligence in the internet-of-things, IEEE Design & Test 37 (1) (2019) 7–27.
[182] B.Guo,D.Zhang,Z.Yu,Y.Liang,Z.Wang,X.Zhou,Fromtheinternetofthingstoembeddedintelligence,WorldWideWeb16(4)(2013)
399–420.
[183] W. Dai, H. Nishi, V. Vyatkin, V. Huang, Y. Shi, X. Guan, Industrial edge computing: Enabling embedded intelligence, IEEE Industrial
Electronics Magazine 13 (4) (2019) 48–56.
[184] O. Vermesan, M. EisenHauer, M. Serrano, P. Guillemin, H. Sundmaeker, E. Z. Tragos, J. Valino, B. Copigneaux, M. Presser, A. Aagaard,
et al., The next generation internet of things–hyperconnectivity and embedded intelligence at the edge, Next Generation Internet of Things.
Distributed Intelligence at the Edge and Human Machine-to-Machine Cooperation (2018).
[185] G. Plastiras, M. Terzi, C. Kyrkou, T. Theocharidcs, Edge intelligence: Challenges and opportunities of near-sensor machine learning
applications, in: 2018 ieee 29th international conference on application-speciﬁc systems, architectures and processors (asap), IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1–7.
[186] G. Gobieski, B. Lucia, N. Beckmann, Intelligence beyond the edge: Inference on intermittent embedded systems, in: Proceedings of the
Twenty-FourthInternationalConferenceonArchitecturalSupportforProgrammingLanguagesandOperatingSystems,2019,pp.199–213.
[187] M. H. Anwar, et al., Recommender system for optimal distributed deep learning in cloud datacenters, Wireless Personal Communications
(2021) 1–25.
[188] M.Xue,H.Wu,R.Li,M.Xu,P.Jiao,Eosdnn:Aneﬃcientoﬄoadingschemefordnninferenceaccelerationinlocal-edge-cloudcollaborative
environments, IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking (2021) 1–1 doi:10.1109/TGCN.2021.3111731 .
[189] H.M.Gomes,J.P.Barddal,F.Enembreck,A.Bifet,Asurveyonensemblelearningfordatastreamclassiﬁcation,ACMComputingSurveys
(CSUR) 50 (2) (2017) 1–36.
[190] Y. Chen, H. Hu, Internet of intelligent things and robot as a service, Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory 34 (2013) 159–171.
[191] A.Arsénio,H.Serra,R.Francisco,F.Nabais,J.Andrade,E.Serrano,Internetofintelligentthings:Bringingartiﬁcialintelligenceintothings
and communication networks, in: Inter-cooperative collective intelligence: Techniques and applications, Springer, 2014, pp. 1–37.
[192] B.Nathani,R.Vijayvergia,Theinternetofintelligentthings:Anoverview,in:2017InternationalConferenceonIntelligentCommunication
and Computational Techniques (ICCT), IEEE, 2017, pp. 119–122.
[193] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, S. Shetty, M. Jo, A tutorial and future research for building a blockchain-based secure communication scheme for
internet of intelligent things, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 88700–88716.
[194] N. Chen, T. Qiu, X. Zhou, K. Li, M. Atiquzzaman, An intelligent robust networking mechanism for the internet of things, IEEE
Communications Magazine 57 (11) (2019) 91–95.
[195] M. K. Choi, C. Y. Yeun, P. H. Seong, A novel monitoring system for the data integrity of reactor protection system using blockchain
technology, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 118732–118740. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3005134 .
[196] I. Zikratov, A. Kuzmin, V. Akimenko, V. Niculichev, L. Yalansky, Ensuring data integrity using blockchain technology, in: 2017 20th
Conference of Open Innovations Association (FRUCT), 2017, pp. 534–539. doi:10.23919/FRUCT.2017.8071359 .
[197] J.Doyle,etal.,Blockchainbus:Alightweightframeworkforsecurevirtualmachinemigrationincloudfederationsusingblockchain,Security
and Privacy (2021) e197.
[198] M. T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, A. Serhrouchni, Bubbles of trust: A decentralized blockchain-based authentication system for iot,
Computers & Security 78 (2018) 126–142.
[199] Z. Abaid, A. Shaghaghi, R. Gunawardena, S. Seneviratne, A. Seneviratne, S. Jha, Health access broker: Secure, patient-controlled
managementofpersonalhealthrecordsinthecloud,in:ComputationalIntelligenceinSecurityforInformationSystemsConference,Springer,
2019, pp. 111–121.
[200] Z.Sisi,A.Souri,Blockchaintechnologyforenergy-awaremobilecrowdsensingapproachesininternetofthings,TransactionsonEmerging
Telecommunications Technologies (2021) e4217.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 37 of 43

==== Page 38 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
[201] T.Shao,etal.,Iot-pi:Amachinelearning-basedlightweightframeworkforcost-eﬀectivedistributedcomputingusingiot,InternetTechnol-
ogy Letters (2022) e355 arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/itl2.355 ,doi:https://doi.org/10.
1002/itl2.355 .
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/itl2.355
[202] M. Xue, H. Wu, G. Peng, K. Wolter, Ddpqn: An eﬃcient dnn oﬄoading strategy in local-edge-cloud collaborative environments, IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing (2021) 1–1 doi:10.1109/TSC.2021.3116597 .
[203] M. Sha, D. Gunatilaka, C. Wu, C. Lu, Empirical study and enhancements of industrial wireless sensor–actuator network protocols, IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 4 (3) (2017) 696–704.
[204] J. Liu, M. Chu, J. Reich, F. Zhao, State-centric programming for sensor-actuator network systems, IEEE Pervasive Computing 2 (4) (2003)
50–62.
[205] S.A.Çeltek,M.Durgun,H.Soy,Internetofthingsbasedsmarthomesystemdesignthroughwirelesssensor/actuatornetworks,in:20172nd
International Conference on Advanced Information and Communication Technologies (AICT), IEEE, 2017, pp. 15–18.
[206] M. Van de Panne, E. Fiume, Sensor-actuator networks, in: Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, 1993, pp. 335–342.
[207] P. V. M. Deshmukh, Monitoring and control of gas leakages of industrial sector using pic 18f4550, zigbee and wireless sensor actuator
network, i-Manager’s Journal on Electronics Engineering 8 (3) (2018) 5.
[208] T. Joshi, K. Nagiya, M. Ram, Performance evaluation of a wireless sensor actuator network under reliability approach., Mathematics in
Engineering, Science & Aerospace (MESA) 11 (1) (2020).
[209] J.Shi,M.Sha,Z.Yang,Digs:Distributedgraphroutingandschedulingforindustrialwirelesssensor-actuatornetworks,in:2018IEEE38th
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 354–364.
[210] A.Bragarenco,Sensor-actuatorsoftwarecomponentstackforindustrialinternetofthingsapplications,in:202024thInternationalConference
on System Theory, Control and Computing (ICSTCC), IEEE, 2020, pp. 540–545.
[211] S.Muralidhara,N.Hegde,Airqualitymonitoringandgasleakagedetectionwithautomaticshut-oﬀusingwirelesssensor-actuatornetworks,
Internet Technology Letters 3 (5) (2020) e185.
[212] P. Linardatos, V. Papastefanopoulos, S. Kotsiantis, Explainable ai: A review of machine learning interpretability methods, Entropy 23 (1)
(2021) 18.
[213] P. Gohel, P. Singh, M. Mohanty, Explainable ai: current status and future directions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07045 (2021).
[214] Q. V. Liao, M. Singh, Y. Zhang, R. Bellamy, Introduction to explainable ai, in: Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2021, pp. 1–3.
[215] A.Souri,A.M.Rahmani,N.J.Navimipour,R.Rezaei,Ahybridformalveriﬁcationapproachforqos-awaremulti-cloudservicecomposition,
Cluster Computing 23 (4) (2020) 2453–2470.
[216] K.Zhang,J.Zhang,P.-D.Xu,T.Gao,D.W.Gao,Explainableaiindeepreinforcementlearningmodelsforpowersystememergencycontrol,
IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems (2021).
[217] 5 impactful technologies from the gartner emerging technologies and trends impact radar for 2022 (2021).
URL https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/5-impactful-technologies-from-the-gartner-emerging-technologies-and-trends-impact-radar-for-2022
[218] Gartner identiﬁes the top strategic technology trends for 2022 (2021).
URL https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2021-10-18-gartner-identifies-the-top-strategic-technology-trends-for-2022
[219] Generative ai, autonomic systems, hyperautomation and more top gartner list of top tech trends in 2022 (2021).
URL https://www.zdnet.com/article/generative-ai-autonomic-systems-hyperautomation-and-more-top-gartner-list-of-top-tech-trends-in-2022/
[220] P. Kochovski, S. Gec, V. Stankovski, M. Bajec, P. D. Drobintsev, Trust management in a blockchain based fog computing platform with
trustlesssmartoracles,FutureGenerationComputerSystems101(2019)747–759. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.
07.030.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X19301281
Authors Biography
SukhpalSinghGill is a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) in Cloud Computing at the School of Electronic Engineering
and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK. Prior to his present stint, Dr. Gill has held positions
as a Research Associate at the School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK and also as
a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at CLOUDS Laboratory, The University of Melbourne, Australia. Dr. Gill received
his Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Punjab Technical University with Distinction in
2010. Then, he obtained the Degree of Master of Engineering in Software Engineering (Gold Medalist), as well as
a Doctoral Degree specialization in Autonomic Cloud Computing from Thapar University. He was a DST (Department of Science &
Technology) Inspire Fellow during his doctoral studies and also worked as a Senior Research Fellow (Professional) on a DST Project
sponsored by the Government of India. One of his research paper has been nominated and selected for the ACM’s 21st annual Best of
Computing Notable Books and Articles as one of the notable items published in computing – 2016. Dr. Gill was a research visitor at
Monash University, University of Manitoba, University of Manchester and Imperial College London. Dr. Gill is serving as an Associate
Editor in Wiley ETT and IET Networks Journal. He has co-authored 70+ peer-reviewed papers (with H-index 30+) and has published
in prominent international journals and conferences such as IEEE TCC, IEEE TSC, IEEE TII, IEEE IoT Journal, Elsevier JSS and
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 38 of 43

==== Page 39 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
IEEE CCGRID. He has received several awards, including the Distinguished Reviewer Award from SPE (Wiley), 2018, Best Paper
Award AusPDC at ACSW 2021 and has also served as the PC member for venues such as PerCom, UCC, CCGRID, CLOUDS, ICFEC,
AusPDC. Dr. Gill served as a Guest Editor for SPE (Wiley) and JCC Springer Journal. He is a regular reviewer for IEEE TPDS,
IEEE TSC, IEEE TNSE, IEEE TSC, ACM CSUR and Wiley SPE. He has edited a research book for Elsevier. Dr. Gill has reviewed
370+ research articles of high ranked journals and prestigious conferences according to the data from Publons. His research interests
include Cloud Computing, Fog Computing, Software Engineering, Internet of Things and Energy Eﬃciency. For further information,
please visit http://www.ssgill.me .
Minxian Xu is currently an associate professor at Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. He received the B.Sc. degree and the M.Sc. degree, both in software engineering from University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from the University of Melbourne in
2019. His research interests include resource scheduling and optimization in cloud computing. He has co-authored
30+ peer-reviewed papers published in prominent international journals and conferences, such as ACM Computing
Surveys,IEEETransactionsonSustainableComputing,IEEETransactionsonCloudComputing,JournalofParallel
and Distributed Computing, Software: Practice and Experience, International Conference on Service-Oriented
Computing. His Ph.D. Thesis was awarded the 2019 IEEE TCSC Outstanding Ph.D. Dissertation Award. He is member of CCF and
IEEE. More information can be found at: http://www.minxianxu.info .
Carlo Ottaviani is Associate Lecturer at Department of Computer Science and Research Fellow at the York
Centre for Quantum Technologies (YCQT) of the University of York, UK. His research activity is in Quantum
Information and Quantum Technologies. He worked on theoretical proposals to design quantum-phase gates,
quantum memories and quantum repeaters using non-linear quantum atom-optics systems. In recent years he
focused on security, quantum-key distribution, and the realisation of quantum relays and quantum networks based
on quantum continuous-variable systems.
Panos Patros is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of Software Engineering, University of Waikato, Aotearoa
New Zealand. He leads the Cloud and Adaptive Systems (Ohu Rangahau Kapua Aunoa) ORKA Lab, is a member
of the Ahuora Smart Energy Systems Centre and focuses on self-adaptive computer systems and digital twins. He
received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada,
on multitenancy, performance, and modeling of cloud systems. Contact him at panos.patros@waikato.ac.nz.
Rami Bahsoon is is a Reader at the School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK. Bahsoon’s
research is in the area of software architecture, cloud and services software engineering, self-aware software
architectures,self-adaptiveandmanagedsoftwareengineering,economics-drivensoftwareengineeringandtechnical
debt management in software. He co-edited four books on Software Architecture, including Economics-Driven
Software Architecture; Software Architecture for Big Data and the Cloud; Aligning Enterprise, System, and
Software Architecture. He was a Visiting Scientist at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI), Carnegie Mellon
University, USA (June–August 2018) and was the 2018 Melbourne School of Engineering (MSE) Visiting Fellow of
The School of Computing and Information Systems, the University of Melbourne (August to Nov 2018). He holds a Ph.D. in Software
Engineering from University College London (2006) and was MBA Fellow in Technology at London Business School (2003–2005). He
is a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and Associate Editor of IEEE Software - Software Economies .
ArashShaghaghi received the B.Sc. degree from Heriot-Watt University, the M.Sc. degree in information security
from University College London (UCL), and the PhD degree in Computer Science and Engineering from The
University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney), Australia. He is currently a Senior Lecturer in Cyber Security
at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He is also a Visiting Fellow at the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, UNSW Sydney. He has previously been aﬃliated with Deakin University, UNSW Sydney, Data61
CSIRO, The University of Melbourne, and The University of Texas at Dallas. He is a multi-award winner cyber security educator and
researcher with a track record of publications at competitive international conferences and journals. To this date, he has received a
total funding of more than 300,000 AUD (as PI and CI combined) for his cyber security research from various internal and external
sources, including the Australian Government. Arash currently serves as an Associate Editor for Ad Hoc Networks journal and has
had roles (TPC member, organizing member, and reviewer) at prestigious security and networking journals and conferences. He is
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 39 of 43

==== Page 40 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
a member of IEEE and the Australian Information Security Association. Visit http://www.arashshaghaghi.com for more information .
Muhammed Golec is a PhD student in Computer Science at Queen Mary University. After his undergraduate
graduation, he was awarded the Ministry of Education Scholarship, one of the most prestigious scholarships in
his country. Within the scope of this scholarship, he graduated from Queen Mary University of London Computer
Science with a high degree (Distinction). His master thesis was found successful and published in IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine. He worked at Sisecam Company as an Electrical and Electronics Maintenance Engineer for
one year to consolidate his academic skills in the private sector. His research interests include AI, Cloud Computing, and Security and
Privacy. For further information, please visit https://www.linkedin.com/in/muhammed-golec-b55756119/ .
Vlado Stankovski is a Full Professor of Computer and Information Science at the University of Ljubljana. Vlado
Stankovski was awarded his Eng. Comp. Sc., M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University
of Ljubljana in 1995, 2000 and 2009, respectively. He began his career in 1995 as consultant and later as project
manager with the Fujitsu-ICL Corporation in Prague. From 1998-2002 he worked as researcher at the University
Medical Centre in Ljubljana. In the period 2003-2019, he was with the Department of Construction Informatics
at the University of Ljubljana. From 2020 he lectures at all levels (undergraduate, postgraduate) at the Faculty
of Computer and Information Science. Vlado Stankovski’s research interests are in semantic and distributed-
computing technologies. He is currently the scientiﬁc and technical coordinator of the Horizon Europe Next Generation Internet
project ONTOCHAIN.
Huaming Wu received the BE and MS degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in 2009 and
2011, respectively, both in electrical engineering, and the PhD degree with the highest honor in computer science
at Freie Universität Berlin, Germany, in 2015. He is currently an associate professor with the Center for Applied
Mathematics,TianjinUniversity.Hisresearchinterestsincludemodel-basedevaluation,wirelessandmobilenetwork
systems, mobile cloud computing and deep learning. He is a member of IEEE and ACM.
Ajith Abraham received the M.Sc. degree from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 1998, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2001. He is currently the
Director of the Machine Intelligence Research Labs (MIR Labs), a Not-for-Proﬁt Scientiﬁc Network for Innovation
and Research Excellence connecting Industry and Academia. The Network with HQ in Seattle, USA, has currently
more than 1000 scientiﬁc members from more than 100 countries. As an Investigator/Co-Investigator, he has
won research grants worth more than U.S.$100 million from Australia, USA, EU, Italy, Czech Republic, France,
Malaysia, and China. He works in a multi-disciplinary environment involving machine intelligence, cyber-physical systems, the Internet
of Things, network security, sensor networks, web intelligence, web services, data mining, and applied to various real-world problems.
In these areas, he has authored/coauthored more than 1400 research publications out of which there are more than 100 books covering
various aspects of computer science. He has more than 46,000 academic citations (H-index of 100 as per Google Scholar). He is also
the Editor-in-Chief of Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI) and serves/served the editorial board of more than 15
international journals indexed by Thomson ISI. More information can be available at http://www.softcomputing.net .
ManmeetSingh is Scientist C at the Centre for Climate Change Research, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology,
Pune since 2013. He was a Fulbright-Kalam fellow at the Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of
Texas at Austin in 2021. He is specially interested in AI/ML techniques, causal approaches, recurrence plots,
complex networks and non-linear time series analysis for solving grand challenges in Earth System Science. He
is an experienced climate modeller having contributed to the IITM Earth System Model simulations towards the
IPCC AR6 report. Together with his PhD co-advisor Dr Ayantika Dey Choudhury, he developed and coupled the
aerosol module of IITM-ESM. Recently, his work has focussed on the impacts of the proposals suggesting volcanic
eruptions as an analogue of solar geoengineering to halt climate change. His international collaborations include researchers from
PIKPotsdam,UTAustin,PennStateUniversity,UniversityofTübingen,Magdeburg-StendalUniversityofAppliedSciences,Germany.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 40 of 43

==== Page 41 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Harshit Mehta is Principal Data Scientist with Dell Technologies. He has led many Data Science projects from
ideation to production.He has extensive experience in diﬀerent domains of AI like Natural language Processing,
Fraud Detection and Anomaly Detection. Harshit graduated from University of Texas at Austin with a Masters in
Operation Research.
Soumya K Ghosh received the M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering,IndianInstituteofTechnology(IIT)Kharagpur,India.HeiscurrentlyaProfessorwiththeDepartment
of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur. He was with the Indian Space Research Organization, India.
He has authored or coauthored more than 300 research papers in reputed journals and conference proceedings.
His current research interests include spatial data science, spatial web services, and cloud computing. He is the
recipient of National Geospatial Chair Professor award from Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India. He is senior
member of IEEE and member of ACM.
Thar Baker is Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science at The University of Sharjah (UoS)
in UAE. Before joining UoS, Thar was Reader in Cloud Engineering and Head of Applied Computing Research
Group (ACRG) in the Faculty of Engineering and Technology at Liverpool John Moores University (LJMU, UK).
He received his PhD in Autonomic Cloud Applications from LJMU in 2010 and became a Senior Fellow of
Higher Education Academy (SFHEA) in 2018. Dr Baker has published numerous refereed research papers in
multidisciplinary research areas including parallel and distributed computing, autonomic computing, federated learning, and IoT.
Ajith Kumar Parlikad is Professor of Asset Management at Cambridge University Engineering Department. He
is based at the Institute for Manufacturing, where he is the Head of the Asset Management research group.
He is a Fellow and Tutor at Hughes Hall. Ajith leads research activities on engineering asset management and
maintenance. His particular focus is examining how asset information can be used to improve asset performance
through eﬀective decision-making. He actively engages with industry through research and consulting projects. He
is currently the Scientiﬁc Secretary of the IFAC TC5.1 Working Group on ‘Advanced Maintenance Engineering,
Services and Technology’ and sits on the steering committee of the UK Digital Twin Hub. Ajith’s current research focuses on the
development and exploitation of digital twins of complex asset systems bringing together data from disparate sources to improve
asset management. Ajith joined Cambridge University to read for his PhD degree, which he successfully completed in August 2006.
For his PhD, he developed a methodology for quantifying the beneﬁts of improving product information availability and quality on
the eﬀectiveness of product recovery processes.
Hanan Lutﬁyya is a Professor and the Chair of the Department of Computer Science, University of Western
Ontario (UWO), Canada. Her research interests include Internet of Things, software engineering, self-adaptive and
self-managing systems, autonomic computing, monitoring and diagnostics, mobile systems, policies, and clouds.
She was a recipient of the UWO Faculty Scholar Award in 2006. She is a Past Member of the Natural Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant Committee, and a Past Member and
the Chair of an NSERC Strategic Grants Committee. She was a member of the Computer Science Accreditation
Council. She is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management and
has recently served as the Program Co-Chair for the IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium and the IEEE
International Conference on Network and Service Management. She is currently on the steering committee for the Ontario Celebration
of Women in Computing Conference.
Salil S. Kanhere received the MS and PhD degrees from Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA. He is a Professor
of Computer Science and Engineering at UNSW Sydney, Australia. His research interests include the Internet
of Things, cyber-physical systems, blockchain, pervasive computing, cybersecurity, and applied machine learning.
Salil is also aﬃliated with CISRO’s Data61 and the Cybersecurity Cooperative Research Centre. He is a Senior
Member of the IEEE and ACM, an ACM Distinguished Speaker and an IEEE Computer Society Distinguished
Visitor. He has received the Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Award (2020) and the Humboldt Research Fellowship (2014), both
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 41 of 43

==== Page 42 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in Germany. He has held visiting positions at I2R Singapore, Technical University
Darmstadt, University of Zurich and Graz University of Technology. He serves as the Editor in Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks Journal
and as an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions On Network and Service Management, Computer Communications, and Pervasive
and Mobile Computing. He has served on the organising committee of several IEEE/ACM international conferences including IEEE
PerCom, IEEE/ACM IPSN, IEEE ICBC, IEEE WoWMoM, ACM MSWiM, etc. He has co-authored a book titled Blockchain for
Cyberphysical Systems published by Artech House in 2020. Further details are at: https://salilkanhere.net/ .
RizosSakellariou obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Manchester in 1997. Since then he held positions with
Rice University and the University of Cyprus, while currently he is Professor with the University of Manchester
leading a laboratory that carries out research in High-Performance, Parallel and Distributed systems. He has carried
out research on a number of topics related to parallel and distributed computing, with an emphasis on problems
stemming from eﬃcient resource utilization and workload allocation and scheduling issues. He has published over
160 research papers, His research has been supported by several UK and EU projects and has been on the Program
Committee of over 180 conferences and workshops. He values collaboration and a strong work ethic.
Schahram Dustdar is Full Professor of computer science heading the Research Division of Distributed Systems
at the TU Wien, Austria. He is founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of the new ACM Transactions on Internet of Things
(ACM TIoT) as well as Editor-in-Chief of Computing (Springer). He is an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, ACM Transactions on the Web, and ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology, as well as on the editorial board of IEEE Internet Computing and IEEE
Computer. Dustdar is IEEE Fellow (2016), recipient of the ACM Distinguished Scientist Award (2009), the ACM
Distinguished Speaker ward (2021), the IBM Faculty Award (2012), an Elected Member of the Academia Europaea: The Academy
of Europe, where he is Chairman of the Informatics Section. In 2021 Dustdar was elected EAI Fellow as well as Fellow and President
for the Asia-Paciﬁc Artiﬁcial Intelligence Association (AAIA).
Omer Rana is a Professor of Performance Engineering in School of Computer Science & Informatics at Cardiﬀ
UniversityandDeputyDirectoroftheWelshe-ScienceCentre.HeholdsaPh.D.fromImperialCollege.Hisresearch
interests extend to three main areas within computer science: problem solving environments, high performance
agent systems and novel algorithms for data analysis and management. Moreover, he leads the Complex Systems
research group in the School of Computer Science & Informatics and is director of the ‘Internet of Things’ Lab, at
Cardiﬀ University. He has published over 310 papers in peer-reviewed international conferences and journals. He
serves on the Editorial Board of IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, ACM Transactions on Internet Technology,
and ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems. He has served as a Co-Editor for a number of journals, including
Concurrency: Practice and Experience (John Wiley), IEEE Transactions on System, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, and IEEE
Transactions on Cloud Computing.
IvonaBrandic is University Professor for HPC Systems at the Institute of Information Systems Engineering, Vienna
University of Technology (TU Wien) where she leads High Performance Computing Systems Research Group. In
2015, she was awarded the FWF START prize, the highest Austrian award for early career researchers. Since 2016
she has been a member of the Young Academy of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. She received her PhD degree
in 2007 and her venia docendi for practical computer science in 2013, both from Vienna University of Technology.
Brandic was on the Editorial Board of IEEE Magazine on Cloud Computing, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems and IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing. In 2011 she received the Distinguished Young Scientist Award
from the Vienna University of Technology for her project on the Holistic Energy Eﬃcient Hybrid Clouds. Her interests comprise
virtualized HPC systems, energy eﬃcient ultra-scale distributed systems, massive-scale data analytics, Cloud & workﬂow Quality of
Service (QoS), and service-oriented distributed systems. In 2019 she chaired the CHIST-ERA panel (ANR) on Smart Distribution of
Computing in Dynamic Networks (SDCDN).
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 42 of 43

==== Page 43 ====
AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Steve Uhlig obtained a Ph.D. degree in Applied Sciences from the University of Louvain, Belgium, in 2004. From
2004 to 2006, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Belgian National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research (F.N.R.S.). His
thesis won the annual IBM Belgium/F.N.R.S. Computer Science Prize 2005. Between 2004 and 2006, he was
a visiting scientist at Intel Research Cambridge, UK, and at the Applied Mathematics Department of University
of Adelaide, Australia. Between 2006 and 2008, he was with Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands.
Prior to joining Queen Mary University of London, he was a Senior Research Scientist with Technische Universität
Berlin/Deutsche Telekom Laboratories, Berlin, Germany. Since January 2012, he has been the Professor of Networks and Head of the
Networks Research group at Queen Mary, University of London. Between 2012 and 2016, he was a guest professor at the Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. With expertise in network monitoring, large-scale network
measurements and analysis, and network engineering, during his career he has been published in over 100 peer-reviewed journals, and
awarded over £3million in grant funding. Awarded a Turing Fellow, Steve is also the Principal Investigator on a new project funded
by the Alan Turing Institute: ’Learning-based reactive Internet Engineering’ (LIME). He is currently the Editor in Chief of ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, the newsletter of the ACM SIGCOMM SIG on data communications. Since December
2020, Steve has also held the position of Head of School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science. Current Research interests:
Internet measurements, software-deﬁned networking, content delivery.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 43 of 43

