==== Page 1 ====
PERSPECTIVE
published: 11 September 2019
doi: 10.3389/fdata.2019.00032
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32Editedby:
KatjaMayer,
UniversityofVienna,Austria
Reviewedby:
HemankLamba,
CarnegieMellonUniversity,
UnitedStates
LukeStark,
MicrosoftResearch,UnitedStates
*Correspondence:
JaredMoore
jared@jaredmoore.org
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
DataMiningandManagement,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinBigData
Received: 31March2019
Accepted: 30August2019
Published: 11September2019
Citation:
MooreJ(2019)AIforNotBad.
Front.BigData2:32.
doi:10.3389/fdata.2019.00032AI for Not Bad
JaredMoore *
WadhwaniInstituteforArtiﬁcialIntelligence,Mumbai,India
Hype surrounds the promotions, aspirations, and notions of “artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for
social good” and its related permutations. These terms, as u sed in data science and
particularly in public discourse, are vague. Far from being irrelevant to data scientists or
practitioners of AI, the terms create the public notion of th e systems built. Through a
critical reﬂection, I explore how notions of AI for social go od are vague, offer insufﬁcient
criteria for judgement, and elide the externalities and str uctural interdependence of AI
systems.Instead,theﬁeldknownas“AIforsocialgood”isbe stunderstoodandreferred
to as “AI for not bad.”
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence, social good, not bad, et hics, data science, critical reﬂection
INTRODUCTION
Wehavebeguntoapplyartiﬁcialintelligence(AI)toareastha tclaimtointeractwith“socialgood.”
New academic centers and initiatives label themselves as su ch. Cornell and Berkeley work on
human-compatibleAI1andStanford’sHuman-CenteredAIinitiativeaims“toadvan ceAIresearch,
education, policy, and practice to improve the human condition .”2The University of Hong Kong
claims to work on “beneﬁcial AI.”3The University of Washington and the University of Chicago
oﬀer programs on “data science for social good,”4while Harvard and the University of Southern
Californiacallit“AIforsocialgood.”5
Theseeﬀortscarryoverintoconferences.AttheprestigiousA IconferencesNeurIPS,ICML,and
ICLR this past year, one group led workshops on “AI for social go od.”6Bloomberg News has held
an annual “Data for good exchange” conference since sponsori ng a “special event” at ACM KDD
in2014,ayearwheretheoverallconferencehadthetheme“Da taScienceforSocialGood,”deﬁned
as“applyingdatasciencetoimprovecivicandsocialoutcomes. ”7A2018talkatACMSIGIRused
sameterm( Ghani,2018 )andissimilartonon-academicconferenceslike“AIonasoc ialmission”8
and the “Rework AI for Good Summit.”9Philosophers, too, have asked, “For The Public Good?
ValuesandAccountabilityinAIandDataScience.”10
The world outside of universities has not been quiet. Google, Facebook, IBM, and Intel have
pageson“AIforsocialgood”11andMicrosofthasoneabout“AIforgood.”12AIresearchlabslike
1https://research.cornell.edu/research/human-compatible-ai;htt ps://humancompatible.ai
2https://hai.stanford.edu/
3https://caire.ust.hk/about/about-caire
4https://dssg.uchicago.edu/;https://escience.washingto n.edu/dssg/
5https://cyber.harvard.edu/story/2018-12/embracing-ai-soci al-good;https://www.cais.usc.edu/about/mission-statemen t/
6https://aiforsocialgood.github.io/2018; https://aiforso cialgood.github.io/icml2019/; https://aiforsocialgood.git hub.io/
iclr2019/
7https://www.bloomberg.com/company/d4gx/;https://www.kdd.or g/kdd2014/bloombergpress.html
8http://iaenmissionsociale.com/
9https://www.re-work.co/events/ai-for-good-summit-san-fran cisco-2019
10https://psa2018.philsci.org/en/74-program/program-schedule/program/1 24/psa2018-public-forum-for-the-public-good-
values-and-accountability-in-ai-and-data-science
11https://ai.google/social-good; https://fbaiforindia.splasht hat.com; https://www.ibm.com/watson/advantage-reports/ai-
social-good.html;https://www.intel.ai/ai4socialgood/
12https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-good

==== Page 2 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
AI2, WadhwaniAI, and MILA, respectively discuss AI for
“common good,” “social good,” and “humanity.”13Government
initiativesfromIndia,theU.S.,andChinadosimilarly14.
“Social good” shifts between social responsibility, societa l
impacts, society, common good, the good, development, and
ethics. Its proposals come in similar forms: calls for more dat a,
better data, broader application, more diverse voices, reﬂex ivity,
transparency, changes to funding priorities, more education ,
moreregulation—more.
The meaning of artiﬁcial intelligence shifts as well. It may
mean “algorithmic systems,” or “automated decision making ”
(Harris and Davenport, 2005 )—other times, it is synonymous
with “data science” or “big data.” It also could be the case
that AI does not truly exist and only refers to some yet-to-
comefuture( Walch,2018 )when,presumably,this“socialgood”
will actually be achieved. To others, that AI does not exist i s
misleading ( Schank, 1987; Bringsjord and Schimanski, 2003 ).
To such technical minds, AI would chieﬂy refer to a set of
techniques like machine learning, deep learning, active le arning,
orreinforcementlearning15.
“AIforthegood”de-politicizestheproblemsaddressed.Many
of these problems, like poverty, recidivism, and the distribu tion
of resources, are ones of institutional failure. Technolog y-based
approaches, when not aimed at the root of problems, divert
attentionfromtheproperrecourse:structuralchange.
In this paper, I oﬀer a critical perspective on the use of
language of AI practitioners like myself who, from practice to
theory, apply their work to some deﬁnition of “good.” I use
discursive analysis to explore the space between the notion of
such projects and their actuality. In so doing, I follow Green
(2018)in identifying AI systems as inherently political. Vague
terms are the wagons of a modern gold rush into the promised
riches of a mythic AI frontier. Like the California gold rush , this
expansionmaybringenvironmentaldegradation,concentrat ions
rather than distributions of wealth, and the oppression of
marginalizedpopulations.
It is not the primary aim of this paper to synthesize a
deﬁnition of AI, social good, or their combination. Chieﬂy,
I theorize about what the apparent use omits. Nonetheless, I
do oﬀer and argue for a preliminary deﬁnition of good in
section three. I use the term “data science” to loosely denote
AI systems. For clarity hereafter and unless otherwise note d,
“AI for the good” or “AI for social good” will encompass the
above uses as they exist today and will refer to the projection
of the computational discipline onto some deﬁnition of public
or societal good. AI itself means, and will be used to mean
in this paper, more than just the application of a statistical
model like logistic regression to a dataset: it will mean the
notionsassociatedwithsuchsystems,thespeciﬁcsofwhichI will
explorebelow.
This paper proceeds in four parts. First, I review relevant
literature. Second, I argue why “AI for the good,” as it is use d, is
13https://allenai.org/;http://wadhwaniai.org/;https://mila.q uebec/en/ai-society/
14https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/ﬁles/document_public ation/
NationalStrategy-for-AI-Discussion-Paper.pdf; https://www. whitehouse.gov/
ai/;http://www.baai.ac.cn/blog/beijing-ai-principles
15Schank (1987) andBringsjord and Schimanski (2003) allow that AI exists given
anarrowfunctionaldeﬁnitionandexplorethecomplicationsofintelli gence.inappropriate.Third,Iaddresspossiblecritiquesofmyapproach .
Fourth,Isuggestdirectionsforthosewhoaimtoworkin“AIf or
thegood.”
LITERATURE REVIEW
Many have already studied the components of “AI
for the good.” I review these attempts in four parts.
First, I establish the precedent for practitioners to
reﬂect on data science. Second, I summarize critiques
of AI systems and language. Third, I review promising
directions for the ﬁeld. Fourth, I present attempts AI
practitioners have made to improve elements of “AI for
thegood.”
First, following Agre (1997) andIliadis and Russo (2016) ,
I critically reﬂect on data science. I draw on science and
technologystudiesanddiscursiveanalysistobolstertheint egrity
of scientiﬁc knowledge through “socially robust knowledge”
(Nowotny,2003 ).IspeaktopractitionersofAIaswellastothose
whostudytheuseofsuchtools.
Second, existing works provide or analyze the meanings
beyond the underlying functioning of AI systems. There are
claims that these data-focused technologies might overcome
theory (Anderson, 2008 ) or transform modern life ( Mayer-
Schönberger and Cukier, 2013 ). In examining “the algorithm
as a thing and the algorithm as a word,” I choose words
rather than the content of techniques as the site of critique
(Beer, 2017 , p. 9). Words are crucial because “by deﬁnition,
a technological project is a ﬁction, since at the outset it does
not exist, and there is no way it can exist yet because it is
in the project phase” ( Latour and Porter, 1996 ). “AI for social
good” is one such project—if it already existed, why say so?
Even AI alone, “evokes a mythical, objective omnipotence, bu t
it is backed by real-world forces of money, power, and data”
(Powles, 2018 ). Here Beer”s dichotomy between the algorithm
as a word and as a physical manifestation becomes evident.
Associating other words with AI—like intelligent, good, or
society—creates notions of eﬃciency, neutrality, and progr ess,
like how many technological metaphors ( Stark and Hoﬀmann,
2019) “are myths that suﬀuse modern society” ( Dalton and
Thatcher,2014 )wieldingpower.
Inrebuttingcommonnotionsofneutralityfrompractitioner s,
Green focuses on the political nature of AI technologies. He
thoroughlyarguesthatdatascienceshouldbeseenofaspolit ical
and, responding to the frequent practitioner argument that “W e
should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good,” states,
“data science lacks any theories or discourse regarding wha t
“perfect” and “good” actually entail” ( Green, 2018 , p. 19). The
pro-technology argument takes “for granted that technology -
centric incremental reform is an appropriate strategy for soci al
progress”( Green,2018 ,p.19)withouthavingtoworryabouthow
(orwhether)thisactuallyoccurs.Thisbeliefthattheintro duction
ofatechnologyissuﬃcienttoyieldapositiveendisoften,lik eby
DaltonandThatcher(2014) ,calledtechnologicaldeterminism.
Third, there are promising approaches to deﬁne “good” with
regard to AI. Social work provides one application. Tambe
and Rice propose a union between social workers and AI
practitioners, because “AI can be used to improve society and
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

==== Page 3 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
ﬁghtsocialinjustice”( TambeandRice,2018 ,p.3).Patton,asocial
worker academic, ﬁnds footing for such a union and identiﬁes
ways AI practitioners can engage well—largely by privileging
thosewithwhomtheywork( Patton,2019 ).D’Ignazioaddstothis
byapplyingasocialworkcodeofethicstodatascientists,mak ing
explicit the principles to which data scientists seldom commit ,
like commitments to social justice and to the communities wi th
whomtheywork( D’Ignazio,2018 ).
Fourth, AI practitioners use terms like “AI for good”
seemingly without regard to their notional or metaphorical
value, but some engage with what might constitute “good.”
Practitioners, like Niño et al. (2017) , use “social good” as a
domainfromwhichtosolveproblems(“theﬁeldofsocialgood”)
(Niño et al., 2017 , p. 896). These projects are designed for
“serving the people who are in need globally, improving the
societyweliveinandpeople’sconditionswithinit”andmakeu p
application areas like health care, ecology, human rights, ch ild
welfare, etc. ( Niño et al., 2017 , p. 897). Niño et al. characterize
key areas in projects for “social good” in a framework includi ng
data ownership, ethics, sustainability, assessment, stake holder
engagement, etc. Nevertheless, they do not mention what mak es
a project constitute “social good” except as existing in one of
the application areas16, as described by Green”s and D’Ignazio”s
critiques. Using “social good” as a domain risks allowing th e
constituent projects to be seen of as good even if they fail
to meet principles espoused by others (like by having poor
data management practices), use no principles at all, or, more
importantly, meet a set of principles that actively violate the
principles of social justice (but retain the term “good”). I wi ll
henceforth refer to this understanding of “social good” as t he
domaindeﬁnition.
For example, Green questions the focus on crime prediction
systems at USC’s AI for Social Good initiative. He argues that
the initiative bolsters racist and oppressive policing instea d of
working to address the structural problems which lead to polic e
action (Green, 2018 ). Similarly, Palantir, a big data company
that produces crime prediction systems for clients like the
U.S. government, recently partnered with the United Nation’s
WorldFoodProgram(WFP)( WorldFoodProgram,2019 ).One
might argue that such an endeavor is “social good” given that
WFP is a not-for-proﬁt aimed at reducing poverty. Nonetheless ,
this partnership met a signiﬁcant outcry from groups like the
Responsible Data List ( Easterday, 2019 ). Clearly, these groups
interpret “social good” quite diﬀerently. Their disagreemen t
indicatestheinsuﬃciencyofthedomaindeﬁnition.
Other practitioners working in “AI for good” recognize
limitations of their eﬀorts. Researchers at IMB call for a shift to
produceopenAIplatformstomitigateone-oﬀprojects( Varshney
and Mojsilovic, 2019 ). Maxmen questions the worth of the Big
Data for Good project from a global telecommunications group
in its use of call detail records to respond to disasters becau se
governments might (mis)use the same data for surveillance
(Maxmen, 2019 ). Along the same lines, but largely not using
the term “AI for good,” recent work in fairness, accountabil ity,
16Theirframeworkdoesaddressa“lackofstandardizedgoodpracticest oleverage
thepowerofdata”( Niñoetal.,2017 ,p.897).andtransparency(FAT∗)hasaimedtodeﬁnebestprinciplesand
practices for AI systems. Like Greene et al. (2019) andLipton
(2016)note that such technical eﬀorts occur in too limited a
manner; they present reforms to structures that might better be
replaced.Selbstetal.expandonthesecritiquestonotehowFAT∗
as a ﬁeld misses the broader social context and might be better
servedfocusingonprocessandcollaboratingdeeplywithdoma in
experts(Selbstetal.,2019 ).
In an examination of the entire ﬁeld of AI, as opposed
to individual projects, Floridi et al. identify principles for the
creation of a “good AI society” regarding under-use, mis-use,
andover-use( Floridietal.,2018 ).Improvingonothers,theyuse
the term “AI for social good” just once and not in the context
of a discipline, but rather to identify the application of their
framework17. Notably, they focus on potential harms (like those
possible from a general artiﬁcial intelligence) on an equal, i f not
greater, degree than current harms (like threats to individu al
privacy). This corresponds to their inclusion of under-use of AI
as a risk. Given the current harms of AI, their “good AI societ y”
mayjustbea“goodbadsociety,”or,thebestoftheworst.
Prominent AI practitioners have acknowledged some of the
inherentrisksandambiguitiesofAItechnologies( Dietterichand
Horvitz, 2015; Horvitz and Mulligan, 2015 ), but they do so in
a way that appears to just pay lip service to, and thus avoid,
fundamental critiques. To paraphrase, they argue that the ris ks
of AI technologies are important, but that the risks can only b e
solved by further development of AI technologies. The utopic
notionofeconomicliberalismemploysthesamesortofrhetor ic:
because the free-market ideal has never been achieved, one c an
alwaysarguethatitsfailuresareduetoinsuﬃcientlyfreem arkets
(Polanyi, 2001 ). Likewise, data scientists, instead of addressing
critiques, focus on how to realize the ideal of dataﬁcation i n
society (Rouvroy et al., 2013 ); they reinforce a technological
determinism. In this way, the use of “AI for the good,” given th e
domain deﬁnition, appears to strategically avoid considerati on
that the risks of AI may be too great to consider any further
developmentofthetechnologies.
Many arguments for and notions of AI technologies sit
on lose ground. Critiques of these technologies highlight t heir
limitations, often in the sense of technological determinis m and
the avoidance of structural problems. A greater focus on thes e
political problems and an engagement with communities might
reorienttheﬁeld.Withtheseinmind,Iexaminewhether“AIfo r
good”isappropriatetoclassifytheﬁeld.
THE GOOD AND BAD OF “AI FOR GOOD”
When working for “the good” we must ask whichgood and
for whom . By committing to deﬁnitions of what constitutes
“good” and “bad” with regard to AI technologies, I examine
the appropriateness of labeling the ﬁeld as “AI for the good.”
I described in the literature review how the clearest criteri a
for “AI for good” is based on the domain with which an AI
17“This should involve a clear mission to advance AI for social good , to serve as a
uniquecounterbalancetoAItrendswithlessfocusonsocialopport unities”(Floridi
etal.,2018 ,p.704).
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

==== Page 4 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
technology interacts (the domain deﬁnition). We are meant t o
accept that because a project works on health, with not-for-
proﬁt organizations, in the space of climate change, on poverty -
reduction, etc., that it is “for social good.” In this sectio n, my
argumentisasfollows:
1. I provide an alternative deﬁnition of good according to the
capabilityapproach andsocialjustice.
2. Following 1, there are projects that are good, but that are n ot
labeledassuch.
3. Following 1, AI technologies carry inherently
badexternalities.
4. Following 3, in order to consider net goods, “AI for social
good”mustengagewithandbalanceoutthesebads.
First, I oﬀer a functional deﬁnition of “good” for an AI system
using the capability approach and social justice. Green(2018,
p. 4) cites ( Collins, 2002 ) in deﬁning a social justice project
as “an organized, long-term eﬀort to eliminate oppression and
empower individuals and groups within a just society” and
advocates for such projects in data science. Such a project can
work in complement with the capability approach, a theoretical
frameworkpredicatedoncontext-dependentindividualfreed om
and well-being as deﬁned by people’s capabilities or real
opportunities to act. This approach, particularly as evoked
in the areas of information and communication technologies
(Johnstone, 2007; Kleine, 2010 ), provides an operational lens for
AI technologies. I use the capability approach with a particular
focus on accountability and individual control over private
information to highlight voices from historically margina lized
communities Of course, one might disagree with my deﬁnition
on many grounds—mine is neither radical (e.g., anti-capital ism)
nor conservative (e.g., a defense of the status quo) enough
and remains vague. My point is not so much to advance this
deﬁnitionastoadvocatefordiscussionof whichdeﬁnitionismost
appropriatejustasGreen,Patton,andD’Ignaziodo.Suchafram e
will then allow us to analyze claims of “social good.” Suﬃce t o
say, a “good” intervention should be empowering (particularl y
of basic human functioning), address structural condition s of
oppression, and perform at least as well as interventions using
similaramountsofresources.
Forexample,imagineaprojectdesignedinpartnershipwitha
community in a speciﬁc West-African country with little acce ss
to health care. The project uses a computer vision application
on a smartphone to screen babies for birth defects. This projec t
might be viewed of as “good” given that it speciﬁcally works
with a marginalized community and increases their capabilit y
to access health care. Further, the community might not have
achieved the same access to care with a similarly-resource-
intensiveeﬀorttotrainmoremedicalprofessionals.
Second, using the deﬁnition of good from 1, there are
projects which do not use the label “AI for the good” that
might be classiﬁed as such. For example, consider recent
eﬀorts in federated learning to decentralize and distribute the
computations constituent in the training of a model ( McMahan
and Ramage, 2017 ). These eﬀorts address some concerns about
theprivacyofuserdata:suchdatamightnotneedtobecollect ed
inthesamecentralizedmanner.Furthermore,onecanimagin eafully-speciﬁedfederatedlearningprojectthatmeetsthecrit eriaof
1. Despite this, the concept of federated learning does not car ry
themonikersocialgood.
Third,inherentlybadexternalitiesarisewithAItechnologi es.
Recent work has shown that model training creates a signiﬁcan t
carbon footprint ( Strubell et al., 2019 ). In order to create an AI
system,onemustemploymanyengineersandscientistsandset-
up infrastructure, all of which are costly—perhaps more so than
otherinterventions. Evenmore signiﬁcantly,enormous inv isible
and unacknowledged labor goes into labeling data for traini ng
purposes, much of which occurs under potentially or explicitly
exploitativeconditions( GrayandSuri,2019 ).Dataﬁcationnames
the creep to record more of life in a manner that can be
processedbyacomputer( Mayer-SchönbergerandCukier,2013 ).
It undergirds the bloom in AI—models need data to combine
with human labels—but brings unknown harms. Data collected
for what 1 day appears good may be used later for what may not
accordthesamedeﬁnitionofgood.Forexample,datatoimprove
resource distribution to parolees were later used to create a
model to gauge how likely oﬀenders were to recommit crimes
(AngwinandLarson,2016 ).Dataﬁcationworksatoddswithuser
privacyasseenwithconsumerhacks,behavioraladvertising, and
governmentsurveillance( Zuboﬀ,2019 ).
“AI for good” distracts from the larger world in which AI
exists.Public visibility does not acknowledge the interdependent
and exploitative nature of the technologies. Labeling them a s
“for the good” positions them as somehow intrinsically bette r
than the social systems on which they depend. For example,
tech companies implement systems they acquire from start-ups
createdfromacademicresearch.Mostresearchpaperscomefrom
graduate students whose long working hours are enabled by th e
labor of custodial staﬀ and food service employees. In order t o
respondtoquestionsontheappropriatenessofalongshort-term
memoryorahiddenMarkovmodelonemustnotjustunderstand
their error rates, but also how to calculate derivatives, en gage in
basic math, and use language—skills learned through years of ,
for most, public schooling and from hundreds of teachers. AI
modelsrunonmachinesmadethousandsofmilesawaybypeople
practitioners will never meet. These machines draw electrici ty
producedbyfossilfuelworkersandwhichisdistributedthrou gh
a grid maintained by scores more. The startups themselves, or
the tech companies that buy up startups to “scale” their system s,
then farm out the process of data labeling to vast networks of
invisibleworkers( GrayandSuri,2019 ).Toevenhavethecapacity
to build an AI system requires what Anderson describes of as
“joint-production” ( Anderson, 1999 , p. 321). Those involved in
AI systems are not just the visible actors of engineers, scie ntists,
researchers, program managers, marketers, negotiators, la wyers,
orendusers.Thesetermstoopreciselyassignagency,ability ,and
intentionality to what is best described as panning the sedim ent
ofstreamsofdata.
The point is not to decry actors who lay claim to terms like
“AIforthegood”somuchastoquestionhowtheiractionsreﬂe ct
ontheirstatedgoals.Thosewhousesuchtermsmayevenbeliev e
thattheyaresavingtheﬁeldofAIfrom“notgood”domains,that
theirresearchareasarethemoreappropriatedirection.Given the
overheads and externalities of AI, it is not clear there is suc h a
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

==== Page 5 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
needatalltofocus on“notgood” domains.Evenwithcriteria to
label AI systems as “good,” the inherent interdependence rai ses
questionsaboutwhetherAIisinherently“bad”andwhethera ny
domaincanredeemthesystemofproduction.
“AI for the good” is strategically vague. Left out by the use of
“AI for the good” is the intensely political nature of any one
of the areas associated with the term (as in domain deﬁnition ).
Recall the USC AI for Social Good project on policing which
Green named as oppressive. Indeed, according to the deﬁnition
ofgoodfrom1,theUSCprojectwouldbebad—itdoesprivilege
community voices and reinforces forms of oppressive policing
(whichrestrictpeoples”capabilities).
Furthermore,non-proﬁtorganizations,whichatleastsomeA I
practitionersassociatewiththeiruseof“socialgood,”18mightnot
even desire such technology. For example, for these non-proﬁt s,
technical contributions might be better spent on upgrading ol d
systems(likefromWindowsXP)ratherthanspendingresource s
togetdatainthe“right”formatforbuildingAIsystems.
Fourth,thisallsuggeststhattobeconsidered“good,”proje cts
must commit to a deﬁnition of social good and then show that,
evenafterconsideringnegativeexternalities,onthebala ncethey
still achieve good. On the whole, then, projects might better
considerthedegreetowhichtheyare“notbad.”
CRITIQUES
Inthissection,Iconsiderfourcritiquesofmyargument.
First, detractors might chafe at a focus on the words of AI.
Theymightarguethatfocusingonwordsignoresthesubstanc eof
technologieswhichwouldactuallybringabout“good.”Ofco urse
thesubstanceofthetechnologiesisimportant,butinthispape rI
focusontheuseoflanguage,which,asImakethecaseforinth e
introduction,isalsoimportant.
Second,onemightpositthatevenif“AIforthegood”isvague,
theuseofsuchtermsdoesnoharm.Whiletheclaimofvaguenes s
hasbeenusedtodecrythediﬃcultyofregulatingAItechnolo gies
(Scherer,2015 ),weusevaguetermslikeenergyormanufacturing
and are able to operationalize them ( Danaher, 2018 ). In this
sense, the absence of a deﬁnition would be permissible so long
as we “know it when we see it.” This is not the case with
claims of “social good.” Such a response is strategically vag ue; it
elides the externalities inherent to AI technologies and us es the
weak criteria of the domain deﬁnition. Harm comes in allowin g
ourselvestofeelgoodwhileperpetuatingoppressivesystemsan d
whenmisallocatingresources.
Third, a reader might say that “social good” is just marketin g
speak—not what practitioners say. That may be so, but the
term appears from research to implementation: in governments,
in funding agencies, in research papers, at conferences, in
companies, and in public discourse. Even if the majority of the
use of “AI for good” occurs externally to AI practitioners, it is
through these routes that the notions of AI manifest. That is ,
practitionersmustcareabouthowtheirworkisusedandnotju st
whatitis.
18https://www.research.ibm.com/science-for-social-good/Still, one might argue that, fourth, despite its ﬂaws, “social
good” is a relevant distinction. Even in the absence of a more
robust criteria, there is a diﬀerence between machine learni ng
researchers choosing to work on credit card companies being
defrauded vs. those working on disease modeling. I suggest
that there is a better approach than to ignore the ambiguity,
the insuﬃcient criteria, and the externalities of AI. Instea d of
banishing“AIforgood,”wemightratherrenametheﬁeld.
SUGGESTIONS
In this critique of the use of language, I also oﬀer a suggestion .
Namely,weshouldstoplabelingprojectsas“forsocialgood” and
instead use the term “for not bad.” The latter more accuratel y
evokestheneedtoavoidtheinherentbadtraitsofAItechnol ogies
without falling into the traps involved with vague claims to
“socialgood.”
Practitioners who would still like to use terms like “AI
for the good” should read literature that studies the criter ia
for evaluation of social change projects and then apply those
criteria.Thisincludesworkinthehealthsciences,social sciences,
development studies, economics, and more. In the scope of
technologicalchangesforimplementingtheoriesofajustsoc iety,
the literature in Information and Communication Technolog ies
for Development provides some examples. Conferences in
this space include the ACM Conference on Computing and
Sustainable Societies (COMPASS) and the Workshop on
ComputingWithinLimits19.Thejournal InformationTechnology
andInternationalDevelopment focusesonthebackgroundtheory
ofsuchwork20.
Withsuchabackground,practitionersmaybebetterprepared
to deﬁne and measure criteria of “good” to expand on my
attempt above. More work to quantify the externalities of AI
projects[buildingonexampleslike Maxmen(2019) andStrubell
et al. (2019) ] will then ﬁll out such criteria. This might include
comparable metrics on cost, energy usage, and potential for
futuremisuseofdata.
Sustained interaction with those in communities that are to
be “innovated” will further concretize what constitutes “goo d.”
Tambe and Rice (2018) andPatton (2019) demonstrate how this
can be done with social work. Action research, like as relate d to
human computer interaction by Hayes (2011) , provides another
lens for community interaction in terms of accountability a nd
shared credit for results. Many “social good” initiatives a lready
discussafocusonpartnerships21—theseshouldbeexpandedand
madesuretorecognize,ifnotattempttoaddress,theunderly ing
structuralissues.
“AIfornotbad”avoidssomeoftheproblemsof“AIforgood.”
It more honestly describes the current vagueness and centers
the externalities. Practitioners unwilling or unable to co mmit to
explicitnotionsofgoodshouldconsideradoptingit.
19https://acmcompass.org/;http://computingwithinlimits.org
20https://itidjournal.org/index.php/itid
21For example, WadhwaniAI partners with India’s Central Tuberculosi s Division
https://wadhwaniai.org
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

==== Page 6 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
CONCLUSION
“AI for the good” is vague, lacks suﬃcient criteria, omits th e
externalities of AI, and elides the structural interdepende nce of
AI projects. “AI for the good” may really be AI for ﬂashy slide
decks, AI for diﬃcult-to-maintain and highly interdependen t
computational systems, AI for new statistical methods, or (a t
best) AI for public health analyses that may end up saving live s.
In this paper, I raise concerns about the presentation of the “AI
frontier” as beneﬁcent. Following Green, I ask that the ﬁeld “ AI
for the good” recognize that, as it is now, it really constitu tes
“AIfornotbad.”Practitionerswouldmorehonestlyembracet his
labelorelsedotheworknecessarytolegitimatelyclaimgood .
In this work, I advocate for a more honest discipline.
I ask those out there who interact with AI at any level—
the new student wondering where to put her time, the
executive of a company—to consider what their use of
languageignores.
“AI for social good” speaks to the desire of many of
practitioners to share what opportunities they have. It sounds
nice. It imagines a world of lucrative careers optimized to be tter
humanity. The world is not so simple. Perhaps it is enoughthat society, as bolstered by science, has tended toward lon ger
lives, more food, and less violence ( Pinker, 2019; Rosling et al.,
2019), but extrapolation will not alone resolve problems. AI
practitioners, like myself, are part of the prospecting of scienc e
fromwhichwehopeforgold,butinwhichwillwelikelyﬁndjust
sand—and perhaps leave in our tailings environmental damage
andlabordisplacement.Lestthatbeso,wemustbehonestabout
whatwearedoingandwhatwemightdobetter.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JM contributed everything to this paper and is accountable for
thecontentofthework.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Johan Michalove and Dallas Card for
helpingadvisethispaperintolife.ManythankstoMominMalik
and Katja Mayer for organizing the workshop on critical data
science and editing this paper. I would also like to thank the
reviewersforprovidingmemuchneededfeedback.
REFERENCES
Agre, P. E. (1997). “Towards a critical technical practice: Lesso ns learned from
trying to reform AI,” in Social Science, Technical Systems, and Cooperative
Work:BeyondtheGreatDivide ,edsG.C.Bowker,S.L.Star,W.Turner,andL.
Gasser(Mahwah,NJ:LawrenceErlbaumAssociates),131–158.Av ailableonline
at: https://web.archive.org/web/20040203070641/http:// polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/
pagre/critical.html
Anderson,C.(2008,June). TheEndofTheory:TheDataDelugeMakestheScientiﬁc
Method Obsolete. Wired. Retrieved from: https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-
theory/
Anderson, E. S. (1999). What is the point of equality? Ethics109, 287–337.
doi:10.1086/233897
Angwin, J., and Larson, J. (2016). Machine Bias. ProPublica. Retrieved
from: https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-asse ssments-in-
criminal-sentencing
Beer, D. (2017). The social power of algorithms. Inform. Commun. Soc. 20, 1–13.
doi:10.1080/1369118X.2016.1216147
Bringsjord, S., and Schimanski, B. (2003). “What is artiﬁcial in telligence?
PsychometricAIasananswer,”in IJCAI’03Proceedingsofthe18thInternational
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (San Francisco, CA: Morgan
KaufmannPublishersInc.).
Collins, P. H. (2002). Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness,
and the Politics of Empowerment . New York, NY: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203900055
Dalton, C., and Thatcher, J. (2014). What Does a Critical Data Studies Look Like,
andWhyDoWeCare?SevenPointsforaCriticalApproachto‘big data.’Society
and Space, 29. Retrieved from: https://societyandspace.org/201 4/05/12/what-
does-a-critical-data-studies-look-like-and-why-do-we-ca re-craig-dalton-
and-jim-thatcher/
Danaher, J. (2018, September 27). Is Eﬀective Regulation of AI Possible?
Eight Potential Regulatory Problems . Retrieved from Institute for Ethics
and Emerging Technologies website: https://ieet.org/index. php/IEET2/more/
Danaher20180927(accessedJune6,2019).
Dietterich, T. G., and Horvitz, E. J. (2015). Rise of concerns ab out AI: reﬂections
anddirections. Commun.ACM 58,38–40.doi:10.1145/2770869
D’Ignazio, C. (2018, September 2). How Might Ethical Data Principles Borrow
from Social Work? Retrieved from Medium website: https://medium.com/@kanarinka/how-might-ethical-data-principles-borrow-from-socia l-work-
3162f08f0353(accessedJuly1,2019).
Easterday, J. (2019, February 8). Open Letter to WFP Re: Palantir Agreement .
Retrieved from https://responsibledata.io/2019/02/08/open-let ter-to-wfp-re-
palantir-agreement/
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum,
V., et al. (2018). AI4People—an ethical framework for a good ai soci ety:
opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds Mach. 28,
689–707.doi:10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5
Ghani, R. (2018). “Data science for social good and public policy : examples,
opportunities,andchallenges,”in The41stInternationalACMSIGIRConference
onResearchandDevelopmentinInformationRetrieval (NewYork,NY:ACM),
3–3.doi:10.1145/3209978.3210231
Gray, M. L., and Suri, S. (2019). Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon Valley from
BuildingaNewGlobalUnderclass. Boston,MA:HoughtonMiﬄinHarcourt.
Green, B. (2018). Data science as political action: grounding da ta science in a
politicsofjustice. ArXiv[preprint] arxiv:1811.03435[Cs].
Greene, D., Hoﬀmann, A. L., and Stark, L. (2019). “Better, nicer, clearer, fairer:
a critical assessment of the movement for ethical artiﬁcial intelli gence and
machine learning,” in Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(Maui,HI).doi:10.24251/HICSS.2019.258
Harris, J. G., and Davenport, T. H. (2005). Automated decision makin g comes of
age.MITSloanManagementReview 2–10.
Hayes, G. R. (2011). The relationship of action research to human -
computer interaction. ACM Transac. Comput. Hum. Interact. 18, 1–20.
doi:10.1145/1993060.1993065
Horvitz, E., and Mulligan, D. (2015). Data, privacy, and the greate r good.Science
349,253–255.doi:10.1126/science.aac4520
Iliadis,A.,andRusso,F.(2016).Criticaldatastudies:anin troduction. BigDataSoc.
3:2053951716674238.doi:10.1177/2053951716674238
Johnstone, J. (2007). Technology as empowerment: a capability approac h to
computer ethics. Ethics Inform. Tech. 9, 73–87. doi: 10.1007/s10676-006-
9127-x
Kleine, D. (2010). ICT4WHAT?—Using the choice framework to operat ionalise
the capability approach to development. J. Int. Dev. 22, 674–692.
doi:10.1002/jid.1719
Latour, B., and Porter, C. (1996). Aramis, or, The Love of Technology , Vol. 1996.
Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

==== Page 7 ====
Moore AI for Not Bad
Lipton, Z. C. (2016). The mythos of model interpretability. ArXiv [preprint]
arxiv:1606.03490[Cs,Stat].
Maxmen, A. (2019). Can tracking people through phone-call data
improve lives? Nature 569, 614–617. doi: 10.1038/d41586-019-0
1679-5
Mayer-Schönberger, V., and Cukier, K. (2013). Big Data: A Revolution That Will
Transform How We Live, Work, And Think . Boston, MA: Houghton Miﬄin
Harcourt.
McMahan, B., and Ramage, D. (2017, April 6). Federated Learning: Collaborative
Machine Learning without Centralized Training Data. Retrieved from
GoogleAIBlogwebsite:http://ai.googleblog.com/2017/04/fede rated-learning-
collaborative.html(accessedJune22,2019).
Niño,M.,Zicari,R.V.,Ivanov,T.,Hee,K.,Mushtaq,N.,Rosse lli,M.,etal.(2017).
Data projects for “social good”: challenges and opportunities. Int. J. Hum. Soc.
Sci.11,1094–1104.doi:10.5281/zenodo.1130095
Nowotny, H. (2003). Democratising expertise and socially robust kno wledge.Sci.
Pub.Policy 30,151–156.doi:10.3152/147154303781780461
Patton, D. U. (2019, March 24). Why AI Needs Social Workers and Non-Tech
Folks. Retrieved from Noteworthy website: https://blog.usejournal.co m/why-
ai-needs-social-workers-and-non-tech-folks-2b04ec45848 1 (accessed July
1,2019).
Pinker, S. (2019). Enlightenment Now: The Case for Reason, Science, Humanism,
andProgress .London:PenguinBooks.
Polanyi, K. (2001). The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origin s
ofOurTime,Vol.45 .Boston,MA:BeaconPress.
Powles,J.(2018,December7). TheSeductiveDiversionof‘Solving’BiasinArtiﬁcial
Intelligence. RetrievedfromMediumwebsite:https://medium.com/s/story/the-
seductive-diversion-of-solving-bias-in-artiﬁcial-intelli gence-890df5e5ef53
(accessedMarch20,2019).
Rosling, H., Rosling, O., and Rosling Rönnlund, A. (2019). Factfulness . London:
Sceptre.
Rouvroy,A.,Berns,T.,andLibbrecht,E.(2013).Algorithmicgove rnmentalityand
prospectsofemancipation. Réseaux177,163–196.doi:10.3917/res.177.0163
Schank,R.C.(1987).WhatisAI,anyway? AIMagazine 8,59–59.
Scherer, M. U. (2015). Regulating artiﬁcial intelligence systems: risks,
challenges, competencies, and strategies. Harvard J. Law Tech. 29, 353–398.
doi:10.2139/ssrn.2609777Selbst, A. D., Boyd, D., Friedler, S. A., Venkatasubramanian, S., and Vertesi, J.
(2019). “Fairness and abstraction in sociotechnical systems, ” inProceedings
of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transpare ncy - FAT∗’19
(Atlanta,GA).doi:10.1145/3287560.3287598
Stark, L., and Hoﬀmann, A. L. (2019). Data is the new what? Popular
metaphors and professional ethics in emerging data culture . J. Cult. Analyt .
doi:10.22148/16.036.[Epubaheadofprint].
Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and McCallum, A. (2019). Energy and
policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. ArXiv [preprint]
arxiv:1906.02243[Cs].
Tambe,M.,andRice,E.(2018). ArtiﬁcialIntelligenceandSocialWork .Cambridge:
UniversityPress.
Varshney,K.R.,andMojsilovic,A.(2019).Openplatformsforartiﬁ cialintelligence
forsocialgood:commonpatternsasapathwaytotrueimpact. ArXiv[preprint]
arxiv:1905.11519[Cs].
Walch, K. (2018, November 1). Artiﬁcial Intelligence Is Not A Technology.
Forbes.Retrievedfrom:https://www.forbes.com/sites/cognit iveworld/2018/11/
01/artiﬁcial-intelligence-is-not-a-technology/
WorldFoodProgram(2019). PalantirandWFPPartnertoHelpTransformGlobal
Humanitarian Delivery . Retrieved from: https://www1.wfp.org/news/palantir-
and-wfp-partner-help-transform-global-humanitarian-delivery
Zuboﬀ,S.(2019). TheAgeofSurveillanceCapitalism:TheFightfortheFuturea tthe
NewFrontierofPower. NewYork,NY:PublicAﬀairs.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
beconstruedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.
The handling editor and reviewer HL declared their involvement as co -editors in
theResearchTopic,andconﬁrmtheabsenceofanyothercollaborat ion.
Copyright © 2019 Moore. This is an open-access article distribut ed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use , distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the orig inal author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original public ation in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeset erms.
Frontiers in Big Data | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 32

