==== Page 1 ====
SCIENCE CHINA
Information Sciences
.INVITED REVIEW .
AI for 5G: Research Directions and Paradigms
Xiaohu YOU1, Chuan ZHANG1*, Xiaosi TAN1, Shi JIN1& Hequan WU2
1National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096 , China;
2Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing 100088 , China
Abstract The 5th wireless communication (5G) techniques not only full the requirement of 1 ;000 times
increase of internet trac in the next decade, but also oer the underlying technologies to the entire in-
dustry and ecology for internet of everything. Compared to the existing mobile communication techniques,
5G techniques are more-widely applicable and the corresponding system design is more complicated. The
resurgence of articial intelligence (AI) techniques oers as an alternative option, which is possibly superior
over traditional ideas and performance. Typical and potential research directions to which AI can make
promising contributions need to be identied, evaluated, and investigated. To this end, this overview paper
rst combs through several promising research directions of AI for 5G, based on the understanding of the
5G key techniques. Also, the paper devotes itself in providing design paradigms including 5G network opti-
mization, optimal resource allocation, 5G physical layer unied acceleration, end-to-end physical layer joint
optimization, and so on.
Keywords 5G mobile communication, AI techniques, network optimization, resource allocation, unied
acceleration, end-to-end joint optimization
Citation YOU X H, ZHANG C, TAN X S, et al. AI for 5G: Research Directions and Paradigms. Sci China Inf
Sci, for review
1 Introduction
The fth generation mobile network (5G) applies the next generation of mobile telecommunication stan-
dards which targets at the needs of 2020 and beyond. It aims at providing a complete wireless com-
munication system with diverse applications. Specically, 5G is going to be responsible for supporting
three generic services, which are classied as enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), massive machine-type
communications (mMTC) and ultra-reliable and low-latency communications (URLLC) (also referred
to as mission-critical communications). These applications suggest new performance criteria for latency,
reliability, connection and capacity density, system spectral eciency, energy eciency and peak through-
put that need to be addressed with the 5G technology. To meet these criteria, ongoing researches are
conducted in many areas, mainly focused on key technologies including massive multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO), new radio access technology (RAT), heterogeneous ultra-densication networks (UDN),
channel coding and decoding (e.g. polar codes) and mmWave access [1]. Also, 5G networks will inevitably
be heterogeneous, with multiple modes and devices involved through one unied air interface tailored for
specic applications. Hence, architectures as the dense HetNet are involved and 5G systems are going to
be virtualised and implemented over cloud data centers. Network slicing will be a major feature of a 5G
network, as will the use of a new air interface designed to dynamically optimize the allocation of network
resources and utilize the spectrum eciently.
* Corresponding author (email: chzhang@seu.edu.cn)arXiv:1807.08671v1  [eess.SP]  23 Jul 2018

==== Page 2 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 2
The 5G technology standards are in development, getting complete and mature [2, 3]. In December
2017, 3G Partnership Project (3GPP) ocially announced the new standards for 5G New Radio (NR)
which include supports for 5G Non-Standalone architecture (NSA) and eMBB [4]. On June 14, 2018,
3GPP formally completed the Standalone (SA) version of the 5G NR standard, marking a long-awaited
target date for 5G standardization [5]. These announced standards eectively set the stage to launch
full-scale and cost-eective development of 5G networks. Compared to the current 4G networks, 5G
NR: (1) enhances the MIMO systems with the massive MIMO technology; (2) makes completion to the
time slot structure and resource block (RB) allocation of the orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM), proposing a more exible air interface; (3) will introduce the non-orthogonal multiple access
(NOMA) to support the Internet of Things (IoT) in the near future; (4) follows the previous distributed
antenna systems [6], splits the wireless functions into distributed units (DU) and central units (CU) and
applies network virtualization and network slicing techniques based on cloud computing.
Overall, 5G networks will tailor the provisioning mechanisms for more applications and services, hence
is more challenging with the complicated conguration issues and evolving service requirements. Before
5G, researches of communication systems mainly aim at satisfactory data transmission rate and supportive
mobility management. In the 5G era, the communication systems will gain the abilities to interact with
the environment, and the targets are expanded to joint optimizations of ever-increasing numbers of key
performance indicators (KPIs) including latency, reliability, connection density, user experience, etc [7].
Meanwhile, new features like the dynamic air interface, virtualised network and network slicing introduce
complicated system design and optimization requirements as long as challenges for network operation and
maintenance. Fortunately, such problems falls into the eld of articial intelligence (AI) which provides
brand new concepts and possibilities beyond traditional methods, hence has recently regained attention
in the eld of communications in both academia and industry.
AI is dedicated to allowing machines and systems to function with intelligence similar to humans. The
eld of AI research was born in 1950s, which experienced ups and downs, and is revived in recent years
due to the rapid development of modern computing and data storage technologies. The general problem
of simulating intelligence contains sub-problems like reasoning, inference, data tting, clustering and
optimization, which involves approaches including genetic algorithms [8] and articial neural networks
(ANN) [9, 11]. Specically, AI learning techniques have constructed a universal framework for various
problems and have made tremendous progress, becoming the state of the art in dierent elds.
AI learning tasks are typically classied into two broad categories, supervised and unsupervised learn-
ing, depending on whether labels of the training data are available to the learning system. And another
learning approach, reinforcement learning, is not exactly supervised neither unsupervised, hence can be
listed in a new category.
Supervised learning: Sample data pairs of inputs and desired outputs are feed into the computer,
and the goal is to learn a general function that relates the inputs to the outputs and further detects the
unknown outputs of the future inputs. One typical example of supervised learning is illustrated in Figure
1, in which labeled data pairs are feed in a multi-layer deep neural network (DNN) to train the weights
between the nodes in the DNN. The training is carried out oine, and after convergence, the trained
DNN will be ready for recognition and inference of new inputs.
Unsupervised learning: In unsupervised learning, no labels are given to the learning algorithm
and structure in its input should be found on its own. Self-organizing map (SOM) is an example that is
trained using unsupervised learning. In SOM, unlabeled data are feed in to a neural network to produce
a low-dimensional (usually two-dimensional), discretized representation of the input space of the training
samples, called a map (as illustrated in Figure 2) , and is therefore a method to do dimensionality
reduction.
Reinforcement learning: This technique is based on alternative interaction between \Agent" and
\Environment" and the process is illustrated in Figure 3. The \Agent" will perform certain action and
as a result of this action his state will change which leads to either a reward or a penalty. The Agent
will then decide the next action based on this result. By iterating through action and reward/penalty
process, Agent learns the Environment.

==== Page 3 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 3

 Hidden Layers 
 y Input Layer Output Layer 
,i j W1
,i j W2
,i j W3
,argmin || ||
/g32/g16/g166
k
i j N
i i 
WnD Y 2
1
Input Data 
, , , , /g32
, ,nX n N 12 
Desired Data 
, , , , /g32
,,
, ,nD n N 12 
a
NNNNOutput Data 
, , , , /g32
,
,nY n N 12 
N
N
Figure 1 Example of supervised learning: learning in deep neural networks.
Figure 2 Example of unsupervised learning: self organizing map.
Popular learning methods in AI learning problems includes:
Backpropagation (BP): Backpropagation is a method used in ANN which is in the category of
gradient descent [9]. It iteratively calculates gradient of the dened loss function with respect to the
weights in the ANN to nally make the output of the ANN close to the known training label. The
dynamic learning rate optimization and acceleration of the BP learning are introduced in the author's
previous works [10,11]. In [12], local minima of the BP surface is discussed. Recently, BP is commonly
used to train deep neural networks (DNN), a term referring to neural networks with more than one
hidden layer. For example, convolutional neural network (CNN) is a class of feed-forward DNN, which
has multiple hidden layers including convolutional layer, pooling layer, fully-connected layer and ReLU
layer. CNN can be trained with the BP method eciently, especially in the elds of image and voice
recognition.
Q-learning: The Q-learning algorithm is also referred to as Bellman's algorithm [13], which is a
classical algorithm for the reinforcement learning. In this algorithm, a function (Q function) is dened
to evaluate the actions of the \Agent" based on the current \Environment" and output the result in the
form of award or penalty. At a certain step, all the possible actions of the \Agent" will be evaluated by
the Q function, and the action with the maximum award in the current \Environment" will be selected as
the next step and will be actually carried out. Bellman proposed a Bellman equation which is a recursive
expression that relates the Q functions of consecutive time steps. Bellman equation basically allows us
to iteratively update and approximate the Q function through online temporal dierence learning. More
details can be found in [14].

==== Page 4 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 4
Observation 
Environment 
Most Favorite 
Action 
Q-Function Updating  
Agent Reward/Penalty 
Evaluation Possible 
Action Set 
Unsupervised 
learning: Q-learning 
Q-
Function Updating
Reward /
Penalty 
Evaluation
Possible 
Action Set
Figure 3 Example of reinforcement learning: Q-learning.
2 Research directions for AI in 5G
As a universal intelligent problem-solving technique, AI can be broadly applied in the design, conguration
and optimization for the 5G networks. Specically, AI is relevant to three main technical problems in
5G:
Combinatorial optimization: One typical example of the combinatorial optimization problem in
5G NR is the network resource allocation. Given a resource-limited network, an optimized scheme should
be gured out to allocate resources to dierent users who share the network such that the utilization
of the resource achieves maximum eciency. As the application of the HetNet architecture in 5G NR
with features like network virtualization, network slicing and self-organizing networks (SON), the related
network resource allocation problems are becoming more complicated, which requires more eective
solutions.
Detection: The design of the communication receiver is an example of the detection problem. An
optimized receiver is able to recover the transmitted messages based on the received signals, achieving
minimized detection error rate. Detection will be challenging in 5G within the massive MIMO framework.
Estimation: The typical example is the channel estimation problem. 5G requires accurate estima-
tion of the channel state information (CSI) to achieve communications in spatially correlated channels
of massive MIMO. The popular approach is the so-called training sequence (or pilot sequence), where a
known signal is transmitted and the CSI is estimated using the combined knowledge of the transmitted
and received signal.
Many researches have already been done for the application of AI in 5G as in literatures [15{23].
However, due to the limitations of both the communication systems and AI, some of the applications
may be restricted. Firstly, after years of research and test, conventional methods have shown their abilities
to handle the communication systems. A complete framework with conventional techniques have been
formed, which is eective, mature and easy to implement for real world scenarios. Secondly, the capacity
of a communication system is constrained with certain upper bounds (e.g., the Shannon limit), and some
of the well-designed methods can reach near-optimal performance suering negligible loss with respect to
the capacity bound. For example, in [24] a transmitter optimization method for MIMO is proposed based
on an iterative water-lling algorithm, which closely achieves near-Shannon performance in the general
jointly correlated MIMO channels. This kind of methods will not be over-performed by even the most-
advanced AI technique. Moreover, there're still obstacles to apply AI learning in real-world problems
due to the convergence issues for training. Careful checks should be done to make sure the optimal

==== Page 5 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 5
performance can be \learned" with AI in every specic problem in the communication system. Finally,
AI algorithms usually bring large computational complexity, which makes them not that competitive
compared to conventional methods if the performance improvement is minor.
With all these limitations, nonetheless, AI still has great potentials and prospects in the communication
system of the 5G era. As introduced above, 5G brings complicated conguration issues and evolving
service requirements, resulting in new problems that are hard to be modeled, solved or implemented
within the current conventional framework. Hence, new opportunities as long as challenges are brought
by 5G for AI techniques. From all the challenging problems in 5G, typical and potential research directions
to which AI can make promising contributions need to be identied, evaluated, and investigated.
In this paper, we summarize the potential application directions for AI in 5G in four main categories:
(1) Problems dicult to model; (2) Problems dicult to solve; (3) Uniform implementation; (4) Joint
optimization and detection. In the following analysis and examples, we will see that for problems in
(1) and (2), conventional methods are barely eective and AI techniques are expected to be promising;
on the other hand, for (3) and (4), the potential of AI is problem-dependent compared to conventional
methods, and careful investigation should be done to identify if AI is benecial.
Problems dicult to model: The network optimization problems in communication systems is
overall a kind of technical problem that is hard to model, which includes typical issues such as the net-
work coverage, interference, neighboring cell selection and handover. Current solutions mostly depend on
experience of the engineers. For 5G NR scenarios, these problems are more challenging due to the com-
plicated network structures and large number of KPIs. Applications of new features like massive MIMO
beamforming [25] are associated with high-dimensional optimization parameters and the optimization
problem itself is dicult to model. Also, 5G NR involves multiple KPIs including peak data rate, spec-
tral eciency, latency, connection density, quality of experience (QoE) and so on. These KPIs should
be jointly optimized even if some of them contradicts with each other [7]. In these situations, an overall
optimization model cannot be achieved with conventional methods and AI techniques are expected to be
able to handle them.
Problems dicult to solve: Network resource allocation is a key issue in 5G NR [25,26], which
includes specic issues in inter-cell resource block allocation, orthogonal pilot resource allocation, beam-
forming resource allocation, massive MIMO user clustering and resource pool deployment in virtualized
networks. The network resource allocation aims at maximizing the throughput of the network while
balancing the service rate. It's mostly a NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, and the com-
putational complexity to solve this kind of problem increases exponentially as the size of the systems.
Traditional solutions use static partition of the network to cut down the computational cost for a sub-
optimal solution. Nowadays, with the assistance of modern computing technologies, AI will be an new
eective solution for these problems.
Uniform implementation: Conventional methods are designed in a divide-and-conquer manner
for some function blocks in 5G NR. For example, the physical layer in 5G NR consists of a series of signal
processing blocks such as multiuser MIMO space-time processing, NOMA signal detection and encoding
and decoding for LDPC or polar codes. Researchers have attempted to optimize the algorithms and
implementations of each processing module and achieved success in practice. However, the ecient and
scalable implementation of the entire communication system is lacking, with guaranteed performance. It
is noted that, AI techniques are supposed to be capable for handling each of the modules [15{23]. This
inspires us to further develop a uniform AI-based implementation which works jointly for all the key
modules in the 5G NR physical layer [27]. By unifying the modules with AI methods in both algorithm
and hardware, the design, conguration and implementation of the physical layer communications will
be simpler, faster, more economical and more ecient.
Joint optimization and detection: An intuitive idea for applying AI in 5G is to simply substitute
the conventional modules of transmitters and receivers by ANN. However, the capacity of the channels is
bounded by the Shannon limit and the improvement by using ANN is constricted. Also as discussed above,
the complexity and the convergence of training should be carefully examined in this area. Compared
to this intuitive method, AI is more potential in a bigger picture of the cross-layer joint optimization

==== Page 6 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 6
problem which cannot be solved eciently with conventional methods [28]. Typical examples include
the joint optimizations for the physical and media access control layers [29], joint source and channel
optimizations [30] and the joint optimization for algorithm and hardware implementation [31].
3 Paradigms of AI in 5G
In this section, examples of the application of AI techniques in 5G are presented, which cover four
dierent problems in 5G including: network resource allocation, SON, uniform 5G accelerator and the
optimization of the end-to-end physical layer communication.
3.1 AI for SON: Automatic root cause analysis
Self-organizing networks (SONs) establish a new concept of network management which provide intel-
ligence in the operation and maintenance of the network. It has been introduced by 3GPP as a key
component of LTE network. In the 5G era, network densication and dynamic resource allocation will
result in new problems for coordination, conguration and management of the network, hence bringing
increased demand for the improvements of the SON functions. SON modules in mobile networks can be
divided into three main categories: self-conguration, self-optimization and self-healing. The main ob-
jectives of SON are to automatically perform network planning, conguration and optimization without
human intervention, in order to reduce the overall complexity, Operational Expenditure (OPEX), Capital
Expenditure (CAPEX) and man-made faults. Various researches of AI in SON have been summarized
in [32{34] which includes AI applied in automatic base station conguration, new cell and spectrum
deployment, coverage and capacity optimization, cell outage detection and compensation, etc., using
approaches including ANN, ant colony optimization, genetic algorithm, etc..
In this section, we introduce the automatic root cause analysis framework proposed in [35] as an
example for AI in SON. The design of the fault identication system in LTE networks faces two main
challenges: (1) A huge number of alarms, KPIs and conguration parameters can be taken as fault
indicators in the system. Meanwhile, most of the symptoms of these indicators are not labeled with
fault causes, hence are dicult to identify; (2) The system is not automatic and experts are involved to
analyze each fault cause. With the huge amount of high-dimensional data, human intervention is not
ecient while expensive. Authors of [35] proposes an AI-based automatic root cause analysis system
which combines supervised and unsupervised learning techniques as summarized in the following steps:
1. Unsupervised SOM training. SOM as shown in Figure 2 is applied for an initial classication of
the high-dimensional KPIs. An SOM is a type of unsupervised neural network capable of acquiring
knowledge and learning from a set of unlabeled data. It will process high-dimensional data and reducing
it to a two-dimensional map of neurons that preserves the topological properties of the input data. Hence,
inputs close to each other will be mapped to adjacent neurons. By this unsupervised process, the high-
dimensional KPIs are mapped into a lower-dimensional map which can classify new KPI data by nding
the closest neurons.
2. Unsupervised clustering. After SOM training, all the neurons in the SOM system will be clustered
into a certain number of groups using an unsupervised algorithm. Since the SOM neurons are already
ordered and the dierence between the original inputs can be represented by Euclidean distance between
the corresponding neurons, clustering algorithms based on Euclidean distance, e.g. Wards hierarchical
method, can be applied to cluster the neurons.
3. Labeling by Experts. After the above two steps, the original high-dimensional data are clustered
into several classes. We will nally have the experts to analyze and identify the fault causes of each
obtained cluster to have all the clusters labeled.
With the training, clustering and labeling, an automatic system for network diagnosis is constructed
by the workow shown in Figure 4. For a new input of KPIs, it will rstly be mapped to a neuron in
SOM. Then by the label of the cluster this neuron belongs to, we can identify the fault and the causes.
After obtaining a certain amount of new fault data, we can verify whether the system is right or not and

==== Page 7 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 7
Figure 4 Automatic root cause analysis workow [35].
MT(1,3)
BS1 
MT(1,2)MT(1,1)MT(2,1)
MT(2,2)MT(2,3)
BS2 
RB-A
RB-B
Figure 5 Dynamic resource allocation for multi-cell and multi-user systems.
update it by re-training with the above three steps. Simulation results presented in [35] show that the
proposed root cause analysis system is highly accurate even though it's mainly built using unsupervised
techniques.
3.2 AI for resource allocation: OFDMA downlink resource allocation
The OFDM resource block (RB) allocation in 5G NR is more complicated and challenging than ever
before due to the support for the three aforementioned generic services. In Figure 5, a typical multi-cell,
multi-user downlink resource allocation scenario is illustrated. In this system, the intra-cell interference
is eliminated since the RB allocated to dierent users in the same cell is orthogonal to each other. The
system interference mainly depends on the inter-cell interference, which makes the RB allocation for users
in neighboring cells important. Suppose the throughput of each user can be evaluated based on signal-to-
interference ratio (SIR), the target for the optimization of the RB allocation is the maximization of the
total system throughput. This is indeed an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem with nonlinear
constraints. The complexity of the traditional solution is proportional to the factorial of the number of
users in coverage, which is computationally prohibitive.
Q-learning can be applied to this problem. Suppose an \Agent" is in charge of the RB allocation, then
the possible \Action" of this \Agent", which is to update the RB for each user, can be selected by the
following strategies as illustrated in Figure 5: (1) Within the same cell, allocate free RB with higher SIR
to the users; (2) Update the RB allocated to the user with the worst SIR in current cell continuously
to achieve better overall system capacity; (3) For a certain RB, pair or cluster the user with worst SIR
in the current cell with users with the best SIR from the neighboring cell. The rst two strategies are

==== Page 8 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 8
intuitive. The third one is applied to avoid allocating the same RB to users in neighboring cells that are
located close to the boarder, since in such situations the involved users cannot acquire essential SIR to
work properly regardless of the transmitting power of the base stations.
After dening all the possible \Actions", the \Agent" will evaluate each of them to select the next
\Action" to adjust the RB allocation which maximizes the overall capacity of the whole system. The Q
function is updated according to the Bellman equation [13] at the same time. We iterate through this
process until the Q function converges.
These iterations should also be considered with the optimization of the user power allocation. In [36],
a framework based on generalized Nash equilibrium problem (GNEP) is proposed for the optimization of
the power control for users from multiple cells that are assigned the same RB. Global quality of service
(QoS) constraints are also considered hence Lagrange multipliers are introduced to evaluate the \Actions"
and establish the Q function.
3.3 AI for baseband signal processing: Uniform 5G accelerator
The baseband signal processing in 5G consists of a series of signal processing blocks including massive
MIMO detection, NOMA detection and decoding for polar codes. The increased number of baseband
blocks leads to more hardware area and varied implementation structures. However, we notice that
the belief propagation algorithm based on factor graphs can be applied to all the blocks as proposed
in [37{41]. For each specic block, the frameworks are kept unchanged and we only have to adapt the
symbol set and constraints of the variables to the certain function. Hence, a uniform accelerator for the
baseband can be designed based on the belief propagation algorithms with congurable variables.
However, the performance of belief propagation is limited in some baseband blocks in certain scenarios.
Here, AI can be a possible solution to these problems. By improving the belief propagation methods with
the AI techniques, an AI-based uniform accelerator can be constructed. The AI-aided belief propagation
algorithms can be designed with the following two methods:
DNN-aided belief propagation: (1) Unfold the factor graph of belief propagation by duplicating
the iterations to form a DNN; (2) Train the DNN by supervised training. Applications of this method
in the baseband include the DNN-based polar codes decoder proposed in [20] and the DNN-aided MMO
detector proposed in [42].
Belief propagation-based CNN: (1)Map each node in the factor graph of belief propagation to
one pixel in a picture, in which connected nodes should be mapped into neighboring pixels; (2) Train
the CNN using the obtained pictures. This method is utilized in the BP-CNN channel decoder proposed
in [43].
The neural networks are highly self-adaptive and reliable. By applying DNN and CNN in the baseband,
we can achieve performance enhancements as long as a uniform hardware implementation framework.
Actually, the core operation for CNN is the convolution, while the core of DNN is the multiplication of
the two-dimensional matrices. We notice that the systolic architecture can realize both of the operations.
Figure 6 illustrates a recongurable systolic architecture designed for accelerating convolutional neural
network [18]. It can be seen that the systolic architecture is regular and scalable, which supports dierent
CNNs and DNNs. This motivates us to explore the possibilities of reusing the same hardware architecture
to realize both 5G and DL algorithms.
The authors of [21] point out that in a system formed with the channel encoder, the channel, the
channel equalizer and the decoder (as shown in Figure 7), the equalizer and the decoder in the receiver
can be implemented with a CNN and a DNN, respectively. The associated AI accelerator can be jointly
realized by two strategies:
(1) The uniform architecture: The overall receiver can be folded into one uniform processor to save
the hardware area. This processor rstly works as a CNN-based equalizer with the input signals from
the channel. The output of the CNN will be saved at this point. The processor will then function as a
DNN-based decoder, for which the saved output from the CNN will serve as the input. The decoding
results will be the nal output. (2) The cascade architecture: Two processors will be cascaded directly to

==== Page 9 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 9
On-chip 
Buffer 
Ifmap 
Buffer 
Filter 
Buffer 
Ofmap 
Buffer PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
PE PE PE ... PE 
... ... ... ... FIFO 
FIFO 
FIFO FIFO FIFO FIFO FIFO 
. . . . . . 
Max Pooling/ReLU/Sparse Ofmap FIFO Systolic
Array
Figure 6 Systolic array hardware structure for neural networks [18].
Figure 7 Architecture of a receiver including neural network equalizer and decoder [21].
construct the receiver, one being the CNN-based equalizer while the other being the DNN-based decoder.
This architecture has more hardware consumption, but achieves higher throughput rate.
Overall, the AI-based uniform accelerator is more exible for the hardware implementation, hence can
achieve various system requirements.
3.4 AI for physical layer: DNN-based end-to-end communication
As mentioned above, AI, especially DNN, has been applied to dierent function blocks in the physical
layer, e.g., modulation recognition [44], polar codes decoder [20] and MIMO detection [43]. For the joint
optimization of two or more blocks, AI algorithms also achieve success, e.g., the aforementioned joint
optimization of channel equalizer and channel decoder proposed in [21]. However, optimizing each of the
blocks individually cannot guarantee the optimization for the whole physical layer communication [45].
In the viewpoint of the whole end-to-end communication system, the intuitive connection of dierent
AI modules may bring extra computational cost for both training and online tasks. Hence, a joint
optimization method for the end-to-end system is in need.
[46] proposes an autoencoder-based end-to-end system optimization method, in which the communi-
cation system is recast as an end-to-end reconstruction optimization problem, and a novel concept, the
autoencoder, is introduced to serve as a simplied representation of the system. The autoencoder is a
type of ANN. It aims at learning a representation (encoding) for a set of data in an unsupervised manner,
which will be capable to reconstruct compressed inputs at the output layer. In the proposed approach
in [46], the end-to-end system is simply represented with three blocks, the transmitter, the receiver and
the channel. The transmitter and the receiver are both represented as fully connected DNNs. A nor-
malization layer is connected to the transmitter to guarantee the energy constraints, whereas a softmax
activation layer is placed before the receiver to output soft decisions for the received information. The
AWGN channel in between is represented as a simple noise layer with a certain variance. The resulted
autoencoder has a structure as shown in Figure 8. This autoencoder is trained based on bit error rate

==== Page 10 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 10
Figure 8 A simple autoencoder for an end-to-end communication system [45].
Figure 9 A general MIMO channel autoencoder architecture [45].
(BER) or block error rate (BLER). After training, it will be able to reconstruct the transmitted signals
based on the received signals.
The autoencoder is a novel concept dierent to all the traditional, conventional methods. DNNs
are utilized to represent the whole end-to-end system without considering the specic models in each
traditional function block. Hence, in scenarios that is too complicated to model, autoencoder can be a
good solution to \learn" these scenarios and optimize the performance. This scheme is extended to a
multi-user scenario with interfering channels in [46], and is further extended to MIMO in [47] by adding
a module for the channel matrix as shown in Figure 9. Simulation results presented in [46,47] show that
the autoencoder can \learn" dierent scenarios with various CSI and number of antennas and achieves
enhanced BER performance.
4 Conclusions
5G makes a signicant breakthrough in the traditional mobile communication system. While enhancing
the service capability of the traditional mobile networks, it further evolves to support the applications
of IoT in various elds including business, manufacturing, health care and transportation. Hence, 5G is
becoming the basic technology for the future IoT that connects and operates the whole society. Aiming
at supporting dierentiated applications with a uniform technical framework, 5G is facing enormous
challenges. With the revive and the rapid development in recent years, AI is rising to these challenges.
It is a potential solution to the problems in the 5G era, which will lead to a revolution in the concepts
and capabilities of the communication systems.

==== Page 11 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 11
Many researches have already been done for applying AI in 5G. In this paper, instead of trying to review
all the existing literatures, we focus on clarifying the promising research directions with the greatest
potential. By further eorts in these research directions, 5G can be anticipated to achieve signicantly
better performance and more convenient implementations compared to the traditional communication
systems. With the inspiring research paradigms introduced in this paper, we are looking forward to the
remarkable achievements of AI in 5G in the near future.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
61501116 and 61221002).
Conict of interest The authors declare that they have no conict of interest.
References
1 You X H, Pan Z W, Gao X Q, et al. The 5G mobile communication: The development trends and its emerging key
techniques. Sci Sin Inform, 2014, 44 (5): 551-563 [. 5G. 2014, 44 (5):551-563]
2 3GPP. RP-170741, Way Forward on the Overall 5G-NR eMBB. Workplan[s]. 2017
3 3GPP. Study on New Radio Access Technology: Radio Access Architecture and Interfaces (Release 14). TR38.801,
v14.0[s]. 2017
4 ITU-R. Minimum Requirements Related to Technical Performance for IMT2020 Radio Interface(s). Report ITU-R
M.2410-0. 2017
5 3GPP. Release-15: LTE Enhancements and 5G Normative Work. 2018
6 You X H, Wang D M, Sheng B, et al. Cooperative distributed antenna systems for mobile communications. IEEE
Wirel Commun, 2010, 17(3): 35
7 Yang W J, Wang M, Zhang J J, et al. Narrowband wireless access for low-power massive Internet of things: A
bandwidth perspective. IEEE Wirel Commun, 2017, 24(3): 138-145
8 Whitley D. A genetic algorithm tutorial. Stat Comput, 1994, 4(2): 65-85
9 Schmidhuber J. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Netw, 2015, 61: 85-117
10 Yu (You) X H. Can backpropagation error surface not have local minima. IEEE T Neural Networ, 1992, 3(6): 1019-1021
11 Yu (You) X H, Chen G A, Cheng S X. Dynamic learning rate optimization of the backpropagation algorithm. IEEE
T Neural Networ, 1995, 6(3): 669-677
12 Yu (You) X H, Chen G A. Ecient backpropagation learning using optimal learning rate and momentum. Neural
Netw, 1997, 10(3): 517-527
13 Kaelbling L P, Littman M L, Moore A W. Reinforcement learning: A survey. J Artif Intell Res, 1996, 4: 237-285
14 Watkins C J C H, Dayan P. Q-learning. Mach Learn, 1992, 8(3-4): 279-292
15 Gatherer A. Machine learning Modems: How ML will change how we specify and design next generation communication
systems. IEEE ComSoc News, 2018. https://www.comsoc.org/ctn/machine-learning-modems-how-ml-will-change-
how-we-specify-and-design-next-generation
16 Yang C, Xu W H, Zhang Z C, et al. A channel-blind detection for SCMA based on image processing techniques. In:
Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2018: 1-5
17 Zhang C, Xu W H. Neural networks: Ecient implementations and applications. In: Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2017: 1029-1032
18 Xu W H, You X H, Zhang C. Ecient deep convolutional neural networks accelerator without multiplication and
retraining. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2018: 1-5
19 Xu W H, Wang Z F, You X H, et al. Ecient fast convolution architectures for convolutional neural network. In:
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2017: 904-907
20 Xu W H, Wu Z Z, Ueng Y L, et al. Improved polar decoder based on deep learning. In: Proceedings of IEEE
International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), 2017:1-6
21 Xu W H, Zhong Z W, Be'ery Y, et al. Joint neural network equalizer and decoder. In: Proceedings of IEEE
International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2018:1-6
22 Xu W H, Be'ery Y, You X H, et al. Polar decoding on sparse graphs with deep learning. In: Proceedings of Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers (Asilomar), 2018:1-6
23 Xu W H, You X H, Zhang C. Using Fermat number transform to accelerate convolutional neural network. In: Pro-
ceedings of IEEE International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2017: 1033-1036
24 Gao X Q, Jiang B, Li X, et al. Statistical eigenmode transmission over jointly-correlated MIMO channels. IEEE T
Inform Theory, 2009,55 (8): 3735-3750
25 Wang D M, Zhang Y, Wei H, et al. An overview of transmission theory and techniques of large-scale antenna systems
for 5G wireless communications. Sci China Inform Sci, 2016, 59(8): 081301
26 Gesbert D, Hanly S, Huang H, et al. Multi-cell MIMO cooperative networks: A new look at interference. IEEE J Sel
Area Comm, 2010, 28(9): 1380-1408

==== Page 12 ====
YOU X H , et al. Sci China Inf Sci 12
27 Jing S S, Yu A L, Liang X, et al. Uniform belief propagation processor for massive MIMO detection and GF (2n)
LDPC decoding. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2017: 961-964
28 Gandhi V S, Maheswaran B. A cross layer design for performance enhancements in LTE-A system. In: Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET), 2016:
905-909
29 Kuen J, Kong X F, Wang G, et al. DelugeNets: Deep networks with ecient and exible cross-layer information
inows. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), 2017: 958-966
30 Farsad N, Rao M, Goldsmith A. Deep learning for joint source-channel coding of text. arXiv preprint, 2018.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.06832
31 Xu X W, Ding Y K, Hu S X, et al. Scaling for edge inference of deep neural networks. Nature Electronics, 2018,
1(4):216
32 Wang X F, Li X H, Leung V C M. Articial intelligence-based techniques for emerging heterogeneous network: State
of the arts, opportunities, and challenges. IEEE Access, 2015, 3: 1379-1391
33 Klaine P V, Imran M A, Onireti O, et al. A Survey of machine learning techniques applied to self-organizing cellular
networks. IEEE Commun Surv Tut, 2017, 19(4): 2392-2431
34 P erez-Romero J, Sallent O, Ferrs R, et al. Knowledge-based 5G radio access network planning and optimization. In:
Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2016: 359-365
35 G omez-Andrades A, Munoz P, Serrano I, et al. Automatic root cause analysis for LTE networks based on unsupervised
techniques. IEEE T Veh Technol, 2016, 65(4): 2369-2386
36 Wang J H, Guan W, Huang Y M, et al. Distributed optimization of hierarchical small cell networks: A GNEP
framework. IEEE J Sel Area Comm, 2017, 35(2): 249-264
37 Ren Y R, Zhang C, Liu X, et al. Ecient early termination schemes for belief-propagation decoding of polar codes.
In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2015: 1-4
38 Fossorier M P C, Mihaljevic M, Imai H. Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based
on belief propagation. IEEE T Commun, 1999, 47(5): 673-680
39 Yang J M, Song W Q, Zhang S Q, et al. Low-complexity belief propagation detection for correlated large-scale MIMO
systems. J Signal Process Sys, 2018, 90(4): 585-599
40 Liu L, Yuen C, Guan Y L, et al. Gaussian message passing iterative detection for MIMO-NOMA systems with massive
access. In: Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2016: 1-6
41 Yang J M, Zhang C, Zhou H Y, et al. Pipelined belief propagation polar decoders. In: Proceedings of IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2016: 413-416
42 Tan X S, Xu W H, Be'ery Y, et al. Improving massive MIMO belief propagation detector with deep neural network.
arXiv preprint, 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.01002
43 Liang F, Shen C, Wu F. An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding. IEEE J Sel Top Signa, 2018, 12(1):
144-159
44 Lv X Z, Wei P, Xiao X C. Automatic identication of digital modulation signals using high order cumulants. Electronic
Warfare, 2004, 6:1
45 Wang T Q, Wen C K, Wang H Q, et al. Deep learning for wireless physical layer: Opportunities and challenges. China
Commun, 2017, 14(11): 92-111
46 O'Shea T, Hoydis J. An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer. IEEE Trans on Cogn Commun Netw,
2017, 3(4): 563-575
47 O'Shea T J, Erpek T, Clancy T C. Deep learning based MIMO communications. arXiv preprint, 2017.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.07980

