==== Page 1 ====
AliGraph : A Comprehensive Graph Neural Network
Platform
Rong Zhu, Kun Zhao, Hongxia Y ang, Wei Lin, Chang Zhou, Baole Ai, Y ong Li, Jingren Zhou
Alibaba Group
ABSTRACT
An increasing number of machine learning tasks require dealing
with large graph datasets, which capture rich and complex relation-
ship among potentially billions of elements. Graph Neural Network
(GNN) becomes an effective way to address the graph learning
problem by converting the graph data into a low dimensional space
while keeping both the structural and property information to the
maximum extent and constructing a neural network for training
and referencing. However, it is challenging to provide an efﬁcient
graph storage and computation capabilities to facilitate GNN train-
ing and enable development of new GNN algorithms. In this paper,
we present a comprehensive graph neural network system, namely
AliGraph , which consists of distributed graph storage, optimized
sampling operators and runtime to efﬁciently support not only exist-
ing popular GNNs but also a series of in-house developed ones for
different scenarios. The system is currently deployed at Alibaba to
support a variety of business scenarios, including product recommen-
dation and personalized search at Alibaba’s E-Commerce platform.
By conducting extensive experiments on a real-world dataset with
492.90 million vertices, 6.82 billion edges and rich attributes, Ali-
Graph performs an order of magnitude faster in terms of graph
building (5 minutes vs hours reported from the state-of-the-art Pow-
erGraph platform). At training, AliGraph runs 40%-50% faster with
the novel caching strategy and demonstrates around 12 times speed
up with the improved runtime. In addition, our in-house developed
GNN models all showcase their statistically signiﬁcant superiorities
in terms of both effectiveness and efﬁciency (e.g., 4.12%–17.19%
lift by F1 scores).
1. INTRODUCTION
As a sophisticated model, graph has been widely used to model
and manage data in a wide variety of real-world applications. Typi-
cal examples include social networks [21, 30], physical systems [1,
43], biological networks [14], knowledge graphs [19] and etc [28].
Graph analytics, which explore underlying insights hidden in graph
data, have drawn signiﬁcant research attention in the last decade.
They have been witnessed to play important roles in numerous areas,
i.e., node classiﬁcation [2], link prediction [35], graph clustering [4],
recommendation [51], among many others.
As conventional graph analytic tasks often suffer from high com-
putation and space costs [9, 21], a new paradigm, called graph
embedding (GE), paves an efﬁcient yet effective way to address
such problems. Speciﬁcally, GE converts the graph data into a low-
dimensional space such that the structural and content information
in the graph can be preserved to the maximum extent. After that,
the generated embeddings are fed as features into the downstream
machine learning tasks. Furthermore, by incorporating with deep
learning techniques, graph neural networks (GNN) are proposedby integrating GE with convolutional neural network (CNN) [30,
7, 24, 22]. In CNN, shared weights and multi-layered structure are
applied to enhance its learning power [31]. And graphs are the most
typical locally connected structures, with shared weights to reduce
the computational cost and the multi-layer structure being the key to
deal with hierarchical patterns while capturing features of various
sizes. GNNs ﬁnd such generalizations of CNNs to graphs. Thus,
GNN not only embraces the ﬂexibility of GE but also showcases
its superiority in terms of both effectiveness and robustness with
generalizations of CNNs.
Challenges. In the literature, considerable research efforts have
been devoted in developing GE and GNN algorithms. These works
mainly concentrate on simple graphs with no or little auxiliary in-
formation. However, the rising of big data and complex systems
reveal new insights in graph data. As a consensus [9, 21, 5, 17],
the vast majority of graph data related to real-world commercial
scenarios exhibits four properties, namely large-scale ,heteroge-
neous ,attributed anddynamic . For example, nowadays e-commerce
graphs often contain billions of vertices and edges with various types
and rich attributes, and quickly evolve over time. These properties
bring great challenges for embedding and representing graph data
as follows:
The core steps in GNN are particularly optimized for grid struc-
tures, such as images, but not feasible for graphs in irregular
Euclidean space. Thus, existing GNN methods can not scale on
real-world graphs with exceedingly large sizes. The ﬁrst prob-
lem is how to improve the time and space efﬁciencies of GNN
on large-scale graphs ?
Different types of objects characterize the data from multiple
perspectives. They provide richer information but increase the
difﬁculty to map the graph information into a singleton space.
Thus, the second problem is how to elegantly integrate the het-
erogeneous information to be an uniﬁed embedding result ?
The attribute information can further enhance the power of the
embedding results and make inductive GE possible [9, 21, 5, 17].
Without considering attribute information, the algorithms can
only consider the transductive settings and ignore the need for
predicting unseen instances. However, the topological structure
information and unstructured attribute information are usually
presented in two different spaces. Thus, the third problem is how
to unify them to deﬁne the information to be preserved ?
As GNN suffers from low efﬁciency, recomputing the embedding
results from scratch with respect to structural and contextual up-
dates are expensive. Thus, the fourth problem is how to design
efﬁcient incremental GNN methods on dynamic graphs ?
1arXiv:1902.08730v1  [cs.DC]  23 Feb 2019

==== Page 2 ====
Contributions. To tackle with the above challenges, considerable
research efforts have been devoted to design efﬁcient yet effective
GNN methods. In Table 1, we categorize a series of popular GE
and GNN models according to the aspects that they focus on, as
well as our in-house developed models shaded in yellow. As shown,
most existing methods concentrate on one or two properties at the
same time. However, real-world commercial data usually faces
more challenges. To mitigate this situation, in this paper, we present
a comprehensive and systemic solution to GNN. We design and
implement a platform, called AliGraph , which provides both system
and algorithms to tackle more practical problems that exhibit the
four summarized arising problems, to well support a variety of GNN
methods and applications. The main contributions are summarized
as follows.
System. In the underlying components of AliGraph , we build a
system to support GNN algorithms and applications. The system
architecture is abstracted from general GNN methods, which con-
sists of a storage layer, a sampling layer and an operator layer.
Speciﬁcally, the storage layer applies three novel techniques, namely
structural and attributed speciﬁc storage, graph partition and caching
neighbors of some important vertices, to store large-scale raw data
to fulﬁll the fast data access requirements of high-level operations
and algorithms. The sampling layer optimizes the key sampling
operation in GNN methods. We categorize sampling methods into
three classes, namely TRAVERSE ,NEIGHBORHOOD and NEGATIVE
sampling, and propose lock-free methods to perform sampling op-
erations in distributed environment. The operator layer provides
optimized implementation of two common applied operators in
GNN algorithms, namely AGGREGATE and COMBINE . We apply
a cache strategy to store some intermediate results to accelerate
the computation process. These components are co-designed and
co-optimized to make the whole system effective and scalable.
Algorithms. The system provides a ﬂexible interface to design GNN
algorithms. We show that all existing GNN methods can be easily
implemented upon our system. Besides, we also in-house developed
several new GNNs for practical requirement and detail six here. As
illustrated in Table 1, our in-house developed methods are shaded in
yellow and each of them are more ﬂexible and practical to deal with
real-world problems.
Evaluation. Our AliGraph platform is practically deployed in the
Alibaba company. The experimental results verify its effectiveness
and efﬁciency from both the system and algorithm aspects. As
shown in Figure 1, our in-house developed GNN models on the
AliGraph platform improves the normalized evaluation metrics by
4:12% –17:19% . The data are collected from Alibaba’s e-commerce
platform Taobao and we contribute this dataset to the community to
nourish further development1.
Normalized	Evaluation	Metric
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
GATNE
Mixture	GNN
Hierarchical	GNN
Evolving	GNN
Bayesian	GNN
	AliGraph	
(
Our	Method
)
					
	
	
	
	Other	Competitors
+4.12%~16.43%
+8.73%~15.58%
+13.99%
+5.72%~17.19%
+15.48%
Figure 1: Comparison of normalized evaluation metric on the
effectiveness of different methods. The red text indicates the
lifting range of each in-house developed method w.r.t. its com-
petitors.1https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/
dataDetail?dataId=9716.Table 1: The property of different methods.
HeterogeneousCategory MethodNode EdgeAttributed Dynamic Large-Scale
Classic
Graph
EmbeddingDeepWalk $ $ $ $ $
Node2Vec $ $ $ $ $
LINE $ $ $ $ $
NetMF $ $ $ $ $
TADW $ $ " $ $
LANE $ $ " $ $
ASNE $ $ " $ $
DANE $ $ " $ $
ANRL $ $ " $ $
PTE $ " $ $ $
Methpath2Vec $ " $ $ $
HERec $ " $ $ $
HNE $ $ $ $ $
PMNE $ " " $ $
MVE $ " " $ $
MNE $ " " $ $
Mvn2Vec $ " " $ $
GNNStructural2Vec $ $ " $ $
GCN $ $ " $ $
FastGCN $ $ " $ $
AS-GCN $ $ " $ $
GraphSAGE $ $ " $ $
HEP " " " $ $
AHEP " " " $ "
GATNE " " " $ "
Mixture GNN " " " $ $
Hierarchical GNN " " " $ $
Bayesian GNN $ " " $ $
Evolving GNN $ " " " $
Table 2: Summarization of symbols and notations.
Symbols or Notations Description
G graph or attributed heterogeneous graph
G(t)the graph at the timestamp t
V(V(t)) vertex set (at timestamp t)
E(E(t)) edge set (at timestamp t)
n;m number of vertices and edges
W(W(t)) edge weight assigning function (at timestamp t)
TV vertex type mapping function
TE edge type mapping function
AV vertex attributes mapping function
AE edge attributes mapping function
xv;i thei-th feature vector of vertex v
we;i thei-th feature vector of edge e
d the embedding dimension
Nb(v) neighbors set of vertex v
hv the embedding vector of vertex v
hv;c the embedding vector of vertex vw.r.t. typec
D(t)
i(v) number oft-hop in-neighbors of v
D(t)
o(v) number oft-hop out-neighbors of v
Imp(t)(v) importance of vertex v
2. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the basic concepts and formalize the
graph embedding problem. The symbols and notations frequently
used throughout this paper are summarized in Table 2. We start with
the acyclic, simple graph G= (V;E;W)whereVandErepresent
the set of vertices and edges, respectively; and W:E ! R+
is a function assigning each edge (u;v)2E a weightW(u;v)
indicating the strength of relationships between vertex uandv. Let
n=jVjandm=jEjdenote the number of vertices and edges
inG, respectively. Notice that, the graph Gcan be either directed
or undirected. IfGis directed, (u;v)and(v;u)represent two
different edges and may have different weights; otherwise, (u;v)
and(v;u)are the same edge and we have W(u;v) =W(v;u). For
each vertexu, we useNb(u)to denote the set of its (in and out)
neighbors.
Attributed Heterogeneous Graph. To comprehensively character-
ize the real-world commercial data, the practical graphs often con-
tain rich content information, e.g., multiple types of vertices, mul-
tiple types of edges, attributes and etc. Thus, we further deﬁne
2

==== Page 3 ====
theAttributed Heterogeneous Graph (AHG). An AHGGis a tu-
ple(V;E;W;TV;TE;AV;AE)whereV,EandWhave the same
meaning as the simple graphs. TV:V!FVandTE:E!FE
represent the vertex type and edge type mapping functions, where
FVandFEare the set of vertex types and edge types, respectively.
To ensure the heterogeneity, we request jFVj2and/orjFEj2.
AVandAEare two functions assigning each vertex v2V and
each edgee2E some feature vectors representing its attributes.
We denote the i-th feature vector of vertex vand edgeeasxv;iand
we;i, respectively. An example of AHG is shown in Figure 2, which
contains two types of vertices, namely users and items, and four
types of edges connecting them.
usersitemsclickcollectcartbuy*HQGHUPDOH$JH/RFDWLRQ%HLMLQJŏPrice: $1000Brand: Lenovo…*HQGHUPDOH$JH/RFDWLRQ%RVWRQŏ*HQGHUIHPDOH$JH/RFDWLRQ%DQJDORUHŏPrice: $800Brand:Apple…Price: $50Brand: Nike…
Figure 2: Illustrative example of AHG with multiple types of
edges, nodes and rich attributes.
Dynamic Graph. Real-world graphs usually evolve with time. Given
a time interval [1;T], adynamic graph is a series of graphsG(1);G(2);
:::;G(T). For each 1tT,G(t)can be a simple graph or an
AHG. For ease of notation, we add a superscript (t)to represent
the corresponding state of the objects at timestamp t. For example,
V(t)andE(t)represent the vertex set and edge set of graph G(t),
respectively.
Problem Deﬁnition. Given an input graph G, which is a simple
graph or an AHG, and a predeﬁned number d2Non the dimension
of embedding where d<<jVj, the embedding problem is to con-
vert the graphGinto thed-dimensional space such that the graph
property is preserved as much as possible. GNN is a special kind of
graph embedding method, which learns the embedding results by
applying neural networks on graphs. Notice that, in this paper, we
concentrate on the vertex-level embedding. That is, the embedding
output is ad-dimensional vector hv2Rdfor each vertex v2V. In
our future work as discussed in Section 7, we will also consider the
embedding on edges, subgraphs or even the whole graph.
3. SYSTEM
In our AliGraph platform, whose architecture is shown in Figure 3,
we design and implement an underlying system (marked in blue
square) to well support high-level GNN algorithms and applications.
The details of this system will be described in this section. To start
with, in Section 3.1, we abstract a general framework of GNNs to
explain why our system is designed in this way. Sections 3.2 to
3.5 introduce the design and implementation details of each key
component in the system.
3.1 Framework of GNN Algorithms
In this subsection, we abstract a general framework to GNN
algorithms. A series of classic GNNs such as Structure2Vec [42],
GCN [30], FastGCN [7],AS-GCN [24] and GraphSAGE [20]
can be characterized by instantiating the operators in the framework.
The input of the GNN framework includes a graph G, the embedding
dimensiond2N, a vertex feature xvfor each vertex v2V and the
Figure 3: Architecture of the AliGraph system.
Algorithm 1: GNN Framework
Input: networkG, embedding dimension d2N, a vertex feature xvfor each
vertexv2V and the maximum hops of neighbors kmax2N.
Output: embedding result hvof each vertex v2V
1h(0)
v xv
2fork 1tokmax do
3 foreach vertexv2V do
4Sv SAMPLE (Nb(v))
5 h0
v AGGREGATE (h(k 1)
u;8u2S)
6 h(k)
v COMBINE (h(k 1)
v;h0
v)
7 normalize all embedding vectors h(k)
vfor allv2V
8hv h(kmax )
v for allv2V return hvas the embedding result for all
v2V
maximum hops of neighbors kmax2N. The output of the GNN is
an embedding vector hv2Rdfor each vertex v2V and will be fed
into the downstream machine learning tasks, such as classiﬁcation,
link prediction and etc.
The GNN framework is described in Algorithm 1. At the very
beginning, the vertex embedding h(0)
vof vertexvis initialized to
be equal to the input attribute vector xv. Then, at each k, each
vertexvaggregates the embeddings of its neighbors to update the
embedding of itself. Speciﬁcally, we apply the SAMPLE function
to fetch a subset Sof vertices based on the neighbor set Nb(v)of
vertexv, aggregate the embeddings of all vertices u2Sby the
AGGREGATE function to obtain a vector h0
v, and combine h0
vwith
h(k 1)
v to generate the embedding vector h(k)
vby the COMBINE
function. After processing all vertices, the embedding vectors are
normalized. Finally, after kmax hops, h(kmax)
v is returned as the
embedding result hvof vertexv.
System Architecture. Based on the GNN framework described
above, we naturally construct the system architecture of the Ali-
Graph platform, as shown in Figure 3. Notice that, the platform
consists of ﬁve layers on the whole, where the three underlying
layers form the system to support the algorithm layer and the ap-
plication layer. Inside the system, the storage layer organizes and
stores different kinds of raw data to fulﬁll the fast data access re-
quirements of high-level operations and algorithms. Upon this, by
Algorithm 1, we ﬁnd that three main operators, namely SAMPLE ,
AGGREGATE andCOMBINE , play important roles in various GNN
algorithms. Among them, the SAMPLE operator lays foundation for
AGGREGATE andCOMBINE since it directly controls the scope of
information to be processed by them. Therefore, we design the sam-
pling layer to access the storage for fast and accurate generation of
training samples. Above it, the operator layer speciﬁcally optimizes
theAGGREGATE andCOMBINE functions. On top of the system,
the GNN algorithms can be constructed in the algorithm layer to
serve real-world tasks in the application layer.
3

==== Page 4 ====
3.2 Storage
In this subsection, we discuss how to store and organize the raw
data. Notice that, the space cost to store the real-world graphs is very
large. Common e-commerce graphs can contain tens of billions of
nodes and hundreds of billions of edges with storage cost over 10TB
easily. The large graph size brings great challenges for efﬁcient
graph access, especially in a distributed environment of clusters. To
well support the high-level operators and algorithms, we apply the
following three strategies in the storage layer of AliGraph .
Graph Partition. Our AliGraph platform is build on a distributed
environment, thus the whole graph is divided and separately stored
in different workers. The goal of graph partition is to minimize the
number of crossing edges whose endpoints are in different workers.
To this end, literature work has proposed a series of algorithms. In
our system, as recommended in [13], we implement four built-in
graph partition algorithms: 1) METIS [27]; 2) Vertex cut and edge
cut partitions [16]; 3) 2-D partition [3]; and 4) Streaming-style par-
tition strategy [45]. These four algorithms are suitable to different
circumstances. In short, the METIS method is specialized in pro-
cessing sparse graphs; the vertex and edge cut method performs
much better on dense graphs; 2-D partition is often used when the
number of workers is ﬁxed; and streaming-style partition method
are often applied on graphs with frequently edge updates. Users
can choose the best partition strategy based on their own needs,
moreover, they can also implement other graph partition algorithms
as plugins in the system.
In Algorithm 2, lines 1–4 present the interface of graph parti-
tion. For each edge e2E, the general function ASSIGN in line 4
computes which worker ewill be in based on its endpoints.
Separate Storage of Attributes. Notice that, for AHGs, we need
to store both the structural and attributes of the partitioned graphs
in each worker. The structural information of graph can be simply
stored by an adjacency table. That is, for each vertex v, we store
its neighbor set Nb(v). Whereas, for the attributes on both vertices
and edges, it is inadvisable to store them together in the adjacency
table. The reasons are two-fold: 1) Attributes often cost more
spaces. For example, the space cost to store a vertex id is at most
8bytes while the attributes on a vertex may range from 0:1KB to
1KB. 2) Attributes among different vertices or edges have largely
overlaps. For example, many vertices may have the same tag “man”
indicating its gender. Therefore, it is more reasonable to separately
store attributes.
In our system, we do so by building two indices IVandIEto
store the attributes on vertices and edges, respectively. Each entry in
IV(IEresp.) is a unique attribute associated on vertex (edge resp.).
As illustrated in Figure 4, in the adjacency table, for each vertex
u, we store the index of attribute AV(u)inIV, and for each edge
(u;v), we also store the index of attribute AE(u;v)inIE. LetND
andNLbe the average number of neighbors and average length of
attributes. Let NAbe the number of distinct attributes on vertices
and edges. Obviously, our separate storage strategy decreases the
space cost from O(nNDNL)toO(nND+NANL).
Undoubtedly, separate storage of the attributes will increase the
access time for retrieving the attributes. On average, each vertex
will need to access the index IEat mostNDtimes to collects the
attributes of all of its neighbors. To mitigate this, we add two cache
components to reside the frequently accessed items in IVandIE,
respectively. We adopt the least recently used (LRU) replacing
strategy [8] in each cache.
Caching Neighbors of Important Vertices. In each worker, we fur-
ther propose a method to locally cache the neighbors of some impor-
tant vertices to reduce the communication cost. The intuitive idea
Figure 4: Index structure of graph storage.
is that if a vertex vis frequently accessed by other vertices, we can
storev’s out-neighbors in each partition it occurs. By doing this,
the visiting cost of other vertices to their neighbors via vcan be
greatly reduced. However, if the number of neighbors of vis large,
storing multiple copies of v’s neighbors will also incur huge storage
cost. To make a better trade-off, we deﬁne a metric to evaluate the
importance of each vertex, which decides whether a vertex is worth
to cache or not.
LetD(k)
i(v)andD(k)
o(v)denote the number of k-hop in and
out-neighbors of the vertex v, respectively. Certainly, D(k)
i(v)
andD(k)
o(v)can measure the beneﬁt and cost of caching the out-
neighbors of v, respectively. Thus, the k-thimportance ofv, denoted
asImp(k)(v), is deﬁned as
Imp(k)(v) =D(k)
i(v)
D(k)
o(v): (1)
We only cache the out-neighbors of a vertex vif its importance value
Imp(k)(v)is sufﬁciently large. In Algorithm 2, lines 5–9 present
the process of caching neighbors of important vertices. Let hdenote
the maximum depth of neighbors we consider. For each vertex v, we
cache the 1tok-hop out-neighbors of vifImp(k)(v)k, where
kis a user-speciﬁed threshold. Notice that, setting hto a small
number, usually 2, is enough to support a series of practical GNN
algorithms. Practically, we ﬁnd that kis not a sensitive parameter.
By experimental evaluation, setting kto a small value around 0:2
can make the best trade-off between cache cost and beneﬁt.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the vertices to be cached is only a very
small part of the whole graph. As analyzed in [48], the direct in
and out-degree of vertices in real-world graphs, i.e., D(1)
i(v)and
D(1)
o(v), often obey the power-law distribution. That is, only a very
few vertices in the graph have large in and out-degree. Based on
this, we derive the following two theorems. The proof can be found
in the appendix.
THEOREM 1.If the in and out-degree distribution of the graph
obey the power-law distribution, for any k1, the number of
k-hop in and out-neighbors of the vertices in the graph also obey
the power-law distribution.
THEOREM 2.If the in and out-degree distribution of the graph
obey the power-law distribution, the importance value of the vertices
in the graph also obey the power-law distribution.
Theorem 2 indicates that only a very few vertices in the graph
have large importance values. That means, we only need to cache
a small number of important vertices to achieve a signiﬁcant cost
decrease of graph traversals.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Algorithm 2: Partition and Caching
Input: graphG, partition number p, cache depthh, threshold1;2;:::; h
Output:psubgraphs
1Initializepgraph servers
2foreach edgee= (u;v)2E do
3j=ASSIGN (u)
4 Send edgeeto thej-th partition
5foreach vertexv2Vdo
6 fork 1tohdo
7 ComputeD(k)
i(v)andD(k)
o(v)
8 ifD(k)
i(v)
D(k)
o(v)kthen
9 Cache the 1tok-hop out-neighbors of von each partition where
vexists
3.3 Sampling
Recall that, GNN algorithms rely on aggregating neighborhood
information to generate embeddings of each vertex. However, the
degree distribution of real-world graphs is often skewed [48], which
makes the convolution operation hard to operate. To tackle this,
existing GNNs usually adopt various sampling strategies to sample
a subset of neighbors with aligned sizes. Due to its importance, in
our system, we abstract a sampling layer speciﬁed to optimize the
sampling strategies.
Abstraction. Formally, the sampling function takes input a vertex
subsetVTand extracts a small subset VSVTsuch thatjVSj<<
jVTj. By taking a thorough overview of current GNN models,
we abstract three kinds of different samplers, namely TRAVERSE ,
NEIGHBORHOOD and N EGATIVE .
TRAVERSE : is used to sampling a batch of vertices or edges
from the whole partitioned subgraphs.
NEIGHBORHOOD : will generate the context for a vertex. The
context of this vertex may be one or multi hop neighbors,
which are used to encode this vertex.
NEGATIVE : is used to generate negative samples to accelerate
the convergence of the training process.
Implementation. In the literature, the sampling method plays an
important role to enhance the efﬁciency and accuracy of the GNN
algorithms [22, 21, 5, 17]. In our system, we treat all samplers as
plugins. Each of them can be implemented independently. The three
types of samplers can be implemented as follows.
ForTRAVERSE samplers, they get data from the local subgraphs.
ForNEIGHBORHOOD samplers, they can get one-hop neighbors
from local storage as well as multi-hop neighbors from local cache.
If the neighbors of a vertex are not cached, a call to remote graph
server is needed. When getting the context of a batch of vertices, we
ﬁrst partition the vertices into sub-batches, and the context of each
sub-batch will be stitched together after being returned from the
corresponding graph server. NEGATIVE samplers usually generate
samples from local graph server. For some special cases, negative
sampling from other graph server may be needed. Negative sampling
is ﬂexible in algorithm, and we do not need to call all graph servers
in a batch. In summary, a typical sampling stage can be achieved as
illustrated in Figure 5.
We can accelerate training by adopting several efﬁcient sampling
strategies with dynamic weights. We implement the update opera-
tion in a sampler’s backward computation, just like gradient back
propagation [26] of an operator. So when updating needed, what
we should do is to register a gradient function for the sampler. TheDefine a TRAVERSE sampler as s1
Define a NEIGHBORHOOD sampler as s2
Define a NEGATIVE sampler as s3
...
def sampling(s1, s2, s3, batch_size):
vertex = s1.sample(edge_type, batch_size)
# hop_nums contains neighbor count at each hop
context = s2.sample(edge_type, vertex, hop_nums)
neg = s3.sample(edge_type, vertex, neg_num)
return vertex, context, neg
Figure 5: Sampling stage using three kinds of samplers
updating mode, synchronous or asynchronous, is due to the training
algorithm.
Till now, both reading and updating will be operated on the graph
storage in memory, which may lead to weak performance. Accord-
ing to the neighborhood requirement, the graph is partitioned by
source vertices. Based on this, we split the vertices on a graph server
into groups. Each group will be related with a request-ﬂow bucket,
in which the operations, including reading and updating, are all
about the vertices in this group. The bucket is a lock-free queue.
As shown in Figure 6, we bind each bucket to a CPU core and then
each operation in the bucket will be processed sequentially without
locking, which will further enhance the efﬁciency of the system.
Figure 6: Lock-free graph operations
3.4 Operator
Abstraction. After sampling, the output data is aligned, and we can
process it easily. Upon samplers, we need some GNN-like operators
to consume them. In our system, we abstract two kinds of operators,
namely AGGREGATE andCOMBINE [30, 7, 24, 22]. Their roles are
as follows.
AGGREGATE : collects the information of each vertex’s neigh-
bors to produce a uniﬁed result. For example, the AGGRE -
GATE function in Algorithm 1 maps a series of vectors hu2
Rdto a single vector h0
v2Rd, whereubelongs to sampled
neighborhood nodes of v.h0
vis an intermediate result to
further generate h(k)
v. The AGGREGATE function acts as the
convolution operation since it collects the information from
its surrounding neighborhoods. In different GNN methods, a
variety of aggregating methods are applied, such as element-
wise mean, max-pooling neural network and long short-term
memory (LSTMs) [22, 21].
COMBINE : takes care of how to use neighbors of a vertex to
describe the vertex. In Algorithm 1, the COMBINE function
5

==== Page 6 ====
maps the two vectors h(k 1)
v andh0
v2Rdinto a single
vector h(k)
v2Rd. The COMBINE function can integrate the
information of the previous hop and the neighborhoods into an
uniﬁed space. Usually, in existing GNN methods, h(k 1)
v and
h0
vare summed together to fed into a deep neural network.
Implementation. Notice that, both samplers and GNN-like oper-
ators not only do computations forward, but also take charge of
parameters updating backward if needed. So that we can make the
whole model as a network for an end-to-end training. Considering
the characteristics of graph data, a lot of optimization can be taken
into account to achieve better performances. Similar to SAMPLE ,
AGGREGATE andCOMBINE are plugins of AliGraph , which can be
implemented independently. A typical operator is made up of for-
ward and backward computations to be easy to be involved in a deep
network. Based on operators, users can set up a GNN algorithm
quickly.
To further accelerate the computation of the two operators, we
applying strategies by materialization of intermediate vectors h(k)
v.
Notice that, as shown in [7], in each mini-batch during the training
process, we can share the set of sampled neighbors for all vertices
in the mini-batch. As well, we can also share the vectors h(k)
v
for all 1kkmax among vertices in the same mini-batch.
To this end, we store kmax vectors ^h(1)
v;^h(2)
v;:::;^h(kmax)
v to be
the newest vectors of all vertices in the mini-batch. Then, in the
AGGREGATE function, we apply vectors in ^h(1)
v;^h(2)
v;:::;^h(kmax)
v
to obtain ^h0
v. After that, we apply ^h0
vandh(k 1)
v to compute ^h(k)
v
by the COMBINE function. Finally, the stored vector ^h(k)is updated
by^h(k)
v. By this strategy, the computation cost on the operators can
be greatly reduced.
4. METHODOLOGY
On top of the system, we discuss the design of algorithms in
this section. We show that existing GNNs can be easily built on
AliGraph . Besides, we also propose a bunch of new GNN algorithms
to tackle the four newly arisen challenges of embedding real-world
graph data as summarized in Section 1. All of them are plugins in
thealgorithm layer of the AliGraph platform.
4.1 State-of-the-Art GNNs
As our AliGraph platform is abstracted from upon the general
GNN algorithms, existing GNNs can be easily implemented on this
platform. Speciﬁcally, the GNNs listed in Table 1 can all be built in
AliGraph by following the framework in Algorithm 1. Here we take
theGraphSAGE as an example. Other GNNs can be implemented
in a similar way. We omit them due to space limitations. Notice
that, for GraphSAGE , it applies a simple node-wise sampling to
extract a small subset from the neighbor set of each vertex. Obvi-
ously, its sampling strategy can be easily implemented by using our
SAMPLING operator. Then, we need to instantiate the AGGREGATE
andCOMBINE functions in Algorithm 1. The GraphSAGE can
apply the weighted element-wise mean in the AGGREGATE function
in line 4. Besides, other more complex functions such as the max-
pooling neural network and LSTM can also be used. In other GNN
methods such as GCN ,FastGCN andAS-GCN , we can replace
different strategies on S AMPLING , AGGREGATE and C OMBINE .
4.2 In-House Developed GNNs
Our in-house developed GNNs focus on various aspects, e.g.,
sampling ( AHEP ), multiplex ( GATNE ), multimode ( Mixture GNN ),
hierarchy ( Hierarchical GNN ), dynamic ( Evolving GNN ) and
multi-sourced information ( Bayesian GNN ).AHEP Algorithm. This algorithm is designed to mitigate the heavy
computation and storage costs of the traditional embedding propa-
gation ( EP) algorithm [12] on heterogeneous networks, HEP [56].
HEP follows the general framework of GNN with minor modiﬁca-
tions adapted to AHG. Speciﬁcally, in HEP , the embeddings of all
vertices are generated in an iterative manner. In the k-th hop, for
each vertexvand each node-type c, all neighbors uofvin type
cpropagate its embedding hu;ctovto reconstruct an embedding
h0
v;c. The embedding of vis then updated by concatenating h0
v;c
across all node types. Whereas, in AHEP (HEP with adaptive sam-
pling), we sample important neighbors instead of considering the
whole set of neighbors. During this process, we design a metric to
evaluate the importance of each vertex by incorporating its structural
information and features. After that, all neighbors in different types
are separately sampled according to their corresponding probability
distributions. We carefully design the probability distributions to
minimize the sampling variance. In a speciﬁc task, to optimize the
AHEP algorithm, the loss function can be generally described as
L=LSL+LEP+
(); (2)
whereLSLis the loss from supervised learning in the batch, LEPis
the embedding propagation loss with sampling in the batch, 
()
is the regularizer of all trainable parameters, and ; are two hyper-
parameters. As veriﬁed by experimental results in Section 5, AHEP
runs much faster than HEP while achieving comparable accuracies.
GATNE Algorithm. This algorithm is designed to cope with graphs
with heterogeneous and attribute information on both vertices and
edges. To address the above challenges, we propose a novel ap-
proach to capture both rich attributed information and to utilize
multiplex topological structures from different node types, namely
General Attributed Multiplex He Terogeneous Network Embedding,
or abbreviated as GATNE . The overall embedding result of each
vertex consists of three parts: the general embedding, the speciﬁc
embedding and the attribute embedding, which correspondingly
characterize the structural information, the heterogeneous informa-
tion and the attribute information, respectively. For each vertex v
and any node type c, the general embedding bvand the attribute
embedding fvkeep the same. Let tbe an adjustable hyper-parameter
andgv;t0where 1t0tbe meta-speciﬁc embeddings. The spe-
ciﬁc embedding gvis obtained by concatenating all gv;t0. Then, for
each typec, the overall embedding of hv;cw.r.t.ccan be written as
hv;c=bv+cMT
cgvac+cDTxv; (3)
wherecandcare two adjustable coefﬁcients reﬂecting the im-
portance of the speciﬁc embedding and the attribute embedding;
the matrix ac2Rmof coefﬁcients are computed by using the
self-attention mechanism in [36]; and McandDare two trainable
transformation matrices. The ﬁnal embedding result hvcan then be
obtained by concatenating all hv;c.
The embeddings can be learned by applying the random walk
based methods similar to [39, 18]. Speciﬁcally, given a vertex vin
typecin a random walk and the window size p, letv p;v p+1;:::;
v;v1;:::;vpdenote its context. We need to minimize the negative
log-likelihood as
 logPc 
v p;:::;vpjv
=X
1jp0jp logPc(vp0jv);(4)
wherecdenotes all the parameters w.r.t. type candPc(vp0jv)is de-
ﬁned by the softmax function. The objective function  logPc(ujv)
for each pair of vertices uandvcan be easily approximated by the
negative sampling method.
6

==== Page 7 ====
Mixture GNN .This model is a mixture GNN model to tackle with
the heterogeneous graphs with multi-modes. In this model, we
extend the skip-gram model on homogeneous graphs [39] to ﬁt the
polysemous situation on heterogeneous graphs. In the traditional
skip-gram model, we try to ﬁnd the embedding of graphs with
parametersthrough maximizing the likelihood as
L= log Pr(Nb(v)jv) =X
u2Nb(v)log Pr(ujv); (5)
whereNb(v)denotes the neighbors of vandPr(ujv)is a soft-
max function. In our setting on heterogeneous graphs, each node
owns multiple senses. To differentiate them, let Pbe the known
distribution of node senses. We can rewrite the objective function as
Lpoly; = log PrP;(Nb(v)jv) =X
u2Nb(v)log PrP;(ujv):(6)
At this time, it is hard to incorporate the negative sampling metod
to directly optimize Equation (6). Alternatively, we derive a novel
lower bound Llowof Equation (6)and try to maximize Llow. We
ﬁnd that the terms in the lower bound Llowcan be approximated by
the negative sampling. As a result, the training process can be easily
implemented by slightly modifying the sampling process in existing
work such as Deepwalk [39] and node2vec [18].
Hierarchical GNN .Current GNN methods are inherently ﬂat and
do not learn hierarchical representations of graphs: a limitation that
is especially problematic to explicitly investigate such similarities
of various types of user behaviors. This model combines the hier-
archical structure to strengthen the expression power of GNN. Let
H(k)2RjVjddenote the matrix of node embeddings computed
afterksteps of the GNN and Abe the adjacency matrix of the
graphG. In Algorithm 1, traditional GNN iteratively learns H(k)by
combining H(k 1),Aand some trainable parameters (k). Initially,
we have H(0)=X, where Xrepresent matrix of the node features.
In our hierarchical GNN, we learn the embedding result in a layer-
to-layer fashion. Speciﬁcally, let A(l)andX(l)denote the adjacency
matrix and the node feature matrix in the l-th layer, respectively.
The vertex embedding result matrix Z(l)in thel-th layer is learned
by feedingA(l)andX(l)into the single-layer GNN method. After
that, we cluster some vertices in the graph and update the adjacency
matrixAltoAl+1. LetS(l)denote the learned assignment matrix
in thel-th layer. Each row and column in S(l)corresponds to a
cluster in the l-th and (l+ 1) -th layer, respectively. S(l)can be
obtained by a softmax function applied on another pooling GNN
uponA(l)andX(l). Taking Z(l)andS(l)in hand, we can obtain
the new coarsened adjacency matrix A(l+1)=S(l)TA(l)S(l)and
the new feature matrix X(l+1)=S(l)TZ(l)for the next (l+ 1) -th
layer. As veriﬁed in Section 5, the multi-layer hierarchical GNN is
more effective than the single-layer traditional GNNs.
Evolving GNN .This model is proposed to embedding vertices in
the dynamic network setting. Our goal is to learn the representations
of vertices in a sequential of graphs G(1);G(2);:::;G(T). To capture
the evolving nature of dynamic graphs, we divide the evolving links
into two types: 1) the normal evolution representing the majority
of reasonable changes of edges; and 2) burst links representing
rare and abnormal evolving edges. Based on them, the embedding
of all vertices in the dynamic graphs are learned in an interleave
manner. Speciﬁcally, at timestamp t, the normal and burst links
found on graphG(t)are integrated with the GraphSAGE model [22]
to generate embedding results hvof each vertex vinG(t). Then,
we apply a method to predict the normal and burst information
on the graphG(t+1)by using Variational Autoencoder and RNNTable 3: Datasets used in system experiments. Taobao-large is
six times large than Taobao-small .
Dataset# user
vertices# item
vertices# user-item
edges# item-item
edges# attributes
of user# attributes
of item
Taobao-small 147,970,118 9,017,903 442,068,516 224,129,155 27 32
Taobao-large 483,214,916 9,683,310 6,587,662,098 231,085,487 27 32
model [29]. This process is executed in iterations to output the
embedding results of each vertex vat each timestamp t.
Bayesian GNN .This model integrates two sources of information,
knowledge graph embedding (e.g., symbolic) or behavior graph
embedding (e.g., relations), through the Bayesian framework. To
be more speciﬁc, it mimics the human understanding process in the
cognitive science, in which each cognition is driven by adjusting
the prior knowledge under a speciﬁc task. Speciﬁcally, given a
knowledge graphGand an entity (vertex) vinG, its basic embedding
hvis learned by purely considering Gitself, which characterizes
the prior knowledge in G. Then, a task-speciﬁc embedding zvis
generated according to hvand a correction term vrespect to the
task. That is,
zvf(hv+v); (7)
where fis a non-linear function that projects hv+vaszv.
Notice that, learning exact vandfseems infeasible since each
entityvhas a different vand the ffunction is very complex. To
address this problem, we apply a generation model from hvto
zvby considering the second-order information. Speciﬁcally, for
each entityv, we sample its correction variable vfrom a Guassian
distributionN(0;s2
v), wheresvis determined by the coefﬁcients of
hv. Then, for each pair of entities v1andv2, we sample zv1 zv2
according to another Guassian distribution
N 
f(hv1+v1) f(hv2+v2);diag(2
v1+2
v2)
;
whererepresenting the trainable parameters for the function f. Let
the posterior mean of vbe^vand^be the resulting parameters, we
ﬁnally apply hv+ ^vas the corrected embedding for the knowledge
graph, and f^(hv+ ^v)as the corrected task-speciﬁc embedding.
5. EXPERIMENTS
We conducted extensive experiments to evaluate our AliGraph
platform, including both system and algorithms.
5.1 System Evaluation
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of the underlying
system in the AliGraph platform from the perspectives of storage
(graph building and caching neighbors), sampling andoperator . All
experiments are carried on two datasets Taobao-small andTaobao-
large described in Table 3, where the storage size of the latter is
six times larger. Both of them represent the subgraphs of users and
items extracted from the Taobao e-commerce Platform.
Graph Building. The performance of graph building plays a central
role in a graph computation platform. AliGraph supports various
kinds of raw data from different ﬁle systems, partitioned or not.
Figure 7 presents the time cost of graph building w.r.t. the number
of workers on the two datasets. We have the following two obser-
vations: 1) the graph building time explicitly decreases w.r.t. the
number of workers; 2) AliGraph can build large-scale graphs in
minutes, e.g. 5 minutes for Taobao-large . This is much more efﬁ-
cient than most state-of-the-arts (e.g., PowerGraph [16]) that usually
takes several hours).
Effects of Caching Neighbors. We examine the effects of caching
k-hop neighbors of important vertices. In our caching algorithm, we
7

==== Page 8 ====
	
Time	Cost	
(
Sec
)
10
100
1
,
000
Number	of	Workers
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
	Taobao-large
	Taobao-smallFigure 7: Graph building time w.r.t. number of workers. The
graph could be built in several minutes on two datasets.
need to set threshold for Imp(v)as deﬁned in Equation (1)with the
analysis ofD(k)
iandD(k)
o. In the experiments, we locally cache the
1-hop (direct) neighbors of all vertices and vary the threshold con-
trolling for caching the 2-hop neighbors. We gradually increase the
threshold from 0:05to0:45to test its sensitivity and effectiveness.
Figure 8 illustrates the percentage of vertices being cached w.r.t. the
threshold. We observe that the percentage of cached vertices de-
creases w.r.t. the threshold. When the threshold is smaller than 0:2,
it decreases drastically and becomes relatively stable after that. This
is because the importance of vertices obey the power-law distribu-
tion as we prove in Theorem 2. To make a good trade-off between
the cache cost and the beneﬁt, we set the threshold as 0:2based on
Figure 9 and only need to cache around 20% of extra vertices. We
also compare our importance-based caching strategy w.r.t. two other
strategies, namely the random strategy which caches the neighbors
of a fraction of vertices selected at random and the LRU replacing
strategy [8]. Figure 9 illustrates the cost time w.r.t. the percentage
of cached vertices. We ﬁnd that our method saves about 40 %–50%
time w.r.t. the random strategy and about 50 %–60%time w.r.t. the
LRU strategy, respectively. This is simply due to: 1) the randomly
selected vertices are less likely to be accessed; and 2) the LRU
strategy incurs additional cost since it frequently replaces cached
vertices. Whereas, our importance-based cached vertices are more
likely to be accessed by others.
	
Percentage	of	Cached	Vertices	
(
%
)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
Threshold
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
	AliGraph
Figure 8: Cache rate w.r.t. threshold. Setting the threshold near
0:15makes the best trade-off.
Time	Cost	
(
ms
)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage	of	Caches	Vertices
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
	AliGraph
	Random	Cache
	LRU	Cache
Figure 9: Cost time w.r.t. percentage of cached vertices. Our
method saves much time than other cache strategies.
Effects of Sampling. We test the effects of our optimized imple-
mentation on sampling with the batch size of 512and cache rateTable 4: Effects of optimized Sampling . All sampling methods
can ﬁnish in no more than 60ms.
Setting Time (ms)Dataset#of workers Cache Rate TRAVERSE NEIGHBORHOOD NEGATIVE
Taobao-small 25 18:46% 2.59 45.31 6.22
Taobao-large 100 17:68% 2.62 52.53 7.52
Table 5: Effects of optimized Operators with an order of mag-
nitude of time speed up.
Dataset W/O Our Implementation (ms) Our Implementation (ms) Speedup Ratio
Taobao-small 7.33 0.57 12.9
Taobao-large 17.21 1.26 13.7
20%. Table 4 shows the time cost of the three types of sampling
methods. We ﬁnd that: 1) Sampling methods are very efﬁcient
which ﬁnish between a few milliseconds to no more than 60ms; 2)
The sampling time grows slowly w.r.t. the graph size. Although
the storage size of Taobao-large is six times larger compared to
Taobao-small , the sampling time on the two datasets is quite close.
These observations verify that our implementations of the sampling
methods are efﬁcient and scalable.
Effects of Operators. We further examine the effects of our imple-
mentation on the operators AGGREGATE andCOMBINE . Table 5
shows the time cost of the two operators and the time costs can
speed up by an order of magnitude with our proposed implemen-
tations. This is simply because we apply the caching strategy to
eliminate the redundant computation of intermediate embedding
vectors. Once again, this veriﬁes the superiority of our AliGraph
platform.
5.2 Algorithm Evaluations
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of our proposed
GNNs compared to state-of-the-arts. We ﬁrst describe the experi-
mental settings including the datasets, competitors and evaluation
metrics. Then, we examine the efﬁciency and effectiveness of each
proposed GNN.
5.2.1 Experimental Settings
Datasets. We employ two datasets in our experiments, including a
public dataset from Amazon andTaobao-small . We choose Taobao-
small due to the reason of the scalability of several competitors.
The statistics of the datasets are summarized in Table 6. Both of
them are AHGs. The public dataset Amazon extracted from [38,
23] is the product metadata under the electronics category of the
Amazon company. In this graph, each vertex represents a product
with its attributes and each edge connects two products co-viewed
or co-bought by the same user. It has two types of vertices, namely
user and item, and four types of edges between users and items,
namely click, add-to-preference, add-to-cart and buy.
Algorithms. We implement all of our proposed algorithms in this
paper. For comparison, we also implement some representative
graph embedding algorithms in different categories as follows:
C1: Homogeneous GE Methods. The compared methods include
DeepWalk [39], LINE [47], and Node2Vec [18]. These methods
can only be applied on plain graphs with purely structural informa-
tion.
C2: Attributed GE Methods. The compared method includes
ANRL [55], which can generate embeddings capturing both struc-
tural and attributed information.
C3: Heterogeneous GE Methods. The compared methods include
Methpath2Vec [10], PMNE [37], MVE [41] and MNE [54]. Meth-
path2Vec can only process graphs with multiple types of vertices
while the other three methods can only process graphs with mul-
tiple types of edges. The PMNE involves three different kinds of
8

==== Page 9 ====
Table 6: Statistics of datasets used in experiments.
Dataset# of
vertices# of
edges# of
vertex type# of
edge type
Amazon 10,166 148,865 1 2
Taobao-small 156,988,021 666,197,671 2 4
approaches to extend the Node2Vec method, which are denoted as
PMNE-n ,PMNE-r andPMNE-c , respectively.
C4: GNN Based Methods. The comparison methods include Struc-
tural2Vec [42], GCN [30], Fast-GCN [7],AS-GCN [24], Graph-
SAGE [22] and HEP [56].
For fairness, all algorithms are implemented by applying the
optimized operators on our system. If a method cannot process
attributes and/or multiple types of vertices, we simply ignore these
information in the embedding. We generate the embedding for each
subgraph with the same type of edges and concatenate them together
to be the ﬁnal result for homogeneous based GNN. Notice that, in
our examination, we do not compare each of our proposed GNN
algorithms w.r.t. all competitors. This is because each algorithm
is designed with different focus. We will detail the competitors of
each GNN algorithm in reporting its experimental results.
Metrics. We evaluate both the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
proposed methods. The efﬁciency can be simply measured by the
execution time of the algorithm. To measure effectiveness, follow-
ing previous work [5, 9, 21], we apply the algorithm on the widely
adopted link prediction task, which plays important roles in real-
world scenarios such as recommendation. We randomly extract a
portion of the data as the training data and reserve the remaining
part as test data. To measure the quality of the results, four com-
monly used metrics are applied, namely the area under ROC curve
(ROC-AUC ), the PR curve ( PR-AUC ), theF1-score and the hit
recall rate ( HR Rate ). Notably, each metric is averaged among
different types of edges.
Parameters. We setd, the dimension of embedding vectors, to be
200for all algorithms.
5.2.2 Experimental Results
We report the detailed experimental results of each proposed
GNN algorithm here.
AHEP Algorithm. The goal of the AHEP algorithm is to fast obtain
the embedding result while does not sacriﬁce too much accuracy. In
Table 7, we show the comparison results on result quality of AHEP
w.r.t. its competitors on the Taobao-small dataset. In Figure 10, we
illustrate time and space cost of different algorithms. Obviously,
we have the following observations: 1) On the large Taobao-small
dataset, HEP andAHEP are the only two algorithms that can pro-
duce results in reasonable time and space limits. However, AHEP is
about 2–3faster than HEP and uses much less memory than HEP .
2) In terms of the result quality, the ROC-AUC andF1-score of
AHEP is comparable to HEP . These verify that AHEP can produce
similar results of HEP by using much less time and space.
GATNE Algorithm. The goal of GATNE is designed to process
graphs with heterogeneous and attributed information on both ver-
tices and edges. We show the comparison results of the GATNE
algorithm w.r.t. its competitors in Table 8. Obviously we ﬁnd that
GATNE outperforms all existing methods in terms of all metrics.
For example, on the Taobao-small dataset, GATNE improves the
ROC-AUC ,PR-AUC andF1-score by4:6%,1:84% and5:08%,
respectively. This is simply due to that GATNE simultaneously
captures both the heterogenous information of vertices and edges
and the attributes information. Meanwhile, we ﬁnd that training
Figure 10: Average memory cost and running time of per batch.
indicates the algorithm can not terminate in reasonable time.
AHEP is 2–3 faster than HEP and uses much less memory on
Taobao-small .
Table 7: Effectiveness comparison of AHEP w.r.t. its competi-
tors. AHEP is close to HEP onTaobao-small .
Method ROC-AUC( %)F1-score( %)
Structural2Vec N.A. N.A.
GCN N.A. N.A.
FastGCN N.A. N.A.
GraphSAGE N.A. N.A.
AS-GCN O.O.M O.O.M
HEP 77.77 57.93
AHEP 75.51 50.97
“N.A.” indicates the algorithm can not terminate in reasonable time.
“O.O.M.” indicates that the algorithm terminates due to out of memory.
time of GATNE decreases almost linearly w.r.t. the number of work-
ers. The GATNE model converges in less than 2 hours with 150
distributed workers. The veriﬁes the high efﬁciency and scalability
of the GATNE method.
Mixture GNN .We compare our Mixture GNN method w.r.t. DAE
[49] and-VAE [33] methods. The hit recall rate of applying the
embedding results into the recommendation task is shown in Table 9.
Notice that, by applying our model, the hit recall rates have been
improved by around 2%. Similarly, this improvement also makes
signiﬁcant contributions in a large network.
Hierarchical GNN .We compare our Hierarchical GNN method
w.r.t. GraphSAGE . The results is shown in Table 10. The F1-score
is signiﬁcantly improved by around 7:5%. This indicates that our
Hierarchical GNN can generate more promising embedding results.
Evolving GNN .We compare our Evolving GNN method w.r.t.
other methods on the multi-class link prediction task. The com-
petitors include the representative algorithms DeepWalk ,DANE ,
DNE ,TNE andGraphSAGE . These competitor algorithms can not
handle dynamic graphs, thus we run the algorithm on each snapshot
of the dynamic graphs and report the average performance over all
timestamps. The comparison results on the Taobao-small dataset are
shown in Table 11. We easily ﬁnd that, Evolving GNN outperforms
all other methods in terms of all metrics. For example, with burst
change, Evolving GNN improves the micro and macro F1-score
by4:2%and3:6%. This is simply because our proposed method
can better capture the dynamic changes of real-world networks, thus
can produce more promising results.
Bayesian GNN .The goal of this model is to combine Bayesian
method with the traditional GNN model. We use GraphSAGE as
the baseline and compare the results with and without incorporating
the proposed Bayesian model. We present the hit recall rate of the
recommendation result in Table 12. Notice that, we considerthe
granularity of both item brands and categories. Obviously, when
applying our Bayesian model, the hit recall rates have been increased
by1%to3%respectively. Notice that, this improvement can bring
signiﬁcant beneﬁts on our network containing 9 million items.
6. RELATED WORK
9

==== Page 10 ====
Table 8: Effectiveness comparison of GATNE w.r.t. its competitors. GATNE outperforms all competitors in terms of all metrics on
both Amazon andTaobao-small .GATNE lifts theF1-score by16:43% on the Amazon dataset.
Amazon Taobao-smallMethodROC-AUC( %)PR-AUC( %)F1-score( %)ROC-AUC( %)PR-AUC( %)F1-score( %)
DeepWalk 94.20 94.03 87.38 65.58 78.13 70.14
Node2Vec 94.47 94.30 87.88 N.A. N.A. N.A.
LINE 81.45 74.97 76.35 N.A. N.A. N.A.
ANRL 95.41 94.19 89.60 N.A. N.A. N.A.
Metapath2Vec 94.15 94.01 87.48 N.A. N.A. N.A.
PMNE-n 95.59 95.48 89.37 N.A. N.A. N.A.
PMNE-r 88.38 88.56 79.67 N.A. N.A. N.A.
PMNE-c 93.55 93.46 86.42 N.A. N.A. N.A.
MVE 92.98 93.05 87.80 66.32 80.12 72.14
MNE 91.62 92.46 84.44 79.60 93.01 84.86
GATNE 96.25 94.77 91.36 84.20 95.04 89.94
Table 9: Effectiveness comparison of Mixture GNN w.r.t. its
competitors. Mixture GNN improves the hit recall rate by
around 2%onTaobao-small .
Method HR Rate @20 HR Rate @50
DAE 0.12622 0.21619
-VAE 0.11767 0.19997
Mixture GNN 0.14317 0.23680
Table 10: Effectiveness comparison of Hierarchical GNN
w.r.t. its competitors. Hierarchical GNN improves the hit re-
call rate by 7:5%onTaobao-small .
Method ROC-AUC (%) PR-AUC (%)F1-score (%)
GraphSAGE 82.89 44.45 45.76
Hierarchical GNN 87.34 54.87 53.20
In this section, we brieﬂy review the state-of-the-arts on GE
and GNN methods. Based on the four challenges summarized in
Section 1, we categorize existing methods as follows.
Homogeneous. DeepWalk [39] ﬁrst generates a corpus on graphs
by random walk and then trains a skip-gram model on the cor-
pus. LINE [47] learns node presentations by preserving both ﬁrst-
order and second-order proximities. NetMF [40] is a uniﬁed matrix
factorization framework for theoretically understanding and im-
proving DeepWalk and LINE. Node2Vec [18] adds two parameters
to control the random walk process while SDNE [50] proposes a
structure-preserving embedding method. GCN [30] incorporates
neighbors’ feature representations using convolutional operations.
GraphSAGE [22] provides an inductive approach to combine struc-
tural information with node features.
Heterogeneous. For graph with multiple types of vertices and/or
edges, PMNE [37] proposes three methods to project a multiplex
network into a continuous vector space. MVE [41] embeds net-
works with multiple views in a single collaborated embedding using
the attention mechanism. MNE [54] uses one common embedding
and several additional embeddings of each edge-type for each node,
which are jointly learned by a uniﬁed network embedding model.
Mvn2Vec [52] explores the embedding results by simultaneously
modeling preservation and collaboration. HNE [6] jointly considers
the contents and topological structures to be uniﬁed vector rep-
resentations. PTE [46] constructs large-scale heterogeneous text
network from labeled information, which is then embedded into a
low-dimensional space. Metapath2Vec [10] and HERec [44] formal-
ize meta-path based random-walks to construct the heterogeneous
neighborhood of a node and then leverage skip-gram models to
perform node embeddings.
Attributed. Attributed network embedding aims to seek for low-
dimensional vector representations to preserve both topological
and attribute information. TADW [53] incorporates text features
of vertices into network representation learning by matrix factor-
ization. LANE [25] smoothly incorporates label information intothe attributed network embedding while preserving their correla-
tions. AANE [24] enables joint learning process to be done in a
distributed manner for accelerated attributed network embedding.
SNE [34] proposes a generic framework for embedding social net-
works by capturing both the structural proximity and attribute prox-
imity. DANE [15] can capture the high nonlinearity and preserve
various proximities in both topological structure and node attributes.
ANRL [55] uses a neighbor enhancement autoencoder to model the
node attribute information and a skip-gram model to capture the
network structure.
Dynamic. Actually, some static methods [39, 47] can also handle
dynamic network by updating the new vertices based on static em-
bedding. Considering the new vertices’ inﬂuence on the original
networks, [11] extends the skip-gram methods to update the original
vertices’ embedding. [57] focuses on capturing the triadic structure
properties for learning network embedding. Considering both the
network structure and node attributes, [32] focuses on updating the
top eigenvectors and eigenvalues for the streaming network.
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We summarize four challenges from the current practical graph
data problems, namely large-scale ,heterogeneous ,attributed and
dynamic . Based on these challenges, we design and implement a
platform, AliGraph , which provides both system and algorithms to
tackle more practical problems. In the future, we will focus on but
not limited to the following directions: 1) GNN for edge-level and
subgraph-level embeddings; 2) More execution optimizations, such
as co-location of computation variables in GNN with graph data
to reduce the cross network trafﬁc, introduction of new gradient
optimization to leverage the trait of GNN to speed up the distributed
training without accuracy loss, and better assignment of the workers
in multi-GPU architectures; 3) Early-stop mechanism, which can
help to terminate training tasks earlier when no promising results
can generate; 4) Auto-ML, which can help to select the optimal
method from a variety of GNNs.
8. REFERENCES
[1] P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, and D. J. Rezende.
Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and
physics. In NIPS , pages 4502—-4510, 2016.
[2] S. Bhagat, G. Cormode, and S. Muthukrishnan. Node
classiﬁcation in social networks. Computer Science ,
16(3):115–148, 2011.
[3] E. G. Boman, K. D. Devine, and S. Rajamanickam. Scalable
matrix computations on large scale-free graphs using 2d graph
partitioning. 2013.
[4] U. Brandes, M. Gaertler, and D. Wagner. Experiments on
graph clustering algorithms. LNCS , 2832:568–579, 2003.
10

==== Page 11 ====
Table 11: Effectiveness comparison of Evolving GNN w.r.t. its competitors. Evolving GNN improves the F1-score by about 4%
onTaobao-small .
Normal Evolution burst ChangeMethodMicroF1-score( %) MacroF1-score( %) MicroF1-score( %) MacroF1-score( %)
DeepWalk N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
DANE N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
TNE 79.9 71.9 69.1 67.2
GraphSAGE 71.4 70.4 60.7 60.5
Evolving GNN 81.4 77.7 73.3 70.8
Table 12: Effectiveness comparison of Bayesian GNN w.r.t. its competitors. Bayasian GNN improves the hit recall rate by 1%–3%
onTaobao-small .
Click BuyGranularity HR RateGraphSAGE GraphSAGE + Bayesian GraphSAGE GraphSAGE + Bayesian
10 15.97 16.14 24.87 25.10
Brand 30 16.65 17.12 25.70 26.57
50 17.26 17.90 26.39 27.33
10 27.46 27.49 27.85 27.91
Category 30 28.43 29.99 28.50 29.45
50 29.58 32.88 26.26 31.47
[5] H. Cai, V . W. Zheng, C. C. Chang, H. Cai, V . W. Zheng, and
C. C. Chang. A comprehensive survey of graph embedding:
Problems, techniques and applications. TKDE ,
30(9):1616–1637, 2017.
[6]S. Chang, W. Han, J. Tang, G.-J. Qi, C. C. Aggarwal, and T. S.
Huang. Heterogeneous network embedding via deep
architectures. In KDD , pages 119–128, 2015.
[7]J. Chen, T. Ma, and C. Xiao. Fastgcn: fast learning with graph
convolutional networks via importance sampling.
arXiv:1801.10247 , 2018.
[8] M. Chrobak and J. Noga. Lru is better than ﬁfo. In Acm-siam
Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , 1998.
[9] P. Cui, X. Wang, J. Pei, and W. Zhu. A survey on network
embedding. TKDE , 2018.
[10] Y . Dong, N. V . Chawla, and A. Swami. metapath2vec:
Scalable representation learning for heterogeneous networks.
InKDD , pages 135–144, 2017.
[11] L. Du, Y . Wang, G. Song, Z. Lu, and J. Wang. Dynamic
network embedding: An extended approach for skip-gram
based network embedding. In IJCAI , pages 2086–2092, 2018.
[12] A. G. Duran and M. Niepert. Learning graph representations
with embedding propagation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 5119–5130, 2017.
[13] W. Fan, J. Xu, Y . Wu, W. Yu, J. Jiang, Z. Zheng, B. Zhang,
Y . Cao, and C. Tian. Parallelizing sequential graph
computations. In SIGMOD , pages 495–510, 2017.
[14] A. Fout, J. Byrd, B. Shariat, and A. Ben-Hur. Protein interface
prediction using graph convolutional networks. In NIPS ,
pages 6530—-6539, 2017.
[15] H. Gao and H. Huang. Deep attributed network embedding. In
IJCAI , pages 3364–3370, 2018.
[16] J. E. Gonzalez, Y . Low, H. Gu, D. Bickson, and C. Guestrin.
Powergraph: Distributed graph-parallel computation on
natural graphs. In OSDI , 2012.
[17] P. Goyal and E. Ferrara. Graph embedding techniques,
applications, and performance: A survey. Knowledge-Based
Systems , 2018.
[18] A. Grover and J. Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature
learning for networks. In KDD , pages 855–864, 2016.
[19] T. Hamaguchi, H. Oiwa, M. Shimbo, and Y . Matsumoto.
Knowledge transfer for out-of-knowledge-base entities : A
graph neural network approach. In IJCAI , pages 1802—-1808,
2017.[20] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive
representation learning on large graphs. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 1024–1034, 2017.
[21] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Representation
learning on graphs: Methods and applications. 2017.
[22] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec. Inductive
representation learning on large graphs. In NIPS , pages
1025–1035, 2017.
[23] R. He and J. McAuley. Ups and downs: Modeling the visual
evolution of fashion trends with one-class collaborative
ﬁltering. In WWW , pages 507–517. International World Wide
Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2016.
[24] X. Huang, J. Li, and X. Hu. Accelerated attributed network
embedding. In SDM , pages 633–641. SIAM, 2017.
[25] X. Huang, J. Li, and X. Hu. Label informed attributed
network embedding. In WSDM , pages 731–739, 2017.
[26] D. R. Hush and J. M. Salas. Improving the learning rate of
back-propagation with the gradient reuse algorithm. In IEEE
International Conference on Neural Networks , 1988.
[27] G. Karypis and V . Kumar. Metis–unstructured graph
partitioning and sparse matrix ordering system. Technical
Report .
[28] E. Khalil, H. Dai, Y . Zhang, B. Dilkina, and L. Song.
Learning combinatorial optimization algorithms over graphs.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
6348–6358. 2017.
[29] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-encoding variational
bayes. arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013.
[30] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation
with graph convolutional networks. In ICLR , 2017.
[31] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning. In
Nature , pages 521–436. 2015.
[32] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, J. Tang, Y . Chang, and H. Liu.
Attributed network embedding for learning in a dynamic
environment. In CIKM , pages 387–396. ACM, 2017.
[33] D. Liang, R. G. Krishnan, M. D. Hoffman, and T. Jebara.
Variational autoencoders for collaborative ﬁltering. 2018.
[34] L. Liao, X. He, H. Zhang, and T.-S. Chua. Attributed social
network embedding. TKDE , 30(12):2257–2270, 2018.
[35] D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. The link prediction
problem for social networks. 2003.
[36] Z. Lin, M. Feng, C. N. d. Santos, M. Yu, B. Xiang, B. Zhou,
and Y . Bengio. A structured self-attentive sentence embedding.
11

==== Page 12 ====
arXiv:1703.03130 , 2017.
[37] W. Liu, P.-Y . Chen, S. Yeung, T. Suzumura, and L. Chen.
Principled multilayer network embedding. In ICDM , pages
134–141. IEEE, 2017.
[38] J. McAuley, C. Targett, Q. Shi, and A. Van Den Hengel.
Image-based recommendations on styles and substitutes. In
SIGIR , pages 43–52. ACM, 2015.
[39] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena. Deepwalk: Online
learning of social representations. In KDD , pages 701–710.
ACM, 2014.
[40] J. Qiu, Y . Dong, H. Ma, J. Li, K. Wang, and J. Tang. Network
embedding as matrix factorization: Unifying deepwalk, line,
pte, and node2vec. In WSDM , pages 459–467, 2018.
[41] M. Qu, J. Tang, J. Shang, X. Ren, M. Zhang, and J. Han. An
attention-based collaboration framework for multi-view
network representation learning. In CIKM , pages 1767–1776.
ACM, 2017.
[42] L. F. R. Ribeiro, P. H. P. Saverese, and D. R. Figueiredo.
struc2vec : Learning node representations from structural
identity. 2017.
[43] A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, N. Heess, J. T. Springenberg, J. Merel,
M. Riedmiller, R. Hadsell, and P. Battaglia. Graph networks
as learnable physics engines for inference and control. In
arXiv preprint: 1806.01242 , 2018.
[44] C. Shi, B. Hu, X. Zhao, and P. Yu. Heterogeneous information
network embedding for recommendation. TKDE , 2018.
[45] I. Stanton and G. Kliot. Streaming graph partitioning for large
distributed graphs. In KDD , 2013.
[46] J. Tang, M. Qu, and Q. Mei. Pte: Predictive text embedding
through large-scale heterogeneous text networks. In KDD ,
pages 1165–1174. ACM, 2015.
[47] J. Tang, M. Qu, M. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yan, and Q. Mei.
Line: Large-scale information network embedding. In WWW ,
pages 1067–1077, 2015.
[48] S. Tanimoto. Power laws of the in-degree and out-degree
distributions of complex networks. Physics , 2009.
[49] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y . Bengio, and P. A. Manzagol.
Extracting and composing robust features with denoising
autoencoders. In ICML , 2008.
[50] D. Wang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu. Structural deep network
embedding. In KDD , pages 1225–1234, 2016.
[51] Z. Wang, Y . Tan, and Z. Ming. Graph-based recommendation
on social networks. In APWeb , 2010.
[52] W. Xiong, M. Yu, S. Chang, X. Guo, and W. Y . Wang.
One-shot relational learning for knowledge graphs. In
EMNLP , pages 1980–1990, 2018.
[53] C. Yang, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, M. Sun, and E. Y . Chang. Network
representation learning with rich text information. In IJCAI ,
2015.
[54] H. Zhang, L. Qiu, L. Yi, and Y . Song. Scalable multiplex
network embedding. In IJCAI , pages 3082–3088, 2018.
[55] Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Bu, S. Zhou, P. Yu, J. Zhang, M. Ester,
and C. Wang. Anrl: Attributed network representation
learning via deep neural networks. In IJCAI , pages
3155–3161, 2018.
[56] V . W. ZHENG, M. SHA, Y . LI, H. YANG, Z. ZHANG, and
K.-L. TAN. Heterogeneous embedding propagation for
large-scale e-commerce user alignment. 2018.
[57] L. Zhou, Y . Yang, X. Ren, F. Wu, and Y . Zhuang. Dynamic
network embedding by modeling triadic closure process.
2018.Appendix
Proof of Theorem 1 LetD(k)
iandD(k)
obe two random variables
representing the number of k-hop in and out-neighbors of a ran-
domly chosen vertex from the graph, respectively. We derive the
probability distribution of D(k)
iandD(k)
ofor eachk1by induc-
tion.
1. Following previous work [48], when k= 1, the in-degree D(1)
i
and out-degree D(t)
oboth obey the power-law distribution. Specif-
ically, let(1)
oand(1)
idenote the exponent, we have Pr(D(1)
i=
q)/q (1)
iandPr(D(1)
o=q)/q (1)
o.
2. Then, we consider the probability distribution of D(k)
iand
D(k)
owherek2. Assume that D(k 1)
i andD(k 1)
o obey the
power-law distribution with exponent (k 1)
i and(k 1)
o , respec-
tively. Letube a randomly chosen vertex from the graph. If we
randomly chose a (k 1)-hop in-neighbor sofuand a one-hop
out-neighbor vofu,vis obviously a k-hop out-neighbor of s. Since
sis chosen randomly, we have
Pr(D(k)
o=q) =nX
j=1Pr(D(1)
o=j)Pr(D(k)
i=q
j)
/nX
j=1j (1)
o(q
j) (k 1)
i/q (k 1)
inX
j=1j(k 1)
i (1)
o:
Sincen,(t 1)
i and(1)
oare all ﬁxed, the last term is a constant
value. As a result, we have Pr(D(k)
o=q)/q (k)
o, where(k)
ois
a term determined by (k 1)
i and the last term. In similar, we also
havePr(D(k)
i=q)/q (k)
i. This indicates both D(k)
oandD(k)
i
obey the power-law distribution.
By summarizing 1 and 2, we ﬁnd that both D(k)
iandD(k)
oobey
the power-law distribution for each k1.
Proof of Theorem 2 LetImp(k)=D(k)
i=D(k)
obe a random
variable denoting the importance of a randomly chosen vertex. We
have
Pr(Imp(k)=`) =nX
j=1Pr(D(k)
o=j) Pr(D(k)
i=`j)
=nX
j=1j (k)
o(`j) (k)
i=` (k)
inX
j=1j ((k)
i+(k)
o):
Since the last term is also a constant value, we ﬁnd that Imp(k)also
obeys the power-law distribution. This analysis result indicates that
the importance Imp(k)of most vertices is very small. Thus, we
only need to cache a small number of vertices with large importance
values. Intuitively, for any vertex whose importance is large, it has a
large number of in-neighbors and a small number of out-neighbors.
12

